NICHE CONSTRUCTIONThe MIT Press
Cambridge, Massachusetts
London, England
NICHE 
CONSTRUCTION
How Life Contributes to Its Own Evolution
JOHN ODLING-SMEE© 2024 Massachusetts Institute of Technology
This work is subject to a Creative Commons CC-BY-NC-ND license.
This license applies only to the work in full and not to any components included with permis￾sion. Subject to such license, all rights are reserved. No part of this book may be used to train 
artificial intelligence systems without permission in writing from the MIT Press.
The MIT Press would like to thank the anonymous peer reviewers who provided comments 
on drafts of this book. The generous work of academic experts is essential for establishing the 
authority and quality of our publications. We acknowledge with gratitude the contributions 
of these otherwise uncredited readers.
This book was set in Adobe Garamond and Berthold Akzidenz Grotesk by Jen Jackowitz.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Odling-Smee, J. C. (John C.), author.
Title: Niche construction: how life contributes to its own evolution / John Odling-Smee.
Description: Cambridge, Massachusetts : The MIT Press, [2024] | Includes bibliographical 
references and index. 
Identifiers: LCCN 2023035586 (print) | LCCN 2023035587 (ebook) | 
ISBN 9780262548168 (paperback) | ISBN 9780262378895 (epub) | 
ISBN 9780262378888 (pdf)
Subjects: LCSH: Evolution (Biology) | Adaptation (Biology) | Bioenergetics. 
Classification: LCC QH366.2 .O33 2024 (print) | LCC QH366.2 (ebook) | 
DDC 576.8—dc23/eng/20231211 
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2023035586
LC ebook record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2023035587This book is dedicated to my wife, Ros. I dedicate it to her in gratitude for giving 
me so much affection and support during my years of blindness, as well as for her 
indispensable help in the writing of this book.Preface ix
I LIFE ON ANY PLANET
1 WHAT IS LIFE? 3
2 INFORMATION 35
3 ADAPTATION 67
4 ADAPTIVE KNOW-HOW IN EVOLUTION 109
5 LIFE ON ANY PLANET 139
 II LIFE ON EARTH
6 THE ORIGIN OF LIFE 175
7 SUPPLEMENTARY KNOWLEDGE-GAINING PROCESSES 
IN EVOLUTION 195
8 THE ORIGIN AND EVOLUTION OF ECOSYSTEMS 233
9 EXTENDING THE SYNTHESIS 261
10 HOW ARE HUMANS CONTRIBUTING TO THE EVOLUTION 
OF LIFE? 291
Notes 335
References 355
Index 373
ContentsThis book was written in strange times. I shared many of these strange times
with everyone else. They comprised the 2019 COVID-19 pandemic and its 
associated disruptions and lockdowns in the following two years and then, 
in 2022, the war in Ukraine began after the invasion by Russia.
It was also a strange time for me personally. After enjoying a lifetime 
of excellent vision, shortly before my seventy-eighth birthday, I suddenly 
became totally blind in less than ten days. It was a considerable shock for 
both myself and my wife and family, as well as for our friends and col￾leagues. What was I to do? Give up, or start a new kind of life? With a great 
deal of encouragement and concerned affection from so many friends and 
colleagues and above all from my family, I eventually decided to start life 
again. But how? A UK charity called Blind Veterans came to my rescue. They 
equipped me with machines and gadgets that allowed me to read and write 
again, and they trained me how to use them. I then resumed the work that 
I had been in the middle of before I went blind, most of it in collaboration 
with my colleagues. Subsequently, I continued to collaborate with my col￾leagues on new papers for the next six years.
I then received an unexpected email from the life sciences editor of the 
MIT Press, Robert Prior, asking me if I would consider writing a new book 
about niche construction. I emailed him back saying I would not be able to 
manage it because I was now blind. To my amazement and lasting gratitude, 
Prior pushed back. I remember him saying something like, “If you can write 
emails, then surely you can write a book.” That was how this book came to 
Prefacex Preface
be written. I still had a lot of unfinished business in my head, in the form 
of ideas about evolution. Prior’s challenge was all I needed to start putting 
some of these ideas on paper as best as I could.
Nonetheless, I fear that blind authorship has its limitations and conse￾quences. One of its consequences is that I have been unable to cite the work 
of many authors that I should have done but couldn’t because I can no longer 
track the scientific literature in the ways that I used to do. I owe all these
authors an apology and ask for their understanding. Another consequence 
of my blind authorship is that, with the exception of a single diagram, I have 
been unable to use figures, graphs, or even photographs to support my text. I 
have also cited a minimal number of equations and have avoided discussing 
mathematical models, partly because my reading machine goes berserk if I 
ask it to read mathematics. That may prove to be an asset rather than a deficit, 
given that allegedly so many readers are put off by equations.
I should also like to acknowledge the many people who have in dif­fer￾ent ways helped me to write this book. I would particularly like to thank 
Kevin Lala (formerly Laland) at the University of St Andrew’s, Scotland, who 
more than anyone else helped me to prepare my manuscript by reading and 
editing drafts and writing endnotes. In addition, Kevin, with the help of his 
assistant Linda Hall, did one job for me that I now find so difficult: tracking 
down and compiling the list of references that I have managed to cite in this 
book. I would also like to thank Tobias Uller, at Lund University, Sweden, 
who likewise gave me critical but very helpful feedback on all my chapters. I 
would like to thank several other scientists as well, who have helped me with 
particular chapters. They include Addy Pross, Ben Gurion University, Israel; 
David Deamer and Bruce Damer, Santa Cruz University; Sonia Sultan, 
Wesleyan University; and Philip Kreager, Oxford University. I would like to 
thank three anonymous referees too, who read part of or all my manuscript. 
They gave me encouragement as well as specific criticisms, which further 
improved my text. Finally, I should like to thank Anne-Marie Bono and her 
team of editors at the MIT Press for coping with my difficult circumstances 
so well. As always, any remaining faults are mine and no one else’s.
I should also like to acknowledge the help that I received from Helen 
Krajicek, who read aloud to me numerous articles from Nature and other xi Preface
journals over the course of many years. By doing so, she helped me to keep
abreast of at least some of the things that were going on in contemporary 
science. I also owe a debt to both my daughters, Anne and Lucy Odling￾Smee, who helped me in dif­ferent ways. Anne runs a design company in
London, Design Science, concerned with communicating science to lay￾people, as well as to other scientists. She has greatly helped me with the 
presentation of my book. Lucy is one of Nature’s senior editors. That allowed 
her to criticize some of my chapters, which she did with filial severity. I also 
need to thank the two blind charities in the UK, which have helped me so 
much. One is the Blind Veterans Charity, which I’ve already mentioned. The 
second is the Royal National Institute of the Blind, who were particularly 
helpful during my first months of blindness. With my wife’s help, I intend 
to set up a trust to enable at least some of the proceeds that may arise from 
the sales of this book to be given to these two charities.
I want to dedicate this book to my wife, Ros. Many authors dedicate 
their books to their wives. It’s almost a convention. But I need to add some￾thing extra about her being the hidden coauthor of this book since almost 
every word in it started by my dictating sentences to my wife, who then 
turned it into text. She often did so by turning my sentences into better 
English. She also insisted that even though she is neither a biologist nor a 
scientist, she had to understand each sentence before she wrote it down. I 
think and hope that she improved my text considerably.
John Odling-Smee
September 2023I LIFE ON ANY PLANETWe are incredibly improbable systems. The second law of thermodynam￾ics dictates that everything in the universe inevitably travels toward a state 
of greater disorder. Yet somehow human beings, along with the rest of life, 
buck this trend. We are made of trillions of cells, packed densely together 
and organized into functional tissues and organs in our bodies. For instance, 
there are roughly a hundred billion interconnected neurons in a human 
brain, about as many as there are stars in the known universe. In virtually 
every cell in our bodies, there are innumerable molecules, including proteins 
and nucleic acids, interacting with a complexity greater than any human￾made artifact. If the fate of all things is an inevitable journey toward greater 
disorder, how can such an immense concentration of order and complexity 
be packed together in a single human body? Come to think of it, how can 
any living organism exist? Also, once life appeared on Earth, how could 
more complex organisms evolve? And how has the biosphere continued to 
grow in complexity?
The laws of physics and chemistry alone cannot answer these ques￾tions, nor can contemporary biology. For example, orthodox evolutionary 
theory cannot explain how life got started. Nor can it explain how purpose￾ful, goal-directed organisms could evolve out of an apparently purposeless 
universe. To understand these issues, I suggest we are eventually going to 
have to develop a more comprehensive theory of evolution than the current 
orthodox theory. Among other things, we are going to need a theory that 
recognizes that living organisms are active, purposeful agents that contribute 
in fundamental ways to their own and each other’s evolution.
1 WHAT IS LIFE?4 Chapter 1
The questions that I want to focus on in this book are closely related to 
another question, which was asked by the famous physicist Erwin Schrödinger 
in 1944, in the title of his now-celebrated book What Is Life?1
 Schrödinger was 
primarily concerned with a subordinate question, which I will paraphrase here: 
What else is needed beyond the known laws of physics and chemistry to understand 
life? He indicated that these questions can be answered only in the context of 
the laws of thermodynamics. Life has to obey these laws.
There are three laws of thermodynamics, which were progressively 
discovered by physicists during the second half of the nineteenth and the 
beginning of the twentieth century. Initially, I will focus only on the first
two. The first law states that energy is conserved throughout the universe, 
while the second law specifies that entropy—that is, the amount of disorder 
or randomness in a system—is always increasing. The second law implies 
that everything in the universe is traveling from a state of relatively higher 
organization and order to a state of greater disorder. This implies that any 
system that happens to be more organized or more ordered than its immedi￾ate surroundings will dissipate over time and continue to do so until it has
returned to thermodynamic equilibrium with its surroundings.
Everything in the universe obeys the first and second laws of thermo￾dynamics. However, the ways in which living and nonliving systems obey 
the second law differ in important ways. Leaving aside human artifacts for 
the moment, inanimate objects are relatively simple. They are also passive 
and purposeless. They obey the second law of thermodynamics reactively. 
Forces act on them, but they do not act of their own accord. This is true on 
multiple scales. For example, on a large scale, the Sun responds reactively 
to the laws of physics, including the laws of thermodynamics. If you know 
these laws, it is possible to predict the future of the Sun with some accuracy. 
On a smaller scale, the iceberg that sank the Titanic was responding passively 
to the laws of physics. If the crew of the Titanic had known enough about 
where and when the iceberg had originated and the subsequent prevailing 
weather and sea conditions that it encountered, they could have predicted its 
position accurately. The tragedy was that they did not. At a smaller scale still, 
the molecules of metal in the head of a pin change their state only through 
random motion unless acted on by physical forces.5 What Is Life?
In contrast, living organisms are far more complicated. Crucially, they 
are active, purposeful systems, which makes them less predictable. Because of 
their complexity and high degree of organization, organisms are very far from 
thermodynamic equilibrium systems relative to their abiotic surroundings. 
If living organisms did nothing, if they were passive in the same way that 
inanimate systems are passive, they would rapidly dissipate until they were 
back in thermodynamic equilibrium with their surrounding environment. 
That is, they would die. Organisms have to be active, purposeful systems 
to oppose the second law and stay alive. However, at all times and places, 
organisms are still subject to the second law. Somehow, organisms have to 
“cheat” the second law of thermodynamics, while still obeying it, to stay 
alive. How is it possible for organisms to pull off this trick? Unfortunately, 
the laws of thermodynamics are notoriously difficult to understand. Even 
contemporary physicists sometimes struggle with them.2
 Yet we encounter 
them every day of our lives, usually without realizing it.
Before going any further, I will give some examples of the ways in which 
we meet the first and second laws in everyday life by focusing on three 
increasingly complicated yet familiar examples. Let’s start with a simple
armchair experiment, one that you can easily do yourself. Take a glass of 
water, and then add to the water a drop of dye, such as red ink. As soon as 
you’ve added the drop, the situation in the glass changes. It becomes more 
complicated because the drop of ink is out of thermodynamic equilibrium 
with the surrounding water. The ink will immediately start to dissipate by 
diffusing into the water around it. A few hours later, you will have a glass of 
slightly pink water. The ink drop has obeyed the second law of thermody￾namics by dissipating. It was initially concentrated in one dense area rather 
than spread evenly around. Such dissipation is an everyday experience. It’s 
equivalent to making yourself a hot cup of coffee and pouring sugar in it, 
which by dissipating will sweeten your entire drink rather than staying as 
one very sweet mouthful. Likewise, after making your coffee, if it is still too 
hot for you to drink, you can rely on the second law again to cool it until it’s 
closer to the temperature of its surrounding environment.
There is an important twist here that is not so obvious. When you first 
add the drop of red ink into the glass of water, you have not only introduced 6 Chapter 1
a more complicated system in the glass, but you have also turned the entire 
glass of liquid into a less probable system. The system will then gradually
travel toward a more probable state as the ink diffuses. Another way of 
characterizing the second law of thermodynamics is to say that everything in
the universe is traveling from a less probable state to a more probable state. 
This is illustrated by the fate of the ink in the water. It travels from the 
less thermodynamically stable state of the concentrated ink drop to the more 
thermodynamically stable state of the well-mixed solution.
At the molecular level, this journey toward greater probability is driven 
by background thermal agitation, called “Brownian motion.” It happens by 
chance. But because it only happens by chance, it is still possible for the
unexpected to happen instead of the expected. Purely by chance, it is possible
that the drop of red ink that you added to the water might start to dissipate 
but then return to a discrete drop of red ink surrounded by water again. That
is incredibly unlikely but it is a statistical possibility. To give an even crazier 
example, it’s also possible that, purely by chance, your drop of red ink might, 
for a fleeting moment, cause a picture of your face to appear in the water. But 
I wouldn’t wait around for this to happen. That is so improbable that you 
might have to hang around for several times the age of the universe before it 
occurred. Nonetheless, it is statistically still a possibility, however remote. In 
contrast, you may have to wait for only a couple of hours for the red ink to be 
wholly dissipated in your glass of uniform pink water. That is a vastly more 
probable outcome. It was another famous physicist, Ludwig Boltzman,3
who first established the underlying statistical nature of the second law of 
thermodynamics. It should not be forgotten that, even in everyday life, you 
just might be taken by surprise by a highly improbable event one day.
My second example is more complicated. Suppose that you are a car￾penter and want to make an object such as a wooden table. To make the 
table, you have to oppose the second law of thermodynamics by investing 
in active, purposeful, physical work. Once you have made it, the table will
be even more out of thermodynamic equilibrium with its surroundings than 
the wood was before you started to work on it. To make the table, you also 
have to know in advance what you have to do to the wood and how to do it. 
You start by preparing the wood. You do so by sawing the wood to the size 7 What Is Life?
and shape that you’re going to need. You then smooth down the wood by 
hand with sandpaper to eliminate rough edges. You have to supply the energy 
needed to do this work from your own body, drawing on energy extracted 
from the food that you have eaten. Your work of sawing and smoothing the 
wood necessarily generates friction and heat. The heat dissipates in the sur￾rounding atmosphere; you are unlikely to notice it, but nevertheless, it hap￾pens. The energy that you used to do your work is conserved as per the first 
law of thermodynamics, but it has now dissipated in the surrounding atmo￾sphere by being transformed into other forms of energy (heat and sound), 
in accordance with the second law. This second example is more complex 
than the first because active, purposeful work is being done on a system. That 
is what allows a highly improbable object, the table, to be created in your 
workshop against the wider background of constantly increasing entropy.
My last example is still more complicated. Imagine that you are a pot￾ter and want to make some coffee mugs. But this time, you also want to 
teach other people how to do the same. Once again, you will need the raw
materials: some china clay, a supply of water and electricity, and perhaps 
paint and glaze to decorate the mugs after you have made them. You also 
need some tools, such as a potter’s wheel and a kiln to fire the mugs after
they are made. Potters have to buy both their raw materials and their tools 
from others, who must in turn invest work and energy to manufacture or 
gather them and transport them to where they can be purchased. The clay 
would not have been out of thermodynamic equilibrium with its surround￾ings before it was dug out of the earth. But it would have taken energy from 
other people to dig it out.
As you work on the clay, showing your pupils how to make a mug, you 
turn it into an increasingly improbable object. The clay is also becoming 
increasingly far from thermodynamic equilibrium with its surroundings. 
In this case, in the same way as when you were building your table, you are 
opposing the second law, to create the order that you are putting into each of 
your mugs by your work. After you have made the mugs, they will be put to 
use and start to dissipate. Over time, cracks and chips may gradually appear 
in them. Then one day you drop a mug and it smashes into fragments. Your 
carelessness has assisted the mug on its journey to greater thermodynamic 8 Chapter 1
stability and a more probable state, in accordance with the second law. What 
is interesting this time is that the information or know-how that you were 
transmitting to your pupils about how to make the mug will not have dis￾sipated when you break the mug. Rather, the mug-making knowledge will
have spread to all the other people you were teaching. That knowledge about 
how to make another mug will remain in your head too. It will not have dis￾sipated either, just because you’ve broken your mug, nor has the net amount 
of mug-making knowledge remained constant. It has increased.
The relationship between information and the laws of thermodynamics 
is still not fully understood,4
 but nonetheless there is an intriguing difference 
between what happens to the energy that you have been using to make your 
mugs, as opposed to the information or knowledge that you also needed 
to make your mugs and that you passed on to the others you were teach￾ing. In everyday life, you will probably take this difference for granted. But 
physicists cannot do that.5
 Neither will it be possible to take it for granted
if we want to understand the biology of life, including the biology that lies 
behind the dif­ferent ways in which living organisms contribute to their
own and each other’s evolution. The distinction between physical resources 
and informational resources is highly relevant to the way that evolution 
works. It is not an overstatement to suggest that it may hold the key to the 
very existence of life.
That’s enough examples. Because they are all prosaic, everyday human
experiences, it may still be hard to recognize the generality of the natural 
phenomena that they are illustrating. If the physicists are correct, the laws 
of thermodynamics are as universal as the laws of gravity. The falling apple 
that inspired Isaac Newton was equally a prosaic event. However, because
Newton realized that it was an example of a universal phenomenon, he was 
able to discover so much about the universal laws of gravity. Similarly, if you 
want to understand the answers to Schrödinger’s “What is life?” question, 
you have to start by trying to understand how life copes with the universal 
laws of thermodynamics, no matter how humdrum the examples are with 
which you begin.
Let’s return to considering the basic physics, chemistry, and biology of 
these laws. Schrödinger emphasized there were two outstanding problems9 What Is Life?
that biologists had to solve, each of which relates to a basic requirement of 
life. The first is that organisms must actively oppose the second law of thermo￾dynamics to stay alive. Organisms have to maintain their own very-far-from￾thermodynamic-equilibrium status, relative to their external environment, 
by active, purposeful, energy-consuming, and physical work. If organisms 
did nothing, they would dissipate and die. For every moment they are alive, 
organisms must actively oppose the flow of energy and matter between them￾selves and their environments, which is favored by the second law.
Organisms must continuously import resources that are relatively high 
in free energy6
 from their environments. They must also export the detritus 
that they generate by living, and that are lower in free energy, back to their 
environment. This exchange of physical resources between organisms and 
their environments is primarily understood by biologists in terms of the 
metabolic activities of organisms. However, the metabolic activities of 
organisms depend in turn on the capacity of organisms to interact with their 
external environments by two-way-street interactions. Via these interactions, 
organisms must take energy and matter resources from their environments 
and also dump their detritus back into their environments. It follows that 
organisms must cause some changes in their local external environments 
by interacting with them, as well as causing changes in their own internal 
environments by their metabolic activities. However, the physical changes 
that organisms cause in their external environments will not just be by￾products of their metabolic activities. They will also be the consequences of 
other kinds of activities and the choices that organisms make, which are now 
referred to as “niche construction.”7
In organisms, niche construction promotes “dynamic kinetic stability 
(DKS)”8
 (discussed further in chapter 6), which for organisms refers to 
the interactive niche relationships between the phenotypic traits of organ￾isms and the multiple variables that they encounter in their local external 
environment. The niche-constructing activities of organisms are likely to 
increase their DKS, not just their thermodynamic stability. Ultimately, the 
niche-constructing activities of organisms cause them to coevolve with their 
external environments instead of just evolving reactively in response to 
their allegedly autonomous environments.910 Chapter 1
The second basic requirement of life can then be derived from the first. 
Life cannot oppose the second law of thermodynamics by chance. The odds of 
it doing so effectively by chance are so improbable that it’s not worth consider￾ing in practice. Neither can organisms resist the second law through random 
activity. To survive, all living organisms have to be informed by “meaningful” 
information. They must have the requisite kind of knowledge, or “adaptive 
know-how,” about their local external environment and the nature of the 
work that they need to do to retain their far-from-thermodynamic equilib￾rium status. Living organisms cannot harvest the energy and matter resources 
that they need from their external environment to stay alive if they don’t 
know what those resources are, where they can be found, or how they can 
be extracted and processed. Neither can they dump the detritus that they 
have to get rid of back into their external environment without appropriate 
adaptive know-how, concerned with how to excrete their waste products. 
These considerations dictate that life must have certain key properties. Living 
organisms not only have to be active, fuel-consuming systems, but they must
also be informed, purposeful, goal-seeking agents to oppose the second law.10
The knowledge of how to oppose the second law is the second basic 
requirement of life. As we saw in my third example, there is a fundamental 
asymmetry between the availability of the two kinds of resources that organ￾isms need to stay alive. They are energy and matter resources, which I’ll call 
the “bioenergetics resources” of life, as opposed to informational resources, 
which I’ll call the “bioinformatics resources” of life. Although biologists 
usually think of the bioenergetic resources of life in terms of the metabolic 
activities of organisms, here I’m going to use the term “bioenergetics” pri￾marily in an ecological sense, to refer to the energy and matter that flow 
through ecosystems and that organisms have to tap into to stay alive.
With respect to the bioenergetics of life, raw energy and matter resources 
exist in the external environments of organisms. Energy and matter
resources even exist on lifeless planets, in the total absence of organisms. 
But with respect to the bioinformatics of life, raw informational resources, 
in the form of adaptive know-how or knowledge, do not exist in the external 
environments of organisms. Raw informational resources exist only in the 
form of the information carried by other organisms, but they don’t exist 11 What Is Life?
anywhere else in their environment. The knowledge that organisms require 
to oppose the second law has to be made by life itself. In practice, adaptive 
know-how is made by evolutionary processes as a consequence of evolving 
populations of organisms interacting with their external environments and 
the natural selection that ensues from their interactions.
Genetic variations, which were previously adaptive for ancestral organ￾isms relative to their environment in the past, can accumulate in evolving 
populations. Individual organisms may then inherit a sample of adaptive 
information as a function of their membership of their particular evolving 
populations. Individual organisms may also gain additional adaptive know￾how for themselves as a function of a variety of developmental processes, 
such as adaptive immunity, epigenetic processes, or learning in animals. By 
using whatever adaptive know-how they acquire, individual organisms may 
be able to control the energy and matter flow between themselves and their 
external environment in ways that allow them to oppose the second law of 
thermodynamics and survive. Throughout this book, we are going to be
preoccupied with the asymmetries between these two kinds of resources.
Schrödinger was well aware of both the bioenergetics requirements and 
the bioinformatics requirements of life, when he asked his question “What 
is life?”11 Largely thanks to him, we can now see that both of these basic 
requirements of life are closely related to the laws of thermodynamics. The 
first requirement, the bioenergetics of life, stems directly from the second 
law of thermodynamics. The second requirement, the bioinformatics of life, 
stems directly from the first requirement. Life cannot solve the first bioen￾ergetics of life problem unless it can also solve the second bioinformatics of 
life problem, and vice versa.
Schrödinger explicitly addressed the first bioenergetics of life problem as 
follows: “A living organism. . . . feeds upon negative entropy [by] attracting. . . .
a stream of negative entropy upon itself, to compensate [for] the entropy 
increase it produces by living and thus to maintain itself on a stationary and 
fairly low entropy level.”12 His answer to this first bioenergetics of life problem
introduces two key concepts that we need: “negative entropy” and “entropy.” 
Entropy equates to greater disorder and is reasonably familiar. However, 
“negative entropy,” or “negentropy,” is less intuitive: it means a greater order. 12 Chapter 1
As yet, there is probably no such thing as a common sense version of either
of these concepts. For the moment, I will continue to use the term “entropy” 
but I will often substitute the terms “free energy” or “order” for the awkward 
term “negative entropy.” Free energy is any kind of energy that can be utilized 
by a physical system to do work.13 In crude terms, the greater the amount of 
order in a resource, the more free energy it possesses.
Schrödinger was less explicit about the second bioinformatics require￾ment of life. He simply assumed that organisms are informed by the processes
of evolution, and primarily by the process of natural selection discovered 
by Charles Darwin.14 However, the acquisition of adaptive know-how by 
organisms, as a function of their evolution, is not cost-free. The processes
whereby organisms acquire, encode, store, transmit, and decode adaptive 
know-how, or even erase or forget it,15 all cost energy and matter. They all 
require some kind of physical platform, which must be built and maintained.
By the time Schrödinger was writing, Darwin’s theory of evolution by 
natural selection had been combined with Gregor Mendel’s laws of gene￾tic inheritance to provide the first truly coherent theory of evolution. In 
the title of a now well-known book, Julian Huxley called it the “modern 
synthesis.”16 In light of the modern synthesis theory, evolutionary biolo￾gists came to understand that for natural selection to be able to inform
individual organisms in evolving populations, physically encoded “memo￾ries” of some kind had to exist. These memories also had to be transmitted
between parent organisms and their offspring across successive generations 
of their populations. Specifically, memories of the historical outcomes of 
prior natural selection, acting on ancestral organisms, had to be transmitted
to contemporary organisms.
In 1944, the concepts of genetic inheritance and gene-based “memories” 
already existed. It was assumed that successive generations of organisms 
could inherit adaptive know-how from ancestral generations via whatever 
“particles” that underlay Mendel’s laws of inheritance. But no one knew 
how memories of the past were physically registered and stored in the cur￾rent generation, nor how that generation could transmit those memories to 
subsequent generations, because at that time, no one knew what the physical 
bases of gene-based memories were.13 What Is Life?
It was in these circumstances that Schrödinger put forward a hypothesis. 
He suggested that the physical basis of genetic memories should be some
kind of quasi-aperiodic crystal. At the time, he was probably thinking that
a protein molecule might do this job rather than a nucleic acid. But the 
proposal was prescient. The breakthrough came only nine years later, when 
James Watson and Francis Crick (1953), aided by others, most notably
Rosalind Franklin, discovered the real memory molecule, deoxyribonucleic 
acid (DNA), which indeed has the properties of a quasi-aperiodic crystal. 
Their discovery was inspired, at least in part, by Schrödinger.
Since Schrödinger’s time, orthodox evolutionary theory, today usually
referred to as “neo-Darwinism,” has made huge advances in understanding 
the bioinformatics of life problem. In contrast, orthodox evolutionary theory 
has paid far less attention to the bioenergetics of life, which has been largely 
left to ecologists. Orthodox evolutionary theory has also failed to pay much 
attention to the interactions between the bioenergetics and the bioinformat￾ics requirements of life, which are considerable. As a result, contemporary 
evolutionary theory doesn’t address how life contributes to its own evolution. 
We will be giving these issues far more attention in this book.
Given that Schrödinger was writing seventy-five years ago, why are we 
still going back to him and the physics of his time rather than building on
contemporary physics? This question has recently become more pertinent to 
biologists because a contemporary biophysicist, Stuart Kauffman, has been 
asking similar questions to the ones that we have been asking here about 
the nature of life, while also acknowledging his debt to Schrödinger. For 
instance, in his intriguingly named book A World beyond Physics,17 Kauffman 
asks how life evades but does not avoid the second law. However, Schröding￾er’s physics allows me to use conventional or even common sense versions 
of the flow of time, from past to present to future. It also allows me to use 
conventional ideas about cause-and-effect relationships in nature, which I 
couldn’t use if I based my approach on more modern understandings of 
those concepts by contemporary physicists, such as Ravelli’s The Order of 
Time.18 That would demand placing my account of the thermodynamics 
of life on quantum field theory, which is beyond me and I imagine most others 
(but see Carroll, 2019). For these reasons, I will stick with Schrödinger’s 14 Chapter 1
physics, combined primarily with the classical physics of the nineteenth and 
twentieth centuries.
MAXWELL’S DEMON
Where have the physicists left us? What can they tell us about the capacity 
of organisms to resist the second law of thermodynamics? Instructive here 
is the work of a father figure in the field of thermodynamics from an earlier
generation: James Clerk Maxwell. In the nineteenth century, Maxwell was 
interested in the laws of thermodynamics for two reasons. First, he wanted 
to know whether it was really impossible for any system to violate the second 
law of thermodynamics in a closed system (i.e., a system closed off from the 
rest of the universe). Can anything cheat the second law simply by violat￾ing it? At the time, that was still a sensible question to ask since the laws of 
thermodynamics were not as well established then as they are now. Implicitly, 
Maxwell also asked a second question: What minimal properties are needed 
for any system to resist the second law? He was interested in the efficiency 
of Victorian steam engines and, more generally, in human-designed and
manufactured fuel-consuming machines. Such machines are also out of ther￾modynamic equilibrium with their surroundings, although not nearly so far 
out of equilibrium as any living organism. Maxwell wondered whether it 
might be possible to build a machine that was so efficient that it could resist 
the second law by violating it in a closed system. One consequence of his 
second question was that Maxwell inadvertently provided biologists with 
an extremely helpful starting point for considering Schrödinger’s “What is 
life?” question.19
In his Theory of Heat (1871), Maxwell described a hypothetical “intel￾ligent,” conceptually subversive, second-law-opposing imaginary crea￾ture, which subsequently became known as “Maxwell’s demon.” Maxwell 
equipped his demon with the ability to monitor individual molecules of a 
gas in a cartoon environment, usually reduced to a boxlike container filled 
with a gas. Typically, the container is divided into two compartments, A and 
B, by a partition with a molecular-sized hole in it. A and B are initially in 
thermodynamic equilibrium with each other because the temperature and 15 What Is Life?
pressure of the gas are the same in both compartments. The container is shut 
off from the rest of the universe and is therefore a closed system.
Maxwell wanted to know whether in theory, a suitably energized and 
structurally and functionally informed demon could drive compartments 
A and B out of thermodynamic equilibrium by doing nonrandom, second￾law-opposing work. He was therefore exploring the opposite problem to the
one that I illustrated in my first example. Instead of introducing something 
that was deliberately out of thermodynamic equilibrium with its surround￾ings (as in my example of the red ink in the glass of water), to see whether
it would achieve thermodynamic equilibrium by passively reacting to the 
second law, Maxwell started with the opposite problem. He started with 
compartments A and B in his cartoon environment that were already in ther￾modynamic equilibrium with each other (equivalent to the pink water), and 
he investigated whether his demon could drive compartments A and B out of 
thermodynamic equilibrium relative to each other by doing active, informed 
work (equivalent to producing a concentrated drop of dye surrounded by 
clear water in the glass). Would this be possible? That was Maxwell’s question.
Let’s consider the two kinds of resources (labeled R) that the demon 
would require to do its job. First, it needs sufficient physical energy and 
matter to fuel its second-law-opposing work, and to supply it with the mate￾rial ingredients that it needs to accumulate negative entropy or order to build 
its body. From here on, this physical resource will be notated as R
p
, where 
the subscript p representing physical energy and matter. The demon also 
needs sufficient information in the form of meaningful, adaptive know-how 
in order to do its work “correctly” relative to its local external environment. 
From here on, this informational resource will be notated as Ri
, where the 
subscript i represents information in the form of adaptive know-how rela￾tive to the demon’s task in its environment. These two kinds of resources, 
R
p
 and Ri
, are identical to the basic requirements that living organisms need 
to oppose the second law, and it’s these equivalences that make the ques￾tions that Maxwell was asking so illuminating. First, we will consider how 
Maxwell’s demon acquires both its bioenergetic (or R
p
 requirements) and its 
adaptive know-how (or Ri
 requirements), and then we will return to consider 
how living organisms acquire these same resources.16 Chapter 1
Let’s start with the informational requirements of Maxwell’s demon. 
There was no problem for Maxwell’s demon in acquiring its adaptive know￾how in advance: Maxwell simply gave the demon the Ri
 that it needed to do 
its work, drawing on his scientific knowledge to design, inform, and instruct 
it. Maxwell also gave the demon a goal by instructing it to open and shut the 
door between compartments A and B selectively so as to cause it to oppose 
the second law of thermodynamics. For instance, Maxwell told his demon 
to sort all the fast-moving molecules into compartment A and all the slow￾moving molecules into compartment B. In doing so, he effectively turned the 
demon into a purposeful agent, or goal-seeking system. Maxwell also gave 
his demon sufficient intelligence, or know-how, to perceive, remember, and 
demarcate between fast and slow molecules and to assign dif­ferent values to 
dif­ferent molecules. Their values were derived from his demon’s goal or pur￾pose. Maxwell then gave his demon the physical capacity to open and shut 
the door between the two compartments in its environment selectively. In this 
way, his demon acquired both its necessary structural design and functional 
adaptations to do its second-law-opposing work. Maxwell also designed 
his demon’s environment. To ask whether it was theoretically possible for a
demon to oppose the second law in a closed system, he placed it in a closed 
environment (i.e., the box with two compartments and a small partition).
Now let’s consider the physical resources (R
p ) that the demon also 
needed to oppose the second law. Here, it had a problem—Maxwell did not 
give it any energy to fuel its work. This was a deliberate decision on Maxwell’s 
part because the acquisition of sufficient energy (R
p ) by the demon from its 
closed environment was the principal problem that Maxwell was investigat￾ing. The demon had to take the energy that it needed from within the closed 
environment (i.e., within the box). A subsidiary problem is that the demon
had to dump the entropy that it was generating by its work, presumably in 
the form of heat, back into its closed environment without destroying the 
capacity of its environment to go on supplying it with energy.
What did Maxwell conclude? Was it possible for the demon to cheat 
the second law in its closed environment, at least in theory? Could it do so 
by creating free energy, by sorting between the faster and the slower mol￾ecules? If it could, the demon would succeed in violating the second law of 17 What Is Life?
thermodynamics in a closed system. But the answer was, famously, “No.” It 
was only the presence of variant molecules in its environment that allowed 
the demon to accumulate negative entropy by driving compartments A and 
B out of thermodynamic equilibrium by its intelligent work. In the absence 
of any environmental variance, the demon’s task would not have been pos￾sible, not even in theory.20 Moreover, the demon could only sort molecules 
effectively because it was fully informed. It had been given all the relevant 
information that it needed by Maxwell.
Maxwell, and later other physicists, demonstrated that no conceivable 
demon could oppose the second law by doing nonrandom work in a closed 
environment. Subsequently, many physicists challenged Maxwell’s findings 
by imagining ever more ingenious and minimalist versions of his demon, 
typically demons that needed either more Ri
 or less R
p
 than did Maxwell’s.21
Their efforts have been extremely enlightening, but none changed the basic 
result. No one has ever come up with a Maxwell’s demon that could violate 
the second law of thermodynamics in a closed environment by generating 
more free energy than it consumed.
Could the demon work in an open environment? Physicists have dem￾onstrated another much more mundane result that is of considerable interest 
to biologists. It turns out that it is relatively easy to design a “demon,” such 
as a fuel-consuming engine, that can oppose the second law of thermody￾namics, temporarily and locally, without violating the law, provided that the 
demon is placed in an open environment, which can supply it with the extra 
free energy that it needs to fuel its work. The demon’s open environment 
must also be able to absorb the increased entropy that its work generates.
The second law determines that the net entropy generated by the 
demon’s work must always be equal to or greater than the net free energy that 
the demon produces by its work. Maxwell demonstrated that although it is 
not possible for his demon to oppose the second law in a closed system, 
it is possible for a suitably informed demon to assemble highly improbable, 
very-far-from-thermodynamic-equilibrium systems in open environments, 
which contain sufficient R
p
 to sustain them, at the cost of increasing entropy 
somewhere else in the open environment. That is a less dramatic result than 
the violation of the second law, but it is nonetheless of major significance to 18 Chapter 1
the questions that interest us here. Maxwell’s ingenious thought experiment 
takes us at least part of the way toward satisfying Schrödinger’s criteria for life.
THE NECESSARY REQUIREMENTS FOR LIVING ORGANISMS
Now we can compare the (R
p
 and Ri
) requirements of living organisms to 
those of Maxwell’s demon. There is a strong convergence between the bio￾energetic (R
p) requirements of Maxwell’s demon and those of organisms. By 
demonstrating that it is impossible for any system to oppose the second law 
in a closed system, Maxwell demonstrated that it is impossible for a living 
organism to oppose the second law in a closed system. Both Maxwell’s demon 
and living organisms can acquire the energy and matter (R
p) resources that 
they need to do their second-law-opposing work only in open environments.
However, the requirement that organisms must live in open environ￾ments is easily satisfied. Life on Earth (or any conceivable extraterrestrial 
life) can exist only in open environments. More specifically, organisms can 
live only in those open environments that can supply them with enough free 
energy to build their improbable bodies and fuel their second-law-opposing
work. Organisms must also live in environments that can absorb the entropy 
or detritus that they generate through their work, without destroying the 
environment’s capacity to continue supplying them with their energy and 
matter needs. All organisms live in open heterogeneous ecosystems that are 
themselves open to wider ecosystems, up to and including Earth’s biosphere, 
which is open to the solar system. The last point is relevant because it means
that even though the physical energy and matter resources available on Earth 
are finite, the radiant energy from the Sun is effectively unlimited relative to 
life on Earth. All Earth’s life forms exist in the so-called Goldilocks zone of 
the Sun, which refers to regions of the solar system that are neither too cold 
or too hot, but, as in the children’s story, are just right. The Earth satisfies 
this criterion.
The Sun too obeys the second law of thermodynamics, but it is such a 
vast source of free energy and it lasts so long that, in practice, it is legitimate 
for biologists to treat it as an external source of unlimited free energy. Con￾sequently, all organisms on Earth do live in open environments that can 19 What Is Life?
supply them with sufficient R
p
 to fuel their second-law-opposing work. The 
Earth can also supply dif­ferent living organisms with the diverse physical 
ingredients that they may need to allow them to assemble and maintain their
highly improbable bodies. In addition, it allows some organisms to assemble
other highly improbable systems in their environments, such as animal and 
human artifacts.
Another convergence between the requirements of Maxwell’s demon 
and living organisms concerns the properties that Maxwell gave his demon to 
do its second-law-opposing work. Organisms must possess the same mini￾mal set of properties that Maxwell gave his demon.22 It follows that organ￾isms like Maxwell’s demon have to be purposeful, goal-seeking systems. They
must possess at least the minimal goal of actively opposing the second law to 
stay alive. In conventional biology, this basic goal of organisms corresponds 
to the survival component of fitness.
There is no comparable convergence between the demon and living 
organisms with respect to the bioinformatics requirements of organisms 
for two reasons. A minor reason for this lack of convergence is that organ￾isms need far more adaptive know-how (Ri
) than Maxwell’s demon needed 
to oppose the second law because of the sheer complexity of living organ￾isms’ internal and external environments compared with those of Maxwell’s 
demon. The demon’s environment was sufficiently simple that it did not 
need to “know” much to pursue its goals.
The opposite is true of organisms, whose internal and external environ￾ments vary in a very large number of dimensions. For example, the exter￾nal environments of organisms always include other second-law-opposing
organisms, including multiple predators, prey, parasites, competitors, and 
other species, with whom they share mutualistic relationships. Maxwell’s 
demon’s task was to drive a very simple system out of equilibrium to a
minimal degree. In contrast, organisms have to build and maintain mas￾sively improbable, far-from-equilibrium living bodies relative to extremely 
complex external environments. For these reasons, organisms need far more 
adaptive know-how (Ri
) than Maxwell’s demon needed. But this differ￾ence between Maxwell’s demon and living organisms is only a matter of
degree.20 Chapter 1
The major reason for the divergence between Maxwell’s demon and 
living organisms, with respect to the bioinformatics requirements of life, is 
much more fundamental. If organisms were really designed and informed 
by an omniscient, transcendental deity or god, in the same way as Maxwell 
was able to design and inform his demon on the basis of his own scientific 
knowledge, there would have been a much stronger convergence between 
living organisms and Maxwell’s demon. But nature tells us that that is not 
what happened. Organisms were not “designed,” nor spontaneously created, 
to fill their respective niches by a divine, transcendent, intelligent Creator. 
Instead, a huge amount of evidence tells us that all organisms owe their 
adaptive know-how to the natural processes of evolution. In particular, they 
owe it to the processes of natural selection, acting on populations of variant 
organisms over eons. Unlike Maxwell’s demon, organisms must be supplied 
with all the knowledge they need to do their second-law-opposing work by 
evolutionary processes. But how?
NATURAL SELECTION AND INFORMATION
Assuming that natural selection is the primary source of adaptive know-how 
(Ri
) for living organisms, we immediately run into two major limitations 
of natural selection. The first concerns the inability of natural selection to
prepare organisms in advance for their second-law-opposing work, in the same 
way that Maxwell was able to prepare his demon in advance to do its work. If 
organisms did not carry adaptive Ri
 from the outset of their lives, they would 
not be viable. Their initial interactions with their environments would be 
chance-based and probably fatal. However, natural selection does not work 
prospectively, but only retrospectively. It cannot inform organisms a priori 
about their futures, in advance of their lives. It can only inform them a pos￾teriori, after natural selection has already occurred relative to their ancestors 
and parents.
For this reason, natural selection has often been described as a “blind” 
process. It is blind to the future. Natural selection cannot predict new changes 
either in organisms or in their environments ahead of time. Instead, natural
selection works by selecting those memories of past historical interactions21 What Is Life?
between ancestral organisms and their ancestral environments that hap￾pened to be adaptive in the past. These memories, which we now assume 
are primarily encoded in genes, are then transmitted via inheritance sys￾tems to contemporary organisms in each successive generation of evolving 
populations. But this process cannot guarantee that the Ri
 that was adaptive 
for ancestral organisms in the past will still be adaptive for contemporary 
organisms in the present.
The best that natural selection can do is to inform contemporary organ￾isms with know-how (Ri
) that was adaptive in the past. Unlike the demon, 
which was given all the knowledge it needed by Maxwell a priori, natural
selection cannot guarantee that organisms will possess the adaptive know￾how (Ri
), that they need to survive. Natural selection informs organisms by 
an inductive gamble, which amounts to a bet that the present and future 
environments of contemporary individual organisms will be similar to the
past environments of their ancestors.
If there is little or no change either in organisms or their environments 
across generations, this inductive gamble is likely to work by producing well￾adapted contemporary organisms. However, if there are any changes either
in the organisms or in their environments, the gamble will be much more 
likely to fail. Later generations of organisms, informed by what is now out￾of-date adaptive know-how, may not possess the knowledge that they need 
to survive. The persistence of life depends on endless probabilistic inductive 
gambles. The fact that species survive for substantial periods of time shows that 
these inductive gambles can be effective. At the same time, the observation 
that all species eventually go extinct highlights the fact that these gambles
are not foolproof.
What kinds of changes are likely to undermine the capacity of natural
selection to supply organisms with adaptive know-how? Some components 
of the external environments of organisms do not change. For example, the 
laws of gravity and thermodynamics don’t change, at least on the timescales 
that interest us here, and neither do the structures of atoms unless they
become negative or positive ions by gaining or losing electrons. Subatomic 
elementary particles do not change either, nor do the laws of chemistry. It 
is a safe bet that all these laws were the same at the origin of life on Earth 22 Chapter 1
approximately four billion years ago as they are today. Insofar as natural
selection is sensitive to these unchanging components of organisms’ environ￾ments, it should be able to supply contemporary organisms with the adaptive 
know-how that they need to survive.
Other components of the external environments of organisms do 
change, but only slowly. For example, the radiant energy from the Sun takes 
millions of years to change. The prior natural selection of ancestral organ￾isms is likely to have a considerable capacity for preparing contemporary 
organisms with appropriate adaptations in response to the radiant energy 
of the Sun.
Difficulties arise when components of the external environments of 
organisms change more rapidly, such as climate changes and evolutionary 
changes in other organisms. Moreover, because almost all organisms modify
their environments by their niche-constructing activities, these activities are 
also likely to cause some changes in their own and in each other’s environ￾ments. Some of these changes may be rapid, and they may also be significant
relative to the adaptations of contemporary organisms. They may demand 
further evolution from evolving populations.23 In these circumstances, we 
might expect natural selection to favor any biological trait that can offset 
this first limitation of natural selection. For example, natural selection might
favor organisms that live only very short lives, thereby limiting the amount of 
change that they are likely to have to cope with in each generation.
Natural selection might also favor organisms that invest in large num￾bers of diverse offspring in order to increase the chances that a fraction 
of their descendants will happen to be well adapted to whatever environ￾mental changes do occur. Alternatively, in longer-lived organisms, natural
selection may favor the evolution of supplementary developmental infor￾mation gaining processes that update adaptive know-how (Ri
), in individual 
organisms. These supplementary developmental processes include immune 
systems, epigenetic processes, and learning in individual animals. Natural
selection may also favor the evolution of sociocultural information-gaining
processes in social animals, including humans (see chapter 7).
There is also another way in which natural selection can favor traits in 
organisms that compensate for natural selection’s limitation of only being 23 What Is Life?
able to confer knowledge that was adaptive in the past. Natural selection 
may favor organisms that partly determine their own environment, either by 
physically modifying it by their niche-constructing activities or by actively 
relocating to environments that have properties that resemble their ances￾tors’ environments.24
Natural selection should also favor organisms that choose, modify, or 
regulate the environments in which their offspring develop in order to maxi￾mize the chances that their offspring’s environments are well suited to their 
inherited adaptive know-how. For instance, birds’ nests, termite mounds, 
and mammal burrows reduce the range of temperatures that these organisms
and their offspring experience in their environments.25 The transmission of 
environments, modified by the niche-constructing activities of ancestral and 
parent organisms to their descendants, is referred to as an “ecological inheri￾tance”26 in niche construction theory (NCT). Living organisms frequently 
inherit not just their genes, but an environment that has been shaped by 
their parents’ niche construction, in an effort to ensure that the adaptive 
know-how (Ri
) that they inherit via genetic inheritance will be adaptive.
The second major limitation of natural selection is that it cannot inform 
individual organisms with adaptive know-how (Ri
) directly. It can inform 
evolving populations directly, but it can inform individual organisms in 
populations only indirectly, as a function of the membership of their partic￾ular populations. Let’s first consider how natural selection informs evolving 
populations. Then I’ll consider why natural selection cannot do the same for
individual organisms. Evolving populations comprise multiple organisms, 
manifesting a variety of diverse phenotypes in each generation. This diversity 
is partly due to the various adaptive know-how (Ri
) and resources (R
p ) that 
each individual organism in a population inherits from its ancestors via its 
parents. The population will then undergo natural selection arising from 
the interactions of each individual organism in the population, with its own 
local external environment. Each individual organism in each generation is 
exposed to its own idiosyncratic selection pressures.
The dif­ferent selective fates of individual organisms in each generation 
then allow natural selection to sort between better- or worse-adapted indi￾viduals. The least well adapted, or the least fit, are likely to be eliminated 24 Chapter 1
from their population, while the best adapted, or most fit, are likely to make 
the greatest contribution to the next generation. The net effect should 
be to update the adaptive know-how (Ri
), carried collectively by the 
individual organisms in each successive generation of their populations. 
In this manner, natural selection is able to inform evolving populations 
directly.
Natural selection cannot do the same for individual organisms. Indi￾vidual organisms are similar to populations in that they can express a large 
number of diverse phenotypic traits, loosely analogous to the large number 
of diverse phenotypes expressed by individual organisms in populations. 
What may be confusing is that biologists use the same word, “phenotype,” 
to describe both each dif­ferent individual organism in a population and 
each separate phenotypic trait in each individual organism. For example, a 
spaniel is a phenotype in a population of dogs, while a spaniel’s characteristic 
floppy ears are a particular phenotypic trait in individual spaniels. The dif￾ference is that the diverse phenotypic traits in individual organisms cannot 
be separately evaluated by natural selection, in the same way that individual 
organisms in populations can be separately evaluated.
Natural selection cannot act within individual organisms by selecting 
between their diverse phenotypic traits. For example, if the spaniel has a left 
ear slightly bigger than its right ear, even if that makes it hear better in the 
left, natural selection cannot favor the left ear over the right. The fates of all 
an individual spaniel’s traits are tied together. Natural selection can only act
directly on the whole organism that carries them, in this case selecting both 
ears together. Neither natural selection nor artificial selection can affect the
floppy ears of an individual spaniel during its lifetime. It can change the ears 
of a population of spaniels only by imposing a selective bias, either in favor 
of or against bigger or smaller floppy ears. The phenotypic traits expressed by 
any individual organism are bound to share the same selective fate as all the 
other phenotypic traits carried in that particular organism. Sometimes this 
may have unfortunate consequences for an organism. For instance, if one of 
its phenotypic traits is severely maladapted, it may cause the whole organism
to be eliminated by natural selection, even though all its other phenotypic 
traits may be well adapted. The net result is that individual organisms cannot 25 What Is Life?
be directly informed by natural selection during their lifetimes, in the same
way that evolving populations can be directly informed by natural selection
over successive generations.
This second limitation of natural selection was noted by Darwin when 
he originally discovered natural selection. Darwin could not explain how 
natural selection could inform individual organisms with adaptive structural 
and functional know-how (Ri
), until he had invented population biology. 
Only then could he explain how natural selection could inform individual
organisms as a function of their membership of their particular evolving 
populations.27
Now we can take a closer look at how natural selection is able to inform
individual organisms in populations indirectly. It starts with the legacies 
that newly born organisms inherit from their ancestors via their parents. We 
know that offspring inherit genes from their ancestors, and we have also seen 
that they frequently inherit an ecological legacy in the form of an ancestrally 
modified local environment. For the moment, I will assume that this initial
inheritance comprises no more than a new organism’s genetic inheritance
and ecological inheritance, relative to each other. This package I call “niche 
inheritance.”28 In reality, it may involve some additional nongenetic (Ri
) 
inheritance systems, as well as the inheritance of some initial energy and 
matter (R
p ) resources. But I’ll ignore these complications for the moment.
The ecological inheritance of any neonate organism will always include
an initial address in space and time. The new organism then has to immedi￾ately start translating its niche inheritance into the assembly and growth of its 
very-far-from-thermodynamic-equilibrium internal environment and body. 
It has to do so in opposition to the second law of thermodynamics by imme￾diately importing energy and matter from, and exporting detritus to, its local 
environment. Natural selection will be evaluating the new individual organ￾ism’s capacity for survival throughout this time. Only organisms equipped 
with the appropriate properties, including Maxwell demon–type properties 
relative to their local selective environments, will survive and grow into adult￾hood. This accounts for the first classical component of fitness: survival.
But survival alone is not enough. The only organisms that can exist in 
successive generations of a population are those that happen to be instructed 26 Chapter 1
by the adaptive know-how (Ri
) that they inherit, in order to pay back the 
gift of their initial adaptive know-how that they receive from their ancestors. 
They pay for the adaptive know-how for the next generation of organisms 
in their population, primarily by transmitting the Ri
 that they currently 
carry to their offspring via one or more inheritance systems. They may also 
pay for the initial assembly of their offspring’s bodies with some directly 
transmitted energy and matter (R
p ) resources.
This introduces the second classical component of fitness: reproduction. 
To reproduce, individual organisms require additional R
p
 and Ri
, beyond 
what they need for their own survival. They also require some extra phe￾notypic properties beyond their minimal Maxwell demon–type properties. 
These additional properties are required both to produce new offspring and, 
quite often, to supply their offspring with initial energy and matter resources 
to increase their offspring’s initial viability. They may also include the con￾struction of a benign developmental nursery environment. They need all 
these extra properties to enable the next generation of organisms in evolving 
populations to be informed indirectly by natural selection. If organisms did 
not reproduce as well as survive, then evolution would stop. In the long run, 
enough organisms in each generation must reproduce to ensure the ongoing 
evolution of their populations.
Physically, individual organisms in populations cannot survive for long. 
Sequoia trees are among the longest-lived plants on Earth. They can live for 
up to 3,000 years, which is impressive, but they are still mortal. Animals are 
less impressive. Probably some species of turtle are among the longest-lived 
animals. They can live in excess of 200 years. That’s also impressive by human
standards, but turtles too are mortal. The aging process has multiple causes,
but a major reason why all individual organisms are mortal is because, by their 
active second-law-opposing work, they are bound to generate entropy (or 
disorder) within their own bodies over time, as well as the entropy that they 
must export back to their external environments. For example, some genes 
(called “vacuole-protein genes”) are essential in humans because they remove 
toxins in cells, but the same genes are not essential in mice. It would seem that 
recent increases in the longevity of humans have rendered these genes crucial, 
as toxins can now build up for longer periods, to the point at which they are 27 What Is Life?
lethal if not removed.29 The phenotypes of organisms inevitably accrue scars 
by the wear and tear of their existence. They must eventually age, dissipate, and 
die. When they die, the residue of the energy and matter (or R
p ) resources car￾ried in their bodies is returned to their environment in the form of another 
kind of detritus: dead organic matter (or DOM, as ecologists call it).
In contrast, the adaptive know-how (or Ri
) carried by individual organ￾isms need not dissipate in the same way. If individual organisms manage to 
reproduce before they die, then they may be able to transmit and spread 
copies of their Ri
, such as genetic information, to multiple offspring and 
potentially to unlimited numbers of descendants in their populations. It 
will still cost organisms energy and matter resources to acquire, process, 
and transmit their adaptive know-how to their offspring, and it will cost 
more energy and matter resources to produce the offspring themselves. Also, 
the adaptive know-how may not always be faithfully copied when it is trans￾mitted to the next and succeeding generations. Copying mistakes, such as
mutations, can occur. For all these reasons, the Ri
 resources of organisms may 
eventually dissipate too. But if organisms in each generation can pay the 
cost of the evolutionary processes that make their adaptive know-how, and 
if the transmission of their Ri
 is faithful, then the adaptive know-how, carried 
by individual organisms, may last for millions or even billions of years of 
evolution. Relative to R
p
, Ri
 approaches immortality.
This asymmetry between the physical energy and matter (R
p ) resources 
of mortal individual organisms in their bodies, and the near-immortality of 
the adaptive know-how (Ri
) that they also carry is significant. It is reminis￾cent of the way in which the potter in my earlier example could transmit
her adaptive know-how about how to make coffee mugs to others, both in
her own generation and, in principle, also to succeeding generations. If this 
asymmetry between the R
p
 and Ri
 requirements of organisms did not exist, 
it is hard to see how the evolution of life would be possible.
In spite of this asymmetry, it is of interest that organisms may sometimes 
be able to transmit energy and matter resources across multiple generations 
too. They can do so via the ecological inheritance that they bequeath to 
their descendants as a consequence of their niche-constructing activities.30
A large-scale example is the oxygen in Earth’s atmosphere. The origins of the 28 Chapter 1
atmosphere is a complicated story involving both abiotic and biotic sources 
of oxygen, but crucially, it initially involved the production of oxygen as a 
waste product of photosynthetic reactions in cyanobacteria. This probably
began more than three billion years ago. Cyanobacteria are still with us today, 
and they are still pumping out oxygen as a by-product of photosynthesis. 
In NCT, this is called “by-product niche construction.” In this case, it is 
a by-product that has changing natural selection pressures in the selective 
environments of countless species of organisms, and over eons of time.
JOHN VON NEUMANN’S NATURAL AUTOMATA
Let’s consider what extra properties individual organisms need, beyond 
their minimal Maxwell’s demon–type properties, to reproduce as well as 
to survive. Another physicist, John von Neumann, aided by his colleagues, 
notably Stanislaw Ulam,31 was the first to ask that question. He was inter￾ested in the minimal properties that any physical system needs to reproduce. 
His approach was similar to Maxwell’s, in that von Neumann developed his 
theory of natural automata in an attempt to answer his own question.32
His theory later morphed into cellular automata theory,33 but I will nonethe￾less focus on natural automata theory because von Neumann was the first to 
raise some basic philosophical as well as logical points about reproduction.
Natural automata theory attempted to establish the irreducible minimal 
properties that any physical system requires to reproduce by making a copy of 
itself. It combines the properties of a “universal constructor” with the proper￾ties of a “universal controller.” The theory depends on four interacting com￾ponents:
• The universal constructor
• The constructor’s universal controller
• The instructions that inform the controller with meaningful informa￾tion, in the form of appropriate adaptive know-how specifying how to 
make the constructed entity
• A copier that can copy the instructions, and insert a copy of them into 
whatever entity the constructor constructs3429 What Is Life?
In principle, the universal constructor is reducible to any sufficiently 
informed and energized system capable of doing the work that von Neu￾mann’s theory assigned to it. In his original version, the universal constructor 
was equipped with a “long arm” that could construct any entity. To do so, it 
needed a favorable external environment that could provide it with enough 
energy and material parts (R
p ), to allow it to do its constructive work. The 
universal constructor could therefore construct any entity, including a copy 
of the natural automata itself, provided that the appropriate know-how was 
encoded in the instructions and could be copied.35
However, the natural automata’s universal constructor could not evade 
the second law of thermodynamics. To do its second-law-opposing work, it 
needed to be fueled by energy and matter (R
p ) resources that it had to take 
from its external environment. Implicitly, the constructor must have been 
equipped with Maxwell’s demon–type properties, as well as its own natu￾ral automata–type properties, to do its work. Originally, von Neumann 
appeared to take this for granted. He didn’t pay much attention to the natural
automata’s environment either, beyond assuming that it could supply the 
constructor with everything that it needed.
The universal controller is equivalent to a universal computer (i.e., a 
computer capable of calculating anything that can be computed, bearing in 
mind that some things are not computable).36Today, a universal computer is 
usually called a “Turing machine” after Alan Turing, a pioneering computer 
scientist. The computer is reducible to a finite set of parts and states.
The computer “reads” the instructions, which are reducible to a poten￾tially infinite string of binary digits (0s and 1s) on a tape. The instructions 
carry “knowledge” (Ri
) that is “read” by the control unit and then controls the 
constructor’s work. In principle, the information could cause the construc￾tor to construct anything, but what is relevant here is that it could contain 
instructions to make another copy of the natural automata itself. The decisive 
step occurs when the universal constructor constructs another universal con￾structor, another universal controller, another set of instructions, and another 
copier and inserts them all into whatever entity it is constructing.37 That step 
permits a “parent” natural automata to make an “offspring” natural automata; 
that is, a copy of itself. Thus, it allows the natural automata to reproduce.30 Chapter 1
The original natural automata by von Neumann showed that even imper￾fect parts can lead to a sustained process of replication if there is sufficient 
redundancy in the instructions or their implementation for error correction to 
occur. The natural automata’s controller is responsible for quality checks, but 
it is not always the controller that does the checking since it can be done by 
external factors too. This is significant here, as it implies that if living creatures 
have natural automata–type properties, quality control could arise through 
natural selection pressures in their external environments. In addition, von 
Neumann established that the natural automata is logically capable of con￾structing automata that are more complicated than itself.38 In the case of 
reproducing organisms, that is what allows more complex systems to evolve.
Natural automata have a lot in common with living organisms. There 
are many similarities, but also some significant differences. Let’s consider the 
similarities first, by translating natural automata into a representative indi￾vidual organism. Here, we will illustrate the connection by assuming that 
the only significant inheritance system between generations of organisms in 
evolution is genetic inheritance. That is oversimple, but it was probably close
to what von Neumann was assuming anyway, since that was the orthodox 
understanding of evolution at the time. The connections between natural
automata and individual organisms are then as follows: The phenotypes of 
organisms correspond to the natural automata’s universal constructor. Phe￾notypes cannot claim to be universal constructors, but they can produce a lot 
of diversity among their offspring. In this simplified conception, the univer￾sal controller of an organism equates to the individual organism’s genome, 
and the instructions correspond to the way in which adaptive know-how is 
encoded in the strings of nucleotide bases that exist in the DNA that organ￾isms inherit from their parents (i.e., genetic information). The capacity of
DNA to replicate copies of itself is also equivalent to the capacity of the natu￾ral automata’s copier to replicate copies of its own instructions. Moreover, 
thanks to Watson and Crick (1953) and others, we now know how DNA 
does replicate. These similarities between natural automata and organisms
are remarkable. They are almost self-evident to anyone who knows how 
organisms reproduce. That was probably no accident. It was, after all, what
von Neumann was originally trying to capture.31 What Is Life?
But there are also some significant differences between the natural
automata and organisms. One is that natural automata reproduce asexually, 
whereas most organisms, including microorganisms, need to combine with 
other organisms to reproduce. Sexual reproduction complicates reproduc￾tion, but it doesn’t fundamentally change the natural automata–type proper￾ties that lie at the heart of the reproductive process. Once begun, the natural
automata’s capacity for reproduction can continue indef­initely, generation 
after generation. It can thereby also mimic the capacity of the evolution of 
life to continue indef­initely.
The most important difference between natural automata and living
organisms is the same as the fundamental difference between Maxwell’s 
demon and living organisms. The natural automata was given its adaptive 
know-how (Ri
) a priori by its parent-scientist (in this case, by von Neumann). 
But the reproductive activities of organisms must actually be informed by 
the natural processes of evolution, not by scientists acting as proxies for a 
divine Creator. It follows that organisms must be instructed to reproduce 
by the adaptive know-how (Ri
) that they inherit from their ancestors via 
their parents. Living organisms have to be active, purposeful, goal-seeking
agents in their own evolution, both to survive as a function of their Max￾well’s demon–like properties and to reproduce as a function of their natural
automata–like properties.
CONCLUSIONS
Now let’s return to Schrödinger’s subordinate question: What else is needed
beyond the known laws of physics and chemistry to understand life? It is clear, 
thanks to Maxwell, von Neumann, and many others, that living organisms
do not evade the laws of physics and chemistry. Rather, they owe many of 
their vital properties to the underlying lawfulness of the universe. But there 
are at least two properties of living organisms that appear to be beyond 
physics. The first is the active, purposeful agency of fitness-seeking organ￾isms. Physics deals with purposeless physical systems on all scales. But so far 
it has never had to deal with or explain purposeful systems. At present, the
concept of purposeful systems is beyond orthodox evolutionary theory too. 32 Chapter 1
Neo-Darwinism assesses the fitness of individual organisms in populations 
in terms of their capacity to survive and reproduce, but without attributing 
these capacities to the active, purposeful agency of organisms. In this book, 
I am going to argue that the purposeful agency of individual organisms plays
a central role in evolution.
The second phenomenon of life, which the known laws of physics and 
chemistry cannot account for, is how the evolutionary process creates the 
“knowledge” or adaptive know-how that organisms need to live. Knowledge￾making processes lie beyond the laws of physics and chemistry. Biologists 
have to study these processes and attempt to understand them. However, 
neo-Darwinism, the current orthodox theory of evolution, does not describe 
evolution as a knowledge-making process, but only as an adaptation￾supplying process that occurs thanks to natural selection. This is so, even 
though adaptations depend on the acquisition of structural and functional 
adaptive know-how (Ri
) by evolving populations of organisms. The adapta￾tions of organisms are contingent on the capacity of evolution to “make” the 
knowledge that ultimately informs them. Furthermore, the natural selection
of genetic variation, while primary, is only one of several knowledge-gaining
processes that can occur in evolution (see chapter 7). Here too, orthodox 
evolutionary theory falls short. It doesn’t yet recognize supplementary 
information-gaining processes in evolution. We will be returning to these
issues in later chapters.
THE STRUCTURE OF THE BOOK
Part I of this book attempts to understand the fundamental properties of 
life anywhere in the universe where life may exist. The remaining chapters of 
part I concentrate on Schrödinger’s subordinate question: What else is needed
beyond the known laws of physics and chemistry to understand life? Chapter 2 
considers what is meant by the term “information” in evolutionary biology. 
There are many conceptions of information used by scientists and engineers. 
Chapter 3 explores what is meant by the biological concept of adaptation in 
the context of adaptive interactive niche relationships between organisms 
and their local external environments. This will include the use of Ross 33 What Is Life?
Ashby’s control theory to specify how the variable properties of organisms 
relate to the variable properties of their environments. In chapter 4, I will
consider meaningful information or adaptive know-how, rather than just 
bits, relative to the adaptations of organisms. Chapter 5 considers how the 
bioenergetics and the bioinformatics requirements of life, interact with each 
other, potentially on any planet where life may exist.
Part II of this book applies the points raised in part I to life on Earth. 
Chapter 6 addresses the specific challenge of explaining the origin of life 
on Earth. This chapter owes a great deal to the support of Bruce Damer 
and David Deamer, the authors of one of the two principal contemporary 
hypotheses about the origin of life on Earth. Chapter 7 concentrates on 
the evolution of supplementary information-gaining processes, including 
developmental processes in individual organisms and social and cultural
processes in social animals, including humans. Chapter 8 concerns the 
origin and subsequent evolution of ecosystems on Earth as a function of 
the coevolution of niche-constructing organisms with their environments. 
Chapter 9 summarizes why, in light of all the preceding chapters, it may be 
necessary to extend the theory of evolution beyond the modern synthesis and 
neo-Darwinism. Chapter 10 applies all the ideas discussed in the preceding 
chapters to the question of how humans are currently contributing to the 
evolution of life on Earth.In chapter 1, we established that all living organisms have to oppose the 
second law of thermodynamics without violating it, and that to do so, they 
must be informed. In such cases, to understand life, we must focus on the 
natural processes that supply organisms with their adaptive know-how, or 
Ri
. What are these processes, and how do they work?
To answer these questions, we need to go back to the work of Claude 
Shannon, often called “the father figure of information theory,” even though 
he didn’t much like that accolade. Shannon was a mathematician and engi￾neer working at Bell Labs in New Jersey, which is renowned for pioneering 
research into telecommunications. In the late 1940s, he completed his most 
celebrated work, establishing the foundations of communication theory–
which is what he preferred to be remembered for—and thereby ushered in 
the new digital age. Not everyone realized it at the time, but the value of 
Shannon’s work was immediately recognized by his fellow mathematicians, 
engineers, and scientists, and by his colleagues at Bell Labs. One conse￾quence of Shannon’s immense prestige was that his employers had the wit 
to give him a free hand to work on any problem he liked or to fool around 
in any way he wished. (Among other quirks, he rode down the corridors of 
Bell Labs on a monocycle while juggling!)1
Shannon nonetheless delivered some truly memorable and pioneering 
work. One project was initiated by his wife, Betty, a fellow mathematician 
at Bell Labs. She gave Shannon a present, the biggest and most expensive 
construction kit she could find. It was designed for kids, which raised a 
2 INFORMATION36 Chapter 2
few eyebrows, but Betty Shannon knew her husband, and he loved his pres￾ent. He immediately started using it to construct all manner of things in 
the basement of their house. Before long, Shannon, with Betty’s help, was 
constructing robots. The first one was called a “turtle,” and it did little more 
than explore a room by traveling around the room until it hit a wall, and
then it turned around to travel further and eventually discover another wall 
by hitting that one too. Not too impressive by modern standards.
Shannon’s second robot, however, which he named Theseus, became 
internationally famous. Theseus was a small wooden mouse, equipped with 
three wheels, some copper whiskers, and a magnet embedded in its body. 
He also had an external brain, comprised of seventy-five post office relay 
switches under the maze. Theseus’s job was to negotiate a maze and learn how 
to find a piece of metallic cheese as a reward. His ability to move depended 
on interactions between the magnet embedded in its body and the magnet, 
or possibly magnets, embedded in the maze. It was Theseus’s ability to learn 
the maze by running through it that so intrigued and startled everybody. 
Remember, this was 1948. Theseus took some time to learn how to negoti￾ate the maze, but once he did, he subsequently went straight to the metallic 
cheese reward, without making any further errors. In this, the robot was 
similar to the rats that psychologists were teaching to learn comparable mazes 
at that time. Shannon’s own provocative comment about Theseus’s achieve￾ment was that the mouse did not solve the maze, “the maze was solving the 
mouse.”2
 That was a joke. But what did he mean by it? And how did Shan￾non’s interest in a robot that was capable of learning relate to his work on 
communication theory?
Shannon’s first insight was that you had to forget about the meaning of 
a message if you want to understand how a message is communicated. There 
is a difference between the act of communication and the meanings that are 
communicated, and the latter is irrelevant to the former. Shannon then estab￾lished the basic components and mechanisms of communication. A message 
must have a source and a transmitter. Typically, the transmitter has to encode 
the message into symbols of some kind and then transmit the message in 
symbolic form, down a communication channel, connecting the transmitter 
to a receiver. The channel carries the signal between the transmitter and the 37 Information
receiver. The channel’s capacity to transmit signals is limited in various ways. 
For instance, the speed with which it transmits the message may be limited by 
power or bandwidth, or the clarity with which it transmits may be limited
by the amount of background “noise” that the signal has to compete within 
the channel. A crucial variable is the signal-to-noise ratio. Crudely stated, if 
the noise gets too great relative to the power of the signal, the receiver will
not get a clear message. The receiver has to decode the message and send it 
to its destination.
Major questions that Shannon was trying to solve included: How much 
information was lost during its transmission through the channel? What 
were the causes of this loss? How could the losses be minimized? These prob￾lems were assigned to him by Bell Labs. After all, Bell Labs were owned by 
the biggest telephone company in the US at the time, AT&T, and these were 
the kinds of practical problems for which they wanted answers.
To solve such problems, Shannon had to find some way of measuring
the amount of information carried by whatever message was being trans￾mitted down the channel from the transmitter to the receiver. The unit of 
measurement he came up with was a binary digit, or bit. A bit equals the 
amount of information in, or the amount of uncertainty reduced by, one 
answer to one “yes” or “no” question. A bit can therefore be represented as 
either 1 or 0, and any message of any length can be represented by a string 
of 1s and 0s. Shannon also indicated how measuring information in bits 
was independent of the meaning of any message. For example, Morse code 
comprises strings of dots and dashes, equivalent to 1s and 0s. You can send 
a meaningful message to another person, such as your daughter, like “Your 
dinner is in the oven,” by selecting the appropriate string of dots and dashes 
in Morse code. But you could also send your daughter a completely mean￾ingless message in the form of a random string of dots and dashes of exactly 
the same length and with the same number of bits. This example makes the 
point that, to communicate, both the transmitter and the receiver must share 
the same symbol system. In this instance, both you and your daughter must
know Morse code in order to communicate.
Shannon used bits to measure the efficiency of the transmission of infor￾mation through a channel, including the loss of information between a 38 Chapter 2
transmitter and a receiver. To everyone’s surprise, he came up with an equa￾tion that captured the efficiency of information transmission, including 
the loss of information, and was very similar to the equation that measures the 
loss of order, or the increase in entropy, in a physical system as a function 
of the second law of thermodynamics. There was one difference, though. 
The second law of thermodynamics includes a measure of temperature, 
because entropy is related to temperature, but Shannon’s equation did not. 
His measure of information was dimensionless and had no need to refer to 
temperature.
Shannon talked to John von Neumann, who was the author of the 
equation that described entropy in physical systems, about what he should 
call his finding. In response, von Neumann rather flippantly suggested that 
he should call it “entropy” because no one understands entropy anyway, 
and it would make everyone interested. (That may not have been what von 
Neumann actually said, but it has been repeated in textbooks ever since.) 
Equipped with his equation, Shannon was then able to tell his employers 
at Bell Labs a lot about the most efficient way of sending signals between 
transmitters and receivers along communication channels such as telephone 
lines. For example, to send messages faster, you need more power. That was 
obvious. Or you could strip out as much redundancy from the message as 
possible, so long as the message still made sense. To do this, you need to 
reduce the number of symbols that you use to carry a message to a minimum. 
This idea was less obvious. However, to reduce interference due to noise in 
a channel, you had to do the opposite. You had to add redundancy to make 
sure that your message still gets through, in spite of the background noise. A 
simple example might be to repeat the message, such as what occurs at air￾ports where airlines make repeated announcements about gates for specific 
flights. There is always a balance between reducing redundancy to increase 
the speed of transmission and increasing redundancy to combat noise in a 
communication channel. That was a useful result.
Now we can go back to Shannon’s mouse, Theseus. How can communi￾cation theory be applied to the learning process in an individual mouse, real 
or robotic? Does it even make sense to ask this question, given that Shannon’s 
communication theory ignores the meaning of messages, whereas learning is 39 Information
always about the acquisition of meaningful information? Shannon presum￾ably thought it did. But how could his communication theory lead him to 
building a robot mouse that was capable of learning to negotiate a maze?
It is possible to represent any ordered physical system or structure—in 
this case, the maze—in terms of bits. The mouse is capable of detecting these
bits, and therefore acquiring information in this still meaningless but quan￾tifiable sense. This information was derived from the design and structure of 
the maze that the mouse was running through. The Princeton physicist, John 
Wheeler, once described the order inherent in organized physical entities as 
“its” and the information associated with it as “bits,” and argued that it is 
possible to extract “bits from its,” and vice versa.3
 For Theseus, the source 
of its information (i.e., his bits) came from the design, order, and structure of 
the maze (his “ITs”), as sensed by his copper whiskers. Theseus’s task was to 
translate the information that he sensed via his whiskers into meaningful, 
internalized “knowledge” in his robotic “brain” (i.e., about the structure of 
the maze, where the walls and arms are, and where the cheese reward is) and 
then into adaptive know-how, or Ri (i.e., concerning which way to run and 
which turns to take to find the cheese). Hence, I am defining three grades 
of information here. Henceforth, I will restrict the term “information” to 
meaningless bits, but also talk about meaningful (i.e., declarative) informa￾tion as “knowledge,” and meaningful functional (i.e., procedural) knowledge 
as “adaptive know-how.” Ri refers to the latter.
Shannon’s mouse also had to be capable of a minimal degree of niche 
construction—namely, to make choices about which arm of the maze to 
enter, to run down the chosen arm, and to register in some kind of memory 
the outcomes of his actions in the maze. When psychologists teach rats to do 
much the same thing in mazes, they refer to a rat’s activity as an instrumental 
response or action. Can the learning process in the rats, and in Theseus, be 
redescribed in terms of the components of Shannon’s communication the￾ory? If so, was this what Shannon was indicating about the mouse’s learning 
process when he said, “The maze solved the mouse”? Does the maze “teach” 
the mouse how to find its “cheese”?
I want to explore the possibility that Shannon’s communication the￾ory applies to all knowledge-gaining processes in nature. I will begin with40 Chapter 2
learning, but then consider evolution. There is a preliminary problem, how￾ever. We usually think of communication in terms of two people, often
nicknamed Alice and Bob by the professionals in the communication busi￾ness. They could be talking to each other over a phone line. But are Alice 
and Bob having a two-way conversation, or are they having only a one-way
conversation? Is Alice talking to a silent Bob, or is Bob talking back to Alice? 
If the latter, then Alice and Bob will both be transmitting and receiving mes￾sages. In which case, who is communicating to whom (or what is communi￾cating with what?) when an individual learner is learning something about 
its environment, as Theseus was in the maze, and when no other organism 
is present? Who or what is the transmitter and who or what is the receiver 
in these circumstances?
The naive learner, which I’ll call the “a priori” learner, transmits a mes￾sage after it has learned something to a receiver, which I’ll call the “a poste￾riori” learner. For a rat in a maze, the a posteriori learner is just a later version 
of itself. The a posteriori learner then switches to become the a priori learner 
again (in Theseus’s case, at the start of his next run through the maze). The 
second time around, however, the a priori learner is no longer naive. It is 
now equipped with a memory of the outcome of its previous run through 
the maze, which it communicates to a later version of itself. It is as if an 
earlier Alice is communicating what she has learned, in the form of memories 
about the outcomes of previous learning trials, to a later version of herself. 
The learning process, in any individual organism or in Shannon’s robot, 
is a time-based process. It requires time and communication between the 
before-and-after states of the individual learner. During this time, the learner 
is communicating to itself after each of its successive learning experiences.
Now we can consider the learning process by an individual learner step 
by step, as if it were a form of communication that can be described by 
Shannon’s communication theory. It begins with the source of the infor￾mation (e.g., the bits extracted from the maze). The mouse acquires this 
information by interacting with the maze. The outcomes of each run must 
be remembered, registered, and encoded in the brain of the mouse in the 
form of knowledge about the maze. In this way, Theseus converts bits into 
knowledge, a process that relies on the seventy-five post office relay switches 41 Information
that served as Theseus’s brain. The a posteriori mouse must then have com￾municated the revised state of its brain, in the form of the revised configura￾tion of its switches, back to its later self. Then the a posteriori mouse would 
have become an a priori mouse again at the start of its next run through the 
maze. However, it would no longer have been so naive. The mouse would 
now be carrying memories of its past interactions with the maze from its pre￾vious runs through it, in the form of the revised configuration of its switches. 
Functionally and implicitly, the mouse would also have had to assume that 
the maze had not changed and therefore its memories of its past runs were 
still relevant. The mouse could then use its memories to guide its next run 
through the maze. In this way, the outcomes of Theseus’s previous experi￾ences were remembered and communicated to the later version of himself.
Eventually, after a number of learning trials, the mouse learned to run 
directly to its cheese reward without making any mistakes. In this way, use￾ful “knowledge” about the maze was apparently translated into adaptive 
know-how, or Ri, that specified how Theseus could solve his task. More 
generally, the same translation of information first into knowledge and then 
into adaptive know-how should be true not just of Shannon’s robot, but of 
all animals that are capable of learning.
But what motivated Theseus, or for that matter, what motivates any 
learner, animate or inanimate, and causes it to want to learn? Shannon must 
have turned his mouse into a “goal-seeking” system that was motivated to 
find his “cheese” reward. In turning his mouse into a purposive, goal-seeking
system, Shannon was doing the same as Maxwell did for his demon in his 
thought experiment many years earlier. Shannon was giving Theseus the 
properties that a real mouse would need to stay alive. Among other things,
a real mouse must find food and consume it at regular intervals to survive.
SOCIAL LEARNING
Individual learning, however, is only one kind of animal learning. Many spe￾cies of animals are also capable of social learning: they can learn by imitating 
or copying each other. Typically, in a social learning situation, one or possibly 
several animals already possess the knowledge about their world and the 42 Chapter 2
adaptive know-how that they need to operate in it. Inadvertently or delib￾erately, they may then transmit some of their adaptive know-how to a naive 
animal, who learns from them by copying.4
 Social learning is perhaps more 
overtly compatible with Shannon’s communication theory than individual 
learning. In a social learning situation, one knowledgeable animal may serve 
as the transmitter of the message, while another naive animal may serve as the 
receiver. In every other respect, the communication between them should 
be the same as the communication between an individual learner communi￾cating its memories of its past experiences to a later version of itself. Learning 
is clearly a natural information-gaining and knowledge-making process in 
animals. The knowledge acquired is likely to be meaningful, and therefore 
probably adaptive, for the animals that gain it, regardless of whether it is 
cognitive or conscious.
Now we can summarize the chain of relationships between informa￾tion, meaning, purpose, knowledge, and adaptive know-how (Ri
), relative 
to at least one information-gaining process in nature: learning. Information, 
measurable in bits, can be acquired by a learner from the causal texture of its 
external environment via its senses as it interacts with it. At this stage, the 
information is neither meaningful nor meaningless. It is just another aspect 
of physical reality.
5
Meaning is assigned to this information by purposeful organisms when 
they interact with their external environments. All meaning in the envi￾ronment is relative to the purposive systems that experience it. There is no 
meaning without purpose. All living organisms are purposive systems. Some 
artifacts constructed by organisms, especially humans, may also qualify as
purposive systems. They will do so if they are carrying out any purpose on
behalf of the organisms that construct them. Shannon’s Theseus was one 
such artifact. The walls of the maze were given meaning by Theseus, either
presenting barriers or facilitating his purpose of finding the cheese. If Theseus 
has not been given this purpose, no adaptive knowledge of how to run the 
maze could have accrued.
The purposes of organisms in their environments ultimately stem from 
the universal requirements of all living organisms to oppose the second law 
of thermodynamics without violating it. This fundamental need arises from 43 Information
the improbability of the internal environments of organisms, relative to their 
external environments, and their far-from-thermodynamic-equilibrium sta￾tus. A fundamental need of all organisms, therefore, is to control a flow of 
energy and matter between themselves and their external environments that 
opposes the flux of energy and matter favored by the second law. If they 
fail, the flux would destroy them. Organisms must also avoid or mitigate 
other threats to their existence, stemming from abiotic sources or from other 
organisms, such as predators, in their environments. They must also avoid 
destroying their own habitats by harvesting excessive resources from them or 
dumping excessive detritus in them. But organisms cannot oppose the sec￾ond law by chance. Survival and reproduction require organisms to acquire 
sufficient adaptive know-how (Ri
) about their local external environments 
to persist, using whatever knowledge-making processes are available to them, 
including the learning process in animals.
Meaning converts bits into knowledge on the basis of its perceived use￾fulness or biological utility. As it learns, an animal will communicate its
earlier memories to its later self—in fact, that is what memory is. Successive 
learning experiences will accumulate as memories in the nervous systems 
or brains of the animal. A subset of this knowledge, when put to work by 
the learner, will become operational knowledge in the form of adaptive 
know-how, or Ri
. A learner may then modify its subsequent behaviors in its
environment. It may also modify its environment by its niche-constructing 
activities in light of what it has learned.
THE ASSIGNMENT OF MEANING
The assignment of meaning to information emanating from the external 
environment raises a problem not just for learning animals, but for all organ￾isms, at all times. The issue is that the biological needs6
 of organisms fluc￾tuate continuously throughout their lifetimes—food is no longer required 
once they have eaten, and rest is not a priority after they have slept. These
fluctuations are partly due to the fluctuating demands of organisms’ own 
internal environments, such as their state of hydration, but also partly due 
to the heterogeneity of the external environments that they encounter. As 44 Chapter 2
a result, the relationships between individual organisms and their external 
environments are always changing, on all possible scales. But if the needs 
of organisms fluctuate relative to their external environments, so do their 
purposes and motives at dif­ferent times and places. The (perhaps surpris￾ing) conclusion is that the meaning that individual organisms assign to the 
incoming information that they receive via their senses must fluctuate too.
Superficially, some of the needs of organisms, such as their basic fit￾ness needs, may appear to be stable throughout their lives. For example, all 
organisms need to survive at all times during their lives. However, in reality, 
this permanent need to survive decomposes into hierarchies of shorter-term
contributing needs, such as for food or shelter, with dif­ferent priorities at
dif­ferent times and places. These subordinate survival needs may sometimes 
also compete with each other for priority. To a lesser extent, the same is true 
of the needs of organisms to reproduce and rear their offspring.
This means that the meaning that organisms assign to the apparently 
objective information that they receive from their external environments 
will always be heavily dependent on the subjective states of the organisms 
themselves. There is no objective description of meaning associated with an 
environment—it varies from one individual to the next and from one time 
to the next, which makes characterizing meaning complex. In fact, the result￾ing complexity is so great that this may have been one reason why Shannon 
originally ignored the meaning of messages being sent by transmitters to 
receivers, in order to enable him to concentrate on the process of commu￾nication itself. So how can this complexity be handled?
Richard Lewontin was one of the first evolutionary biologists to draw 
attention to the dif­ferent meanings, or significances, of the same events in 
the external environments for dif­ferent organisms. He did so, not so much in 
terms of the fluctuating needs of individual organisms during their lifetimes, 
but more due to the variable needs of dif­ferent species that experience the
same environmental events in shared ecosystems. For example, the same 
environmental change, say a slight change of temperature, might be insig￾nificant for many organisms but important for others. In that case, the 
same change in an environmental factor or condition would have dif­ferent
meanings for dif­ferent species in the same environment.45 Information
Other investigators have concentrated more on the fluctuating needs, 
purposes, and motives of individual organisms during their lives. One 
approach was initiated by the psychologist James Gibson,7
 writing in the 
1950s and 1960s about the perceptions of both animals and humans of 
events in their external environments. He realized the degree to which the 
perceptions of organisms combine objective realities with subjective needs. 
He came up with the concept of “affordances,” which characterize the 
perceived properties of physical objects. Depending on its current needs, 
purposes, and motives, an animal would assign dif­ferent affordances to the 
same external environmental events and to the same external stimuli, at dif￾ferent times and places. The same event might be assigned strong positive 
affordances and be highly meaningful to an organism at one time but then 
be meaningless and have zero affordances at another time. For example, a 
hungry animal may assign high affordance to any cue indicating how it could 
find food, whereas a satiated animal might not even notice the same cue.8
All these approaches have their merits, but none really solve the prob￾lem of how the meaningfulness of events in the external environments of 
organisms could be measured or studied empirically.9
EVOLUTION
Can these relationships between information, knowledge, and adaptive 
know-how, discussed in the context of learning, be generalized to other 
knowledge-gaining processes in nature? What about the primary knowledge￾gaining process of population-genetic evolution? Can evolution also be 
described in terms of Shannon’s communication theory? And is anything 
gained by doing so? Might the application of Shannon’s communication 
theory to evolution increase our understanding of the bio-informatics of 
evolution? I suggest that the answer to these questions is “Yes.”
Let’s go back to evolutionary theory. According to traditional neo￾Darwinism, populations of evolving organisms are informed by autonomous 
natural selection pressures arising from the causal textures and dynamics of 
their external environments. From this traditional standpoint, individu￾als in populations are informed by the genes that they inherit from their 46 Chapter 2
ancestors about the environmental factors that their ancestors encountered 
in the past. This information may or may not be meaningful for individual 
organisms in the current generation relative to their contemporary environ￾ments. Whether the genetic information they carry is valid partly depends 
on whether the prior natural selection pressures, experienced by ancestral 
organisms, are the same as or similar to those being experienced by their 
descendants in the current generation. It also depends on the fluctuating 
fitness goals and needs of individual organisms in the current generation.
Potentially, the biological concept of fitness provides a way of measuring
the meaningfulness of incoming information relative to individual organ￾isms in evolving populations. This is where Lewontin’s point, that the same 
physical events in environments may have dif­ferent meanings for dif­ferent
species of organisms, is relevant.
Now we can apply Shannon’s communication theory to the evolution￾ary process, as described by neo-Darwinism. When we do, the ancestral 
populations of organisms become the transmitters of potentially meaningful 
messages to descendant organisms in each succeeding generation of their 
population, including the current generation, which become the receiver 
of the messages.
The source of the information carried by these messages is the set of
natural selection pressures that the organisms in ancestral populations 
encountered in the past. The channels of communication between ances￾tral organisms and descendant organisms in populations are the genetic
inheritances that connect them. These genetic channels may be more or less 
noisy depending on the frequency of random genetic mutations transmit￾ted between generations, most of which will be deleterious. Further noise 
may be added by the evolutionary process of random genetic drift. Through 
the process of natural selection in ancestral populations, environmental 
information (which could in principle be measured in bits) was converted 
by the ancestors into adaptive know-how (concerning how to survive and 
reproduce in their environments), and this former know-how is passed on to 
descendants through genetic inheritance. The know-how that each genera￾tion receives from its ancestors is spread across all the individual organisms 
in the current generation via their individual genetic inheritances. Whether47 Information
this information becomes the source of meaningful adaptive know-how (Ri
) 
for contemporary individual organisms, then, depends on the two provisos 
that we have just encountered.
If the natural selection pressures encountered by contemporary organ￾isms in their environments are the same as or similar to those encountered 
by their ancestors, then the messages that they receive from their ancestors 
will probably remain adaptive. If the fluctuating needs, fitness goals, and 
purposes of contemporary organisms are also similar to those of their ances￾tors, then that too will make it more likely that the messages that they receive 
from their ancestors will be adaptive. But if either of these provisos are not 
realized, the former know-how will no longer be adaptive.
Now let’s consider the evolution of a population of organisms, all of 
whom are capable of learning. In practice, the points that I make about evo￾lution in a population of learners apply more broadly to any organism that 
possesses an exploratory and selective knowledge-gaining process, as I discuss 
later in this chapter. What difference does this make, relative to a population 
of nonlearning organisms? The first difference is that the individual animals 
in the population of learners will no longer be exclusively dependent on the 
primary evolutionary process of population genetics for their adaptive know￾how. They can gain additional adaptive know-how by informing themselves 
about their own individual local environments through their learning.
The second difference is that because the sources of the information 
detected by these two knowledge-gaining processes are dif­ferent, the knowl￾edge that individual organisms gain from them will be dif­ferent too. The set 
of past interactions among diverse individual organisms in ancestral popula￾tions and their environments will span a very wide region of space and time. 
Individual organisms in each generation will be informed by their individual 
genetic inheritances as a consequence of their membership of an evolving 
population.
In contrast, in the case of individual learners, the samples of past 
organism-environment interactions that inform their learning will be far 
less rich. They will be drawn exclusively from the individual learner’s past 
encounters with its own local environment. In the case of social learning, 
the source of the information transmitted to an individual learner will be48 Chapter 2
the sample of collective experiences of members of the individual’s social 
group. All knowledge-gaining processes are historical; they supply messages 
about the past to the present. But they refer to dif­ferent histories, of dif­ferent
individuals or populations, and hence with dif­ferent content. These vary￾ing histories then supply diverse meaningful messages to individual organ￾isms. If we compare individual learning with the evolutionary process, the 
past interactions of individual learners with their local environments will 
be more recent than the interaction of their ancestors with their ancestral 
environments. They will also be based on the learner’s own within-lifetime
encounters with its local environment. Learning, therefore, may supply more 
up-to-date and relevant information to an individual than its inherited genes 
can.
More generally, dif­ferent types of knowledge stemming from alterna￾tive knowledge-gaining processes may have dif­ferent values for individuals, 
at dif­ferent times and places. If a learner lives in an environment that has 
hardly changed from the environments encountered by its ancestors, the 
meaningful genetic information that it inherits may be the most reliable 
source of adaptive know-how for that animal. However, if the learner’s own 
local developmental environment is very dif­ferent from the environments 
experienced by its ancestors, perhaps because of changes that have occurred 
since it was born, then the information gained from its own learning may 
be a better source of adaptive know-how than its genetic inheritance. This
advantage, conferred by learning, may be one reason why the supplemen￾tary knowledge-gaining process of learning evolved in the first place (see 
chapter 7).
The application of Shannon’s communication theory to both the evolu￾tionary and learning processes highlights their similarities and differences. 
The principal similarity stems from the point that knowledge-gaining pro￾cesses always seem to involve some kind of communication between the 
past and the present. They therefore always depend on some kind of history. 
The logic describing the communication of ancestral messages by both the 
evolutionary process in populations and the learning process in individual 
animals is also the same, as was established by Shannon’s communication 
theory and more recently argued by Watson and Szathmáry (2016).10 There 49 Information
always has to be a source of the information, a transmitter to transmit the 
knowledge extracted from that information, a channel of communication 
between transmitter and receiver, a receiver of the knowledge, and a final 
destination for the message.11 In practice, when considering evolution and 
learning, where the receiver and destination are the same population or same 
individual, then the distinction between receiver and destination is blurred.
The principal differences between the evolutionary and learning pro￾cesses are that information is derived from dif­ferent histories and the physical
mechanisms and components involved in the communication of messages 
by the two processes are completely dif­ferent. For example, in evolution, the 
genetically encoded memories are transmitted by ancestral populations of 
organisms to a later generation of the same population via genetic inheri￾tance. In contrast, when learning, an individual transmits what it learns 
about its environment to a later version of itself, utilizing the communication 
channel of its nervous system or brain.
Given their similarities and differences, how do these two knowledge￾gaining processes relate to each other? Learning allows individual animals 
to acquire modified phenotypic traits in the form of modified behaviors
and niche-constructing activities, which may then affect their future behav￾iors. These phenotypic modifications amount to within-lifetime acquired 
characteristics. But according to neo-Darwinism, none of the characteristics 
that individual organisms acquire during their lifetimes can affect the genes 
that they subsequently pass to their descendants, or the evolution of their 
populations. That would amount to Lamarckism, which neo-Darwinism 
rejects. However, the application of Shannon’s communication theory to 
both the evolutionary and learning processes raises doubts about whether
neo-Darwinism is right to reject Lamarckism so emphatically.
Shannon’s communication theory indicates that the relationship 
between evolution and learning may be a reciprocal one, in which both 
processes affect each other. The capacity of an animal for learning is likely to 
depend on its membership of a particular population. That capacity is itself
a genetic given, an evolved capability. But the same is not true of what they 
learn. What individual animals learn during their lifetimes may be biased 
by the genes that they inherit from their ancestors, but the details of what 50 Chapter 2
they learn cannot be determined in advance. For instance, if the information 
that individual learners gain from their ancestors via their genetic inheritance 
is now out of date, relative to their contemporary environments, a learner 
may be able to adapt to its environment by updating its out-of-date genetic
information via learning.
It may help to illustrate these abstractions with a few examples. Imagine 
that you are a psychologist interested in animal behavior. You are trying to 
teach a rat in an artificial environment, called a Skinner box, how to press the 
left lever but not the right lever in the box to gain a food reward. But no rat 
in the wild could ever have experienced such an artificial environment. It 
is therefore not plausible that what an animal learns in a Skinner box could 
be exclusively a consequence of the genes that it inherits from the evolving 
population of animals to which it belongs. Nevertheless, rats, as well as 
many other species of animals, easily learn such tasks. This point is brought 
home by experimental studies showing that through copying, rats will learn
to eat low-nutrition or even toxic foods, and birds can acquire fears of even 
arbitrary objects, such as kitchen utensils.12 What the genome encodes is the 
means to learn, not the outcome of the learning.
The same is true of learned niche-constructing behaviors, particu￾larly in the case of opportunistic niche construction. One of my favorite 
examples is the Galapagos woodpecker finch. This bird learns to exploit a 
woodpecker niche without being previously equipped by evolution with 
the typical phenotypic traits of more familiar woodpeckers, such as a sharp 
bill, long tongue, and reinforced skull morphology. Rather, it learns to use 
a stick or a cactus spine tool to poke out grubs from the barks of trees.13 On 
dif­ferent islands in the Galapagos archipelago, related species have learned 
dif­ferent niche-constructing tricks. On one island, the birds discovered how 
to become vampires as such, by pecking at large booby birds until they bled
and then drinking their blood. On another island, the finches discovered 
how to eat eggs that were too hard for them to break open with their beaks. 
If they found an unguarded egg that they couldn’t break open, some birds 
learned how to lie on their backs and push the egg over the edge of a cliff 
with their feet, causing it to break on the rocks below. After that, it was easy 
for the bird to fly down and eat the egg’s contents.1451 Information
But if prior evolution cannot account for everything that animals learn
during their lifetime, including their niche-constructing activities, what they 
learn may subsequently affect the evolution of their populations. Probably
it will not do so directly, but rather indirectly. This is because what an indi￾vidual animal learns about the external environment is likely to affect its own 
fitness. Smart learners may be fitter than dumb learners. They may increase 
the probability of their own survival through their learning, such as by 
learning how to forage for food better than their conspecifics. Or they may 
learn how to modify their own environments by their niche-constructing 
activities better than their rivals. If they do so, it will be likely to affect their
reproductive success. For instance, it may bias which individuals in the cur￾rent generation of a population make the most contribution to the genetic
inheritances that are transmitted to their descendants in the next generation. 
Or they may learn to consume a novel food, and thereby generate selection
for gene variants that improve the metabolism of that dietary item, as has 
seemingly happened repeatedly in the course of recent human evolution.15 In 
these ways, the learned and acquired characteristics of individual organisms 
may affect the subsequent evolution of their populations.
The application of Shannon’s communication theory to both the pri￾mary evolutionary process and supplementary process such as learning, there￾fore, challenges neo-Darwinism’s assumption that acquired characteristics 
of individual organisms cannot affect the subsequent evolution of their 
populations. Shannon’s theory may be able to throw further light on the 
bioinformatics of evolution.
In much of the rest of this book, we are going to be concerned with
how the information accrued by individual organisms in evolving popula￾tions through natural selection is translated into adaptive know-how (Ri
). 
Initially, we will focus primarily on population-genetic processes and gene￾tic inheritance systems (see chapters 3 and 4) but later, we will consider 
other supplementary, evolutionary, and developmental processes, includ￾ing learning (see chapter 7). In the remainder of this chapter, however, we 
will be concerned only with the several dif­ferent ways in which informa￾tion is described in evolutionary biology and how each of them relates to 
“meaning.”52 Chapter 2
INFORMATION AND ITS MEANINGS
Dif­ferent sciences use the word “information” in dif­ferent ways. It will be
sufficient to consider just four of them here. The four alternatives are bits, 
qubits, semantic information, and algorithmic information. Do any of these
four ways of describing information help us to understand the kind of adap￾tive know-how that is responsible for the adaptations of organisms? I’ll elabo￾rate on each of them in turn.
Binary Digits (Bits)
We have already encountered bits while discussing Shannon’s communica￾tion theory and his robotic mouse, Theseus. This measure of information has 
turned out to be of only limited use in evolutionary biology. That is because
Shannon’s bits deliberately ignored meaning, but the information accrued by 
natural selection in evolving populations must be translated into meaningful 
knowledge relevant to the adaptive demands placed on organisms in evolving 
populations by their environments. Fundamentally, the information has to 
be about the far-from-thermodynamic-equilibrium relationships between 
the internal environments of organisms and their external environments. 
Bits have nothing to say about meaning for fitness-seeking, purposive organ￾isms in their environments. They do not specify fitness or adaptive know-how. 
They only measure the quantity of information in a physical system.16
The apparent parallel between information in a communication chan￾nel, as specified by Shannon, and order and disorder in a physical system, as 
characterized by thermodynamics, can also be misleading. As we saw previ￾ously, Shannon’s measure of “entropy” in his communication theory does not 
relate to temperature in the same way as entropy does in physical systems. This 
means that there is no easy way of connecting the physical theory of entropy 
with Shannon’s measure of bits, in spite of their provocative similarities.
Another difficulty is that the amount of information, measured in bits, 
depends on what you are trying to measure. If you are trying to measure the 
amount of information carried on a computer chip in a conventional com￾puter, you might come up with a figure of 1012 bits, while if you wanted to 
measure how many bits could be carried by subatomic particles in the same 
chip, you might come up with a figure in excess of 1023 bits.53 Information
Initial oversimple attempts to apply Shannon’s bits in evolutionary biol￾ogy did not work either. In the 1970s, it was assumed that humans, being
the most complex of all organisms, must carry the most genes and the most 
DNA, and also the longest strings of base sequences as measured in bits. At 
that time, people thought that humans must carry about 100,000 genes. In 
fact, it turned out that several other organisms, such as salamanders, have 
far more genes and more DNA than humans. Humans are now thought to 
possess approximately 22,000 genes, a number that is regarded by some as 
astonishingly small. Strikingly, humans have a similar number of genes to 
the nematode worm Caenorhabditis elegans, which comprises only 1,000 
cells and has no brain, heart, or complex organs.
It is also the case that humans, along with many other organisms, do not
depend exclusively on genetic inheritances, communicated between succes￾sive generations for their adaptive know-how. They depend on other inheri￾tance systems as well, such as learning and sociocultural processes. Human 
complexity is not just a function of the number of inherited genes; it depends 
on other processes too. Contemporary geneticists also point out that it is 
not the number of genes, but rather the details of how they interact with 
each other, that best explain complex metazoan organisms, such as humans.
In general, there is no simple way of relating fitness to bits, and for these
and other reasons, evolutionary biologists have largely lost interest in Shan￾non’s binary digits. With respect to the question of what is meant by adaptive 
know-how, or Ri
, in evolution, bits are not the answer.
Qubits
In the context of quantum mechanics, physicists talk about quantum bits, 
or qubits, rather than bits. This is another way in which information is 
described in the sciences.17 Quantum physics makes any reasonable person 
dizzy. But I’ll have to risk a little dizziness to introduce the topic of qubits. 
Many years before he wrote What Is Life? Erwin Schrödinger made two sig￾nificant contributions to quantum physics. One was an equation that has 
been known as “Schrödinger’s equation” ever since. The other was his cat.
You will probably have heard of Schrödinger’s cat. It is an astonishing 
creature. Schrödinger used the idea of a strange cat to translate one of the 54 Chapter 2
weirdest concepts in quantum mechanics into the world of classical mechan￾ics and the physics of everyday life. His cat was neither alive nor dead, but 
both at once. It was illustrating the quantum property of “superposition.” 
The cat’s life and death were in superposition. You can’t ask a simple “yes” 
or “no” question about whether Schrödinger’s cat is alive or dead. Asking 
that question would not yield one bit of information. You simply can’t use 
bits to measure information in a quantum system. Quantum physicists had 
to develop the concept of qubits to enable them to account for quantum 
phenomena.
Quantum physics is concerned with the properties of subatomic par￾ticles, such as electrons or photons. It does not immediately refer to macro￾physical objects in everyday life. The key to entering the quantum world is 
another of nature’s constants, called “Planck’s constant,” after the physicist
Max Planck, who discovered it at the beginning of the twentieth century. 
Most physicists assume that the strange world of quantum physics is more 
fundamental than the familiar world of classical physics. The latter is derived 
from the former, not vice versa. Quantum physics does not refer directly to 
the world of cats.
So why did Schrödinger challenge us with his cat? Apparently, he was 
uneasy about the directions in which quantum physics was heading in the 
first decades of the last century. He used his cat to satirize some of its appar￾ent absurdities. But why a cat that was both alive and dead? Schrödinger’s 
daughter pointed out that her father’s cat need not have been both alive and 
dead. He could have made the same point, less dramatically, with a cat that 
was both asleep and awake. But his daughter also tells us that Schrödinger 
did not like cats.18 Perhaps he was using his cat to get his revenge on the 
whole feline species.
Schrödinger’s other major contribution, however, undermined his own 
satire. His equation describes the dynamics of a fundamental phenomenon 
in quantum physics, known as the “wave function,” which refers to the 
amount of energy in whatever quantum system is under consideration. As
I understand it, Schrödinger’s equation was originally intended to describe 
the dynamics of a wave function relative to a single elementary particle, such 
as an electron. However, it turned out to apply universally.1955 Information
That meant that Schrödinger’s equation could be applied to the whole
of the quantum world. And it made quantum physics operational. Appar￾ently, Schrödinger remained none too pleased with his own contribution to 
quantum physics.
Schrödinger was not the only eminent physicist to feel uneasy about 
quantum physics at the time. Another was Einstein. Einstein introduced 
a second weird concept into quantum physics, known as “entanglement,” 
which refers to action at a distance between particles. For instance, if a 
physicist measures one of the quantum properties of an electron in Oxford 
(e.g., its rotation or spin), and if the Oxford electron is entangled with 
another electron in New York, then by measuring the spin of the Oxford 
electron, the physicist will also fix a complementary quantum property of the 
electron in New York. It would do the same relative to any other particle with 
which it was entangled, anywhere in the universe. All of this left Einstein 
very uneasy, and he worked on it for many years. He described it as “spooky 
physics.” He also did not like the fundamental probabilistic, as opposed to 
deterministic, nature of quantum physics. His celebrated comment about 
that was “God doesn’t play dice.”
There is far more to quantum physics than this, and many physicists are 
devoting their careers to trying to understand it better.20 But we can leave it 
there. The relevant question for us is: Do biologists need to know anything 
about quantum physics to understand their own subject? Conversely, do 
quantum physicists need to know anything about biology to understand 
theirs? The answer to both these questions appears to be “No.”21 It may be 
that qubits can help quantum physicists understand their subject, but that 
is not going to help us understand the kind of meaningful information that 
underpins adaptive know-how, or Ri
, in evolution. In this respect, qubits are 
of no more use to evolutionary biologists than bits are. A mouse needs to 
know about cats, but it can’t know and doesn’t need to know about cats that 
are both alive and dead.
Semantic Information
Let’s turn from measurable information to unmeasurable meaning. Mean￾ingful information, or “knowledge,” is often called “semantic information.”2256 Chapter 2
Semantic information was shunned by Shannon because of the unmeasur￾ability of meaning. It threatened the clarity and power of his theory of com￾munication. Shannon could describe the amount of information, measured 
in bits, in messages sent by transmitters to receivers through communication 
channels. But he did not attempt to describe the meaning of those messages.
As we have seen, the meaning of a message communicated between two 
people requires the introduction of some extra subjective variables to account 
for it. These variables are usually the province of philosophers, psychologists, 
artists, poets, and lovers, rather than mathematicians.
Nevertheless, evolutionary biologists have to deal with meaning. They 
cannot ignore meaning in the same way that Shannon did, since organisms 
cannot be informed by nonsense. Organisms are active, purposive systems, 
and their purposes define what information is meaningful for them, relative 
to their fundamental task of opposing the second law of thermodynam￾ics. Biologists come closest to measuring the meaning of the information 
acquired by organisms when they use the concept of fitness. While there 
are many concepts of fitness,23 the adaptations of organisms typically are 
assessed in terms of their contributions to survival and reproduction. That 
is an indirect way of measuring the adaptive know-how (or Ri
) carried by 
organisms. Recall that Ri
 is responsible for the expression of the structural 
and functional adaptations of organisms. But does reproductive success cap￾ture all the adaptive know-how carried by organisms?
At present, commonly deployed fitness concepts in evolutionary biol￾ogy suffer from at least one shortcoming—namely, they do not yet refer to 
thermodynamics. These concepts are not derived from the thermodynamic 
relationships between improbable living organisms and their external envi￾ronments. And they should be.
Evolutionary biologists have made several adjustments to their fitness 
concepts over many years. One of the best known is the concept of inclusive 
fitness, introduced by Bill Hamilton.24 Hamilton pointed out that to trans￾mit your genes to the next generation, you don’t have to reproduce more 
offspring yourself. You can help your closest genetic relatives to reproduce 
instead. For example, your brother or sister will carry half of your genes. If 57 Information
he or she can be encouraged to have two offspring, then genetically, that will
be equivalent to you having one extra offspring yourself.
The calculation is more complicated in the case of remote relatives, 
but you get the idea. The theoretical attraction of inclusive fitness is that it 
can go some way toward accounting for cooperative relationships between 
organisms that are compatible with neo-Darwinism. It can account for coop￾eration among close kin. However, inclusive fitness (at least as generally 
understood) cannot account for cooperation among genetically unrelated 
organisms.25 This matters because sometimes organisms can enhance their 
fitness by cooperating with unrelated conspecifics in their own population 
(e.g., through mutualistic relationships). However, niche construction theory 
(NCT) raises a further problem here. It challenges the idea that measuring
the fitness of organisms exclusively in terms of the genes that they pass to 
their descendants is sufficient. NCT proposes that there is a second general 
inheritance system in evolution, in addition to genetic inheritance, called
“ecological inheritance.” Niche construction and ecological inheritance also 
imply an additional form of relatedness, which arises through shared niche￾constructed environments.26
At the population level, if multiple individual organisms in the same 
population engage in niche construction in the same or a similar way, then 
collectively they may cause significant changes in the ecological flows 
of energy and matter, or R
p
 resources, in the current populations’ envi￾ronments. They may also affect the energy and matter available to later
generations via ecological inheritance.27 But if niche construction and 
ecological inheritance are primarily about the modification of energy and 
matter resources in environments by organisms, then why are they relevant 
to semantic information? The answer is that when populations of niche￾constructing organisms change ecological variables in their environments, 
they also modify natural selection pressures for their own and each other’s 
populations. Modified natural selection pressures then change the “mes￾sages” that are communicated in the form of meaningful adaptive know￾how, or Ri
, by the current generation of organisms to later generations via
genetic inheritance.58 Chapter 2
In this manner, over time, the two inheritance systems, ecological and 
genetic, interact with each other. That means that the two fundamental 
resources that are vital for life: energy and matter resources, or R
p
 and infor￾mational resources, or Ri
, also interact with each other over time. However, 
neither inheritance system fully determines the other. Niche construction 
is not fully predetermined by genetic inheritance because it is also influenced 
by other developmental processes, such as learning. Likewise, genetic inher￾itances are not fully determined by prior niche construction. Genetic 
inheritances are determined by both those natural selection pressures previ￾ously modified by niche-constructing organisms and by autonomous natural
selection pressures (and a multitude of other population-genetic processes).28
Is there another way to measure fitness that better captures ecological 
inheritance? Brown et al. refer to two components of fitness that they call 
“survival” and “production,” where production equals growth and reproduc￾tion.29 They are interested in the trade-off between generation times and 
productive power among all the diverse species on Earth. The reproductive 
component of fitness is usually measured in the currency of genes; however, 
Brown et al. prefer to use energy as their currency of fitness. In this way, they 
find that organisms in diverse species transmit approximately the same energy 
per gram to their offspring in the next generation, regardless of huge differ￾ences in their size and biomass. They argue that their approach supplements 
and complements genetic fitness. Their point of view is fully compatible with 
the two inheritance systems, ecological and genetic, proposed by NCT: an 
energy component and a genetic component. NCT implies just that.
Perhaps a dif­ferent conception of fitness might better capture the rela￾tionship between energy and information in evolution. However, even if 
that is the case, difficulties remain in relating semantic information to the 
evolutionary concept of fitness, even though it remains relevant to the evo￾lutionary process, as well as to a subset of adaptations. Semantic informa￾tion is meaningful information, and thereby it equates to “knowledge,” as 
I have used the term previously. But adaptations do not solely constitute 
expressions of knowledge about ancestral environments; they also exhibit 
practical knowledge concerning how to build and operate traits that func￾tion effectively in ancestral environments. Hence, semantic information still 59 Information
falls short when it comes to accounting for the adaptive know-how, or Ri
, 
carried by organisms.
Algorithmic Information
One problem with semantic information in the context of evolution is that, 
while it potentially accounts for the meaningful information or knowledge 
possessed by organisms about their environment, it is not explicitly opera￾tional knowledge. It is not equivalent to the adaptive know-how, or Ri
, 
needed by organisms to act on their world in pursuit of their fitness goals. 
Hence, it is necessary to supplement semantic information with another 
kind of information, algorithmic information, to fully capture concepts such 
as adaptation and fitness. An organism has to know about the consequences 
of its own actions in its world to operate adaptively. For example, a foraging 
bird may be sensitive to environmental cues, which indicate the presence of 
a worm in the soil. That is semantic information, or knowledge about the 
environment. But the bird also needs to know how to catch the worm. That 
demands algorithmic information. The bird has to know how to peck the 
soil in the right place and at the right moment in order to extract the worm 
from it. The bird needs both semantic and algorithmic information to catch 
its prey. Both are required for the bird to survive and reproduce.
There is another property of algorithmic information that is relevant 
to evolution. Meaningful information may have a measurable algorithmic
value. It is potentially quantifiable.30 Algorithmic information is defined 
by asking what size of computer program is needed to generate some data, 
where the minimum number of bits is “the algorithmic information content” 
of that data.31 Counterintuitively, the less “algorithmic content” there is, the 
more “meaningful” the algorithm is likely to be.32 For instance, only a little
algorithmic information is needed to generate the value of the number π to 
a million decimal places, while much more algorithmic content is needed to 
generate a string of a million random numbers, and “the shortest program 
for outputting it will be about as long as the number itself.”33 The key vari￾able is the “compressibility” of data. To quote Chaitin, “A useful theory is 
a compression of the data: comprehension is compression. You compress 
things into computer programs, into concise algorithmic descriptions. The 
simpler the theory, the better you understand something.”3460 Chapter 2
This compressibility is likely to be relevant to evolution to the extent 
that natural selection can be regarded as an optimizing process that seeks 
efficiency gains in information acquisition and use. Natural selection should 
favor the most efficient way of acquiring adaptive know-how in organisms. 
Organisms have to be able to go from knowledge about the world to adap￾tive know-how, but these are complementary forms of information. The 
better an organism understands something, the more likely it is that it will
possess the adaptive know-how that it needs to predict the outcome of its 
own actions in its world and to respond to the causal texture of its world 
adaptively. The greater the compression of the data, the more efficient the 
strategy employed by the organism is likely to be. The kind of information 
that is relevant in evolution (Ri
) is a combination of meaningful semantic 
and algorithmic information, where in each case the meaning is derived from 
the fitness purposes of organisms.
GENERALIZING FROM SHANNON
So what have we learned about the bioinformatics of life from applying 
Shannon’s communication theory to both evolution and learning? Have we 
learned anything more about how organisms acquire the adaptive know-how 
(Ri
) that they need to oppose the second law of thermodynamics without 
violating it? Perhaps quite a lot. The fact that it is possible to describe evolu￾tion and learning in terms of Shannon’s communication theory encourages 
the hypothesis that it may be possible to do the same for all the information￾gaining processes that inform organisms in nature. These processes range 
from the vertebrate immune system, to the insect tracheal system, to socio￾cultural processes in humans, up to and including the processes of science.35
They all have a great deal in common.36 However, there are clearly significant 
differences between them too. If I am correct, then we ought to find compa￾rable similarities as well as comparable differences to those that I described 
between evolution and learning. These should reoccur in all knowledge￾gaining processes in nature.
Let’s start with the similarities. There is one provisional point. It is neces￾sary to distinguish between the physical systems in nature that are doing the61 Information
actual knowledge gaining and the organisms themselves. It is a subtle but 
important distinction. An animal is an knowledge-gaining system, relative 
to its own capacity for learning. But it is not a knowledge-gaining system,
relative to the genetic information that it inherits from its ancestors, as a 
function of its membership of its population. All knowledge-gaining sys￾tems depend on organisms. However, some depend on sets or groups or 
communities of organisms, whereas others depend on individual organisms
only. The population is what acquires genetic knowledge, although indi￾viduals may subsequently inherit that information. Darwin had to intro￾duce population biology to explain how natural selection pressures could 
inform organisms indirectly. Following Darwin’s lead, it’s always necessary 
to identify the nature of the information-gaining system that is responsible 
for each dif­ferent information-gaining process in nature. I will concentrate
primarily on the dif­ferent knowledge-gaining systems in nature rather than 
on the organisms that they inform.
The first general point is that all knowledge-gaining systems in nature are 
localized in space and time. They may be able to travel in any direction in all 
three dimensions in space, as well as in time. They can also stand still in space, 
for a time. They can even return to a place that they visited before, at some 
earlier time. Seasonal migrating animals demonstrate this point. But in time, 
they are much more restricted. They cannot stand still in time, nor can they go 
back in time. Whatever their nature, organisms can only travel from the past 
to the present.37 This localization of knowledge-gaining systems in space and
time has two consequences. One refers to their capacity to gain knowledge 
during time, and the other to gaining knowledge from dif­ferent places in space.
All knowledge-gaining systems are time-based processes. They can only
inform organisms about the outcomes of previous interactions between 
organisms and their environments in the past. Knowledge-gaining systems
can only transmit messages from the past to the present. The past can refer 
to ancestral populations communicating to the current generation, or, in the 
case of learning, to an organism’s younger self in the past communicating 
what it has learned to its later self in the present. Either way, all messages 
transmitted by any knowledge-gaining system can be described by Shannon’s 
communication theory.62 Chapter 2
The principal consequence of the localization of the knowledge-gaining
systems in space is that such systems can gain knowledge only from places 
that they previously encountered. As we have seen, how much of its environ￾ment any knowledge-gaining system can sample in space will partly depend 
on the nature of its own distribution across space during time. Populations 
of organisms are likely to be widely distributed across environmental space 
and time and can sample many dif­ferent places in their environments, both 
simultaneously and successively. By comparison, the capacity of individual 
learning animals to sample their environments will be much more limited.
Knowledge-gaining systems in biology must be able to sense the actual
causal texture and dynamics of the environments that they previously expe￾rienced in both space and time. They must also have at least a rudimentary 
capacity to register or remember the outcomes of their previous interactions 
with their environments. Over time, they have to accumulate a remembered 
history of these interactions. The histories accumulated by physically dif­fer￾ent knowledge-gaining systems then provide the data that informs organ￾isms, with each history from each knowledge-gaining system containing a
dif­ferent data set.
At this point, we have to go beyond Shannon because the messages sent 
from the past to the present must be meaningful. This requires the existence 
of biological mechanisms that are capable of demarcating between meaning￾ful adaptive know-how and meaningless or maladaptive information. Ulti￾mately, this is the knowledge that organisms need to oppose the second law 
of thermodynamics. The knowledge is evaluated by the subsequent fates of 
the organisms that are carrying it. Each dif­ferent knowledge-gaining process 
can then communicate meaningful information about what worked before, 
or was adaptive in the past, with these distinct histories collectively providing 
the knowledge that allows individual organisms to survive and reproduce. 
That accounts for how meaningful information can be deduced from data 
provided by one or more histories of the past.
But this deductive logic does not account for how organisms can use 
this knowledge to move into their futures. This requires another kind of 
logic, an inductive as opposed to a deductive step. Constrained by whatever 
meaningful information they have acquired from the past, organisms can 63 Information
then gamble that their future interactions with their environments will be
the same or similar to their interactions in the past. This is the inductive 
gamble that was first described in chapter 1. What I’m now suggesting is 
that this same gamble reoccurs in every knowledge-gaining process in nature. 
It is the only way for any organism to prepare for its not-yet-experienced 
future. This was first pointed out by the philosopher David Hume in con￾nection with human knowledge.38 It is never possible to guarantee that that
any inductive gamble is going to work. But in practice, the evolution of life 
on Earth over the last four billion years tells us that it seems to work better 
than chance. God may or may not play dice, but life must. However, life can 
load the dice in its own favor, more or less heavily, by knowing something 
about the past. Life needs messages from the past and needs to act on those
messages to constrain its bets about its future.
In spite of these similarities shared among all knowledge-gaining pro￾cesses in nature, there should also be some significant differences between 
them. Most obviously, the component mechanisms, responsible for both 
communicating and evaluating messages, should be dif­ferent in every 
knowledge-gaining system. There should also be another kind of difference, 
which we have not yet discussed. It occurs within, rather than between, 
knowledge-gaining systems, and it depends on whether the system is com￾municating to a later version of itself or to some other similar system.
I’ll illustrate this and other points by returning to Alice and Bob. Sup￾pose, at the level of individual learning, Alice has been informed by her senses 
that her plants need watering. She then uses her memory of this event to 
transmit a message, via a channel of communication, to her own nervous 
system, telling her later self to water her plants. The transmitter and the
receiver, as well as the channel of communication, all reside within Alice. 
The later Alice then waters her plants.
Alternatively, Alice sends a message to Bob, telling him that her plants 
need watering and asking him to water them. Now, the transmitter and the 
receiver are two dif­ferent people: the transmitter is Alice and the receiver is 
Bob. The channel of communication between them is also dif­ferent. Alice’s 
message has to be encoded in the symbolism of words, whether spoken or
written. Subsequently, these words have to be decoded by Bob. Bob then 64 Chapter 2
acts on the meaningful message that he has received from Alice, watering 
her plants.
At the population level, the same logic reoccurs, but among completely 
dif­ferent transmitters and receivers and channels of communication. Let 
us suppose that an ancestral population of niche-constructing organisms 
(population A) modifies selection pressure for a later version of itself, the 
current generation of the same population. Here, the source of the message 
is the natural selection pressure modified by the ancestral population. This 
message is communicated by ecological inheritance, now serving as another 
channel of communication between ancestral population A and the cur￾rent generation of the same population. The population may subsequently 
respond with further evolutionary changes, thereby sending modified gene￾tic messages via genetic inheritances to the next generation of itself. In this 
case, both ecological inheritances and genetic inheritances are in play as 
communication channels within a single population.
Alternatively, suppose that ancestral organisms in population A modify 
natural selection pressures for a second population B, where population B could 
be a dif­ferent species from population A. This time, population B may respond 
with genetic changes, which may cause population B to niche-construct in a 
dif­ferent way. B’s niche-constructing activities may then feed forward to 
modify natural selection pressures for population A via an ecological inheri￾tance channel. This two-way communication between populations A and 
B, via both ecological and genetic inheritance channels. could then initiate
their subsequent coevolution in the context of an ecosystem. The general 
point is that Shannon’s communication theory applies to meaningful mes￾sages that can be sent by transmitters, in knowledge-gaining systems, to 
receivers, which are either in later versions of themselves or in other dif­ferent
knowledge-gaining systems.
CONCLUDING REMARKS
I have argued that it doesn’t make sense to reduce all knowledge-gaining
processes in nature to just the primary process of population genetics, as neo￾Darwinism advocates. Unless a population of organisms really is informed 65 Information
only by the primary process of population genetics, this reductionism will
distort our understanding of the bio-informatics of evolution. The more 
pressing problem is how to explain the evolutionary origin of supplementary 
knowledge-gaining processes in nature. In what circumstances, and relative 
to what kind of population, is the primary evolutionary process likely to 
evolve one or more supplementary knowledge-gaining processes? A second
problem occurs in populations of organisms that are supplied with adaptive 
know-how (Ri
) by more than one knowledge-gaining process. How do they 
relate to each other? What happens if knowledge from plural processes is 
not well integrated? Might this become another source of maladaptation in 
organisms in some populations? We will return to these problems in later 
chapters.Let’s forget science for a moment and revert to common sense. The adapta￾tions of organisms demonstrate “design” to their environments. The giraffe’s 
long neck, for instance, appears designed for browsing leaves from tall trees. 
To some people, that semblance of design strongly implies an “intelligent 
designer.” As no human designer has the capacity to design even the simplest 
organism, this might imply that all organisms on Earth were individually 
planned by an omniscient creator, or God. That inference was famously 
drawn by the eighteenth-century English savant William Paley. His argu￾ment went like this:
In crossing a heath, suppose I pitched my foot against a stone, and were asked 
how the stone came to be there, I might possibly answer that, for anything 
I knew to the contrary, it had lain there for ever. . . . But suppose I found a 
watch upon the ground and it should be enquired how the watch happened to 
be in that place, I should hardly think of the answer which I had before given.
Instead, Paley writes he would be forced to make the inevitable infer￾ence “that the watch must have had a maker: that there must have existed, at 
some time, and at some place or other, an artificer or artificers who formed 
it for the purpose which we find it actually to answer; who comprehended 
its construction, and designed its use.” As “every manifestation of design 
that existed in the watch also exists in the works of nature,” but with nature 
far more wonderful and complex, Paley concluded that a divine creator or 
God must exist.1
 Creationists still use a closely related argument to Paley’s, 
even today.
3 ADAPTATION68 Chapter 3
Now let’s return to science. Enter Darwin, who introduced the pro￾foundly anti-commonsense idea of design without a designer. With an 
answer to Paley that is still shocking to many, Darwin described how entirely 
natural processes could generate the semblance of design. Darwin’s response 
also demonstrates the limitations of common sense.2
 Common sense can’t 
imagine a million years, let alone billions of years. Darwin was lucky to be 
one of the first scientists to know that the world was far older than anyone 
had previously thought, an insight that he owed to reading Charles Lyell’s 
The Principles of Geology.
3
 Darwin still fell far short of realizing the true age 
of the Earth, but he knew enough to realize that design, caused by natural
selection instead of an intelligent designer, was possible given sufficient time.
In this chapter and the next, I’m going to consider how organisms can 
adapt to their external environments in the absence of an intelligent designer. 
So far, we have established that the fundamental reason why organisms have 
to be adapted to their environments stems from the thermodynamic rela￾tionship between living organisms and their external environments. The 
internal environments of organisms are very far from thermodynamic equi￾librium, relative to their external environments. This relationship is unstable. 
If organisms did nothing, they would rapidly dissipate. They would die and 
return to thermodynamic equilibrium, in obedience to the second law of 
thermodynamics. Although nothing can violate the second law, in order to 
survive, living organisms are compelled to resist it for a time by doing active 
purposeful, fuel-consuming, physical work.
This work involves actively importing physical resources (or R
p ) that are 
relatively high in free energy from their external environments, and export￾ing resources that are lower in free energy back to their environments, an 
imperative demanding that organisms continuously interact with their envi￾ronments throughout their lives. However, organisms cannot interact with 
their environments productively unless they are adapted to those environ￾ments, which requires them to be informed by adaptive know-how (or Ri
), 
acquired through the processes of evolution.
All scientific theories of evolution accept that the acquisition of adap￾tations by organisms primarily depends on the natural selection of vari￾ant phenotypes in populations, combined with the transmission of genetic69 Adaptation
inheritances between generations. But that still leaves room for dif­ferent
accounts of how organisms acquire their adaptations. I’ll concentrate on the 
differences between the orthodox standard evolutionary theory (SET) and 
niche construction theory (NCT).
SET accounts for the adaptations of organisms solely in terms of natu￾ral selection sorting among phenotypes of varying fitness in the current 
generations of populations. It further assumes that the phenotypes in these
populations are primarily determined by previously selected genes inherited 
from their ancestors, as well as by chance mutations. SET thus accounts for 
the adaptations of organisms in terms of a one-way-street or linear causal 
relationship between organisms in populations and autonomous natural
selection pressures in their environments. The feedback recognized in the 
study of sexual selection, coevolution, or social evolution does not really 
change this linear characterization of causation: it simply means that the 
source of selection is another evolving organism. The causal model remains 
linear: selective environments bring about changes in organisms. SET 
acknowledges that organisms modify environmental states, but it does not 
recognize niche construction as a cause of evolution.4
In contrast, NCT claims that while the processes that SET describes are 
necessary components of evolutionary theory, they are not sufficient. While 
SET fails to accept that the active agency of purposive, fitness-seeking organ￾isms plays a causal role in evolution, NCT emphasizes that the adaptations 
of organisms depend on both natural selection and the niche-constructing 
activities of individual organisms. This changes evolutionary theory in at 
least three important ways.
First, according to NCT, organisms in populations codirect adaptive 
evolution by modifying some of the natural selection pressures in their envi￾ronments through their niche-constructing activities. They do this either by 
physically perturbing their environments or by actively relocating in their 
environments in ways that transform the target of selection.5
 For instance, 
by digging a burrow to escape extreme temperatures, burrowing animals 
reduce the intensity of selection for the ability to cope physiologically with
high or low temperatures, and generate selection on burrow-digging capabil￾ity. Likewise, by overwintering in warmer climes rich with food, migrating 70 Chapter 3
animals reduce the intensity of selection on starvation tolerance and create 
selection for migrating capabilities. Hence, for NCT, the natural selection
pressures that organisms encounter in their environments are no longer 
exclusively due to autonomous environmental events. Many are due to the 
prior niche-constructing activities of organisms.
Second, insofar as niche-constructing organisms modify the environ￾ments of their descendants (e.g., by building nests in which their young are 
reared), they also modify selection pressures in their descendants’ environ￾ments. NCT differs from SET in characterizing the transmission of modi￾fied selection pressures between generations as a second general inheritance 
system in evolution, called “ecological inheritance.” Offspring receive both 
genetic and ecological inheritances from their parents, and these two inheri￾tance systems interact with each other in descendant populations. Some￾times the ecological inheritance can persist for multiple generations.
Third, as modified environments can persist across multiple generations 
or be continuously and repeatedly transformed, components of the environ￾ment will change in concert as the niche-constructing outputs of organ￾isms evolve. According to NCT, but not SET, evolutionary theory should 
not solely be about the evolution of organisms. Rather, it should be about 
organism-environment coevolution. This evolving organism-environment 
complex encompasses coevolving abiota in the environments of populations, 
as well as other coevolving populations, including other species.6
In each of these three ways, niche-constructing organisms introduce 
feedback into evolution—feedback that is not yet fully recognized by SET. 
The feedback converts the evolutionary process into a nonlinear causal 
process. In NCT, the adaptations of organisms no longer depend exclusively 
on autonomous natural selection pressures and genetic inheritances. They
depend on natural selection and niche construction, acting reciprocally. 
They also depend on at least two inheritance systems, genetic inheritance and 
ecological inheritance, interacting with each other in descendant popula￾tions.7These nonlinear causal evolutionary relationships between organisms 
and their environments can be initiated in two ways: either by the natural
selection of novel genetic changes in organisms or by the construction of 
novel changes to environments, and hence to selection pressures. Where the 71 Adaptation
changes are initiated by niche-constructing organisms, these activities may
not always be genetically determined and can sometimes be caused by other 
supplementary processes that inform plastic phenotypes or organisms in 
evolution, such as epigenetic processes, learning in animals and sociocultural
processes in humans.8
How do these feedbacks affect organisms’ adaptations? This is a difficult 
question because there is more than one concept of adaptation in biology. 
Often, the adaptations of organisms are explained in terms of their historical 
and evolutionary origins. This first concept of adaptation directly addresses 
the question of how organisms acquire their adaptive designs, relative to their 
environments, in the absence of an intelligent designer. Traits are recognized 
as adaptations if they evolved by past natural selection for a particular role.9
I’ll call this first concept of adaptation “historical adaptation.”
However, adaptation also commonly refers to the immediate relation￾ships between individual organisms and their local external environments 
in the current generation. Traits are described as adaptations if they increase 
the fitness of individuals.10 As the individual organism-environment rela￾tionships are constantly changing, this conception of adaptation varies 
throughout the lives of individual organisms. I’ll call this second concept 
of adaptation “contemporary adaptation,” as it refers to the contemporary 
match between an organism’s traits and the environment it encounters, in 
the present.
While rarely conceived of in these terms, we might also envisage a 
conception of adaptation rooted in the future. Adaptations might be con￾strued as those capabilities that allow organisms to resist the second law of 
thermodynamics for long enough to achieve their fitness goals of survival, 
growth, and reproduction. Schrödinger’s book What Is Life? tells us that, 
in contrast to purposeless nonliving abiota, organisms are purposeful sys￾tems by definition. This suggests that the origin of life was also the origin 
of purpose, in the form of purposeful living organisms (see chapter 6). It 
also implies that the adaptations of organisms refer primarily to whatever 
traits in organisms enable them to anticipate their future interactions with 
their environments most effectively. Such “anticipatory adaptations” include 
the niche-constructing activities of organisms. Organisms anticipate their 72 Chapter 3
futures on many scales, ranging from the microscale of a few seconds to the 
duration of their entire lives. But organisms cannot achieve their purposes 
unless they are adapted to their external environments at each place and 
moment during their lives.
Hence, there are past (or historical), present (or contemporary), and 
future (or anticipatory) concepts of adaptation, and the three forms of adap￾tation interact in interesting ways. From here on, I am going to focus primar￾ily on the contemporary adaptations of organisms, which are the immediate 
adaptations upon which the lives of individual organisms depend. However, 
it is not possible to understand the adaptations of organisms except in the 
light of their historical evolutionary origins and their anticipated fitness 
goals.
It is not often acknowledged, but the adaptations that organisms inherit 
from their ancestors have the logical status of inductive gambles relative to 
their future interactions with their environments. Their gambles are based 
on the deductive information (Ri
), primarily encoded in genes, about what 
was adaptive for their ancestors in the past. On the basis of this inherited 
information, individual organisms in the current generation make induc￾tive bets that whatever phenotypic traits were adaptive for their ancestors 
in the past are likely to be adaptive for them again in their own individual 
futures. These inductive gambles refer to both the structural and functional 
adaptations of organisms.
Why can’t organisms do better than bet on their futures? The problem
is that the adaptations of organisms depend on the acquisition of adaptive 
know-how, or Ri
, as a function of the evolutionary process (as described in 
chapter 4). However, it is impossible for any organism to know with cer￾tainty what is coming next. The philosopher David Hume may have been 
the first person to make this point clear, in 1739.11 Even the laws of physics 
and chemistry are ultimately stochastic rather than deterministic laws. For 
instance, none of us can know with absolute certainty that the universe will
not evaporate in the next three seconds. The probability of it doing so is very 
low. Low probabilities can be written as a decimal point followed by lots of 
zeros and then a 1—however, it might take more zeros to describe this prob￾ability than I can fit on this page. Nevertheless, absolute certainty is denied 73 Adaptation
to us and to all other organisms. All organisms have to rely on inductive 
gambles that the future will resemble the past to have any chance of resisting 
the second law for long enough to achieve their fitness goals.
Thus the problem of adaptation for individual organisms is how to con￾nect their inherited deductions about what was adaptive for their ancestors 
in the past to their inductive gambles about what is likely to be adaptive for 
them in their futures, while always being sufficiently well adapted to their 
immediate environments in the present. It is still possible for organisms 
to make better or worse bets about what will be adaptive for them in their 
futures. For example, insofar as individual organisms are betting on diurnal, 
seasonal, or tidal changes being the same as they were in their ancestors’ pasts, 
they will be likely to win their bets. Conversely, if organisms in the current 
generation are betting that the capricious behaviors of other organisms, in
their own or other species, will always be the same, they will be more likely 
to lose their bets.
How does SET on the one hand, and NCT on the other, handle the
interactions between these past, present, and future concepts of adaptation? 
First, let’s consider the past. SET and NCT describe the historical origins of 
the adaptations of individual organisms in broadly the same way. They both 
seek to understand and explain the origins of the dif­ferent adaptations of
organisms as evolutionary histories arising from natural selection in partic￾ular ecological contexts. All evolutionary biologists pay a lot of attention to 
the origin of such phenomena as photosynthesis in bacteria and plants, eyes 
in animals or insects, flight in birds, and the origin of bipedalism in humans
through natural selection. On a smaller scale, biologists are also interested 
in the origin of peacocks’ tails through sexual selection and the eye-spots on
butterfly wings through mimicry.
The principal difference between SET and NCT concerns the source of 
the natural selection experienced by successive generations of populations. 
With caveats, SET assumes that natural selection arises from autonomous 
events in the environments of organisms. The organisms themselves, or other 
species, may be the source of selection, such as what occurs during sexual 
selection or coevolution. However, in such circumstances, other organ￾isms are simply treated as an aspect of the external environment. Living 74 Chapter 3
organisms are not generally viewed as part-determining, or codirecting, the 
natural selection that ensues. In contrast, NCT claims that some of the natural 
selection pressures that act on individual organisms in the current generations 
of populations are likely to have been modified by the niche-constructing 
activities of their ancestors. NCT also expects some novel evolutionary epi￾sodes in the histories of evolving populations to have been initiated by the 
niche-constructing activities of organisms. Natural selection doesn’t just 
happen to organisms; organisms themselves construct selection pressures, and 
they frequently do so in reliable and consistent ways so as to impose a bias 
on selection.
What demands are made on the adaptations of organisms by the envi￾ronments that they currently encounter? Here again, SET and NCT have 
a lot in common. For instance, both SET and NCT recognize that the 
contemporary adaptations of organisms are multivariate and dynamic. 
Organisms always express multiple adaptations, simultaneously as well as 
successively, relative to the plural selection pressures that they are encoun￾tering in their ever-changing environments. They do so at each place and 
moment during their lives. But there are also some differences. For instance, 
NCT emphasizes how organisms possess knowledge-gaining capabilities that 
allow them to improve their fit to the environment. For instance, animals 
can learn to respond to novel predators (see chapter 4).
What about the future? In addition to possessing sufficient adaptations 
to cope with their immediate environments, organisms need to carry suf￾ficient general-purpose adaptability to prepare them, in advance, for what 
is coming next. For instance, a rabbit needs to be prepared in advance, by 
the past evolutionary history of its population, to respond appropriately to 
foxes and dogs. It needs to know a priori how to recognize them, hide from 
them, or run away from them. A rabbit cannot gain these adaptations a
posteriori, after it has already been eaten by a fox. But here again, we will
see that there are also differences between SET and NCT. For instance, the 
latter emphasizes how the anticipated future might lead to the expression 
of niche construction now to change the anticipated future. The rabbit 
might prepare a new bolt hole in anticipation of encountering a fox in 
the future.75 Adaptation
ADAPTIVE NICHE MANAGEMENT
The multivariate and dynamic nature of the relationships between living 
organisms and their selective environments turns the problem of adaptation 
for contemporary living organisms into a complicated niche-management
problem. It requires an understanding of how living organisms deploy the 
adaptations that they possess in their immediate and changing environ￾ments. This is true of all organisms in all species. It doesn’t matter whether
we are talking about bacteria or elephants, or about organisms that live on 
land, in the sea, or in the air. These same issues arise for both structural and 
functional adaptations.
As this niche management problem is common to all organisms in all
environments, I want to focus on the abstract logic of the problem. I’m going
to use game theory to help me do so, but the particular game I want to use
may not be familiar to you. I am going to call it the “Adaptive Niche Man￾agement Game,” as it can be applied to understand the inductive gambles
of organisms, although it was originally described by Lawrence Slobodkin 
and Anatol Rapoport in 1974.12 The game is played between two entities, 
any living organism or population of organisms (O) and its local external or 
selective environment (E). To keep things simple, I’ll initially assume that E 
is exclusively an abiotic environment for O. I’ll bring in the other organisms 
in O’s environment later. I’ll also restrict the game to one played between an 
individual organism and its particular local selective environment, although 
the same logic applies when the game is between evolving populations and 
their environments.
We can now consider the nature of O’s adaptive niche management in 
more detail.13 Following Bock (1980), I previously described this game as a 
“feature-factor matching game” between O and its environment E.14 When 
the game is played between an individual organism (O) and its local environ￾ment (E), then O’s features become a set of phenotypic traits relative to the 
set of selective factors that it is encountering. Likewise, the environment can 
be characterized as a set of environmental factors. A match, known as “syn￾erg,” occurs whenever a phenotypic trait is well suited to an environmental 
factor. A mismatch occurs whenever a feature expressed by O is maladaptive 76 Chapter 3
relative to a factor in its E, in which case there is no synerg. The implication is 
that organisms must be able to express sufficient contemporary adaptations, 
both simultaneously and successively, relative to whatever natural selection
pressures they are encountering in their environments, to survive at each 
place and moment during their lives. Any vital mismatch between the set of 
features (or adaptations) that an organism is expressing and the set of factors
that it is currently encountering in its environment could be fatal. It could 
terminate the game. If it does, O will lose the game and E will win it.
There are some important asymmetries between the two players in this 
game. I’ll list the main ones. First, assuming that E is exclusively abiotic, E is 
indifferent to O’s fate, but O cannot be indifferent to E’s fate. An organism’s 
life depends on its environment, so O cannot afford to be indifferent to what 
happens to E, or to whatever changes occur in E, because of the requirement 
that O must be continuously adapted to E if it is to live at E’s expense.
The second asymmetry between the two players is associated with the 
first. O has to adapt to E to stay in the game, but E does not have to adapt 
to O. E will always persist in some form, regardless of what happens to O.
A third asymmetry between O and E is that O is a purposive goal￾seeking system but E is not. O must be capable of some degree of active 
purposeful agency relative to E, but insofar as E is abiotic, it has no fitness 
goals of its own.
In reality, O’s environment never comprises abiota only. Every O’s envi￾ronment is bound to include some other living organisms. Like O, these 
other organisms will have fitness goals and purposes of their own. The addi￾tion of other organisms in O’s environment turns E into a mix of purposeless 
abiota and purposeful biota. The other purposeful organisms in O’s environ￾ment may compete with, be irrelevant to, or even be beneficial to O, all of 
which complicates the game and may make it more difficult for O, but it 
doesn’t change the logic fundamentally.
The final asymmetry between O and E is that while O is a finite-state
system relative to E, E is effectively an infinite-state system relative to O. That 
is because there are always a limited number of features, or phenotypic traits, 
that any O can express in its E. However, O’s local E is an open system. On 
Earth, E is always open to inputs (e.g., from the rest of an ecosystem or the 77 Adaptation
rest of the biosphere), while the Earth’s system itself is open to the rest of the 
universe. This final asymmetry between O and E accounts for the original 
name of the niche management game, “Gambler’s Ruin.” Since a finite-state
system can never match everything thrown at it by an infinite-state system,
the adaptive niche management game is unfair. O can never win. The best 
that it can achieve is to delay losing. E must eventually win the game, regard￾less of whatever O it is playing against.15
Reproduction, however, allows an individual organism to go some way 
toward overcoming the limitation of being a finite-state system in an infinite￾state environment. When organisms reproduce, they are contributing to 
another putative infinite-state system—namely, to the almost infinite num￾ber of ways that the evolutionary process can generate variant organisms and 
species. Evolving life in general can stay in its niche management game for 
a great length of time—approximately 4 billion years on this Earth, so far. 
It can also cause life to exist across great intervals of space (e.g., the whole
biosphere on Earth).
Up to this point, the adaptive niche management game of organisms is 
broadly the same game, regardless of whether it is described by SET or NCT. 
There are only two significant differences between the two theories. First, 
because SET is not based on the laws of thermodynamics, its starting point is 
the adaptations of organisms rather than their purposes. SET’s treatment of 
the purposes of organisms is dismissive—organisms are treated as apparently, 
but not actually, purposive. Nor does SET consider purposeful organisms 
to be agents in evolution. In contrast, partly because NCT has always been
closely associated with the second law of thermodynamics,16 NCT’s starting 
point is the active, purposive agency of organisms. In NCT, the purposes of 
organisms are to resist the second law for long enough to achieve their fitness 
goals, with the adaptations of organisms evolving to meet these purposes.
The second significant difference between these theories is that NCT
assigns evolutionary causal significance to some “moves” in its niche manage￾ment game that SET does not characterize as causal. These moves include O’s 
environment-modifying, niche-constructing activities, as well as its active 
responses to natural selection pressures from E. According to NCT, O’s capac￾ity for niche construction gives organisms a degree of control over some of 78 Chapter 3
the natural selection pressures expressed by E. This makes a difference to 
how organisms play the game.
ASHBY’S CONTROL THEORY
Let’s return to the question of how organisms deploy their adaptations to 
achieve their fitness goals. Here, I’m going to turn to Ross Ashby’s control 
theory, which may help us to better understand biological adaptation. Ashby 
was one of the father figures of cybernetics at a time—in the 1950s—when
the word “cybernetics” was used primarily to describe the control of dynamic 
systems. I’ll describe the relevant aspects of Ashby’s control theory17 in gen￾eral terms first, and then apply it to the concept of adaptation in biology.
Ashby’s theory refers to the regulation of the relationship between any 
two or more interacting dynamic systems. Often one system constitutes 
some kind of environment for another system. One system may be a self￾maintaining and self-controlling system that is attempting to regulate its 
own relationship with some other system, such as its external environment. 
Alternatively, the first system may be controlled by some other system. The 
latter is often true in the case of human artifacts, which are ultimately con￾trolled by human designers, programmers, or users, such as cars controlled 
by their drivers or planes controlled by their pilots.
In Ashby’s theory, the fundamental task of the controller is to protect an 
“essential variable.” The essential variable may be multifaceted and include 
multiple subvariables. It refers to the variations that can occur in the relation￾ships between two or more dynamic varying systems. The essential variable 
does not refer directly to either the variance in the controlled system or to 
the variance in the system with which it is interacting. It refers to a third 
kind of variance—namely, the variations that can occur in the relationship 
between two or more varying systems, one of which is the controlled system. 
It is this third kind of variance that the controller must control to protect 
its essential variable.
The essential variable is defined by the purposes and goals of its control￾ler. If the controlled system is self-controlling, then the essential variable will
be defined by its own purposes and goals. In this case, the self-controlling 79 Adaptation
system must be able to control its own variance relative to the variance in 
whatever other system it is interacting with. In general, the essential variable 
must be defined and protected by the controller, regardless of whether the
control is exerted by a self-controlling system or a third party. For example, 
in the case of a plane, the essential variable that must be protected by the 
pilot is likely to include the route, chosen by the pilot, that will bring the plane 
to its destination. If the plane strays off course, the pilot must correct it. 
Subessential variables may include maintaining the orientation of the plane 
(i.e., the right way up), its internal conditions (i.e., suitable cabin pressure), 
and its physical state (i.e., undamaged). Whatever the essential variable, the 
controller must never allow it to stray beyond some kind of tolerance limits. 
For example, the plane shouldn’t fly into a severe storm. These tolerance
limits are necessary to ensure that the controlled system succeeds in achiev￾ing the goal set for it by its controller.
At the heart of Ashby’s control theory is his Law of Requisite Variety 
(LRV), which states that only variety can “destroy” or “drive down” variety.18
The controller’s job is to protect the essential variable, connecting one vary￾ing or changing system to another varying or changing system. The control￾ler must do so by causing the system that it is controlling to express some 
appropriate, novel, or counteractive variance of its own, at each place and 
moment, to “destroy” or “drive down” the variance that it is encountering in 
the other system that it is interacting with, at the same places and moments. 
For instance, as roads can be dark at night, as well as light during the day, 
then cars must be equipped with lights that can be switched on at night to 
counter the darkness if they are to be driven safely.
A further implication of LRV is that, to guarantee that the controller 
will always be able to protect a relevant essential variable, there must be 
sufficient variance available in the controlled system relative to the variance 
in the system that it is interacting with. The amount of variance made avail￾able by the controlled system should ideally be equal to or greater than the 
amount of variance in the system that it is interacting with. If it is not, then 
sooner or later, the controlled system will be destroyed by the variance in 
the other system. For instance, at some point, a car without lights driven 
in the dark would crash.80 Chapter 3
I’ll illustrate this abstract logic with another example. Imagine that you 
are the controller of a small sailboat sailing on the sea and you are attempting 
to reach a nearby harbor. The system that you have to control is your boat. 
The boat has two or more sails and a number of ropes, such as the halyards, 
that control the settings of the sails and allow them to be raised, lowered, or 
reefed. All these features can be varied and controlled by you. In addition, 
a wheel, or tiller, controls the rudder, enabling you to steer the boat. There 
may also be some moveable ballast. If you are in a small sailing dinghy, the 
ballast could be another member of the crew. The dif­ferent states of the boat
constitute the variance that you control.
Then there is the variance that you are liable to encounter in your boat’s 
marine environment. This includes the strength and direction of the winds, 
both of which could be steady or highly variable, and the variable sea states 
and waves through which your boat is sailing. It may also include variable 
tides and currents and varying depths of water.
Your job is to protect an essential variable by controlling the variance 
offered by your boat’s equipment, relative to the variance that your boat 
is encountering in its environment, in such a way that you can reach your 
destination safely. If things go badly wrong, if the weather suddenly becomes 
very violent and the sea very rough or if you hit a rock, then you might never 
get there. You could lose control, and your boat might capsize or sink, having 
been destroyed by an excess of environmental variance relative to the vari￾ance made available by your boat. You will have failed to keep the essential 
variable within its tolerance limits.
My boat example is intended to mimic the adaptive niche-management
problem between organisms and their environments. Unlike the artifacts 
that we have just been considering, individual organisms are self-controlling 
systems. A closer contemporary mimic of self-controlling organisms would 
be a plane when switched to autopilot or the Mars Rover.
What can Ashby’s concept of an “essential variable” and his LRV tell us 
about biological adaptation? He was not greatly concerned with the histori￾cal origins of the adaptations of organisms, nor with the problem of their
design in the absence of an intelligent designer. Most of the systems to which 
Ashby’s theory has been applied are human artifacts, which are obviously 81 Adaptation
designed by intelligent human designers. However, Ashby’s theory does have 
something to say about the match between organism and environment, as 
well as the purposes of living organisms.
APPLYING ASHBY’S CONTROL THEORY 
TO INDIVIDUAL ORGANISMS
Recall that the fundamental purposes of living organisms are to resist the 
second law for long enough to survive, grow, and reproduce. These fitness
purposes define their goals and subgoals, which in turn define the essential 
variables that individual organisms have to protect in order to achieve their 
goals. However, as well as having to be sufficiently adapted to their immedi￾ate environments here and now, because the fitness goals of organisms lie
in their futures, organisms need a minimal capacity to anticipate or predict 
their future interactions with their environments. This capacity may or may 
not involve cognition. Usually it does not.
All organisms have to be equipped with adaptations that allow them to 
perceive or sense their environments. They also have to be able to interpret 
the meaning of the information that they receive from their senses relative 
to their purposes in ways that are likely to motivate them to achieve their 
fitness goals. But, because their fitness goals lie in their futures, organisms 
also need some capacity to anticipate or “predict” their future interactions 
with their environments. It follows that organisms can protect their essential 
variables only by using combinations of adaptive gambles and chance-based
mutations.
In spite of all these provisos, the essential variables that living organisms 
have to protect correspond to the essential variables in Ashby’s control the￾ory. Adaptation is not about variant phenotypic traits, or variant organisms, 
in evolving populations, nor is it about varying natural selection pressures 
in the environments of organisms. Adaptation is about the third kind of 
variance, captured by Ashby’s essential variable, which concerns the varying 
relationships between two varying systems. Adaptation is about how vary￾ing individual organisms, equipped with variant phenotypic traits, manage 
or fail to manage to protect their essential variables relative to varying natural82 Chapter 3
selection pressures in their environments. Well-adapted organisms are those
individual organisms in populations that are equipped by their prior evolu￾tionary histories, with sufficient adaptations and sufficient capacity to con￾trol them. Such organisms may then be able to resist the second law for long 
enough to achieve their fitness goals.
One major difference between SET and NCT concerns the extra causal 
significance that NCT attributes to individual organisms in evolution aris￾ing from their niche-constructing activities. When applied to adaptation 
in biology, Ashby’s LRV concerns how two kinds of variety, environmental 
variety (VE ) and organism variety (VO), interact with each other. VE refers 
to the variant natural selection pressures that organisms encounter in their 
environments, while VO refers to any variant adaptations or variant pheno￾typic traits that organisms express at dif­ferent times and places.
Ashby described how variety destroys variety. In the niche management 
game, the word “destroy” takes on two dif­ferent meanings depending on 
what is destroying what. The destruction of VO by VE may be literal. Any 
organism expressing a maladapted phenotypic trait may be killed by envi￾ronmental components for which it is ill prepared. Alternatively, an animal 
might learn not to perform a particular behavior in a particular environment, 
which constitutes another way by which VO is reduced.
What happens the other way round, when VO destroys VE? This occurs 
when a phenotypic trait expressed by an organism is well-adapted to a natural
selection pressure in its external environment. In this case, VO destroys VE
metaphorically by preventing VE from killing or harming the organism that 
is expressing the phenotypic variant. Possibly the organism may do better 
than that, and the trait may allow the organism to exploit its environment 
in a way that increases its fitness, such as to harvest additional energy and 
matter from its environment or dump more of its detritus. The same phe￾notypic trait may be able to drive down multiple selection pressures in their 
environments, such as when a turtle’s shell or hedgehog’s bristles ward off 
multiple dif­ferent predators.
In practice, all organisms have to be adapted to multiple selection pres￾sures simultaneously at each place and moment during their lives. If organ￾isms are to protect their essential variables and live, they must destroy all the 83 Adaptation
VE that they encounter in the “here and now,” and do the same again at each 
successive place and moment “elsewhere and later” throughout their lives. A 
single vital mismatch between a phenotypic trait and its environment could 
kill the organism, no matter how well adapted all its other phenotypic traits 
are relative to other selection pressures.19
How do niche-constructing organisms utilize their capacities to modify 
natural selection pressures to adapt to their environments in ways not fully 
recognized by SET? A useful way of answering this question is by considering 
the maladaptive mistakes that organisms can make, rather than their well￾adapted successes during their niche management games with their environ￾ments. Logically, there are two ways in which organisms can fail to adapt 
to their external environments, which I’ll call “limited regulator failures” 
and “fallible regulator failures.” A limited regulator failure occurs when an 
organism does not possess any adaptation that can destroy an environmental 
selection pressure that it is currently encountering. For instance, an animal 
that escaped prey by running away might be destroyed by the appearance of 
a new predator far faster than itself. In such circumstances, VE will destroy 
VO, and the organism may go extinct. In contrast, a fallible regulator failure 
occurs when O possesses an appropriate adaptive adaptation to cope with 
the environmental selection pressures that it is encountering, but it fails 
to express the correct adaptation at the right time and place. A rabbit that 
decided to fight a fox might be doomed.
One way of illustrating the logic behind these two kinds of failures is 
provided by another human artifact, a radiator, which is connected to a 
thermostat and a boiler. The radiator may be required to turn up the heat to 
a level that it cannot manage because it is out of its range. Here, its capacity 
to regulate temperature is too limited. Conversely, the radiator might be 
required to turn up the heat to a level that it could manage in principle, but
it fails because it is not controlled correctly due to a faulty thermostat. That 
would be a fallible regulator failure.
Limited regulator mistakes can be readily understood in the context 
of both SET and NCT, as organisms either do or don’t have a capacity to 
avoid them, depending on whether they already possess appropriate adap￾tations. But if an organism makes a limited regulator mistake, what can it 84 Chapter 3
do about it? Living organisms needn’t passively submit to the VE that they 
encounter. Organisms can deploy their niche-constructing adaptations to 
generate additional VO to destroy more of the VE in their naturally selecting 
environments. For instance, a niche-constructing organism may actively 
relocate to somewhere else in its environment that is better suited to the 
tactical adaptations or VO that it already possesses. Algae respond to diurnal 
changes in their environments by adjusting their place in the water column,
such as typically ascending during the day and descending at night. Simi￾larly, diatoms change their positions on mud banks in estuaries according 
to the state of the tides. Many animals invest in larger-scale relocations. 
For instance, swifts, swallows, and terns (among many other birds) migrate 
annually between northern Europe and southern Africa. They avoid winters 
by doing so.
Niche-constructing organisms can also change the selection pressures 
that they are encountering by physically buffering them out. This often 
involves organisms physically changing their environments through “per￾turbational niche construction,”20 in ways that suit the organism itself, to 
the point where the VE that it is encountering in its environment can be 
destroyed by the VO that it is already expressing. For instance, some animals 
buffer out winter by hibernating rather than relocating. That may require 
the animals to store extra fat in their bodies, or possibly to cache extra food 
in their immediate environments before they hibernate. It also requires them 
to actively dig burrows or choose places where they can hibernate safely, 
possibly for months.21
Both SET and NCT recognize these possibilities, but the two theories
differ in the significance that they attribute to them. For SET, relocating 
in space (e.g., through migration), or modifying the environment, (e.g., 
through nest building), are of no great evolutionary significance. Nests can 
be viewed as “extended phenotypes,” which according to Dawkins evolve 
through natural selection in essentially the same manner as any phenotype.22
For NCT, on the other hand, these moves are recognized to be important
causes of evolutionary change. Niche construction is not simply a product 
of evolution—it is a central aspect of the process of adaptation. That is 
because niche-constructing organisms are compelled by their purposes to 85 Adaptation
niche-construct in nonrandom or directional ways, generating order in the 
external environment, and statistical biases in the selection emanating
from that niche-constructed environment.23 For illustration, studies have 
shown that where organisms buffer VE through counteractive niche con￾struction, such as building a nest to damp out variations in temperature,24
they reduce the strength and variability of the natural selection that they 
experience relative to selection emanating from components of the environ￾ment that they have not built and cannot control.25 This consistent biasing 
of natural selection, recognized by NCT but not SET, is what makes niche 
construction a causal factor in evolution.
Now let’s consider the second kind of maladaptive failures, those due to
control errors. Organisms can make control errors for quite simple reasons 
that can be equally well understood by SET and NCT. For example, an 
organism’s senses may misinform it about the state of its external environ￾ment, or an organism may misinterpret the meaning of the messages that 
it is receiving from its senses. A consequence of both these eventualities is 
that an organism may express the wrong structural or functional adaptation 
relative to its environment or at the wrong time and place.
To avoid making maladaptive control errors, individual organisms must 
control their adaptations in ways that cause them to express the right adapta￾tions at the right times and places. For SET, the capacity of individual organ￾isms to control their adaptations is exclusively determined by the genes that 
they inherit from their ancestors. But this way in which individual organ￾isms can control the expression of their adaptations has its limitations. For 
instance, in novel or rapidly changing environments, the sample of deduc￾tive know-how, or Ri
, that organisms inherit from their ancestors via their 
genetics may be out of date, and as a consequence, they may give individual 
organisms incorrect information about what adaptations they should express 
(see chapter 1). Even if it was adaptive at the beginning of the organism’s 
life, years later it may no longer be so. Or organisms may encounter a novel 
environmental event, such as the arrival of a new virus that has never existed 
before and that its ancestors never experienced. In the absence of appropriate 
recognition and analysis of the threat, this could lead to an inappropriate 
utilization of existing adaptations (i.e., the virus might end up being lethal).86 Chapter 3
In addition, individual organisms can inherit only a sample of the gene 
variants carried by the population to which they belong, which means that 
individual organisms can inherit only a sample of the total deductive know￾how, or Ri
, acquired by their evolving population. Moreover, that genetically
encoded know-how is constantly being shuffled by recombination in a way 
that will sometimes generate suboptimal combinations, expressed via poor 
control of adaptations.
Populations of organisms that regenerate very rapidly and in large num￾bers, such as bacteria, might be able to track any changes in their environ￾ments on the basis of chance mutations only. Alternatively, populations of 
organisms that live in environments that don’t change, or change only very 
slowly, might also be able to adapt to their environments. In such instances, 
appropriate control mechanisms for adaptations might evolve. However, 
other organisms would be far less likely to adapt to their environments if they 
lived longer, regenerated more slowly, or lived in rapidly changing environ￾ments, including environments that they themselves were changing by niche 
construction. SET implicitly assumes that such organisms would sometimes 
make control errors, risking extinction.
NCT, in contrast, escapes SET’s limitation that organisms can inherit 
their deductive know-how only from their genes by stressing the evolu￾tionary significance of additional information-generating mechanisms and
additional sources of control. NCT claims that individual organisms must be 
self-controlling purposive systems. To put that more accurately, NCT claims 
that natural selection will favor individual organisms that inherit at least a 
minimal capacity for the self-control of their own inductive gambles. That 
self-control is what provides organisms with the capacity to impose direction 
on evolution through their niche construction.
But if individual organisms are self-controlling systems, and if Ashby’s 
control theory is correct, self-controlling systems have to define and protect 
their own essential variables. This means that living organisms must evolve 
some autonomy from genetic control of adaptations, including through the 
ability to acquire new know-how, or Ri
, during their lives, which is capable of 
updating the control of their adaptations. By enabling individual organisms 
to be self-controlling, evolving populations should increase their amount of 87 Adaptation
variance that is available to natural selection. Evolving populations should 
thereby increase their own evolvability, and perhaps the likelihood that their 
lineage will persist. In addition, if organisms are self-controlling systems, 
they can no longer be accurately characterized as passive vehicles for genes 
but rather must be construed as active agents that partly determine the 
strength and direction of evolution.
The adaptive know-how, or Ri
, that they inherit must equip individual 
organisms with sufficient autonomous decision-making capacity to control 
their own adaptations during their idiosyncratic niche management games 
with their environments. However, the particular subgoals that each indi￾vidual organism has to satisfy if it is to achieve its fitness goals of survival and 
reproduction are likely to be unique to that organism, at least in detail, rather 
than being generic to the population. Its subgoals will include having to
overcome very particular obstacles, as well as having chances to exploit unan￾ticipated particular resources in its environment. It is these kinds of idiosyn￾cratic fitness subgoals that NCT claims vary between individual organisms 
in populations. These fitness goals can be met only because individuals in
populations are equipped with the same capabilities for supplementary 
knowledge gain, allowing each individual to tailor its control of adaptation 
to the idiosyncrasies of its own personal experiences. The reliance on these
same capabilities means that (at least sometimes) multiple individuals in the 
population will respond in similar ways to meet their subgoals, generating a 
stable modification in selection pressures.
Hence, NCT, but not SET, emphasizes that organisms may switch to 
controlling their adaptations on the basis of deductive, adaptive know-how 
(Ri
) that is derived from their own individual past experiences and devel￾opmental histories instead of being derived from the past histories of their 
evolving populations. Any population of exclusively genetically determined
organisms is vulnerable to invasion by organisms that have at least a modi￾cum of autonomous self-control. Hence, natural selection may also favor 
supplementary information-gaining processes in individual developing 
organisms. The evolution of immune systems, epigenetic processes, learn￾ing in animals, and eventually human cultural processes allows organisms to 
go beyond the relatively coarse-grained control of their adaptations granted 88 Chapter 3
to genetic predetermined organisms in order to allow additional fine-tuning
of this control (see chapter 7).
This means that individual organisms will have the option of controlling 
the expression of their adaptations by using deductive Ri
 from more than 
one source, such as by relying on their own past developmental histories of 
interacting with their local environments instead of on the past evolution￾ary histories of their population’s interactions with the wider environment. 
Alternatively, they may control their tactical adaptations by a mixture of 
more than one kind of adaptive know-how, or Ri
, if, for instance, there are 
genetic constraints on learning or genetic biases in the generation of antibod￾ies. Self-controlling, purposive individual organisms will then have the task 
of integrating all these sources of information. This may be difficult if and 
when the dif­ferent sources of information generate contradictory informa￾tion for the organism, such as what occurs where inherited genetic information 
“tells” human senses that sugary or fatty foods are good, while our cultural 
knowledge tells us that they are bad for us.
The deductive Ri
 acquired by these supplementary developmental pro￾cesses will be registered in dif­ferent physical memory systems in dif­ferent 
parts of an organism’s body. The deductive Ri
 that organisms inherit from 
their ancestors is primarily held in the genomes of organisms, but additional 
supplementary knowledge is stored elsewhere, including in their brains and 
immune systems. A further implication is that self-controlling, purposeful 
individual organisms need to be equipped by the prior evolution of their 
populations with some kind of higher-order autonomous executive capac￾ity to make some decisions about how they choose among or integrate the 
various sources of adaptive know-how (Ri
) that are available to them. For 
instance, individual organisms may have to make some decisions about how 
to control their adaptations, which override the naturally selected genetic
information that they inherited from their ancestors.
I’ll illustrate some of these points by referring to human artifacts again. 
The Perseverance Mars Rover had to be equipped with some autonomous 
decision-taking capacity by its ground controllers to enable it to avoid 
obstacles in its path that could not be anticipated or predicted by its ground 
controllers. The example has strong implications for some of the differences 89 Adaptation
between SET and NCT, which concern the autonomy of supplementary 
knowledge gaining systems and the ramifications of that knowledge gain. 
SET recognizes that organisms have evolved supplementary sources of adap￾tive know-how. For instance, SET recognizes that vertebrates have evolved 
immune systems and that animals can learn. However, SET views supple￾mentary knowledge gain to be under tight genetic control, and thereby it 
denies individual organisms any capacity for autonomous decision making. 
For SET, the genes retain control, micromanaging the acquisition of new 
knowledge and biasing it toward what was adaptive in the past. In con￾trast, for NCT, the entire function of the supplementary knowledge-gaining 
process is to wrestle control away from algorithms that were adaptive in 
the past and to replace it with control on the basis of algorithms that are 
adaptive in the present. One important implication of this insight is that
organisms can develop genuinely novel phenotypes rather than phenotypes 
restricted to those prescreened by ancestral selection, increasing VE. The 
lesson of the Perseverance Mars Rover is that NCT is likely to be correct, 
as the strict kind of genetic control anticipated by SET would leave organ￾isms vulnerable to unanticipated events. Perseverance’s requirement for an 
autonomous decision-making capability to function strongly implies that 
the supplementary knowledge-gaining capabilities of living organisms are 
likely to have evolved some significant degree of autonomy.
SET also denies that any of the adaptive Ri
, gained from these nongenetic
supplementary processes in individual organisms can affect the subsequent
evolution of their populations. NCT disagrees. Historically, SET refuted 
that any of the characteristics acquired by individual organisms during their 
lives could be transmitted to their descendants via genetic inheritance.26
More recently, even orthodox evolutionary biologists have been forced to 
recognize the existence of one or more nongenetic inheritance systems in
evolution.27 Insofar as individual organisms increase their own fitness by 
using supplementary developmental sources of Ri
, NCT also claims that 
organisms could bias the inheritances of later generations of their popula￾tions by contributing more than the genes that they carry to their descendants. 
Not just genes, but acquired epigenetic marks, hormones, nutrients, anti￾bodies, a host of symbionts (including bacteria, protists, and viruses), as well 90 Chapter 3
as learned and cultural knowledge, are passed from one generation to the 
next. Any or all of these supplementary inheritances can enhance the regula￾tory control of individual organisms by updating the information underpin￾ning their inductive gambles. In addition, niche-constructing organisms, 
including being informed by supplementary sources of adaptive Ri
 based 
on their own individual past histories, contribute ecological inheritances to 
their descendants. These ecological inheritances can also help to ensure that 
the regulatory control of adaptations by individual organisms is adaptive by 
reliably producing benign environmental states suited to their offspring’s 
genotype. In this manner, ecological inheritance also helps to ensure that the 
inductive gamble pays off. SET does not deny these legacies, but it does not
regard them to be evolutionarily significant either, since control is assumed 
to reside with the genes.28 In contrast, NCT regards these supplementary 
inheritances as playing a crucial role in evolution, by enhancing the predic￾tive power of Ri
, particularly over relatively short timescales. In chapter 10, 
we will see that there is now considerable evidence that inherited cultural 
knowledge has directed recent human evolution.
APPLYING ASHBY’S CONTROL THEORY 
TO EVOLVING POPULATIONS
Can Ashby’s control theory be applied to evolving populations? I will con￾sider two alternative scenarios, in which the population does and then does 
not reduce to the sum of its constituent organisms.
First, for simplicity, let’s assume that at any given moment, a popula￾tion comprises no more than the sum of the current generation’s constituent 
individuals. In such a case, the putative adaptations of a population should 
be reducible to the collection of the actual adaptations of its constituents.
That implies that evolving populations are not self-controlling or fitness￾seeking purposive systems in the same way that individual organisms are. It 
also implies that evolving populations cannot define or protect any essential 
variables of their own, independent of the essential variables defined and 
protected by their constituent individual organisms. However, if the appar￾ent adaptations of populations really are reducible to the adaptations of their 91 Adaptation
individual organisms, we may be able to apply Ashby’s control theory to 
populations indirectly. In that case, populations should have a similar status 
to human artifacts that are controlled by their human operators, with the
survival and persistence of populations exclusively dependent on the survival 
of their constituent individuals. Likewise, the dispersal of populations across 
their environments should depend exclusively on the capacity of diverse 
individual organisms to disperse, including for active relocation. Also, the 
regeneration of populations should depend exclusively on the capacity of 
individual organisms, or male and female pairs of organisms, to reproduce 
in each generation.
This does not mean that the contributions of individual organisms to 
the evolution of their populations will be identical. Each individual inherits
a distinctive sample of Ri
 from its population and experiences a unique 
personal history, as a result of which individuals vary considerably, inclusive 
of their variant self-controlling capacities. The usual way of thinking about 
this variance is in terms of variations in the fitness of individual organisms 
in populations. The fittest variant organisms are those that contribute most
Ri
 to the next generation of variant individual organisms.
Individual organisms do not exist in isolation but rather live in the con￾text of networks of interactive relationships with other organisms, including 
conspecifics and individuals of other species. In the context of interactions 
among members of the same species, the fitness of each individual organ￾ism is likely to be affected by the fitness-seeking activities of most of or all
the other organisms with whom it is interacting within its population. For 
SET, many of these interactions are typically understood through the logic 
of inclusive fitness theory, with its focus on the extent to which organisms 
share genes.29 For NCT, other forms of “relatedness” can arise through shared 
ecological inheritances, which can support mutualistic interactions, includ￾ing among species.30
These interactions with conspecifics are typically two-way-street inter￾actions. Each individual organism may have some capacity to influence or 
determine its relationships with other organisms. For instance, an organ￾ism may have some choice over which individuals it interacts with, and 
those decisions will be shaped by the individual personal histories of the 92 Chapter 3
individuals. But the fitness of a focal organism will also depend on how other 
organisms interact with it. In general, natural selection pressures, arising 
from the interactions of individual organisms with their conspecifics, should 
favor organisms best able to satisfy their fitness goals in the context of their 
networks of interactive relationships. These should be the same organisms
that contribute most Ri
 to the evolution and adaptation of their populations. 
Thus, even in cases where it is possible to reduce the apparent adaptations of 
populations to no more than the collective expression of the adaptations 
of their individual organisms, it is still possible for populations to influence
their own evolution indirectly, in a manner not fully recognized by SET.
Now let’s consider a second scenario, where it is not possible to reduce 
the adaptations of populations to the adaptations of their constituent indi￾vidual organisms. What happens if the whole is more than the sum of its 
parts? An example cited by Puckett et al. (2018)31 is the collective sensing of 
environmental gradients, such as light, by large shoals of fish. Collectively, a 
shoal of fish is sensitive to gradients of light, but each individual fish in the 
shoal is not. This appears to be a genuine example of an irreducible adaptive 
property of a group or subpopulation that cannot be explained in terms of 
the adaptations of its individual organisms. Some bird and fish migrations 
may fall into this category too, such as when members of the group pool their 
knowledge to solve a problem collectively.32 Other compelling examples are 
provided by the collective decision making of social insects, including ants, 
termites, bees, and wasps.33 Some researchers suggest that it is not possible to
explain the adaptedness of a leaf cutter ant colony or a termite nest, including 
the divisions of labor among plural castes, solely in terms of the adaptations 
of their individual constituent organisms;34 the termite nest itself displays 
emergent properties.
One approach to this phenomenon is to refer to a termite’s nest or leaf￾cutter-ant colony as a “superorganism.”35 However, in the context of Ashby’s 
control theory, this implies that to qualify as a superorganism, the collective 
entity must be able to define and protect its own essential variables and 
pursue its own fitness goals, independent of the essential variables and fit￾ness goals defined by its constituent individual organisms. This means that a 
superorganism must also be able to protect a third kind of variance—namely, 93 Adaptation
the variant relationship between the variant superorganism and the variant 
natural selection pressures that it encounters in its external environment.
None of this precludes the essential variables defined by a superorgan￾ism or a population from running in parallel with the essential variables and 
fitness goals defined by their constituent individual organisms. It probably
demands it, in fact. In such a case, how is it possible for the superorganism to 
ensure harmony between its own putative higher-order adaptations, fitness 
goals, and essential variables with the essential variables and fitness goals of 
its constituent individual organisms?
Can there be conflicts between the adaptations and fitness goals of 
higher-order populations that are not in harmony with those of its constitu￾ent individual organisms? Human societies suggest that the answer is yes.
THE MOVES OF THE GAME
Let’s return to the niche management game and attempt to specify the vari￾ous moves that are possible. Once again, I’ll start by considering any indi￾vidual organism in a population (O), and its local selective environment 
(E), although the same logic applies to populations of organisms in their 
environments (see Odling-Smee 1988 for details). A move occurs when￾ever there is any change in the relationship between the organism and its 
environment. Both the selective environments and individual organisms 
can introduce changes in this relationship, and therefore initiate moves in 
the game. This is true according to both SET and NCT, but it becomes 
more prominent in NCT because of NCT’s emphasis on the role of active 
niche-constructing organisms in evolution. The environment will cause a
change in the O-E interactive niche relationship whenever a change in its 
state leads to a modification in one or more selection pressure relative to the 
organism. Conversely, the organism will cause a change in the O-E interac￾tive niche relationship whenever it exhibits a changed or novel phenotypic 
trait, relative to its environment.
Individual organisms and their environments can change their inter￾active niche relationship in innumerable ways, but these are reducible to 
eight logically distinct categories, or moves. Four of these comprise the94 Chapter 3
fundamentally dif­ferent ways in which external environments can change 
the interactive O-E niche relationship by modifying one or more selection
pressures, while the other four constitute distinct ways in which any indi￾vidual organism can change the same O-E relationship by modifying its 
phenotype. While it is difficult, or perhaps even impossible, to fully describe 
varying environments,36 and it is probably equally impossible to fully catego￾rize varying organisms, it is possible to reduce all changes in the organism￾environment relationship to one of these eight moves.
This is where we make contact with Ashby’s control theory and his LRV 
again. The eight moves are the source of the third kind of variance—namely, 
the varying relationship between the varying phenotypic traits and the varying 
natural selection pressures. Hence, the moves are the source of the essential 
variables and its component subvariables described by Ashby, and the essen￾tial variable refers to the relationships that self-controlling individual organ￾isms O must continuously protect to stay adapted to their changing external 
environment E, throughout their lives. The eight moves are illustrated in 
figure 3.1, with each move occupying a single cell.
Cell 1 The environment changes itself (E changes E). The wider ecosystem 
can always introduce a change into the individual organism’s local selec￾tive environment, E, by causing a new change in O’s environment. This 
is because each organism’s local environment is open to inputs from the 
ecosystem in which it exists, which is open to the biosphere, which in turn 
is open to the universe. Hence, O’s local E can be fed by unlimited variance, 
or VE, from its ecosystem.
Cell 2 The environment changes the organism (E changes O). The local 
environment not only provides the physical energy and matter resources 
that O needs to stay alive, but is also a source of information that shapes 
development. The change in E that causes O to change could be as simple as
a seasonal change, an incoming tide, or a change in the weather. Temperature 
and light, for instance, are important influences on developing organisms, 
with hormones commonly mediating the effects of environmental stimuli 
on gene expression.37 For example, the butterfly Bicyclus anynana switches 
its phenotype dramatically to either produce wings with or without eyespots 95 Adaptation
depending on the temperature, the switch arising because higher tempera￾tures increase the rate of production of a hormone that affects the expres￾sion of the gene determining eyespot size.38 When O refers to populations, 
this move represents how selective environments (E) change populations of 
organisms (O) through the action of natural selection (see Odling-Smee, 
1988).
Cell 3 The environment changes the organism’s location (E changes O-E in
space). The organism’s position in space can be changed by passive dispersal 
mechanisms, such as wind, tides, currents, or waves, or through the activities 
of other organisms, such as pollinating insects. The environment can also 
Figure 3.1
The moves of the game classified in terms of the set of possible changes in the O-E relationship. 
Reproduced from figure 5 in Odling-Smee (1988).96 Chapter 3
impose isolating barriers on the organism, such as a mountain range or a 
lake on land, thereby limiting its dispersal across space.
Cell 4 The environment can change the organism-environment relation￾ship in time (E changes O-E in time). The environment, E, can permit the 
organism, O, to move into its future by allowing it to survive, or alternatively, 
it can prevent O from moving into its future by killing it. When O refers to 
populations, this represents the situation in which populations go extinct.39
Then there are four fundamental ways in which the organism, O, can 
change its O-E interactive niche relationship relative to its local selective 
environment, E:
Cell 5 The organism changes itself (O changes O). The organism can
change itself, either in response to, or in anticipation of, a move from E, 
or in response to internal metabolic changes. For instance, over time, the 
organism could become hungry, or get tired, or come into reproductive state.
Cell 6 The organism changes the environment (O changes E). For example, 
an individual organism can take energy and matter resources from its local 
external environment, dump its detritus in E, or change the environment’s 
physical structure by redirecting a flow of energy or matter through it, such 
as when earthworms process soil. Organisms may also be able to construct 
artifacts in their environments, such as nests, burrows, dams, or houses.
Cell 7 The organism changes its own location (O changes O-E in space). An
organism can actively relocate in space by choosing to move somewhere else.
For instance, a fish may do that by swimming in the sea, or an animal may 
do so by walking, climbing, or running on land. An organism may also be 
able to change its own location in space merely by growing larger over time.
Cell 8 The organism can change the organism-environment relationship in 
time (O changes O-E in time). O can extend its lifetime and thereby move 
into its future by surviving, or it could end its own life, such as by sacrificing 
itself to benefit a relative.
This last move involving O moving into its future is the trickiest one to 
explain, for two reasons. First, it takes us back to the relationship between 
individual organisms and their evolving populations. Second, it subsumes all 97 Adaptation
eight logically distinct categories of moves in this niche-management game. In 
particular, it subsumes all four of the logically distinct categories of O’s moves 
because they are all linked to each other by sequences of dependencies, which 
run as follows: More lifetime for an organism is equivalent to the persistence
over time of a very-far-from-thermodynamic equilibrium system. This means
that more lifetime demands more free energy to fuel it. Any individual organ￾ism requires energy and matter, or R
p
 resources, to resist the second law and 
stay alive. An organism can gain energy and matter resources to live only by 
physically contacting an environment that can supply it with those resources. 
That environment must also be able to act as a sink for the organism’s detritus. 
While persisting, the organism may grow, shrink, or change in location. Hence, 
when organisms survive (move 8), they likely also change themselves (move 
5), their environment (move 6), and their location (move 7) in the process.
Moves 5–8 constitute all the means available to organisms to protect 
their essential variables. A change in state of the organism (move 5), such 
as growing hungry, will trigger appropriate actions, such as foraging behav￾ior, that help to ensure that energy levels remain within suitable bounds. 
Constructing a nest or digging a burrow (move 6) can allow organisms to 
escape extremes or temperature, humidity or predation threats. Migrating 
to warmer climes in the winter (move 7) allows animals to remain within 
suitable temperatures and levels of food availability. Finally, survival (move 8) 
is possible only if key essential variables have been protected. Earlier in this
chapter, I described how contemporary adaptations can be characterized as 
a “synerg,” or complementary match, between the traits of the organism and 
the factors in its environment.40 This conception is evocative of the ecolo￾gist Evelyn Hutchinson’s (1957) concept of the niche as a multidimensional 
hypervolume of tolerances relative to a potentially unlimited set of environ￾mental variables. Each dimension refers to an O-E relationship. Hence, we 
can view moves of the game that preserve the O-E niche relationship and 
protect essential variables as attempts by the organism to remain in tolerance 
space regions of its Hutchisonian niche.
Persisting in the game requires both Ri
 and R
p
. Any organism must pos￾sess sufficient adaptive know-how (Ri
) a priori, either from the prior evolu￾tionary history of its population, or from its supplementary developmental 98 Chapter 3
processes, to control its contemporary adaptations in ways that enable it to 
harvest the energy and matter (R
p ) resources that it needs from its environ￾ment and to dump its detritus back into it. The immediate point is that 
these cell 8 requirements that enable O to stay alive in its environment begin 
immediately, from the first moment when O appears. From the very first 
moment of its life, an individual organism requires both sufficient energy 
and matter (R
p ) and sufficient adaptive know-how (Ri
) to survive, grow, 
and reproduce and manage its O-E interactive niche relationship adaptively.
How can any new organism get started on its life if it needs both suffi￾cient R
p
 and Ri
 resources a priori? The answer is that O’s life is dependent on 
O initially inheriting assets from its parents and ancestors as a function of its 
membership of an evolving population or species. O must inherit its initial 
adaptive know-how by inheriting previously naturally selected genes from its 
parents and ancestors, primarily but not exclusively via genetic inheritance. 
It must also inherit other resources (namely, energy and matter resources) 
from its parents and ancestors a priori via other inheritance systems, most 
prominently via ecological inheritance. Each O must therefore inherit its 
own initial start-up O-E niche relationship from its parents and ancestors 
as a function of its membership of its particular evolving population. This 
includes inherited genes and other sources of inherited knowledge (Ri
), and 
inherited physical resources (R
p), at the initial space-time location that O 
inherits from its parents and ancestors.41 For instance, chicks inherit not only 
genes from their avian parents, but also the hormones and antibodies that 
are placed in eggs and the nest environment that is temperature-regulated 
and comparatively safe from predators. Likewise, phytophagous insects not 
only supply their offspring with genes and all the resources contained in eggs, 
but also carefully choose host plants on which to lay their eggs that provide 
their descendants with suitable food sources. In short, each organism must 
inherit a “start-up niche.”42
I previously described all these inherited assets as a “free gift” to organ￾isms from their parents.43 But the gift is not really a gift, it is only a loan, or 
mortgage.44 The loan has to be paid off by the organism reproducing, and in 
its turn transmitting, both Ri
 and R
p
 assets by genetic and ecological inheri￾tance to its offspring. The evolutionary trick is that the organism’s initially 99 Adaptation
inherited Ri
 or genetic inheritance almost invariably include the adaptive 
know-how, plus the instructions, to reproduce as well as to survive. This is 
how the cost of the evolutionary process itself is paid for by its constituent 
individual organisms. Hence, all organisms must acquire sufficient resources 
from their environments, not only to keep themselves alive and to oppose 
the second law on their own behalf, but also to fuel reproduction of viable
offspring.
By producing offspring and contributing to the next generation, indi￾vidual organisms, O, are not only contributing to the further evolution of 
their populations, but also permitting natural selection to retest, and hence 
update, the adaptive know-how (or Ri
) that is transmitted between genera￾tions in evolving populations.
While I will not dwell on it here, there is a recursion of the eight catego￾ries of moves from both O and E in the game, in which O is a population 
of individual organisms and E has become the selective environment of that 
population. This happens because any adaptive living system can only rely 
on the same categories of four fundamental moves to drive down whatever 
VE or changing natural selection pressures that it encounters in its interac￾tive O-E niche relationship, now at the population level. At this new higher 
level, a population may or may not then define and protect an essential 
variable of its own, over and above the essential variables of its constituent 
individual organisms. Regardless of whether O is an individual organism or 
a population, these eight logically distinct moves are universals that apply 
to the adaptive niche-management problems of all living systems relative to 
their particular external selective environments.
EMPIRICAL EXAMPLES
After all that abstract logic, we badly need some concrete examples again in 
order to illustrate the preceding arguments. I have chosen three animal exam￾ples, all taken from the work of Scott Turner.45 Let’s begin with termites.
Generally, termites do not have high tolerance for hot and dry con￾ditions. Yet certain termite populations can live in these environments. 
According to SET, the adaptations that we should expect from termites 100 Chapter 3
that do this should be modified physiological adaptations to hot and dry 
conditions due to the natural selection of genes for high tolerance. This 
seems to have occurred in the case of Hodotermes mossambicus, a southern 
African harvester termite, which can often be seen foraging on the surface, 
in full sunlight, in hot and dry conditions. Their physiological adaptations 
include the development of a highly sclerotized exoskeleton and large size, 
which help prevent dessication, and retention of eyes by the workers, which 
is obviously necessary for them to forage in the light. In this case, the natu￾ral selection of appropriate phenotype-determining genes, as described by 
SET, appears to have been paramount. Those termites with physiologies
best able to cope with the heat and desiccation were better placed to pass 
on their genes to descendant populations, allowing the entire population to 
evolve a suitable physiology. In terms of the aforementioned game, the hot 
and dry environment (E) has generated a change in a population of termites 
(O) through natural selection that favored contemporary adaptations that 
facilitate heat tolerance, such as a highly sclerotized exoskeleton (i.e., move 
2). These contemporary adaptations allow the termites to keep an essential 
variable (their internal temperature) within a suitable range.
However, most termites in similar conditions do not go down this route. 
Instead, they employ niche construction to modify their selective environ￾ments (i.e., move 6). This has changed how they have evolved to cope with 
harsh, hot environments. “Heuweltjies” are curious landforms common in 
the winter rainfall regions of South Africa’s Nama Karoo.46 These are low 
mounds, roughly one-to-two meters tall and around twenty meters in dia￾meter. They are often distributed in regular arrays over the landscape and 
typically support a distinct plant community that makes them stand out 
visually from their surroundings. Heuweltjies are the products of a dif­fer￾ent species of harvester termite, Microhodotermes viator. The nests of these
termites qualify as constructed niches because the burrowing activities of the 
termites, which are ancillary to constructing the colony’s underground nest 
and network of foraging tunnels, enhance the infiltration of sparse seasonal 
rainfalls. Heuweltjie soils are slightly moister and better aerated than sur￾rounding soils, which tend to be compact so that rainfalls are prone to run 
off instead of infiltrating them. Through niche construction, the termites 101 Adaptation
expose themselves to a suitable temperature and humidity, protecting these
essential variables but modifying natural selection in the process. As a direct 
consequence of their mound-building and other niche-constructing activi￾ties, such as mining underground water, termites weaken selection for physi￾ological adaptations that facilitate heat tolerance, such as a highly sclerotized 
exoskeleton, and strengthen selection for behavioral adaptations, such as
mound building. Heuweltjies also qualify as a form of ecological inheritance 
because the structural modification of the soil by one colony typically per￾sists beyond the colony’s lifetime. These modified selective environments are 
inherited by later generations of termites. Such ecological inheritances can 
be impressive because some heuweltjies can be several thousand years old.47
This example illustrates two alternative means by two dif­ferent species
of termites to the same adaptive end. H. mossambicus appears to respond 
in the manner expected by SET to natural selection pressures with genet￾ically determined phenotypes to these harsh environmental conditions. 
The second species, M. viator, however, adapts in a dif­ferent way, which 
is anticipated by NCT. It responds to harsh environmental conditions by 
niche construction. It changes its environment to suit itself by its activities.48
My second example is one studied by Darwin: the earthworm, Lumbri￾cus terrestris.49 Turner50 points out that earthworms are essentially aquatic 
oligochaetes, poorly equipped physiologically for life on land. Yet there they 
are. How can we explain that? We don’t know when earthworms first invaded 
the land, but it is almost certainly over 100 million years ago.51 We do know 
an advantage enjoyed by animals that live on land as opposed to in water is
that taking oxygen from air is much more efficient than taking it from water. 
It is easier to do and far less costly in terms of the amount of water versus 
the amount of air that animals have to pump through their bodies to gain 
the same amount of oxygen.52 Given oxygen’s considerable contribution to 
metabolism, that is a major advantage for animals that live on land. This 
may have been the reason why the ancestors of today’s earthworms invaded 
land in the first place.
But how could earthworms survive on land when they possess a physi￾ology suited to an aquatic existence? Why didn’t that physiology stop them 
unless or until it had been retooled by natural selection, as SET would102 Chapter 3
anticipate? Turner53 answered this question by focusing primarily on earth￾worm organs equivalent to kidneys, their nephridia. Turner pointed out 
something extraordinary. Earthworms clearly possess the “wrong” physi￾ological adaptations for achieving water balance in their terrestrial envi￾ronments. They live on land, but they have not evolved typical terrestrial 
“kidneys.” They have largely retained the aquatic physiology of their fresh￾water ancestors.
Turner describes three kinds of physiology needed by dif­ferent animals
in dif­ferent environments. Animals that live in freshwater are in danger of 
being flooded by excess water. They need to be capable of excreting large 
amounts of water, and thus produce lots of dilute urine. Animals in marine 
environments are in danger of being overwhelmed by too much salt. They 
have to be capable of excreting very concentrated urine to get rid of those
excess salts. Animals living on land are in danger of dehydration. They need 
to retain as much water as possible. But earthworms have retained their 
ancestral freshwater physiology even though they now live on land; hence 
they continue to produce large amounts of urine as if they were freshwater 
animals. They thereby lose considerable amounts of water, which they would 
do better to retain. So how have they gotten away with that? The answer 
is that they have modified their terrestrial environment by diverse niche￾constructing activities.
Earthworms don’t just live “on” land, they live “in” it. They live in the 
soil. That complicates matters. Soil scientists divide soils into layers, called 
“horizons.” Three basic horizons reflect the degree to which porous spaces in 
the soil are occupied by air or water. Proceeding downward from the surface, 
they are the aerial, edaphic, and aquatic (water table) horizons, respectively. 
For animals, it is relatively easy to get oxygen from the aerial horizon and easy 
to get water from the aquatic horizon, but not vice versa. Earthworms are 
confronted with a dilemma because they need both oxygen and water. They 
can go up for oxygen, but risk desiccation. They can go down for water, but 
risk suffocation. So earthworms attempt to get the best of both worlds by 
living mostly in the edaphic horizon between the aerial and aquatic regions. 
However, this horizon offers too limited a habitat to permit earthworms 
to live in it without niche construction. So earthworms enlarge the soil’s 103 Adaptation
edaphic horizon by active work, expressing diverse niche-constructing activi￾ties in the process.
One major consequence of the worms’ niche construction is to make 
more water available to themselves in enlarged edaphic horizons. The move￾ment of water through soil is determined by the soil’s water potential, com￾prising four principal forces: pressure, gravity, osmotic potential, and the 
matric potential. The force that is crucially affected by earthworm niche 
construction is the matric potential. The matric potential arises from interac￾tions between electrical charges on surfaces in interfacial areas. In soils, the 
matric potential depends primarily on pore size. Left undisturbed, “soil . . .
gradually become(s) more and more clay-like in its interactions with water:
it will hold lots of water, but will hold it with stronger and stronger matric 
forces.”54 Earthworms oppose this matric force through niche construction. 
They do so primarily by aggregating soil particles into larger pieces with 
increased surface areas. That weakens matric potential and makes it easier 
for the worms to draw water into their bodies.
In practice, earthworms affect the soil they are living in by several kinds 
of niche construction. One of them is by opening tunnels in the soil to 
improve soil drainage and aeration. Another is by passing soil through their 
guts, which causes the soil to pick up water-absorbing mucus from the 
worms. Third, the worms’ fecal casts glue small soil particles together into 
larger pieces. Fourth, worms draw in pieces of plant litter from soil surfaces 
to eat and to line their tunnels. Earthworms also increase the abundance of 
macropores in the soil. The net effect of all these niche-constructing activities 
is to expand the soil’s edaphic horizon. The earthworms expand their habitats 
by niche construction, and thus release themselves from “having to evolve” 
changes to their largely aquatic water balance physiology, in response to 
natural selection pressures arising from their novel terrestrial environments.
A major consequence of this earthworm niche construction is to “coun￾teract” some of the natural selection pressures that they encounter in their 
“novel” terrestrial environments, and that they must have encountered when 
they first invaded the land. Supposing that earthworms had not invested in 
counteractive niche construction, then natural selection pressures in ter￾restrial environments would presumably either have prevented earthworms 104 Chapter 3
from invading land, or they would have selected for the adaptive “retooling” 
of earthworm physiology to enable them to live on land. That would be 
equivalent to move 2 in the game. However, the latter processes would prob￾ably have greatly slowed the rate at which earthworms could have adapted 
to their novel terrestrial environments compared to the rate of adaptation 
that they seem to have achieved by niche construction. It would also have 
changed their physiology dramatically, which hasn’t happened.
Rather, the transition to land appears to have been reliant on niche 
construction, as represented by move 6 in the game. That niche construction 
allowed the earthworms to move onto land while protecting the essential 
variable of a suitable water balance. In spite of that, natural selection must
have played its part in this story too. For example, after invading land, 
with the aid of counteractive niche construction, it is probable that natural
selection would subsequently have selected for additional earthworm niche 
construction that further enhanced their fitness in their “novel” habitats. 
Natural selection would very likely have selected for any earthworm niche 
construction that further expanded edaphic soil horizons. For example, 
earthworms could not have been selected for dragging leaves into the soil if 
they had remained aquatic. But once on land, natural selection probably did
select for that particular niche-constructing activity in earthworms. Earth￾worm niche construction did not replace natural selection but merely reset 
it, transforming the trajectory of these animals.
This earthworm example illustrates another general point. Inceptive (or 
innovative) and counteractive niche construction can act synergistically with 
each other. Creating a semiaquatic environment on land is innovative niche 
construction since it exposes earthworms to a new way of life. Processing 
soil to reduce matric potentials is counteractive niche construction, as it 
counteracts the reduced availability of water at higher soil layers. Together, 
these activities allow for a dramatic change in lifestyle without a funda￾mental change in physiology. The earthworm example also shows that both 
inceptive and counteractive niche construction can act synergistically with 
natural selection. All such interactions are likely to affect the rate of evolution, 
sometimes speeding it up, and in some circumstances slowing it down.55105 Adaptation
More generally, inceptive niche construction may allow a species to 
invade a new habitat. However, the species may subsequently be able to exploit 
and tolerate its novel habitat only by buffering out some of the novel selection
pressures that it then encounters in its new habitat through counteractive 
niche construction. That in turn may lead to the subsequent natural selection
of still more effective counteracting niche-constructing activities. Adapta￾tions depend on the interactions of natural selection and niche construction.
My third example is concerned with the ways in which individual organ￾isms have to control their contemporary adaptations throughout their lives 
in their niche-management games with their environments.56 A minority 
of animals, mostly birds and mammals, are endotherms. They maintain 
constant body temperatures by diverse internal physiological mechanisms 
that generate heat internally. But generating heat internally is costly. In our 
own case, about 90 percent of the food that we eat is needed to maintain 
our bodies at the homeostatic level of approximately 37°C.
Most animals adopt less costly ways of maintaining their bodies at a 
more or less constant temperature, ways not determined by internal heat 
generation. Instead, it is maintained by the clever exploitation of external 
sources of heat. Creatures that maintain their body temperatures in this 
way are usually called “cold-blooded,” but this is misleading. For example, 
as Turner57 points out, several species of lizards can maintain high and 
stable body temperatures throughout the day. A lizard might spend the 
early morning sunning itself on a rock to regain heat lost overnight or to 
the cold morning air. Once it has built up its body temperature sufficiently, 
it may then make sorties into the colder parts of its environment in search 
of food. It is then likely to cool down again. Eventually, it will have to 
stop foraging and return to basking in the Sun to warm up, and so on 
throughout the day. By shuttling all day between hot and cold spots, lizards 
can keep their bodies within a narrow range of temperatures. In this way, 
a lizard can not only turn itself into a warm blooded creature, but it also 
can be remarkably adept at regulating its temperature at a near-constant
level, behaviorally. Its behavioral thermostat then affects almost all aspects 
of how the lizard fits into its environment adaptively. Its body temperature 106 Chapter 3
affects how fast a lizard can move, the rate at which it can digest food, how 
big its territory is, and its success in foraging. It even affects its capacity for 
reproduction.
What temperature a lizard maintains is the result of a careful balancing 
of benefits versus costs. Some are called “opportunity costs.” For instance, 
while basking on a rock, a lizard is giving up the opportunity to search for 
food. However, good sunbathing spots are often exposed sites, where the 
risks of predation are higher. What temperature a lizard maintains will there￾fore depend on a balance sheet of costs and benefits, as well as by immediate 
and sometimes overriding events in its environment, such as the sudden 
appearance of a predator.
This third example illustrates the ongoing dynamics associated with the 
contemporary adaptations of organisms. The lizards’ state (i.e., body tempera￾ture) constantly varies, relative to their varying environments, on a moment￾by-moment basis. They have to balance the costs and payoffs continuously 
between their varying physiological needs and the varying opportunities and 
threats offered by their external environment.
This balancing act is equivalent to the lizards attempting to protect an 
essential variable—its body temperature, as described by Ashby’s control 
theory. This requires a balancing act between three variables: temperature, 
foraging, and the risk of predation. In reality, and in the case of all organisms, 
many more variables are likely to be in play in their attempts to protect their 
essential variables. For instance, another intriguing variable that lizards have 
to take into account occurs if they become infected by bacteria. Apparently, 
like endotherms, the lizards have to cause their body temperatures to rise 
to a temperature that is higher than normal to combat the infection. But 
they differ from endotherms in having to achieve this febrile state behavior￾ally, rather than by resetting an internal thermostat. Of course, if a febrile 
lizard does sun itself more, it raises the risk of predation and loses more 
opportunities for foraging, which must change its overall balance sheet. As 
Hutchinson58 pointed out, in reality all organisms actually live in niches 
composed of n-dimensional hypervolumes of ecological variables. Organ￾isms don’t have to pay attention to all of them, but usually they have to pay 
attention to many more than three!107 Adaptation
CONCLUSION
In this chapter, I’ve argued that adaptation is not a straightforward unified 
concept in biology. The adaptations of organisms decompose into three 
distinct concepts that need to be understood separately. They relate to the 
past, present, and future. Historical adaptations account for the evolutionary 
origins of phenotypic design. Contemporary adaptations are concerned with 
the fit or complementarity between individual organisms and their external 
environments in the present. Anticipatory adaptations refer to the fitness 
purposes or goals of organisms in each generation.
After considering each of these concepts separately, it is then possi￾ble to recombine them in ways that I have been suggesting could lead to a 
deeper understanding. It is not possible to understand the repertoires of the 
contemporary adaptations of individual organisms, nor how contemporary 
adaptations are controlled by individual organisms, except in the light of the 
historical evolutionary origins of the populations to which the organisms 
belong. Nor is it possible to understand how individual organisms control 
the expression of their contemporary adaptations, except in the light of their 
fitness goals of resisting the second law of thermodynamics for long enough 
to survive and reproduce.
Organisms have to constrain their inductive gambles about what adapta￾tions they need to express, where and when in their contemporary environ￾ment, by relying on inherited and acquired adaptive know-how, or Ri
, about 
what was adaptive in the past. They also have to constrain their contemporary 
adaptations by their expected future interactions with their own individual 
selective environments to achieve their fitness goals. I also discussed how the 
two theories of evolution that we have been considering here, SET and NCT, 
differ with respect to how they see the integration of these three components 
of the concept of adaptation in biology. NCT offers a richer understanding 
of these complex issues and a stronger interpretation of empirical examples.
This has been a difficult chapter to write, and I fear to read too. In the 
twentieth century, the developmental geneticist Conrad Waddington once 
said that how organisms adapt to their unknown, but not wholly unforecast￾able, futures is the hardest problem in biology. It is this problem with which
we have been grappling in this chapter.How can the past inform the present about the future? This is a question that 
any theory of evolution, including both standard evolutionary theory (SET) 
and niche construction theory (NCT), must address. So how does natural
selection inform organisms in evolving populations?
Strictly speaking, that is the wrong question. Biologists usually think of 
natural selection as a blind and purposeless process.1
 Natural selection alone
cannot be a source of “meaningful” information for organisms. By itself, it 
does not supply the know-how, or Ri
, that organisms need to adapt to their 
environments. For Ri
 to accumulate, there must also be processes that gener￾ate heritable phenotypic variation.
What about the genes that are carried by organisms? Unless they have 
been subject to prior natural selection, genes cannot inform organisms either. 
New gene variants typically arise through chance-based mutations. Such 
mutations cannot inform organisms, except by accident, and then only 
extremely rarely. Only in combination with natural selection, can the genes
that organisms inherit from their ancestors become a source of adaptive 
know-how, or Ri
. For this to be possible, natural selection must be biased 
toward the differential inheritance of the genetic variants of fit organisms, 
in each generation, in evolving populations.
The genes that organisms inherit from their ancestors may then be 
able to supply organisms in the current generation of a population with 
deductive know-how, or Ri
, about which phenotypic traits were adaptive for 
their ancestors in the past. This Ri
 is deductive because it is deduced from 
4 ADAPTIVE KNOW-HOW IN EVOLUTION110 Chapter 4
past interactions of the population with its environment, and it is adaptive 
because only those interactions that led to successful outcomes resulted in 
the transmission of genes to the next generation. Ideally, organisms in each 
generation would inherit the adaptive know-how that maximizes the chances 
that the inductive gambles that they have to make when they express their 
contemporary phenotypic traits will prove adaptive again. Similarly, the Ri
organisms inherit from their ancestors would ideally maximize the chances 
that their expectations or predictions about their future interactions with 
their environment will turn out to be correct.
But why should information about the evolutionary histories of popula￾tions, or for that matter the developmental histories of individual organisms, 
ever have the capacity to tell organisms anything meaningful about their 
present or future interactions with their environments? To what extent is 
this inherited adaptive know-how, deduced from the past, relevant to Wad￾dington’s problem of how organisms adapt to their unknown but not wholly 
unforecastable futures? These are the questions that I want to concentrate 
on in this chapter.
HOW IS IT POSSIBLE FOR ANY ORGANISM 
TO KNOW ANYTHING?
All discrete systems or objects in the universe, whether nonliving or living,
are transitory.2
 They are the temporary manifestations of physical processes.
Some (such as clouds) have only a fleeting existence. Others, such as moun￾tains, may exist for millions of years. And planets can exist for billions of 
years. I’ll assume that any discrete system that we are talking about is one 
that persists with the same identity for a measurable period of time.
All discrete systems are highly localized in space and time. They are also 
constantly compelled to change their locations in their environments in 
space and time. Obviously, no discrete system can stop still in time. Each 
is compelled to move from the past, to the present, and on to the future. 
The succession of here-and-now moments for all discrete systems becomes a 
“worldline” in four-dimensional space-time for all nonliving abiotic systems
and a lifetime for living organisms in biology.3111 Adaptive Know-How in Evolution
Superficially, it might seem possible for discrete systems to stop still 
in space for a time, but that is an illusion. For example, all earthbound 
systems are traveling in space, as well as in time, if only because the Earth 
itself is continuously moving in space during time by spinning on its axis 
and orbiting round the Sun. In spite of continuously having to travel 
through space and time, every discrete system can interact only with other 
systems, or with its surroundings, in the specific location where it exists 
and in the present.
On Earth, discrete abiotic and biotic systems are confronted with vary￾ing temperatures, rainfall, wind, gravity, weathering, magnetic fields, light 
and dark, and so on, but they can interact with any of these phenomena 
only in the present. In this sense, all discrete systems exist only in the pre￾sent. Their pasts have ceased to exist, and they cannot now erase whatever 
interactions may have occurred between them and their environments in 
bygone days. Similarly, their futures do not yet exist, which means that 
discrete systems cannot physically interact with their environments ahead 
of time before they travel into their futures. They are localized systems that 
exist only in the here and now. In these circumstances, how is it possible for
any discrete, transitory system, which is constantly changing its location in 
space and time, to “know” anything?
Everything that I have been saying until now about localized discrete 
objects and systems applies equally to both nonliving systems and to living 
organisms. But this question marks the point at which nonliving and liv￾ing systems diverge fundamentally. Abiotic systems don’t need meaningful 
information to persist. Abiotic systems are typically probable systems that 
are not far from thermodynamic equilibrium relative to their surround￾ings. They do not have to resist the second law of thermodynamics as they 
travel through space and time. They merely have to obey the laws of nature, 
including the laws of thermodynamics. They do so by shedding free energy, 
dissipating by generating disorder and entropy, as they travel toward greater 
thermodynamic stability. Abiota only have to react to their surroundings. 
Their reactions may cause further reactions, but nonliving systems are not 
capable of any autonomous actions. Rare exceptions include radioactive 
entities, which I’ll ignore here.112 Chapter 4
Unlike abiotic systems, all living systems must actively resist the second 
law of thermodynamics to stay alive. To do so, they have to continuously 
import energy and matter, or R
p
 resources, from their environments and 
export their detritus back to their environments. Organisms cannot do either
of these things without interacting with their environments, and they cannot 
interact with their environments unless they adapt to them. But organisms 
cannot be adapted to their environments unless they are informed by appro￾priate adaptive know-how, or Ri
.
The capacity of organisms to resist the second law by establishing a flow 
of energy and matter (R
p ) between themselves and their environments suffi￾cient to counteract entropic processes therefore depends on their acquisition 
of meaningful information (i.e., Ri
). The Ri
 that organisms need is primarily 
inherited from their ancestors via their genes and consists primarily of the 
adaptive know-how that they inherit from their ancestors. However, for 
the acquisition of adaptive know-how by organisms to be possible, both the
organisms themselves and their external environments must satisfy some 
preliminary requirements.
A completely chaotic universe could never inform organisms. The 
universal environment must be at least partly lawful, as it is impossible to 
know anything about randomness. If you happen to know the initial state 
of a chaotic system, it is just possible to know a little about chaos, but not
much.4
 Should the universe ever achieve maximum entropy (i.e., total dis￾order) then, regardless of everything else, life would be impossible because
no organism could know anything.
Fortunately, the universe is at least partly lawful. It expresses the causal 
laws of physics and chemistry and the putative laws of biology, as well as 
physical symmetries and some physical constants. However, the laws of 
nature refer primarily to the dynamics of the universe. They refer to change. 
In a static universe that was ordered but completely frozen and fixed, there 
would be no change, and therefore no laws of physics, chemistry, or biology 
in operation, because there would be no changes to describe or govern. In 
these circumstances, any imaginary organism that happened to exist would 
not need to know anything anyway. It would not have to oppose the second 
law of thermodynamics because the second law would not exist.113 Adaptive Know-How in Evolution
Thus, organisms could not “know” anything if the universe were cha￾otic, and they would not need to know anything if the universe were static. 
For organisms to know anything, or even need to know anything, their 
environments must be both lawful and dynamic. In practice, the universe 
is neither entirely chaotic nor unchanging. As a consequence, organisms 
must “know” something about how the laws of nature cause changes in the 
universe.
The hallmark of the laws of nature is that they refer to causal relation￾ships between events, in regularly reoccurring patterns. Causal relationships 
reoccur in space and time, whereas the hallmark of chance is a lack of repeti￾tion. Chance events do not typically reoccur in space and time, and certainly 
they do not reliably reoccur. They are commonly random events, events 
of very low probability, or even unique events. The ultimate nature of the 
relationship between causality and chance, or between regularly repeating 
invariant event patterns versus nonrepeating variant event patterns, remains 
unresolved within the field of physics5
 and will not be discussed here.
Before organisms can “know” anything, they must possess some fun￾damental properties too. They must have at least an elementary capacity to 
“sense” the present, to “remember” the past, and to “anticipate” the future. 
Because localized organisms exist only in the present, their senses can only
detect the present. They may be able to sense signs of past events in their 
environments, before the present moment, as is the case when astronomers 
perceive events that occurred many light-years in the past. But they can 
detect meaningful information only arising from past events, in the present.
Organisms must also be able to “remember” something about their 
ancestors’ interactions with their past environments. In the case of many 
animals, they must remember something about their own past individual 
interactions with their own individual environments too (see chapter 7). 
Individual plants also register the past through developmental plasticity. 
However, leaving learning, memory, and developmental plasticity to one 
side, organisms in evolving populations remember the past primarily in 
the form of the genes that they inherit from their ancestors. These genes are 
expressed in phenotypes that proved adaptive in past environments, and in 
that sense constitute a “memory.”114 Chapter 4
Organisms must also have some capacity to apply whatever know￾how they have gained from their remembered pasts (primarily from their 
inherited genetic “memories”) to their own current, and anticipated future, 
interactions with their environments. The key requirement for all knowledge￾gaining organisms is that they must be sensitive to the difference between 
regularly reoccurring causal relationships between events in their environ￾ments and one-off, rare, or random events. Unless they are, organisms will
not be able to demarcate between repeating cause-and-effect relationships 
in their environments and everything else. In such a case, whatever Ri
 they 
acquire from the past risks being maladaptive.
How is it possible for any living system to make this vital demarcation? 
Instead of trying to answer this question by immediately considering evolu￾tionary biology, I’ll begin by discussing science.
I’m going to assume that the logic that describes all meaningful 
information-gaining processes in living organisms is always the same.6
 The 
logic of knowledge gain is the same, regardless of whether we are talking 
about how adaptive know-how is gained by evolving populations of organ￾isms, or by learning in individual animals, or by collective sociocultural 
knowledge–gaining processes in humans, including science.7
 In each case, 
despite the fact that the mechanisms and processes responsible for the gain￾ing of meaningful information by organisms are quite dif­ferent, the logic of
knowledge gain is the same8
 (for more, see chapter 7).
We can take advantage of this situation by comparing dif­ferent 
knowledge-gaining processes with each other. At the moment, we probably 
know more about how science gains meaningful information about nature 
than we do about how evolving populations of organisms gain adaptive 
know-how via the mechanisms of natural selection and population gene￾tics. We may be able to learn more about how evolution works by looking 
at how science works first.
GAINING KNOWLEDGE IN SCIENCE
Before it was possible to land humans on the Moon, or Rovers on Mars, 
scientists and engineers had to make correct predictions about how they 115 Adaptive Know-How in Evolution
could travel to these extraterrestrial places, as well as what kind of conditions 
they were likely to meet when they arrived. The success of these missions
proves that it is possible to use information deduced from the past to make 
correct predictions about the present and the future, although never with 
absolute certainty.
But how is this possible? The reason stems from the ways in which 
cause-and-effect relationships work in nature. Causes have effects. Causes
precede effects in time. Unless masked by hidden or interfering variables, the 
same cause always has the same effect. It follows that if scientists observe a 
particular cause-and-effect relationship and subsequently encounter a repeti￾tion of the same cause, they can then, with reasonable confidence, predict 
the reoccurrence of the same effect.
This, of course, presupposes that the scientist can tell the difference 
between reoccurring cause-and-effect relationships and chance events in 
nature. Scientists cannot make correct predictions about the future unless
they can demarcate between “true” cause-and-effect relationships and every￾thing else in nature, and do so a priori. To make this vital demarcation, a 
scientist must be able to “remember” which cause-and-effect relationships 
regularly reoccurred in the past.
Today, the ability of individual scientists, or scientists working in institu￾tions and wider scientific communities, to make correct predictions about 
nature is greatly enhanced by modern technology. For example, scientists 
and engineers have been extending our human senses for centuries. Vision 
is amplified through the use of telescopes, binoculars, and microscopes, and 
sound through the use of microphones and amplifiers. Scientists have con￾structed innumerable artificial senses of enormous sensitivity. We now possess 
instruments that can monitor previously unknown or unrecognized phenom￾ena on Earth and in the universe, such as radio waves from space. Our tech￾nologies have also extended our “memories,” which can now be registered in 
multiple dif­ferent ways, as well as in human heads. They range from books 
and journals, to tapes, films, and computers, and to vast stores of digitalized 
data. Deductions can be drawn from these data about past historical cause￾and-effect relationships, by reason, logic, and deductive mathematics, aided
by powerful computers that process the data and detect regularities.116 Chapter 4
Frequently, the consequences of these deductions are the gaining of new 
scientific knowledge about nature. Initially, this new knowledge is likely 
to take the form of conjectures and hypotheses. In science, however, it is 
not enough to sense, observe, and remember putative, reoccurring cause￾and-effect relationships. Nor is it enough to form hypotheses about how 
nature works. In science, hypotheses must be tested empirically. Scientists 
are constantly doing experiments in attempts to pin down the actual cause 
or causes of natural phenomena, typically by manipulating one variable at 
a time and controlling all other potentially interfering or masking variables.
In the context of NCT, our empirical sciences are a form of sociocultural 
niche construction. In the first instance, the goals of science are typically the 
gaining of more meaningful information, or Ri
, about how nature works. It 
is seldom about the immediate gaining of more R
p
. That usually comes later, 
for instance through the application of scientific knowledge in technology.
Scientific experiments can greatly speed up the demarcation of repetitive 
cause-and-effect relationships. Experiments also ensure that previous obser￾vations of cause-and-effect relationships were reliable. If scientific hypotheses 
survive repeated empirical testing, they can eventually be turned into well￾established theories. Unless they are destroyed by new observations that 
they cannot explain, well-established scientific theories are assumed to be 
reliable (i.e., truthful) statements about the lawfulness of nature. This new 
scientific knowledge may then be used by scientists and others to constrain 
our collective human inductive gambles about what adaptations will work 
for us again with respect to our relationships with our environments in our 
futures. It might even be used to land humans on Mars one day.
KNOWLEDGE GAIN IN BIOLOGICAL EVOLUTION
Now let’s return to evolution. I’ve already suggested that the gaining of new 
adaptive know-how, or Ri
, by evolving populations of organisms is logi￾cally equivalent to the gaining of new knowledge in science, even though 
the mechanisms involved are typically dif­ferent. I will focus primarily on the
evolutionary processes described by population geneticists.117 Adaptive Know-How in Evolution
Organisms in evolving populations are discrete, localized systems con￾tinuously traveling in environmental space and time. As they travel, they 
will encounter regularly reoccurring sequences of events, indicative of cause￾and-effect relationships in their environments. For instance, they might learn 
that lightning precedes thunder, that the sights and sounds of moving water
go together, or that earthworms come to the soil surface after rain. They
will also encounter chance events, and events or sequences of events of very 
low probability. These may include a shooting star or a random leaf falling 
from a tree after a cat walks by. Some regularly reoccurring cause-and-effect
relationships will be of particular significance to the organism, as they are 
indicative of consistently reoccurring natural selection pressures in their 
environments. The sight of a predator, for instance, might be predictive of 
danger, while the sound of prey might predict food. To the extent that such 
regularities affect the organism’s fitness, populations can evolve a “memory” 
of the cause-and-effect relationship through natural selection. Individual 
organisms possessing genes that predispose them to respond to predator 
cues by a suitable response to danger, such as fleeing, might have a fitness 
advantage. As such cause-and-effect relations are reliable and reoccur in time 
and space, they generate a consistent advantage over those gene variants, and 
may subsequently spread through the population.
Organisms will also encounter events of very low probability, or irregular 
sequences of events, indicative of inconsistent natural selection pressures in 
their environments. Such encounters, because they do not reliably reoccur, 
will not reliably trigger consistent selection for particular genes. The difference 
between consistently reoccurring natural selection pressures and inconsistent 
natural selection pressures should then allow evolving populations of organ￾isms to demarcate between cause-and-effect relationships and all else in nature, 
leaving a “memory trace” of such relations in their naturally selected genes.
The capacity of populations to make these demarcations is equivalent 
to evolving populations demarcating between signals (S) and noise (N) in 
communication theory (see chapter 2). The signals correspond to cause￾and-effect relationships in nature, and the noise to everything else. In this 
connection, it’s also important to realize the dif­ferent roles played by natural118 Chapter 4
selection, relative to evolving populations on the one hand, and individual 
organisms in those populations on the other.
In populations, the role of natural selection is to sort between fit and 
unfit individual organisms in each generation. Natural selection thereby 
biases the adaptive know-how, or Ri
, that is transmitted in populations. 
However, relative to individual organisms in populations, natural selection
plays a dif­ferent role. It is the source of the threats and dangers and opportu￾nities that individual organisms confront in their niche-management games
with their local environments throughout their lives. Natural selection pres￾sures are the sources of the selection factors (or VE ) that individual organ￾isms must drive down or destroy by possessing suitable adaptations (VO ) at 
each place and moment during their lives, as per Ashby’s control theory (see 
chapter 3). Fit organisms manage this by possessing adaptations capable of 
responding to the environmental conditions encountered. Unfit organisms 
do not. Natural selection pressures acting on populations then sort between 
fit and unfit organisms as previously discussed.
Assuming that organisms in evolving populations encounter the same 
or similar natural selection pressures repeatedly in their environments, the 
same reoccurring selection pressures should select the same or similar phe￾notypic traits in successive generations of evolving populations or species. 
Consistently reoccurring natural selection pressures in the environments of 
populations should indirectly select for whatever genes are correlated with 
the reoccurring adaptive phenotypic traits that are expressed by successive 
generations of organisms in evolving populations. The genes inherited by 
individual organisms correspond to “memories” of the consistent natural 
selection pressures that were encountered by their ancestors in the past. 
Whatever genetic “memories” that individual organisms inherit, serve to 
anticipate that the phenotypic traits that were adaptive for their ancestors in 
the past will be adaptive for them again in the present and in their futures.
THE DIVERSITY OF ORGANISMS
Given that the logic that describes how populations of organisms gain their 
adaptive know-how is the same in all populations, you might be forgiven 119 Adaptive Know-How in Evolution
for expecting that all organisms in all populations could end up with the 
same Ri
 and the same adaptations. They don’t, for several reasons. First, all 
evolving populations, and all individual organisms in those populations,
have dif­ferent locations in space and time. The niche relationships between 
individual organisms and their environments, and between populations and 
their environments, are always unique, and hence they must differ at least 
slightly from each other.9
In addition, organisms in dif­ferent populations have very dif­ferent 
ecological and evolutionary histories. Their dif­ferent evolutionary histories 
promote dif­ferent adaptations in dif­ferent populations and species. That is 
self-evident. You don’t have to be a biologist to notice the diversity of the adap￾tive designs of dif­ferent species. But you may have to be a biologist to notice 
some other, less obvious sources of diversity between species. For example, the 
adaptation that particular species of organisms acquired as a consequence of 
their past evolutionary histories may lock them into restricted evolutionary 
futures by causing them to pass points of no return. Insects, for instance, got 
locked into being small in size by their exoskeletons and their subsequent 
need to breathe through them via tracheas. Likewise, in bilateral organisms, 
the two sides of their bodies are symmetrical, or nearly so. It’s hard to imagine 
how any bilaterian species could evolve further in ways that require them to 
abandon their basic body plan. The same points of no return may not apply 
to dif­ferent species with dif­ferent past evolutionary histories. That will cause
dif­ferent species to diverge from each other irreversibly.
One critical evolutionary breakthrough on Earth was the evolution of 
the first eukaryotes following at least 2 billion years of simpler prokaryotic 
cells, including bacteria and archaea. The subsequent evolution of multicel￾lular or metazoan organisms on Earth would not have been possible without 
this breakthrough, but all metazoa are effectively locked into a eukaryotic 
cellular structure.
Another source of diversity arises from the fact that dif­ferent species of
organisms may have very dif­ferent subjective utilities and affordances relative 
to dif­ferent components in their environments. This means that the same 
environmental factors may have very dif­ferent meanings to dif­ferent species
of organisms. For instance, a 1°C change of temperature in the environment 120 Chapter 4
of an elephant would probably be insignificant, but it could be highly sig￾nificant for a small reptile living in the same location10 (see chapter 2). Like￾wise, ocean ecosystems appear to be more sensitive to climate change than 
terrestrial ecosystems, perhaps because organisms can more easily escape the 
heat. in the latter than in the former.11
THE DIVERSITY OF CAUSAL RELATIONSHIPS
More complex cause-and-effect relationships are harder for the processes of
evolution to detect than simpler ones, a point that almost certainly holds 
true for other information-gaining processes too. “A causes B” is the simplest
kind of causal relationship, but it should be more difficult for evolution￾ary processes to detect more complex cases, such as when A + B causes C, 
or A + B +C causes D, or when A + B, but not C, causes D, or still worse 
when A + B +C partly causes A again, in a nonlinear causal relationship 
involving feedback. Examples of relatively simple cause-and-effect relation￾ships in nature are diurnal changes, seasonal changes, and tidal changes. A 
slightly more complicated cause-and-effect relationship combines changing 
day lengths with seasonal changes. In this case, A (night or day) + B (seasonal 
change) is needed to cause C (day length).
No organisms on Earth, apart from humans, can truly know the causes
of these phenomena. It took our own species about 300 millennia to realize 
that the cause of day and night is the Earth spinning on its axis, and that 
the cause of seasonal changes is a combination of the tilt of the Earth on 
its axis and its annual orbiting of the Sun. It also took humans hundreds of 
thousands of years to realize that tides were caused by a combination of the 
gravitational pull of both the Moon and the Sun on Earth. They pull together 
and then against each other on a bimonthly basis.
Yet the diurnal and seasonal adaptations of numerous organisms in dif￾ferent species demonstrate that even without knowing the true causes of
these phenomena, organisms can still detect all of these repeating cause￾and-effect relationships. They must have done so as a consequence of their 
repeated encounters with the consistent natural selection pressures in their 
environments that are generated by these phenomena. Probably it will always121 Adaptive Know-How in Evolution
be more difficult for the evolutionary process to detect and demarcate, on a 
stochastic basis, more complex cause-and-effect relationships than it is for 
simpler ones. But the logic should always be the same. It may just take longer 
for organisms to adapt to more complex causation.
ADDITIONAL SOURCES OF COMPLEX CAUSATION
There are also many other sources of complex causation. One of them is the 
addition of more background noise (N) to signal-to-noise (S/N) ratios. The
signal (S), which here refers to a causal relationship, may be deeply embed￾ded in a lot of background noise in the form of “masking” variables in the 
environments that organisms have to interact with, which correlate with 
but do not cause the event. Here again, it may take longer for evolution￾ary processes to register more deeply embedded causal relationships than 
superficial ones, but on a stochastic basis, given sufficient time, they should 
still be able to do so.
Another kind of complexity refers to competing natural selection pres￾sures. For example, if as a consequence of their past histories, organisms in a 
population end up being selected for trait X, as opposed to trait Y, in some 
environmental contexts, but trait Y instead of trait X in other contexts, this 
may make it more difficult for organisms to adapt to their environments. For 
example, the lizards discussed in chapter 3 had to maintain their body tem￾peratures (i.e., selection for increased basking in the Sun) while still avoiding 
predators (i.e., selection for reduced basking). This is a familiar problem to
most biologists. The end result is usually some kind of trade-off between 
competing selection pressures and competing adaptations in organisms.
There are also dif­ferent kinds of natural selection pressures due to their 
dif­ferent origins. Three kinds of interactions can occur between localized, 
discrete systems in ecosystems: (1) interactions between abiota (i.e., between 
two or more nonliving, purposeless systems); (2) interactions between non￾living abiota and living organisms (i.e., between purposeless and purposeful 
systems); and (3) interactions between organisms and other organisms (i.e., 
between two or more, purposeful living systems). This requires a fuller dis￾cussion, which follows.122 Chapter 4
Interactions between Abiota
I’ll briefly consider interacting abiota first. Similar to organisms, abiota 
interact bidirectionally with their abiotic surroundings. Discrete abiotic 
systems react to inputs from their abiotic surroundings, but they can also 
cause reactions in their surroundings, including both endergonic (i.e., 
energy-requiring) reactions and exergonic (i.e., energy-dissipating) reac￾tions. Because abiotic systems are purposeless, their reactions with their 
surroundings are informed by the laws of physics and chemistry only. Natu￾ral selection is not involved. These are the kinds of interactions that occur 
on “dead” planets (i.e., planets where there is no life). Similar to organ￾isms, however, discrete abiota carry with them the historical consequences 
of their past interactions with their surroundings as they travel into their 
futures. Their present here-and-now states may reveal their past histories. 
For instance, geologists and paleobiologists can often read the past histories 
of the rocks that they are looking at from the present state of the rocks.
Interactions between Abiota and Organisms
The interactions between organisms and abiotic systems are more com￾plicated than those interactions that solely involve abiota. They comprise 
two categories of natural selection. The two categories refer to whether the 
selection stems from unmodified abiota in the environments of populations 
of organisms, or from abiota that have previously been modified by niche￾constructing organisms. If unmodified abiotic sources of natural selection
are affecting organisms in evolving populations, then they correspond to 
autonomous sources of natural selection pressures in the environments of 
organisms, which are commonly modeled by SET. Conversely, where abi￾otic sources of natural selection have been modified by niche-constructing 
organisms, they become a dif­ferent category of natural selection. The natural
selection pressures will no longer stem exclusively from purposeless abi￾ota; rather, they now stem partly from the active purposeful agency of the 
niche-constructing organisms that previously modified the abiota. In other 
words, the abiota will bear the signatures of the purposes of the organisms 
that modified them. This category of natural selection has received much less 
attention from SET, but it is the focus of NCT. Whether or not the abiota123 Adaptive Know-How in Evolution
were previously modified by niche-constructing organisms may affect the 
capacity of organisms in evolving populations to detect the causal relation￾ships that underpin them. It may make it either easier or harder for evolving 
populations to detect those causal relationships.
While the purposes of niche-constructing organisms vary between spe￾cies, individuals of the same species generally share similar purposes, which 
often leads them to interact with their environments, and to modify those
environments, in similar ways.12 These issues are complex and multifaceted, 
with dif­ferent forms of niche construction (e.g., inceptive verses counter￾active) having dif­ferent impacts on the intensity and variability of natural
selection.13 However, a recent meta-analysis of selection gradients (which are 
measures of natural selection in the wild) found that organism-constructed 
sources of selection that buffer environmental variation (i.e., that result from 
counteractive niche construction—for example, adaptations to living in
nests and burrows) will generate reduced variation in selection in space and
time and weaker selection relative to abiotic sources (e.g., adaptations to the 
climate). For instance, across diverse taxa, nests buffer climatic fluctuations 
that have been found to be metabolically costly.14 Likewise, when animals 
like lizards choose habitats with a suitable temperature, they too have acted 
in ways that increase the likelihood that the temperatures experienced stay 
within a tolerable range thereby reducing temperature-related selection.
For illustration, the flow of water in a river could be affected by either
rainfall or a dam built by beavers. While the consequences of rainfall for the 
numerous organisms that live in riparian ecosystems may to some extent 
be predictable, the precise impact on selection will vary from one year to the 
next depending on how much rain falls. Selection switches from adaptation 
to wet or to dry conditions depending on the weather.
In contrast, the immediate consequences of beaver dams on the river, 
at least in the vicinity of the beavers’ lodge, are more predictable. Beavers 
adjust the height of the dam to control the flow of the river and the depth 
of the water in the lakes that they create, with families of beavers main￾taining and repairing the dam over long periods of time. This allows them 
to ensure that the lodge is safe from predators, such as bears or wildcats, 
regardless of how much rainfall there has been. This activity is thought to 124 Chapter 4
dampen selection on beaver antipredator adaptations since it reduces the 
incidence of predation.
The upstream and downstream consequences of beaver dams may be less 
predictable, but at least with respect to the selection pressures that beaver dam￾building directly counteracts, niche construction renders selection more predict￾able.15 The differences between these two kinds of natural selection could affect
the capacity of organisms in recipient evolving populations to be informed by 
adaptive know-how, or Ri
, about dif­ferent causal relationships in their environ￾ments. These differences help evolutionary biologists to distinguish empirically 
between these two categories of natural selection in evolution.16
By ignoring the purposes of organisms, or treating these as genetically
determined, SET does not encourage biologists to distinguish between 
that natural selection that stems from purposeless abiota and that gener￾ated by purposeful organisms. In contrast, NCT assumes that the purposes 
of organisms are derived primarily from the universal requirement of all 
life to resist the second law of thermodynamics. Because it is a universal 
requirement of life, this primary purpose does not involve dif­ferent natural
selection pressures acting on dif­ferent populations of organisms. However, 
NCT acknowledges that owing to their past histories, dif­ferent organisms
in dif­ferent species depend on dif­ferent adaptations to resist the second law.
Insofar as their adaptations are due to unmodified natural selection
pressures stemming from purposeless abiota, the reduction of the purposes 
of organisms by SET to no more than the consequences of prior natural
selection might be justified. But this justification evaporates if these abiotic
sources of natural selection have been previously modified by the purpose￾ful niche-constructing activities of their ancestors, or of other organisms, or 
even of their own prior individual, purposeful niche-constructing activities. 
In these cases, it will be possible to understand the purposes of organisms
only in terms of nonlinear causal relationships based on feedbacks from 
niche-constructing organisms.17
Interactions among Purposeful Living Organisms
Interactions between living organisms involve the second category of natu￾ral selection only. Here, the niche-constructing activities of one population 125 Adaptive Know-How in Evolution
can change the natural selection experienced by another population, and 
vice versa.
Here, I will focus on the three principal classical relationships between 
dif­ferent populations of organisms in both evolution and ecology (which are 
discussed further in chapter 8). These relationships go beyond trophic (“who 
eats whom”) and competitive interactions, and also encompass engineering 
interactions (i.e., niche construction).18
Competitive relationships between two or more evolving populations 
occur when the populations are competing for the same environmental 
resource, or resources. They may either be competing for the same physical 
locations in their environments or for the same energy and matter (i.e., R
p
resources), in those locations. When two populations compete with each 
other, the organisms in one population impair the fitness of organisms in the 
other population, and vice versa. In evolution and ecology, this relationship 
is known as a “minus/minus” relationship. Examples include when plants 
compete with each other for light and groundwater, or when animals com￾pete for food and territories. Here, the organisms in one population might 
benefit from transmitting deceptive signals to the other population, making 
it harder for individuals in the second population to outcompete individuals 
in the first and undermining the ability of each to detect causal relationships.
Mutualistic relationships occur when one population provides another 
population with a resource that it needs, and the second reciprocates by 
providing another resource for the first population. Mutualist relationships 
are known as “plus/plus” relationships. A classic example is between flower￾ing plants and insects such as bees: the flowers provide the bees with food, 
and the bees help the plants to reproduce by spreading pollen. In these
circumstances, populations have been found to generate particularly con￾sistent natural selection pressures19 and may transmit “honest” signals to 
their mutualist partner. This may make it easier for organisms in mutualist 
populations to detect the nature of the causal relationships between them￾selves and their mutualist partner, to the benefit of both.
Predator-prey and host-parasite relationships are asymmetric relation￾ships, in which the organisms in one evolving population benefit from their 
relationship with the organisms in another population, but where the fitness 126 Chapter 4
of organisms in the second population is impaired by this same relationship. 
Asymmetric relationships are known as “plus/minus” (+/−) relationships. 
There are innumerable examples of both predator-prey and host-parasite
relationships in ecosystems: for instance, foxes prey on rabbits, while cuckoos 
parasitize reed warblers. Here again, there is evidence that organisms in both 
populations generate deceptive signals to each other—cuckoos have been 
described as “cheating by nature,” for instance.20 This deception undermines 
the ability of each to detect causal relationships.
BIODIVERSITY AND COMPLEX ECOSYSTEMS
In simple terms, the more dif­ferent species there are in an ecosystem, the 
greater its biodiversity, and the greater the biodiversity, the greater the com￾plexity. Next, I’ll discuss two examples of these sources of causal complexity.
First, dif­ferent organisms in dif­ferent species may adopt dif­ferent evo￾lutionary strategies and may affect each other by doing so. A well-known 
example of contrasting strategies is that between “r-selected” and “K 
selected” organisms. Typically, r-selected organisms lead relatively simple,
short lives and invest little in gaining adaptive know-how, or Ri
. Instead, 
they produce vast numbers of gametes, spores, or seeds, which they may 
literally throw in the wind to deposit in water or stick haphazardly to the 
fur of passing animals, relying heavily on numbers and chance events to 
reproduce. Hence, r-selected organisms produce large numbers of cheap, 
relatively simple offspring. The inductive gambles made by r-selected organ￾isms are that if they can produce enough offspring, then even by chance, 
some of them will survive, reproduce, and pass on their genes to the next 
generation.
K-selected organisms do almost the opposite. They invest far more in 
the gaining of adaptive know-how, or Ri
, and typically, they are relatively 
more complex, longer-lived organisms. They produce far fewer but rela￾tively more complicated offspring. They also invest, sometimes heavily, in 
parental care. The inductive gamble made by K-selected organisms is that if
they invest heavily in their offspring, inclusive of parental care, that should 127 Adaptive Know-How in Evolution
generate high-quality offspring sufficient to ensure that enough of the organ￾isms will survive and reproduce to create the next generation.
If r-selected organisms interact with K-selected organisms, their greater 
reliance on chance may generate particularly inconsistent natural selection
pressures for the K-selected organisms they are interacting with. For example, 
bacteria that parasitize vertebrates may generate too many chance mutations 
for the vertebrates to adapt to, which is probably why vertebrates evolved 
specialized immune systems to cope (see chapter 7).
A second example of potentially disruptive interactions between dif­ferent
populations of organisms in ecosystems is provided by “invasions.” Invasions 
occur when a species from one community, or ecosystem, invades another 
community or ecosystem, usually in another part of the world. For instance, 
presently, Pacific lionfish are spreading along the Eastern coast of the US, 
while Asian zebra mussels have invaded several North American lakes. Most 
invasions don’t matter much because they don’t upset the communities of 
organisms into which the invaders arrive. For instance, they may not greatly 
affect the flow of energy and matter between the incumbent populations in 
the community that they have invaded. However, some invasive species can 
be very disruptive. If an invader niche constructs in a dif­ferent way from 
incumbent species and outcompetes the incumbents by doing so, it may
have damaging knock-on consequences for the stability of the community or 
ecosystem that it has invaded.21 One example is provided by European earth￾worms, which have invaded North American hardwood forests and triggered 
a devastating cascade of consequences for the entire ecosystem.22
However, an invasion does not always depend on the arrival of a new 
species from somewhere else. It may depend only on the introduction of a 
new kind of niche-constructing activity by an incumbent species in the com￾munity. If an incumbent species or population evolves a new kind of niche 
construction, its novel activity may have similar disruptive consequences for 
its community as an invading species from elsewhere.23 For example, novel 
cultural niche-constructing activities by humans (such as planting crops or 
building roads) may be equivalent to new invasions in communities and 
ecosystems each time they occur (see chapter 10).128 Chapter 4
EVOLUTION AND INFORMATION-SEEKING PROCESSES
Now let’s compare knowledge-gaining processes in science to adaptive know￾how-gaining processes in evolution again. What more, if anything, can we 
learn from this comparison? The parallels are illuminating, but counterin￾tuitively, we may learn more about how evolution works from where the pro￾cesses appear to be most dif­ferent than from where the parallels are closest. 
The empirical nature of science is probably the biggest apparent difference 
between how we think about science versus how we think about evolution. 
Scientists generate models, hypotheses, and theories about the world; com￾pile data suitable to test their effectiveness; and build on the most useful 
findings. In this manner, they overtly set out to explore cause-and-effect
relations in nature. They are information-seeking. But is this difference real, 
or do the processes of evolution already include some not yet fully recognized 
forms of empiricism? I want to explore this possibility.
Empirical science greatly speeds up the detection and demarcation of 
cause-and-effect relationships in nature, as described previously. Might the 
processes of evolution sometimes do the same? I suggest the answer may 
be “yes,” albeit on a less overt scale. Instead of relying exclusively on the 
differences between consistent versus inconsistent natural selection pres￾sures for demarcating cause-and-effect relationships from background noise, 
organisms in evolving populations may sometimes be selected for anything 
that enhances their capacity to gain additional adaptive know-how (Ri
). 
This might occur in rapidly changing environments, as natural selection is
impotent to detect causal relations that occur on scales shorter than a gen￾eration. Supplementary Ri
-gaining processes are any processes that speed 
up the ability of evolving populations to gain additional adaptive know￾how about causal relationships. They magnify the capacity of populations 
to detect causal relations, and they provide shortcuts to new adaptations 
(see chapter 7).
I’ll define such an information-seeking process as any process that, at 
least in the short term, gives priority to the gaining of more meaningful 
information, or Ri
, over the immediate gaining of more energy and matter
resources, or R
p
, or other fitness goals. These processes could require a greater 129 Adaptive Know-How in Evolution
expenditure of R
p
 in the short run in order to gain the additional Ri
. The 
subsequent advantages to organisms could be the more efficient gaining 
of R
p
 resources or of mates, or the better avoidance of threats. In general, 
it could be an enhanced capacity by organisms to resist the second law of 
thermodynamics for long enough to survive and reproduce.
These information-seeking processes imply the existence of a supple￾mentary fitness goal—namely, the expenditure of energy for the sake of 
gaining Ri
. Any process that enhanced the gaining of adaptive know-how 
would then be in the service of this supplementary fitness goal. But how and 
why might organisms ever be naturally selected for a process that increased 
the adaptive know-how of their descendants? This question becomes more 
acute when the gaining of adaptive know-how costs more energy and matter
resources in the short run. No organism in any evolving population would 
ever be selected for any process that enhanced the supplementary gaining of 
Ri unless on average the benefits outweigh the costs.
Perhaps the first and most widespread information-seeking process was 
the evolution of an increase in the rate of mutations in specific regions of 
the genome. To the extent that natural selection favors an increase in the 
mutation rate because this causes parent organisms in one generation to 
increase the phenotypic variability of their offspring in the next generation, 
this qualifies as an information-seeking adaptation. The production of more 
variant offspring is analogous to increasing the variety of trials in a “trial-and￾error information gaining process.” By analogy to science, it is equivalent 
to generating more hypotheses that can be subject to testing, while in the 
context of Ashby’s control theory, it is also equivalent to parent organisms 
increasing the amount of variance, or VO, among their offspring, relative to 
the variant natural selection pressures, or VE, the offspring will encounter
in their futures (see chapter 3).
The simplest evolutionary mechanisms for introducing greater phe￾notypic variability are random genetic mutations. Genetic mutations are 
transmitted by parent organisms to their offspring in successive generations 
of populations via genetic inheritance. The additional random mutations 
could occur in all the genes in the genomes, transmitted between genera￾tions. Alternatively, these additional random mutations might occur in only130 Chapter 4
a subset of the genes in the transmitted genomes, possibly as a consequence 
of dif­ferent natural selection pressures acting on dif­ferent populations.
In the short run, parent organisms in one generation may risk reducing 
their fitness, as a consequence of some of these mutations. The mutations
might reduce the fecundity of parent organisms by increasing the number of 
nonviable offspring that they bequeath to the next generation. But if among 
the increasingly variable offspring of parent organisms, a few variants were 
fitter than their competitors, then those fitter variants could become the 
dominant phenotypic variant in later generations of a population. That might 
speed up the rate of evolution in a population. In other words, the costs of 
increased mutation, in terms of wasted R
p
 might be offset by the benefits, 
in terms of increased Ri
, that manifest as greater fitness among descendants.
Sexual reproduction, in conjunction with its associated genetic recom￾binations, is another source of increasing variability in evolving popula￾tions. Through chance recombinations, sexual reproduction is commonly 
the source of high-fitness phenotypic variants. In sexual populations, both 
male and female parent organisms must have already survived so far. Perhaps 
sex provides a means to increase phenotypic variation while biasing it toward 
previously tested variants. There are many hypotheses for the evolution of 
sex, many of which stress that it increases phenotypic variability and others
that emphasize how it enhances the efficiency of natural selection by mak￾ing it easier to weed out low-fitness alleles.24 Bill Hamilton’s suggestion that 
sex may have evolved to combat increased rates of parasitism is one such 
example. The genetic recombination that accompanies meiosis provides 
a mechanism for the rapid production of new combinations of resistance 
factors in the hosts in order to counter the diversity generated in the more 
rapidly evolving parasites. In terms of Ashby’s control theory, sex allows suf￾ficient variability in the organism (VO ) to destroy the variability of the envi￾ronment (VE ), with parasites as the major axis of environmental variability.
A putative benefit of sex is that it enhances the efficiency of selection.
This reduces the energy and matter (R
p ) costs associated with an informa￾tional (Ri
) gain. An alternative mechanism to reducing R
p
 costs is to produce 
phenotypic variation that is biased toward high-fitness solutions.25 Devel￾opmental bias occurs when some combinations of traits arise more readily 131 Adaptive Know-How in Evolution
than others.26 The field of evolutionary developmental biology has identified 
a large number of examples.27 The functional integration of organisms arises 
because developmental systems make the traits of organisms develop in a cor￾related fashion, such that random mutation has phenotypic effects that are 
biased toward high-fitness dimensions.28 Investigations of the size, position, 
and color of eyespots in butterflies provide an example. A combination of 
artificial selection and evolutionary developmental biology experimentation 
has revealed butterfly characters that show clear evidence for developmental 
bias (e.g., eyespot size and color)29 with a corresponding impact on evolvabil￾ity.30 Developmental bias seemingly allows the generation of more “plausible” 
phenotypic traits in offspring organisms (i.e., traits that are more likely to be 
adaptive a priori, relative to natural selection in their environment).31
Some organisms have evolved supplementary knowledge-gaining pro￾cesses, such as adaptive immunity or a capacity to learn.32 These processes 
operate in a manner remarkably similar to natural selection. For instance, the 
vertebrate adaptive immune system operates by generating diverse antibod￾ies, initially at random, and retaining and reproducing the ones that prove 
most effective, discarding the other variants. This process is costly, as consid￾erable energy and matter (R
p
 resources) must be invested in variant immune 
cells, most of which confer little protection. Nonetheless, the system is adap￾tive because it allows individual organisms to acquire additional Ri
, in the 
form of knowledge about the antibodies that are most effective in countering 
the antigens in their immediate current environment. Again, this makes 
sense in terms of Ashby’s control theory, where adaptive immunity allows 
each organism to rapidly increase the amount of variance, or VO, among its 
antibodies, to counter the variant threats to its health, or VE, encountered in 
its environment. This is discussed in more detail in chapters 7 and 9, along 
with other supplementary processes, such as epigenetic processes, that also
add more phenotypic variance among organisms in evolving populations.
If living organisms are sensitive to increases or changes in environmental 
variability (VE ) and able to adjust by producing compensatory phenotypic 
variation (VO ), then given that the world is heading toward human-induced
climate change, we might anticipate the production of additional genotypic 
and phenotypic variation in evolving populations. For some populations, this 132 Chapter 4
could be the final straw. The additional variants might only have the effect of 
increasing the number of nonviable organisms in each generation. Most muta￾tions are deleterious. Extra R
pwill be expended, but no extra Riwill be derived. 
However, in other populations, the additional variance might increase their 
capacity to endure the changing climate by generating additional valuable Ri
. 
Such populations might avoid extinction. However unwelcome the human￾induced climate change is, it could offer a test of this reasoning.
HEURISTIC NICHE CONSTRUCTION
Most of the possible ways that we have discussed so far, in which the evolution￾ary process could become more empirical, are compatible with both SET and 
NCT. The next alternative is emphasized only by NCT. I’ll call it “heuristic 
niche construction” and define it as the niche-constructing activities of organ￾isms that have the immediate fitness goal of gaining more adaptive know￾how (Ri
) about causal relationships in their environments, rather than the 
immediate gaining of more energy and matter resources (R
p). Heuristic niche 
construction might take the form of exploratory, relocation by organisms in 
their environments as a means to acquire knowledge about the environment 
(e.g., foraging ants exploring beyond the immediate vicinity of their nest to 
identify a new food source). Niche-constructing organisms could also explore 
the possibility of earning a better living somewhere else in their environments, 
on a trial-and-error basis. For example, through innovation and social learn￾ing, orangutans are known to have invented new food-processing techniques, 
which allow them to access hitherto-unexploited foods, such as palm hearts.33
Alternatively, organisms may introduce novel physical perturbations in their 
environments. Animal artifacts provide many examples. For instance, scent 
marks confer information about the identity of individuals in a territory, tracks 
and trails confer information about efficient routes through the environment, 
and the threads of a spiderweb inform the spider where in the web a fly has 
gotten stuck, and how big it is.34 But once again, how could any organism 
increase its fitness by investing in heuristic niche construction?
Heuristic niche construction must pay for itself by increasing the fitness 
of organisms in populations. If the immediate gaining of more adaptive 133 Adaptive Know-How in Evolution
know-how, or Ri
, by heuristic niche construction leads to organisms sub￾sequently increasing their capacity to harvest energy and matter, or R
p
resources, from their environments, that could be one way in which heuris￾tic niche construction could pay for itself. Exploration might cost energy in 
the short run, but ultimately, it increases the fitness of individual organisms 
in the longer run. It could do so as a consequence of ancestral organisms in 
populations bequeathing more appropriate ecological inheritances to their 
descendants relative to their descendants’ genetic inheritances. For instance, 
once superior food sources have been identified, ovipositing insects can lay 
their eggs on them.35
While niche-constructing organisms need to know as much as pos￾sible about the cause-and-effect relationships in their environments that 
are independent of their own actions, they also need to know about the 
consequences of their own actions. That is because, in their particular envi￾ronments, they are commonly the instigators of a cause and its effects. Just 
as they can gain more know-how by being sensitive to the consistency of 
the natural selection pressures that arise from cause-and-effect relationships 
that are independent of their own actions, so organisms can gain Ri
 about the 
consequences of their own actions by being sensitive to the effects that con￾sistently follow from them.
We have seen that when organisms in evolving populations repeat￾edly encounter similar natural selection pressures in their environments, 
this should select for similar phenotypic traits in successive generations of 
evolving populations. However, that environmental regularity need not arise 
by chance. It may be self-imposed. Consistent resources and conditions 
arise in the environments of organisms because organisms consistently and 
reliably construct them. Nests are regularly found in the environments of 
birds, webs in the environments of spiders, and dams in the environments 
of beavers because the animals concerned built those structures. Moreover, 
each niche-constructing species builds nests, digs burrows, or spins webs or 
cocoons in a species-typical manner.
This has a number of important consequences.36 First, it means that the 
natural selection arising from organism-built aspects of the environment can 
be unusually consistent. Niche construction sometimes generates atypically 134 Chapter 4
strong directional natural selection and other times generates atypically strong 
stabilizing natural selection or weak directional responses to selection, with
these patterns predictable a priori and confirmed in meta-analyses of selection
in the wild.37 Second, this means that closely related species that engage in 
similar forms of niche construction should generate similar selection pressures 
and commonly exhibit a similar evolved response to selection. This provides 
an explanation for the parallel evolution frequently observed, and increasingly 
reported, in independent populations. Third, niche construction is expected 
to generate predictable evolutionary trends. For instance, building a nest will
generate reliable selection for the nest to be improved, maintained, defended, 
and repaired; for other species to live in the nest, dump eggs in the nest, or 
steal nest material; and for chicks and eggs reared in the nest to develop in 
the predictably encountered conditions of the nest.38
The physiologist Scott Turner suggests that many organisms impose 
regularity on their immediate environments by pushing out the boundaries
of their internal environments into their external environments, a phenom￾enon that he calls “extended physiology.”39 Organisms such as wasps, bees, 
and ants exert an extended physiological homeostatic control of their nest 
environments. In many respects, Turner’s “extended physiology” is similar to 
Richard Dawkins’s extended phenotypes. However, it differs because Turner 
is explicit in stressing how extended physiology depends on the active pur￾posive agency of phenotypes, which is consistent with NCT but not SET.
We have already seen some examples of Turner’s extended physiology in 
chapter 3. They include termite mounds, the modification of their soil envi￾ronments by earthworms, beaver dams, and, for that matter, human houses.
All these artifacts increase homeostasis in the immediate environments of 
dif­ferent organisms, thereby making them more predictable for those organ￾isms, including as sources of natural selection. For instance, humans often
control the internal temperature of their own homes exogenously, almost as 
much as they control the internal temperatures of their own bodies by endo￾thermic mechanisms. This damps down natural selection for morphological
adaptations to the heat or cold.
These observations raise some caveats. First, Turner’s extended physiol￾ogy may be expensive. Extending the domain of homeostasis beyond the 135 Adaptive Know-How in Evolution
organism’s body into its external environment inevitably costs organisms 
additional energy and matter, or R
p
 resources. Organisms may be limited in
how far they can extend a domain of predictable homeostasis by an inability 
to gain sufficient energy and matter, given their current know-how, or Ri
. In 
simple terms, they may not always be able to pay for it.
Second, by pushing out the boundary of their domain of homeostasis 
further into their environments, organisms may be taking too big a risk. They 
may not possess enough adaptive know-how, or Ri
, to control the effects 
generated. Niche-constructing organisms need to be sufficiently informed, 
not only about the immediate consequences of their extended physiology, 
but also about its knock-on consequences for their ecosystems, to the extent 
that these consequences feed back in order to affect the constructor’s fitness. 
If organisms are not sufficiently informed about the consequences of their 
activities, then they may eventually be overwhelmed by their own attempts 
to make their unforecastable futures more forecastable. They may do so 
by inadvertently modifying other natural selection pressures in ways that 
threaten their own futures (see chapter 10).
Turner’s extended physiology provides another means by which organ￾isms can potentially engineer their own futures to some extent. If organisms 
can demarcate cause-and-effect relationships in their environments, which 
are independent of their own actions, and they can also demarcate those 
effects that are contingent on their actions, then they may be able to “antici￾pate” the likely consequences of their own niche-constructing actions in the 
context of their niche relationships with their environments. Their anticipa￾tions have to be functional, but they need not be cognitive. In most species, 
they will not be. Either way, niche-constructing organisms may be able 
to codetermine their own futures by modifying specific natural selection
pressures in their environments. They could thereby ensure that their own 
futures, and possibly the futures of their descendants, were more forecast￾able. They might do so either for themselves or by bequeathing modified 
ecological inheritances to their descendants.
Another supplementary fitness goal for niche-constructing organisms 
could be the achievement of greater thermodynamic efficiency. Greater ther￾modynamic efficiency implies better or less costly adaptations needed by 136 Chapter 4
organisms to resist the second law of thermodynamics. However, more effi￾cient adaptations would need to be better informed by adaptive know-how, 
or Ri
. That might require heuristic niche construction to gain Ri
 about the 
interactive niche relationships of organisms with their environment.
Addy Pross (2012) proposes a similar version of this hypothesis in the 
book that he entitled What Is Life? How Chemistry Becomes Biology, in hom￾age to Schrödinger. He starts by talking about an inanimate example of 
dynamic stability in a flowing river. It’s possible to step into a continuously
flowing river repeatedly, while at the same time never stepping into exactly 
the same river twice. This is because the molecules of water flowing past 
your ankles are always changing. However, inanimate flowing rivers do not 
have to actively resist the second law of thermodynamics to achieve dynamic 
stability. The constant renewal of the flowing river depends on repeated 
rainfall and is ultimately energized by the hydrological cycle, independent
of the river itself. The attractor of the flowing river is therefore greater ther￾modynamic stability, in the same way that it is for all nonliving abiota. Pross 
argues that in order to resist the second law, all living systems have to travel 
in the opposite direction, toward a dif­ferent “attractor.” So long as they are 
alive, organisms must keep heading toward greater “dynamic kinetic stability 
(DKS),” instead of thermodynamic stability. Greater DKS demands greater 
thermodynamic efficiency.
Pross describes ordinary chemical reactions that continuously travel 
toward greater thermodynamic stability or disorder until the point where 
the reactions stop. He contrasts them with chemical reactions in living 
systems, which are characterized by self-replication and therefore by what 
Pross calls “replicative chemical reactions.”40 The problem is that all self￾replicating systems have the potential to expand exponentially if supplied 
with sufficient energy and matter resources, or R
p
. This makes living systems 
inherently unstable.
Stability returns in such populations when the birth of new organisms 
in a population is balanced by an approximately equal number of deaths. 
The resulting balance between the birth of new organisms in a population, 
as a function of reproduction and ultimately of self-replicating chemistry, 
and the deaths of older organisms is an example of a population in DKS. 137 Adaptive Know-How in Evolution
This implies an endless turnover of transitory individual mortal organisms 
in populations, generation after generation, and the dispersal of these organ￾isms across endlessly diverse local environments in space and time.
Pross argues that DKS is a “physical analogue of niche construction” 
(personal communication). The DKS of all organisms depends on their inter￾active niche relationships with their environments. The niches of organisms 
are codetermined by their own niche-constructing activities, and therefore by 
their own active purposeful agency in resisting the second law. But to resist the 
second law effectively, the niche-constructing activities of individual organ￾isms depend on them being well informed by meaningful adaptive know￾how, or Ri
. Organisms gain their Ri
 primarily via the genes that they inherit 
from their ancestors. Individual organisms may then gain additional Ri
 as a 
consequence of their own niche-constructing activities, including their heu￾ristic niche-constructing activities. Greater DKS must be an attractor for all 
living systems, including all individual organisms in all evolving populations.
CONCLUSIONS
How far have we got toward understanding how organisms solve the Wad￾dington problem of adapting to their unknown but not wholly unforecast￾able futures? To what extent can niche-constructing organisms solve the 
Waddington problem by engineering their own futures?
Organisms cannot engineer their own futures, simply by generating more 
variety on a trial-and-error basis, but generating variety is often a pathway to 
acquiring Ri
. If organisms are able to gain more Ri
, such as by developmen￾tal exploratory and selective processes or through heuristic niche construc￾tion, and if they can apply their increased know-how to control their own 
niche-constructing activities and regulate their experienced environment, then 
organisms may be able to go some way toward determining their own futures. 
They may be able to make their own futures more predictable and forecastable.We have now reached the last chapter of part I of this book. Here, on the 
basis of the preceding chapters, as well as on examples drawn exclusively from 
life on Earth, I will claim that everything we have discussed so far should also 
be relevant to life anywhere in the universe, wherever it exists. That might 
seem like an overstatement. Shouldn’t our understanding of the putative 
lawfulness of evolutionary biology be restricted to life on Earth?
I think not, for the simple reason that I have described the processes 
of evolution in a manner that is consistent with the fundamental under￾lying laws of physics and chemistry, including the laws of thermodynamics, 
which I maintain will not vary across the universe. To the extent that this 
assumption holds, it is reasonable to claim that the putative laws of evolu￾tionary biology, which are consistent with the universal laws of physics and 
chemistry, will be universal too. My claim would fail if the laws of physics 
and chemistry had not always been the same throughout space and time. For 
example, it is just possible that these laws were dif­ferent during an extraor￾dinary period of inflation of the universe shortly after its origin in the Big 
Bang, 13.8 billion years ago.1
Assumptions about the universality of the laws of physics and chemistry 
can be tested to some extent, however. For instance, astronomers can now 
look back in space and time to what the universe was like billions of years 
ago by looking back to the edge of the visible universe. In this manner, 
astrophysicists and cosmologists have confirmed that the laws of physics and 
chemistry do not appear to have changed for billions of years. For example, 
5 LIFE ON ANY PLANET140 Chapter 5
the laws of physics and chemistry that specify how chemical reactions pro￾ceed and are closely associated with thermodynamics have apparently been 
the same for all that time. The same is true of the laws of gravity. It is also 
possible to check the theoretical models that cosmologists and physicists 
have developed about the dynamics of the universe. For instance, they can 
be checked by smashing atoms in the Large Hadron Collider. Once again, 
the conclusion is that the laws of physics and chemistry are universal.
Recently, it has become possible to start looking for life on other planets 
in our galaxy. We can do so by assuming that whatever we know about how 
biological evolution works on Earth should also apply anywhere else in the
universe. Niche construction theory (NCT) may have something to offer 
in this respect. If niche-constructing organisms modify their environments, 
and if all organisms niche-construct, then the existence of life elsewhere 
in the universe (e.g., in our own solar system or galaxy) may be detectable 
from the signatures left behind by the earlier (perhaps very much earlier) 
niche-constructing activities of organisms. For example, any planet with an 
atmosphere whose constituent gases are seriously out of thermodynamic 
equilibrium, as is the case for Earth, would provide an indication of the 
prior existence of life. The planet’s atmosphere would be most unlikely to 
be in that observed state unless it had been pumped into it by the niche￾constructing activities of living organisms. That is what happened, and what 
is continuing to happen on Earth.
The laws of physics and chemistry alone, however, are not sufficient 
to understand life. After asking his “What is life?” question, Schrödinger2
immediately followed it with a supplementary question, which in chapter 1 
I paraphrased as: “What else is needed beyond the known laws of physics and 
chemistry to understand life?” Bear in mind that Schrödinger asked this 
question more than seventy-five years ago—and since that time physicists, 
chemists, and cosmologists have learned a lot more about the laws of physics 
and chemistry3
—and yet, remarkably, Schrödinger’s supplementary question 
is still relevant. We have already been considering this question in the previous 
chapters with respect to life on Earth, but I now want to consider it again rela￾tive to the possibility of life elsewhere in the universe. Are the same properties 141 Life on Any Planet
of life, beyond the known laws of physics and chemistry, that are required on 
Earth, also likely to be required by life anywhere else in the universe?
THE PROPERTIES OF LIFE ON EARTH
Let’s review the properties of life on Earth that go beyond the known laws 
of physics and chemistry. There are some initial points that by now may 
be familiar. First, organisms are very improbable systems. They are very 
far from thermodynamic equilibrium with their environments. To remain 
alive, organisms have to resist the second law of thermodynamics while still 
obeying it, which is possible only for purposeful systems.4
 At some time in 
the past, purposeless inanimate matter must have become the origin of the 
first protocells, and subsequently the first purposeful living cells on Earth.5
It was because these first cells were not only very improbable, but also 
purposeful, that they were able to stay alive by resisting the second law while 
still complying with it. If this is correct, then the emergence of purpose must 
have been an origin-of-life phenomenon, both on Earth and anywhere else in 
the universe where life exists. Ever since life first appeared on Earth, the capac￾ity of organisms to stay alive was critically contingent on the active, pur￾poseful agency of organisms. Were organisms not purposeful systems, they 
would rapidly dissipate, reverting to the status of nonliving, abiotic systems, 
far closer to being in thermodynamic equilibrium with their environments. 
The primary purpose of all organisms is simply to stay alive.
Organisms can stay alive only by organizing a flow of energy and matter
between themselves and their environments that opposes the flow of energy 
and matter favored by the second law. That requires organisms to be able 
to detect events in their environments. It also requires them to innovate 
by seizing any opportunities to reverse the flow of energy and matter that
happened to come their way.6
 But recognizing and seizing opportunities are 
things that only purposeful systems can do. Opportunities are meaningless 
relative to purposeless systems. That is another reason why organisms must 
be purposeful systems to live. It is also the fundamental difference between 
living organisms and nonliving systems.142 Chapter 5
Assuming that organisms are purposeful, how do they reverse the flow of 
energy and matter (or R
p
 resources) between themselves and their environ￾ments through active agency? This returns us to a familiar chain of cause￾and-effect relationships. Organisms cannot counteract the flow of energy 
and matter favored by the second law without interacting with their external 
environments, and they cannot interact with their external environments 
unless they are adapted to those environments. Minimally, all organisms 
must possess semipermeable boundaries between themselves and their 
environments.
Two-way-street interactions may then allow organisms to import energy 
and matter resources from their environments, and export detritus back to 
their environments, through these boundaries, in opposition to the second
law. For instance, single-cell organisms interact with their external environ￾ments via pores in their membranes that allow atomic and molecular traffic 
to pass in and out. These two-way-street interactions may then enable organ￾isms to stay alive for a time, at the expense of their external environments.
Most organisms need far more adaptations than just semipermeable 
boundaries, however. They need appropriate phenotypic traits that are suf￾ficiently well adapted, structurally and functionally, relative to all the natural
selection pressures that they are liable to encounter in their external environ￾ments during their lives. These selection pressures include both those unaf￾fected by organisms and those previously modified by the niche-constructing 
activities of organisms. They include natural selection pressures that may 
threaten the future existence of individual organisms, such as predators or 
parasites, floods or droughts. However, it is impossible for organisms to 
adapt to any natural selection pressures in their external environments unless
they are informed by meaningful information in the form of adaptive know￾how, or Ri
. That information primarily stems from their ancestors, as well as 
from their own prior experiences.
There is also another consequence of organisms living at the expense of 
their environments. Organisms cannot organize a second law–opposing flow 
of energy and matter between themselves and their environments without 
causing changes in their external environments. Those changes are the origin 
of niche construction, which in turn is the origin of both modified natural143 Life on Any Planet
selection in the environments of organisms and the ecological inheritances 
that ancestral organisms bequeath to their descendants. When the evolu￾tionary process comprises both natural selection and niche construction, 
and both genetic and ecological inheritances, evolution is transformed into 
a process of organism-environment coevolution.7
What are the minimum adaptive properties that organisms must possess 
to do this active, purposeful, energy-consuming, second law–resisting work 
on their environments? The minimal properties are those that the physicist
James Maxwell gave to his “demon” in the nineteenth century (see chapter 1), 
but with one significant difference. Unlike organisms, Maxwell’s demon was 
not informed by the processes of evolution, but by Maxwell himself, when 
he designed it. Maxwell gave his demon its second law–resisting purpose. 
He also gave it the adaptive know-how (Ri
), expressed as the conceptual 
structural and functional adaptations, that it needed to fulfill its purpose.
Recall that Maxwell was exploring whether it was possible for any dis￾crete system, be it living or nonliving, to oppose the second law of thermo￾dynamics without violating it. He demonstrated that his demon could not 
oppose the second law so long as it was confined within a closed environ￾ment, as the demon required more energy and matter to do its work than 
it could extract from that environment. However, Maxwell also showed 
(indirectly) that any discrete system, nonliving or living, anywhere in the 
universe could potentially oppose the second law of thermodynamics with￾out violating it, provided that the system existed in an open environment 
that could supply it with the additional energy and matter resources that 
the demon needed to do its work, and provided that it was equipped with the 
minimal properties that Maxwell gave his demon. Maxwell thereby revealed 
the minimal properties that all living organisms need to survive, including 
some that go beyond the known laws of physics and chemistry.8
Maxwell’s demon goes some way toward explaining how organisms can 
resist the second law of thermodynamics, while still complying with it, via 
their active, purposeful, energy-consuming work. But his demon did not 
go far enough, primarily because it had to be informed by an intelligent 
designer: Maxwell himself. In contrast, organisms are informed by the natu￾ral processes of evolution.144 Chapter 5
We have already considered how organisms are informed by evolution 
(see chapters 3 and 4). Individual organisms in evolving populations are 
informed primarily by the deductive know-how, or Ri
, they inherit from 
their ancestors via genetic inheritance. The genes that they inherit register 
memories about what phenotypic traits were adaptive for their ancestors in the 
past, relative to the natural selection pressures that their ancestors encoun￾tered. Individual organisms may also be informed by other supplementary 
information-gaining processes that cause them to remember their own indi￾vidual past interactive experiences with their individual environments, and 
perhaps too by other evolutionary processes such as cultural evolution or the 
population-level selection and transgenerational inheritance of epigenetic
variants. Either way, these memories of the past, whether of their ancestors’ 
past or of their own past developmental histories, can have only a limited
capacity to inform organisms about what may be adaptive for them again 
in their futures.
These limitations stem from three sources. The first problem that must
be overcome is that the systems that register memories of the past in organ￾isms (e.g., genomes in all organisms or brains in animals) are imperfect. 
They may be inaccurate (e.g., because of mutation), or the organism may 
forget the past. The second problem is that the deductive know-how that 
is inherited, such as in genes, are nothing more than particular samples of
the past and are not comprehensive records of everything that happened. It 
is therefore possible that some individual organisms will encounter natural
selection stemming from past events that were not sampled, and do not pro￾vide adaptive information. Third, changes may occur in the environments of 
organisms that introduce novel selection pressures that were not encountered 
by ancestral populations. A famous example is the sudden, novel changes 
that were caused by the asteroid strike that occurred in the Yucatan Peninsula 
in Mexico about 66 million years ago. It was an abiotic event that triggered 
so many changes in the environments that it killed off the dinosaurs, and 
many other species too.
More frequent and less dramatic sources of novel change are the niche￾constructing activities of individual organisms in diverse evolving popula￾tions. A subcategory of niche construction is inceptive (i.e., opportunistic) 145 Life on Any Planet
niche construction,9
 which by definition causes novel changes in envi￾ronments. While the changes that single microorganisms cause in their 
microenvironments can be disregarded as insignificant, if populations of 
microorganisms all niche-construct in the same way because they carry the 
same Ri
, then their collective niche-constructing activities may add up and 
cause highly significant changes in their environments. For example, thanks 
to global warming, the permafrost in northern Siberia is melting, causing 
microorganisms known as methanogens to emit additional methane into 
the atmosphere. That is significant because methane is a more potent green￾house gas than carbon dioxide, and the extra methane is accelerating global 
warming.
Probably the most fundamental source of novel change is the evolution￾ary process itself, because it is always generating novel variant organisms 
in populations and novel species in ecosystems. All these changes have the 
potential to act as the source of novel natural selection pressures for indi￾vidual organisms in evolving populations. Stuart Kauffman10 has pointed 
out that the evolutionary process is “nonergodic,” by which he means that 
it has never realized its full potential and always has the ability to come up 
with unprecedented novelties, including new species.
In combination, these three limitations ensure that organisms can never 
adapt to all the natural selection pressures that they may encounter in their 
unknown but not wholly unforecastable futures. The evolutionary process 
can never inform organisms with sufficient adaptive know-how, or Ri
, a 
priori to immortalize them as they travel into their futures. All organisms, 
and all species, are mortal.
REPRODUCTION
The mortality of living beings highlights the second strategic fitness goal of 
organisms: reproduction. When organisms reproduce, they solve two prob￾lems. First, even though all organisms are mortal, they can survive by proxy 
via the genes (and other forms of inherited knowledge) that they transmit 
to their offspring and subsequent descendants when they reproduce. They 
can do this indef­initely for generations. Reproduction is therefore the second 146 Chapter 5
way in which mortal organisms can resist the second law of thermodynamics 
while still complying with it.
However, individual organisms could not resist the second law indef￾initely, even by proxy, if they only made exact copies of themselves when they 
reproduced. If they did just that, their exact copy offspring would probably 
run into exactly the same adaptive problems as they confront themselves. For￾tunately, because of faults in their gene-based memory systems, reproducing 
organisms can seldom or never reproduce exact clones of themselves. They 
are almost bound to make copying mistakes and generate variant organ￾isms when they reproduce. The primary sources of these copying mistakes
are random genetic mutations. As we saw in chapter 4, natural selection
may also favor increased rates of mutations in subsets of the genes in their 
genomes in some environmental circumstances. Sexual reproduction may 
further increase the variation among the offspring of male and female parent 
organisms by the recombination of their genes during meiosis.
All these sources of increased variance among the offspring and sub￾sequent descendants of reproducing organisms then solve a second prob￾lem. Organisms in the current generation are bound to supply the next 
and subsequent generations of their population with new variant organisms 
when they reproduce. These inputs of variation in each successive genera￾tion, when subject to natural selection, may then allow evolving populations 
to update themselves by tracking any novel changes that they encounter 
in their environments through changing their phenotypic traits over time. 
Novel changes in individual variant organisms in evolving populations may 
introduce novel adaptive solutions to novel problems, generation after gen￾eration. Ultimately, such changes may also lead to the introduction of new 
species in ecosystems.
How do organisms reproduce? Just as it is possible to reduce the proper￾ties that organisms need to survive to the minimal properties that Maxwell 
gave his demon, it is also possible to reduce the properties that organisms 
need to reproduce to the minimal properties that John von Neumann gave 
his natural automaton (see chapter 1). Like Maxwell and his demon, von 
Neumann informed his natural automaton, in advance, by giving it all the 
adaptive know-how, or Ri
, that it needed to reproduce.147 Life on Any Planet
Recall that the minimal properties that von Neumann gave his natural
automaton were as follows: First, it had to be equipped with a “universal 
computer,” otherwise known as a “Turing machine.” Second, it also had 
to be equipped with a “universal constructor” that was able to construct 
anything, provided that it had sufficient energy and matter, as well as appro￾priate instructions. Hence, third, von Neumann had to give his natural
automaton suitable instructions, including the information, or Ri
, that his 
natural automaton needed to reproduce. Fourth, the automaton needed a 
universal copier. Fifth, the copier must copy the natural automaton’s own 
instructions, inserting these into any “offspring.” Since von Neumann’s day, 
there have been considerable practical and theoretical advances in automata 
and robotics,11 but von Neumann’s key points are the most relevant here.
Maxwell and von Neumann were both physicists who presumably 
assumed that the laws of physics were universal. Maxwell’s demon and von 
Neumann’s natural automata both go beyond the known laws of physics to 
Schrödinger’s supplementary question about what else is needed beyond the 
known laws of physics and chemistry to understand life.
Maxwell’s demon describes the minimal properties that organisms need 
to survive by resisting the second law of thermodynamics without violating 
it. Also, von Neumann’s natural automata describes the minimal properties 
that organisms need to reproduce. Given that in combination, these are the 
minimal properties that all organisms need to survive and reproduce on 
Earth, and given that these properties have been derived from the universal 
laws of physics by Maxwell and von Neumann, the same minimal prop￾erties are likely to be the minimal properties of life, wherever it may exist 
in the universe. It may therefore be possible to build a universal theory of 
evolution.12
A universal theory of evolution does not mean that life anywhere else in
the universe need be the same as life on Earth. Life elsewhere in the universe 
might have to comply with the same lawfulness of the evolutionary processes
as life on Earth, but that still leaves a lot of scope for life to be very dif­fer￾ent from life on Earth. Imagine a dif­ferent planet, hundreds of times more 
benign to life than Earth. Organisms on excessively benign planets could 
be flooded with energy and matter resources by their environments without 148 Chapter 5
them having to do much or to know much to stay alive. In such worlds, 
individual organisms in evolving populations might approach immortality 
by living for extremely long lifetimes. Or imagine the opposite—imagine
an extremely impoverished world in which life forms may nevertheless exist.
Such environments do exist on Earth, and we do find forms of life there 
that are somehow adapted to their very harsh conditions. These organisms 
are known as “extremophiles.” One example is the bacteria that live in hot 
volcanic springs in Yellowstone National Park in the western US. They can 
tolerate temperatures in excess of 90°C.13 Other examples of extremophiles 
are the bacteria that live in sediments, and even in rocks far below the ocean 
floors on Earth. Some extremophile microorganisms stay alive by practically 
shutting down their metabolism. They seem to be able to reduce their meta￾bolic activities until they are roughly equivalent to a single animal heartbeat 
in a year.
Another imaginary organism that might exist somewhere else in the
universe and yet still be compatible with a universal theory of evolution 
could be an organism that carried so much redundancy that it could adapt 
to almost any natural selection pressure that it encountered.
Science fiction writers invent other exotic life forms, such as organ￾isms on wheels;14 however, to exist in the actual, rather than the imaginary, 
universe, organisms would have to comply with the same universal theory 
of evolution.
To what extent might any of our current theories provide a foundation 
for a universal theory of evolution? And to what extent do current theories 
of evolution fall short? I’ll only consider the two approaches to evolution 
that we have been discussing here, SET and NCT. Could either of these
contemporary approaches to evolution become a parent theory for a future 
universal theory of evolution? Before trying to answer that question, let’s 
consider how far we have already traveled, thanks to Maxwell and von Neu￾mann pushing the known laws of physics of their day to their limits.
Maxwell and von Neumann’s conceptual artifacts demonstrated that the 
minimal properties that organisms need to survive and reproduce are poten￾tially universal. That was a good start, but it’s not enough. Both Maxwell and 149 Life on Any Planet
von Neumann were the intelligent designers of their conceptual artifacts. 
That allowed them to take short cuts when it came to supplying their artifacts 
with the same two fundamental resources that organisms need to live: energy 
and matter, or R
p
, and meaningful information, or Ri
.
Maxwell and von Neumann both gave their artifacts sufficient Ri
, up 
front, to allow them to survive and reproduce. They also accounted for the 
energy and matter resources that their artifacts needed to do their work. 
Maxwell explored his demon’s capacity to acquire sufficient energy and 
matter from within its closed environment to do its work, but it couldn’t. 
And von Neumann assumed that his natural automaton existed in such a 
benign environment that it had access to all the R
p
 it needed, both for itself 
and to build its copy offspring. However, von Neumann’s natural automaton
really dealt only with the bioinformatics of reproduction. In reality, to be 
viable, offspring organisms also need to inherit environments relative to which 
their inherited instructions have at least some chance of being well adapted. 
Strictly speaking, organisms need to inherit viable niche relationships, com￾prising both meaningful information about their environments (i.e., Ri
) and 
environments capable of supplying organisms with the necessary energy and 
matter that they need to survive and reproduce (i.e., R
p ). It is not enough to 
inherit copies of instructions alone.
Hence, even though Maxwell’s demon and von Neumann’s natural
automata are already modeling some of the universal properties of life, they 
do not provide a foundation for a universal theory of evolution. Their arti￾facts fall short because they were the intelligent designers for these artifacts, 
and also, in the case of von Neumann, because he failed to consider bioen￾ergetics adequately. That is enough to rule out their artifacts from being a 
satisfactory foundation for a future universal theory of evolution. Nonethe￾less, it is helpful to understand in what ways they fall short, as this sheds light 
on the requisite properties of a universal theory of evolution.
In contrast, both SET and NCT are genuine theories of evolution. They 
do not appeal to intelligent designers, whether supernatural or otherwise, to 
account for the processes of evolution. Do they suffer from other limitations? 
I’ll consider SET first.150 Chapter 5
STANDARD EVOLUTIONARY THEORY
What does SET get right, and where does it fall short? It is hard to imagine 
any universal theory of evolution that is not based on the natural selection
of heritable variation in evolving populations, as currently described by SET. 
To this extent, SET could be a forerunner of a future universal theory of 
evolution. Darwin’s description of evolution as a process of descent with 
modification is likely to apply to the evolution of life wherever it may exist 
in the universe. But we have also seen some of the ways in which SET is fall￾ing short. Even though Schrödinger wrote his book What Is Life? in 1944, 
orthodox evolutionary theory, initially in the form of the modern synthesis 
and later in the form of contemporary evolutionary theory, which I call 
SET, did not, and still does not, fully recognize the relevance of the laws of 
thermodynamics to biological evolution.
SET also falls short by failing to acknowledge that organisms are pur￾poseful systems. The purposes of organisms do not demand cognition or 
consciousness, but they always demand the presence of meaningful informa￾tion, or adaptive know-how, in organisms. SET recognizes that the adap￾tations of organisms depend on information carried in their genes. But it 
does not recognize the connection between the adaptive know-how carried 
by organisms and their active purposeful agency in resisting the second law, 
which organisms must express to survive and reproduce.
These two shortcomings of SET then have several consequences. SET 
fails to recognize that organisms must be purposeful systems merely to stay 
alive. Minimally, to stay alive, active, purposeful organisms have to organize 
a flow of energy and matter between themselves and their environments 
that opposes the flow of energy and matter favored by the second law. When 
organisms do this, they are bound to cause changes in their environments, if 
only because they have to take physical resources from their environments 
and dump their detritus back into their environments, to oppose the second 
law. Although individual organisms may have only a very slight impact on 
their local environments, collectively populations of organisms are likely to 
have a measurable and sometimes considerable impact on their own and 
each other’s environments.151 Life on Any Planet
As a result, SET fails to emphasize how the changes that second law–
opposing populations of organisms cause in their environments will almost 
inevitably modify some of the natural selection pressures in their environ￾ments. That is, SET fails to recognize that niche construction is an obligate 
feature of evolving organisms. The natural selection pressures that change 
through niche construction may subsequently feed back to act on the popu￾lations of organisms themselves or on other evolving populations in their 
ecosystems. The purposeful, niche-constructing activities of organisms then 
introduce the second category of natural selection that we met previously, 
comprising purposeful natural selection pressures, in contrast to the first 
category of purposeless natural selection stemming from all other envi￾ronmental events (see chapter 4). Because organisms are the source of this 
second category of natural selection, the niche-constructing activities of 
organisms codirect their own and each other’s evolution.
However, because SET does not recognize the relevance of the second 
law of thermodynamics to evolution, and because it does not recognize 
that organisms must be purposeful systems, SET does not yet discriminate 
between these two categories of natural selection. That prevents SET from 
recognizing niche construction as a codirecting process in biological evolu￾tion, and from recognizing that evolution must be a process of organism￾environment coevolution rather than just a process of organisms evolving 
in response to quasi-autonomous15 natural selection pressures in their envi￾ronments.16
SET is also falling short in the way in which it is currently handling the
relationship between the two fundamental resources that organisms need to 
live: energy and matter resources, or R
p
, and adaptive know-how resources, 
or Ri
. SET acknowledges that living organisms need both these kinds of
resources to survive and reproduce, but it does not deal with the relationship 
between them even-handedly. At least since the discovery of DNA in 1953, 
SET has concentrated primarily on the bioinformatics of evolution, and 
hence on Ri
. It has usually left the bioenergetics of evolution to the ecolo￾gists.17 For instance, SET describes the major transitions of evolution almost 
exclusively in terms of bioinformatics rather than in terms of bioinformatics 
and bioenergetics in combination.18152 Chapter 5
For instance, Maynard Smith and Szathmáry19 do a good job of describ￾ing in bioinformational terms each major transition in evolution, but they 
pay far less attention to the associated bioenergetics that must also have been 
required. In contrast, Nick Lane and William Martin20 deal with the missing 
bioenergetics of one of the greatest transitions of all—namely, the transition 
from prokaryotes to eukaryotic cells. Lane and Martin point out that this 
transition could not have happened without the extra energy supplied to 
novel eukaryotic cells by their endosymbiotic mitochondria.21 Recently, SET 
has been paying more attention to the relationship between evolution and 
ecology, but until niche construction is recognized by evolutionary biology, 
reconciling evolution with ecosystem level ecology, rather than just popula￾tion and community ecology, will remain difficult.22
There are also some less obvious ways in which SET falls short of pro￾viding a solid basis for a future universal theory of evolution. One of them 
takes us back to the purposes of organisms again. Neither evolution, nor 
development, nor inheritance would be possible without meaningful infor￾mation, or Ri
. However, meaning is derived from purpose. There can be no 
meaning without purpose. There can be regularities, or natural laws, without
purpose, such as what arises through the laws of physics and chemistry. But 
that lawfulness is meaningless to purposeless systems. Purposeless abiotic 
systems comply with the laws of nature, but that is all they can do. They 
cannot generate meaning. In contrast, purposeful living organisms, which 
are informed by meaningful information or Ri
, about the cause-and-effect
relationships that arise from the laws of nature, are sometimes able to harness 
the laws of nature for their own purposes, provided that they still obey them. 
In the process, they can generate new meaning. The purposes of organisms 
may therefore be the origin of much of “what else is needed beyond the 
known laws of physics and chemistry to understand life.”23
The problem here is that SET ignores the purposes of organisms. But if 
organisms are not purposeful systems, how can ancestral organisms transmit 
meaningful information in the form of adaptive know-how, or Ri
, to their 
descendants, and how can this information accrue and change over time? 
SET’s answer to that question goes something like this: Purposeless natural
selection pressures in the external environments of organisms select those153 Life on Any Planet
variant organisms in each generation of evolving populations that are the 
fittest organisms with respect to their capacity to survive and reproduce. 
According to SET, the apparent purposefulness of living organisms is either 
a mirage or an irrelevancy. From SET’s perspective, living organisms have 
no purpose. They evolve solely because they vary in fitness, and they owe 
their fitness exclusively to the purposeless natural selection pressures that 
they encounter in their environments, in combination with the particu￾lar genes and chance mutations that they inherit from their ancestors and 
their parents. For SET, the ultimate source of the meaningful information, 
or Ri
, that organisms need to survive and reproduce is reducible to prior 
purposeless natural selection pressures that act on their purposeless ances￾tors, combined with genetic inheritances that must have originally stemmed 
from chance-based genetic mutation. The problem with this reasoning is 
that unless their ancestors were purposeful organisms in the past, popula￾tions of organisms could not acquire or inherit meaningful information, 
or Ri
, in the present.
SET also suffers from a second, less obvious limitation that we have 
not yet discussed. That arises from what I have previously called a “refer￾ence device problem.”24 I suggest that, currently, SET uses an inappropriate 
reference device with which to understand the processes of evolution. What 
does that mean? Well, it is not possible to understand anything relative to 
nothing. Everything always has to be understood relative to something, and 
that something is its reference device. This applies not only to biological evo￾lution, but to all sciences, including physics and chemistry.25 The questions 
are: What reference device can we best look at to understand the biological 
processes of evolution? What cause, or causes, are sufficient to explain bio￾logical evolution, and what is their source?
Given that SET rules out the purposeful agency of individual organisms 
as a contributing cause of evolution, and leaving aside random processes such 
as genetic drift, the theory’s only option is to treat natural selection as the sole
directing cause of adaptive evolution. That turns the external environments 
of organisms into the fundamental reference device relative to which SET 
understands evolution.26 We can, for instance, understand that giraffes have 
long necks because trees are tall and their forage source is high, or that cacti 154 Chapter 5
have spines rather than leaves because deserts are arid and leaves lose lots of 
water through transpiration, but spines do not. We would be puzzled, in 
contrast, if giraffes fed on low bushes or cacti were found in swamps. The 
adaptations of organisms make sense only relative to the external environ￾ment that is the source of the natural selection that favored them.
This approach has been labeled the “externalism” of SET since the 
properties of organisms are understood relative to the properties of their 
external environment.27 The use that SET makes of the external environ￾ment as its reference device for describing evolution makes intuitive sense, 
but it is responsible for reinforcing some of SET’s other shortcomings. For 
instance, SET’s externalism is incompatible with the idea that the purpose￾ful, niche-constructing activities of organisms can be a codirecting process in 
evolution, in conjunction with natural selection. SET struggles to recognize 
how niche construction can be regarded as a cause of evolution since niche￾constructing traits must themselves be understood relative to the external 
environment that favored their evolution. From this mindset, niche constric￾tion is a proximate rather than an evolutionary cause.28 SET’s externalism is 
also incompatible with the concept of organism-environment coevolution. 
Because SET uses the external environment as its reference device to describe 
evolution, it cannot recognize that populations of niche-constructing organ￾isms have the ability to cause their environments to coevolve with them. 
An exception is where the relevant source of selection in the environment is 
another organism, in which case we have organism-organism coevolution 
rather than organism-environment coevolution. For this reason, SET cannot 
accept that when purposeful, niche-constructing organisms in populations 
modify natural selection pressures in their environments, they often cause 
their environments to coevolve with them.29
At this point, the philosophy and history behind these ideas may be 
of some interest, even though they are seldom considered by evolutionary 
biologists. This is a brief sketch of these areas. Prescientific explanations of 
life usually invoked creative deities of some kind. In particular, the three 
major Abrahamic religions that originated west of the Indus—Judaism, 
Christianity, and Islam—all explain the adaptive design of organisms rela￾tive to their local environments in terms of an external, transcendental, and 155 Life on Any Planet
creative deity. In each case, God is deemed to have created organisms that 
are well suited to their environments.
Darwin proposed that natural selection was the source of the adap￾tations of diverse species of organisms relative to their diverse local envi￾ronments. His idea that natural selection, which stems from the external 
environments of organisms, is responsible for the adaptation of organisms is 
minimally logically consistent with the prescientific ideas about an external 
deity being the source of the design of organisms, regardless of all the other 
difficulties that Darwin raised for those religions. To borrow a quip from 
Richard Dawkins,30 it is as if “The God Delusion” merely had to be replaced 
by natural selection. But that simple substitution risks creating a new delu￾sion. It is not that natural selection is unimportant—it is very important.
However, as I’ve been arguing throughout this book, natural selection is not 
the sole cause of the adaptations of organisms.
Darwin’s thinking was probably also indirectly influenced by the field of 
physics, which by ill luck and unfortunate timing was dominated at the time 
by Newtonian mechanics. Newton’s second law of motion is F = ma, which 
is to say that an external force (F) acts on objects with mass (m), which react 
by accelerating (a) in the direction of the force. Newton’s theory was very 
successful because, among other things, it explained gravity. It was, therefore, 
vastly authoritative in Darwin’s day. Translated into biology, it encouraged 
the idea that a putative external force (i.e., natural selection), acts on objects
(here, populations of organisms), that react by moving in the direction dic￾tated by the force (i.e., evolving to be suited to the environment). The same 
idea discourages recognition of the contribution of the purposeful, fitness￾seeking activities of organisms to the evolutionary process through their 
niche-constructing activities.31
When Darwin published On the Origin of Species in 1859, a comprehen￾sive theory of thermodynamics did not yet exist. That theory was progres￾sively developed by physicists, initially by Nicolas Carnot and ultimately 
by Ludwig Boltzmann, during the fifty years following the publication of 
Darwin’s book.32 When Darwin introduced the idea that natural selection
was responsible for the adaptations of organisms, his idea was consistent 
with the prevailing physics of his time—Newtonian mechanics. Eventually, 156 Chapter 5
Newtonian mechanics was not only superseded by thermodynamics but also 
subsumed by Einstein’s theories of special and general relativity, published in 
1905 and 1915, respectively. Post-Einstein, we end up with the much more 
complicated and fundamentally relativistic idea that “mass acts on space￾time, telling it how to curve” and “space-time acts on mass, telling it how to 
move.”33 It might be too glib to claim that Einstein’s theory is an “interac￾tionist theory”34 involving interactions between space-time and matter, but 
it is certainly a relativistic theory. The relativism of organism-environment 
coevolution is what we have been advocating in the previous chapters. That is 
why I am arguing that SET still falls well short of being a candidate parent 
theory for a future universal theory of evolution.
NICHE CONSTRUCTION THEORY
NCT avoids many of the limitations of SET. First, NCT recognizes the 
relevance of the laws of thermodynamics to evolution. Second, it recognizes 
how the active, purposeful agencies of organisms contribute to their own and 
each other’s evolution through niche construction. And third, NCT recog￾nizes the coevolution of organisms and their environments in the context 
of their shared ecosystems. That is a good start, but it immediately raises a 
further problem. We have just noted that both niche construction, when 
regarded as a codirecting process in evolution, and organism-environment 
coevolution are incompatible with the externalist reference device used by 
SET. If everything requires a reference device, then we will need a new refer￾ence device for NCT. What should it be?
The external environment is the obvious reference device for under￾standing natural selection, even though it may have limitations as the foun￾dation for a universal theory of evolution. Similarly, organisms might be 
thought of as an alternative reference device for understanding niche con￾struction since organisms are the source of that niche construction. Such an 
account would be labeled “internalist,” as the traits of organisms are being 
understood relative to some internal properties of organisms.35 Lamarckism 
has been described as an internalist theory, as the traits of organisms were 
seen as evolving due to an internal cause—namely, the organism’s inner drive 157 Life on Any Planet
for complexity. That is not what NCT is advocating. We cannot use organ￾isms as a reference device for understanding evolution, as that would merely 
replace an incomplete externalist evolutionary theory with an incomplete 
internalist evolutionary theory.36 Instead, “we need to start in the middle,” as 
Santa Fe Institute director David Krakauer once put it.37 We need a reference 
device that can catch the relativistic interactions between natural selection
pressures in environments and the purposeful niche-constructing activities 
of populations of organisms. How can we do this? Let’s go back to Ashby.
According to Ashby’s control theory, organisms have to protect one or 
more essential variables to be adapted. His Law of Requisite Variety (LRV) 
tells us that “only variety can ‘drive down’ or ‘destroy’ variety.” That means 
that it is only possible for organisms to drive down (i.e., cope with) the vari￾able natural selection pressures, or VE, that they encounter in their environ￾ments by expressing adaptive phenotypic variation, or VO, that can drive 
down (i.e., neutralize or exploit) the variable environmental conditions that 
they encounter. Recall that here, essential variables do not refer directly to 
variant natural selection pressures in the environments of organisms, nor to 
the variant structural and functional phenotypic traits of organisms. Rather, 
essential variables refer to that third kind of variance, the constantly fluctuat￾ing variable relationships between variant natural selection pressures in the 
environments of organisms and variant phenotypic traits of organisms, or 
VO-E. Essential variables therefore refer to the interactive niche relationships 
between organisms and environments.38
According to NCT, these interactive niche relationships can be modi￾fied by both changes in the natural selection pressures in the external envi￾ronments of organisms and changes in the purposeful, niche-constructing 
activities of organisms as they manage their niche-management games with
their local environments. All these sources of change are summarized in the 
moves shown in figure 3.1 in chapter 3.
Changes in the interactive niche relationships can drive changes in indi￾vidual organisms during their lives, including the developmental changes 
that contribute to the variability of organisms in successive generations 
of evolving populations. The same distinct categories of change can also 
drive changes in evolving populations of organisms over time, as well as 158 Chapter 5
changes in aspects of the environment subject to niche construction, some 
of which are passed to future generations as an ecological inheritance. 
Organism-environment coevolution can thus be described relative to the 
niche-constructing activities of organisms and the natural selection pressures 
that they encounter. All relevant aspects of change in evolving organism￾environment systems can be understood relative to changes in the interactive 
O-E niche relationship. For all these reasons, I previously proposed that the 
variable interactive niche relationships between organisms and their environ￾ments should replace the externalism of SET as a more appropriate and less 
restrictive reference device for understanding evolution.39
There are at least three nontrivial advantages of this relativistic refer￾ence device compared to the externalism of SET. First, while the exter￾nalism of SET can only explain the adaptations exhibited by populations 
of organisms, the relativistic reference device can potentially apply to any 
individual organism or to any focal population of organisms, in relation to 
their environment, and therefore to any niche relationship, on any scale. 
Second, unlike SET, which is biased toward explanations based on natural
selection, the relativistic reference device approach is indifferent to whether
the niche relationship is changed by natural selection or niche construction. 
In both cases, it reduces change to the common currency of modifications 
of the interactive O-E niche relationship (see chapter 3). Third, because it
can act as a general-purpose reference device for both the development of 
individual organisms and the evolution of populations, changes in the O-E
niche relationship can be understood as driving the development of indi￾vidual organisms in their individual niches, just as they also drive the evo￾lutionary changes that occur in the populations of organisms.40 This brings 
the twin advantage that it helps set development in an evolutionary context 
and helps reveal how, contrary to SET, developmental processes can play an
evolutionary role.41 Many of these points were anticipated by Waddington 
in 1969, as well as by Lewontin in 1983.
The interactive niche relationship also has at least one disadvantage 
when used as a reference device. That is, it introduces a third kind of vari￾ance (VO−E) that is more difficult to think about or comprehend than both 
VE and VO. Sources of natural selection in environments (VE) are physical, 159 Life on Any Planet
observable, and measurable, and the same is true of the variant phenotypic 
traits (VO) expressed by organisms. But the varying relationships between 
natural selection pressures and varying phenotypic traits (VO−E) are more 
abstract and harder to comprehend. Nevertheless, I maintain that the adap￾tations of organisms are not primarily about varying natural selection pres￾sures in their environments, nor are they about the varying phenotypic traits 
expressed by organisms. They are primarily about the varying relationships 
between selection and phenotypic traits, which introduces a third dynamical 
variable (VO−E), determined by the dynamics of the other two (VE and VO).
Nevertheless, the interactive niche relationships that encapsulate the 
varying relationships between varying organisms and their varying environ￾ments are empirically tractable. It is possible to investigate whether these
relationships are adaptive, and it is possible to identify dif­ferent sources of 
adaptive variation, corresponding to dif­ferent moves in the game, as depicted 
in chapter 3. For illustration, let’s reconsider the termite examples discussed in 
that chapter. Among some species of termites, variant individuals that differed 
in the thickness of their outer cuticles (VO), possessed varying abilities to cope 
with the arid desert conditions in which they lived (VO−E), which led to natu￾ral selection sorting between individuals, and eventually to these populations
evolving thick cuticles that limit desiccation (move 2), thereby protecting the 
essential physiological variable of water balance.42 In contrast, other species 
of termite, exposed to desert conditions that varied in their aridity and the 
availability of subterranean water (VE), were able to find water deep below 
the desert surface and bring it back to their nests.43 As a direct consequence 
of this niche construction, differences in the thickness of their outer cuticles 
(VO) did not lead to varying abilities to cope with the arid external desert 
conditions (VO−E), because these animals had protected the essential physi￾ological variable of water balance through a dif­ferent move—namely, niche 
construction (move 6). In doing so, however, varying abilities to mine for 
water (VO) may have led to varying moisture levels within and between nests 
(VE), generating fitness differences (VO−E) that favored an enhanced capacity 
to locate and transport subterranean water (move 2).44 The example suffices 
to illustrate that the deployment of a relativistic reference device, as well as the 
identification of moves in the game, are empirically tractable.160 Chapter 5
Odling-Smee et al. (2003) cited hundreds of examples, organized into 
tables, of adaptations that could have been due to the modification of natural
selection pressures by niche construction. These tables of examples were dis￾missed as “factoids” by some of NCT’s critics.45 However, all these examples 
are open to empirical investigation, and many have been with a role for niche 
construction confirmed. That could turn these factoids into newly estab￾lished facts about the causes of adaptations, while at the same time exposing
others as erroneous hypotheses. In 1957, the ecologist Evelyn Hutchinson 
pointed out that the niche relationships and their environments break down 
into n-dimension hypervolumes of variables, all of which, in principle, are 
open to empirical investigation. In practice, it is possible to investigate only 
a few of them at a time. Following Hutchinson’s lead, my collaborators and 
I advocated investigating only the most important niche variables relative to 
whatever research questions were being investigated at the time.46
Used in this way, the advantages of the VO−E interactive niche refer￾ence device for understanding evolution far outweigh any disadvantages. 
Unlike the use of the external environment as a reference device for evolution 
by SET, which reinforces its shortcomings, the interactive niche reference 
device strengthens NCT. But NCT, at least as it was laid out prior to this 
publication, is still an unfinished theory of evolution. That is because NCT
still fell short in the way that it handled the relationship between energy and 
matter (or R
p ) and meaningful information (or Ri
). Organisms cannot gain 
R
p
 from their environments unless they are informed by adaptive know￾how, or Ri
, a priori. But the opposite is also true. Evolving populations of 
organisms cannot gain adaptive know-how, or Ri
, without paying for it a 
priori with energy and matter, or R
p
. For example, the major extra energy 
and matter costs involved when organisms reproduce have to be paid for in 
advance by parent organisms in the preceding generation. In many animal 
species, these costs include the considerable costs of parental care.
Dilemmas in the R
p
–Ri
 relationship have occurred and reoccurred 
repeatedly throughout the evolution of life on Earth. The existence of these
dilemmas implies that the processes of evolution must have had a capacity 
to resolve them in dif­ferent evolving populations, and in dif­ferent environ￾ments. Thus far, neither SET nor NCT has yet been able to fully explain how 161 Life on Any Planet
R
p
–Ri
 dilemmas are resolved by evolution. However, for the reasons given in 
this chapter, NCT provides a much more promising framework on which to 
build a universal theory of evolution. It may only be possible to understand
how evolution has resolved R
p
–Ri
 dilemmas in the past by working out the 
relationship between the bioenergetics and bioinformatics of evolution in 
more detail, building on the secure foundations of NCT. One highly relevant 
domain in which R
p
–Ri
 dilemmas frequently play out is major evolutionary 
transitions. Evolutionary biologists do consider the major transitions in the 
bioinformatics of evolution, but typically without closely integrating the 
associated bioenergetics. In the remainder of this chapter, I examine whether
it might be possible to extend NCT in ways that potentially will allow R
p
–Ri
dilemmas to be better understood.
NICHE CONSTRUCTION THEORY 
AND THE RP–RI
 RELATIONSHIP
Let’s go through some of the basic points about the R
p
–Ri
 relationship again. 
If I give you an energy and matter resource (say, an apple), I lose the apple 
and you gain it. But if I tell you about an apple tree that is currently bear￾ing fruit, I give you some meaningful information about something that 
you did not know before, and yet I still retain the knowledge myself. Thus 
there is a fundamental asymmetry between energy and matter resources and 
information resources.
In spite of this asymmetry, both R
p
 and Ri
 can affect the fitness of organ￾isms. For example, if I give you an apple, I may be reducing my own fitness 
while increasing yours. If, on the other hand, you are one of my offspring, or 
another close relative, I could increase my inclusive fitness by giving you an 
apple. If you are a friend, or a member of my social group, I could be increas￾ing my social status by my generosity, which might confer fitness benefits in 
the longer term. But if you are a stranger, someone whom I would not see 
again, I would be reducing my fitness by increasing yours.
Contrast that to what happens if I give you the knowledge of where to 
find that apple tree. I still know where to find the tree myself, which changes 
the fitness payoffs slightly. By sharing this knowledge with a relative, I can 162 Chapter 5
increase my inclusive fitness. I might also increase my social status and fit￾ness indirectly by sharing my knowledge within my social group. But if I 
tell a stranger where to find an apple tree, it may have little impact on my
fitness—unless, that is, apples are a limiting resource, in which case I might 
reduce my fitness by giving adaptive know-how to a competitor. The next 
time I go to the apple tree, there may be no apples left. Every time there is a 
change in the R
p
 and Ri
 relationship in evolving populations, these problems
are likely to reoccur.
Let’s now consider how these differences play out in major evolution￾ary transitions. I suggest that each of the major transitions in evolution 
discussed by Maynard Smith and Szathmáry in 1995 not only represent a 
new breakthrough in the bioinformatics of evolution, but also represent a new 
breakthrough in our understanding of the relationship between bioenerget￾ics and bioinformatics. This point is illustrated by Lane and Martin’s work on 
the prokaryote-eukaryote transitions in evolution,47 which I discussed earlier
in this chapter, but it should apply more generally. That is because organisms
cannot gain Ri
 without paying for it in advance with R
p
, and neither can they 
gain R
p
 from their environments unless they are informed in advance with Ri
.
Is there anything in the bioenergetics of evolution equivalent to the 
major transitions in bioinformatics? In a remarkable paper published in 
2017,48 Olivia Judson suggested that there is. Leaning heavily on earlier
work by Timothy Lenton and colleagues,49 Judson identified five energetic 
epochs in the history of evolution on Earth. First, there was an epoch labeled 
“geochemical energy,” when only geochemical resources were available to 
support life. A second epoch subsequently arose, called “sunshine,” when 
some bacteria acquired the adaptive know-how for photosynthesis, allow￾ing them to utilize the radiant energy of the Sun directly. The third epoch, 
which Judson called “oxygen,” refers to the time following the so-called great 
oxidization event, when multiple organisms acquired the capacity to exploit 
oxygen. The fourth epoch, labeled “flesh,” refers to the capacity of organisms 
to feed off other organisms. And the final epoch, which Judson called “fire,” 
refers to the ability of our own hominin ancestors to control fire as a way of 
increasing our human capacity to harvest energy and matter resources from 
our environments.163 Life on Any Planet
To be consistent with the concept of the major bioinformatic transi￾tions in evolution, I’ll call Judson’s five successive energetic epochs the major 
bioenergetic transitions in evolution. These two kinds of transitions, bioen￾ergetics and bioinformatics, not only interacted with each other in the past, 
they also changed and triggered transitions in each other. Expansions of the 
sources of energy available to living organisms led to concomitant increases 
in the diversity and complexity of both organisms and ecosystems. Apart 
from the origin of life itself, which probably only depended on geochemi￾cal sources of energy and matter, it is likely that all the other epochs in the 
major bioenergetic transitions depended, at least partly, on the activities of 
organisms (i.e., on niche construction).
For instance, in the geochemical epoch, Judson describes how early eco￾systems may have quickly diversified to resemble a microbial mat, where the 
waste products of one type of organism fed the metabolism of others. This
inference is consistent with a recent experimental evolution investigation in 
bacteria, which showed that huge biodiversity could emerge in a completely 
homogeneous environment through niche construction.50 San Roman and 
Wagner describe how bacteria create new ecological niches when they excrete 
waste products that sustain other bacterial populations. Thousands of new 
niches were created in this manner.
Similarly, with respect to sunshine, oxygen would never have built up 
in the atmosphere of Earth had cyanobacteria never evolved. Sunlight is 
available across much of the Earth’s surface, which allowed life forms to 
disperse around the globe. Oxygen is a very efficient source of energy for 
any organisms that can utilize it.51 Oxygen was just a waste product of the 
photosynthesizing chemical reactions of cyanobacteria. Accordingly, NCT 
describes the production of oxygen by cyanobacteria as “by-product niche 
construction”. Nevertheless, its production subsequently modified natu￾ral selection pressures in the environments of countless other organisms.52
Most obviously, the oxygenation of the atmosphere created an abundance of 
oxygen-rich niches, which supplemented the existing anoxic niches.
It is also worth noting that the production of oxygen by cyanobacteria 
must initially have been toxic for many organisms. This is because most
organisms at that time were anaerobic. They lacked the adaptive know-how 164 Chapter 5
to utilize oxygen. Eventually, atmospheric oxygen became a positive resource 
for multiple species of organisms after they had evolved the adaptive know￾how to use it. For instance, Judson describes how the availability of oxygen 
also may have permitted the construction of new molecules, such as collagen, 
which allowed further diversification.53 This may be an example of organisms 
initially degrading the environments of many contemporary organisms by 
their niche construction, but subsequently enriching the environments of 
multiple other species.
It may be no coincidence that during this epoch, two major evolutionary 
events took place: the emergence of eukaryotes and the appearance of the 
lineage that would lead to land plants. Each represents an important shift
in the capacity for organisms to transduce energy. Judson describes how 
the emergence and diversification of eukaryotes provided new niches for 
prokaryotes to occupy. As Lane and Martin describe, this then fueled the 
expansion of eukaryotes into occupying a far wider variety of niches.
The “flesh” epoch allowed the acquisition of energy through the hunt￾ing and eating of other life forms. This led to the emergence of the clas￾sic pyramid of trophic levels in ecology. It also led to innumerable species 
of organisms interacting with each other in ecosystems, and it introduced 
another celebrated question: “Who eats whom in ecosystems?” The first tro￾phic level at the base of the pyramid comprises autotrophs that are primary 
producers of energy and matter, or R
p
, in ecosystems, including microor￾ganisms and plants. These organisms gain their energy and matter either 
from geochemical sources (from epoch 1) or from the Sun (from epoch 2). 
The autotrophs produce resources for the second trophic level, typically 
comprising herbivores that eat the plants. The third trophic level comprises 
smaller carnivores, which get most of their resources from herbivores. The 
fourth trophic level comprises larger carnivores, which live off the smaller 
carnivores. In reality, the trophic pyramid is a good deal more complicated 
than this simple description. For instance, it includes omnivores that feed 
at more than one trophic level.
We’ll be returning to the trophic pyramid in part II. For the moment, it 
will suffice to make some brief points. First, the entire food web is ultimately 
reliant on the capacity of autotrophs to extract energy from geochemical 165 Life on Any Planet
sources or from sunlight through simple, but profound forms of niche 
construction. Second, the advent of flesh eating allowed for increases in 
organism size, which in turn generated new and more complex kinds of 
ecosystems. Third, the evolution of predation not only led to diversifications 
in morphology among predators (e.g., teeth, claws) and prey (e.g., shells, 
scales, spikes), but also to the creation of refuges (e.g., nests, burrows), and 
hunting artifacts (e.g., webs, pit traps), which demanded niche construction. 
Nest building created new resources for inquilines to exploit. Widespread 
burrowing, in turn, creates a mixing of sediments known as “bioturbation,” 
which redistributes nutrients and aerates sediments and soils. Animals also 
produce feces, which strongly affect how nutrients are distributed and the 
rates at which they cycle.
Judson highlighted how Earth is the only planet in our solar system 
where fire could exist. That is because fire not only depends on sources of 
ignition, such as lightning strikes, which are common to many planets, but 
also requires the presence of oxygen and combustible fuel. Both of these are 
products of prior biotic evolution and are present on our planet only because
of the niche construction of ancestral populations. Even on our planet, fire 
cannot have existed before the invasion of land by life and the growth of 
vascular plants on land as a source of fuel.
The use of fire depended on the prior acquisition of appropriate adap￾tive know-how, or Ri
, by our ancestors. Judson discusses some of the ways in 
which the controlled use of fire increased our ancestors’ capacity to harvest 
more energy and matter resources from their environments. For example, 
our ancestors used fire for cooking. Cooking releases more nutrients from 
food than can be obtained from raw food. Judson also refers to the use of fire 
by humans for smelting metals, for making tools for hunting, and later for
agriculture. More advanced tools then enabled the agricultural revolution, 
urbanization, the Industrial Revolution, and our contemporary societies
(see chapter 10).
Judson’s list of the bioenergetic transitions in evolution also raise some 
additional questions. One question is: Why don’t successive generations 
of organisms progressively degrade their external environments of energy 
and matter resources until the evolution of life stops? What seems to have 166 Chapter 5
happened on Earth is the reverse. The biosphere of our own planet seems to 
have got richer rather than more impoverished over time. It has increased 
rather than decreased potentially available “ecospace” for diverse organisms 
to exist over time.54 It is possible that during the first bioenergetic epoch
of life on Earth, organisms did degrade their environments. The evolution of 
life could have stopped. It didn’t, though, because some organisms on Earth 
acquired the necessary adaptive know-how, or Ri
, to achieve photosynthesis. 
That allowed them to utilize the radiant energy of the Sun. More generally, 
throughout the history of life on Earth, progressive expansions of ecospace 
took place over time, in many instances following the emergence of new 
forms of niche construction.
As far as the evolution of life on Earth is concerned, the Sun can be 
thought of as an infinite source of energy. It is possible that on some plan￾ets elsewhere in the universe, life did originate, but then it stopped. Life
may have stopped prematurely because organisms on those planets used
up too much of their within-planet geochemical energy and matter, or R
p
, 
before photosynthesis evolved and allowed them to harvest radiant energy 
from their stars. Waddington claimed that once the processes of organism￾environment coevolution begin, evolution cannot stop. However, I suggest 
that it might stop if evolving populations of organisms can no longer tap into 
sufficient energy and matter, or R
p
, to pay for their own future evolution.
Indeed, there have already been some dangerous moments when the 
future evolution of life on Earth was severely threatened, which correspond 
to the mass extinctions of life that occurred repeatedly during the last 4 bil￾lion years.55 There are controversies among paleobiologists about how to 
define mass extinctions and how to count them. However, there is a broad 
consensus that there have been five mass extinctions since the Cambrian 
explosion 542 million years ago. In reverse order, the last two mass extinctions 
were the Cretaceous or Cretaceous Tertiary mass extinction, 66 million years 
ago, and the Permian mass extinction, about 250 million years ago. They 
had overlapping but dif­ferent causes. For example, the Cretaceous-Tertiary 
mass extinction was due to abiotic environmental events. It was caused by a 
preliminary period of intense volcanic activity in the region of modern India, 
followed by the sudden asteroid strike in the Yucatan in Mexico.167 Life on Any Planet
The Permian mass extinction, which nearly ended life about 250 million 
years ago, was due to an “unthinkable volcanic nightmare.”56 It is sometimes 
called “the worst of times” by paleobiologists.57 The Permian extinction led 
to 96 percent of all life in the sea going extinct, which raised the question of
why the remaining 4 percent didn’t go extinct too. The extinctions on land 
were more complicated, but also very severe. According to the paleobiologist 
Doug Erwin,58 most of the losses in a mass extinction probably don’t come 
from the initial shock, but rather from the secondary cascade of failures that 
follow. The Cretaceous-Tertiary and Permian mass extinctions may have 
been due more to the resultant atmospheric dust, which deprived life on 
Earth from access to a major source of energy, sunlight, which prevented 
autotrophs from supporting the food webs that underpin most ecosystems.
There were also multiple pre-Cambrian mass extinctions, about which
far less is known. An example was the “Snowball Earth” mass extinction, 
which occurred in the Ediacaran era about 632 million years ago.59 There 
were probably other “Snowball Earth” extinctions that had occurred earlier.
60
During a “Snowball Earth” extinction, the Arctic and Antarctic snow ice 
sheets expand from the north and the south until they almost meet at the
equator. It is assumed that in the Ediacaran era, life only existed in the sea, 
and apparently, most of it went extinct.
What do all these mass extinctions have in common, relative to the 
bioenergetics-bioinformatics, or R
p
–Ri
 relationship? Can we account for 
them in the context of evolutionary theory?61 Let’s first consider the extinc￾tion of a single species. Why does a species go extinct? It’s a safe bet that all 
species go extinct sooner or later, although how much sooner or later var￾ies considerably with dif­ferent species, in dif­ferent environments. To avoid 
extinction, there must always be enough organisms in a species that are, 
capable of surviving and reproducing in each generation. That requires an 
adaptive match or synchrony between the sources of energy and matter, 
or R
p
, that are present in the environments of organisms and the adaptive 
know-how, or Ri
, carried by those organisms.
This adaptive synchrony has two prerequisites. First, the environment 
must have the capacity to supply the organisms with sufficient energy and 
matter to enable enough of them to survive and reproduce in each generation, 168 Chapter 5
and it must also be able to act as a sink for their detritus. Second, there must 
always be enough organisms in the species that are sufficiently well informed 
to harvest the energy and matter afforded to them by their environments. If, 
for whatever reason, one or both of these preconditions for the future evolu￾tion of a species are not satisfied, then the species risks extinction.
There are several reasons why a species-environment relationship could 
fail to provide it with sufficient R
p
 resources. For instance, a species could 
damage its own habitat by overexploiting it or dumping excessive detritus 
into it. More likely, a focal species could be outcompeted by another rival 
species that is equipped with superior Ri
, for harvesting the same R
p
 resources 
in their shared ecosystem. Or another species might destroy the habitat of 
the focal species. There are other possibilities too, but I will not dwell on 
them here.62
Given these kinds of threats, how do species avoid extinction? There 
is no general solution to the R
p
–Ri
 dilemmas that at all times and places 
threaten the ongoing evolution of a species. Each individual species repeat￾edly has to find its own way into its future. The way in which any particular
species does this may largely depend on the capacity of individual organisms 
in the species to engage in “inceptive” or opportunistic niche construction. 
To echo Stuart Kauffmann,63 individual organisms in a species need to be 
able to seize new opportunities by taking advantage of whatever potential 
new sources of R
p
 happen to come their way relative to the adaptive know￾how, or Ri
, that they already possess.
Individual species can avoid extinction if they can repeatedly restore 
the synchrony between their own Ri
 and the R
p
 afforded to them by their 
environments. Organisms may do this either by responding to the natu￾ral selection pressures that they encounter in their environments without 
changing them, or by modifying some of the natural selection pressures that 
they encounter by purposeful active niche construction. These alternatives 
correspond to the two dif­ferent categories of natural selection that we met 
in chapter 4. They are unmodified, purposeless natural selection pressures 
versus natural selection pressures that have been previously modified by the 
active, purposeful agency of niche-constructing organisms. If they cannot 169 Life on Any Planet
do either of these things, they may go extinct. If they can, they may evolve 
further. They may even speciate.
Now we can go back to those mass extinctions again. How can evolution￾ary theory account for them, if at all? Mass extinctions are logically equiva￾lent to the extinction of individual species, except that multiple dif­ferent 
species go extinct almost simultaneously. But here, the word “simultaneous” 
refers to what paleobiologists call “deep time,” rather than ordinary “human
time.” For instance, simultaneity in deep time could refer to 100,000 or 
200,000 years in ordinary human time.64 With that proviso, we need to 
account for the near-simultaneity of mass extinctions
Encouraged by SET, paleobiologists usually look for anything that may 
have caused significant changes in the natural selection pressures acting on 
many species at approximately the same time. There are several possible
abiotic agents with the capacity to change natural selection in the environ￾ments of many dif­ferent species simultaneously. For instance, a mass extinc￾tion could be caused by a major change of climate, a major change in an 
ocean current, a huge volcanic eruption, or an asteroid strike. Any one of 
these events could be the source of changes in the natural selection pressures 
encountered by many dif­ferent species simultaneously.
However, it is also possible that there were some biotic sources of mass 
extinctions in the past as well, often working in conjunction with abiotic 
sources. We may have met one of them already, in the oxygen produced as a 
by-product of the photosynthetic activities of cyanobacteria. Another much 
more recent example occurred in the Holocene, during the last 11,000 years. 
It’s called “large-scale mega-faunal extinction” rather than mass extinction.65
These mega-faunal extinctions were partly due to abiotic events, but they 
were also almost certainly due to the arrival of modern humans, equipped
with weapons and hunting skills, in new regions of the Earth. The arrival 
of humans in these new regions rapidly drove most of the large animals 
that they encountered to extinction. This process is still continuing today. 
NCT raises the possibility of biotically induced mass extinction. A mass 
extinction could be caused either by significant changes in unmodified natu￾ral selection pressures, due to abiotic events, the modification of natural170 Chapter 5
selection pressures by the particularly potent niche-constructing activities 
of organisms (see chapter 4), or both.
One reason why a species could be a particularly potent niche construc￾tor is by it evolving a major breakthrough in either the bioenergetics or
the bioinformatics of evolution. A niche-constructing species could thereby 
disturb the synchrony of the R
p
 versus Ri
 relationship for multiple other 
species, more or less simultaneously. This is always a possibility because of 
the ways that the bioenergetics and bioinformatics of evolution interact with 
each other and cause changes in each other, generating chain reactions that 
ripple through ecosystems. The cyanobacterial production of oxygen, as a 
by-product of photosynthesis, is a case in point. It had huge consequences. 
It modified natural selection pressures in the environments of multiple other 
species, through niche construction, in the process introducing the third 
bioenergetic epoch, oxygen.
We do not know enough about this major bioenergetic transition in 
evolution, partly because it happened so long ago, and partly because the
oxidization of Earth’s atmosphere was a complicated process that took a 
long time. However, it must have upset the synchrony between the adaptive 
know-how, or Ri
, carried by numerous species of anaerobic microorgan￾isms and this new source of energy and matter resources, or R
p
, in their 
environments. It probably drove many species extinct and drove others into
oxygen-free environments. Eventually, it drove some other populations to 
evolve further in response to this biotically induced change in the natural 
selection pressures that they were encountering.
My second example of a potent niche-constructing species is closer to 
home. It refers to our human exploitation of fossil fuels in our environ￾ment. Most of these fossil fuels were originally laid down by diverse species 
of organisms in the Permian era, about 250 to 300 million years ago. For 
example, when trees in the Permian forests fell and died, they did not rot 
in the same way as trees in modern forests rot when they fall and die. This 
was largely because at that time, there were no species of detritivores in 
existence that carried the appropriate adaptive know-how, or Ri
, to harvest 
or use all the nutrients made available by the fallen trees. In particular, there 
were no detritivores capable of breaking down the lignin in the rotting trees. 171 Life on Any Planet
Consequently, over millions of years, the dead trees sank into the ground and 
gradually transformed into coal.66 The coal remained an untapped resource 
in the environments of multiple species of organisms for millions of years. It 
couldn’t be harvested by any organisms. At that time, no species of organ￾ism existed that had evolved the appropriate adaptive know-how, or Ri
, to 
exploit this resource, or R
p
, in their environment. There was no adaptive 
synchrony between the Ri
 carried by any species of organism and the R
p
, in 
their environments in the form of coal—until, that is, the arrival of humans.
Today’s humans, in our contemporary societies, are finally equipped, as 
a consequence of another putative major transition in the bioinformat￾ics of evolution, fire, and its subsequent use in the Industrial Revolution, 
when humans acquired sufficient adaptive know-how, or Ri
, to harvest coal. 
The crucial putative major bioinformatics transition consists of the extra 
knowledge-gaining, or Ri
-gaining, processes of human sociocultural evolu￾tion (see chapter 7). We are now using coal, as well as other fossil fuels, to 
generate electricity in power stations. Ironically, the detritus produced by our 
power stations when they burn coal are now threatening to change Earth’s 
atmosphere again, not with oxygen this time, but with carbon dioxide. As 
a result, we may currently be threatening much of life with another future 
mass extinction due to global warming.
If we compare the cyanobacteria example with the human fossil fuel 
example, what do they have in common, and where do they differ? They 
differ in that cyanobacteria were responsible for a major transition in the 
bioenergetics of evolution. In contrast, the human capacity to exploit fossil
fuels arises from a putative major transition in the bioinformatics of evolu￾tion (although, according to Judson, this has triggered a further major tran￾sition in bioenergetics). Humanity’s ability to harness this source of energy 
depends on another putative Ri
-gaining process in evolution, “science,” and 
its associated technologies (see chapter 10). It may be the case that whenever 
a major transition in evolution occurs, whether in bioenergetics or in bioin￾formatics (possibly in the limiting case), initiated by the niche-constructing 
activities of just a single species, a dangerous moment may follow for many 
other species in their shared ecosystems. Such moments could be caused by 
the fracturing of the synchronous adaptive relationships between the energy 172 Chapter 5
and matter resources available to species in their environments and the adap￾tive know-how that they carry, primarily as a consequence of their prior 
evolution. Sometimes this fracturing may cause mass extinction. Whenever 
a major transition in the evolution of life occurs, it possibly ushers in associ￾ated dangerous moments. In which case, a potential mass extinction would 
be induced by biotic agents rather than by abiotic events. They could be 
induced by the processes of evolution themselves, through which species of 
organisms achieve major breakthroughs in either the bioenergetics or the 
bioinformatics transitions of life, often through new forms of niche con￾struction. That may or may not be true, but I suggest that it is a hypothesis 
worth exploring.
CONCLUSIONS
NCT may be a forerunner for a future universal theory of evolution because
it recognizes that the second law of thermodynamics is relevant to evolution, 
that organisms must be purposeful systems to be able to resist the second law, 
and that to do so, organisms must interact with their environments in ways 
that modify them through niche construction. Crucially, for NCT, evolution 
is about organism-environment coevolution, not just about the evolution of 
organisms. Any future universal theory of evolution will need to be a univer￾sal theory of organism-environment coevolution. It will need to understand
how evolving organisms solve perpetual R
p
–Ri
 dilemmas.
The same R
p
–Ri
 dilemmas, whereby each depends on the prior acquisi￾tion of the other by organisms, raises a well-known problem for how life 
began in the first place. Which came first, the harvesting of R
p
 or the acqui￾sition of Ri
? How could life have gotten started when each needs the other, 
a priori? This is the classical “origin of life” problem, which is the focus of 
chapter 6.II LIFE ON EARTHIf my arguments in part I are correct, the origin of life on Earth must also have 
been the origin of purposeful systems on Earth. Insofar as purposeful systems 
are able to make “choices” between alternatives, they are decision-making 
systems. That need not imply that purposeful systems must be cognitive or 
conscious, but it does require that they have access to meaningful informa￾tion. It also implies the existence of at least a crude form of intentionality 
in purposeful systems. This point is obscured, when either for philosophic 
or religious reasons, people insist that intentionality is exclusively a human
property. To satisfy their fitness goals, organisms must possess some level 
of intentionality, which establishes that intentionality is not an exclusively 
human attribute.
Today, there are three sets of fundamentally dif­ferent kinds of systems 
on Earth. There are inanimate, purposeless systems, which have to comply 
with the laws of nature, but cannot do much else. Rocks and mountains can 
change over time (e.g., through erosion), but they do not have any fitness 
goals that they must meet. That is in marked contrast to living organisms, 
which are animate, purposeful systems. They too must comply with the laws of 
nature, but if animate purposeful systems can acquire sufficient meaningful 
information in the form of adaptive know-how, or Ri
, about their interactive 
niche relationships with their environments, they may be able to use some 
of the laws of nature to fulfill their own purposes of survival and reproduc￾tion. Third, there are inanimate artifacts, which are constructed by animate 
purposeful systems. Artifacts have an unusual status with respect to purpose,
as they lack the inherent purposefulness of living organisms. They have no 
6 THE ORIGIN OF LIFE176 Chapter 6
fitness goals of their own. They are supplied with artificial purposes by the 
organisms that constructed them and may help their animate constructors 
to fulfill their fitness goals. They include birds’ nests, animal burrows, beaver 
dams, and so forth, but currently the most sophisticated artifacts are made 
by humans, such as computers, iPhones, and robots.
This classification into the three logically distinct types of system found 
on Earth raises two questions. One applies to some of our most recent human
artifacts. Might it be possible in the future for some of our most sophisticated 
artifacts, which can currently only act on the basis of their human-supplied
purposes, to acquire purposes of their own? If so, might such artifacts also be 
able to pass on their own purposes to “descendant” artifacts? Must our arti￾facts always be constrained by their present inanimate limitations of having 
to receive their purposes exclusively from their human constructors? Or will
technological advances mean that they eventually bypass these limitations
by constructing purposes of their own? Could our artifacts program them￾selves one day to achieve their own “fitness” goals, as science fiction writers 
have fantasized? If that happened, it would introduce a fourth category of 
systems on Earth—namely “purposeful, abiotic life.” We might then want 
to know how it was possible for this kind of abiotic life to have originated 
from human artifacts. I’m not going to deal with this question here; I will
touch on it in chapter 7.
Here, I want to focus on the other question raised by my classification, 
which concerns the origin of life. How was it possible for a process with a 
nonliving assemblage of simple chemical compounds and energy to give rise 
to the first living cells or organisms, approximately 4 billion years ago? How 
could inanimate, purposeless systems produce purposeful animate systems? 
This takes us back to where we left off in chapter 5. To exist, life needs two 
kinds of resources—energy and matter (R
p ) and meaningful information 
(Ri
). Living organisms need both of these resources to counteract the flow 
of energy and matter between themselves and their environments, favored 
by the second law of thermodynamics. Organisms have to resist the second 
law continuously by their active, purposeful, fuel-consuming work.
These two requirements immediately raise the R
p
 versus Ri
 dilemma 
again. The acquisition of R
p
 by organisms requires Ri
, a priori, but equally, 177 The Origin of Life
the acquisition of Ri
 has to be paid for in advance with energy and matter, or 
R
p
 resources. So which came first at the origin of life, R
p
 or Ri
? How did life 
get started? This is the classical origin-of-life question.1
 It is often phrased as 
“Which came first: metabolism or reproduction?” The adaptive know-how 
(Ri
) required for reproduction implies the prior existence of parent organ￾isms, which are not available in an origin-of-life scenario. For that reason, I’ll 
stick with my version of this same question: “Which came first at the origin 
of life, R
p
 or Ri
?” What must we look for when trying to answer this question?
Given that life is cellular, we need to look for the origin of the first liv￾ing cells. But because living cells can exist only by counteracting the second 
law of thermodynamics, by taking R
p
 resources high in free energy from 
their environments and dumping detritus lower in free energy back to their 
environments, it raises another origin of life demand. We need to look not 
only for the origin of the first living cells, but also for the origin of the first 
interactive niche relationships on Earth, between the first cells and their 
initial environments. That means that we need to consider the relationships 
between the first cells, or microorganisms (O), and their first local external 
environments (E). How and where did the first interactive O-E niche rela￾tionships between living cells and their environments originate on Earth?
One hypothesis is that it didn’t. According to some authorities, life 
did not originate on Earth but somewhere else in the universe. It’s called 
the “Panspermia hypothesis,” and it’s associated with the cosmologist Fred 
Hoyle,2
 among others. According to this hypothesis, microorganisms from 
somewhere in outer space were responsible for the origin of life on Earth. 
The hypothesis gains plausibility from the fact that when the Sun and its 
surrounding planets first formed, approximately 4.5 billion years ago, space 
was teeming with dust, meteorites, asteroids, and comets, many of which 
were known to have bombarded the early Earth and were involved in the 
creation of Earth itself. Earth is still being bombarded by meteorites, com￾ets, and an occasional asteroid, although these bombardments are far less 
frequent now. But it is known that many of these foreign bodies are awash 
with organic compounds, including amino acids, lipids, and sugars. They 
might therefore have led to the origin of the first microorganisms that seeded 
Earth with life. The trouble with this hypothesis is that it does not solve the 178 Chapter 6
origin of life problem—it merely transfers it from Earth to somewhere else
in the universe. For this reason, I’ll ignore this hypothesis here and assume 
that life did originate on Earth.
Given this assumption, let’s consider the two leading contemporary 
hypotheses about how life originated on Earth. The first hypothesis is that 
life began in deep-sea hydrothermal ocean vents.3
 The second hypothesis is 
that it originated in fresh water, in small puddles or ponds on land, that were 
constantly forming and drying out.4
 I will consider both of these hypoth￾eses in turn, primarily from the point of view of niche construction theory 
(NCT). I want to consider whether NCT is compatible with each of these
hypotheses. Before I do that, though, there are two preliminary points to 
make.
First, I must declare my own limitations. Research into the origin of 
life demands a detailed knowledge of both chemistry and biochemistry. 
Since I am neither a chemist nor a biochemist, I can only refer to the work 
of others who are. In the case of the deep-sea hydrothermal vent hypothesis, 
regardless of its validity or otherwise, I will do no more than indicate where 
there might have been a role for niche construction that is consistent with 
this hypothesis, even though its authors don’t mention niche construction. 
In the case of the hypothesis that life originated in fresh water on land, I 
will describe the possible part played by niche construction in slightly more 
detail, and in terms that are already being explored by its authors. However, 
because of my limitations, I’ll keep this chapter short.
My second point is that I want to draw attention to the correspondence 
between chemical reactions and the laws of thermodynamics, based primar￾ily on personal communications with David Deamer and Bruce Damer, both 
of whom are authorities on the origin of life at the University of California, 
Santa Cruz. Deamer points out that chemical kinetics go hand in hand 
with thermodynamics. The term “chemical kinetics” refers to the rates at 
which chemical reactions take place. When the chemical reactions that lead 
to complicated molecules occur more rapidly than the chemical reactions 
that break them down again, then thermodynamically far-from-equilibrium
systems can persist for extended periods of time. Deamer refers to such cir￾cumstances as a “kinetic trap.”179 The Origin of Life
All life today exists in a “kinetic trap.” All organisms spend most of their 
lives living in a steady state, away from thermodynamic equilibrium. Deamer 
proposes that the origin of life must have incorporated a kinetic trap. If a 
chemical reaction exists that rapidly drives chemical complexity uphill away 
from equilibrium, and if the downhill reaction is slower, more complex mol￾ecules can exist in a transient state, far from equilibrium. Deamer illustrates 
this point with a simple human example. We don’t dissolve when we take a 
shower because the downhill chemical reactions of hydrolysis are so much 
slower than the uphill chemical reactions that built our bodies in the first 
place. The concept of a kinetic trap is relevant to both of these hypotheses
about the origin of life. It is particularly relevant to Deamer and Damer’s 
hypothesis, discussed in the next section.
THE DEEP-SEA HYDROTHERMAL VENT HYPOTHESIS
The deep-sea hydrothermal vent hypothesis is summarized in Nick Lane’s 
book The Vital Question,5
 and more critically by David Deamer in his book 
Assembling Life,6
 although it is derived from the work of other authors dating 
back to the 1960s, notably Peter Mitchell7
 and Michael Russell.8
 Scientists 
studying the origin of life have made progress with experiments, designed 
to re-create as closely as possible the early chemical processes on Earth, via 
which the antecedents of cells, known as “protocells,” could have formed. 
Protocells consist of a bilayer membrane around an aqueous solution. Lane 
describes how in recent years, researchers have succeeded in creating self￾assembling protocells in an environment similar to that of hydrothermal 
vents. His hypothesis is based on the relationship between deep-sea alka￾line vents and the surrounding slightly acidic sea. The acidic sea is more 
proton-rich than the alkaline deep-sea hydrothermal vents. This asymmet￾rical distribution of positively charged proton ions in the vicinity of the 
vents, compared to the surrounding sea, sets up a natural gradient in which
proton ions diffuse from an area of higher to a region of lower concentration. 
According to Lane’s hypothesis, energy and chemical gradients could have 
been established across the elementary semipermeable membranes, separat￾ing the first protocells from their external worlds. This putative relationship 180 Chapter 6
is also associated with a process known as “chemiosmosis,” which refers to 
the movement of ions across a membrane-bound structure, down an elec￾trochemical gradient. Lane assumes that this energy gradient was responsible 
for setting up a potential difference or force between the inner world of the 
earliest protocells and their external environment. Following Peter Mitchell9
and others, Lane calls this force a “proton motive force.”
The proton motive force is a relatively recent discovery. Before it was 
discovered, origin-of-life researchers had concentrated on trying to under￾stand the energizing of life almost exclusively in terms of flows of nega￾tively charged electrons across protomembranes, and therefore on redox 
chemistry. Redox chemistry involves an exchange of negatively charged 
electrons between electron donors and electron acceptors. Electron dona￾tion, for example by molecules, is referred to as “oxidation,” while electron 
acceptance by other molecules is referred to as “reduction”—hence the term
“redox.” Redox chemistry was long regarded as the most likely source of 
energy for protocells and the earliest cells. If we ignore fermentation (e.g., 
in yeasts), redox chemistry underpins respiration and metabolism in all liv￾ing organisms.
The significance of the proton motive force is that it could have kick￾started and then sustained the subsequent redox-based metabolism to which
it is now coupled, by supplying protocells with an initial gift of free energy 
in the form of adenosine triphosphate (ATP). The ATP molecule is the 
universal energy currency in all organisms because of its ability to release 
energy, when it breaks down into adenosine diphosphate (ADP). Lane sug￾gests that a flow of positively charged protons, from the external worlds of 
the first living cells into their internal environments, could have led to the 
subsequent synthesis of ATP.
According to Lane, this initial gift of free energy could have been a vital 
first step toward the origin of life. It could have initiated and subsequently 
sustained metabolic activities in the first living cells. Initially however, it 
could only have been a brief first step because as soon as the flow of pro￾tons across the semipermeable membrane between the first cells and their 
environments achieved equilibrium, the flow of proton ions would stop. To 
maintain the proton motive force, and therefore the continuing synthesis 181 The Origin of Life
of ATP, the cell must keep returning either excess protons or equivalent 
positively charged ions such as sodium ions from inside the cell to its out￾side environment. A cell must do this to preserve the energy and chemical 
gradients between its inner and outer worlds, upon which the synthesis of 
ATP and its metabolism depends.
Lane proposes that the export of charged particles may have been 
achieved by an antiporter molecule or protein in the membrane of the first 
living cells. The job of the antiporter molecule is to restore the electro￾chemical gradients between the inner and outer worlds of the first living cells 
through active nonrandom work. Lane loosely refers to this molecule as a 
“turnstile molecule.” Insofar as the antiporter molecule is an origin-of-life
adaptation in the first living cells, the cell must be informed by meaningful 
adaptive know-how, or Ri
. But the first living cells can have been informed 
only by the processes of evolution, and primarily by natural selection. Assum￾ing that Lane’s antiporter molecule is an adaptation, how does it relate not 
only to the origin of life, but also to the origin of the processes of evolution? 
At the origin of life, natural selection could have acted only on populations 
of variant individual protocells, and then cells. Natural selection could not
have informed individual protocells or cells directly. It could have informed 
individual protocells or cells only indirectly, as a function of their member￾ship of evolving populations of protocells or cells.
This limitation of natural selection strongly suggests that the origin of 
life cannot refer exclusively to the origin of the first living cells. It must refer 
to the origin of the first population of cells, including component adapta￾tions of those cells, in this case the structure and function of the antiporter 
molecules. The antiporter molecules could then be informed by prior natural
selection, acting on previous generations of populations of protocells, and 
later cells, in the usual way. Specifically, individual cells could be informed 
by heritable, deductive, adaptive know-how, or Ri
, registered in elementary 
memory systems in populations of variant individual cells and specifying 
what was adaptive for earlier generations of cells. Their informed properties 
could then provide individual cells with a basis for making their inductive 
gambles about what might be adaptive for themselves, as well as for their 
descendants in future environments (see chapters 3 and 4).182 Chapter 6
The active export of positively charged ions by the antiporter molecules 
in the first living cells would also have introduced the first two-way interac￾tive niche relationships between the first cells and their local environments. 
These first interactive niche relationships must have affected the cells’ own 
internal environments. They must also have caused at least some micro￾changes in the cells’ external environments. It is currently unknown whether
these initial interactive niche relationships may also have introduced the 
second category of natural selection that we discussed earlier. The second 
category is natural selection pressures previously modified by the purposeful, 
nonrandom niche-constructing activities of the first cells
The putative niche-constructing activities of the first living cells must 
have included the expulsion of positively charged ions by the antiporter 
molecules. These metabolic activities would have included the harvesting 
of resources from the cells’ environments and the return of detritus to those
environments. The impact of these putative niche-constructing activities by 
each individual living cell would have been minuscule. However, the col￾lective activities of large populations of cells might have had a measurable
impact on chemical gradients in their immediate external environments, in 
restricted domains. Origin-of-life populations of variant cells might there￾fore have started to introduce some modifications to natural selection pres￾sures in their immediate microenvironments, or in the microenvironments 
of some individual variant cells, by their environment-modifying activities.
This is the first way in which niche construction might possibly have played 
at least a minor role in origin-of-life scenarios, as described by the deep-sea
hydrothermal vent hypothesis.
All of this raises the next question: How could populations of living cells 
be generated by earlier protocells? Presumably this required the reproduc￾tive or self-replicative activities of the protocells through proto cell division. 
These first populations of protocells could then have been evaluated and 
informed by natural selection, and possibly by niche construction too. That 
might have been sufficient for adaptive phenotypic traits in individual cells 
in populations to be informed as a consequence of their membership of 
their populations.183 The Origin of Life
In this context, the reproductive activities of the first protocells would 
have depended on what another origin-of-life researcher, the Israeli chem￾ist Addy Pross, calls “replicative chemistry,” which eventually leads to the 
exponential growth of populations of origin-of-life cells. The reproductive 
activities of early protocells introduce a second way in which niche construc￾tion could have played a role in origin-of-life scenarios. I suggest that in all
organisms, reproduction is itself an elementary kind of niche construction. 
This is because when organisms reproduce, if only by cell division in the case 
of single cells, they immediately introduce additional organisms into their 
own and each other’s environments.
Organisms must thereby modify their environments by their reproduc￾tive activities. Reproduction necessarily modifies the selective environments 
of organisms and must have done so from the outset, even in the case of pro￾tocells undergoing a crude form of reproduction. In origin-of-life scenarios, 
some of the offspring introduced by the reproductive activities of protocells 
would be potential competitors, while others might be potential cooperators.
If and when the first protocells start to cooperate with each other, this intro￾duces the possibility of more advanced or complicated adaptations appearing 
in origin-of-life scenarios based on interactions between sets or groups of 
protocells in interacting networks.
The Nobel Prize–winning German chemist Manfred Eigen and his 
colleagues10 proposed an early example of cooperative interactions among 
networks of molecules with his concept of the “hypercycle.” A hypercycle 
is a cycle of connected, self-replicating macromolecules that are linked to 
each other such that each of them catalyzes the creation of its successor, 
with the last molecule catalyzing the first one again. In this way, the cycle 
is self-perpetuating. It has been shown that hypercycles can originate natu￾rally and evolve through natural selection. As a result, not only does the 
system gain information, but its information content can be improved. In 
the process, the hypercycle potentially becomes a more complex adaptive 
system, comprising a set of cooperating interacting units (in this case, genes 
in a network). That was not enough to account for the origin of life, but it 
was a step in the right direction because it showed how biological complexity 184 Chapter 6
could increase over time through interactive relationships among its com￾posite elements. It was a fascinating idea at the time.
Again, it suggests that life could not have started with the origin of 
the first protocells in the context of single, interactive niche relationships. 
Rather, it must have started with networks of variant protocells and later
cells, in populations, with multiple diverse niche relationships between 
individuals and their individual local environments. Pross11 proposed a 
similar idea with his concept of “complexification,” which involves interac￾tions among networks of similar prebiotic, and later biotic, units. It may 
demand catalytic relationships among these interacting units, leading to the
emergence of more complex autocatalytic adaptive systems. Pross argues 
that complexification played a crucial part in setting up the origin-of-life
scenarios.
The production of the first protocellular populations would still have 
depended on the capacity of individual protocells to reproduce. Reproduc￾tion always demands adaptive know-how or Ri
. The first living cells would 
have needed additional adaptive know-how to reproduce. They would have 
needed sufficient Ri
 to inform both their R
p
 processing metabolisms and
their reproductive activities. But in both cases, the first cells would have 
needed energy to pay for their Ri
, possibly taking us back to life by being 
kick-started by ATP, synthesized by the proton motive force and then to the 
redox chemistry to which it is coupled.
Might there also be a further role for niche construction, as well as natural
selection, in these scenarios? Insofar as the first protocells may have cooper￾ated with each other to generate more complex traits, they may have done 
so by modifying each other’s environments by mutual niche construction. 
One quite likely form of cooperation was that protocells could have acted 
as catalysts for each other’s chemical reactions. Mutual relationships are best 
understood in terms of natural selection pressures, previously modified by 
the niche-constructing activities of their mutualist partners. Mutualist part￾ners typically benefit each other by modifying natural selection pressures 
in each other’s environments, by their niche-constructing activities. It is 
more difficult to understand mutualist relationships exclusively in terms of 
unmodified purposeless natural selection pressures. This is a third way in 185 The Origin of Life
which niche construction might have participated in the scenario described 
by Lane’s deep-sea hydrothermal vent hypothesis.
Like all hypotheses about the origin of life, the deep-sea hydrothermal 
vent hypothesis must confront the “Which came first?” dilemma: metabolism 
or reproduction. The origin of life is the first major transition in evolution. It 
is a transition from nonlife to life. There obviously must have been some kind 
of solution to this dilemma, and it is difficult to escape the idea that both these
fundamental requirements of life must have been satisfied simultaneously.
One possibility, suggested by Lane’s hypothesis, is that the “proton￾motive” force, based on a flow of positively charged protons across mem￾branes in both directions, might have initiated both metabolism and 
self-replication, but in dif­ferent variant cells. The proton-motive force could 
have granted a free-energy gift to prebiotic entities to kick-start both active 
metabolism and active self-replication in the first protocells. These variant 
protocells may then have collaborated in prebiotic mutualistic relationships, 
combining to form an emergent, more complex adaptive system capable of 
both active metabolism and self-replication. In combination, they could 
have accounted for the first true organisms.
The principal strength of this deep-sea hydrothermal vent hypothesis 
is that, in using the proton motive force, it introduces a hitherto unknown 
source of activation energy to drive increasingly complex chemical reactions. 
It is also possible to test some of the ensuing ideas in the lab, although this 
is by no means easy. Unfortunately, there are also some major challenges 
for this hypothesis, which to some authorities at least, appear to rule it 
out.12 For example, a saltwater environment is extremely hostile to the self￾assembly of lipid membranes. But in the absence of membrane-bounded 
compartments, or barriers, it is difficult if not impossible to see how the 
necessary concentration of chemicals, required for work to be done through 
energy gradients to initiate combinatorial reactions, could have occurred.
A second problem is to explain how the products of these complex
chemical reactions could have been preserved for long enough in a deep-sea
environment to have eventually led to the origin of life. If chemical reactions 
had built more complex polymers out of simple monomers, then the poly￾mers would almost certainly have been destroyed by subsequent hydrolysis, 186 Chapter 6
caused by invading water molecules in an underwater marine environ￾ment. The consequences of these reactions could not have been preserved 
in a kinetic trap underwater. Deamer has argued that chemiosmosis cannot 
occur in conditions of hydrothermal vents.13 In addition, to be credible, this 
hypothesis must be tested in the wild as well as in the lab. For obvious rea￾sons, this is difficult to do, and it has not yet been done. But until it is tested
in the wild, the deep-sea hydrothermal vent hypothesis remains conjecture.
DARWIN’S WARM LITTLE POND HYPOTHESIS
The second hypothesis is that life originated on land in fresh water, in small 
pools or ponds. The principal authors of this idea, David Deamer and Bruce 
Damer, call it “Darwin’s warm little pond hypothesis,” in honor of a conjec￾ture that originally came from Darwin, in a letter that he wrote to a friend, 
the biologist Joseph Hooker.14 Again, I won’t go through this hypothesis in 
detail. I’ll just sketch some of the principal steps toward the origin of life 
as described by Deamer and Damer.15 Both these authors believe that life 
originated in small pools or ponds associated with hot springs and geysers in 
volcanic regions of Earth. These ponds undergo repeated rounds of hydra￾tion and dehydration, known as “wet-dry cycling,” as they continuously 
fill up with water and then later dry out again. This introduces a dynamic 
process into origin-of-life scenarios.
The cycles can occur on varying time scales. For instance, wet-dry cycles 
may take seconds to minutes, such as when geysers splash water on hot
rocks. Other cycles may take longer, such as when they are caused by the 
rise and fall of pool levels due to fluctuations in the hot springs. Still other 
cycles, lasting hours or days, may be caused by the complete evaporation 
of the ponds and subsequent refilling by rainfall. Warm, small ponds with 
these properties are quite common in volcanic regions of Earth today, such 
as Yellowstone National Park in the western US. This is significant because
it means that it is possible to test some components of this hypothesis in the
field as well as in the lab.
Deamer and Damer’s approach to the origin of life circumvents many 
of the obstacles confronted by the deep-sea hydrothermal vent hypothesis 187 The Origin of Life
proposed by Lane (2015) and others. The warm little pond (aka “hot spring”) 
hypothesis is described by Deamer in his books First Life and Assembling 
Life, and also in Damer and Deamer’s articles.16 I suggest that it’s the most 
plausible idea at the moment about the origin of life.17 The key reason why 
it is more likely that life originated in freshwater rather than in the sea is 
because salty seawater inhibits the self-assembly process and many crucial 
prebiotic reactions.
I’ll use some of the personal communications that I’ve had with Deamer 
and Damer to summarize the dynamics of the wet-dry cycles. First, I’ll 
consider the wet phase, when Darwin’s warm little pond is full of water
and may be overflowing. Under such circumstances, the pond is likely to 
be connected to networks of streams and rivers and other ponds, ultimately 
ending up in the sea. This implies that the products of any chemical reac￾tions that occur in the initial pond may subsequently be distributed across 
a whole drainage system.
Deamer and Damer assume that during the wet phase, when the pond 
is full, it will contain diverse monomers, simple polymers, amino acids, and
nucleotides. Monomers are small molecules that bond together to form more 
complex structures, such as polymers. Polymers are strings of monomers of 
varying lengths. The ponds may also contain some amphiphilic compounds, 
which are molecules such as lipids that are attracted by water at one end and
repelled by water at the other end. As a result of this and other properties, 
amphiphilic molecules spontaneously form membranes and vesicles that can 
encapsulate other molecular contents. This self-assembling property of mem￾branes by lipids has been referred to by Stuart Kauffman as “order for free.”18
Now we can turn to the dry phase of a wet-dry cycle. Evaporation dur￾ing the dry phase concentrates otherwise dilute potential chemical reactants, 
including monomers. As a pond shrinks during a dry phase, it will often 
leave a rim of concentrated chemicals at its edges on some kind of surface, 
perhaps basaltic or silicate minerals. Deamer and Damer draw a loose anal￾ogy with the dirty ring left in a bathtub after someone has taken a bath. The
difference is that the rim in a dirty bathtub is likely to include some cells 
and complex biotic molecules bequeathed by whoever last used the bath. 
Nothing like that could have been left behind originally when Darwin’s 188 Chapter 6
warm little ponds dried up, but there would still have been a more condensed 
concentration of chemicals left at the edges of dried-up ponds, particularly 
on mineral surfaces.
Damer also realized that between the wet and dry phases, there must be 
a gel-like moist phase where protocells can begin to fuse and exchange use￾ful polymers that have survived earlier wet-dry cycles. This means that the 
wet-dry cycles are really wet-moist-dry cycles. Deamer and Damer consider 
aggregated protocells in the gel phase to have been a primitive version of 
Carl Woese’s “progenote,”19 a hypothetical, communal, preprokaryotic stage 
in cellular evolution.
Combinatorial chemical reactions inside these vesicular protocells pro￾mote condensation reactions during the subsequent dry phase, leading to the 
polymerization of monomers and to the further buildup of complex chains 
of polymers. Polymers made in the dry phase would then be captured within 
the multilayered matrix of amphiphilic compounds. It has been shown that 
during the next wet phase, the polymers would become encapsulated in 
membranous compartments that spontaneously break off to form very large 
populations of microscopic protocells. This budding process creates popula￾tions of variant vesicles. Initially, the budding process probably involves only 
the informing of replicates by binary digits or bits (to be discussed shortly), 
rather than being informed by meaningful information, or Ri
.
The transmission of information by templates is limited but efficient.
To give an everyday example of its efficiency, suppose that you want another 
copy of your front door key, so you take your key to a key-cutter and ask for
a copy to be made. They will use the original key as a template. Information 
in the form of binary digits, or bits, encapsulated in the structure of the 
original key will be transmitted to the copy of the new key by the key-cutter
when the original key is used as a template (see the discussion of Shannon’s 
communication theory in chapter 2). But nobody bothers about binary 
digits when cutting a new key. Each replicate protocell, whether produced by 
template information, bits, or meaningful information (Ri
), is likely to differ 
in composition from all the other replicates, at least slightly. That should be 
enough for protonatural selection processes to start sorting between dif­ferent
variant protocells with dif­ferent survival capabilities.189 The Origin of Life
The buildup of more complicated chemical reactions should also be aided 
by the kinetic trap phenomena. Not all polymer variants, assembled during 
a previous dry phase, will be wiped out by subsequent hydrolysis during the 
next wet phase. That means that during any subsequent dry phase, the polym￾erization and the process of building up more complex chemical reactions do 
not have to start over from scratch. The following dry phase would inherit a 
residue of chemical products left over from earlier dry phases by a crude form 
of inheritance over successive generations of wet-moist-dry cycles.
The kinetic trap allows a progressive buildup of more complicated 
chemical reactions during successive cycles. In combination, the popula￾tions of variant protocells, due to the “inheritances” of the variant polymers 
over successive generations of wet-moist-dry cycles, introduces a “prebiotic 
evolutionary process.” By “prebiotic evolution,” I mean a selective process 
across repeating generations of wet-moist-dry cycles, leading to the buildup 
of more complex systems. This dynamic process introduces a ratchet effect 
leading to longer-chained polymers, which may eventually have included 
both proteins and nucleic acids. Deamer and Damer call this process “com￾binatorial selection” prior to the start of gene-based “Darwinian selection.” A 
well-developed experimental field known as chemical or molecular evolution 
has demonstrated the viability of this approach.20
This is an attractive feature of Damer and Deamer’s hypothesis. It intro￾duces a potentially creative prebiotic evolutionary process into origin-of-life
scenarios. The process includes the protonatural selection of heritable variant 
polymers in populations of protocells. It combines all three of the fundamen￾tal processes necessary for evolution to occur21 at a prebiotic stage—namely, 
phenotypic variation among polymers, the protonatural selection of that 
variance, and differential inheritance of the fittest variance.
FIVE POSSIBLE ROLES FOR NICHE CONSTRUCTION 
AT THE ORIGIN OF LIFE
Where, if anywhere, might there be a role for niche construction in this 
prebiotic evolutionary process? Let’s go back to the cycling scenario. One 
possible candidate for protoniche construction is the formation of the rims 190 Chapter 6
of condensed organic compounds around the edges of ponds during the 
drying phases of the wet-moist-dry cycles. The succession of wet-moist-dry 
cycles are exclusively abiotic events that apparently have nothing to do with 
niche construction. Yet the condensation and the composition of the lipid 
membranes, polymers, and other solutes, on the rims around the edges of 
drying ponds, form distinctive structures with properties conducive to key 
prebiotic chemical reactions. As the polymers formed through dehydra￾tion synthesis between drying lipid lamellae accumulate and lengthen, the 
complexity of the environment grows. When water is reintroduced, these
polymers enter vesicular compartments, budding off from the lipid layers to 
form protocells. Polymers trapped within these compartments can stabilize 
the membranous boundaries surrounding them. Through an early form of 
mutualism, the protocells are more likely to survive the aqueous immersion 
phase and return to a moist aggregate, fusing with neighboring protocells 
and delivering their cargoes of polymers.
It has been observed, in the lab and in recent field experiments at vol￾canic hot springs, that the aggregate and its populations of polymers grow 
through multiple cycles. Could these aggregates and the protocells and poly￾mers which comprise them be regarded as a form of prebiotic “proto niche 
construction”? Whatever we might call this self-assembling bathtub ring 
sludge at the edges and bottoms of pools four billion years ago, it may have 
been an essential medium in the emergence of the first communities of 
living cells. Until now, NCT has assumed that organisms already exist and 
niche construction refers to the interactions between organisms and natu￾ral selection pressures in their environments. NCT has not previously been 
applied to origin-of-life scenarios, although it has been applied to the inter￾nal environments of living organisms.22 But could NCT be applied to events 
within the internal environments of protocells in origin-of-life scenarios, 
as implied by Damer and Deamer? Possibly yes, even though Damer and 
Deamer’s’ suggestion raises some difficulties for NCT. For instance, who or 
what is the niche constructor within the internal environment of a protocell?
One of the earliest established examples of niche construction is pre￾served in rock, in the form of laminated structures known as “stromatolites.” 
Stromatolites are widely represented in the fossil record from more than 191 The Origin of Life
3.2 billion years ago. These laminated textures were laid down through the 
niche-constructing activities of microbial mats.23 Entire colonies of variant 
bacteria, including cyanobacteria, produce the constructed product (namely, 
stromatolites). There is therefore a precedent for recognizing that niche con￾struction can be produced by a network of multiple, diverse entities. The 
primary difference is that in the case of the microbial mats, the constructors 
are a network of living cells rather than a network of prebiotic protocells, 
but in other respects, the comparison is striking.
A second possible role for niche construction arises from the following 
question: What could be the source of an internal natural selection pressure 
in the protocell, which could be modified by proto niche construction? This 
question refers to interactions between polymers of dif­ferent complexities 
in the internal environments of protocells. Might dif­ferent polymers aid the
extension of other polymers, or possibly do the opposite, by outcompeting 
them or destroying them? If we cheat a little, by arbitrarily running the 
evolutionary clock forward by over 2 billion years to the first appearance of 
multicellular metazoan organisms, it is possible to ask more precise versions 
of this question. For example, there appear to be intriguing coevolutionary 
processes going on between the products expressed by the nuclear DNA 
and the products expressed by the mitochondrial DNA in the eukaryotic 
cells of metazoan organisms.24 Might this coevolution between mitochon￾drial organelles and their host cells involve some kind of internal niche 
construction as well as internal natural selection? It is known that eukary￾ote cells formed through endosymbiosis, in which originally prokaryote 
cells engulfed mitochondrial organelles. Rather than digesting them, the 
prokaryote cells benefited from energy resources produced by the engulfed 
mitochondrial organelles, such as from their production of sugar or ATP. At 
the same time, the host prokaryotic cell constituted a benign environment 
for the mitochondrial organelles.25
A third role for niche construction in origin-of-life scenarios is more 
definite. It refers to the multiplication of variant vesicles, protocells, or 
progenotes by their reproductive activities. It may not have mattered much 
whether the replication of vesicles or protocells initially only involved rep￾lication via templates, or whether their reproduction may have involved 192 Chapter 6
meaningful information, or Ri later. The multiplication of protocells by some 
form of replication or reproduction would have had two effects. First, it would 
have caused replicating protocells to generate populations of variant proto￾cells, thereby allowing protonatural selection pressures to start sorting between 
them. Second, the replication of protocells would have added protocells to 
their own and each other’s environments. Adding extra protocells would by 
itself have been enough to modify some of the natural selection pressures in the 
external environments of the populations of protocells. For this reason, repli￾cation through these primitive forms can be viewed as an elementary form of 
niche construction in prebiotic evolution, as we saw before in Lane’s deep-sea
hydrothermal vent hypothesis. The multiplication of protocells in populations 
by replication becomes both the origin of protonatural selection, acting on 
variant protocells and the origin of protoniche construction, modifying those
particular natural selection pressures in prebiotic evolution.
A fourth possible example of protoniche construction in protocells is 
the active construction by polymers of pores in the membranes that encap￾sulate the vesicles that contain them. There is some evidence from laboratory 
experiments that internalized polymers can fix themselves to membranes and 
create dislocations or pores in the membranes, which create opportunities 
for small molecules to pass through them. Concentrating mixtures during 
the dry-down phases would force solutes through these pores, passing close 
to the polymers that formed them and creating opportunities for chemical 
reactions. If true, it would be another example of protoniche construction. 
It would have created the opportunity for the exchange of resources between 
the vesicle and its external environment.
A fifth candidate for niche construction refers to the potentially active 
control of the atomic and molecular traffic that passes in and out of pro￾tocells via these pores. This example corresponds closely to conventional 
niche construction. The import of energy and matter, or R
p
 resources, from 
the external environments of organisms, and the export of detritus back 
to their external environments by active work in both cases, are conven￾tional forms of niche construction. Through both the import and export of 
resources, the metabolic activities of the protocells would be likely to modify 
some of the natural selection pressures in their microenvironments.193 The Origin of Life
In comparison with prebiotic protocells, the active metabolic work of 
living cells should have had an even greater effect on both their internal and 
external environments on either side of their membrane boundary. Some 
definitions of life list the characteristics that living organisms must possess, 
one of which is their capacity to actively import resources from and export 
detritus to their environments. If we accept that definition, then the origin 
of life could not have begun prior to the origin of these forms of elementary 
niche construction.
We can now see that these five proposed examples of putative niche con￾struction by protocells, or their constituent polymers, represent increasingly 
credible candidates for a role, or roles, for niche construction in the origin 
of life on Earth. But in conjunction with Deamer and Damer’s “warm little
pond hypothesis,” they raise a further question: Was protoniche construc￾tion necessary for the origin and subsequent evolution of life on Earth? 
I suggest that it was.
Protoniche construction by protocells, and later niche construction by 
living cells, should have introduced the second category of natural selection
into evolution (namely, natural selection pressures modified by prior niche 
construction from the outset). Damer and Deamer’s observation that flimsy 
protocells in isolation cannot undergo complexification suggests that some 
form of niche construction was necessary for life and evolution to begin. 
This implies that the first protocells, and later the first living cells, were 
cocontributors to their own prebiotic and later biotic evolution.
From the origin of life onward, evolution was about the coevolution of 
protocells, and later of living organisms, with their contemporary environ￾ments. I submit that origin-of-life researchers should be looking not only for 
the origin of the first living cells or organisms, they also should be looking 
for the origin of the first interactive niche relationships between active and 
eventually purposeful living organisms and their external environments. This 
is not just a semantic point; it could have some bearing on how origin-of-life
researchers do their work. Some of these points were already anticipated by 
Deamer and Damer.26
Finally, we are still left with the R
p
 versus Ri
 dilemma. Given that life 
required both energy and matter resources and meaningful information 194 Chapter 6
resources to resist the second law of thermodynamics, which came first at the 
origin of life, R
p
 or Ri
? Deamer and Damer’s answer to this question is that 
there is no dilemma. If the abiotic Earth had a mixture of potentially reactive 
chemical compounds in aqueous solutions, as well as an abundant energy 
source, there need not have been a “Which came first?” dilemma. Every￾thing would have happened simultaneously. In this respect at least, both the
deep-sea hydrothermal vent and Darwin’s warm little pond hypotheses agree.
One advantage of Deamer and Damer’s hypothesis is that during the 
last fifteen years, it has been subjected to empirical tests in both the lab and 
(more to the point) in the field, at hot springs in a number of active volcanic 
regions of Earth. However, some of the stepping stones toward life may never 
be accessible to empirical tests. For example, some steps may actually have 
required millions of years of wet-moist-dry cycles ratcheting up increasingly 
complex chemical reactions. It is hard to see how any tests in either the lab
or the field could mimic all of them adequately. But there are two ways in 
which this second hypothesis about the origin of life might be tested. If it 
eventually proves possible to synthesize life artificially in a lab from prebiotic 
precursors, then the way in which it is achieved will itself be a test of Deamer 
and Damer’s hypothesis. The paths to this synthesis of life will either be
consistent or inconsistent with their hypothesis. Likewise, if extraterrestrial 
life is ever discovered, it will again either be consistent or inconsistent with
their arguments. It might also raise hitherto unsuspected surprises. If this 
reasoning is correct and if, for example life did once exist on Mars, even if 
it no longer does, then it should have left traces of prior biological niche￾constructing activities in the Martian landscape, and some of them may still 
be detectable. One day, we may find out.Max Tegmark’s intriguing 2017 book, Life 3.0: Being Human in the Age of 
Artificial Intelligence, talks about three distinct stages of life on Earth. For 
Tegmark, “Life 1.0” refers to almost all conventional evolutionary biology, 
while “Life 2.0” refers to human, sociocultural, language-based life. Teg￾mark’s “Life 3.0” refers to a future artificial life based on artificial general 
intelligence (AGI) and robotics. It assumes that AGI robotic life will, in the
not-too-distant future, exceed human intelligence, eventually by orders of 
magnitude. Life 3.0 doesn’t exist yet, but Tegmark wrote his book to encour￾age his readers to think about where we may or may not be heading as a 
result of the digital information revolution. He is neither an optimist nor a 
pessimist; he stresses both the opportunities and dangers that contemporary 
humans face.
To this end, Tegmark has also been instrumental in cofounding the 
Future of Life Institute (FLI) at Berkeley, California, and Cambridge, Mas￾sachusetts. The relevant point that I wish to draw attention to here is that 
almost all the people that have assembled under the rubric of the FLI are 
physicists, cosmologists, mathematicians, economists, neuroscientists, 
philosophers, and computer scientists. To the best of my knowledge, there 
isn’t a single evolutionary biologist among them. Why not? One reason is 
that Tegmark and his colleagues assume that biological evolution was a nec￾essary initial evolutionary step toward launching future artificial life. How￾ever, they also assume that Life 1.0 is destined to become either irrelevant to 
Life 3.0 or extinct altogether.
7 SUPPLEMENTARY KNOWLEDGE-GAINING 
PROCESSES IN EVOLUTION196 Chapter 7
So, why bother about evolutionary biology? In reality Tegmark’s classi￾fication is a little too simple, as it is now well established that there are other 
species aside from humans that also have a capacity for cultural evolution, 
but for the moment, I will ignore this caveat. Life 2.0, which for Tegmark 
is restricted to human life, may coexist with artificial life for a time, in some 
kind of hybrid or mutual coexistence. But the implication is that if artificial 
life really takes off, human life will also drop out of the picture. That leaves 
postbiological artificial life, or Life 3.0, as a different kind of breakthrough. 
Given this conceptual framework, it may explain why Tegmark and his col￾leagues do not seem to think that evolutionary biology has much to offer. For 
example, they think that neo-Darwinism, or standard evolutionary theory 
(SET), is not sufficiently relevant to the future of life to be worth including 
evolutionary biologists in the FLI.
In this chapter, I want to take up this implicit challenge by reconsider￾ing how a more comprehensive evolutionary theory, which includes niche 
construction theory (NCT) and various other components of the extended 
evolutionary synthesis,1
 may be more relevant to the future of life on Earth 
than SET. It could be of greater interest than SET to Tegmark and his col￾leagues at the FLI. I suggest that there is an evolutionary continuum con￾necting Life 1.0, Life 2.0, and a future Life 3.0. Of course, there are many 
possible reasons why evolutionary biologists may not be involved with the 
FLI initiative. However, plausibly, it is because SET deals with a truncated 
version of Life 1.0, and not much else, that Tegmark and his colleagues 
appear to think that it is irrelevant to a possible Life 3.0.
I will start by considering why SET seems to have got stuck with Life 
1.0 only, and why it seems to Tegmark to be irrelevant to the future of life on 
Earth, or anywhere else in the universe where life may exist. The point that 
Life 1.0 may be irrelevant to life anywhere in the universe was also antici￾pated by Tegmark, who is a cosmologist as well as a physicist. He wants us 
to realize that human Life 2.0 could be on the threshold of waking up the 
universe by introducing superintelligent forms of artificial life that have 
the potential to disperse beyond Earth. Life 3.0 could do this by colonizing 
our solar system, and then by colonizing other planets in our galaxy, up to 
the limits allowed by the laws of physics.197 Supplementary Knowledge-Gaining Processes in Evolution
THE LIMITATIONS OF STANDARD EVOLUTIONARY THEORY
We have already considered one of the limitations of SET at some length—
namely, its failure to recognize niche construction as a distinct causal 
process in evolution. SET also fails to recognize the two categories of natu￾ral selection: purposeless, natural selection and natural selection previously 
modified by the active, purposeful agency of niche-constructing organisms 
(see chapter 4). There is another limitation of SET, however, that may be 
more relevant here. SET fails to fully recognize the capacity of the primary 
evolutionary population genetic process to bootstrap.
What is meant by “bootstrapping” in evolution? I mean evolving supple￾mentary mechanisms for adaptive knowledge gain. For SET, in the majority 
of species, the phenotypic traits of organisms are exclusively informed by 
population genetic processes. In all such populations, the phenotypic traits 
of individual organisms are largely, if not exclusively, determined by the 
naturally selected genes that the individual organisms inherit from their 
ancestors at the start of their lives. The individual organisms subsequently 
use the genetic knowledge that they have inherited by expressing it in their 
structural and functional adaptations. Hence, as organisms cannot gain any 
additional genetic information for themselves during their lives, there is no 
capacity for bootstrapping in these populations for SET.
2
In contrast, I suggest that bootstrapping occurs when the primary 
population-genetic processes give rise to phenotypic traits in organisms 
that are capable of acting as supplementary, knowledge-gaining processes in
evolution. There is a nested hierarchy of such information-gaining processes,
operating at up to three levels. At level 1, at the base of the hierarchy, there 
is the primary knowledge-gaining process of population genetics, which is 
common to all evolving populations whether they bootstrap or not.
In bootstrapping populations, there may be up to two supplementary 
information-gaining levels of knowledge-gaining processes, which are them￾selves products of genetic evolution at level 1.3
 At level 2, the supplementary 
information-gaining processes comprise the gaining of additional adaptive 
know-how, or Ri
, by individual organisms during their lives. For instance, 
later in this chapter, I will discuss how the vertebrate adaptive immune 198 Chapter 7
system and animals’ capacity for associative learning are level 2 knowledge￾gaining processes. Other examples include the vertebrates’ nervous system, 
the vertebrate vascular and muscular systems, the insects’ tracheal system, and 
the microtubular system, all of which operate through the generation of 
variation, largely at random, and selective retention of functional variants; 
and hence they are to some degree level 2 knowledge-gaining processes.4
Individual organisms may gain knowledge as a consequence of their own indi￾vidual interactions with their local environments. Unlike in level 1, they may 
gain additional adaptive know-how at any moment during their lives. There 
may also be another level of supplementary information-gaining process in 
some species of animals, including humans. Level 3 refers to the informa￾tion that is gained by the sociocultural group to which individual animals 
or human beings belong. Like level 2, but unlike level 1, individual organ￾isms may gain additional information from their sociocultural groups at any 
moment during their lives.
Bootstrapping populations, which possess level 2 knowledge-gaining 
adaptations, differ from nonbootstrapping populations in two main ways. 
Most obviously, individual organisms in bootstrapping populations are 
informed by more than one knowledge-gaining process. Less obviously, 
organisms in bootstrapping populations are informed by more than one 
kind of biological system: their population’s genetic history (at level 1), their 
individual experiences (at level 2), and their social group’s culture (at level 3). 
These two differences have a significant evolutionary consequence for organ￾isms in bootstrapping populations. Organisms in bootstrapping populations 
are likely to gain qualitatively dif­ferent adaptive know-how from each of the 
biological systems that are informing them. There are two reasons why. One 
is that organisms in bootstrapping populations can be informed only by the 
prior histories of the knowledge-gaining systems that they possess, and dif￾ferent biological systems will have dif­ferent histories of the past. The second 
is that each biological system, at each level, has dif­ferent operating charac￾teristics. They use dif­ferent biological mechanisms to inform organisms.
I’ll consider both of these points, starting with the dif­ferent histories 
of each knowledge-gaining system. At level 1, the relevant history of the 
past is the history of a collective. The collective is the particular evolving 199 Supplementary Knowledge-Gaining Processes in Evolution
population, or species, to which an individual organism belongs. At level 3, 
the relevant history is that of another kind of collective—namely, the partic￾ular sociocultural group to which an individual cultural animal, or human
being, belongs.5
At level 2, the relevant history is not the history of any group of organ￾isms. Instead, it is the past developmental history of an individual organism.6
Whatever additional adaptive know-how is gained by individual develop￾ing organisms at level 2 contributes to the phenotypic plasticity of individual 
organisms in bootstrapping populations.
These histories of the past also operate on dif­ferent time scales. At the 
primary level of genetic evolution, the relevant time scale ranges from a few 
generations to millions of years. At level 2, the relevant history of individual 
organisms could be on a time scale of a few hours, days, or years. At level 3, 
the history of a sociocultural group is likely to range from days or months to 
centuries, or even millennia. These radically dif­ferent timescales are another 
reason why the dif­ferent knowledge-gaining systems will be liable to provide 
individual organisms with qualitatively dif­ferent adaptive know-how, or Ri
.
Now we can turn to the various operating characteristics of each of
the dif­ferent biological systems that inform organisms. First, we need to 
consider the fundamental requirements that all knowledge-gaining systems
must satisfy. What must they all have in common? Then we will consider 
how they differ.
There are three fundamental requirements that all knowledge-gaining
systems in nature must be able to satisfy. First, they have to be sensitive to 
at least some cause-and-effect relationships in nature. As we have seen, they 
have to be able to demarcate between signals and noise, where signals refer to 
reoccurring cause-and-effect relationships in nature and noise refers to every￾thing else (see chapters 3 and 4). Second, knowledge-gaining systems must 
be able to register information about these cause-and-effect relationships in 
some kind of memory system. Third, they must be able to express some of 
the knowledge that they have previously registered in their memory systems 
via some kind of communication channel, passing this information either to
other individuals in the population or to themselves at a later time (see the
discussion of Shannon’s communication theory in chapter 2).200 Chapter 7
But these knowledge-gaining systems do not have to fulfill these require￾ments in the same way. For example, knowledge-gaining systems may not be
sensitive to the same cause-and-effect relationships in nature, nor do they all 
have to register the knowledge that they gain in the same kind of memory 
systems. There are many kinds of memory systems in dif­ferent species of 
organisms: the genome is one kind, but brains are a second and memories 
of effective antibodies are a third. Similarly, the informing biological systems 
do not have to communicate the remembered information that they have 
previously gained to individual organisms in bootstrapping populations via 
the same kind of communication channels. The ways in which they com￾municate previously gained knowledge need to be consistent with Shannon’s 
communication theory, but other than that, they can differ.
Now let’s consider how each of these biological systems satisfies these
three fundamental requirements, starting with evolving populations at 
level 1. Evolving populations can only demarcate between true cause-and￾effect relationships in nature and everything else, as a consequence of the
differential survival and reproduction of organisms in a population. Like 
many processes that operate by generating excess variation at random and 
selecting functional solutions, this is not an efficient knowledge-gaining
process, as many dysfunctional variants will have been generated, but not 
used. Population genetics may be particularly inefficient, given the large 
number of selective deaths necessary to acquire adaptive information (see 
chapter 3 and 4).
How is information registered by evolving populations at level 1? One 
problem is that there is no way that any evolving population can register 
or store the totality of the information that it has previously gained at the 
population level itself. There is no such thing as a population-level genome. 
A population can register information that it has previously gained only by 
distributing dif­ferent samples of the information across the genomes of all 
the individual organisms in each successive generation. This distribution of 
information occurs when individual organisms in each generation inherit 
the particular sample of genetic information from their ancestors, via their 
parents, at the start of their lives. After that, individual organisms cannot
gain any additional genetic information at any later stage.7201 Supplementary Knowledge-Gaining Processes in Evolution
If fit individual organisms survive and reproduce, they may pass on 
genetic information that has been reevaluated by natural selection to the next
generation of their population. This involves a reversal of the flow of infor￾mation between individual organisms and their populations. After initially
receiving their sample of genetically encoded information, fit organisms
return their samples of genetic information, after it has been reevaluated by 
natural selection along with some mutations, and typically with some mix￾ing through recombination in sexual populations, to their populations via 
their offspring. If enough fit organisms in each generation of a population 
do this, then that allows successive generations to “communicate” (i.e., pass 
on) reevaluated and potentially updated information to each other, thereby 
allowing their populations to continue to evolve.
At level 2, where the knowledge-gaining systems are communicating 
with themselves at a later time, the biological mechanisms involved are easier 
to understand, at least conceptually. The capacity of individual organisms to 
demarcate between reoccurring cause-and-effect relationships in nature and 
everything else is largely a genetic, predetermined gift to individual organ￾isms. This gift is provided by the prior evolution of their populations at level 
1. For example, dif­ferent species have evolved dif­ferent senses. They have 
also evolved dif­ferent abilities to perceive dif­ferent kinds of cause-and-effect
relationships in nature. These differences largely depend on what organ￾isms in dif­ferent species need to know about to survive and reproduce in 
their particular environments. However, level 1 evolution cannot prede￾termine precisely which cause-and-effect relationships will be encountered 
by individual organisms during their lives. For instance, genetic evolution 
has provided animals with a capacity to learn, but it hasn’t specified exactly 
what each individual will learn: the specific idiosyncratic experiences of each 
individual will determine which cause-and-effect relations they detect. A 
probable reason for the evolution of the supplementary adaptive know-how, 
or Ri
, gaining processes at level 2 is that they provide additional adaptive 
flexibility to individual organisms in evolving populations, such as by allow￾ing them to respond to features of their environment that change on shorter 
than generational timescales. Hence, this adaptive flexibility goes beyond 
what can be conferred in advance by level 1 evolution.202 Chapter 7
I’ll give one example to illustrate these points, taken from a process that 
we have met before and will shortly meet again—animal learning. Often, 
when animals, inclusive of ourselves, learn they are predisposed to notice 
and register events that occur closely together in space and time. These
events can become associated in the individual’s brain. For instance, in what 
psychologists call “associative learning,” animals learn most rapidly about 
events in their environments that regularly reoccur in close spatial and tem￾poral contiguity. Animals also learn best when the intervals in space and 
time between contiguous events remain constant, and less rapidly when 
those intervals are irregular. Animals can also learn that a pattern of events 
that they have previously learned has changed. They can unlearn what they 
have previously learned, through a process known as “extinction” (though 
here, it is knowledge rather than the species that is lost). The parameters of
these learning processes have been studied by psychologists over many years, 
mainly by the artificial manipulation of stimuli in the environments of labo￾ratory animals, such as rats and pigeons. The point that I want to make is 
that these same parameters of learning in the lab are relevant to how animals 
learn about cause-and-effect relationships that they encounter in the wild in 
their particular environments.
What about the other two fundamental requirements for knowledge 
gain at level 2? They comprise the registration of previously gained knowl￾edge in memory systems and the subsequent communication of the retrieved 
knowledge from memories to individual organisms in populations. Here, I 
use the term “memory” broadly, to encompass any information accrued by 
knowledge-gaining systems at any level.8
 To register information in memory, 
individual organisms need retain only some trace of their past developmental 
experiences. For instance, when they learn, animals typically do this by reg￾istering knowledge that they have previously gained in their central nervous 
systems or brains. They may subsequently communicate some of the infor￾mation that is registered in their brains to later or older versions of them￾selves by recalling the information from their brains and applying it to their 
current interactions with their environments. In animal learning at level 2, 
there is no need for any additional communication channel, apart from the 203 Supplementary Knowledge-Gaining Processes in Evolution
knowledge-gaining system itself (i.e., the central nervous system in the case 
of learning, or the immune system in the case of adaptive immunity).
Now let’s turn to the mechanisms that operate at level 3. How do socio￾cultural groups satisfy the same three fundamental requirements that are 
common to all knowledge-gaining systems? I will try to answer this question 
first, relative to other animals, starting with some well-known examples. In 
the simplest case, a reoccurring cause-and-effect relationship may be dis￾covered, possibly by chance, by a single individual in a group. Initially, the 
discovery will be registered only in the brain of that single animal, but knowl￾edge of the same cause-and-effect relationship may spread, possibly rapidly, 
to other animals in the same group (e.g., if they copy the original innovator). 
The information will then be registered in their brains too. Copying is an 
elementary form of communication between animals in social groups.
There are many examples of this kind of phenomenon occurring among 
diverse animal species. A celebrated example is the invention of potato wash￾ing by an individual called Imo among a group of Japanese macaques, a 
habit that spread throughout the troop.9
 Another is varying techniques 
that dif­ferent populations of chimpanzees use to fish for termites and ants 
in dif­ferent regions of Africa, which are known to be cultural traditions.10
Yet another example is provided by the habit of drinking milk from milk 
bottles exhibited by various species of birds.11 The individual animals that 
may have initiated each of these behaviors are not often known—Imo was 
an exception. In other, more complicated cases, an innovation, based on a 
newly discovered cause-and-effect relationship, may be made by a group of 
animals rather than by a single individual in a social group. For example, 
during the acquisition of cooperative hunting skills by killer whales, the
initial recognition of a cause-and-effect relationship during the hunt would 
have required more than a single innovating animal: it would have required 
a cooperative group, or team.12
Now let’s turn to humans. The ways in which human beings in socio￾cultural groups satisfy the same three fundamental requirements of knowl￾edge gain are so diverse that it is not feasible to summarize them briefly. I 
will only try to point out some of the salient similarities and differences 204 Chapter 7
between knowledge-gaining human sociocultural groups and the other kinds 
of knowledge-gaining systems that we have been discussing. Up to a point, 
humans behave in similar ways to other social animals. We imitate or copy 
each other and tend to copy perceived successful or high-status members 
of our social groups. It’s also possible that many human discoveries may be 
made by accident. I sometimes wonder how many of the world’s favorite 
recipes were originally discovered by mistake. But at the other end of a spec￾trum of alternatives, humans have developed during the last few centuries 
the most advanced way of telling the difference between the reoccurrence 
of true cause-and-effect relationships in nature and everything else: science.
The human cultural practices of science are the most powerful
knowledge-gaining processes that have ever evolved on Earth. Potentially, 
they are the most potent sources of adaptive know-how available to human
sociocultural groups. For this reason, I will treat science as the paradigm 
example of knowledge-gaining processes in human sociocultural groups, 
while not forgetting that there are many other kinds of human knowledge￾gaining processes too. We have already considered how scientists discriminate 
between true cause-and-effect relationships in nature, especially in our natu￾ral sciences (see chapter 4). We have also considered how scientific knowl￾edge is registered and communicated today, not only among scientists, but 
potentially to everyone. In the first instance, scientific knowledge is usually 
registered in the brains of scientists. However, it is registered in innumerable 
kinds of human-constructed artifacts as well.
Both the registration and the communication of human knowledge, 
however, whether scientific or otherwise, are critically dependent on another 
human adaptation, language. Many other animals in social groups can com￾municate with each other by smells, sounds, and even gestures, and even via 
some of their own artifacts (e.g., via scent marks or pheromone trails).13 But 
no other animal can communicate information with the same efficiency and 
precision that is afforded to us by language. Language is a unique human
adaptation.
We don’t know when language first evolved. But it is safe to assume that, 
at least until the last few thousand years, the primary way in which humans
communicated with each other was by talking and maybe by gesturing, and 205 Supplementary Knowledge-Gaining Processes in Evolution
perhaps even singing.14 This would have restricted our ancestors to commu￾nicating to only a few people at a time, who were physically close to them. 
That changed with the invention of writing, approximately 6,000 years 
ago.15 Writing then enabled the development of additional languages, such 
as notations in mathematics and musical scores, apparently quite quickly. 
I will not attempt to consider how writing affects communication between 
people in other domains, such as the arts and humanities. It clearly does.
Of greater immediate interest in the present context is that writing 
makes it possible for a single human being to communicate to many other 
people, whom they do not know and who may be far away in space and 
time. Writing even makes it possible for some individuals to go on commu￾nicating to other members of their sociocultural groups long after they are 
dead. We can still learn from Aristotle, and we can still read and go to plays 
by Shakespeare. Language and the technologies enabled by language and 
mathematics are largely responsible for how we register and communicate 
culturally acquired information today.
We can register all kinds of cultural knowledge, including scientific 
knowledge, in multiple artifacts. They range from private notepads, books,
journals, and newspapers to magnetic tapes, musical scores, paintings, and 
photographs, and vast data sets stored in the digital memories of computers. 
They also include physical institutions, such as libraries, museums, art gal￾leries, research laboratories, and university departments, all of which store 
and make available to large numbers of people culturally acquired scientific 
data and much else, including works of art. We have also invented other 
kinds of artifacts for broadcasting information to each other. They include 
radio, film, television, and recorded music. More recently, we have added 
the World Wide Web and social media. Equipped with all these artifacts, 
how do human sociocultural groups inform individual human beings at 
level 3, compared to the ways in which individual organisms are informed 
by dif­ferent biological systems at levels 1 and 2?
First, I’ll compare human sociocultural groups at level 3 with the pri￾mary knowledge-gaining process of population-genetic evolution at level 1. 
At both of these levels, individual organisms can only gain samples of the 
totality of the information accrued by the particular collectives to which 206 Chapter 7
they belong. In this respect, levels 1 and 3 are similar. But there is also at 
least one significant difference between them. As we saw before, the primary 
knowledge-gaining process of population-genetic evolution can inform indi￾vidual organisms only once, via genes that they inherit from their parents 
at the start of their lives. Similarly, at level 1, individual organisms can con￾tribute to the evolution of their populations only at the moments when they 
reproduce. In contrast, individual animals or humans in sociocultural groups 
can learn continuously from the sociocultural groups that they belong to 
throughout their lives. Potentially, individual animals or humans can also 
contribute information that they learn themselves back to their sociocultural 
groups at any time during their lives. This is the major difference between 
the knowledge-gaining processes at level 1 and those at level 3 in bootstrap￾ping populations.
Now I’ll compare levels 1 and 3 with level 2. In one respect, level 2 is 
more similar to level 3 than to level 1. Individual developing organisms can 
potentially gain additional knowledge at any moment during their lives by 
interacting with their local environments, unlike at level 1. But the totality 
of the information that can be gained by individual organisms at level 2 is 
far less than the totality of the information that is gained by their collectives 
at levels 1 and 3.
There is also one other interesting difference between evolving popula￾tions at level 1 and sociocultural groups, particularly those of humans, at
level 3. Sociocultural processes introduce an additional concept of fitness, 
known as “cultural fitness.”16 Cultural fitness is sometimes contingent on 
biological fitness at both levels 1 and 2, but it is not identical to biological 
fitness and indeed may conflict with it. Fitness at levels 1 and 2 refers to 
the achievement by individual organisms of their fitness goals of survival 
and reproduction. It primarily refers to the rate of transmission of naturally 
selected genes to offspring in the next generation.
At the cultural level, however, cultural fitness means survival and trans￾mission of culturally acquired know-how, or Ri
. It refers to the differential 
propagation of diverse cultural traits and cultural legacies to cultural off￾spring in the next generation of a sociocultural group.17 Cultural fitness also 
implies the prior selection of transmitted cultural assets by cultural selection207 Supplementary Knowledge-Gaining Processes in Evolution
processes. The cultural offspring of an individual member of a sociocultural
group need not be identical to their biological offspring. They need not even 
be close genetic relatives, as implied by Hamilton’s inclusive fitness theory.18
They could be the biological offspring of other members of the same socio￾cultural group. They could even be members of dif­ferent species.19 There is 
also a difference between the natural selection pressures that operate at level 1 
and the cultural selection pressures that operate at level 3, which can conflict, 
particularly in human sociocultural groups.20 For the moment, I will ignore 
the effects of cultural selection on developing individual humans at level 2. 
Clearly, cultural influences must be present too (e.g., during the education of
children in schools). I will only consider cultural evolution relative to level 3.
It is also of interest to compare natural selection at level 1 with cultural 
selection at level 3 because they differ in several respects. For instance, natural
selection can favor deception, at both levels 1 and 2, such as when cuckoos 
produce eggs that mimic their hosts and dump them in the hosts’ nests for the 
hosts to rear them. Natural selection is likely to do so if the deceiving organ￾isms outcompete their more honest rivals by their dishonesty. But the natural
selection pressures themselves necessarily stem from true reoccurring cause￾and-effect relationships in nature. The natural selection pressures themselves 
cannot lie. The same is not always true of cultural selection pressures at level 
3. Cultural selection pressures stem from a variety of sources, which may be 
honest or deceptive. For example, they may stem from political or religious 
ideologies or social or commercial vested interests in subgroups of people
in a sociocultural group. It is certainly possible that cultural selection pres￾sures could stem from deliberate lies, as well as deliberate misinformation, 
promulgated by dishonest members of a sociocultural group. When this 
happens, there is a danger that cultural selection processes might sometimes
select for maladaptive traits in sociocultural groups relative to the natural
selection pressures that operate on populations at level 1. Since all members 
of a sociocultural group are also members of their evolving populations at 
level 1, this sets up the possibility of additional antagonisms between natural
selection at level 1 and cultural selection at level 3.
The dif­ferent operating characteristics of these biological systems, com￾bined with their dif­ferent histories, means that it is almost inevitable that 208 Chapter 7
each biological system will “acquire” qualitatively dif­ferent adaptive know￾how, or Ri
, for individual organisms in bootstrapping populations. The quali￾tatively dif­ferent forms of Ri will then translate into dif­ferent adaptations 
at each level.
Level 1 adaptations are phenotypic traits in individual organisms, 
informed by Ri
 previously gained by population-genetic processes. Level 2 
adaptations are phenotypic traits in individual organisms that are informed 
by adaptive know-how gained by the developing organisms themselves as a 
result of their prior interactions with their local environments. Level 3 adap￾tations are phenotypic traits in individual organisms previously informed 
by adaptive know-how gained as a function of their membership of a socio￾cultural group.
BETWEEN-LEVEL INTERACTIONS
These dif­ferent levels of adaptations, informed by dif­ferent forms of adap￾tive know-how, can also interact with each other in individual organisms. 
They may interact positively or negatively. Usually, they can be expected to 
interact positively, or synergistically. If there were not a net benefit to biologi￾cal fitness, the supplementary knowledge-gaining process at levels 2 and 3 
presumably would never have evolved in those populations. But negative or 
antagonistic interactions are also possible, as we’ve just noted.
Organisms can experience positive or negative interactions in at least 
two ways. They may exhibit different-level adaptations in dif­ferent pheno￾typic traits in the same individual organism. For example, a case with nega￾tive interactions occurred when the Fore people of Papua New Guinea had 
a cultural tradition for funerary cannibalism, which led to the spread of the 
deadly neurodegenerative disease kuru.21 Or they may express more than one 
level of adaptation and more than one kind of adaptive know-how, or Ri
, in 
the same phenotypic trait in the same single organism. For example, rhesus 
monkeys’ fear of snakes is socially learned, but individuals are prepared by 
prior genetic evolution to be fearful of snake-shaped objects.22 It is seldom 
easy to distinguish these dif­ferent levels of adaptations in the phenotypes 
of individual organisms. Many phenotypic traits expressed by individual 209 Supplementary Knowledge-Gaining Processes in Evolution
organisms are a mixture of plural levels of adaptation, informed by more 
than one kind of knowledge-gaining process.
At present, the problem of dissecting the processes at the dif­ferent
adaptive levels, responsible for the etiology of specified phenotypic traits in 
individual organisms, is often called the “nature-nurture” problem. Nature 
is commonly loosely thought of as traits determined by genes as a conse￾quence of population-genetic evolution, and nurture as traits determined by 
environmental factors. Applied to individual traits, this simple dichotomy
is highly misleading, though, since all traits are shaped by both nature and 
nurture.23 However, variations among individuals can be attributed to dif￾ferent sources: for instance, the differences between individuals can be due 
to differences in their genes, their individual experiences, their culture, or 
a combination. To understand adaptations and phenotypic traits in organ￾isms, I suggest that what we should be trying to do is to dissect the influ￾ences of each of the kinds of adaptive-know-how-gaining processes that are 
informing variations in the adaptations of organisms. That means dissecting 
the influence of genes and population-genetic evolution at level 1, the influ￾ence of supplementary developmental knowledge-gaining processes at level 
2, and in some animals, especially ourselves, of the supplementary cultural 
knowledge–gaining processes at level 3.
Where the interactions between these levels of adaptation in organisms 
are positive or cooperative, there can be interest among biologists in dissect￾ing these levels of adaptation. For example, there is extensive current inter￾est in the topic of plasticity-led evolution. Conversely, where they become 
antagonistic or pathologically negative, these interactions may also become
intensely interesting, such as to medical veterinary scientists (e.g., where 
intensive farming led to bovine spongiform encephalopathy) and to plant 
scientists and ecologists (e.g., where pesticides are overused). Then the rel￾evant question will not be “Is the pathology due to nature or nurture?” but 
rather “Which knowledge-gaining process at which level is maladaptive?”
In this connection, phenotypic traits in organisms due to the level 1 
process of population-genetic evolution may be well or badly adapted, rela￾tive to the organism’s fitness goals of survival and reproduction. The same 
could be true of cultural phenotypic traits, relative to cultural selection210 Chapter 7
pressures and the cultural fitness goals of organisms at level 3. However, 
even where level 1 and level 3 adaptations are well suited to their respective 
fitness goals, it is still possible that in conjunction with each other, they may 
not be well adapted, as they may not be compatible. In combination, they 
could be maladaptive for individual organisms and detrimental for their 
populations.
For example, a level 1 adaptation may precede a cultural adaptation 
at level 3, possibly by millions of years. Many generations later, a level 3 
cultural phenotypic trait may take the form of cultural niche construction. 
The cultural niche-constructing activities of organisms in a population may 
then change the natural selection pressures that previously favored their level 
1 adaptations. The changed natural selection pressures may then render the 
level 1 adaptation maladaptive, in an environment that has been changed by 
cultural niche construction. The changes may override natural selection pres￾sures at level 1. For instance, by constructing environments replete in sugar 
and fat, humans have created a context in which adaptations for sugar con￾sumption and fat storage, which evolved in environments where sugar and fat 
are comparatively rare, are commonly no longer adaptive, and lead to disease. 
However, there is one sense in which, in all organisms (including humans),
cultural selection pressures at level 3 are subordinate to and contingent on 
biological fitness goals at level 1. Organisms have to survive and reproduce 
at level 1, before they can invest in any kinds of adaptations at levels 2 or 
3. It is possible that our species is more prone than most other species to 
causing negative interactions between these levels of adaptations, including 
for other species. For instance, human cultural niche construction is largely 
responsible for the Anthropocene, as well as the actual or potential extinc￾tion of countless species who struggle to adapt to a human-modified world.
Without wishing to be alarmist, in the longer term, humans may be just as
vulnerable to the changes in selection pressures that our cultural activities 
are generating, and may themselves go extinct. The main reasons why these
observations may be true are the potency of our human cultural niche￾constructing activities in pursuit of our cultural fitness goals, in addition to 
our biological fitness goals. I will return to this hypothetical scenario later.211 Supplementary Knowledge-Gaining Processes in Evolution
THE LIMITATIONS OF STANDARD EVOLUTIONARY 
THEORY REVISITED
We need to update the old nature-nurture arguments along the lines that I’ve 
just outlined. There is a key question: Is it possible for any phenotypic traits,
acquired by individual organisms during their lifetimes, to influence the sub￾sequent evolution of their populations at level 1? SET clearly recognizes that 
many developmental knowledge–gaining processes, such as animal learning
at level 2, are products of the primary evolutionary process of population￾genetic evolution at level 1. SET also recognizes that human sociocultural
processes are products of both the primary processes of population gene￾tics, acting on our human ancestors at level 1 and developmental processes
in individual organisms at level 2. Nevertheless, SET still falls short when 
it comes to fully acknowledging the implications of these supplementary 
knowledge-gaining processes at levels 2 and 3 for the primary adaptive￾know-how- or Ri
-gaining process at level 1. SET bypasses these implications
in two ways. First, it assumes that any characteristics acquired by individual 
organisms during their lives cannot influence the genetic evolution of their 
populations at level 1, as, human culture aside, those characteristics are 
assumed to be lost when they die, and in any case, they are viewed as being 
unable to influence inherited genes. Such traits are assumed not to leave any 
traces that can be genetically inherited by their descendants.
These assumptions have ruled out any role for Lamarckism in evolution. 
Recall the textbook comparison of the theories of Jean-Baptiste Lamarck and 
Darwin. For Lamarck, giraffes acquired their long necks by stretching out 
their necks when trying to reach additional sources of food at the top of trees, 
for generation after generation. No, said the Darwinians. Giraffes got their 
long necks because in each successive generation, those individual giraffes
that happened to have the longest necks were the fittest relative to natural
selection pressures in their environments. They therefore contributed more 
of their genes to the next generation than their less-fit, shorter-necked com￾petitors. Their genes would have included some that translated into longer 
necks. Initially, Darwinians won their argument. Darwin provided a clear 
and testable mechanism to explain how evolution works; Lamarck did not.212 Chapter 7
A second, closely associated reason for the success of Darwinism over 
Lamarckism was an experiment carried out by August Weismann. It led 
to widespread acceptance of what is often referred to as the “Weismann 
Barrier.” Weismann’s experiment appeared to demonstrate that phenotypic 
traits acquired by individual animals during their lives could not be passed 
to their offspring. Weismann cut off the tails of individual mice in succes￾sive generations and found that after many generations of doing so, the
offspring of his “tailless” mice still had tails. Subsequently, Ernst Mayr (1961) 
claimed that Weismann’s experiment was one of the most important ever 
done in biology because it separated out what Mayr called, “How questions” 
from “Why questions” in biology. “How questions” refer to mechanistic or 
developmental issues—they ask how things work. “Why questions” refer to 
evolutionary questions—why traits evolved. Mayr’s paper was influential 
for many decades among evolutionary biologists, but it is increasingly seen 
as problematic.24 Weismann’s barrier, combined with Mayr’s dichotomy, 
appeared to suggest that developmental experiences, which include level 
2 knowledge-gaining processes, were irrelevant to evolution. To be fair to 
Weismann, it is doubtful if he ever gave as much weight to his own experi￾ment as Mayr did later. In the light of contemporary molecular biology, as 
well as our contemporary understanding of inheritance systems, Weismann’s 
experiment now appears rather unconvincing. It is now well established that 
a wide variety of developmental resources, including hormones, symbionts, 
epigenetic marks, antibodies, and learned knowledge, are passed from one 
generation to the next (see chapter 9).25
There is another reason why SET downplays the influence of the sup￾plementary knowledge-gaining processes at levels 2 and 3 on the primary 
process of population-genetic evolution at level 1. SET assumes that these
supplementary processes are largely, if not wholly, determined by the natu￾rally selected genes that individual organisms inherit from their ancestors. 
This is where NCT, extended evolutionary synthesis, and several other 
contemporary approaches to evolution part company with SET.
26 It has 
also led to two of the most controversial areas in evolutionary biology. 
One is the relationship between evolutionary biology at level 1 and devel￾opmental biology at level 2.27 The other is the controversial relationship 213 Supplementary Knowledge-Gaining Processes in Evolution
between evolutionary biology at level 1 and human sociocultural processes
at level 3.28
TEGMARK REVISITED
The more comprehensive theory of evolution that I propose here may be 
of greater interest to Tegmark and his colleagues at the FLI. More to the 
point, it should make an understanding of evolution of greater interest to 
anyone interested in the future of life on Earth. This more comprehensive 
theory implies that Tegmark’s future Life 3.0 would not just be a product of 
level 1, population-genetic evolutionary processes, but also of all knowledge￾gaining processes operating at all three levels. In particular, evolution would 
depend on human sociocultural knowledge–gaining processes at level 3. 
There would be a continuum between Life 1.0 and Life 3.0 in Tegmark’s 
scheme. This approach also implies that Life 3.0 would be another product 
of the capacity of evolution to bootstrap, relative to yet another kind of life 
(in this case, artificial, abiotic life based on robots and AGI). It would be a 
new level of evolution.
In what circumstances should we expect the primary evolutionary 
process to bootstrap, and when should we expect it not to do so? We need 
to go back to the fundamental problems of life again. All living systems 
are very improbable systems that are far from equilibrium relative to their 
environments. Minimally, all organisms have to resist the second law of 
thermodynamics by active, purposeful physical work. But organisms cannot 
do this work without being informed by adaptive know-how, or Ri
, gained 
by one or more process in evolution.
These thermodynamic requirements take us to the R
p
 versus Ri
 relation￾ship again. Organisms have to invest energy and matter (R
p ) resources to 
pay for whatever adaptive know-how (Ri
) they need from all the knowledge￾gaining processes that are informing them. In the light of this mutual 
dependency of energy and matter (R
p ) resources and information (Ri
) 
resources, it is possible to come up with some tentative rules about when 
an evolving population should bootstrap, as opposed to when it should 
not. If individual organisms gain Ri
 resources from any supplementary 214 Chapter 7
knowledge-gaining process at either level 2 or level 3, then the organisms 
must be able to gain more R
p
 from their environments via these supplemen￾tary processes than the R
p
 costs of those processes. There must be an R
p
 profit 
to make it worthwhile for their populations to bootstrap by investing in the 
supplementary processes.
If organisms satisfy this criterion, then their populations should 
bootstrap—that is, level 2 or level 3 knowledge-gaining processes will be 
adaptive and should evolve through natural selection. Conversely, if the 
energy and matter (R
p ) costs of the supplementary knowledge-gaining pro￾cesses at level 2 or level 3 exceed the value of the extra R
p
 resources that are 
gained by individual organisms via these processes, then their populations 
should not bootstrap. When calculating these R
p
 costs and benefits, the 
costs should include those of any between-level conflicts that may arise.
HOW TO AVOID BOOTSTRAPPING AT LEVEL 1
One way in which the primary process of population-genetic evolution can 
avoid bootstrapping is by improving the thermodynamic efficiency of each of 
the three subprocesses that are responsible for evolution by natural selection
at level 1. Recall that these subprocesses comprise the generation of variety, 
the generation of fitness differences in the interactive organism-environment 
(O-E) niche relationship, and the inheritance of fit variants in successive 
generations of populations.29 It now appears possible that each of these
subprocesses is amenable to becoming more thermodynamically efficient as 
a consequence of natural selection.
Until recently, this was not thought to be true of the first subprocess 
of adaptive genetic evolution, the generation of variety in populations. It 
was assumed by modern synthesis, and also by neo-Darwinism, to depend 
on de novo random mutations or sheer chance. It now appears that natural
selection can (at least sometimes) bias the rates and directions of mutation 
in populations. For example, in the region of the genomes of organisms 
where we find genes that translate into particularly important proteins, the 
genes appear to be intolerant of mutation.30 In other regions of the genomes 
of organisms, however, the rates of mutations appear to speed up rather 215 Supplementary Knowledge-Gaining Processes in Evolution
than slow. Increased mutations have the effect of increasing the genetic and
phenotypic variance in organisms. Even when most of the extra mutations 
are deleterious, the implication of both these points is that natural selection
must have some capacity to bias the rates of mutations in dif­ferent regions 
of an organism’s genomes, even though we still don’t completely understand 
how it does so.31
The second subprocess of adaptive evolution is the one responsible for 
the generation of fitness differences. How might natural selection bias itself?
One way is by selecting for niche-constructing activities in organisms that 
modify their own natural selection pressures. We have also already met one of 
the principal ways by which natural selection may bias inheritance. It can do 
so by favoring sexual reproduction over asexual reproduction (see chapter 4). 
There are limits to how much genetic evolution at level 1 can increase the 
thermodynamic efficiency of itself by responding to natural selection. Once 
a population has reached its limits in this respect, it should be expected to
either go extinct or to bootstrap.
THE RECURSIVE ALGORITHM
There remains one more issue that we have not yet discussed. We have seen 
how each of the biological systems at levels 1, 2, and 3 can inform individual 
organisms in populations with adaptive know-how, or Ri
, that they have 
previously gained from their past histories. But we have not yet discussed 
how each of these knowledge-gaining processes can gain new information. 
We know how to answer this question at level 1 relative to natural selection.
The knowledge-gaining process works via the three subprocesses of adaptive 
evolution that we’ve just been discussing: generation of variety, generation of 
fitness differences in the interactive O-E niche relationship, and inheritance.
These genetic inheritances, bequeathed by fit organisms to their off￾spring, always include some novel genetic mutations, as well as some novel 
genetic recombinations in sexually reproducing organisms. Many such gene￾tic novelties will never have been subject to natural selection. But there is 
always at least a slim chance that these novel genetic mutations and recom￾binations in offspring may express phenotypes that are fortuitously adaptive 216 Chapter 7
relative to novel natural selection pressures in their environments. In this 
way, the evolutionary algorithm at level 1 is able to acquire novel adaptive 
know-how, or Ri
.
I now want to explore the hypothesis that this evolutionary algorithm 
at level 1 is recursive at levels 2 and 3. The same three subprocesses of adap￾tive evolution that operate at level 1, reoccur at levels 2 and 3. However, 
the recursive evolutionary algorithm uses dif­ferent biological mechanisms to
inform organisms at these two supplementary levels. Analogous mechanisms, 
corresponding to these same three subprocesses, support the recursions of this 
algorithm at levels 2 and 3. These analogous mechanisms are likely to be prod￾ucts of the primary process of population-genetic evolution at level 1. This is 
not a new hypothesis. An early advocate was Donald Campbell,32 while more 
recent advocates include David Hull, Daniel Dennett, John Gerhart and Mark 
Kirschner, and others. The psychologist Henry Plotkin and I also put forward 
a version of this idea, as far back as 1979.33 Yet, currently, the recursive nature 
of this algorithm is not widely recognized and is still controversial.
In spite of this recursive algorithm depending on dif­ferent mechanisms 
at each level, the logic of how these mechanisms conserve adaptive know￾how from the past and gain new information about the present is the same
at every level. We discussed this logic, relative to level 1, in chapter 4. Infor￾mation is deduced by individual organisms in the current generation of a 
population, from whatever information it has been supplied with, about 
what was adaptive for organisms in the same population in the past. Indi￾vidual organisms then use this adaptive know-how, deduced from the past, 
in combination with novel variance due to mutations and sexual recombina￾tions, to make inductive gambles about what may be adaptive for them again 
in their “unknown but not wholly unforecastable futures.”34 This recursive 
algorithm might be described as trial and error, with selective retention and 
reuse of what works.
SOME EXAMPLES
I now want to support this claim that the evolutionary algorithm at level 1 is 
recursive at levels 2 and 3, with some examples. I’ll start with the vertebrate 217 Supplementary Knowledge-Gaining Processes in Evolution
immune system and animal learning at level 2. I’ll postpone talking about 
epigenetic inheritance until chapter 9.
The vertebrate immune system is not often thought of in terms of a recur￾sive supplementary evolutionary process, although sometimes components 
of this recursion have been recognized before (e.g., by Macfarland Burnet).35
The logic of how the vertebrate adaptive immune system works suggests that 
it is a fully recursive, supplementary evolutionary process. It combines the 
generation of variants with selection and the retention of selected variants. 
If the preceding argument is correct, the vertebrate adaptive immune system 
qualifies as a supplementary evolutionary process at level 2, even though it 
works only within the lifetimes of individual organisms.
In recent decades, the immune system has attracted a great deal of 
research. This is for several reasons. One has been human immunodefi￾ciency virus (HIV) infections, which have the capacity to overwhelm human
immune systems. Another has been a consequence of organ transplant tech￾nology, which tackled the problem of how to counter the natural tendency
of the human immune system to reject foreign transplanted organs. A third 
has been the application of some recent advances in molecular biology, some 
of which have been highly relevant to immunology. I have no intention of 
reviewing this research here, nor do I want to describe how the immune sys￾tem works in any detail. All I want to do is to describe some of the principal 
mechanisms whereby the vertebrate adaptive immune system works. First, 
I will indicate how the adaptive immune system brings together the three 
subprocesses of adaptive evolution—namely, the generation of variety, the 
selection of variety, and the transmission of selection of that variety into 
the future, thereby qualifying it as a supplementary evolutionary process. 
Second, I’ll also indicate why this supplementary evolutionary process 
apparently evolved in support of the primary process of population-genetic
evolution.
The vertebrate immune system has two components. The first is an 
innate immune system, which is shared with invertebrates. It is a relatively 
crude immune system. The second is the adaptive immune system, which is 
a more sophisticated system that occurs only in vertebrates. It works almost 
exclusively on a within-individual and within-lifetime basis, although in 218 Chapter 7
mammals, it is possible for mothers to transmit some immunity, in the form 
of antibodies, to their newborn offspring via the uterus, the birth canal, or 
lactation. In contrast, the innate immune system works primarily on a popu￾lation basis between generations. These two processes interact. For instance, 
in vertebrates, the innate immune system calls the adaptive immune system 
into play when it is needed. Here, I will concentrate only on the adaptive 
immune system. That is because it is more clearly differentiated from the 
primary process of population-genetic evolution than the innate immune 
system. It is also a better example of a completely recursive supplementary 
evolutionary process.
The subprocesses that generate variance in the adaptive immune system 
are triggered by dif­ferent antigens. Antigens come in a number of classes, but
for my purposes, everything can be regarded as a pathogen. Pathogens can 
infect normal cells and include nonsymbiotic viruses, bacteria, fungi, and 
parasites. Antigens vary based on the proteins with which they bind. Antigen 
receptors that bind with infected cells or pathogens trigger the production of 
antibodies by B-cells and T-cells in the immune system. B-cells and T-cells
do a similar job, but via slightly dif­ferent mechanisms relative to dif­ferent
targets. I’ll focus on the B-cells here.
Collectively, the B-cells in any individual organism have the potential to 
generate vast numbers of antibodies, which are a further source of variance 
in the immune system. However, a crucial restriction is that any single B-cell 
can trigger the production of only a single antibody in the immune system—
namely, the antibody that can destroy the particular pathogen presented by 
a particular antigen-presenting cell. Once triggered in this way, the B-cell
then causes the production and proliferation of the specific antibody that can 
counteract the specific pathogen that triggered it. The proliferation involves 
clonal selection, leading to the production of huge numbers of the appropri￾ate antibody. That particular antibody is then carried around the organism’s 
body by the bloodstream. When the antibody encounters any cell that is 
infected by that particular pathogen, it either kills the cell or prevents it 
from replicating, thereby halting the spread of the infection in the organism.
In addition to this projection of antibodies into the immediate future 
of an organism, the adaptive immune system has the capacity to remember 219 Supplementary Knowledge-Gaining Processes in Evolution
episodes of prior infection for varying periods of time during the future 
lifetime of the organism. These memories are highly adaptive because they
can protect an organism from most reoccurring infections. If an infection 
reoccurs during the life of an organism, it can be dealt with far more rapidly 
by a retained or “remembered” antibody. Sometimes this kind of memory 
of past infections can grant lifetime immunity. For example, in humans,
recovery from measles ensures subsequent lifelong immunity from future 
measles infections. The same is not true of chicken pox, which in humans
grants variable periods of immunity from subsequent chicken pox infections.
These examples of how subprocesses of evolution, comprising the gen￾eration of variety, the selection of variety, and the projection of selected 
variety into the future, are not exhaustive. However, they should suffice to 
indicate that a supplementary evolutionary process really is at work in the 
adaptive immune system of vertebrates.
The second question raised by the adaptive immune system is why it 
should have evolved in support of the primary population genetic process 
of evolution, as well as in support of the innate immune system in verte￾brates. This question is not difficult to answer, at least at the hypothetical
level. First, any multicellular organism that lives for any significant period of 
time is liable to encounter huge numbers of pathogens during its life. These
numbers are so great that it would not be possible for an unaided primary 
population genetic process to cope with the innumerable selection pressures 
imposed by innumerable pathogens by conventional evolutionary responses 
at level 1. A back-of-the-envelope calculation suggests that to do so, the 
genomes of vertebrates would have to contain millions of genes. In fact, they 
typically contain less than 25,000, and the human genome contains only
20,000. There is a severe mismatch between these numbers. The implication 
is that the primary genetic process was forced to evolve the supplementary 
evolutionary processes of the adaptive immune system to cope with the sheer 
diversity of the pathogens that any long-lived organism is likely to encounter 
during its lifetime.
There is a second, closely related point too. Many pathogens encoun￾tered by long-lived organisms, such as viruses or bacteria, may not even 
have existed when the organisms were born. They may have evolved only 220 Chapter 7
much later during the life of any long-lived organism. Since the primary 
population-genetic processes of evolution cannot foresee any future selection
pressure ahead of time, including any novel pathogen that does not even 
exist yet, it cannot supply long-lived organisms with defensive adaptations 
in advance. It therefore must evolve fast-acting supplementary evolutionary 
responses (in this case, the adaptive immune system) to enable long-lived 
organisms to survive relative to unpredictable pathogens.36
LEARNING IN INDIVIDUAL ANIMALS
My second example of a supplementary evolutionary process is learning in 
individual animals, which is another level 2 process. Once again, I won’t 
attempt to describe how learning works in detail, but instead draw attention 
to the nature of the principal biological mechanisms that operate. I’ll also 
briefly consider why learning evolved in the first place.
Learning qualifies as a supplementary knowledge-gaining evolutionary 
process because it involves a recursion of the same three subprocesses of 
population-genetic evolution: generating variety, selecting between variants, 
and projecting selected variants into the future. The biological mechanisms 
via which learning work are all brain based. However, because the brains 
of animals are themselves species-specific products of their prior evolution, 
as well as of intermediate developmental processes, all the mechanisms of
learning are in a nested relationship with the underlying primary process 
of population-genetic evolution. They may also be in a nested relationship 
with underlying developmental processes.
The relevant basic subprocesses of learning are as follows. The first 
subprocess for generating variance involved repertoires of variant behav￾iors, both covert and overt. Animals inherit these repertoires as a function 
of both the prior evolutionary history of their populations and their own 
prior individual developmental histories, including their own prior learning.
The second subprocess of selection is derived from the capacity of ani￾mals to respond to what psychologists call “reinforcement.” Reinforcing 
events are positive (i.e., rewarding) or negative ‘(i.e., punishing) events that 
occur in the environment of the animal. The capacity of learners to respond 221 Supplementary Knowledge-Gaining Processes in Evolution
to such events as if they were rewarding or punishing ultimately relates 
to the biological fitness goals of organisms. These fitness goals are derived 
from the primary processes of population-genetic evolution and from prior 
developmental processes.
The third subprocess of learning, whereby selected variants are pro￾jected into the futures of individual animals, are memories. The relevant 
brain-based memory mechanisms record which events were associated with 
rewards and which events were associated with punishments in the past. 
Animals may also remember which events in their environments were nei￾ther rewarded nor punished in the past, and therefore were irrelevant to their 
fitness goals; and also which events occurred together, regardless of whether
or not they were subject to reinforcement.
In general, a new episode of learning in individual animals is triggered 
by what psychologists who study learning frequently call “surprise.” Surprise 
is generated when an animal encounters either an unfamiliar environment 
or, more often, a novel stimulus in a familiar environment. The novelty 
apparently generates uncertainty in the animal’s brain. The animal seems 
to be threatened by the unpredictability of the novel environment or novel 
stimulus, as well as by not knowing the likely outcomes of its own variant 
behaviors in that environment. Surprise motivates it to acquire more adap￾tive know-how, or Ri
, to help it to achieve one of its fitness goals. It does 
this by learning.
The three most basic kinds of learning in animals, most frequently studied 
by psychologists and to a lesser extent by behavioral ecologists, are habitu￾ation learning, Pavlovian conditioning, and instrumental conditioning. All 
these kinds of learning also involve sensory and perceptual mechanisms, 
attentional mechanisms, and nascent cognitive mechanisms. But I won’t 
discuss any of these extra mechanisms here, nor will I discuss any further the 
learning about what is irrelevant in the animal’s environment or habituation. 
Instead, I’ll concentrate on one of the most familiar learning paradigms: 
instrumental conditioning. That should suffice to illustrate the recursive 
evolutionary logic and the mechanisms of learning in individual animals.
Instrumental learning concerns the learning by an animal about the 
consequences of its own overt behaviors in specific environments. An animal 222 Chapter 7
learns about what happens if it does behavior X in a particular environment 
Y. This kind of learning was originally investigated in the lab of an American 
psychologist called Edward Thorndike. It was later further investigated by 
another more famous American psychologist, B. F. Skinner. Skinner devel￾oped an apparatus known as a “Skinner box,” comprising a restricted envi￾ronment in which he introduced an animal, typically a hungry rat. The rat’s 
hunger motivated it to explore its environment in a search for food. During 
its searches, the rat typically emitted a variety of alternative overt behaviors
until, partly by chance, it would stumble against a protruding bar on one of 
the walls of its box. When pressed, the bar would cause a food reward, usually 
a food pellet, to appear in a tray for the rat to eat. The still-hungry rat would 
then be motivated to learn which of its behaviors had caused the arrival of 
the food pellet. It would repeat many of its previous diverse behaviors until
it stumbled on the successful behavior again. After that, most rats would 
zero in on the successful behavior pretty rapidly. Eventually, they could feed 
themselves by repeatedly pressing the bar in their Skinner boxes.
In later tests, rats demonstrated what they had learned earlier by imme￾diately repeating the same successful behavior when they were reintroduced 
into the same environment. Also, if the experimenter ceased to reward bar￾pressing with food, then the animal’s learned response would eventually 
cease. It would be extinguished. By stopping its behavior in this way, a 
rat would demonstrate the sensitivity of learning in individual animals to 
rapid environmental change. Psychologists subsequently explored both the 
instrumental and other learning paradigms in depth, and by doing so, they
learned much more about animal learning. But what I have described should 
be enough to indicate the recursive evolutionary logic of the supplementary 
evolutionary process of learning, as well as its associated brain mechanisms.
The terminology used by psychologists to describe their conditioning 
experiments is forbidding for most people. I suggest it might have been 
better to refer to all kinds of learning as “causal learning” rather than as 
“associationist learning” or “conditioning.”37 More recently, psychologists 
have also concentrated far more on human cognition and learning at the 
cognitive level than on animal learning. But I’ve used animal learning in this 223 Supplementary Knowledge-Gaining Processes in Evolution
discussion because it shows more clearly how the recursive evolutionary algo￾rithm operates at level 2. Behavioral ecologists have been more interested in 
making connections between learning and evolutionary biology. They may 
eventually correct this inbalance, but probably not until evolutionary theory 
has been extended. At present, behavioral ecologists are usually held back 
by their adherence to the assumptions of SET. This causes many behavioral 
ecologists to follow Mayr’s distinction between ultimate and proximate pro￾cesses and how and why questions in biology.38
The reason why a capacity for learning evolved in animals is probably
very similar to why immune systems evolved. It is not possible, particularly 
in any long-lived organism, for the primary population-genetic processes 
to anticipate in advance all the novel circumstances and stimuli that the 
organism may encounter during its life. Instead, the primary process of 
population-genetic evolution appears to have bootstrapped by evolving the 
supplementary evolutionary process of learning at level 2 in response to 
rapidly changing environments. I suggest that the fundamental evolutionary 
role of learning is to enable animals to achieve their biological fitness goals of 
survival and reproduction in rapidly changing, unpredictable environments. 
It does so by allowing animals to gain additional adaptive know-how, or 
Ri
, for themselves rapidly during their lifetimes. Learning allows individual 
animals to do this as a function of their interactions with their own partic￾ular local environments.
It is also worth pointing out that animals, unlike plants, move around 
in their environments. They can relocate. Relocation is itself a form of active 
niche construction. Other kinds of niche construction by individual animals, 
such as innovative, perturbational niche construction, may also increase the 
amount of novelty that animals are liable to encounter in their environments 
during their lives. In turn, that should increase the demand for animals 
to learn more about the novelties that they themselves, as well as other 
organisms, introduce into their environments. In effect, niche-constructing 
animals may, by their own activities, modify natural selection pressures in 
their environments in favor of the selection of the supplementary process 
of individual learning.224 Chapter 7
SOCIAL LEARNING IN ANIMALS
My next example of a supplementary process stems directly from the previ￾ous one. Given that individual animals can learn, it is scarcely surprising that 
animals can learn from each other. There is considerable overlap between 
the three subprocesses of individual learning and the three subprocesses of
social learning.39 However, there are significant differences too. In social 
learning, variance is group-generated rather than being generated by indi￾vidual learners.
The selection of that variance by reinforcement—that is, by rewarding 
or punishing events—may be determined by social fitness goals rather than 
by (or as well as by) biological fitness goals. For instance, it may be more 
rewarding for an individual animal in a social group to invest in behaviors
that improve its status in its social group, or to conform to the norms of 
group behavior relative to its social fitness goals, than to invest in behaviors
that advance its biological fitness, at least temporarily. Retained, reinforced 
behaviors will still be remembered in the brains of individual animals in a 
social group, but they may be imitated or copied by many other members 
of the social group, including juveniles in the next generation, as well as 
individuals outside the social group, or even in dif­ferent species.
In humans, the unique adaptation of language, and later writing, affects
all three of the subprocesses operating at level 3. I therefore need to say a bit 
more about each of these subprocesses in the special case of the gaining of
human cultural information. The generation of variety by human cultural
groups is greatly enhanced by the much more efficient communication pro￾vided by languages. I use the term “language” broadly in this discussion to 
include mathematics and music. Selecting these variants by rewarding or 
punishing events is often determined by reinforcing events that are derived 
from cultural fitness goals, either as well as or instead of biological fitness 
goals, at least in the short run.
Language, whether oral or written, also makes human cultural commu￾nication and inheritance far more potent, both within and between human
generations. This potency is recognized by the theory of human cultural evo￾lution and gene-culture coevolution.40 Gene-culture coevolution recognizes 
that human cultural inheritances at level 3 ultimately rely on human genetic225 Supplementary Knowledge-Gaining Processes in Evolution
evolution at level 1. However, human cultural inheritances often appear
to be determined at least as much by cultural fitness goals as by biological 
fitness goals. Because of the interactions between human genetic evolution 
at level 1 and human cultural knowledge–gaining processes at level 3, the 
adaptations will be informed by qualitatively dif­ferent adaptive know-how, 
or Ri
, at these two levels. Their interactions are likely to be a salient feature 
of human evolution, whether they are positive or negative.41
Positive interactions between level 1 and level 3 should enhance both 
their biological and cultural fitness, but negative interactions are also possi￾ble. If the adaptive know-how that informs human genetic evolution at level 
1 and human cultural evolution at level 3 are incompatible, or just badly 
integrated with each other, then human cultural inheritances could degrade, 
rather than enhance, human biological fitness. They could degrade human
cultural fitness too. I will illustrate these two alternative kinds of interactions 
with the same example. It is the human cultural niche-constructing activity 
of dairy farming among pastoralist communities.
Dairy farming depends on adaptive know-how gained by human socio￾cultural processes at level 3. It appears to confer the advantage of providing 
pastoralists with additional food resources in the form of milk or processed
dairy products such as cheese. However, originally there must have been a 
downside too. Like all mammals, human infants can digest their mother’s 
milk because they are lactose tolerant, but when the cultural practice of dairy 
farming was first introduced in the Neolithic era, human adults were not 
lactose tolerant. They probably could not digest milk, at least not efficiently. 
Probably it made them sick. Subsequently, and apparently in response to 
natural selection pressures modified by the cultural niche-constructing activ￾ity of dairy farming at level 3, although possibly only at times of famine or 
disease,42 pastoralists evolved lactose tolerance at level 1 in human adults, 
as well as in human infants. A genetic change occurred in chromosome 2 
in the human genome, which enabled lactose tolerance to persist in adult
humans.43
Today, those of us who had pastoralist ancestors, such as most northern 
Europeans, are usually lactose tolerant in adulthood, as well as in infancy. 
Others, such as many people in East Asia or Africa who apparently never had 226 Chapter 7
pastoralist ancestors, continue to be lactose intolerant in adulthood. It fol￾lows that originally, dairy farming probably introduced a maladaptation, at 
least during periods of stress, as a consequence of both negative and positive 
interactions between level 1 and level 3 knowledge-gaining processes. Only 
after the subsequent evolution of lactose tolerance in adults would dairy 
farming have become an unalloyed, consistent adaptation.
There must have been a time lag before this happened, and this is 
sometimes called an “adaptive lag.” Even in pastoralists, it must have taken 
some time before level 1 population-genetic evolution in humans in the
relevant population could have caught up with the new adaptive problem set
for them by their own level 3 dairy farming activities. During this adaptive 
lag, the positive benefits of cultural adaptations of human pastoralists (i.e.,
consuming milk) would have been at least partly offset by the negative rami￾fications of the genetic maladaptation, comprising the inability of human
adults to digest milk properly.
Thus there are risks, as well as advantages, in evolving supplementary adap￾tive know-how- or Ri
-gaining processes by bootstrapping. These risks are not 
confined to dairy farming; rather, they are more general. They are always liable 
to occur, particularly when human cultural niche-constructing activities at 
level 3 modify natural selection pressures relative to human population-genetic 
evolution at level 1. Some time ago, my colleagues and I reviewed many other 
putative examples of human gene-culture coevolution in a paper in Nature 
Review Genetics entitled, “How Culture Shaped the Human Genome: Bringing 
Genetics and the Human Sciences Together.”44
For now, this is all I want to say about the recursive algorithm at levels 1, 
2, and 3. Because of the complexity of human cultural knowledge–gaining
processes at level 3, it may be quite hard to detect the same three subprocesses
of generating variety, selecting that variety and the retention of fit variance 
that occur at level 1 and reoccur in the supplementary processes at level 3, 
particularly in the case of humans. But I hope that I have done enough to 
show that the same recursive algorithm and its associated knowledge-gaining 
logic really does reoccur in human cultural evolution at level 3, as well at 
levels 1 and 2. I’ll return to these negative and positive possible interactions
between level 2 and level 3 adaptations in chapter 10.227 Supplementary Knowledge-Gaining Processes in Evolution
Paradoxically, it may be easiest to detect the logic of this knowledge￾gaining algorithm in science. We have already seen that in science, carefully 
collected data generate new ideas, concepts, conjectures, and finally testable
hypotheses about cause-and-effect relationships in nature. Hypotheses are 
then tested empirically. Hypotheses that survive this selective testing may 
then give rise to major theories about nature and about our place in nature.
Many philosophers of science have described one or more of these
subprocesses of science. For instance, Karl Popper, David Hull, and Daniel 
Dennett have described how science operates through a Darwinian algorithm 
of generating hypotheses, subjecting them to empirical tests and retaining 
the ones that have not been falsified.45 The same logic of recursion observed 
in adaptive population-genetic evolution at level 1, is also clearly manifest at 
levels 2 and 3, including in the advance of science and technology.
THE RELEVANCE OF BOOTSTRAPPING 
TO TEGMARK’S LIFE 3.0
Rather than asking questions about a possibly predetermined destiny for 
evolution, a dif­ferent and more tractable question is to ask how, in the light 
of this new understanding of evolution proposed here, might it be possible
to say anything about what evolution might do next, at least for our own 
species? One obvious possibility is that a species that has already evolved 
supplementary processes by bootstrapping might bootstrap again. This, after
all, is what Tegmark’s Life 3.0 amounts to. But his speculations led to the 
idea of a possible abiotic future kind of life.
Need that be the only possibility, or could humanity bootstrap by 
inventing one or more new kinds of biotic life? Here, a recent book by 
David Goldstein is suggestive, as well as alarming. Called The End of Gene￾tics,
46 it warns us about the implications of one imminent and biotic future 
based on current genome editing. Goldstein describes a future in which 
it will be possible for human parents to start designing their own babies. 
These parents will need a lot of help from geneticists, medical specialists, and
molecular biologists, especially experts in genome editing and CRISPR9-
Cas technology.228 Chapter 7
A benign aim of this technology is to reduce the burden of genetic dis￾eases on humanity. Few would quarrel with that goal. But Goldstein warns 
that there will be unpredictable consequences when it comes to designing 
babies. Benign eugenics, designed to eliminate genetic diseases, are possi￾ble. But unfortunately, malign eugenics, such as those advocated by the 
Nazis, are also possible. Also, we won’t just want to control human repro￾duction and genetic inheritances. We will also want to control reproduction 
in many other species, with unknown consequences for ecosystems and the 
biosphere. Nevertheless, we are clearly on the threshold of a future in which 
design and control of reproduction in our own and in other species is fast 
approaching. Might that represent another bootstrapping event in the evolu￾tion of life on Earth?
LIFE 3.0 REVISITED
I would like to close this chapter by returning to Tegmark’s Life 3.0 once 
again. Were Life 3.0 to happen, it would constitute another major transi￾tion in evolution, comparable only to the transition from abiota to biota 
at the origin of life. It would now be a transition from biotic life to some 
future abiotic life. However, it would still have to take the form of another 
supplementary evolutionary process, once again in a nested relationship with 
all the past underlying processes of evolution, including population-genetic
evolution, even if those living forms of evolution no longer exist in the 
future. As Tegmark himself indicated, it would be based on another recursion 
of the fundamental evolutionary algorithm. But this time, all three of the 
subprocesses of the basic evolutionary algorithm would depend on abiotic 
mechanisms operating at the level of a novel-independent abiotic platform.
In the light of the more comprehensive theory of evolution proposed 
here, as opposed to SET, does a forthcoming Life 3.0 seem plausible? Does 
it seem more or less likely than it did before? Also, is there anything that a 
more comprehensive theory of evolution could teach us about how a puta￾tive life 3.0 might work? In this respect, is there anything that the advocates 
or prophets of Life 3.0 could learn from a more comprehensive theory of 
evolution that they have not already learned from SET?229 Supplementary Knowledge-Gaining Processes in Evolution
The first point to acknowledge is that the very idea of abiotic life sounds 
like an oxymoron to cap all oxymorons. For anyone who still believes that 
humans at least owe their existence to supernatural processes, governed by 
one or more supernatural, creative deities, the concept of abiotic life must 
seem totally implausible. From that starting point, it may be difficult or 
impossible to consider or even think straight about Life 3.0. But given the 
bootstrapping capacity of the fundamental evolutionary algorithm discussed 
here, a further bootstrapping step, comprising the origin of Life 3.0 can at 
least be considered. It might happen along the lines sketched by Tegmark. It 
is certainly not totally implausible from the point of view of a more extended 
theory of evolution. In this context, how might we expect Life 3.0 to work? 
Alternatively, might we discover a fundamental obstacle that could prevent 
3.0 from ever happening? Let’s consider each of these questions in turn.
First, if there is an abiotic recursion of the evolutionary algorithm in 
Life 3.0, then this novel abiotic evolutionary process would still have to work 
in much the same way as all the other supplementary processes of evolu￾tion. It would still rely on each of the same three subprocesses of evolution 
again—namely, generation of variety, selection of variety, and the projection 
of selected variants into the future. The great change, however, would be 
that this time, each of these subprocesses would be based on abiotic rather
than biotic mechanisms. Also, the way in which these subprocesses interact
might be fundamentally dif­ferent than in SET’s characterization of biologi￾cal evolution. For instance, each subprocess might do more than simply flow 
into each other; it might interfere with the others’ inner workings to render 
them interdependent, just as niche construction does through contributing 
to the generation of phenotypic variety, the modification of fitness differ￾ences, and, through ecological inheritance, the projection of those variants 
into the future.47
We have already seen that one of these subprocesses—the projection of 
selected variants into the future—is already present in the form of computer￾based memory systems. Selected variants stored in computers are projected 
into the future whenever humans retrieve information from them. But the 
other two subprocesses have not yet been fully replaced by abiotic mecha￾nisms. Therefore, as yet, an independent abiotic platform to enable Life 3.0 to 230 Chapter 7
exist is not in place. Could it ever be? Tegmark and his colleagues at the FLI 
provisionally suggest that the answer is “yes.” AGI carried by abiotic robots 
might acquire and deploy additional know-how, or Ri
, beyond anything 
that humans can currently achieve. It might do so by some kind of abiotic 
learning. In principle, inductive machine learning of this kind is within the 
range of some of the artificial systems now being built.
But what other evolutionary problems would Life 3.0 have to solve? 
For example, what should be the fitness goals of a superintelligent robot? I 
suggest, because we are still talking about evolution, that any robot’s fitness 
goals would have to be logically equivalent to, but distinct from, the fit￾ness goals of any biotic organism. In simple terms, they should relate to the 
capacity of variant technology to generate copies of itself. This should be 
true of both individual robots and populations of robots. We should there￾fore expect the fitness goals of abiotic artificial systems to be survival and 
reproduction, and of their populations to be their own survival and regen￾eration and the spread of abiotic life into as many diverse niches as possible.
Remember, however, that this time, these interactive niche relationships 
would comprise robot-environment (Rob-E) interactions with their local 
selected environments. These Rob-E niche relationships would now become 
the fundamental units of abiotic life at the level of Life 3.0.
The dispersal of abiotic life into diverse niche relationships could eventu￾ally be on a much grander scale than has been achieved by biotic life as far as 
we know. For instance, as Tegmark points out, abiotic life might well be bet￾ter equipped to colonize the solar system and other solar systems elsewhere 
in our galaxy. That could be a prize worth having. It could be something to 
which contemporary human beings might wish to contribute.
There is also another point to establish here. I suggest that the fitness 
goals of all artificial systems would be constrained not only by the same 
laws of thermodynamics that apply to living systems, as originally described 
by Schrödinger (see chapter 1), but also by the bioenergetics versus bioin￾formatics dilemma discussed in previous chapters. Artificial life would still 
have to cheat the second law of thermodynamics, but without ever violating 
it, and it would still have to continuously resolve the R
p
 versus Ri
 dilemma 
to do so. For example, artificial abiotic life would still have to pay for any 231 Supplementary Knowledge-Gaining Processes in Evolution
increased adaptive know-how that it might acquire by generating detritus of 
some kind in its environment. It could not escape these basic laws of physics
any more than can any form of biotic life.
This raises a final fundamental question: Could abiotic life be equipped 
with the appropriate motives or emotions, or even sufficient active purpose￾ful behaviors, to achieve these fitness goals and the continuous resolution 
of the R
p
 versus Ri
 dilemma? Or, to repeat a former question, may a funda￾mental obstacle exist to stop them from doing so? Is there any barrier to stop 
the full realization of Life 3.0?
This is perhaps the major remaining unknown, but my intuition is to 
say “no.” In human evolution at Life 2.0, human behaviors are motivated by 
both emotions and consciousness. Of course, not all human behaviors are 
consciously motivated, nor are they consciously controlled. But many of our 
most significant behaviors clearly are. So, must artificial life in the form of 
robots, equipped with AGI, be equipped with motives and consciousness as 
well before Life 3.0 can exist? This is a question that Tegmark himself raises 
in his book. If the function of consciousness in humans, and by implication 
in other animals too, could be better understood, then it might be possible
to make an artifact that could carry out the equivalent conscious functions 
in robots at the level of Life 3.0. However, the function of consciousness in 
humans is still very far from being understood.
In both individual and social learning, one of its functions appears to 
have something to do with a kind of higher-order attention control, which 
facilitates the learning process. But this is not much more than an educated 
guess at the moment. Consciousness is often described as a hard problem
when it comes to understanding human evolution, human behavior, and 
human social life. It may prove to be the barrier that prevents Life 3.0 from 
ever happening, whether here on Earth or anywhere else in the universe. But 
I suspect that it will not be, and something akin to consciousness might be
engineered into robot minds one day.If Lewontin (1983) is correct about the logic of niche construction, evolu￾tionary theory should really be about the coevolution of organisms with their 
environments rather than just about the evolution of organisms. In which 
case, evolutionary theory should also concern the evolution of ecosystems. 
The coevolution of organisms with their external environments invariably 
occurs in the context of a hierarchy of ecosystems, shared with multiple other 
species of organisms. This is true on all possible scales, ranging from a rotting 
acorn to Earth’s biosphere.1
 The coevolution of organisms with their local 
environments inevitably contributes to the evolution of the ecosystems that 
they share. In this chapter, I want to consider both the origin of ecosystems 
and their subsequent evolution.
For most of the twentieth century, there was a disconnect between evo￾lutionary biology and ecosystem-level ecology. There were two main reasons 
for this. One was a relatively trivial, but nonetheless understandable mistake
about the respective timescales of evolutionary and ecological processes.
The second was a more profound problem arising from the conjunction of 
populations of living organisms and nonliving abiota in ecosystems. Obvi￾ously, evolutionary theory can be applied to living organisms, but how can it 
be applied to abiota? In this chapter, I will consider both of these problems,
the first only briefly, and the second in greater depth.
INCOMPATIBLE TIMESCALES?
Following the publication of Darwin’s The Origin of Species in 1859, for the 
rest of the nineteenth century and most of the twentieth, it was assumed 
8 THE ORIGIN AND EVOLUTION 
OF ECOSYSTEMS234 Chapter 8
that evolution is always a very slow process. This idea was encouraged by 
Darwin, who frequently stressed the gradualism of evolution by natural
selection, based on the steady accumulation of multiple small changes in the
characteristics of organisms over considerable periods of time. It was also 
encouraged by the fossil record which, as evidence accumulated, appeared 
to indicate that evolution was a very slow process, taking millions of years 
for interesting things to happen.
Sometimes this is true. Sometimes it really has taken millions of years for 
a significant evolutionary event to appear in the fossil record.2
 In the twenti￾eth century, it was also assumed that natural selection is frequently stabiliz￾ing rather than directional. “Stabilizing selection” refers to selection against
extreme values of a character, which was thought to oppose evolutionary 
change rather than favor it. In fact, the evidence for stabilizing selection is
surprisingly weak, and it is detected in natural populations comparatively 
rarely.3
 Despite this, the assumption that stabilizing selection is frequent 
persists even today, which is another reason why the evolutionary process 
was thought to be slow.
For all these reasons, evolution was assumed for many decades by biolo￾gists and naturalists to be a slow process. In contrast, ecological events typi￾cally happen on much shorter timescales, ranging from days to years and 
sometimes a few centuries, but not much longer. There are some exceptions 
that relate to macroevolutionary events. There have been long-term ecologi￾cal changes, as well as short-term ones. Examples include the accumulation 
of shell beds on the ocean floor and the bioturbation of burrowing organ￾isms.4
 For the moment, I’ll leave these to one side, in which case, given the 
apparently contrasting timescales of evolutionary and ecological events, how 
can evolutionary and ecological processes interact with each other at the
ecosystem level?
In the twenty-first century, on the basis of new evidence, some of it from 
molecular biology, we now know that evolutionary events can sometimes be 
just as rapid as ecological events. Evolutionary changes can track rapid eco￾logical changes at comparable rates, such as in microorganisms with rapid 
generational turnover. One example is the very rapid evolution of resistance 
to antibiotics in bacteria, as discussed earlier in this book. Evolutionary 235 The Origin and Evolution of Ecosystems
change can also be fast in metazoans. A good example was provided by Peter 
and Rosemary Grants’s forty-year study of the continuously and unpredict￾ably evolving finches on the Galapagos Islands.5
 Another example is pro￾vided by the rapid evolutionary response of diverse species to human urban
environments, inclusive of the recent innovation of street lights.6
 Further 
examples include the rapid evolution of smaller tusks in elephants and of 
slower growth in fishes in response to hunting and fishing by humans.7
 One 
consequence of these data is that the problem of ecology and evolution work￾ing on dif­ferent timescales may no longer be a major obstacle, standing in
the way of applying evolutionary theory to ecosystem-level ecology.
NONEVOLVING ABIOTA IN ECOSYSTEMS
The more profound question is: How can evolutionary theory be applied 
to ecosystems, given that ecosystems contain abiota that apparently cannot 
evolve? Abiotic components in ecosystems are connected to organisms by 
energy and matter, or R
p
 flows, that pass through both abiota and biota in 
ecosystems. It is clearly possible for energy and matter to flow continuously 
through both the living and nonliving components of ecosystems in biogeo￾chemical flows and cycles, such as the nitrogen cycle and the carbon cycle. 
This has long been recognized by ecologists. These flows are captured by 
what the Oakridge ecologist Robert O’Neill and colleagues previously called 
“process-functional ecology.”8
 However, from a traditional perspective, there 
seemingly cannot be an equivalent flow of evolutionarily significant informa￾tion, or Ri
, through all the components of ecosystems due to the presence of 
abiota in ecosystems, which don’t evolve.
There can be continuous flows of evolutionarily significant informa￾tion between coevolving populations in communities, of course. This is 
possible because, for example, population A can act as a source of natural
selection pressures for population B, which may evolve in response to 
these selection pressures. Subsequently, a changed population B may act 
as a source of natural selection back on population A, which in its turn can
exhibit another evolutionary response. In this manner, there can be a con￾tinuous flow of evolutionarily significant information between populations 236 Chapter 8
A and B, causing them to coevolve with each other in the context of their 
community, such as what is seen in predator-prey or host-parasite coevolu￾tionary interactions.9
The same is not true of interactions between populations of organisms 
and abiotic components of their ecosystems. Abiota can act as sources of 
natural selection for populations of organisms, in the same way that popu￾lations of organisms can act as sources of natural selection for each other. 
Abiota can thereby cause populations to exhibit evolutionary responses to 
the natural selection pressures that originate from them. But according to 
standard evolutionary theory (SET), it is not possible for abiota to respond 
in a reciprocal fashion to the activities of the organisms with which they 
interact. That is because abiota do not carry genes, so whatever changes do 
occur in abiota do not inherently lead to changes in a genetic inheritance
system. Given that SET only recognizes genetic inheritance in evolution, 
that would appear to rule out any kind of biotic-abiotic coevolution in 
ecosystems. The presence of abiota in ecosystems apparently prevents abiota 
from participating in any kind of continuous flow of evolutionarily sig￾nificant information through both the biotic and abiotic components of 
ecosystems. Every time there is an interaction between any biotic and any 
abiotic component in an ecosystem, the abiotic component appears to act 
as an evolutionary dead end.10
Once again, these limitations do not rule out all links between evolution 
and ecology. They permit evolutionary theory to be applied to population 
community ecology and to assemblies of organisms in communities.11 Popu￾lations in wider communities, such as populations competing for light or 
water in food webs, can and do coevolve with each other.12 Therefore, there 
can be a flow of evolutionarily significant information through all the living 
components in communities, provided that all the abiotic components that 
also exist in their environments are ignored or treated as inputs to the system. 
For modeling purposes, the abiota usually have to be edited out. But that 
is not true of ecosystem-level ecology, where it is not possible to ignore the 
role of abiotic components in energy and matter flows through the biotic 
and abiotic components of ecosystems.237 The Origin and Evolution of Ecosystems
The net result is that, in addition to the problem of dif­ferent timescales,
there were two other obstacles rather than just one, keeping evolutionary 
biology and ecology apart for most of the twentieth century. First, there 
was a disconnect between evolution and ecosystem-level ecology, which 
was caused by the presence of nonevolving abiota in ecosystems. Second, 
there was also a disconnect between population-community ecology and 
ecosystem-level ecology within ecology itself, with the former studying evo￾lution in food webs, and largely ignoring abiota, and the latter studying 
entire biogeochemical cycles, but largely ignoring evolution.13 Both of these
divisions have frequently been discussed by ecologists.14 They have been 
discussed by evolutionary biologists less often.15
During the final decade of the last century, things began to change. 
Two ideas, one from ecology and one from evolutionary biology, appeared 
in the literature almost simultaneously. They both suggested that the activi￾ties of organisms not only affect abiota in ecosystems, but these effects also
sometimes feed back to populations of evolving organisms in ways that 
can subsequently affect both the ecology and the evolution of populations 
in ecosystems. In ecology, Clive Jones, John Lawton, and their colleagues 
introduced the concept of “ecosystem engineering.”16 They documented 
how the activities of engineering species could affect energy and matter flows 
in ecosystems in ecologically significant ways. One of their salient examples 
was beavers building dams in rivers, thereby causing multiple subsequent 
changes in riparian ecosystems.17
In evolutionary biology, Richard Lewontin introduced the logic of niche 
construction in 1982, although he didn’t use that term.18 He just wrote about 
the “construction” of environments. I first coined the term “niche construc￾tion” in 1988.19 The niche-constructing activities of organisms are those
that modify biotic or abiotic components of their local environments. These
modifications may then become the source of modified natural selection that
feeds back to affect the subsequent evolution of either the niche-constructing 
population itself or other populations in its ecosystem, or both. For exam￾ple, when organisms interact with abiota, the state of the abiota can be 
transformed to register the informed niche-constructing activities of the 238 Chapter 8
organisms that act on them. These changes in abiota then may become 
the sources of specific modified natural selection pressures, either by feed￾ing back to the same niche-constructing population or by feeding forward 
to one or more other populations in an ecosystem. This accounts for the 
two categories of natural selection that I introduced in chapter 4. They are 
unmodified, purposeless natural selection pressures in the environments of 
organisms, as opposed to natural selection pressures that were previously 
modified by the active purposeful agency of niche-constructing organisms 
in evolving populations.
The recipient population, or populations, exposed to modified envi￾ronmental conditions, may subsequently exhibit evolutionarily significant 
responses in the usual way.20 In this manner, the abiotic components can 
participate, not only in energy and matter (or R
p ) flows, but also in continu￾ous flows of evolutionarily meaningful information (or Ri
) through both 
populations of organisms and abiota in ecosystems. This is in spite of the 
fact that there are no genes in abiota. Abiota can do this by acting as inter￾mediate sources of modified natural selection, connecting the evolutionarily 
informed niche-constructing activities of one population to usually adaptive 
evolutionary responses in another population.
The capacity of intermediate abiota to act as evolutionarily signifi￾cant bridges between either dif­ferent generations of a single population or
diverse populations in ecosystems is captured by the concept of environmen￾tally mediated genotypic associations (EMGAs) in niche construction theory 
(NCT).21 More recently, and perhaps not entirely independently, similar ideas 
have been picked up by the emerging field of ecoevolutionary dynamics.22
Despite the parallels between NCT and ecoevolutionary dynamics, there is 
one aspect of NCT that the latter has not yet greatly emphasized. That is that 
when changes caused in abiota by niche-constructing populations modify 
the natural selection pressures encountered by descendant organisms, they 
introduce a second general inheritance system to evolution, which I’ve called 
“ecological inheritance.” This means that successive descendant generations 
of evolving populations are now recipients of both genetic inheritance and
ecological inheritance. These two inheritances relate to each other in evolv￾ing populations.239 The Origin and Evolution of Ecosystems
Earlier in this book, I described “ecological inheritance” as comprising 
natural selection pressures arising from either biota or abiota that have previ￾ously been modified by the niche-constructing activities of earlier genera￾tions of organisms in either the same or dif­ferent populations (see chapter 1). 
Ecological inheritance seldom carries evolutionarily significant information 
directly between ancestral and descendant generations in populations in the 
same way that genetic inheritance does. Instead, it carries modified environ￾mental states, and hence modified natural selection pressures between gen￾erations, relative to whatever historical information is encoded by previously 
selected genes. It thereby influences the fitness of the inherited genes. In this 
sense, a population’s genetic inheritance system and its ecological inheritance
system are complementary. It is possible for evolving populations to inherit 
information about something in their environment via genetic inheritance
(e.g., a predisposition to grow well in a nest). It is also possible to inherit the
“something” in the environment that the information is about via ecological 
inheritance (i.e., the nest itself).
I have now indicated how both the principal barriers that previously 
prevented the integration of ecosystem-level ecology and evolutionary theory 
can be surmounted. Recent insights in ecology and evolutionary biology 
are now allowing biologists to start exploring new ways of bridging the gaps 
between ecosystem-level ecology and evolutionary biology.23 For example, 
biologists have begun to explore the ways in which ecoevolutionary feedback 
occur in ecosystems,24 including ways in which this feedback can be detected 
and ways in which it contributes to the structure, function, robustness and 
resilience of ecosystems.25 Other authors have concentrated on investigat￾ing specific cases, in a bottom-up attempt to understand the details of how 
ecoevolutionary feedback works in ecosystems.26
For the rest of this chapter however, I want to take a dif­ferent approach 
to the problem of how to integrate evolutionary biology with ecosystem-level 
ecology—namely, a top-down approach. First, I want to consider the origin 
of ecosystems on Earth as an almost immediate consequence of the origin 
of life on Earth (see chapter 6). Then I want to consider the subsequent 
evolution of ecosystems as a function of the evolution of life on Earth. I am 
not going to consider the evolution of ecosystems in the light of SET, or 240 Chapter 8
neo-Darwinism, but rather in the light of NCT and of the more comprehen￾sive theory of evolution offered in the preceding chapters. My aim is to show 
how the additional phenomena incorporated by NCT, as well as some other 
contemporary approaches to evolution, may be able to throw more light than 
SET can on both the origin of ecosystems and their subsequent evolution.
THE FUNDAMENTAL UNITS OF LIFE
The fundamental units of life are not just cells, or organisms, in vacuo. They 
are organism-environment (or O-E) interactive niche relationships, where O 
is any organism and E is that organism’s environment (see chapter 6). This 
point traces to Lewontin’s (1983) observation that organisms cannot exist, 
except relative to their selective environments, and reciprocally that selective 
environments, as opposed to just surroundings, exist only relative to their 
organisms. The reason why interactive niche relationships are the fundamen￾tal units of life is due to the physical thermodynamic requirements of life, as 
described by Maxwell, von Neumann and Erwin Schrödinger (see chapter 1).
To recap, organisms are very-far-from-equilibrium systems relative to 
their environments. The energetics of life is doubly dependent on the inter￾actions between organisms and their environments. As Schrödinger (1944) 
originally put it, organisms must continuously import “negative entropy,”27
in the form of physical resources that are relatively high in free energy, from 
their environments, and they must continuously export entropy, in the form 
of physical resources that are lower in free energy, back to their environ￾ments. To allow organisms to live, their local environments must both be 
open, capable of absorbing the detritus that organisms inevitably generate by 
living without posing a threat to them, and be able to supply the organisms 
with sufficient free energy, or R
p
, to meet their needs.
Organisms also have to control a flow of energy and matter between 
themselves and their local environments in ways that allow them to resist 
the second law of thermodynamics, without violating it (see chapter 1). That 
introduces a third way in which organisms depend on their environments. 
Their environments must be sufficiently lawful, as specified by the laws of 241 The Origin and Evolution of Ecosystems
physics and chemistry and the putative “laws” or regularities of biology, to 
make it possible for organisms to acquire adaptive know-how (Ri
) from the 
causal textures of their environments. Organisms in evolving populations 
must acquire sufficient Ri
 to enable them to control a flow of energy and 
matter between themselves and their environments, in ways that allow them 
to survive and reproduce (see chapter 4).
Here, NCT emphasizes how the relationships between organisms and 
their environments are necessarily two-way-street interactions. Populations of 
organisms are changed by natural selection in their environments, as both SET 
and NCT acknowledge. But populations of organisms also niche-construct 
to modify environmental states. SET recognizes that niche construction 
occurs, but it does not recognize it as a cocausal process in evolution, along￾side natural selection. Conversely, NCT stresses that organisms have to 
niche-construct to control the energy and matter flows between themselves 
and their local environments on which their lives depend. Moreover, when 
they niche-construct, organisms inevitably cause some changes in their 
local environments, some of which feed back to modify natural selection 
again.
For NCT, organisms are goal-seeking systems. Minimally, they have 
to act purposefully in pursuit of their fitness goals of survival, growth, and 
reproduction. Individual organisms must be purposeful and active systems 
to achieve these fitness goals. Hence, when organisms change components 
of their external environments through their niche construction, the changes 
that they cause should reflect their goal-seeking purposes. This implies there 
must be an orderliness to the environmental change that arises from the niche￾constructing activities of organisms, as well as an orderliness to the modified 
selection that follows—a prediction that I made several years ago28 and that 
has subsequently been confirmed.29 These two-way-street interactive niche 
relationships, according to which evolving populations of organisms and their 
environments change each other, means that populations of organisms and 
their respective environments must coevolve. Moreover, both the biotic and 
abiotic components of the environments of organisms must participate in this 
coevolution. This point applies to all populations, in all ecosystems.242 Chapter 8
BIOENERGETIC AND BIOINFORMATIC FLOWS 
IN ECOSYSTEMS
All populations are bound to participate in energy and matter, or R
p
, flows 
in ecosystems, and to contribute to the generation of flows of evolutionarily 
significant information, or Ri
, in ecosystems. Each population utilizes and 
potentially contributes to the biogeochemical flows and cycles that they share 
with many other populations in their ecosystem. All populations niche￾construct, and therefore each must have a minimal capacity to modify natu￾ral selection, not only for themselves but also for other populations in their 
ecosystems. This happens as a consequence of the overlapping but not iden￾tical niches of diverse populations in ecosystems, and it should eventually 
affect all the populations in an ecosystem.
This point is consistent with Lewontin’s (1983) comment that evolu￾tionary theory should really be a general theory of organism-environment 
coevolution, rather than just a theory about the evolution of organisms. 
Since all populations in an ecosystem are coevolving with their own, and 
with some other organisms’, selective environments, it follows that all the 
components of ecosystems, both biotic and abiotic, must be connected to 
each other by energy and matter, or R
p
 flows, as has long been recognized by 
ecologists. However, they must also be connected by flows of evolutionarily 
significant information, or Ri
, that are generated by the coevolving popula￾tions of organisms with their environments. Like R
p
, Ri
 flows through both 
biota and abiota in ecosystems.
This second point has not been previously recognized by either ecologists
or evolutionary biologists. It implies that the integration of evolutionary biol￾ogy with ecosystem-level ecology is going to depend on our ability to under￾stand how these two flows, the bioenergetics (R
p) flow and the bioinformatics 
(Ri
) flow, interact with each other and change each other in ecosystems.
THE ORIGIN OF ECOSYSTEMS
I’ll start by considering a lifeless planet. In principle, it could be anywhere 
in the universe. The ones that we know most about are the other planets 243 The Origin and Evolution of Ecosystems
in our own solar system. On a lifeless planet, energy and matter flows can 
exist in the form of various kinds of geophysical and chemical interactions
among the nonliving abiotic components of such planets. But there are no 
flows of evolutionarily significant information on planets that have hitherto 
been lifeless.30 It is therefore possible to consider some of the basic proper￾ties of energy and matter flows without them being affected at all by even a 
rudimentary flow of evolutionary significant information.
Many geophysical activities, plus their associated dynamics, can occur 
on lifeless planets. Such changes are ultimately driven by the same four 
forces of nature that are apparently responsible for all the changes that hap￾pen throughout the universe. They are the force of gravity that works on 
the largest scale and the three other forces that stem from the properties of 
atoms and subatomic particles (namely, electromagnetism and weak and 
strong nuclear forces). On the scale of a lifeless planet, these forces can gener￾ate changes that can be observed at a distance (e.g., by human observers on 
Earth). Today, we can observe other planets, including other planets orbiting 
dif­ferent stars elsewhere in our galaxy, by both Earth-bound telescopes and 
telescopes in space. Nowadays, we can send well-equipped spacecraft to all
the other planets in our own solar system. This has already yielded a wealth 
of information about the contemporary state of these other planets and the 
dynamics of some of the geophysical changes that are currently occurring or 
did occur on these lifeless planets in the past. For instance, astronomers and 
astrophysicists have observed seasonal changes and changes of temperature 
on other planets. More dramatically, they have also observed volcanic activ￾ity, jets and flows of water and other liquids, storms, and interactions of these 
planets with their moons and satellites, including the rings of Saturn. Some 
of these planetary satellites, such as Europa, one of Jupiter’s moons, are also 
very active. The net result is that today, we probably know more about all the 
other planets in our solar system than we know about Earth before the ori￾gin of life. That refers to approximately the first 500 million years of Earth’s 
existence, starting with the Hadean geological era.31 We obviously cannot 
send “inquisitive” spacecraft back in time to visit the prebiotic Earth, but 
we do have one advantage. As we live on Earth, we can investigate whatever 244 Chapter 8
residual hints remain (e.g., in early rocks) about the probable or at least the 
possible state of Earth before life began.
After the initial formation of Earth’s first prebiotic atmosphere and the 
formation of its original oceans, there continued to be considerable geo￾physical activity during the Hadean era and the subsequent Archaean era. 
The principal drivers of this activity probably included both the direct 
and indirect consequences of the radiant energy from a younger Sun (e.g., 
storms, winds, waves, and a primitive hydrological cycle). After the birth of 
the Moon, they presumably also included interactions between the Earth, 
Moon and Sun, which should have resulted in the first tides in the oceans. 
Because the Moon will have been very close to Earth initially, the first tides 
would have been colossal. They would have included, not only tides in the 
oceans but “rock tides” on land as well, that heaved up and then released 
Earth’s surface, with each rotation of the Moon. There was also a great deal 
of volcanism, although maybe less than was thought earlier, and there were 
collisions between the early Earth and asteroids and meteorites.32
What scientists have learned from observing other planets, as well as from 
inferences about our own prebiotic Earth, tell us something about how pur￾poseless abiota interact with purposeless abiota on lifeless planets. When abiota 
react to other abiota, they merely react to each other, as well as to their sur￾roundings. These changes may appear to be surprisingly creative. They can 
sometimes create Stuart Kauffman’s “order for free.”33 In chemistry, they can also 
promote energy-producing endergonic reactions, as well as energy dissipating 
exergonic reactions (see chapter 4). Nevertheless, they are still just reactions.
All abiotic-by-abiotic interactions are purposeless in the same sense that 
physicists have learned to assume that the whole universe is purposeless. 
The universe may or may not be purposeless, but insofar as our incomplete 
understanding of it takes us, it does appear to be so. The cosmologist Stephen 
Weinberg once summed this up in a celebrated remark about the cosmos: 
“The more the universe seems comprehensible, the more it also seems point￾less.”34 Yet we don’t understand the cosmos enough to know if this is true. 
The only interactions that can occur on a dead planet are abiotic-by-abiotic
interactions. Here, I’ll assume that these abiotic interactions are not only 
reactions, but they are also completely purposeless.245 The Origin and Evolution of Ecosystems
All abiotic-by-abiotic interactions on lifeless planets have a common 
attractor. They all obey the second law of thermodynamics. They do so by 
contributing to a net increase in entropy. Their attractor is greater thermody￾namic stability, and ultimately greater disorder. Over vast spans of time, this 
implies the destruction of all lifeless planets. Any lifeless planet, or for that 
matter any planet with life, orbiting any star, is likely to be destroyed by the 
eventual breakup of its star. For example, as stars approach the end of their 
lifetimes, many of them morph into red giants. Our own Sun is expected to 
do just that. When it does, it will engulf and consume most of its planets, 
including Earth—but it’s not supposed to do that for a few billion years yet.
That’s a short but probably sufficient list of the principal features of the 
geophysical events arising from abiotic-by-abiotic interactions on lifeless
planets. The only reason for drawing attention to them is to contrast them 
with what can happen on a living planet.
THE EARTH WHEN LIFE FIRST ORIGINATED
What happens to these geochemical energy and matter, or R
p
 flows, when life 
first originates on a previously lifeless planet? How and why are these energy and 
matter flows changed by the presence of life? As we’ve already seen, the proper￾ties of all living organisms are very dif­ferent from the properties of nonliving 
systems. To stay alive, organisms have to actively resist the second law of thermo￾dynamics for the duration of their lives. No abiotic system has to do the same.
One consequence of the origin of life on any planet is that it introduces 
two novel kinds of interactions into these geochemical flows, neither of 
which can occur on a lifeless planet. They are biotic-by-abiotic interactions
and biotic-by-biotic interactions. The first novel interactions introduced by 
the origin of life on Earth would have been biotic-by-abiotic interactions
between the first purposeful living organisms and their purposeless abiotic 
environments. According to NCT, but not SET, these biotic-by-abiotic 
interactions would have initiated a flow of evolutionarily meaningful infor￾mation between the first organisms and their environments.
This flow of meaningful information, in the form of adaptive know￾how (Ri
), between the first organisms and their environments would have 246 Chapter 8
been generated by the first variant organisms responding to abiotic sources 
of natural selection in their environments. Crucially, it would also have 
depended on the feedback generated by the subsequent modification of 
natural selection pressures by the elementary niche-constructing activities 
of the first organisms. The initial niche-constructing activities of the first 
organisms, or cells, would have affected only their own immediate micro￾environments. They probably amounted to no more than the extraction of 
specific molecular energy and matter resources from their environments, 
combined with the dumping of specific molecular detritus back into their 
environments. However, when organisms niche-construct, they don’t just 
modify sources of natural selection in their own environments, they are also 
likely to modify some sources of natural selection in the environments of 
other organisms in their vicinity.
The addition of this new flow of evolutionarily meaningful information, 
generated by the first biotic-by-abiotic interactions between the first organ￾isms and their abiotic environments, would have had a further consequence. 
It would have triggered the first coevolutionary relationships between those 
organisms and their initial abiotic environments. These first coevolutionary 
relationships should have led these organisms and their environments to 
coevolve with each other by causing changes in each other by their two-way￾street interactions. Organisms will have modified their local environments, 
most likely pushing them into states that they could not have occupied on 
a lifeless planet. These interactions would have also have caused the new 
flow of evolutionarily meaningful information on a now-living planet to 
interact with the original geochemical energy and matter, or R
p
 flows, on the 
previously lifeless Earth. In combination, these two flows would then have 
merged to become the origin of the first biogeochemical flows on Earth.
The initial two-way street biotic-by-abiotic interactions between the first 
organisms and their initial abiotic environments should have been enough 
by themselves to introduce the first ecosystems on Earth. It should also have 
been enough to have converted the geochemical energy and matter flows 
on the previously lifeless Earth to biogeochemical flows of both energy and 
matter (R
p ) and meaningful information (Ri
) on the now-living planet. In 247 The Origin and Evolution of Ecosystems
their turn, these biogeochemical flows would have affected the flows of both 
R
p
 and Ri
, in all ecosystems, on all scales, up to and including the biosphere 
itself. This implies that there was no need to wait for the second kind of 
novel interactions, biotic-by-biotic interactions, between dif­ferent popula￾tions of organisms for the origin of the first ecosystems. If this hypothesis is 
correct, ecosystem-level ecology, based on no more than the coevolutionary 
interactions of the first organisms with their abiotic environments, should 
have preceded population-community ecology.
Now we can turn to the second kind of novel interaction introduced by 
the origin of life on Earth. These biotic-by-biotic interactions would prob￾ably have been introduced quite rapidly after life appeared. They would 
have comprised the interactions between dif­ferent organisms in dif­ferent 
evolving populations and dif­ferent species, or perhaps cell lines. The fun￾damental origin of these biotic-by-biotic interactions would have been the 
reproductive capacity of the first organisms. By reproducing, organisms 
immediately change their own interactive niche relationships with their 
environments by introducing new organisms (namely, their daughter cells,
or “offspring”) into their own and each other’s environments. Reproduction 
is hence another kind of elementary niche construction (see chapter 6). The 
reproductive capacity of organisms represents another way in which living 
organisms are unlike the abiotic components of their environments. The 
biogeochemical flows of energy and matter that organisms encounter in their
environments will now include other purposeful, active, fuel-consuming,
detritus-generating agents like themselves, as well as abiota.
The presence of other organisms in the environments of all organisms 
is then responsible for another distinction between biotic-by-abiotic and
biotic-by-biotic interactions. Abiotic sources of natural selection, even if 
they have been previously modified by the purposeful niche-constructing 
activities of organisms, are completely indifferent to the subsequent fates of 
the organisms on which they act. For example, rainfall is a significant source 
of natural selection in the environments of multiple species of organisms, 
but the rainfall itself is indifferent to the subsequent fates of the organisms 
that it affects.248 Chapter 8
The same is not true of biotic sources of natural selection. For exam￾ple, if two species of organisms are competing for the same environmental 
resource, then the organisms in both competing species will themselves be 
affected by the natural selection that each is generating for the other. When 
organisms interact with each other, they are likely to affect each other’s fit￾ness goals.
These differences between biotic-by-abiotic and biotic-by-biotic inter￾actions are likely to be both evolutionarily and ecologically significant. For 
example, on average, organisms are likely to need relatively less adaptive 
know-how, or Ri
, to respond adaptively to abiotic sources of natural selection 
than they do to respond to biotic sources of natural selection. To respond 
adaptively to abiota, organisms need to “know” only two things. They need
to know some relevant lawful properties of the abiota that they are interact￾ing with, as described by the laws of nature, and they need to know about 
the consequences of their own actions on the abiota with which they are 
interacting. Organisms need to be able to anticipate or predict, or at least 
prepare for, the consequences of their own actions on other abiota. But they 
don’t need to know much more than that.
However, when organisms interact with other organisms, they do need 
to know more. Ideally, they need to know something about the fitness goals 
and purposes of the other organisms they are interacting with, as well as some 
relevant lawful properties of the biota they are interacting with as described 
by the laws of nature. For instance, they may need to know something about 
how these other organisms can niche-construct. They also may need to know 
the likely consequences of their own purposeful actions on both the purpose￾ful fitness goals of the organisms that they are acting on, as well as on their 
own fitness goals. This means that the adaptive know-how, or Ri
, that they 
acquire from natural selection arising from other organisms should reflect 
something about the purposeful fitness goals of those organisms.
It is usually more difficult to predict how the purposes and niche￾constructing activities of other organisms are going to play out than to pre￾dict how purposeless abiotic systems may change in the future. It is likely to 
be more difficult to anticipate or predict the activities of active purposeful 
systems than the reactions of passive purposeless objects. Biology is harder 249 The Origin and Evolution of Ecosystems
than physics, as implied by Schrödinger’s analysis of what more is needed, 
beyond the known laws of physics and chemistry, to understand life?35
ADDITIONAL CONSEQUENCES OF BIOTA
Another consequence of these novel interactions between biota and abiota 
or biota and biota is that informed purposeful organisms may be able to 
recruit and harness some of the laws and forces of nature for their own pur￾poses. For instance, organisms can sometimes drive abiotic components 
of their environments into new physical states through biotic-by-abiotic
interactions that could never occur on a lifeless planet. For example, this 
is true of animal artifacts such as beavers’ dams or human houses, partly 
or entirely constructed out of abiotic materials but which could never arise 
without the purposeful activities of organisms. Biotic-by-biotic interac￾tions can also drive novel changes in evolving populations of organisms 
that are dif­ferent from any changes induced by abiotic-by-abiotic interac￾tions. For instance, reed warblers would probably never have started to 
hide their nests, nor would cuckoos have started to disguise their eggs by 
making them look more like reed warblers’ eggs, in the absence of each 
other.36
I also need to say a bit more about the biogeochemical cycles, intro￾duced by the origin of life on Earth. Rather than considering origin-of￾life biogeochemical cycles, about which little is known, I’ll focus instead 
on the contributions of contemporary organisms to contemporary large￾scale biogeochemical cycles, such as the nitrogen, carbon, and hydrological 
cycles. For example, the contemporary nitrogen cycle on Earth begins with 
the active agency of bacteria that converts atmospheric nitrogen (N2
) into 
ammonia (NH3
), which can subsequently be used by plants in contemporary 
ecosystems. Nitrification is the process that converts ammonia into nitrite 
ions, which the plants can take in as nutrients. Similarly, the last step in 
the nitrogen cycle also depends on bacteria actively converting the residual 
nitrogen compounds left over by living organisms, typically in the form of 
their waste products, back into nitrogen gas, which is then returned to the 
atmosphere, possibly to be recycled.250 Chapter 8
THE CONSTRUCTAL LAW
Before leaving this hypothesis about the origin of the first ecosystems on Earth, 
I would like to draw attention to the apparent consistency of my hypothesis 
with the constructal law, described by Adrian Bejan and Peder Zane.37 Bejan 
and Zane propose that, in conjunction with the laws of thermodynamics as 
well as the other laws of physics and chemistry, the constructal law is respon￾sible for the designs of all inanimate and animate systems in nature.
Bejan and Zane propose that all systems in nature that demonstrate 
design facilitate the many kinds of dynamic flows that occur in nature. The 
flows that they talk about include abiotic flows of lava and flowing rivers 
and biotic flows of blood through the vascular systems of animals. I assume 
that all these flows are ultimately derived from the fundamental flow of 
negative entropy to entropy, as Schrödinger (1944) put it, or from lower￾entropy states to higher-entropy states, as described by the second law of 
thermodynamics. I also assume that these flows include both the energy and 
matter (R
p ) flows and the flows of evolutionarily meaningful information 
(Ri
) between the first organisms and their first local environments, that were 
responsible for the origin of both the first biogeochemical cycles and the first 
ecosystems on Earth.
The authors’ approach implies that, in spite of its gloomy prognosis 
about the ultimate dissipation of everything at the end of time, in the mean￾time, the processes described by the second law of thermodynamics must 
actually be very creative. Is the function of all design in nature, inanimate as 
well as animate, to accelerate the flow of lower entropy to higher entropy by 
its creativity of everything everywhere in the universe? That is an astonishing 
question, based on an intriguingly counterintuitive idea. It goes well beyond 
the hypothesis that I am advocating here. Nonetheless, I suspect that it might 
be true, and if so, that it might one day lead physicists to a significantly better 
understanding of the laws of thermodynamics.
THE SUBSEQUENT EVOLUTION OF ECOSYSTEMS
After considering the origin of ecosystems, I want to turn to their subse￾quent evolution. What drives the evolution of ecosystems? I suggest that the 251 The Origin and Evolution of Ecosystems
evolution of ecosystems must have begun with individual organisms having 
to resist the second law of thermodynamics, by energy and matter, or R
p
, 
consuming work. Organisms have to work to oppose the flow of energy and 
matter between themselves and their environments that is favored by the 
second law to stay alive. But, as we also saw before, organisms can achieve 
their fitness goals of survival and reproduction only by actively protecting 
their essential variables. In this instance, to do so, organisms have to keep a 
third variable—namely, the varying relationships between their own vary￾ing phenotypic traits and the varying natural selection pressures that they 
encounter in their environments, which are continuously adaptive (see the 
discussion of Ashby in chapter 3). However, organisms cannot be adaptive, 
relative to either abiotic or biotic sources of selection, unless they are suf￾ficiently well informed by evolution with appropriate adaptive know-how, 
or Ri
.
This Ri
 must be about how specific organisms can adapt to specific 
sources of natural selection in their specific environments. But this takes 
us back again to the R
p
–Ri
 relationship and its associated dilemma. At 
the origin of life, since both R
p
 and Ri
 depend on the prior acquisition 
by organisms of the other, the dilemma is: “Which came first, R
p
 or Ri
, 
and how did life on Earth get started?” The prevailing hypothesis is that 
both R
p
 and Ri
 resources must have been acquired by the first organisms 
almost simultaneously, possibly in a ribonucleic acid (RNA) world (see 
chapter 6).38
However, this dilemma is not just an origin-of-life dilemma. It never 
goes away. The R
p
–Ri
 dilemma applies to all organisms in all evolving popula￾tions, at all times and in all places. It therefore has to be resolved by specific 
individual organisms interacting with specific sources of natural selection
in their idiosyncratic environments. The dilemma reoccurs every time that 
there is a change in the relationship between organisms and their environ￾ments. Organisms can resolve this reoccurring “Which came first, R
p
 or 
Ri
?” dilemma only insofar as their interactions with both abiotic and biotic 
components of their environment are continuously adaptive. They must be 
adaptive, not only relative to specific natural selection pressures that indi￾vidual organisms encounter, but also relative to a set of rules that govern the 252 Chapter 8
relationship between R
p
 and Ri
. We saw some of these rules in chapter 7, but 
here is a more comprehensive list:
Rule 1: R
p
 is relative to Ri
. Organisms need Ri
, a priori, to gain R
p
. Unless 
organisms already carry the appropriate adaptive know-how, or Ri
, to 
harvest specific sources of free energy, or R
p
, from their environments, 
they will not be able to acquire the R
p
 that they need to live, nor will they
be able to dump their detritus back into their environments adaptively. 
They will therefore not be able to achieve their fitness goals.
Rule 2: The acquisition of Ri
 costs R
p
, a priori. This is because all evolution￾ary and developmental processes are energy-consuming and detritus￾generating processes. According to this rule, the acquisition of sufficient 
R
p
 has to occur before further Ri
 can be acquired. If acquiring both 
R
p
 and Ri
 depends on the acquisition of each other a priori, then that 
accounts for the origin-of-life dilemma.
Rule 3: The Ri
 carried by organisms here and now is relative to prior natu￾ral selection pressures or other prior selective processes (e.g., cultural 
selection processes in humans). It is not necessarily adaptive relative to 
contemporary natural selection pressures in the contemporary environ￾ments of organisms.
Rule 4: Sources of natural selection for organisms may change either because
of autonomous environmental events or because they have been 
modified by the prior niche-constructing activities of organisms. The 
changes then reintroduce the R
p
–Ri
 dilemma. The reoccurrences of this 
dilemma then requires new resolutions from organisms.
Before describing any further rules, I’ll consider some of the possible
ways in which organisms may resolve the R
p
–Ri
 dilemma within the scope 
of these first four. The principal possibilities are as follows. After any change
in the interactive relationship between the organisms and their environ￾ments, given their current Ri
, organisms may no longer be able to harvest 
sufficient R
p
 to resist the second law. This means they may no longer be able 
to survive. Some organisms may be able to survive for a time with less R
p
, 
but over time, provided that the population does not go extinct, the changes 
in their environments are likely to favor the selection of novel phenotypes, 
corresponding to additional Ri
. This will require further evolution. However, 253 The Origin and Evolution of Ecosystems
any given population may not be able to pay for the extra R
p
 demanded by 
further evolution. If a population lacks sufficient physical resources to evolve, 
it may become extinct. To survive, it has to resolve the R
p
 versus Ri
 dilemma 
again to adapt to its changed environment.
Another possible problem for evolving organisms is that they may fall 
into an historical trap. Because organisms can evolve only from where they 
are at the moment, they may get stuck with the same body-plan, or the same
entrenched behaviors, irreversibly, lacking the evolvability to respond fully 
to the changed natural selection pressures in their environments.39
Alternatively, they may be able to evolve in some directions but not 
others. One example is bilaterian organisms, which having once evolved, can 
never shed their bilaterian body plan during the course of their subsequent 
evolution, even though in other respects, they may have high evolvability. A 
second example is the respiratory system in insects, which breathe through 
trachea on the surfaces of their bodies. But this means they can never grow 
larger in volume than their surface area and its associated respiratory system 
allows. Insects are enormously evolvable in most directions, but not in the 
direction of larger body size.
There are also potential solutions to these problems compatible with 
these rules. For instance, in response to changing sources of natural selection 
in its environment, organisms may use the adaptive know-how, or Ri
, that 
they already possess to harvest novel sources of free energy, or R
p
, in their 
environments. This amounts to evolutionary opportunism, or perhaps to 
Gould and Vrba’s concept of exaptation.40 Another possibility is that indi￾vidual organisms in a population may modify a source of natural selection
in their external environment in ways that benefit them through their niche￾constructing activities. For instance, organisms can oppose some changed 
sources of selection in their environments, by counteractive niche construc￾tion, such as when an organism digs a burrow or builds a nest to counter the
extremes of temperature.41 But it will still cost them some extra R
p
 to do so.
A third possibility is that two or more evolving populations may be able 
to pool their adaptive know-how in mutual or collaborative relationships. 
They will then gain the extra Ri
 they need to harvest more R
p
 by sharing and 
combining some of their Ri
 with that of a mutualistic partner. A well-known 
example is the relationship between fungal mycorrhizae and the roots of 254 Chapter 8
plants. In this case, each of the mutualistic partners supplies a nutrient to 
the other that the other needs but cannot harvest for itself on the basis of 
its own Ri
 alone.
A fourth possibility is for a population, confronted by new selection 
pressures, to retreat to a more restricted niche in time and space to avoid 
the changed natural selection, or for a population to evolve to become more 
of a specialist. In the latter case, a specialist population might be able to 
outcompete more generalist competitors relative to a reduced number of 
energy and matter, or R
p
, resources in its environment. In this way, it might 
be able to retain its viability. In general, if organisms are to resolve the R
p
-Ri
dilemma following changes in their local external environments, they will
have to do so by changing their interactions with either abiotic or biotic
sources of natural selection in ways that are consistent with the rules that 
govern the dilemma.
We have already considered biotic-by-abiotic interactions at some 
length. These interactions are comparatively straightforward. Abiotic sources 
of natural selection in the environments of organisms stem from purposeless 
reactive systems, which have no capacity for niche construction. In contrast, 
biotic sources of natural selection in the environments of organisms are 
potentially much more complicated. Biotic sources of selection stem from 
other purposeful organisms that are capable of purposeful niche-constructing 
activities and of pursuing their own fitness goals. These differences between 
abiotic and biotic sources of selection then affect how organisms either do
or do not manage to resolve the R
p
–Ri
 dilemma.
If, in imagination, we now return to an early near-origin-of-life scenario,
it seems likely that the first biotic-by-biotic interactions between organisms, 
in dif­ferent but overlapping interactive niche relationships, would have been 
competitive. In ecological shorthand, competitive relationships are referred 
to as “minus-minus” relationships since each population has a negative 
impact on the other’s fitness. These minus-minus relationships can refer to 
competing organisms in either the same or dif­ferent evolving populations. 
Ultimately, competition between organisms would have been a consequence 
of the capacity of organisms to reproduce. This reproductive capacity of the 
first organisms would have led to the multiplication of organisms, equipped 255 The Origin and Evolution of Ecosystems
with either exactly or nearly the same adaptive know-how, and occupying 
adjacent and probably strongly overlapping niches in environmental space 
and time.
Presumably dif­ferent organisms, with nearly the same Ri
 but in slightly 
dif­ferent but overlapping niches, would have attempted to harvest the same 
or similar energy and matter resources, or R
p
, from their shared local envi￾ronments. They must also have dumped nearly the same detritus back into 
their environments. In both these respects, closely related organisms in 
almost identical niches should have competed with each other. Competi￾tion between organisms sometimes may have been made worse by a growth 
in the size of the population of organisms to which they belong. Typically, 
in contemporary populations, it is made worse when the size of evolving 
populations start to exceed the carrying capacity of their environments rela￾tive to specific sources of R
p
. It may also be made worse when a growing 
population of organisms exhausts the capacity for its environment to act as 
a sink for its detritus.
A possible solution to excessive competition between coevolving popula￾tions of organisms that is consistent with the abovementioned rules could have 
occurred if some individual organisms had discovered that they could exploit 
a dif­ferent source of energy, or R
p
, in their shared environments, from any 
exploited by their competitors. They could have done this by utilizing the 
same adaptive know-how, or Ri
, in a novel way. The general point here is that 
competitive relationships among some of the first organisms on Earth should 
have acted as a spur toward their subsequent diversification.
The second classical ecological relationship that could have evolved soon 
after the origin of life may have been some kind of cooperative or mutu￾alistic relationship (in ecological shorthand, a “plus-plus” relationship), 
among coevolving populations. Initially, the first cooperative relationships 
among the earliest organisms would have been elementary. For example, 
individual microorganisms may have assisted each other by combining their 
structural features to withstand or dissipate material energy and matter forces 
in their environments that may have threatened them. An early example of 
this kind of elementary cooperation is provided by the stromatolite bacterial 
mats that are still found in Australia and are known to date to more than 256 Chapter 8
three billion years ago.42 More complex mutualistic relationships involving an 
exchange of dif­ferent resources among organisms could not have appeared until
some diversity among early organisms had evolved. Many mutualisms depend 
on the ability of organisms in dif­ferent niches to trade with each other.
43 They 
may trade either in informational (Ri
) resources, in energy and matter (or R
p) 
resources, or both.44 But if they are to cooperate, they must trade.
The third classical ecological relationship between dif­ferent organisms
in dif­ferent interactive niche relationships is the asymmetrical (or “plus￾minus”) relationship between predators and prey or parasites and their hosts. 
Predator-prey relationships could not have appeared in ecosystems until at
least some organisms were able to gain energy and matter by consuming 
other organisms. That would probably have required the evolution of some 
kind of phagocytosis whereby microorganisms engulfed and then consumed 
other microorganisms.
The predator-prey relationship between metazoan organisms that occur 
in contemporary ecosystems could only have evolved much later. An earlier
asymmetrical relationship might have been that between parasites and 
their hosts, such as between viruses and bacteria or archaea. Unfortunately, 
we still know far too little about either the origin or the subsequent evolution 
of viruses, or even whether viruses can be described as alive, independent of
their host. Other kinds of parasites probably evolved only after viruses had 
already appeared.
At this point, all the classical ecological relationships that occur in con￾temporary ecosystems, including commensal relationships (+/0 and −/0), 
would probably have been in place. In commensal relationships, one popu￾lation of organisms typically acts as a catalyst for the evolution of another 
population, but the second population is irrelevant to the first population. 
Collectively, all these ecological relationships between evolving populations 
would have formed networks of populations or species, interacting with each 
other in ecosystems.45
Another difference between SET and the present more comprehensive 
theory of evolution is also relevant. The difference also has its roots in the 
relationship between the bioenergetics and the bioinformatics of evolution, 
or the R
p
 and Ri
 relationship. Evolutionary and developmental processes257 The Origin and Evolution of Ecosystems
should always be searching for the most thermodynamically efficient solu￾tions to the problem of supplying organisms with adaptive know-how (Ri
). 
This is because more thermodynamically efficient solutions are always likely 
to outcompete less efficient solutions in any particular evolving population.
This point is connected to Richard Watson’s ideas about more￾parsimonious evolutionary algorithms prevailing over less-parsimonious
algorithms.46 It is as if Occam’s razor applies to both evolutionary and devel￾opmental processes, demanding that they are constantly searching for greater 
thermodynamic efficiency when supplying organisms with their adaptive 
know-how. The putative Occam’s razor refers to the universal demand for all 
organisms to continuously solve the R
p
–Ri
 dilemma in the context of their 
changing environments. It also applies to the structurally and functionally 
adaptive know-how, or Ri
, needed by particular organisms to enable them
to adapt to the idiosyncrasies of their particular local external environments.
What is meant by greater thermodynamic efficiency here? One way to 
answer this question is to introduce some extra rules that describe how organ￾isms might achieve greater thermodynamic efficiency during their evolution:
Rule 5: Organisms should use whatever adaptive know-how, or Ri
, they 
already possess with maximum efficiency. They should therefore either
maximize the amount of free energy, or R
p
, that they can harvest from 
their environments, or possibly maximize the rate of energy gain, by uti￾lizing whatever adaptive know-how, or Ri
, they currently possess. They 
should also minimize the destruction (or perhaps rate of destruction) 
that they cause to their environments by emitting detritus.
Rule 6: If organisms increase their adaptive know-how, or Ri
, by further 
evolution, they should minimize the energy and matter or R
p
 cost that 
they have to pay for their further evolution. This implies that natural
selection should favor levels of robustness, plasticity and bet-hedging
that optimize the population’s evolvability.
From rule 6, it is possible to derive two further rules:
Rule 7: Organisms should always be prepared to pay an extra R
p
 cost for 
extra Ri
, provided that by doing so, they are enabled to gain more R
p
from their external local environments than the R
p
 cost of their extra Ri
.258 Chapter 8
Rule 8: If the free energy, or R
p
, cost of expressing the Ri
 that organisms 
already carry is greater than the payoff in R
p
 that they gain by express￾ing that Ri
, then they should either switch off the Ri
 or maybe edit 
it out. They should no longer express it. They should only carry and 
express profitable Ri
, relative to both the harvesting of R
p
 from their 
external environments and the dumping of detritus back into their exter￾nal environments.
These rules are not exhaustive. It’s likely that further rules may be gener￾ated if and when the centrality of the reoccurring R
p
–Ri
 dilemma is recognized 
more fully.
In the light of this discussion, I again suggest that the subsequent evo￾lution of ecosystems could not have occurred in the context of organisms 
responding to autonomous sources of natural selection in their environments, 
as SET suggests. I propose that the subsequent evolution of ecosystems must 
have occurred in the context of organism-environment coevolution, driven 
by the two-way-street interactions between niche-constructing organisms 
and abiotic and biotic sources of natural selection in their environments, as 
NCT specifies. These two-way-street interactions between organisms and 
their environments must also have provided the links between the energy and 
matter (i.e., R
p ) flows and the flows of evolutionarily meaningful informa￾tion (i.e., Ri
), that characterize ecosystems.
These links would have converted the geochemical flows of energy and 
matter that occur on lifeless planets, and were present on Earth before the 
origin of life, to the biogeochemical cycles combining flows of both energy 
and matter and meaningful information that now occur on Earth. These 
biogeochemical flows and cycles would then have become additional sources 
of change, driving the subsequent evolution of ecosystems on Earth. I also 
propose that the evolution of ecosystems must occur in the context of a reoc￾curring R
p
–Ri
 dilemma, which has to be continuously resolved by evolving 
populations in ways that are compatible with all these rules.
Finally, I want to consider the trophic pyramids that occur in dif­ferent
ecosystems. These pyramids must have evolved long after the origin of life on 
Earth. They go some way toward answering the question “Who eats whom?” 259 The Origin and Evolution of Ecosystems
in ecology. The following, crudely oversimple description of a trophic pyra￾mid will suffice. I deal more fully with trophic pyramids in chapter 10. At 
its base, a trophic pyramid typically includes primary producers, which gain 
their energy directly from sunlight via photosynthesis. At the next level up 
(which I’ll call “level 2”), the pyramid typically comprises herbivores, which 
feed on the primary producers at the base level. At level 3, above the herbi￾vores, small carnivores typically feed on herbivores. At level 4 in the pyramid, 
large carnivores feed on small carnivores.
Trophic pyramids describe what is sometimes called the “grazing path” 
in ecosystems. However, there is also a “detritus path” comprising the detri￾tivores, which feed on the detritus generated by organisms on the grazing 
path at all levels in these pyramids. The detritus path is subordinate to the 
grazing path and could evolve only after at least a rudimentary grazing path 
already existed. It is also intimately connected to the grazing path at all levels 
in a trophic pyramid.
This intimacy is captured by Hamlet in the play of that name by Shake￾speare. In act IV, scene iii, Hamlet is talking to his mother, Queen Gertrude. 
Hamlet suddenly realizes that he is being overheard by someone behind a
curtain. Hamlet draws his sword and kills the man. He discovers that the 
man is a courtier called Polonius, sent by King Claudius to spy on him. He 
then removes Polonius’s body. Enter the king: “Now Hamlet, where’s Polo￾nius?” he asks. “At supper,” replies Hamlet. “At supper! Where?” asks the king 
again. “Not where he eats, but where he is eaten,” replies Hamlet. For Polo￾nius, the detritus path was only a sword thrust away from his grazing path.
One easy way to illustrate the validity of these rules is to reconsider 
some of the major transitions in bioenergetics of evolution described by 
Judson and discussed in chapter 5, while simultaneously considering how 
they interact with the bioinformatics of evolution.47 In Judson’s scheme, the 
five major transitions in bioenergetics are geochemical, sunshine, oxygen, 
flesh, and fire. Let’s consider sunshine first. The Sun is a huge external source 
of energy, or R
p
, that must have been present at the origin of life on Earth. 
But no organisms could harvest this source of energy until they had evolved 
sufficient adaptive know-how, or Ri
, to enable them to do so by photosyn￾thesis (see rules 1 and 2).260 Chapter 8
What about the next transition, oxygen? Most organisms need extra 
adaptive know-how, or Ri
, to defend themselves against the toxicity of oxy￾gen, as well as to benefit from it (again consistent with rules 1 and 2). The 
origin of eukaryote cells,48 a major transition in bioinformatics,49 also merits 
consideration. Extra energy, or R
p
, was acquired by single-cell organisms
when they first engulfed mitochondria organelles by the process of endo￾morphism.50 Instead of consuming the mitochondrial organelles, the cells 
harnessed the extra energy and matter, or R
p
, provided by the mitochondria. 
The cells were then able to utilize the extra energy provided by the mitochon￾dria that they had engulfed to acquire more genes, and therefore potentially 
more Ri
, during their subsequent evolution.51 More to the point, single-cell
organisms now had enough energy to acquire and express extra genes and 
novel adaptations relative to their environment. The extra energy provided 
by mitochondria subsequently led to the evolution of multicellular or meta￾zoan organisms, which for more than two billion years had not been possible
because of a lack of energy.52
SUMMARY
We cannot do much more with this top-down approach to the evolution of 
ecosystems that I’ve just been sketching. We need to return to bottom-up 
approaches as well. Possibly the main contribution of the present top-down 
approach has been to emphasize the role of the two-way-street relationship 
between niche-constructing organisms and abiotic and biotic sources of 
natural selection in their environments. These two-way street interactions 
are responsible for the coevolution of environments with their organisms. 
They were also responsible for converting the original geochemical flows of 
energy and matter on Earth before the origin of life to the biogeochemical 
cycles that combine the flows of both energy and matter, or R
p
, and meaning￾ful information, or Ri
, relative to each other that occur on the living Earth. 
They were, and still are, responsible for the ongoing evolution of ecosys￾tems on Earth today, driving change not just in biota, but in abiota too. As 
Lewontin (1983) intuited, evolution is a process of organism-environment 
coevolution.In this penultimate chapter, I want to consider the case for extending the 
modern synthetic theory of evolution. I propose to do that by reconsidering 
some of its core assumptions, which have now been adopted by contemporary 
evolutionary theory, here labeled “standard evolutionary theory (SET).” What 
else is needed beyond the assumptions of SET to enable us to understand the 
evolution of life better than we do at the moment? How can evolutionary 
theory be extended to the point at which it can incorporate the new data accu￾mulating in all the subdisciplines of biology, ranging from molecular biology 
to ecosystem ecology and paleobiology, as well as other disciplines?
I’ll start by considering two of the principal assumptions of SET, which 
we first encountered in chapter 1. One is that genetic inheritance is the only
inheritance system that matters in the evolution of populations. The other 
is the closely associated assumption that there is no such thing as the inheri￾tance of acquired characteristics, such as that described by Jean-Baptiste 
Lamarck (see chapter 5). According to SET, it is not possible for evolving 
populations to be influenced by any characteristics that individual organisms 
acquire during their lifetimes. According to SET, all the characteristics an 
individual organism acquires during its life are erased when the organism 
dies. Consequently, genetic inheritance becomes the only inheritance system 
recognized by SET that is relevant to evolution.
The principal effect of these two assumptions of SET is to downgrade 
the role of phenotypes in evolution. From the SET standpoint, phenotypes 
are relevant in evolution only insofar as they survive and reproduce and pass 
9 EXTENDING THE SYNTHESIS262 Chapter 9
on their naturally selected genes, along with chance-based mutations, to
viable offspring in the next generation.
These two assumptions of SET do not mean that phenotypes in evolv￾ing populations are necessarily determined by naturally selected genes and 
chance-based mutations. But given that, according to SET, individual 
organisms cannot transmit any of their acquired characteristics or traits to 
their offspring, individual organisms might as well be treated as if they were 
genetically determined. This accounts for the gene’s-eye view of evolution, 
as described by Richard Dawkins in his book The Selfish Gene.1
 In SET, the 
phenotypes of organisms become little more than transitory, throwaway 
“survival machines” for their potentially “immortal genes.”2
In spite of this downgrading of the role of phenotypes in evolution, the 
modern synthesis, and later SET, were enormously successful in expanding the 
comprehension of evolution in the twentieth century. SET led to numerous 
advances in the understanding of evolutionary processes, which benefited ani￾mal and plant breeders. The breeders’ equation, R=h2
S, encapsulates SET. This 
equation specifies that the evolutionary response (R) of a population is given by 
the product of the narrow heritability (h2
), which is the fraction of phenotypic 
variance that can be attributed to variation in the additive effects of genes, 
and the selection differential (S), which specifies the relationship between trait 
values and fitness. The equation greatly advanced the scientific use of artificial 
selection by plant and animal breeders. As well as discrete characteristics such 
as eye color, it can handle continuous characteristics, or phenotypic traits such
as height or birth weight, by assuming that there are many genetic loci, each of
which has a small effect on a specific phenotypic trait.3
 However, this equation 
excludes any cryptic inheritance, such as recessive genes in heterozygotic organ￾isms that natural selection cannot “see” because they are not expressed in the 
current generation by the phenotypes that the selection is acting on. Perhaps 
more important, it excludes extragenetic forms of inheritance.4
The problem with this gene’s-eye view approach to evolution is that 
SET’s assumption that genetic inheritance is the only inheritance system 
that matters in the evolution of populations can no longer be defended. 
We now know that there are many nongenetic or extragenetic inheritance
systems that play a role in evolution, in addition to the genetic inheritance263 Extending the Synthesis
system described by SET.5
 The second assumption—that organisms can never 
transmit any phenotypic traits that they may acquire during their lifetimes 
to their offspring—can no longer be defended either.
6
 We now know that 
many species of organisms can transmit some of the phenotypic traits that 
they acquire during their lives to their offspring—ranging from prions, to hor￾mones, to antibodies, to symbionts, to learned knowledge—via one or more 
of these nongenetic inheritance systems in evolution.7
There is one caveat. Although SET rejects Lamarckian inheritance, to 
some extent it can still explain some acquired characteristics and phenotypic 
plasticity in organisms quite well without abandoning its assumptions. This is 
sometimes referred to as “phenotypic plasticity,” which is determined by open 
gene programs in evolution.8
 For example, the reaction norms of phenotypes 
in response to dif­ferent environments in both plants and animals can often be 
explained satisfactorily by SET. Reaction norms that depend on contingent, 
genetic instructions (such as if in environment A, a genotype expresses pheno￾type X, but if in environment B, the same genotype expresses phenotype Y) are 
compatible with the assumptions of SET. These kinds of contingent genetic
instructions can explain many of the reaction norms expressed by both plants 
and animals, including traits that change continuously with an environmental 
variable without contradicting the assumptions of SET.
For example, plastic developmental responses allow some plants to expe￾rience an enhanced oxygen environment in the event of flooding. Plants in 
flood-prone habitats suffer a severe drop in oxygen if their shoots become 
submerged. However, in some species, the submerged shoots produce leaves 
with enlarged surface areas and thinner epidermal cell walls, which provide 
the plant with a supply of carbon dioxide. Together with a reorientation
of chloroplasts toward the epidermis, the net effect of these changes is a
higher underwater photosynthetic rate that results in elevated tissue oxygen 
concentration.9
Another example of phenotypic plasticity that appears to be compatible 
with SET’s assumptions, this time in an animal, is the coat-color markings 
of the Himalayan rabbit.10 The extremities of this animal, such as its feet and 
nose, are colored dark brown or black, but the rest of its body is white. This is 
due to a contingent genetic instruction relating to ambient temperature. Any 264 Chapter 9
part of the rabbit’s body that is regularly below a temperature of 32°C during 
the animal’s development turns black. This accounts for its extremities being 
black, as they are usually the coldest part of the animal. Conversely, any part 
of its body that is above this temperature turns white because the mechanism 
for turning black breaks down. This coloration is not only attractive, it is 
probably adaptive as well. In a snow-and-ice landscape, the black extremities 
of the animal absorb heat better, and the main part of the body being white 
is better for camouflage.
Not all kinds of phenotypic plasticity can be satisfactorily explained by 
SET. Consider, for instance, epigenetic processes. Biologists use the word 
“epigenetics” in many ways. One common way is to describe the mecha￾nisms of the molecular modification of gene expression. Bonduriansky and 
Day11 describe two kinds of epigenetic mechanism: “obligate” and “faculta￾tive.” Obligatory epigenetic processes are controlled by genes and specify 
molecular attachments to DNA, histones, or RNA, which alter patterns of 
gene expression and allow cells to acquire alternative molecular cell profiles. 
For example, obligatory epigenetics is responsible for the differentiation of 
various tissues in developing embryos. Leaving symbionts to one side, all 
the cells in multicellular organisms contain the same genomes, and therefore 
the same genes, but obligatory epigenetic processes determine which genes
are expressed and which are not in particular cells and particular tissues. For 
instance, epigenetic processes determine which tissues will eventually turn 
into muscle, skin, neural, or heart tissue as the embryo develops. Accord￾ing to the current understanding, obligatory epigenetic processes make no
contribution to transgenerational inheritances in evolving populations. For 
these reasons, obligatory epigenetic processes are ostensibly fully compatible 
with the assumptions of SET.
Conversely, Bonduriansky and Day define facultative epigenetic pro￾cesses as either partly or wholly independent of DNA sequences in the
genomes of organisms. They either can involve spontaneous changes or be 
induced by environmental factors. Sometimes these changes can also be
passed on to offspring through transgenerational inheritances in the form 
of an epigenetic inheritance. In the latter case, they are incompatible with 
the core assumptions of SET.265 Extending the Synthesis
There are three main ways in which epigenetic processes can interact 
with genetic processes, which correspond to three principal kinds of molecu￾lar mechanisms that can either turn off or regulate the expression of par￾ticular genes.12 These are DNA methylation, the modification of histone 
proteins, and noncoding RNAs, including interference RNA. Each of these
mechanisms modifies the expression of the base-pair sequences of DNA in
the genomes of dif­ferent organisms.
Typically, in organisms such as mammals, the more methylation takes 
place, the less particular DNA sequences are expressed. Histone proteins 
affect chromatid structure via tightly bundled regions that shield DNA from 
expression. Small, noncoding RNAs do not make proteins. They appear to 
have regulatory roles, influencing which genes are expressed when, where, 
and by how much. They work primarily by affecting the regulation of specific 
genes in gene regulatory networks (GRNs). All these mechanisms are highly 
dynamic and sensitive to environmental conditions.
One example occurs in toadflax (Linaria vulgaris), a small, flowering 
plant. Two variants of this plant exist, with strikingly dif­ferent petal struc￾tures. The more common variety has asymmetric flower structures; the other 
is symmetric. Throughout most of the twentieth century, it was assumed that 
these differences were due to a genetic mutation in the less common variety, 
in line with the assumptions of SET. In 1999, it became possible to sequence
the genomes of both varieties of this plant. It was then discovered that the 
two variant toadflax plants had identical genes with respect to the determina￾tion of their flower structures, but they differed in their epigenetics. It was 
later discovered that their variability was due to a difference between their 
epigenomes, with the symmetrical form exhibiting extensive methylation of 
a gene that affects flower shape.13
This “epi-mutation” must have been transmitted across multiple gen￾erations of toadflax, independent of their genetic inheritances, since it was
first noticed by the Swedish taxonomist Carl Linnaeus in 1744. It therefore 
demonstrated transgenerational epigenetic inheritance across multiple gen￾erations, in addition to genetic inheritance.
Many other examples of transgenerational epigenetic inheritance have 
now been documented in animals as well as in plants. Sometimes heritable 266 Chapter 9
epigenetic changes arise as a consequence of the interactions of develop￾ing organisms with specific factors in their external environments. Other 
investigators have demonstrated that epigenetically determined phenotypic
variations in populations can respond to natural selection and can influence
the subsequent evolution of populations by doing so.
14
Many researchers have started to list other kinds of nongenetic inheri￾tance systems in evolution, as well as in epigenetics.15 I won’t describe these
here; instead, I’ll substitute a list of my own by citing all the dif­ferent kinds of
inheritance systems, genetic as well as nongenetic, that can occur in human
evolution. I’ve chosen humans because our species is probably on the receiv￾ing end of more dif­ferent kinds of inheritances than any other species.
But before that, let’s go back to the origin of life. It is possible that the
first significant inheritance system in evolution predates the origin of life 
itself. One hypothesis is that prebiotic protocells generated daughter pro￾tocells by cell division. In doing so, they transmitted much of their proto￾cell architecture, including their cytoplasm and self-assembled membranes,
to their daughter protocells.16 When the first true living cells appeared on 
Earth, it is likely that they did the same. They very probably transmitted 
components of their cell architecture, including cytoplasm and their mem￾branes, by acting as physical templates for their daughter cells. This kind 
of elementary inheritance system may predate both natural selection and 
genetic inheritance in evolution, and it remains a feature of many single￾cell organisms today.
17 However, it may not predate all kinds of elementary 
prebiotic selection processes, such as the selective properties of protocell 
membranes (see chapter 6). Although this prebiotic inheritance system may 
seem remote from humans, its template-copying characteristics remain rel￾evant to humans today (e.g., arising in inherited prion-related diseases).
The first noncontroversial inheritance system in evolution is genetic 
inheritance, based on the inheritance of specific sequences of DNA. Humans 
inherit two kinds of DNA: nuclear and mitochondrial. Nuclear DNA refers 
to the vast majority of human genes and their regulatory machinery located 
in our genomes within the nuclei of all the eukaryotic cells that make up 
our bodies. We also inherit a few mitochondrial genes, carried by the mito￾chondrial organelles in each of our cells. There is a significant difference in 267 Extending the Synthesis
the ways in which these two kinds of DNA are inherited. We inherit our 
nuclear genes via the sexual reproduction of our male and female parents, 
as originally described by Gregor Mendel. In contrast, our mitochondrial 
genes are transmitted asexually only from our female parent. The relationship 
between these two kinds of DNA inheritance, sexual and asexual, is still far
from being fully understood.18
Recently, we have also had to come to terms with the fact that two other 
kinds of DNA are inherited in the microbiomes of infants, mainly from their 
mother’s birth canal when they are born. Their microbiomes typically include 
a small number of single-celled archaea and a very large number of single￾celled bacteria, as well as protists, viruses, and fungi. These symbionts have 
their own complements of genes. This means that humans also inherit their
DNA, in addition to our own nuclear and mitochondrial DNA. It is now 
known that bacterial DNA, at least, does affect the development of individ￾ual humans, sometimes considerably. For instance, bacterial genes affect our 
digestive systems, our nervous systems, and even some of our behaviors.19 In 
addition to inheriting their microbiomes from their mothers, human infants
inherit aspects of immunity (such as antibodies) from their mothers, which
may prepare their own immune systems for coping with some of the infec￾tions that their mothers previously experienced during their lives.
Further, like so many other plants and animals, humans also acquire 
epigenetic inheritances that are governed by the same molecular mechanisms 
that occur in all the other organisms that we know about. There is grow￾ing evidence that human epigenetic inheritances can be transmitted across 
multiple generations and are likely to contribute to the evolution of our spe￾cies.20 One of the best-known examples of epigenetic inheritance in humans
occurred in response to a famine known as the “Dutch Hunger Winter” at 
the end of World War II. A large proportion of the descendants of starving 
pregnant women developed health disorders, as their malnutrition modified 
epigenetic factors. For instance, famine led to higher body mass index by 
triggering the methylation of a gene called PIM3, leading to health problems
such as obesity and heart disease in both offspring and grand offspring.21
There is one more kind of unusual inheritance system that was dis￾covered only in the late twentieth century, which operates in humans and268 Chapter 9
in some other organisms. It refers to the capacity of certain proteins called 
“prions” to impose their three-dimensional shape on other proteins with 
similar amino-acid sequences. They do so by acting as physical templates for 
other proteins. It originally came to light when scientists were puzzled about 
how a disease called kuru was transmitted across generations, apparently 
only between females, which could not be explained by conventional genetic
inheritance. It was eventually discovered that it was transmitted primarily 
by women and children eating the brains of deceased loved ones in a local 
ritual in Papua New Guinea. It turned out that it was responsible for a neural 
degenerative disease that devastated some communities in that country. A 
number of associated diseases have now been found in humans and other
animals. They include mad cow disease, caused by feeding cows with food 
that contained animal tissue, and Alzheimer’s and Creutzfeldt-Jacob disease.
Niche construction theory (NCT) then assigns a variety of ecological 
inheritances to humans. These ecological inheritances comprise environ￾ments that have been modified by the prior niche-constructing activities of 
their parents and other ancestors at several evolutionary levels. They may 
include modified cultural environments, modified developmental environ￾ments for individual organisms, and modified natural selection pressures in 
the external environments of human populations (see chapter 7).
In general, ecological inheritance does not transmit information directly 
to successive generations of organisms. Rather, it modifies environmental 
states and thereby changes what existing information is about. Specifically, it 
modifies what the adaptive know-how (Ri
) inherited by children from their 
parents is about, relative to natural selection or developmental or cultural 
pressures in their environments (see chapter 7). It therefore modifies the 
fitness value of the information that children inherit via plural inheritance 
systems (see chapters 3 and 4). For instance, it is well documented that slash￾and-burn agriculture among some West African communities created puddles 
of standing water when it rains, which became breeding sites for mosquitoes, 
facilitating the spread of malaria and triggering the selection of the sickle cell 
(Hbs) allele, which confers resistance to malaria in heterozygous carriers.22
Here, the genetic evolution of generations of humans is being affected by the 
activities of their forest-clearing ancestors generations before.23269 Extending the Synthesis
Human beings are also social animals, which means that we are likely 
to inherit socially transmitted behaviors and traditions from whatever social 
groups we belong to.24 For instance, for millennia humans have inherited 
foraging and tool-making skills and technical ecological knowledge from 
other members of their local populations.25 Finally, there is one inheritance 
system that is probably unique to humans. It refers to the unusually potent 
cultural inheritances transmitted by languages.26 We inherit our languages 
and the information that they carry via many routes, ranging from our 
parents, siblings, and friends to our more formal education when we go to 
schools, universities, and other institutions in later life.
That is a formidable list of both genetic and nongenetic inheritance 
systems in human evolution. It supersedes the traditional nature-nurture 
dichotomy to some degree. Most of these inheritance systems occur in the
evolution of many other species too, and some occur in all species. It is not 
even an exhaustive list. For example, in bacteria and other microorgan￾isms, genes are shared and exchanged among organisms during their lives 
by horizontal or lateral gene transfer (see chapter 6). This form of horizontal 
genetic transmission (HGT) preceded vertical inheritance between genera￾tions by perhaps two billion years.27 In humans, HGT is restricted to the 
microorganisms in human microbiomes, but it probably should be listed 
as yet another type of inheritance system that affects human evolution. For 
instance, the ability of the Japanese, but not Westerners, to digest agar arose 
because they have a bacterium in their gut that contains a gene that codes 
for agarose. Apparently, eating seaweed led to the transfer of enzymes from 
marine bacteria to the gut microbiome of Japanese populations.28
None of these nongenetic inheritances are rare; all arise in traits that 
affect fitness and all can be inherited independent of genetic variation. As 
a result, these nongenetic inheritances challenge the assumptions of SET. 
Most obviously, they challenge the assumption that genetic inheritance is the
only inheritance system that matters in evolution. They also challenge the 
assumption that random mutations are ultimately the only source of novel 
variations in evolution. They challenge the assumption that phenotypes can￾not transmit any of the characteristics that they may have acquired during 
their lives to their offspring.270 Chapter 9
Now let’s turn to another of SET’s core assumptions. The theory assumes 
that natural selection is the only process capable of directing the adaptive 
evolution of populations. Everything else, including genetic mutations and
drift, is due to chance. Only natural selection can catch chance-based muta￾tions and use them to direct the evolution of populations of organisms in 
nonrandom ways.29 SET also assumes that the sources of natural selection
are autonomous events in the local environments of organisms. It recognizes 
that organisms can be sources of natural selection for other organisms, such
as in coevolution or sexual selection, but in such cases, adaptive evolution 
is explained through natural selection alone. In contrast, NCT argues that 
niche construction is not just a product of earlier natural selection, but rather
a cocausal evolutionary process in its own right. Niche construction both 
creates and modifies natural selection.
Now I want to raise two queries about SET’s assumptions. The first con￾cerns the origin of natural selection; and the second concerns how and why 
organisms contribute to their own and each other’s natural selection. Before 
I do that, however, I want to remind the reader of the distinction between 
systems that are, versus systems that are not, subject to natural selection in
the Darwinian sense. Recall from earlier chapters that abiotic systems are not 
subject to natural selection. Nonliving, purposeless abiotic systems do not 
have fitness goals that are mediated and evaluated by natural selection. The
same is true of organisms after they are dead. Dead organic matter (DOM) 
has the same status as inorganic matter relative to natural selection. Whether
abiotic systems or DOM persist or not, in the context of their surrounding 
environments, is governed by the second law of thermodynamics.
Living systems are dif­ferent, however. Living organisms are very improb￾able, far-from-equilibrium systems relative to their environments. Unlike 
abiota, living organisms are also purposeful systems in pursuit of their fit￾ness goals of survival and reproduction. Instead of only reacting passively to 
the second law of thermodynamics as abiota do, organisms have to actively 
oppose the second law to achieve their fitness goals. They have to oppose the 
flow of energy and matter, or R
p
, between themselves and their environments 
at each moment during their lives. Organisms can only oppose the second 
law by energy and matter, or R
p
, consuming work. Organisms have to harvest 271 Extending the Synthesis
the energy and matter resources that they need to fuel their work from their 
local environments. They also have to dump the detritus that they generate 
by living back into their environments. Organisms can do this only if they 
are informed with appropriate adaptive know-how, or Ri
, by the processes
of evolution.
Relative to these thermodynamic requirements of life, individual organ￾isms in evolving populations are bound to encounter obstacles and threats, as 
well as opportunities, in their environments. The threats and opportunities, 
afforded to organisms by components of their environments are the sources 
of the natural selection pressures that they confront during their lives. 
Organisms encounter these natural selection pressures as a consequence of 
their niche interactions with their local environments, moment by moment, 
throughout their lives. It follows that natural selection originates from the 
demands that the second law of thermodynamics impose on organisms.
In 1859, when he released The Origin of Species, Darwin could not have 
anticipated that natural selection stems from the requirements of organisms 
to oppose the second law. The laws of thermodynamics were not yet known 
in his day, but they are known now. I suspect that in spite of Darwin’s dis￾covery of natural selection, we will never fully understand either natural
selection or evolution, except in the light of the demands made on life by the 
second law. Natural selection is subordinate to thermodynamics. Specifically, 
it is subordinate to the demands made on living organisms by the second law. 
When we realize this, what difference could it make to our understanding 
of natural selection and evolution by taking us beyond what Darwin knew 
in 1859 and beyond SET today?
I suggest that there is a relationship between the degree of improbability 
or complexity of various species of organisms and the demands made on them 
by the second law. The more complex or improbable evolving populations 
of organisms become, the greater the demands made on them by the second 
law. If this is true, then it has several implications. First, if organisms cannot 
acquire the R
p
 and Ri
 that they need to oppose the second law, they will not
be able to maintain their own improbability, relative to their environments, 
and will die. Second, if individual organisms in populations do manage to 
maintain their current level of improbability, they will not be able to evolve 272 Chapter 9
further improbability or complexity unless they can acquire additional R
p
or Ri
 resources to pay for it. If organisms cannot acquire the additional R
p
 or 
Ri
 resources that they need to become more improbable, then they will get 
stuck at their present level of improbability, behind improbability barriers. 
Third, if evolving populations of organisms do manage to acquire additional 
R
p
 or Ri
 resources, then this may open up opportunities for them to break 
through whatever improbability barriers were previously constraining them. 
Is there any evidence to support these conjectures?
It may be possible to get some clues about the answer to this ques￾tion by looking again at some of the least-understood phenomena that we 
know occurred in evolution in the past. These phenomena include “punctu￾ate” equilibrium and “saltatory” evolutionary events, comprising relatively 
sudden jumps, often toward greater complexity, in evolving populations of 
organisms. Plausibly, such periods of evolutionary stasis in the fossil rec￾ord may correspond to instances in which populations failed to acquire the 
necessary R
p
 or Ri
, and consequently are hindered by improbability barriers, 
while the rapid evolutionary change manifest in the fossil record may follow 
the acquisition of the R
p
 or Ri
 necessary to break improbability barriers. They 
may also include the phenomenon known as “exaptation,”30 which arise 
from the capacity of organisms to evolve adaptive redundancy. Because of 
this redundancy, exaptations sometimes appear to anticipate future sources 
of natural selection, but this is an illusion. “Exaptation” may also refer to the 
capacity of organisms to use their current adaptations in new ways.
I have previously described how, through their niche construction, 
evolving populations can behave opportunistically to exploit new resources, 
thereby potentially breaking the improbability barrier. An example may be 
provided by the transition of animals from sea to land, led by tetrapods, 
about 375 million years ago.31 Moving into a novel environment is an 
example of inceptive, relocational niche construction. Tetrapods’ ability to 
invade the land appears to have depended on the aggregation and coop￾eration of diverse adaptations, inherited from ancestral species of fish and 
earlier aquatic tetrapods, adaptations that had served dif­ferent functions for
the aquatic ancestors of the tetrapods. However, on land, the diverse adapta￾tions were gradually combined and made to serve new functions during the 273 Extending the Synthesis
subsequent evolution of tetrapods, allowing them to break improbability 
barriers, such as by exploiting land-based food resources. Subsequently, fins 
evolved into primitive feet, which allowed tetrapods some capacity to crawl, 
and later walk and run, on land.
THE MAJOR EVOLUTIONARY TRANSITIONS
Perhaps the best evidence for evolving populations of organisms breaking 
through improbability barriers, however, comes from the major transitions 
in evolution in both the bioenergetic transitions32 and the bioinformat￾ics transitions.33 The major transitions typically involve the aggregation 
and cooperation of lower-level biological entities into a higher-level entity. 
Examples include the aggregation of genes into chromosomes, the aggrega￾tion of single cells into multicellular metazoan organisms and the aggregation 
of individual animals into social groups. In the light of these and other
examples of the major transitions, I want to consider what contributions 
natural selection, whether modified by niche construction or not, could 
have made to the engineering of these transitions. I propose to consider 
three major transitions in evolution again: the origin of life, the transition 
from prokaryotic to eukaryotic cells, and the transition from social animals 
to language-based, human sociocultural groups.
The Origin of Life
The origin of life transition must have required breaking through the most 
formidable improbability barrier of all time. At present, we know of nowhere 
else in the universe where the fundamental improbability barrier of life itself 
was breached, although it is certainly possible that that occurred somewhere 
else in the universe. However, from what we now know about life on Earth, 
three requirements appear to be paramount for the origin of life, whether
on Earth or elsewhere in the universe. First, living systems need boundaries
separating them from their external environments. Second, because all living 
systems have to oppose the second law of thermodynamics to stay alive by 
active, purposeful work, they need sufficient energy, or R
p
, to do the work 
to maintain their improbable existence. Third, all living systems also need 274 Chapter 9
sufficient, meaningful information, or Ri
, when interacting with their exter￾nal environments to confer the know-how necessary to survive and repro￾duce. Only when these three paramount requirements are met could it have 
been possible for life to have originated by breaking through the enormous 
primary improbability barrier between nonlife and life.
We discussed each of these three requirements, relative to the origin of 
life on Earth, in chapter 6. I don’t propose to discuss them again here, but 
a brief reminder may be in order. In the light of both the deep-sea-vent and 
the cycling “warm little pond” hypotheses, how far have we gotten toward 
understanding each of these three paramount requirements? The easiest 
of these to understand is the origin of the boundaries between protocells, 
and later the first living cells, and their external environments. The bound￾aries around protocells, and later living cells, self-assembled into membrane
boundaries. They did so primarily as a function of the hydrophilic and 
hydrophobic properties of lipids at the two opposite ends of themselves. 
These boundaries appear to have self-assembled in the form of lipid and
sugar membranes. The membranes separated the protocells, or cells, from 
their external environments. These membranes must also have encapsulated 
tiny packets of improbability, in the form of the internal environments of the 
protocells, and later living cells. At the origin of life, they would have been 
micropackets of improbability.
The second paramount requirement of life—namely, sufficient energy 
resources, or R
p
, to allow living systems to oppose the second law—was
probably initiated by the proton-motive force (see chapter 6). The proton￾motive force, flowing from the external environments to the internal envi￾ronments of protocells or cells, synthesized adenosine triphosphate (ATP) 
within protocells and cells. Recall that ATP is the universal energy currency 
for biological systems. The presence of ATP could have led to chemical reac￾tions in the protocells subsequently kick-starting metabolic reactions in the 
first living cells.34
The hardest of the three paramount requirements of life to understand 
is the third one. It is the origin of sufficient adaptive know-how, or Ri
, to 
enable the first living cells to interact adaptively with their external environ￾ments in ways that allowed them to oppose the second law. This paramount 275 Extending the Synthesis
requirement of life seems to have depended on a combination of factors. 
The first was probably the chemical kinetic traps that enabled the assembly
of simple monomers into more complex polymers. According to Deamer 
and Damer, the assembly of more complex polymers would have been 
made possible by the succession of wet-moist-dry cycles in the freshwater of 
Darwin’s “warm little ponds” in the volcanic regions of the Earth. In these
environmental circumstances, chemical kinetic traps could have enabled 
the assembly of more complex polymers during the dry phases of the cycles 
at a faster rate than they could be broken down again by hydrolysis in the 
next wet phase of these cycles. Polymer strings, generated in this manner, 
could have been the elementary precursors of DNA-based genes, which
register and encode the meaningful information, underpinning the adaptive 
know-how (or Ri
) carried by organisms in evolving populations. That still 
does not explain why this genetically encoded information can be adaptive 
for the organisms that carry it relative to their environments. To explain 
that, we need some understanding of the origin of the three subprocesses of
adaptive evolution: the generation of variety, the generation of fitness dif￾ferences between variants, and the differential inheritance of fit variants by 
later generations.35
The generation of variety was probably initially a by-product of the 
capacity of protocells, and later of living cells, to reproduce. The repro￾duction of daughter cells by elementary kinds of cell division would have 
had two effects. It would have multiplied the number of protocells, and 
then cells, in populations. In chapter 6, I suggested that reproduction is an 
elementary kind of niche construction that modified the environment of 
each individual protocell, and then cell, by adding other protocells, and later
cells, to its environment. At the same time, reproduction introduces variety 
into all evolving populations, if only because of inevitable miscopies. The
presence of variety in these populations would then have been sufficient to 
have triggered the sorting between fit and less fit variants, thereby initiating 
the processes of adaptive evolution. This account of the origin of the third 
paramount requirement of life (namely, the adaptive know-how, or Ri
, that 
organisms need to oppose the second law) is still sketchy and speculative. 
However, it is likely that it depended on both natural selection and the276 Chapter 9
modification of selection by the niche-constructing activities of protocells, 
and later living cells as well.
Prokaryotes to Eukaryotes
The second major transition that I want to reconsider is from simple pro￾karyotic cells to more complicated eukaryotic cells. It represents another 
breakthrough, penetrating another improbability barrier. The principal con￾temporary hypothesis is that this transition was caused by prokaryotic cells 
engulfing other prokaryotes that became mitochondrial organelles in their 
cellular environments. The mitochondrial organelles provided the engulfing 
prokaryotic cells with an increase in energy resources, or R
p
 (see chapter 8). 
The extra energy that the engulfing prokaryotic cells gained from the mito￾chondrial organelles then gave them the opportunity to acquire and express 
a greater number of genes during their subsequent evolution. That in turn 
allowed the cells to acquire more adaptive know-how, or Ri
, relative to natu￾ral selection pressures in their environments, enabling them to harvest still 
more R
p
 from their environments. This eventually allowed the prokaryotic 
cells to evolve into more complicated eukaryotic cells.36
How does niche construction contribute to this transition? The most 
obvious point is that because choice is a hallmark of niche construction,37
the choice made by the first innovating prokaryotic cells to retain rather 
than eat the prokaryotes that they engulfed makes that choice a candidate 
example of niche construction contributing to this transition. That choice 
may have relied on the plasticity of the individual prokaryotic cells, since 
as Watson and Thies suggest, the collective fitness of the package of inter￾acting prokaryotes may require plasticity on the part of each cell.38 How￾ever, Watson and Thies also stress that for the collective to exhibit heritable 
fitness differences, the individual elements—here, both the engulfing and 
engulfed cells—must exhibit niche construction that modifies their interac￾tions.39 Without that niche construction, the higher-level functionality of 
the eukaryote would not be possible. The significance of this transition from 
prokaryotic to eukaryotic cells can be estimated by the time that it took for 
it to occur. Eukaryotic cells did not appear for more than two billion years 
after the origin of life on Earth. For all this time, prokaryotic cells were stuck 277 Extending the Synthesis
behind an improbability barrier that they could not cross. The preceding 
billion years before the first eukaryotic cells appeared is sometimes rather 
dismissively called the “Boring Billion” by paleobiologists who do not work 
on this time period.40 The paleobiologists and geologists who do work on the 
Boring Billion complain that this is unjust. They argue that a great deal was 
happening during this period that affected the subsequent evolution of life 
on Earth. Following the Boring Billion, the transition from prokaryotic to 
eukaryotic cells eventually led to another major transition in evolution, the 
transition from single-cell organisms to the first multicellular or metazoan 
organisms. But I won’t say anything more about that transition here.
Culture to Language
The third major transition that I want to consider is from the relatively limited
cultural traditions of nonhuman social animals to the far more advanced, 
language-based cultural traditions and institutions of human sociocultural
groups. Here, various contemporary accounts of the origins of language 
already emphasize the construction of cultural, symbolic, collaborative for￾aging or pedagogical environments.41 In addition, this transition, relative to 
the bioinformatics of evolution,42 is roughly contemporaneous with the fifth 
bioenergetic transition, described by Judson as the “controlled use of fire by 
humans in human evolution”43 (see chapter 5). The controlled use of fire is a 
good example of human cultural niche construction. It preceded the origin 
of our own species, Homo sapiens, perhaps by more than 100,000 years. The 
controlled use of fire could have been made possible only by an increase in 
adaptive know-how, or Ri
, occurring among small groups of our ancestors, 
whether in our own species or in our earlier hominin ancestors. We don’t 
know to what extent this increase in adaptive know-how depended on the 
ability of humans to exchange ideas and experiences by talking to each other 
in a shared language. We also don’t know whether our earlier hominin ances￾tors had any linguistic abilities that could have contributed to their learning 
how to control fire. Fire is dangerous and can easily get out of control, if mis￾handled. On balance, the evidence of the apparent ability of our pre–Homo 
sapiens ancestors to control fire suggests they may have been aided by primi￾tive language abilities that allowed them to communicate with each other.44278 Chapter 9
In the hands of our own language-speaking H. sapiens ancestors, the 
control of fire subsequently led to many other kinds of cultural niche con￾struction, enabling them to harvest extra energy and matter (or R
p ) resources 
from their environment. One early example is the use of fire by our ancestors 
for cooking.45 Cooking allowed our ancestors to gain more food resources 
in two ways. It detoxified some foods that were toxic if eaten raw, and it 
increased the nutritional value of many cooked foods compared to raw foods, 
partly by aiding digestion.46
Later, the controlled use of fire enabled further innovations. For instance, 
it led to the forging of metals and metallurgy and to better tools and weap￾ons.47 Subsequently, in addition to the controlled use of fire, the diverse 
cultural niche-constructing activities of humans, in increasingly large socio￾cultural groups, modified many more natural selection pressures in their envi￾ronments (e.g., through aggregating into towns and cities, or through the 
domestication of plants and animals). This had the net effect of allowing our 
ancestors to harvest greater amounts of energy and matter from their environ￾ments. More recently, the controlled use of fire, in conjunction with many 
other kinds of cultural niche construction, contributed to both the Agricul￾tural and the Industrial revolutions. They also contributed to the construction 
of the first urban settlements and urban-based civilizations (see chapter 10).
Shared Fate and Separate Fate
Thus, all the major transitions that I’ve mentioned here probably depended
on both natural selection in the environments of organisms and on the 
niche-constructing activities of organisms modifying those selection pres￾sures. But how does natural selection work after a major transition has
occurred, compared to how it worked before the transition? This takes us 
into multilevel selection theory48 and to a comparison between what I’ll call 
“shared fate” natural selection and “separate fate” natural selection. I will 
illustrate this point by comparing the selective fate of a single-cell organism
with the selective fates of various eukaryotic cells embedded in the body of 
a multicellular metazoan organism.
Natural selection works in the same way with single-cell organisms as 
it does with all organisms. But it doesn’t work in the same way for dif­ferent279 Extending the Synthesis
individual cells that are embedded in the bodies of multicellular organisms. 
None of the cells of metazoa have separate selective fates from others. In spite 
of the many differences between dif­ferent kinds of cells in metazoan organ￾isms, all of them share their naturally selective fates with other cells in the 
organism, for two reasons. First, because they are all component cells in one 
or another organ or system of a metazoan organism, the immediate source 
of natural selection for any individual cell is the microenvironment provided 
by the metazoan’s organ or system to which the cell belongs. Second, pro￾vided that the cells of a metazoan organism survive long enough, they will 
ultimately share the naturally selected fate of the metazoan organism itself, 
relative to sources of natural selection in the metazoan’s external environment.
There are advantages and risks of this relationship, both for individual 
cells and their host metazoan organism. A major advantage for both the 
individual cells and the metazoan organism to which they belong is greater 
thermodynamic efficiency with respect to opposing the second law of ther￾modynamics. This may take the form of better access to energy and matter
(R
p ) resources or a reduced cost of gaining those resources, both for the 
individual cells and for the organism as a whole. But the metazoan organism 
also suffers from a potentially significant risk, which we have seen before. If 
an individual cell or a few cells in one of the metazoan’s organs or systems 
become severely maladapted relative to its local natural selection pressures, 
this may be detrimental to the organism itself. The entire system could crash 
and the organism could die.
There are some other risks too. For instance, there is a risk that the 
cooperative relationships between the aggregate of cells in the metazoan’s 
organ may break down. The cooperative aggregate may fragment into cel￾lular components that go their separate ways, as manifest in cancer or in 
autoimmune diseases. The possible links to cancer or to autoimmune dis￾eases are beyond the scope of this book. However, at a completely dif­ferent
level, human sociocultural groups such as a nation could fragment in adverse 
environmental circumstances, and I will return to the formation and breakup 
of human sociocultural groups in chapter 10.
The transitions also demonstrate a variety of ways in which the acquisi￾tion of energy and matter resources (R
p ) and the acquisition of meaningful 280 Chapter 9
information (Ri
) can ratchet each other up during a major transition. By 
doing so, they can sometimes enable evolving populations of organisms to 
cross another improbability barrier that was previously constraining them, 
thereby causing a further transition in evolution.
HOW AND WHY ORGANISMS CONTRIBUTE 
TO NATURAL SELECTION
All of the information given thus far converges on my second query about 
natural selection: How and why do evolving populations of organisms con￾tribute to their own and each other’s natural selection in the context of
their ecosystems? Recall from chapter 8 that the niche interactions between 
organisms and the sources of natural selection in their environments are 
two-way-street interactions. Organisms respond to both abiotic and biotic 
sources of selection in their environments, as both SET and NCT recognize. 
But they also modify both abiotic and biotic sources of natural selection in
their environments by their niche-constructing activities, as NCT empha￾sizes, but SET does not. SET recognizes that organisms are capable of niche￾constructing activities that modify components of their environments. But 
SET assumes that adaptive niche construction can always be fully accounted 
for by prior natural selection. SET does not recognize the reciprocal causal 
arrangement that natural selection can sometimes be a product of prior niche 
construction, and hence that adaptive evolution is determined by both natu￾ral selection and niche construction.49
The niche-constructing activities of organisms, as described by NCT, 
introduce feedback into evolution relative to both abiotic and biotic sources 
of natural selection, in their own environments and in the environments of 
other organisms in their ecosystems. This feedback may affect the future 
evolution of their own populations, as well as other populations. The feed￾back also has another more general implication. It implies that evolution￾ary theory should not be about the evolution of populations of organisms, 
but rather it should really be about the coevolution of organisms with their 
environments. Or, if looked at in the opposite way, it should be about the 
coevolution of environments with their organisms.281 Extending the Synthesis
A general theory of organism-environment coevolution is alien to SET. 
That is because the theory does not recognize niche construction as a cocausal 
process in adaptive evolution, working in partnership with natural selection.
Currently, SET recognizes that two or more evolving populations of organ￾isms can coevolve with each other in the context of population community 
ecology. It also recognizes that dif­ferent traits in the same population can
coevolve, as observed in sexual selection. However, SET does not recognize 
the coevolution of organisms with abiotic components of their environ￾ments. In contrast, NCT recognizes both the coevolution of evolving popu￾lations with each other and the coevolution of evolving populations with 
specified abiotic components of their own and each other’s environments.50
Purpose
The last assumption of SET that I want to consider concerns that word 
“purpose” again. SET acknowledges that organisms have fitness goals but 
denies that to achieve their fitness goals of survival, growth, and reproduc￾tion, organisms must be active, purposeful agents relative to their inter￾actions with their external environments. Rather, SET assumes that the 
apparent purposefulness of organisms is misleading.51 The proponents of 
SET argue that that is an illusion, which can be fully explained by prior 
natural selection. Biologists are often happy to talk about the purposes of 
organisms, when talking informally either to each other or to laypeople.
For instance, when talking informally, biologists tell us that plants “seek” 
light and their roots “seek” moisture, birds and mammals “choose” mates, 
and some Japanese macaques wash potatoes “to” clean them. The easiest 
way to talk about all these actions is in terms of the purposes of the organ￾isms that emit the actions. But when talking formally and in the context of 
SET, biologists switch to talking about the “structures” and “functions” of 
the phenotypic traits of organisms instead of talking about their purposes. 
SET assumes that the phenotypic traits of organisms are consequences of 
prior natural selection, often with reference to the naturally selected genes 
that organisms inherit from their ancestors. Perhaps biologists are closer to 
the truth when they talk informally about the purposes of organisms, rather 
than when they are talking formally.282 Chapter 9
I think biologists are unnecessarily coy when it comes to their unwill￾ingness to describe organisms as active, purposeful agents in evolution. I 
suggest that this coyness ultimately has two sources: fear of God and physics 
envy. Fear of God reduces to fear of the Creationists. In her book The Restless 
Clock, Jessica Riskin draws attention to what appears to be an inadvertent 
collusion between the neo-Darwinists on the one hand and the creationists 
and the mystical vitalists on the other.52 She makes this collusion sound both 
irrational and comic. Both the neo-Darwinists and the creationists appear to 
think that if organisms really are purposeful agents, then their purposes can 
be attributed only to supernatural processes, or deities, or God. Creationists 
like to argue just that, but the neo-Darwinists do not.
Ever since Darwin, there has been a tension between the narratives of 
various religions and evolutionary biologists. Maybe it is because of this ten￾sion that many evolutionary biologists feel threatened by the creationists. 
Some seem to want to put as much distance as possible between themselves 
and the creationists. In the light of the evidence provided by nature and 
in the light of reason, evolutionary biologists are clearly right to oppose 
the creationists. They do not need to “bother God” to explain either the
evolution of life on Earth, or the active, purposeful agency of organisms. It 
therefore seems irrational for SET to claim that the active, purposeful agency 
of organisms is just an illusion.
So much for the fear of God; what about physics envy? Physics envy 
starts with the point that physicists don’t have to deal with such messy things
as purposeful systems. Were biologists to start referring to organisms as pur￾poseful systems, they might run the risk of not being regarded as serious 
scientists, at least not by physicists. I think that is an inappropriate fear, 
too. I suggest that Schrödinger, in his book What Is Life? was right when 
he implicitly suggested that biology is harder than physics by his analysis of
what else is needed, beyond the laws of physics, to understand life.
There is also one interesting exception to the general rule that physicists 
don’t have to deal with purposeful systems. Physicists, engineers, mathemati￾cians, and programmers sometimes do have to deal with the purposes and 
the goals of some of the artificial systems that they themselves construct. One 
example is provided by the software in some modern cars, which can decide 283 Extending the Synthesis
for themselves whether their drivers are drunk or not, and if so, pull to the 
side of the road. Some autonomous decision-making capacity has to be del￾egated by the designers and programmers of these cars to the cars themselves.
A more dramatic example is provided by the Rovers that humans are 
now sending to the neighboring planet of Mars. To what extent must the 
human constructors of a Mars Rover equip it with some autonomous capac￾ity to make some decisions for itself as it trundles across the surface of Mars? 
This question is made more relevant by the approximately twenty-minute
delay that is required for a single communication between the Mars Rover 
and its ground controllers, owing to the distance between Mars and Earth. 
As robots get more advanced, the degree of autonomy that is assigned to 
them by their constructors is likely to increase greatly. For example, even 
at present, if a Mars Rover runs into an obstacle, it needs the capability to 
decide for itself whether to surmount or circumvent the obstacle, on the 
basis of its own built-in sensory and decision-making capacities. It may make 
mistakes of varying seriousness. One serious mistake, sometimes referred to 
by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) as “high￾centering,” occurs when the Mars Rover drives into a mound of sand that 
collects under its belly, lifting it up to the point that its wheels no longer 
touch the ground. This mistake can be fatal to the Rover. Even if not fatal, it 
may still take the Rover’s ground controllers on Earth weeks to get it moving 
again, thanks to the necessarily slow two-way communication between the 
Rover on Mars and the controllers on Earth.
Mars Rovers are built by their human constructors for a human pur￾pose. The constructors of the Mars Rover have to anticipate as many of the 
problems that the Rovers will encounter as possible in advance in order to 
enable the Rover to fulfill the purposes assigned to it by its constructors. But 
the Mars Rover’s constructors must also anticipate the kind of problems
that are best left to the Mars Rover itself to solve, independent of its ground 
controllers. Its constructors must also be able to equip the Mars Rover in 
advance with sufficient autonomous sensory and decision-making capacity
to solve those problems for itself.
Given that it is not possible for any purposeless system to anticipate any
future events, this takes us back to Conrad Waddington’s (1969) question 284 Chapter 9
of how any system, living or artificial, can anticipate its own “unknown 
but usually not wholly unforecastable future’.”53 It also takes us back to the 
bootstrapping problem again, which occurs in evolving populations, where 
purposeful individual organisms are equipped by supplementary evolution￾ary processes, including both developmental and cultural processes, to make 
some decisions for themselves (see chapter 7). Unlike purposeless abiotic 
systems, purposeful living organisms can anticipate some future events, rela￾tive to their purposes, while pursuing their fitness goals.
There is now more than one level of control in the Mars Rover that 
affects its performance. It comprises the ground controllers on Earth and 
the Rover’s autonomous capacity to control some of its own actions in its 
Martian environment independent of its ground controllers. However, this 
analogy between a Mars Rover and an individual organism in an evolving 
population breaks down in one crucial respect. The designers and control￾lers of the Mars Rover are cognitive, competent, intelligent human beings.
According to both SET and NCT, there is no equivalent intelligent designer 
in biological evolution. There is only the laborious process of the natural 
design of organisms by the apparently purposeless and partly chance-based
processes of evolution. Intelligent human designers can design artificial sys￾tems, including Mars Rovers, that are capable of taking some decisions for 
themselves, independent of their ground controllers. But how is it possible
for an apparently purposeless evolutionary process to assemble organisms in
populations with any degree of active, purposeful agency to enable them to 
oppose the second law of thermodynamics? This is equivalent to Paley’s ques￾tion (see chapter 3). If a complicated system such as a watch, whose purpose 
it is to tell the time, cannot exist in the absence of an intelligent watchmaker, 
then how can a much more complicated living organism, whose purpose it 
is to oppose the second law of thermodynamics, exist as a consequence of 
the apparently purposeless processes of evolution?
The philosopher of biology Denis Walsh54 describes this dilemma in 
terms of one cause and two effects. The single cause of evolution is the 
continuous turnover of individual organisms in evolving populations. This 
turnover is due to the struggle for existence that each individual organism
has to endure to survive and reproduce. The two effects occur at two levels. 285 Extending the Synthesis
The lower-level effect is the immediate struggle for existence of every indi￾vidual organism in every evolving population to survive and reproduce. This 
effect is a manifestation of the active, purposeful agency that improbable 
individual organisms have to possess to resist the second law. By definition, 
living organisms have to be purposeful systems to exist in their environments 
in opposition to the second law. Purpose is a defining property of life (see 
chapter 6).
The higher-order effect (namely, the evolution of populations) is a con￾sequence of enough individual organisms in evolving populations, achieving 
their fitness goals of survival and reproduction. But to survive and reproduce, 
individual organisms must be equipped with sufficient adaptive know-how 
about their local environments. This is possible only if organisms inherit 
sufficient meaningful information, in the form of adaptive know-how (Ri
), 
as a result of their ancestors’ struggles for existence in past environments. 
Evolving populations can appear purposeful only as a consequence of the 
active, purposeful agency of all their individual organisms.
This is also where the analogy breaks down between the natural design
of organisms by the processes of evolution and the design of purposeful 
human artifacts, such as the Mars Rover by teams of humans. Another way
of illustrating the difference between a living organism and a Mars Rover is 
with reference to time. It took approximately four billion years for the evolu￾tionary process to come up with the cognitive, conscious, intelligent human
designers who built the Mars Rover. In contrast, it only took a few years for 
teams of physicists, cosmologists, astrobiologists, engineers, mathematicians, 
and programmers to design and build the Mars Rover and send it to Mars. 
That is because the cultural evolutionary process is able to exploit adaptive 
know-how accrued through the process of biological evolution, which helps 
it to provide rapid solutions to adaptive challenges.
Another relevant question here is whether it is appropriate to use the 
same words to describe the cognitive, conscious purposes of human beings
as it is to describe the purposeful phenotypic traits, motives, and activities of 
nonhuman organisms.55 The incipient problem is that words such as “antici￾pate,” “intention,” “expectation,” “cognition,” and “perception,” as well as 
the word “purpose” itself, have powerful connotations with human cognition 286 Chapter 9
and consciousness. This may be another reason why SET is so reluctant to 
accept that the phenotypes of living organisms are purposeful systems. The 
words that we use to describe purpose appear to anthropomorphize biology 
in ways that are completely inappropriate. But by these words, I am only 
seeking clarity by using plain English. Logically, none of these words need 
imply anything about the cognitive, conscious, or unconscious states of liv￾ing organisms. They merely imply dif­ferent capacities and system states, in
dif­ferent species, and at dif­ferent places and moments.
Teleonomy versus Teleology
There is also one other possible reason why biologists are so reluctant to 
acknowledge that organisms are active, purposeful agents in evolution. It 
is an historical and philosophical reason. It goes back to Aristotle’s concept 
of a final cause. This has frequently been interpreted as if Aristotle were 
implying that effects precede their final cause, but that would be nonsense, 
as philosophers and scientists have always pointed out. However, it is possi￾ble for an anticipated future goal, derived from the purposes of any kind of 
purposeful system, to motivate the achievement of future goals or subgoals. 
This is not equivalent to a teleological explanation—that would imply that
the current activities of organisms are effects of some final cause. Here, they 
are only the effects of the goals anticipated by active, purposeful systems, 
including living organisms. A simple human example is athletes. An ath￾lete may anticipate a future goal of winning a medal during some future 
Olympic Games. That anticipated future goal will then cause the athlete to
train hard in the present in the hope of achieving the goal. More generally, 
the anticipated future fitness goals of contemporary organisms are likely to 
cause aspects of their behavior and other outputs, from searching for food 
in animals, to growing roots toward soil moisture in plants, to moving along 
chemical gradients in microorganisms.
This idea is closer to Pittendrigh’s concept of “teleonomy” rather than 
Aristotle’s “teleology.” Pittendrigh introduced the word “teleonomy” in 
195856 to refer to the goal-directedness of the adaptations of fitness-seeking
organisms, which arises from the past and present functions of the adapta￾tions of organisms. It is not to be confused with Aristotle’s final cause, and 287 Extending the Synthesis
therefore with the finalism of teleology. Instead, it seeks to explain the past 
and present activities of organisms in terms of their assumed, anticipated
fitness goals. Aristotle’s teleology implies that the final effects are the cause 
of their prior causes, which would require a reversal of the arrow of time. 
Teleonomy avoids this error by pointing out that an anticipated future goal 
may motivate (and therefore cause) some of the current behaviors and other
activities of organisms. That does not demand a reversal of the arrow of time. 
All it does is explain the current activities of phenotypes by referring to 
what are assumed to be the “anticipated” future fitness goals of the organ￾isms. In practice, this is a ploy frequently adopted by biologists when they 
are trying to understand the adaptations of organisms.
It is interesting to speculate whether Aristotle’s final cause may originally 
have included this teleonomic component. It is also of interest that even 
though in physics and cosmology there is no such thing as a final cause, the 
third law of thermodynamics does describe a final destination. It is some￾times called the “heat death” of the universe and is defined as when the 
universe is due to achieve a final temperature of absolute zero. It represents 
the end of change in the universe and the end of time. It corresponds to 
the total dissipation of all order, the total dissipation of free energy, and the 
achievement of maximum entropy by the universe. Confusingly, this does 
not affect the universal conservation of energy, as described by the first law 
of thermodynamics. There is no change in the energy of the universe—only
the total loss of free energy capable of doing work and of causing change and 
driving the arrow of time.
This final destination of the universe, which may or may not ever be 
reached in reality, does not cause anything teleologically. Rather, it is the 
consequence of all the changes that preceded it earlier in the history of the 
universe, in accord with the second law of thermodynamics. The ultimate 
attractor of all these changes is maximum thermodynamic stability, and 
therefore maximum entropy. This irreversible increase in entropy through￾out the universe also accounts for the arrow of time itself, which proceeds 
from past to present to future. The arrow of time is compatible with conven￾tional cause-and-effect relationships and with Pittendrigh’s teleonomy. It is 
incompatible with Aristotle’s teleology and his final cause.288 Chapter 9
CONCLUSIONS
The implication of this chapter is that all these core assumptions of SET need 
revising. We saw at the beginning of this book how these core assumptions 
were initially justified by the need to understand the fundamental evolu￾tionary processes of Darwinian natural selection combined with Mendelian 
genetic inheritance. But now they are holding back an advance toward a 
more comprehensive theory of evolution that can account for new data, as 
well as for additional processes, such as evolutionarily relevant developmen￾tal processes, that are not yet fully recognized by SET.
I will conclude this chapter by summarizing the principal points raised 
in this and the previous chapters that will have to be addressed by a more 
comprehensive theory of evolution. I have emphasized the relevance of 
the second law of thermodynamics to the processes of evolution. All liv￾ing organisms have to struggle for their existence throughout their lives, as 
Darwin pointed out. They do so to protect their own improbable status and 
to achieve their fitness goals of survival and reproduction, and in the process 
oppose the second law of thermodynamics.
At the start of their lives, organisms receive a niche inheritance as a gift 
from their parent cell or organism. This niche inheritance includes their 
initial location in environmental space and time, and minimally it must also 
include the energy and matter (R
p ) resources and adaptive know-how (Ri
) to 
support them at the start of their lives. After that, organisms have to utilize 
their initial niche inheritances to oppose the second law of thermodynamics 
in order to gain further energy and matter resources from wherever they are 
in their environments.
The capacity of the primary process of population-genetic evolution to 
bootstrap, then, makes it possible for many organisms in diverse species to 
gain additional adaptive know-how through developmental processes, or 
in the case of some social animals (notably humans) through sociocultural 
processes as well (see chapter 7). Many organisms may also be able to trans￾mit some of their acquired knowledge or characteristics to their offspring 
through one or more of the nongenetic inheritance systems reviewed in 
chapters 8 and 9. In addition, offspring inherit acquired environments, 289 Extending the Synthesis
in the form of modified sources of natural selection, due to the prior niche￾constructing activities of their parents and earlier ancestors. The capacity of
active, purposeful organisms to construct their niches changes the role of 
phenotypes in evolution, in ways that still are not fully recognized by SET.
This capacity of organisms to construct niches also changes what a more 
comprehensive theory of evolution should be about. Instead of being exclu￾sively about the responses of organisms to natural selection pressures in 
their environments, as per SET, evolutionary theory should be about the 
coevolution of organisms with their environments.57 If a more comprehen￾sive theory of evolution recognized that the subject matter of evolutionary 
theory should be organism-environment coevolution, it would do justice to 
the active, purposeful agency of phenotypes in evolution, in contrast to the 
more limited role assigned to phenotypes by SET. It would also acknowledge 
the subordination of natural selection to the second law of thermodynam￾ics. There needs to be a new synthetic theory of evolution, which includes 
ecosystem-level ecology, inclusive of the impact of niche-constructing organ￾isms on their environments. Let’s call it an “eco-evo-devo synthesis.”58In this final chapter, I want to consider how the extended theory of evolu￾tion, sketched in the previous chapters, applies to human evolution and 
to our contemporary lives. I also want to consider how humans are cur￾rently contributing to the evolution of life on Earth. To what extent does the 
extended synthesis shed more light on who we are and where we have come 
from, and cause us to think again about how we are living our lives now? 
We seem to be standing on the threshold of two very dif­ferent futures, one 
negative, one positive. I’ll postpone talking about the positive future until
we’ve considered the negative one.
We are all becoming more aware of a possible negative future. It takes 
the form of a human-induced mass extinction of life on Earth. Such a mass 
extinction could be achieved in at least two ways—by nuclear war or global 
warming—both of which are due to the potency of our cultural niche￾constructing activities. Standard evolutionary theory (SET) does not yet 
acknowledge that niche construction is a cocausal process in evolution. It 
is therefore not well placed to understand why humans are currently fac￾ing the prospect of human-induced mass extinction by either of these two
alternative routes, nor how it could be avoided. As a result, these issues are 
often left to the social sciences to worry about. Conversely, the proposed 
extended synthesis includes the recognition of cultural niche construction 
as a significant adaptive process in human evolution. This extended synthesis 
may thus be better placed to enlighten us about our possible negative future. 
It might also help us understand how we could avert it.
10 HOW ARE HUMANS CONTRIBUTING 
TO THE EVOLUTION OF LIFE?292 Chapter 10
NUCLEAR WAR
Let’s begin by considering nuclear war. One day of all-out nuclear war would
be more than enough to trigger a human-induced mass extinction of life 
on Earth. Yet we are still developing progressively more dangerous nuclear 
weapons in high numbers. This is in spite of the fact that it might take only 
about 2 percent of the world’s total arsenal of nuclear weapons to trigger 
a mass extinction of life on Earth.1
 Nuclear weapons are also proliferating 
among more nations. We seem unable to sufficiently inhibit our between￾nation rivalries to avoid all possibility of a nuclear war. In the Cold War 
between the Soviet Union and the West in the 1960s, the policy of mutual 
deterrence by “mutually assured destruction” was nicknamed MAD!
Why have we not yet quelled this madness? It may be an extreme example 
of an adaptive lag in human evolution. Recall that nuclear weapons were first 
assembled by a relatively small number of talented physicists, mathemati￾cians, and engineers working on the Manhattan Project in Los Alamos in the
US, during World War II. It was an emergency project, designed to respond 
to an immediate threat. At the time, it seemed imperative to the Allies to 
acquire nuclear weapons before Hitler and the Nazis did. They succeeded 
in that, but not before the war with Germany was over, even though the 
war with Japan was still continuing. The first atom bombs were dropped on 
Hiroshima and Nagasaki in Japan, in August 1945, which ultimately ended 
World War II, but it introduced a new problem for humanity. The produc￾tion of those atom bombs, by the scientifically enhanced niche-constructing 
activities of a few clever people, changed our world irreversibly. It introduced 
the possibility that humans could now cause a mass extinction of life on 
Earth by engaging in a nuclear war. Shortly after the destruction of Hiro￾shima, Albert Einstein made a memorable comment: “The release of atom 
power has changed everything, except our way of thinking.”2
 The release of 
atom power is now demanding that we change the way we think, particularly 
about our relationships with each other. It requires most of us, not just those
responsible for controlling nuclear weapons, to think differently.
How could we change the way we think? Since we are both social and 
cultural animals, we need to address that question with our “sociocultural” 293 How Are Humans Contributing to the Evolution of Life?
brains.3
 It is possible to detect three kinds of adaptation in our human
sociocultural brains and behaviors. They are derived from the three levels 
of evolutionary processes that we met in chapter 7. They are the primary 
processes of population-genetic evolution at level 1, the relevant supple￾mentary developmental processes in individual organisms at level 2, and 
the additional supplementary sociocultural processes at level 3. As we saw 
in chapter 7, the processes that operate at each of these three evolutionary 
levels acquire qualitatively dif­ferent adaptive know-how, or Ri
, on behalf of 
organisms, human and nonhuman alike, contributing to social adaptation
in each case.
In the case of humans, that means that our sociocultural brains and
behaviors are informed by three qualitatively dif­ferent kinds of meaningful 
information, which, to be consistent with chapter 7, I’ll call “level 1 adapta￾tions,” “level 2 adaptations,” and “level 3 adaptations,” respectively. If the 
various kinds of adaptation, acquired at each of the dif­ferent evolutionary 
levels, enhance or are fully compatible with each other, then humans are 
likely to remain well adapted to their environments most of the time. But 
if for any reason, the kinds of adaptations become incompatible with each 
other, then, even if they were originally well adapted to specific compo￾nents of their environments at each separate level, in combination, they may 
become maladapted relative to their environments. This is not only true of 
humans but of all animals that depend on more than one evolutionary level 
for their brains and behaviors.
Humans are more prone to these between-level incompatibilities than 
other animals. This is because of the potency of our cultural evolution￾ary processes at level 3 relative to our level 1 and level 2 adaptations. For 
example, our level 1 and level 3 adaptations can become incompatible with 
each other for two reasons. The first is that the cultural selection processes
that operate at level 3 may select for adaptations (e.g., birth control) that 
are incompatible with our adaptations selected by natural selection at level 1 
(e.g., genetic propensity to reproduce). The second reason is that our potent 
cultural niche-constructing activities, at level 3, may change our human
environments (e.g., through industrial pollution) in ways that make them 
incompatible with our adaptations previously gained via population-genetic294 Chapter 10
evolution at level 1 (i.e., leading to health problems). Either or both of these
outcomes may then introduce an adaptive lag between out-of-date adapta￾tions, encoded in our naturally selected genes at level 1, and our sociocultural 
adaptations, registered in our brains at level 3.
For the moment, I’ll simplify my discussion about how these processes
at dif­ferent levels interact by ignoring the supplementary individual devel￾opmental processes at level 2, and focusing on incompatibility problems
arising between level 1 and level 3 adaptations. I’ll start with level 1. The 
principal legacy that humans have inherited from our social primate ances￾tors comprises within-group cooperative social alliances, which can also lead 
to between-group rivalries. Both the degree of cooperation within groups 
and the degree of hostility between groups can vary considerably in these
relationships. I will call this legacy a “level 1 social adaptation.” Organisms 
in the same species, including our own, are always potential competitors. 
They all need to acquire much the same energy and matter from their envi￾ronments as each other in order to stay alive by resisting the second law 
of thermodynamics. However, individual humans, like many other social
primates and social animals such as ants,4
 may do better in fitness terms 
by forming within-group alliances with some other members of their own 
species. Individuals in these within-group cooperative alliances may then 
contribute to competitive relationships between their own social groups and 
other rival groups of conspecifics. In humans, the net result is a pattern of 
within-group alliances and between-group rivalries, hostilities, and compe￾tition that we inherited from our social primate ancestors via our naturally 
selected genes at level 1.
Now let’s turn to level 3 sociocultural adaptations, which are not strictly 
genetic adaptations but rather traits produced by a cultural evolutionary 
process. Although many other animals acquire social adaptations from cul￾tural processes too, from here on I’m going to be talking about humans. I do
not intend to do more than describe the principal alternative ways in which it 
is logically possible for individual humans to come together to form within￾group alliances and to split up again subsequently. I will concentrate on how 
individual human decisions, choices, and interactions affect the formation
of alliances, or their breakup, and ignore the many other factors that affect295 How Are Humans Contributing to the Evolution of Life?
human groups and societies. These factors encompass multiple anthropo￾logical and sociological variables, including diverse ecological variables, such 
as the availability of energy and matter resources in human environments 
or the presence of parasites or infectious diseases. All these other variables 
are important, but they are not directly relevant to the particular issue that
I want to focus on here.
Human sociocultural adaptations at level 3 include diverse rituals, laws, 
customs, and ceremonies, as well as political ideologies and religious beliefs. 
They may be supported, and are sometimes enforced, by social institutions, 
such as religions or legal systems. Sociocultural institutions may be required 
to enable humans to put their diverse sociocultural groups together in dif­fer￾ent ways in dif­ferent parts of the world. These human sociocultural adapta￾tions at level 3 do not replace the level 1 in-group versus outgroup adaptations 
inherited from our primate ancestors. Rather, they are superimposed on our 
level 1 adaptations (as discussed later in this chapter). But is this superim￾position invariably adaptive?
The psychologist and primatologist Robin Dunbar addresses this ques￾tion in his book How Religion Evolved.5
 Similar to primate social groups, 
human groups were probably very small for most of the time that our species 
has existed, as they remain among the few human hunting and gathering
communities left today. Dunbar discusses what it takes for primate social 
groups, including humans, to grow larger than what is now called the “Dun￾bar number” of about 150 individuals. Dunbar claims that this number is 
approximately the maximum size of human social groups that depend exclu￾sively on close kin, personal friendships, and useful acquaintances. The idea 
remains controversial,6
 but less contentious is the general idea that human
social groups need mechanisms or structures that provide additional support 
as they grow larger, including some form of within-group policing to hold 
them together, as well as a capacity to defend themselves from competition 
or attacks by rival groups. The additional support typically involves a variety 
of social institutions, often arranged within more-or-less hierarchical social 
structures, which vary across sociocultural groups in dif­ferent parts of the 
world. Leaders and other positions of authority may emerge within these
social groups, with these individuals able to make some decisions on behalf296 Chapter 10
of their groups. This risks introducing or exacerbating inequalities between 
dif­ferent individual members of the social group; for instance, if those in 
positions of authority are given or demand extra privileges or resources at 
the expense of other members of their group. If the inequalities become 
excessive, that may cause larger social groups to split up.7
This is where our human sociocultural adaptations at level 3 come into 
play, as they allow human groups to get bigger and become potentially more 
valuable in fitness terms for individual members of their groups. Individual 
members of social groups may either support their groups in some way or 
they may parasitize them by becoming free-riders, to the detriment of others
in their group. What any individual human may do is also likely to depend
on his or her level 2 developmental adaptations, which encompass individual 
learning and personal experience, although I will not dwell on it here. On 
all scales, human groups are far more likely to endure if enough individuals 
in the group support their cultural institutions and their customs, laws, and 
governance.8
 If they do endure, the social group may still have to compete 
with rival outgroups for economic resources in their shared environments. 
Alternatively, a larger group may fragment into smaller subgroups, which 
may then start to compete with their original group or with each other. This 
is more likely to happen when individual members of the original group take 
much more than their fair share of the benefits conferred on individuals by 
membership of their group, at the expense of others.9
A third possibility is that two or more originally rivalrous social groups 
may settle their differences, form alliances with each other, and merge to 
form a single, larger sociocultural group. This could confer increased fitness 
benefits for individual members of the enlarged group, but it is likely to 
happen only through the application of level 3 adaptations, such as trade, 
negotiation, and social learning. If human sociocultural groups do get much 
larger, individual members of the group may form substructures, without 
threatening the unity of the wider group. Such substructures are boundless 
in modern societies. They can be based on shared interests and shared skills 
and often involve a division of labor between dif­ferent members of a socio￾cultural group. Shared interests may stem from family groups, schools, busi￾nesses, professions, football clubs, dramatic societies, choirs, social media297 How Are Humans Contributing to the Evolution of Life?
groups, and much else. But these kinds of structural organization within 
larger sociocultural groups are more likely to be an asset to the enlarged 
group, rather than a threat, so long as all the components remain affiliated 
to the larger group.
Historically, neither the splitting up of groups nor rivalries between 
groups, with or without armed conflict, would have mattered much during 
most of human existence. They would not have posed wider threats to the 
ongoing evolution of our species or of life on Earth. However, during the 
last few centuries, human warfare has become much more destructive. This 
has been mainly due to our increasingly powerful weapons. For any partic￾ular sociocultural group, developing more powerful weapons, via human 
cultural niche construction at level 3, has frequently been adaptive. For 
instance, insofar as it enabled a sociocultural group to outcompete a rival 
group, it may have enabled it to gain more resources from its environment at 
the expense of its rivals.10 However, ever since the destruction of Hiroshima 
by a nuclear weapon, that is no longer the case. Nuclear weapons are unus￾able. If a sociocultural group or nation were to use nuclear weapons against 
a rival group or nation that also possessed nuclear weapons, the original 
sociocultural group would destroy itself, its rivals, and much of the rest of 
life on Earth too. Multiplying our stocks of nuclear weapons is risky in itself. 
Nor does it make any sense, given that it would take only a small percentage 
of the world’s nuclear arsenal to induce a mass extinction of life on Earth, 
which would almost certainly include our own self-induced extinction. That
is not adaptive; it’s MAD.
From the point of view of evolutionary biology, this madness is due to 
an unusual kind of maladaptation. We usually think of maladaptations in 
terms of one or more phenotypic trait in organisms that are badly adapted 
to aspects of their environments. But the maladaptation this time takes the 
form of an adaptive lag, generated by the incompatibility of our level 1 social 
adaptations, derived from human population-genetic evolution, with our 
social adaptations, derived from the qualitatively dif­ferent adaptive know￾how that we acquire from our supplementary cultural evolutionary processes 
at level 3. Our genes do not confer adaptations that allow us to survive a 
nuclear war, but they may predispose us to outgroup hostility.298 Chapter 10
This unusual kind of maladaptation raises two points. The first is that, 
because the source of this maladaptation is the adaptive lag generated by 
the incompatibility of our ancient level 1 social adaptations with our much 
more recent level 3 sociocultural adaptations, it will not be possible for our
species to correct for this particular maladaptation at a single evolutionary 
level alone. Given the immediacy of our present human predicament in a 
world that we have now changed irreversibly by inventing nuclear weapons, 
we cannot wait for population-genetic evolution at level 1 to catch up by 
diminishing our between-group rivalrous social behaviors.
Conversely, we will not be able to correct for this adaptive lag maladap￾tation by further cultural evolution at level 3 unless we also take our level 1 
social adaptations fully into account. To do that, we will have to recognize 
the primacy and potency of our level 1 social adaptations and their per￾sisting consequences for our species today. We are going to have to come to 
terms with the persistence of our level 1 social adaptations, which manifest 
as tendencies to generate both alliances within groups and hostilities or 
rivalries between groups. The prospect of a future catastrophic nuclear war 
is not just a political problem; it is also a major evolutionary problem for
our species.
This brings me to my second point. Our current orthodox theory of 
evolution—neo-Darwinism or SET—cannot supply an adequate theoretical 
framework for understanding the adaptive lag between our level 1 and level 
3 adaptations, and therefore the nature of our current predicament. This is 
because SET does not recognize niche construction as a cocausal process 
in the evolution of organisms. It only recognizes niche construction as a 
product of prior natural selection. Nor does SET recognize that the adaptive 
know-how- or Ri
-gaining processes of development at level 2, or the socio￾cultural processes at level 3, can be supplementary sources of adaptation for 
organisms. Conversely, the extended theory of evolution explicitly recognizes 
both niche construction as a cocausal adaptive process and developmental 
and cultural processes as supplementary adaptive know-how gaining pro￾cesses in evolution. Might this extended theory of evolution do a better job 
of enabling us to understand our present maladaptive predicament in an 
age when rival social groups or nations are equipped with nuclear weapons?299 How Are Humans Contributing to the Evolution of Life?
Correcting for this adaptive lag will not be easy. A major problem for
all evolving populations is that evolution cannot go backward. Evolving 
populations can only go forward from where they already are, here and now. 
However, evolution can sometimes undo an adaptation that was previously 
acquired by an evolving population by further evolution. A well-known 
example is cavefish in Mexico, which have lost their eyes and have no residual 
vision after living in dark caves for generations.11 Another example is naked 
mole rats, which now live underground in permanent darkness and have 
also lost their eyes.12 However, level 1 evolution alone is unlikely to work 
here, both because there may be insufficient time and because it is unclear
that any diminishment in the social adaptation is selectively advantageous.
It might be possible to get some hints about how we could correct for 
this particular adaptive lag from a surprising source: sex. Within our various
cooperative social groups today, we attempt to civilize our sexual attractions, 
affections, desires, and appetites between individuals by imposing social con￾straints on them that are derived from human sociocultural processes at level 
3. These constraints take the form of laws, customs, rituals, and ceremonies, 
supported by institutions and even social mores or gossip. For example, to 
the best of my knowledge, every human society recognizes marriage between 
men and women, although marriage can be defined differently in dif­ferent
societies. In some societies today, same-sex marriages are also recognized and 
legitimized by social institutions. Perpetrators of sexual violence are often 
subject to severe punishment. In these several ways, although the results are 
never perfect, to some extent we do manage to apply our sociocultural adap￾tations at level 3 to limit the extent to which our sexual adaptations at levels 1 
and 3 are incompatible. Unlike for human sociobiology, when cultural niche 
construction and multiple-level adaptation are taken into account, there is 
no inevitable adaptive lag between our level 1 and level 3 adaptations with 
respect to human sexuality.
Might it be possible to use the theoretical framework offered by the 
extended theory of evolution to help develop analogous sociocultural mecha￾nisms that are capable of constraining our between-group and between￾nation rivalries in a way that permanently eliminates the possibility of a 
future nuclear war? Might we be able to regulate our relationships between 300 Chapter 10
rival social groups and nations, which have now become maladaptive because
of the invention of nuclear weapons?
In the twentieth century, after both world wars, we did attempt to build 
international institutions designed to prevent future wars. They were the 
League of Nations after World War I and the United Nations after World 
War II. The League of Nations failed to prevent World War II, and so far 
the United Nations has not been effective or powerful enough to prevent 
innumerable wars from breaking out in the late twentieth and early twenty￾first centuries, including between nuclear power nations such as India and 
Pakistan. If my argument in this chapter is correct, we will not be able to 
quell our nuclear madness or avert the negative future that it threatens by 
concentrating exclusively on our level 3 sociocultural adaptations.
The principal point, which we are not yet fully acknowledging, is 
that our level 3 sociocultural adaptations cannot replace our level 1 social 
adaptations—they can only be superimposed on them. Because of the imme￾diacy of our present predicament, we can’t wait for genetic evolution to solve 
the problem, nor can we guarantee that it will. This means that to avert the 
possible negative future of human-induced mass extinction by nuclear war, 
we will have to understand ourselves, as best we can, in the context of both 
our evolutionary and our cultural past. We will probably never get rid of 
our between-group rivalries, that we have inherited from our social primate 
ancestors fast enough. We are therefore going to have to accept our level 1 
social adaptations as a long-term component of our contemporary lives, 
and try to tame them by further cultural evolution and social adaptations 
at level 3.
To understand ourselves better, however, we are going to need the aid of 
our biological sciences, our environmental sciences, and our human and
social sciences. Unfortunately, the relationships between the biological and 
the human social sciences have not been good for decades. This has been 
partly due to the rejection of SET by the social sciences. Social scientists 
were and still are unhappy with human sociobiology13 and the “selfish gene” 
approach to evolution.14 It has also been due to a tendency for the social 
sciences to “throw out the baby with the bath water” by claiming that the 
biological evolution of our species is of little relevance to the phenomena that 301 How Are Humans Contributing to the Evolution of Life?
they now study. Ironically, the biological and human sciences are often rivals 
instead of cooperative partners when it comes to studying ourselves. This 
is where the extended evolutionary synthesis, including niche construction 
theory (NCT), might help to build better bridges between the biological 
and human sciences.
Could a better understanding of ourselves, in the context of our evolu￾tionary past as well as in the context of our sociocultural past histories, even￾tually outlaw nuclear wars permanently? That sounds improbable—almost
wishful thinking. It certainly sounds like another improbability barrier. But 
improbability barriers have been crossed before. If, in the future, human 
sociocultural processes did create institutions that effectively eradicated 
nuclear war, that would be nothing less than another major transition in 
evolution, this time in human evolution.
GLOBAL WARMING
The second way in which humans are currently threatening to induce a 
mass extinction of life on Earth is global warming. The principal drivers 
responsible for the ways in which humans are currently contributing to 
global warming are our economic activities and our reproductive activities, 
as well as their interactions.
Human Economic Activities
As with all other organisms, our economic activities occur in the context of 
the ecosystems in which we live and ultimately in the context of the entire 
biosphere. In their book Into the Cool. Energy Flow, Thermodynamics and 
Life,15 Schneider and Sagan describe the relationship between ecosystems 
and the laws of thermodynamics. They claim that ecosystems, as a conse￾quence of all the individual organisms in evolving populations in them, also 
have to resist the second law of thermodynamics in order to persist. Here, 
I’m going to adopt a more limited approach. I’ll concentrate primarily on 
the ways in which our scientifically and technologically enhanced cultural 
niche-constructing activities are currently contributing to human economic
activities at level 3.302 Chapter 10
There is something very peculiar about the way that humans relate to 
ecosystems compared to all other organisms. There seem to be too many of 
us. Why would that be? To answer that question, we need to reconsider some 
of the principal points about how ecosystems work.16 The first of these is
that typically, mature ecosystems comprise a series of trophic levels, which 
roughly describe who is eating whom at each level. Recall that the first tro￾phic level comprises autotrophs; that is, organisms that can feed directly off 
chemical resources or on energy from the Sun. They are primary producers 
of the biomass upon which all other organisms ultimately depend.
At the next trophic level, we find heterotrophs; that is, organisms that 
gain their energy and matter resources by feeding on other organisms. Het￾erotrophs depend on autotrophs, the primary producers. Heterotrophs break 
down into the familiar pyramids of various heterotrophs, starting with her￾bivores, then small carnivores, and finally larger carnivores at the top of the 
food chain. In theory, we humans are large animals at the top of our food 
chain. In reality, however, this description is overly simple, as we have seen 
before in this book. Humans are omnivores, taking food from several trophic 
levels. Our ape ancestors might also be better described as frugivores because
their diets depend so heavily on fruit. In addition to this “grazing path,” 
ecosystems include a “detritus path,” as discussed in chapter 8. Detritivores 
feed off the detritus generated by diverse organisms at each trophic level. 
Detritivores also recycle energy and matter resources throughout ecosystems.
The second point about ecosystems that we need to acknowledge is how 
they proceed from immaturity to maturity over time and space. They can 
do so over months, years, or centuries via the processes of ecological succes￾sion. Ecological successions are often described in terms of a succession of 
plants, where later plant species depend on the prior existence and activities
of earlier plants. Often, this is because the earlier plant species eventually 
destroy their own habitats, while at the same time constructing a habitat 
for their successors. Typically, early successional plants are short-lived and 
rapidly reproducing organisms, while later successional plants are usually 
longer-lived and more slowly reproducing. Generally, ecological succession 
starts with primary producers, regenerating at a rapid rate and proceeding 
through sometimes multiple plant species, with slower generational turnover 303 How Are Humans Contributing to the Evolution of Life?
times, toward a climax forest. Dif­ferent ecosystems are likely to proceed 
toward dif­ferent climaxes. Animals go through closely related successions 
of their own.17
We can now go back to our question: Why are there more humans
on Earth at present than we should expect to find from the ways in which 
ecosystems work? The relevant point is that at each higher trophic level in 
an ecosystem, there is a considerable loss of energy and matter resources 
compared with the resources available at the adjacent lower trophic level. 
The so-called 10 percent rule in ecology tells us that it is possible for only 
about 10 percent of the energy and matter available at a lower trophic level to 
be transferred to the higher trophic level immediately above it. Each higher 
trophic level should therefore only support a decreasing number of organ￾isms, hence the classic trophic pyramid. The highest trophic level should 
support relatively few large animals at the top of their food chains, such as 
resource-hungry humans. But there are more than 8 billion people on Earth 
today. That requires an explanation.
Biologists refer to the number of organisms in a population that their 
environments can support as the “carrying capacity” of that environment, 
for that species. Yet the number of humans on Earth today far exceeds the 
expected carrying capacity of our human environments, supposing that 
humans were exploiting only the resources provided by the natural trophic 
levels that occur in ecosystems. How and why has this happened? I want 
to propose a hypothesis, drawn from NCT. I suggest that our potent cul￾tural niche-constructing activities have enabled us to construct two artificial 
extensions to the classic trophic pyramid. These extensions were constructed 
by the human Agricultural Revolution and the human Industrial Revolu￾tion. Together, they greatly increased the carrying capacity of human envi￾ronments. That permitted an exceptional growth in the size of human 
populations on Earth. For convenience, I’ll call these two artificial extensions 
of the trophic pyramid two additional artificial trophic levels.
The Agricultural Revolution
We cannot claim to be the first agriculturalists on Earth. Ants beat us to 
that distinction by several million years. If we loosely define “agriculture” 304 Chapter 10
in terms of the way that one species looks after and feeds one or more other 
species to enable it to harvest their resources, then ants qualify as farmers. 
Two examples will suffice. One is the way that some ant species tend aphids, 
which allow ants to harvest the sucrose that the aphids produce.18 Another 
much better-known example is the leaf cutter ants that tend fungus gardens, 
sometimes on an enormous scale. The fungus, constantly fed by the leaves 
that the ants cut and bring back to their nests, then becomes the ants’ staple 
diet.19 However, human agricultural activities are orders of magnitude more 
general and productive than those of the ants or of any other species.
The Agricultural Revolution was responsible for two major innovations, 
both of which increased the carrying capacity of human environments. The 
first was the introduction of artificial selection of the plants and animals
that humans domesticated, in lieu of their natural selection. The second was
the introduction of artificially constructed environments for these organ￾isms, in lieu of their natural environments. Human agriculture began about 
11,000 years ago in the Middle East, and then elsewhere.20 Human agri￾culture replaced the hunting and gathering of wild animals and plants with 
their domestication.
From the start, our ancestors were probably motivated to domesticate 
plants and animals by a desire to increase their productivity. Maybe uncon￾sciously, or inadvertently at first, our ancestors must have introduced an 
elementary version of artificial selection relative to the plants and animals 
that they were domesticating. They probably did so as a by-product of the 
early agriculturalists choosing to domesticate those plants that yielded
the richest and most nutritious food crops and were the easiest to process. 
Similarly, they probably selected animals that promised the richest source 
of meat or dairy products and were the easiest to manage. But it would not 
have taken long for our ancestors to realize what they were doing.
Soon they would have started to breed from the most productive and 
easily processed plants and the most productive and docile animals, such as 
sheep and cattle. At some point, our ancestors would have realized that they 
could use other animals that they had previously domesticated and artificially 
selected to help them manage the animals that they were farming. Some used 
dogs to control flocks of sheep. Others used horses they could ride to help305 How Are Humans Contributing to the Evolution of Life?
them control herds of cattle. They also used domesticated horses, buffaloes,
and other animals to plow their land. Today, the artificial selection of plants
and animals has become a science. It is based on our modern knowledge of 
genetics and a much better understanding of how artificial selection works 
in evolving populations.
The second major innovation introduced by the early agriculturalists 
was the construction of artificial environments for the plants and animals 
that they were domesticating. They modified the natural selection experi￾enced by those organisms in ways that are fully consistent with NCT. By 
doing this, they increased the productivity of individual plants and animals 
and greatly increased the numbers that they could cultivate in their vicinities. 
For plants, the construction of artificial environments typically depended on 
the advance preparation of land for the cultivation of crops. It may also have 
involved protecting crops from being eaten by other animals (e.g., by erect￾ing fences). On modern farms, it frequently involves the use of chemicals. 
Artificial fertilizers are spread on land to increase the productivity of crops. 
Herbicides are used to destroy weeds, and pesticides are used to protect crops 
from harmful insects.
For animals, the construction of artificial environments was probably
minimal at first. It may have amounted to little more than the first agri￾culturalists choosing pastures for their animals and then moving them to 
new pastures at dif­ferent seasons. It involves much more than that today. 
It often involves the artificial preparation, protection, and enrichment of 
pastures for grazing animals. Also, in northern Europe, cattle are typically 
taken off the land during the winter months, housed in large barns, and fed
on artificial foodstuffs. In the case of the most intensively farmed animals, 
such as chickens or pigs, the artificial environments constructed for them 
are sometimes drastically dif­ferent from their natural environments. For 
instance, intensively farmed chickens are often kept and fed in small cages, in 
large numbers, inside buildings. Modern farmers also use veterinary services 
to protect the health of their livestock, sometimes combined with a heavy 
use of antibiotics.
As a consequence of the replacement of natural selection by artifi￾cial selection and the replacement of natural environments by artificially 306 Chapter 10
constructed environments, the Agricultural Revolution introduced a third 
major innovation. It suspended the normal processes of evolution relative to 
the organisms that they were domesticating and replaced it with an “artificial 
evolutionary process” based on artificial selection and artificially constructed 
environments. The survival and reproduction of domesticated plants and 
animals now largely depend on how they are managed by human farmers.
The purposes and fitness goals of domesticated organisms are overridden 
by the intentions, purposes, and fitness goals of humans. For instance, con￾temporary farmers usually change the natural sex ratios of the animals that
they are farming in order to increase their net productivity. In herds of cattle,
most males are prevented from reproducing by being castrated shortly after
they are born. A few carefully selected bulls are retained for reproductive 
purposes. In contrast, almost all female cattle are retained for both repro￾ductive and other purposes, such as dairying. By introducing an additional 
artificial trophic level, the Agricultural Revolution considerably increased the 
carrying capacities of human environments. That permitted an abnormal 
increase in the size of human populations. However, in return for overriding 
the fitness goals of domesticated organisms, farmers have to pay the ther￾modynamic costs incurred by the organisms that they domesticated (e.g. 
by feeding and preparing suitable environments for them to enable them to 
oppose the second law to stay alive).
The Industrial Revolution
The human Industrial Revolution is much more recent; it began only just 
over 300 years ago. The Industrial Revolution largely replaced human and
animal muscle power with fuel-consuming machines and engines, eventu￾ally on a vast scale. Today, we get fuel-consuming machines of one kind or
another to do most of our physical work. Fuel-consuming machines partially 
mimic the thermodynamic demands of living organisms. They mimic organ￾isms by consuming energy and matter resources from their environments, 
which are relatively high in free energy. They also dump detritus, which is 
relatively lower in free energy, back into their environments. This was why 
James Maxwell was so interested in Victorian steam engines and why we were 
so interested in Maxwell in chapter 1. But our contemporary machines are 307 How Are Humans Contributing to the Evolution of Life?
not autonomous. Unlike organisms, they cannot supply themselves with the 
fuel that they need to do their work. They cannot control the detritus that 
they have to emit. Nor can they assign themselves purposes. They have to be 
given their purposes by human designers, constructors, and programmers 
that serve our human purposes. We can imagine some future robots that 
will be autonomous, perhaps assisted by quantum computers that will be
massively more powerful than today’s digital computers. These robots might 
write their own algorithms and acquire purposes of their own. They might 
discover how to feed themselves, probably by using sunlight. They might even 
manage their own detritus. But we are not there yet.
Meanwhile, the lack of autonomy of our present machines imposes
additional thermodynamic costs on humanity. We now not only have to 
resist the second law of thermodynamics for ourselves by importing energy 
and matter resources from our environments and by exporting detritus back 
into our environments, but we have to do the same for our machines. We 
have to supply our machines with the fuel that they need to do their work, 
at present primarily in the form of fossil fuels derived from long-dead organ￾isms. We also have to return the detritus that the machines emit to the 
external environments that we share with them.
These extra thermodynamic costs imposed on humanity by our machines 
account for the nature of the additional artificial trophic level constructed 
by the Industrial Revolution. It is trophic, primarily because of the energy
and matter resources that we have to harvest on behalf of our machines to 
“feed” them. It is also artificial because it no longer resembles any of the 
naturally occurring trophic levels in ecosystems. It is a human-made and 
machine-made artificial trophic level, another product of our potent, human
scientifically and technologically enhanced, and cultural niche-constructing 
activities.
The Industrial Revolution affects how we feed ourselves, as well as how 
we feed our machines. It does so by interacting with the artificial trophic level 
created by the Agricultural Revolution, primarily by mechanizing most of 
our modern agricultural practices. Apart from increasing the productivity 
of our agriculture, the Industrial Revolution has generated huge numbers of 
dif­ferent kinds of artificial consumable goods. As a result, in the twentieth 308 Chapter 10
century, most human societies came to be called “consumer” societies.
Humans acquired new appetites for these new kinds of goods, far exceeding 
the appetites of our ancestors. I won’t attempt to describe all the ways that the 
Industrial Revolution has changed our human societies and our individual
lives, but among many other things, it has equipped us with cars, chainsaws,
televisions, computers, and innumerable powered household appliances.
These artificial trophic levels have not been without their costs and set￾backs. For example, in the case of the Agricultural Revolution, it takes a lot 
of additional resources to set up a farm in the first place. A farm represents 
an inescapable capital cost. There were other costs too. Humans became 
overdependent on monocultured domestic crops. That initially led to poorer 
and less-balanced diets. Also, the monoculture crops that entire human com￾munities depended on were sometimes devastated by catastrophic diseases. 
As a result, early agriculturalists suffered a slight decrease in human life
expectancy, as well as various negative health conditions. Nevertheless, agri￾culture led to a net increase in the size of human populations from early 
on. This was because birth rates typically increased faster than death rates 
in agricultural communities. The costs and setbacks due to the Industrial 
Revolution were and still are primarily associated with the pollution caused 
by our human industries.21 However, in combination, the two additional 
artificial trophic levels due to the Agricultural and Industrial Revolutions 
vastly increased the carrying capacity of human environments. That explains 
why there are so many people on Earth today.
NICHE CONSTRUCTION AND THE CARRYING 
CAPACITIES OF ENVIRONMENTS
How do the two additional artificial trophic levels relate to NCT? The rela￾tionship between the Agricultural Revolution and niche construction has 
been well documented, even though it is still controversial.22 The connec￾tion between the much more recent Industrial Revolution and human cul￾tural niche construction is not yet widely recognized or documented.23 One 
author who has written about it is the paleobiologist Doug Erwin,24 who 
criticizes the biological concept of the carrying capacity of environments. 309 How Are Humans Contributing to the Evolution of Life?
He points out that the carrying capacities of environments are always chang￾ing, relative to particular species. At the same time, the adaptations of those
organisms also change in ways that affect those carrying capacities.
Thus the carrying capacities of environments are not exclusively fixed by 
exogenous environmental variables that are independent of the organisms in
question. They also depend on endogenous variables arising from the adapta￾tions of the focal organisms. The latter includes the ecosystem-engineering
and niche-constructing adaptations of organisms.25 Erwin emphasizes that 
by their ecosystem-engineering and niche-constructing activities, organisms 
affect not only the carrying capacities of their own environments, but also 
those of many other organisms. That led Erwin to make a connection with 
economic theory. Until recently, biologists have usually assumed that the 
carrying capacities of environments are determined exclusively by exogenous 
variables. Economists usually do the opposite; they usually assume that the 
carrying capacities of human environments are determined exclusively by 
endogenous variables. The agricultural economist Ester Boserup provides 
one example.26 She claims that human ingenuity will always be capable of
offsetting any limitations imposed on human populations by their environ￾ments. She also claims that one way in which we do this is by substituting an 
alternative resource for one that is running out. Boserup implicitly assumes 
that human environmental resources are infinite.
That approach by Boserup and others gave rise to endogenous growth 
theory in economics.27 This implies that the carrying capacity of human
environments is exclusively determined by human cultural niche construc￾tion, although I know of few economists who are saying that yet. Erwin28
draws attention to this implication by referring to the work of two well￾known economists, Robert Solow and Paul Michael Romer. In 1956, Solow 
argued that economic growth always requires technological innovation.29
Later, however, Romer showed that not all technological innovations cause 
economic growth.30 He distinguished between “rivalrous” and “nonrival￾rous” economic goods. Rivalrous goods are goods that can have only one 
user at a time, such as a conventional bicycle. In contrast, nonrivalrous goods 
can be used by many people at the same time. An example of such a good is
a global positioning system (GPS), which can be used by huge numbers of 310 Chapter 10
people simultaneously. Romer also distinguished between “excludable” and 
“nonexcludable” goods. These terms refer to how easy or difficult it is for a 
user to exclude others from using the same good. Romer’s insight was that 
human economic growth depends on technical innovations that generate 
nonrivalrous and nonexcludable goods, not rivalrous and excludable goods.
Erwin then applied Romer’s insights into paleobiology and ecosystem 
ecology. He proposed that the greatest impact of ecosystem engineering or 
niche construction on ecosystems depends on organisms producing inno￾vations that are analogous to nonrivalrous and nonexcludable goods. He 
cites the production of oxygen by photosynthesizing organisms as a good 
example of a nonrivalrous and nonexcludable resource in ecosystems. This 
may explain why photosynthesizing organisms generated so much biomass 
and diversity in ecosystems. Erwin contrasted oxygen production with 
another kind of resource, the living spaces provided by intertidal zones for 
organisms such as barnacles.31 Barnacles survive by anchoring themselves to 
rocks and holding seawater in their enclosed shells to avoid drying out. 
The availability of these resources, therefore, may be partly determined by 
the niche-constructing activities of the barnacles, as well as of other organ￾isms. They are highly rivalrous and highly excludable. Translated back into 
human environments again, relative to our human economic activities, the
implication is that dif­ferent human niche-constructing activities have dif￾ferent consequences in dif­ferent environments. Although Erwin is not an 
economist, his arguments are sufficient to illustrate the links between eco￾nomics and NCT.32
Given our present dependence on the two artificial trophic levels of 
agricultural and industrial production, are we still managing to resist the 
second law of thermodynamics without threatening ourselves by violating it? 
It is not possible for organisms to violate the second law and stay alive, but 
organisms can sometimes cheat the second law by sacrificing their own and 
their descendants’ futures for the sake of the present. This takes us back to the
here-and-now versus elsewhere-and-later adaptational dilemma that we first 
looked at in chapter 3. Recall that organisms always need to be adapted to 
their immediate here-and-now environments or else they won’t have a future. 
But organisms also need to carry sufficient general-purpose adaptability to311 How Are Humans Contributing to the Evolution of Life?
allow them to adapt to possible changes in their future elsewhere-and-later
environments. It doesn’t matter whether the changes are caused by autono￾mous environmental events or by the niche-constructing activities of the 
organisms themselves. Dif­ferent species invest in dif­ferent adaptational 
strategies.
Specialist species maximize their adaptations to their here-and-now 
environments at the cost of sacrificing their general-purpose adaptability. 
Generalist species invest more heavily in general-purpose adaptability at the
cost of risking being outcompeted by specialists in their immediate here￾and-now environments. If environments change, however, then generalists 
are likely to outcompete their specialist rivals in their elsewhere-and-later
futures.
In the light of this here-and-now versus elsewhere-and-later dilemma,
there are two ways in which organisms could resist the second law here and 
now, risking their future survival. Organisms could fail to harvest sufficient 
energy and matter resources from their environments, in which case they 
would starve to death. Or organisms could fail to return their detritus to 
their environments before it kills them. Generally, humans are not making 
either of these mistakes yet. We are continuing to import resources high 
in free energy from our environments, and we are continuing to dump 
detritus lower in free energy back into our environments before it kills us. 
But there are two other ways in which organisms can resist the second law 
by risking their future survival. Organisms can take excessive energy and 
matter resources from their environments here and now, beyond the amount 
of resources that their environments can sustain over time. Or organisms 
can dump excessive detritus into their environments here and now, beyond 
the amounts that their environments can absorb by acting as sinks for it in 
the future.
Humanity is already making both of these mistakes. This is because of
the ways in which we are currently mismanaging the two additional artificial 
trophic levels that we inherited from our niche-constructing ancestors. There 
is growing evidence that we are currently overexploiting our environments 
by taking excessive resources from them and dumping excessive detritus 
back into them. We risk destroying the carrying capacities of our future 312 Chapter 10
environments for our later selves and our descendants by maximizing our 
immediate here-and-now gratification. We are also modifying the carrying
capacities of the elsewhere-and-later environments of countless other organ￾isms. We are thereby threatening life on Earth with a future human-induced
mass extinction.
Let’s go back to the evidence. We already know that we are currently 
destroying the Earth’s biodiversity at an accelerating rate, primarily by destroy￾ing the habitats of so many other organisms.33 We also know that at pre￾sent, we are overexploiting our forests, overfishing our oceans, and probably
overmining the Earth for resources, including so-called rare earth resources 
such as lithium and cobalt and more basic resources such as iron ore and oil. 
However, in spite of earlier predictions that we would be running out of oil 
by now, we have not done so yet. Instead, as predicted by many economists, 
we have used our technological expertise to extract oil in new ways and from 
new, previously inaccessible places. It is now harder and more expensive to 
extract oil than it was in the twentieth century, but the oil is still there. We 
have not yet reached the limit of the resources that we can take from our 
environments here and now.
In contrast, we may already be dumping too much detritus back into 
our environments as a consequence of our here-and-now economic activi￾ties. The amount of detritus that we have to return to our environments is 
closely correlated with the amount of resources that we are taking from our 
environments. At present, economists and politicians measure the amount 
of resources that we are taking from our environments in terms of the gross 
domestic product (GDP) of economies or nations. But GDP is closely cor￾related with another economic index, which is seldom or never mentioned. 
I’ll call it “gross domestic detritus (GDD),” emitted by nations and econo￾mies. In general, the greater their GDP, or the more energy and matter (R
p ) 
resources high in free energy that economies and nations take from their 
environments, then the greater their GDD; that is, the more energy and 
matter (R
p ) resources lower in free energy that they will have to dump back 
into their environments. I suggest in future that whenever a GDP index is 
cited, we should also cite its correlated GDD. We have invested far more 
capital and scientific and technological know-how in increasing GDP than 313 How Are Humans Contributing to the Evolution of Life?
in reducing GDD. As a result, we are dumping detritus into our environ￾ments to an extent beyond our environments’ capacity to act as sinks for it.
Thanks to our scientific know-how, we are manufacturing many new 
materials, artifacts, and products that have never existed on Earth before. 
They include plastic and electronic items. When we have finished with them, 
we discharge excessive amounts of them back into our environments. We are 
also doing so at a much faster rate than new detritivores could evolve that 
might be capable of degrading them and recycling them. We could delay the 
introduction of new materials into our environments until we have worked 
out and invested in ways in which it is possible to dump them back into our 
external environments without threatening our future. The most obvi￾ous detritus that we are dumping back into our environments to an exces￾sive extent are greenhouse gases, notably carbon dioxide. We are generating 
excessive amounts of carbon dioxide by our industrial activities. This is the 
waste product that, more than any other, is contributing to global warming. 
We are beginning to recognize this and are starting to take corrective action, 
but we have not gone nearly far enough yet (see the latest reports from the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change).
I’ll summarize the preceding argument in terms of a familiar equation 
in ecology, the logistic growth equation. This not only allows me to relate 
my hypothesis more formally to ecological theory, it also introduces the 
second driver of global warming, our reproductive activities. The logistic 
growth equation is dN/dt = rN(1−N/K), where N is population size, r is the 
intrinsic growth rate of the population, and K is the carrying capacity of the
populations’ environments. Our economic activities refer to both K and N
in this equation, while our reproductive activities refer to r.
According to the preceding argument, the value of K should be calcu￾lated both in terms of the energy and matter resources that an environment 
can supply to a population, and in terms of the environment’s capacity to act 
as a sink for the detritus emitted by the population. This way of calculating 
K determines N, the size of a population, relative to the carrying capacities
of its environment. The intrinsic growth rate, r, relates to the growth in the 
value of N over time. That is the usual way of calculating r in ecology, but 
this way of calculating the intrinsic growth rate r is misleading in the case 314 Chapter 10
of human populations. It fails to capture either the extra energy and matter
resources that humans are taking or the extra detritus that we are returning 
to our environments as a consequence of our construction and management 
of those two artificial trophic levels.
We need to be able to measure our increasing impact on our environ￾ments. The parameter that we really need to calculate is the growth in the 
“effective size” of our growing human populations. This parameter refers not 
only to the extra people in a population, but also to the extra resources that 
the extra people are taking from their environments and the extra detritus 
that they are dumping back into them. Let’s call this parameter N' and the 
intrinsic growth parameter associated with it, r'. The latter refers not only to 
the growth of a human population, but also to the growth in the resources 
that the population is taking from its environment and to the detritus that 
it is returning to its environment.
If we want to understand the thermodynamics of the impact of our 
growing populations on our environments, caused by our two additional 
artificial trophic levels, we need to substitute N' and r' for N and r, in a 
revised logistic growth equation that applies exclusively to humans. We also 
need to substitute K' for K in the same logistic equation. K' refers to the 
enhanced carrying capacity of human environments caused by the human 
Agricultural and Industrial revolutions. At present, the value of K' far exceeds 
the value of K for the reasons that we have just been discussing. It’s even 
possible that the difference between K' and K is still increasing globally. K' 
should then affect the values of N' and r' in the revised logistic growth equa￾tion that applies to humanity.
But we are currently destroying biodiversity and dumping excessive 
amounts of detritus back into our environments. That means that the dif￾ference between K' and K may start to reduce rather than increase in the 
near future. Should it do so, the degraded human environments will then
be able to support smaller human populations than today. In the case of a 
catastrophic human failure to prevent a human-induced mass extinction, the
value of K' could sink far below the value of K. It could become far less than 
the original carrying capacity of human environments before the origins 
of either the human Agricultural or Industrial revolution. The difference 315 How Are Humans Contributing to the Evolution of Life?
between K' and K is the one to watch. It is bound to vary at dif­ferent places
and times, in dif­ferent regions of the world, and across dif­ferent countries. As
predicted by NCT’s emphasis on relocation, that will probably cause people
in regions where K' is lowest to relocate by migrating to where K' is higher. 
The consequences of declining values of K' are likely to cause increasingly 
desperate migration. I’ll illustrate the difference that a revised human logistic 
growth equation makes to our understanding of the relationship between 
our contemporary human populations and their environments.
In 1700, just before the start of the Industrial Revolution, the 
world’s human population was approximately 600 million. It is 8 billion 
today—more than a 12.5-fold increase in the size of the total human popu￾lation in just over 300 years. Let’s now compare the estimated resources 
taken by humans in 1700 with the total resources that we are taking from 
the environment today, in light of this revised logistic growth equation. Let’s 
also compare the correlated detritus that our ancestors were generating in 
1700 with the detritus that we are generating today. This should enable us 
to capture the interactions of humans with their environments in terms of 
the true thermodynamic costs that we are imposing on our environments 
by the ways that we are living today. This measure is often called our “col￾lective” or “individual” ecological footprint on our environments. It might 
be better to call it a “thermodynamic” footprint. But I will continue to call
it an “ecological” footprint because that term is more familiar.
I’ll arbitrarily assume that on average, every human being alive on Earth 
today consumes 25 times more energy and matter resources than the aver￾age individual human did in 1700, which various sources suggest is likely 
to be a conservative estimate.34 We are not each eating 25 times more food 
than our ancestors; it is that the energy and matter costs of our individual
lives have increased by more than 25 times. This is primarily due to our con￾temporary dependence on huge numbers of fuel-consuming and detritus￾producing machines for so much of what we do today. For example, every 
time we travel by bus, car, rail, ship, or plane, our individual ecological 
footprint is increased by our individual share of the thermodynamic costs 
of those machines. The same is true every time we switch on the light, turn 
on a computer or television, or cook on a modern stove. It’s also true of the 316 Chapter 10
roads, railroads, ports, and airports on which we depend and the buildings 
in which we live in, work in, and play.
The construction and maintenance of all these things required and con￾tinue to require fuel-consuming and detritus-producing machines to build 
them, heat them in winter, air-condition them in summer, and keep them in 
good repair. It is even true when we go to supermarkets to buy food. The food 
on the shelves may be local or may have come from distant places. But even 
food grown locally will now take up far more resources than the food con￾sumed by our ancestors in 1700 because it depends so much on agricultural 
machinery. When you add all of that up, the increase of 25 times the energy 
and matter resources that we are using to live, compared with our ancestors 
in 1700, starts to make sense. It means that the effective human population
size N', as opposed to N, must have increased more than 300 times (i.e., 
12.5 × 25 = 312.5) in a little over 300 years. That is not sustainable.
How have we gotten away with that, and for how much longer can we do 
so? Let’s consider some of the ways in which we have managed to continue to 
feed our rapidly growing populations since the start of the twentieth century. 
We’ve done so as a consequence of both the Agricultural and Industrial 
revolutions working together. But remember Malthus.
Malthus was one of those highly original clergymen who in the eigh￾teenth and nineteenth centuries, owing to their light ecclesiastical duties, 
did a lot of thinking. He noted that human populations tend to increase 
geometrically (i.e., exponentially). While the food and energy resources that 
they need to live increase only arithmetically. Malthus inferred from this 
contrast that human numbers would always be limited by lack of sufficient 
environmental resources. He envisaged a nightmare scenario involving a lot 
of human poverty, famine, disease, and misery as a result.
Malthus’s ideas contributed to Darwin’s discovery of natural selection.
Darwin realized that if Malthus were correct, then all organisms in all spe￾cies would inevitably have to compete with each other, as well as with other 
species, for the energy and matter resources that they need to live. Darwin 
also realized that because organisms in the same species always vary, the 
fittest among them would be more likely to survive and reproduce in each 
generation, while the least fit would be eliminated by the competition. As the 317 How Are Humans Contributing to the Evolution of Life?
demand on the environment by any growing population increases, it intro￾duces a category of natural selection called “density-dependent selection.”35
Density-dependent selection intensifies when an increasing number of 
organisms have to compete with each other for diminishing environmental 
resources. Today, we like to think that the nightmare scenario envisaged 
by Malthus no longer applies to us. This is because so far, we have always 
managed to offset the threat of too little food, and more generally of insuf￾ficient energy and matter resources, by increasing the productivity of our 
environments by our niche-constructing activities. But have we really left the 
Malthusian nightmare behind permanently? Or have we only postponed it?
Originally, neither Malthus nor Darwin realized that it was possible
for organisms to change the carrying capacity (K) of their environments by 
their niche-constructing activities positively as well as negatively. However, 
it is possible for organisms to increase the carrying capacity of their envi￾ronments from K to K' in the ways that we have just discussed. If we now 
go back to the beginning of the twentieth century, we come across several 
ways in which humans have continued to increase their food supply as a 
function of their management of the two additional artificial trophic levels. 
One major way was through a scientifically enhanced capacity to produce 
artificial fertilizers. That led to a considerable increase in the productivity 
of our agricultural activities. Then, in the 1970s, just as human population
numbers were threatening to outstrip our food resources, we had the so￾called Green Revolution.36
The Green Revolution introduced not only genetically superior and
more productive plants and animals, but also a further intensification of our 
agricultural activities, leading to even greater productivity. But there was a 
cost. “Green Revolution” crops demanded more artificial fertilizers, more 
pesticides, and more fresh water than the crops that they replaced. Each of 
these additional requirements made further demands on our environments, 
costing additional energy and matter resources. That generated the next 
batch of adaptive problems for humanity. The increased use of fertilizers 
has become a major source of pollution. Fertilizers are currently polluting 
our rivers, lakes, and oceans.37 The overuse of pesticides is killing so many 
insects that eventually, there may not be enough insects left to pollinate our 318 Chapter 10
crops.38 There is also increasing competition between dif­ferent societies and
nations for diminishing supplies of fresh water. So far, we have postponed the 
Malthusian nightmare, but we have certainly not eliminated it permanently. 
There are also many other ways in which modern agriculture is reducing 
biodiversity by destroying the habitats of so many organisms for the sake of 
increasing human food production.39
That brings us to the final variable that affects the carrying capacity, 
K', of our contemporary human environments: life expectancy. That term 
refers to the number of years that the average human is expected to live in 
dif­ferent parts of the world. It is relevant because the longer we live, the more 
energy and matter resources we consume and the more detritus we generate 
during our lives. Increased life expectancy adds to the impact or ecologi￾cal footprint that each of us has on our environments. At the population 
level, if birth rates remain constant but life expectancy doubles in a human
population, that greatly increases the size of the population. The size of the 
effective human population (N') will increase too. If it does, it will further 
increase the thermodynamic costs that a human population imposes on its
external environment.
We can now compare the life expectancy of the average human being on
Earth in 1700 BCE with the average life expectancy of human beings today. It 
has clearly increased, but by how much? I am not a demographer, so I cannot 
answer my own question. In Britain, however, where the Industrial Revolu￾tion began, as well as in most other countries, life expectancy has more than 
doubled since 1700.40 This matters. Increased life expectancies are adding to 
the thermodynamic impact that we are all imposing on our environments.
Why have life expectancies increased so rapidly, almost worldwide? That 
cannot be explained exclusively by more secure food supplies or better living 
conditions. It is also due to the successes of the biomedical sciences in keep￾ing us alive longer. The biomedical sciences have increased life expectancies 
in two main ways. They have reduced infant mortality in many countries, 
and they have increased longevity. Relative to the revised logistic growth 
equation that applies to human populations, it means that although the
biomedical sciences have not directly contributed either to K' or r' in this 319 How Are Humans Contributing to the Evolution of Life?
equation, they have directly contributed to N'. They have done so by greatly 
increasing the effective size of most human populations on Earth.
The biomedical sciences can also claim to be reducing the size of N' and 
the rate of increase in our human populations (r') by developing contra￾ceptive technologies. In the mid-twentieth century, it was expected that a 
phenomenon known as the “demographic transition” would occur. A demo￾graphic transition was first noticed in the industrialized countries of Europe 
toward the end of the nineteenth century.41 It was expected to generalize 
to other countries as they industrialized. The availability of contraceptives, 
combined with increasing wealth and the increasing confidence of parents 
that any children they did have would survive into adulthood, was widely 
expected to halt the growth in human populations. This did happen in some
prosperous countries, such as Japan, South Korea, and Germany. But it has 
not happened worldwide. Something more is still needed to stabilize human 
population numbers.
Another effective way of stabilizing human population growth is female 
emancipation. Female emancipation requires educating women up to at least 
the same level as men, as well as an increase in their economic independence,
and allowing women much greater control over their own reproduction. At 
present, however, in some cultures, female emancipation is often opposed by 
long-standing cultural traditions and by prescientific beliefs and pronatalist 
religions.
Globally, the size of the effective human population on Earth (N') is 
still growing, partly thanks to the biomedical sciences. Therefore, the total 
amount of energy and matter, or R
p
 resources, that we are taking from our 
external environments and the total amount of detritus that we are dump￾ing back into our environments are also increasing. In spite of the welcome 
achievements of the biomedical sciences in alleviating so much human suf￾fering and the extra longevity that they have given humanity, the biomedical 
sciences are inadvertently making our problems worse. They are increasing 
rather than reducing our ecological footprint, simply by increasing N' in 
the logistic growth equation. They are unintentionally contributing to the 
looming threat of global warming despite their benign intentions.320 Chapter 10
Where are we going wrong? The main implication of the preceding 
analysis is that the construction of the two artificial trophic levels by our 
human niche-constructing activities enabled a considerable increase in the 
effective size of our human population. It also led to considerable increases 
in human wealth, although not for everyone. These two artificial trophic 
levels now seem to be indispensable to humanity. They have also introduced 
a positive feedback cycle that keeps ratcheting up the demands that we are 
making on our environments. Human societies quickly use up the benefits
of the extra resources that we gain from our two artificial trophic levels. 
We do that by increasing our material wealth, by increasing the size of our 
populations, or both.
These outcomes then require a further increase in the productivity of 
our agricultural and industrial activities. This increases the thermodynamic 
demands that we make on our environments. One consequence of that is 
that the world’s natural ecosystems may soon no longer be able to sustain
our two artificial trophic levels due to the damage that they are inflicting 
on the natural ecosystems in which they occur. But we still depend on the 
natural ecosystems, as well as on the artificial trophic levels, for our lives. 
These two artificial trophic levels are neither stable nor sustainable. If we are 
to stabilize them, we are going to have to do more than just conserve bio￾diversity. We shall have to change the way that we manage them so they are 
no longer destroying the Earth’s natural systems. Relative to the bioenergetic 
requirements of life, we may have to reduce the amount of energy and matter 
resources that we are taking from our environments, as well as the amount of 
detritus that we are returning to them. Relative to the bioinformatics require￾ments of life, we will certainly have to invest more in acquiring additional 
adaptive know-how to enable us to manage the detritus, or GDD, that so 
closely tracks our expanding global national GDPs.
It should not be impossible for us to achieve these adjustments, assum￾ing that we have not already passed a point of no return. But it will be dif￾ficult. For example, in principle, we could reduce our resource take from 
our environments, or we could reduce the size of our populations. But most 
of us still seem to want greater, rather than less, material wealth (perhaps 
understandably). Also, collectively, we still seem to be unable to limit our 321 How Are Humans Contributing to the Evolution of Life?
reproductive activities enough to stabilize the size of the world’s human
population.
A SECOND ADAPTIVE LAG
In the same way as with the negative future, threatened by our invention 
of nuclear weapons, I suggest that we will not be able to avert the negative 
future threatened by global warming, exclusively through our cultural socio￾economic and geopolitical activities, at level 3. We will also have to take our 
past population-genetic evolution at level 1 into account, recognizing that 
we need to confront at least one more adaptive lag. This primarily refers to 
how we are dealing with our detritus, in particular how we are dealing with 
the greenhouse gases that we are generating by our machines.
This brings to mind a quote from Arthur Conan Doyle’s hero, Sherlock 
Holmes: “Why didn’t the dog bark in the night?” The corresponding ques￾tion is: Why didn’t our ancestors at the start of the Industrial Revolution 
establish the principle that whoever was responsible for the industries that 
were polluting the natural environment should have cleared up the mess, 
or pay for others to do so? There are some obvious reasons why this did not 
happen. It would have made their industries less profitable. Also, the relevant 
technology may not have been available at the time. But I suggest there was 
also another more profound reason. It involves another adaptive lag, gener￾ated by the incompatibility between another ancient level 1 adaptation and 
another much more recent level 3 adaptation in human evolution.
This adaptive lag works in the opposite way as the adaptive lag discussed 
previously, in connection with the threat of nuclear war. Instead of being due 
to the presence of an ancient level 1 social adaptation that has now become 
maladaptive, this second adaptive lag is due to the absence of an ancient 
level 1 adaptation, which we now need to prevent a level 3 adaptation from 
becoming fatally maladaptive. Similar to almost all other organisms, natu￾ral selection favored humans who dumped their raw detritus straight back
into their environments. Consequently, dumping our raw detritus back into 
our environments was the only adaptive trait that we inherited from our 
ancestors for dealing with our detritus. This trait used to be adaptive. It was 322 Chapter 10
a cheap way of dealing with our detritus, in terms of its energy and matter
(R
p ) costs. Also, for as long as our environments could recycle our detritus, 
it was not a threat to ourselves and was far less of a threat to other organisms.
Humans have probably always assumed that our external environments 
are unlimited sinks for our detritus. That was true at least until the start of 
the Industrial Revolution. But it is no longer true today. Because of our heavy 
use of industries, we are now dumping more detritus, including greenhouse
gases, back into our environments than our environments can absorb. If 
we are to consolidate the increased carrying capacities of our human envi￾ronments that we have gained from our two artificial trophic levels, we are 
going to have to invest in an artificial reduction of the detritus, or GDD, 
that is generated by our expanding GDPs. We will have to become our own 
artificial detritivores relative to our own detritus.
HOW COULD WE AVOID A NEGATIVE FUTURE?
How might we avoid inducing a mass extinction of life on Earth, either due
to nuclear war or global warming? It is now possible to see that both of the 
ways in which humans could cause mass extinction have the same origin. 
Both stem from the potency of our cultural niche constructive and destruc￾tive activities. Is there anything else that these two dif­ferent routes into a 
negative future have in common? Possibly yes. Both involve our scientific 
and technological activities at level 3. Are we misusing science and technol￾ogy in ways that are threatening our own futures, as well as the future of all 
life on Earth? Possibly yes.
The Asymmetric Application of Science and Technology
The philosopher Bertrand Russell once proposed that there are two kinds 
of science. He called them “power science” and “understanding science.” 
He stated that some science is motivated by a quest for power, but wisdom 
is derived primarily from understanding science.42 No scientific discipline 
is exclusively either a power science or an understanding science. They are 
all a mix of both, but to varying degrees. Evolutionary biology and ecology
are primarily understanding sciences. Since the discovery of the molecular 323 How Are Humans Contributing to the Evolution of Life?
basis of genes, however, molecular biology has largely become a power sci￾ence. For instance, it led to the ability to change the genetic composition of
plants and animals, through selective breeding, and gene editing. Conversely, 
physics is usually thought of as a power science. It deals directly with the 
forces of nature, including gravity and its own more recent discoveries of 
electromagnetism and the strong and weak nuclear forces, and hence to 
their applications in technology. In my view, cosmology and astrophysics 
are understanding sciences rather than power sciences. Almost everyone
finds power sciences attractive. Those who do range from would-be or actual
dictators to enthusiastic users of the latest powerful artifacts, inventions, 
or gadgets. Conversely, most of us are disturbed or even frightened (some￾times profoundly) by the discoveries of understanding science. Maybe this 
is because scientific enlightenment so often seems to downgrade our own 
self-esteem and self-importance.
Over the last several centuries, science has taught us that the Earth is not 
the center of the universe. It is just a satellite of the Sun, orbiting it once a 
year. Both Copernicus and Galileo got into trouble with their contemporary 
authorities for pointing that out. As we now know from the work of later
scientists, Earth is only one of billions of planets orbiting other stars in 
our galaxy. Moreover, our galaxy is only one of innumerable galaxies in the 
universe. None of that flatters humanity. Then along came Darwin, with 
his ideas about evolution, including human evolution. That made matters
worse. Are we really so closely related to gorillas and chimpanzees? It’s a 
thought that disturbs some people. Science often upsets the most powerful
people in our societies too. Historically, it has challenged the divine rights 
claimed by popes, bishops, emperors, kings, ayatollahs, and caliphs by asking 
awkward questions about the presumed sources of their authority.
Also, as we’ve just noted, humanity has invested heavily in those niche￾constructing activities that gratify us by giving us more of what we want, 
whether it be more wealth or more social, military, economic, or political 
power. But we have largely failed to apply understanding sciences to help us 
to understand the limitations of our cultural niche-constructing activities 
relative to what the rest of life on Earth can sustain. Nor have we applied 
understanding sciences sufficiently to help us to understand ourselves, or our 324 Chapter 10
relationships with other humans, better than we do at the moment. Never￾theless, we could still change the ways in which we niche-construct. We are 
purposeful agents that in principle could adjust our purposes, and therefore 
our niche-constructing activities. We could invest in dif­ferent kinds of niche
construction with respect to the adaptive management of the two artificial 
trophic levels that we have constructed. For example, until global warming
becomes self-perpetuating by generating runaway positive feedback, it is in 
our hands to slow it down or halt it. But we will have to adjust our purposeful 
activities to do so. That will mean investing less in trying to exploit nature 
by the application of power sciences and more in trying to understand our 
relationship with the rest of nature through understanding sciences, and then 
applying this new knowledge.
A POSITIVE FUTURE
After spending so long on that treadmill of doom, what about the alternative? 
Earlier, I suggested that humanity is currently standing on the threshold of 
two very dif­ferent futures. One refers to the negative futures that we have just 
been considering, the other to an alternative possible positive future. What 
form might that take? The positive path to the future is far more tenuous, 
for three main reasons. There is a lack of relevant data, there are difficulties 
with making predictions in biology, and we need to change the way we think.
We lack sufficient data, partly because we still don’t know whether life
exists anywhere in the universe other than on our own planet. Also, our 
knowledge of the past evolution of life, even on our own planet, becomes 
sketchier the further we go back in time. Further, as evolutionary biologists 
know to their detriment, biology is not like physics. It is almost impossible 
to predict what evolution is going to do next, at least in a specific popula￾tion. It is possible for us to understand how evolution works and, in the light 
of that understanding, we can rule out some things that definitely cannot
happen. This is what we have just been doing. For example, evolution can￾not disregard the second law of thermodynamics. But we cannot predict 
the many ways in which evolution can obey the second law. Einstein was 
also right—we really do need to change the way we think, not just to avoid 325 How Are Humans Contributing to the Evolution of Life?
nuclear war or global warming, but to achieve a positive future. I want to 
concentrate on this third point. Changing the way that we think is a neces￾sary precursor to changing our values, our purposes, our behaviors, and the
ways in which we are currently niche-constructing. What will it take for us
to change the way that we think and act?
What influences determine the way that we think at the moment? Obvi￾ously, we are affected by innumerable influences, but I’m going to ignore 
most of them. It would be reckless and out of place here to attempt to find a 
comprehensive answer to that question. In any case, it is beyond my expertise 
to do so. I shall not consider the ways in which our thinking is influenced
by the arts, literature, the humanities, the entertainment industries, or even 
by demagogues. Instead, I want to concentrate on how the understanding 
sciences, and primarily the sciences of evolutionary biology and ecology, 
might eventually start to change the way that we think. Beyond that, I will
only consider other sources of influence that are either directly connected 
to evolutionary biology and ecology or are affected by them. I also want to 
consider how substituting the proposed extended theory of evolution for 
SET might help us change the way that we think, to the point where a posi￾tive future, rather than a negative future, beckons.
Everything that influences the way that we think and behave starts as 
incoming information. This information is acquired by our natural or arti￾ficial senses (e.g., telescopes, microscopes) from both our internal and exter￾nal environments. In the context of the extended evolutionary theory, this 
becomes meaningful information acquired by organisms. Recall that they are 
population-genetic evolution at level 1, individual developmental processes
at level 2, and sociocultural processes at level 3. The understanding sciences 
are a level 3 information-gaining process.
Regardless of which evolutionary level we acquire our information from, 
we translate it into adaptive know-how, or Ri
. From this know-how, whether 
it is adaptive or not, we then derive our emotions, motives, purposes, and 
goal-oriented behaviors (see chapter 2). It follows that if we are to change 
the way that we think and behave, it is always going to require changes in 
the meaningful information that we derive from at least one of those three 
information-gaining processes.326 Chapter 10
It also follows that new information derived from any of these levels 
could initiate new changes in our thinking and behavior. One possible source 
of new information is science, in particular the understanding sciences. Sci￾ences provide us with information that was never available to our ancestors. 
Could the understanding sciences, particularly our understanding of evolu￾tion and ecology, eventually change the way that we think? Let’s consider 
what we have now learned about the past history of our universe and our 
own relationship to the rest of nature on the largest possible scale.
The universe began with a bang that occurred approximately 13.8 bil￾lion years ago. That said, the Big Bang did not occur in time and space. Time 
and space were created by the Big Bang. The Big Bang was a physical singu￾larity, which provided an unimaginable amount of free energy available to 
do physical work. According to astrophysicists, the heat left over after the Big 
Bang must initially have been so intense that the earliest universe must have 
glowed with light, before becoming opaque and dark. As the universe started 
to cool, matter formed. Light then returned, emitted by stars in the first galax￾ies. Since the launch of the Giant Web Space Telescope in 2022, astronomers 
have been receiving new data that allows them to peer so far back in time that 
they can now see what looks to be the very first galaxies in the universe that 
formed after the big bang. Most appear to be very small galaxies compared 
to our own galaxy, and they also appear to be composed of only the lightest 
elements, primarily hydrogen and helium. For example, apparently these 
first galaxies contained only about 2 percent of the oxygen (hardly a heavy 
element itself) that is present in our own galaxy. Astronomers are starting to 
call them “green pea” universes because of their smallness and their color.
43
Subsequently, the Big Bang and the laws of physics and chemistry generated 
our physical universe, comprising the myriad of galaxies, black holes, dark 
matter, and dark energy, as well as the visible stars and their planets.44
On one planet, the Earth, orbiting a star, the Sun, in our own galaxy, life 
originated from abiotic matter about 4 billion years ago. Apparently, it did 
so by self-assembly under the direction of the laws of physics, chemistry, and 
chance (see chapter 6). The subsequent evolution of life on Earth then even￾tually led from simple prokaryotic cells without nuclei to more complicated 
eukaryotic cells with organized nuclei and internalized organelles, including 327 How Are Humans Contributing to the Evolution of Life?
mitochondria. This occurred more than 1.5 billion years ago and was a major 
advance toward greater complexity. It led to the evolution of multicellular 
organisms or metazoans. That was followed by the appearance of the first 
animals in the Ediacaran era, about 600 million years ago. Subsequently, 
multiple dif­ferent forms and kinds of animals appeared during the Cambrian 
explosion, about 540 million years ago. Brains and minds then evolved in 
animals. From animal brains, intelligence and conscious minds evolved, 
culminating in the evolution of our own species about 300,000 years ago 
and to today’s levels of conscious human intelligence. Conscious human
intelligence has now given us the first glimmer of awareness of both the past 
history of our universe and the history of the evolution of life on Earth. It 
has also given us a degree of self-awareness. Paul Nurse provides a similar list 
of discoveries in his book What Is Life? Understand Biology in Five Steps.45
In particular, we have learned that we are probably the only species 
capable of being aware of the evolutionary process that produced all of life 
on Earth. We can also assume that we are the only species alive today with
enough self-awareness to start asking serious questions about our own exis￾tence. We are the first organisms on Earth to become consciously aware of 
the evolutionary processes that are responsible for our existence, as well as 
the existence of all other life on Earth. Through us, evolution has become 
aware of itself. This could eventually change the way that we think. It might 
also enable us to act as responsible custodians of the rest of life on Earth.
But we will have to pay a price for this insight. Collectively, we will have 
to learn much more from the understanding sciences about evolution and 
how it works. This is not a trivial task. Many years ago, I attended a confer￾ence on evolution at Cambridge University. There were a lot of enthusias￾tic evolutionary biologists present. Toward the end of the conference, our 
enthusiasms were dampened by a witty talk from the philosopher of biology
David Hull. Remember, he said that the vast majority of people in the world
have never heard of evolution. Among those that have heard of it, the vast 
majority don’t understand it. Among those that have some understanding of 
it, the vast majority don’t like it. That was sobering. It may still be true. If so, 
it means that the vast majority of humans on Earth today must still have a 
very poor understanding about how we really do relate to the rest of nature.328 Chapter 10
Following the construction of our two artificial trophic levels by our 
cultural niche constructing activities at level 3, we will still have to learn a 
lot more from ecology, evolution, and environmental sciences, including 
the relationship of our two artificial trophic levels with the rest of nature. 
However, to borrow from Hull again, most people alive on Earth today are 
probably more preoccupied with the daily struggles of life to think enough
about the implications of these discoveries of our understanding sciences. 
Many people are interested in, or alarmed by, these discoveries, but not to 
the point that they change the way that they think.
After a period of unprecedented weather and climate events, however, 
ranging from uncontrollable forest fires in Australia, California, and south￾ern Europe and peat fires in Siberia, as well as droughts in the Horn of Africa 
and dramatic increases in the loss of polar ice,46 many people may have 
begun to think differently. We may also have started to think differently after
experiencing the COVID-19 pandemic, which may itself be partly due to 
the ways in which we are now farming animals and destroying the habitats of 
multiple other organisms, thereby increasing zoonotic encounters between 
ourselves and disease-carrying organisms such as bats. But collectively, we 
are still falling far short of the radical changes in human thinking that will
be necessary to rectify our previous mistakes relative to global warming. 
For instance, the need for humanity to give up fossil fuels is now widely 
recognized, but the implementation of policies to achieve this is still being 
opposed.
There are also some new dangers arising from our latest technologies, 
which we now need to understand better to avoid another misuse of science. 
For example, thanks to our new ability to edit not only our own genomes, 
but potentially the genomes of almost all organisms on Earth, we will have 
to understand, better than we do now, precisely what we are doing when we 
edit any organism’s genome. This prospect takes us back to humans having 
the option to “design” their own babies,47 and potentially also the designer 
offspring of multiple other organisms. It also may introduce the prospect 
of humanity having the option of directing the future evolution of some or 
much of life on Earth.329 How Are Humans Contributing to the Evolution of Life?
UNDERSTANDING SCIENCE VERSUS RELIGIOUS BELIEFS
I now want to consider another major influence over the ways that we 
think: religion. There is no direct connection between our relatively ancient 
religious beliefs and the modern understanding sciences of evolution and 
ecology. But in today’s world, the sciences undoubtedly affect our religious 
beliefs. The relationship between evolutionary biology and religion is tense. 
Many religions see evolution as a threat to their beliefs. The prescientific 
world generated numerous creation myths, animisms, shamanisms, and later
the doctrinal world religions.48 They have a lot in common. Typically, they 
assume that the world, the universe, and life on Earth were created by a 
supernatural deity or deities. Many religions also claim that human creation 
was a special case. For example, Christianity claims that humans, unlike all
other organisms, were created in the image of God.
Evolutionary biology provides a dif­ferent kind of explanation for life.
It accounts for the existence of life on Earth, including human life, in terms
of the laborious, four-billion-year-old natural processes of evolution, rather 
than being the spontaneous products of a supernatural, intelligent creator. 
Does this difference between evolutionary biology and religious beliefs make 
them irreconcilable?
Let’s go back to our prescientific selves again. Many people in the past
were often able to find solace, their ethics, their meaning, and their pur￾pose from the stories, legends, and religious beliefs that prevailed in their 
societies. I am not a religious person, but I can offer one suggestion about 
how it might be possible to reconcile science and religion. It stems from 
the seventeenth-century Dutch philosopher Baruch Spinoza. Apparently, 
Spinoza was indifferent to whether we call God nature or nature God. He 
came up with a memorable phrase, Deus, sive natura. In English, that trans￾lates to “God or Nature.” Spinoza was criticized by his contemporaries. He 
was accused of pantheism. I’ll ignore these criticisms. But might Spinoza’s 
indifference to whether we call God nature or nature God still work for us, 
with one crucial proviso?
It could work, provided that the concept of God is repeatedly (and, 
if necessary radically) revised every time we learn more about nature from 330 Chapter 10
science. Failure to update our religions, in the light of new knowledge about 
nature from our sciences, may not rob religious beliefs of their emotional 
appeal, but it would threaten them with intellectual vacuity. It could leave us 
with a maladaptive cultural schizophrenia that could tear our world apart. It 
certainly would not help us avoid a human-induced mass extinction.
What would our religions have to give up to incorporate what the under￾standing sciences of evolution and ecology are now telling us? We will have 
to accept that humans are the products of the same natural processes of
evolution that produced all other organisms on Earth. We owe our exis￾tence to the same laws of physics and chemistry, and to the same biological 
processes of evolution, as all other living organisms. We shall also have to 
accept that nature doesn’t care about us, any more than it cares about any 
of its other creatures. What matters in nature is whether organisms can
satisfy the demands made on them by the second law of thermodynamics 
in ways that allow them to survive and reproduce. If an organism cannot do 
that, too bad. Nature will evolve other organisms that are better adapted. 
Humans will also have to give up the idea that we are cared for by a benign, 
loving deity. Nature is not benign, and natural selection is not a benign way
of designing organisms.
Perhaps the hardest idea that we may have to accept is that we are mortal, 
and as transitory as all other organisms. The evolutionary process could not 
work without the constant turnover of various mortal individual organisms, 
in successive generations of evolving populations. Death is part of life. Dif￾ferent organisms have dif­ferent lifespans, and for an animal, ours is relatively 
generous. But we are still mortal.
What could we gain by updating our religious beliefs in the light of 
evolutionary biology and the other natural sciences? We would gain more 
truthful answers to those age-old questions than have ever been available to 
humans before. Who are we? We are social primates with ape and hominin 
ancestors. Where did we come from? We came from the same processes of
evolution that are responsible for the existence of all organisms on Earth. 
What are we doing here? We are active, purposeful agents in the evolutionary 
process, and we contribute to the future evolution of our own species, as well 
as to many other species. Where are we going? We seem to be heading into one 331 How Are Humans Contributing to the Evolution of Life?
or the other of those two alternative possible futures that we have just been 
discussing—a negative future or a positive future. A positive future includes 
accepting our collective responsibility for the custodianship of life on Earth.
A FINAL QUESTION
This raises a final question. In the absence of a god who cares about us, and in 
the presence of an indifferent nature, do our lives matter? Can they matter? It 
is illuminating to consider two of the most extreme possible human reactions 
to the discoveries of modern science. One possible reaction is that, relative to 
the vastness of the universe, our individual human lives are meaningless. A 
second possible reaction is the exact opposite—that human lives are more 
meaningful than it has ever been possible for us to realize before.
I’ll begin at the pessimistic end of this spectrum. It was anticipated by 
the words that Shakespeare put into the mouth of Macbeth after the death of
his wife, when he was contemplating his imminent downfall and death: “Life 
is a tale told by an idiot, full of sound and fury, signifying nothing.” (act V, 
scene V). Might that be true? Was Macbeth right? What does the scientific 
evidence tell us? It tells us that at least with respect to the evolution of life on 
Earth, Macbeth was wrong. Our lives are meaningful, if only because what
we do and how we live affect not just our own evolution, but the evolution 
of countless other organisms on Earth. NCT demonstrates this point. But 
it raises a further question. Suppose that the evolutionary process itself is a 
tale told by an idiot, full of sound and fury, signifying nothing. What then? 
This is a far more difficult question to answer. Could Macbeth still be right?
If the evolutionary process itself showed no evidence of proceeding in 
any particular direction, but rather appeared to be just a random walk, then 
Macbeth might be right. It would not be possible for humans to impose 
purpose or direction on a fundamentally directionless process, whatever we 
did. Our individual human lives might then seem futile once again. But 
what does the evidence tell us this time? There is weak evidence that since 
the origin of life, the subsequent evolution of life on Earth has not been a 
random walk. It appears that the evolution of life since its origin has been 
traveling from simplicity to greater complexity and greater thermodynamic 332 Chapter 10
efficiency. Evolution happens because organisms are purposeful agents, so it 
cannot be a random walk. There have been many interruptions to this over￾all directionality. These interruptions have been caused by a series of mass 
extinctions, some very severe. So far, however, the evolutionary process has 
always recovered and resumed its travels toward greater overall complexity.
There is considerable evidence that the evolution of life on Earth has 
proceeded through a series of major transitions in evolution, and again niche 
construction lies at the heart of it (see chapter 8). Here, I’ll focus on the 
major evolutionary transitions in bioinformatics.49 Each successive major 
transition relates to an increase in efficiency of an information- or Ri
-gaining 
process. According to Maynard-Smith and Szathmáry, the last of these major 
transitions refers to the appearance of humanity, human societies, and human
language. However, I suggest that there has been another major transition 
in evolution, which was not mentioned by Maynard-Smith and Szathmáry. 
It was introduced by Darwin, and it corresponds with his discovery of the 
process of natural selection and with our subsequent, more comprehensive 
understanding of evolution. I suggest that this qualifies as another major 
transition in the bioinformatics of evolution. It corresponds to the moment 
when the evolutionary process becomes aware of itself, at least in the con￾scious, intelligent minds of one of its own creatures—humans.
This last hypothetical major transition in the bioinformatics of evolution 
takes us to the opposite end of the spectrum of possible human reactions 
to the discoveries of science. Potentially, we are the first organisms on Earth 
with the mental capacity to understand how the evolutionary process works. 
We also know that, thanks to the potency of our cultural niche-constructing 
activities, we are bound to contribute, either positively or negatively, to the 
future evolution of life on Earth, including the future of our own species 
and innumerable other species as well.50
Although evolutionary biology cannot eliminate mortality, it can supply 
us with a helpful analogy. All the individual cells in the bodies of multicel￾lular organisms, including our own, are mortal. Most of them have shorter 
or far shorter lives than their host metazoans. But from our human point 
of view, the individual cells in our bodies are far from being purposeless, 
despite the brevity of their individual lives. Their purpose is to contribute 333 How Are Humans Contributing to the Evolution of Life?
to something greater than themselves—namely, us. Collectively, the cells in 
our body are responsible for who we are and how long we live. By analogy, 
I suspect that we may be contributing to something incomparably greater 
than ourselves by our mortal lives. But unlike the individual cells in our bod￾ies, we may slowly come to know a great deal more about what we may be 
contributing to. If we can avoid self-destruction and human-induced mass
extinction, and if we don’t destroy science, there is every chance that our 
collective understanding of what we may be contributing to will increase.
What will we do with our responsibilities? Might we merely cause 
another mass extinction? That would be a dismal outcome. Or might we 
cause evolution to proceed further in the direction it was already traveling, 
toward still greater awareness of itself in the conscious, intelligent minds of 
the human species or a successor species? This idea touches on a point made
by Max Tegmark about a future conscious intelligence waking up nature 
(see chapter 7).
There are several well-known, unresolved problems in both evolutionary 
biology and the physical sciences. The outstanding questions in evolution￾ary biology are: How did life originate on Earth? Does life exist anywhere 
else in the universe?
That brings me back to Schrödinger, whose “What is life?” question 
inspired this book. It is fitting to close this discussion by returning to him, 
as the second section in his 1944 book was called “Mind and Matter.” Why 
“mind”? Schrödinger’s early involvement in quantum mechanics may have 
something to do with it. In quantum mechanics, it is possible to measure 
either the velocity or the location of an elementary particle, but not both 
simultaneously. The observer has to choose which of these two things to
measure, at any one time. Schrödinger was interested in the active, pur￾poseful agency of living organisms in all respects, including with relation to 
quantum mechanics.
In his 1944 book, he even anticipated the logic of NCT, years before 
it emerged in biology. In a startling epilogue, only included in a later edi￾tion of his book, Schrödinger proposed that every intelligent, conscious 
person has some capacity to control the motions of atoms according to the 
laws of nature and to anticipate the consequences of his or her actions. On 334 Chapter 10
this basis, Schrödinger drew an extraordinary inference: “Hence, I am God 
Almighty.”51 He admitted that to Christians, this “sounds both blasphemous 
and lunatic.” But he justified his statement in terms of the Upanishads of 
Hinduism, in which every mortal, individual self becomes a component in 
the omnipresent, eternal self. In Hindu philosophy, that is far from blas￾phemy. I have been suggesting that in spite of our mortality, our lives matter
because, depending on how we live our lives, we are contributing to “waking 
up evolution” and “waking up nature.” Did Schrödinger mean more than 
that? Possibly yes.
According to Schneider and Sagan (2005), there was a sequel. 
Schrödinger originally submitted his What Is Life? manuscript, without his 
epilogue, to an Irish publisher associated with Trinity College Dublin. He 
added the epilogue as an afterthought. But when his Irish publishers received 
it, they refused to publish the book unless he withdrew the epilogue, on the 
grounds that it was blasphemous. Schrödinger promptly took back his book 
and eventually sent it to a more secular English publisher, Cambridge Uni￾versity Press, which was happy to publish it. Schrödinger’s experience with 
his Irish publisher suggests that enlightened blasphemy could be another 
requirement for reconciling science and religion, if ever they are to be 
reconciled.
Where have we ended up? At the moment, a negative future seems 
far more probable than a positive one. But one of the glories of evolution 
is its seemingly endless capacity to innovate and come up with surprises. 
Perhaps we may still contribute to a positive future, in which we accept the 
custodianship of the future evolution of life on Earth. We may still surprise 
ourselves. Quo vadis?CHAPTER 1
1. Schrödinger 1944.
2. Vidral 2010.
3. Boltzman 1974.
4. Vidral 2010.
5. Vidral 2010.
6. Gibbs 1876.
7. Odling-Smee 1988.
8. Pross, personal communication, 2019.
9. Odling-Smee et al. 2003.
10. Odling-Smee et al. 2003; Laland et al. 2019.
11. Schrödinger 1944.
12. Schrödinger 1944, p. 73.
13. Gibbs 1876.
14. Darwin 1859.
15. Bennet 1987.
16. Huxley 1942.
17. Kauffman 2019.
18. Ravelli 2018.
19. Odling-Smee et al. 2003; Davis 2019.
20. Jaynes 1996.
21. For example, see Szilard 1929; Brillouin 1951; Bennet 1987; Jaynes 1996.
Notes336 Notes to Chapter 1
22. Odling-Smee et al. 2003.
23. Odling-Smee 1988; Odling-Smee et al. 2003.
24. Odling-Smee et al. 2003; Laland et al. 2012; Laland, Odling-Smee, and J. Endler 2017.
25. Odling-Smee et al. 2003; Laland et al. 2017.
26. Odling-Smee 1988.
27. Mayr 1982.
28. Odling-Smee 2007, 2010.
29. Liao and Zhang 2008.
30. Odling-Smee et al. 2003.
31. Cooper 1983.
32. See von Neumann 1956, 1966; Burke 1966; Cooper 1983; Vedral 2010.
33. Wolfram 2002.
34. See von Neumann 1956, 1966; von Neumann and Burks 1966; Vedral 2010.
35. Cooper 1983.
36. Turing 1937.
37. Vedral 2010, p. 44.
38. Cooper 1983.
CHAPTER 2
1. I owe this anecdote and the others in this chapter to Soni and Goodman 2017.
2. Soni and Goodman, 2017, p. 204.
3. Wilczek 1999.
4. In a subset of cases, animals can transmit just declarative knowledge, not procedural know￾how, through social learning (Laland 2017).
5. Vedral 2010.
6. The biological utilities that organisms assign to incoming information from their environ￾ments are analogous to the subjective expected utilities, described by decision theory, that 
are usually but not invariably relative to humans.
7. Gibson 1950, 1966.
8. Contemporary ecological psychologists have developed the affordance concept further. The 
philosopher of biology Denis Walsh (2015) is a contemporary advocate of the affordances 
idea. Lynn Chiu (2019), another philosopher of biology, is also a supporter of the affordance 
concept. She makes an additional point, suggesting that the fluctuating biological utilities of 337 Notes to Chapter 2
organisms correspond to a third kind of niche construction, in addition to the perturbational 
and relocational niche construction, as proposed by Odling-Smee et al. (2003). Chiu (2019, 
p. 301) calls it “mediational niche construction.”
9. Possibly the most useful approach is still decision theory, which offers a way of combining 
arguably objective probabilities with the fluctuating subjective, expected utilities of organ￾isms, relative to events in their local external environments. It also offers one way of calculat￾ing or at least of estimating the resulting biological utilities of organisms. We will return to 
these issues later in this chapter.
10. Watson and Szathmáry 2016.
11. Shannon emphasized that the person receiving a message may not be the person for whom it 
is intended, and the receiver must pass it to the target individual or destination. The destina￾tion may or may not subsequently use the knowledge that it has gotten from the receiver.
12. Laland 2017.
13. Tebbich et al. 2001, 2010; Grant 1999.
14. Grant 1999.
15. Laland, Odling-Smee, and Myles 2010.
16. Griffiths and Stotz 2013.
17. Vedral 2018; Carroll 2019.
18. Carroll 2019.
19. Carroll 2019.
20. For further information, I recommend Carroll 2019.
21. That could change for the simple reason that the world of quantum physics is not yet suf￾ficiently well understood to rule out the relevance of quantum mechanics and qubits to evo￾lution with any degree of authority. For instance, a large number of physicists are trying to 
apply quantum physics to the construction of a quantum computer. If and when they succeed, 
quantum computers should be many times more powerful than our most powerful conven￾tional computers today. This may be relevant to biologists. For many years now, scientists have 
been comparing human brains to conventional computers. One of the first to do so was von 
Neumann again, but many others have followed in his footsteps. When quantum comput￾ers arrive on the scene, that may make comparisons between human brains and quantum 
computers irresistible. Do we already carry quantum computers inside our heads? At the 
moment, neuroscientists assume that we don’t. But that might change. What about genomes? 
Do genomes have any quantum properties that are relevant to how we understand evolution? 
Evolutionary biologists assume that they don’t. It seems too unlikely and too mind-befuddling 
to consider. But this too might change when we know more about quantum physics than 
we do today. An even more fundamental question concerns the origin of life. Did quantum 
mechanics contribute to the origin of life on Earth? We have no idea, but it can’t be ruled out.338 Notes to Chapter 2
22. Odling-Smee et al. 2003; Griffiths and Stotz 2013.
23. Endler 1986.
24. Hamilton 1963.
25. In fact, this point is contestable. Some researchers, including Hamilton himself, have inter￾preted relatedness in a broader way than simply shared genes. For instance, relatedness might 
apply to individuals who are made more similar through acquiring the same shared cultural 
knowledge. To the extent that inclusive fitness is conceived in this broader manner, and that 
researchers recognize the similarity among individuals that can arise through shared environ￾mental conditions that can come about through niche construction, then inclusive fitness can 
be useful here.
26. Odling-Smee et al. 2003.
27. Odling-Smee et al. 2003, 2013; Odling-Smee 2010.
28. These interactions between ecological inheritance systems and genetic inheritance systems
then open up various hypotheses. For example, might niche-constructing organisms partly 
determine their degree of specialization versus generalization, relative to their niche interac￾tions with their environments? Over successive generations, specialists may dig themselves 
deeper and deeper into their niches by specialized niche-constructing activities. Generalists 
may do the opposite. Like the Galapagos woodpecker finch, they may develop or maintain a 
high degree of flexibility in the ways that they niche-construct. As far as I know, this question 
has not been asked before.
29. Brown, Hall, and Sibly 2018.
30. Chaitin 2006; see also Schneider and Sagan 2005.
31. Chaitin 2006, p. 56.
32. Chaitin 2006.
33. Chaitin 2006, p. 56.
34. Chaitin 2006, p. 57.
35. Gerhart and Kirschner 1997, 2007; Popper 1966.
36. Gerhart and Kirschner 1997, 2007; Campbell 1960, 1974.
37. Odling-Smee 1988.
38. Hume 1739.
CHAPTER 3
1. Paley 1802.
2. Richard Dawkins’s book The Blind Watchmaker (Dawkins 1986) depicts how contemporary 
evolutionary biology, in the form of neo-Darwinism, replies to Paley.
3. Lyell 1833.339 Notes to Chapter 3
4. Scott-Phillips et al. 2014; Futuyma 2017.
5. Odling-Smee et al. 2003.
6. Odling-Smee 1988; Odling-Smee et al. 2003, 2013; Sultan 2015.
7. Odling-Smee et al. 2003, 2013; Sultan 2015.
8. Plotkin and Odling-Smee 1979, 1981; Watson and Szathmáry 2016; Watson and Thies 2020. 
Also see chapter 7 of this book.
9. Williams 1966.
10. Reeve and Sherman 1993.
11. Hume 1739.
12. Slobodkin and Rapoport 1974. Note that interactions between purposeful systems can also 
be modeled by two-person games, which date back to much earlier work by von Neumann 
and Morgenstern (1944), with important later contributions from Nash and Maynard-Smith 
(Bhattachary 2021).
13. Here, I draw on a paper on adaptation by the morphologist Walter Bock (1980) because, to
the best of my knowledge, he was one of the first biologists to clearly distinguish between 
the state of being adapted in the present and the historical origins of their adaptations.
The former conception is most relevant to the adaptive niche management problems of
organisms.
14. Odling-Smee 1988.
15. Slobodkin and Rapoport 1974.
16. Odling-Smee et al. 2003, chapter 4.
17. Ashby 1956, 1960.
18. Ashby 1956, 1960.
19. Odling-Smee 1988.
20. Odling-Smee 1988; Odling-Smee et al. 2003.
21. Odling-Smee 1988; Odling-Smee et al. 2003.
22. Dawkins 1982.
23. Odling-Smee 1988; Odling-Smee et al. 2003; Laland et al. 2019.
24. Hansell 1984.
25. Laland et al. 2017; Clark et al. 2019.
26. Mayr (1982, p. 828) describes the inheritance of acquired characteristics as “a chemical 
impossibility.”
27. Bonduriansky and Day 2018. See also chapter 9 of this book.
28. Dickins and Rahman 2012.340 Notes to Chapter 3
29. Hamilton 1964; Gardner and West 2014.
30. Odling-Smee et al. 2003.
31. Puckett et al. 2018.
32. Couzin et al. 2005; Biro et al. 2006; Webster et al. 2017; Sasaki and Biro 2017.
33. For instance, see Seeley and Visscher 2004a, 2004b.
34. Turner 2000.
35. Hölldobler and Wilson 2009.
36. Levins 1968.
37. Environment influences on gene expression can also be mediated by gene methylation (Lyko 
et al. 2010).
38. Brakefield and Reitsma 1991.
39. Odling-Smee 1988.
40. Bock 1980.
41. Odling-Smee 2010.
42. Odling-Smee 2010, p. 182.
43. Odling-Smee 1988.
44. Odling-Smee 1988, 2010.
45. These examples come from Turner (2017), “Purpose and Desire.”
46. Moore and Picker 1991.
47. Moore and Picker 1991.
48. Odling-Smee and Turner 2012.
49. Darwin 1881.
50. Turner 2000.
51. Anderson et al. 2017.
52. Turner 2000, pp. 106–107.
53. Turner 2000.
54. Turner 2000, p. 117.
55. Odling-Smee et al. 2003; Laland et al. 2017; Clark et al. 2020.
56. Turner 2017.
57. Turner 2017.
58. Hutchinson 1957.341 Notes to Chapter 4
CHAPTER 4
1. Williams 1966.
2. Whitehead 1978.
3. Feynman 1965; Odling-Smee 1988.
4. Gribbin 2005.
5. Bohm 1957; Vedra 2010; Rovelli 2021.
6. Plotkin and Odling-Smee 1981.
7. Popper 1979; Plotkin and Odling-Smee 1981; Hull 1981; Plotkin 1994; Dennett 1995.
8. Watson and Szathmáry 2016.
9. Odling-Smee 1988.
10. Lewontin 1983; Chiu 2019.
11. Antao et al. 2020.
12. Laland et al. 2017; Clarke et al. 2020.
13. Laland et al. 2017; Clarke et al. 2020.
14. Hansell 2000; Reid et al. 2002; Odling-Smee et al. 2003.
15. Laland et al. 2017; Clarke et al. 2020.
16. Laland et al. 2017; Clarke et al. 2020.
17. Odling-Smee et al. 2003.
18. Jones, Lawton, and Shachak 1997.
19. Clarke et al. 2020.
20. Davies 2015.
21. Odling-Smee et al. 2003.
22. Laland and Chiu 2020.
23. Odling-Smee et al. 2003.
24. Kondrashov 1993.
25. Uller et al. 2018.
26. Uller et al. 2018.
27. Uller et al. 2018.
28. Watson and Szathmáry 2016.
29. Allen et al. 2008.
30. Brakefield 2010.
31. Uller et al. 2018.342 Notes to Chapter 4
32. Gerhart and Kirschner 1997.
33. Russon 2003.
34. Hansell 1984; Odling-Smee et al. 2003.
35. Odling-Smee et al. 2003.
36. Laland et al. 2017; Clark et al. 2020.
37. Laland et al. 2017; Clark et al. 2020.
38. Odling-Smee et al. 2003; Laland 2014; Laland et al. 2017; Clark et al. 2020.
39. Turner 2000.
40. Pross 2012, p. 68.
CHAPTER 5
1. Gamow 1952; Guth 1997.
2. Schrödinger 1944.
3. Vedral 2010; Ravelli 2015, 2021; Schneider and Sagan 2005; Pross 2012; Lane 2015; Deamer 
2019.
4. It is possible for endergonic energy–generating chemical reactions to occur in purposeless 
systems. It is also possible for autocatalytic reactions to occur in purposeless systems, which 
can greatly speed up chemical reactions. But none of that is enough to allow purposeless 
abiotic systems to resist the second law.
5. Damer and Deamer 2020; Deamer 2019.
6. Kauffmann 2019.
7. Lewontin 1983; Odling-Smee et al. 2003, 2013.
8. Odling-Smee et al. 2003.
9. Odling-Smee et al. 2003.
10. Kauffman 2019, p. 4.
11. Bhattacharya 2021.
12. This possibility of a universal theory of evolution was anticipated by Schrödinger himself in 
his “What is life?” question and by his supplementary question of what else is needed beyond 
the known laws of physics and chemistry to understand life. His questions not only referred 
to life on Earth, but potentially to life anywhere in the universe.
13. Rothschild and Mancinelli 2001.
14. For instance, see Phillip Pullman’s His Dark Materials (1995).
15. I write “quasi-autonomous” natural selection pressures because although SET recognizes 
that organisms commonly modify natural selection (e.g., in cases such as habitat selection,343 Notes to Chapter 5
sexual selection, frequency dependent selection, and coevolution), it attributes no causal 
significance to this. Niche construction is treated as a product of evolution, not an evolu￾tionary process—that is, as an effect rather than as a cause.” SET recognizes that the sources 
of selection may be other organisms, but it treats such cases identically to cases where the 
source of selection is independent of the evolving population. Niche construction is viewed 
as determined by genes and fully explained by earlier natural selection.
16. Lewontin 1983.
17. Jones and Lawton 1995; Holt 1995; Jones, Lawton, and Shachak 1994, 1997.
18. Maynard Smith and Szathmáry 1995.
19. Maynard Smith and Szathmáry 1995.
20. Lane and Martin 2010.
21. Margulis 1967.
22. Post and Palkovacs 2009; Odling-Smee et al. 2013; Matthews et al. 2014; Sultan 2015; 
Laland et al. 2017; Clarke et al. 2019.
23. Schrödinger 1944.
24. Odling-Smee 1988, p. 82.
25. Rovelli 2021.
26. Odling-Smee 1988.
27. Godfrey-Smith 1996, p. 30.
28. Mayr 1961; West et al. 2011; Scott-Phillips et al. 2011; see also Laland et al. 2011.
29. Lewontin 1983; Odling-Smee 1988; Odling-Smee et al. 2003.
30. Dawkins 2006.
31. Lewontin 1983.
32. Godfrey-Smith 1996; Boltzmann 1974.
33. John Wheeler, quoted in Blundell 2015, 13; see also Rovelli 2015, 2021.
34. Godfrey-Smith 1996.
35. Godfrey-Smith 1996.
36. Odling-Smee 1988.
37. Krakauer made this remark at a conference about niche construction held at the Santa Fe 
Institute in 2014.
38. Odling-Smee 1988.
39. Odling-Smee 1988.
40. Odling-Smee 1988; Odling-Smee et al. 2003, see also chapter 4 of this book.
41. Laland et al. 2011, 2014, 2015.344 Notes to Chapter 5
42. Turner 2000, 2006; Laland, Odling-Smee, and Turner 2014.
43. West 1970; Abushama 1974; Sieber and Kokwaro 1982; Lys and Leuthold 1994.
44. Turner 2000, 2005; Laland et al. 2014.
45. Brodie 2005, p. 251.
46. Odling-Smee et al. 2003.
47. Lane and Martin 2010; Lane 2015.
48. Judson 2017.
49. Lenton, Pichler, and Weisz 2016.
50. San Roman and Wagner 2018.
51. Oxygen is a rich source of energy: the use of oxygen as an electron acceptor releases more 
energy per electron transfer than that of any other element except for chlorine and fluorine. 
See Catling et al. 2005.
52. Judson 2017.
53. Towe 1970.
54. Erwin 2005, p. 1752; Erwin and Tweedt 2012; Ward and Kirschvink 2015.
55. Ward and Kirschvink 2015; Hannah 2021.
56. Doug Erwin, quoted in Brannen 2017.
57. Hannah 2021.
58. Erwin, quoted in Brannen 2017.
59. Hannah 2021.
60. Ward and Kirschvink 2015.
61. There is one preliminary point. We need to distinguish between a species and an evolving 
population. A species may include more than one population. However, it is possible that
an endangered species may be reduced to only a single population. That point is relevant to 
the current debate about the loss of biodiversity. It is possible for an endangered species to 
look less in danger of extinction than it actually is because there may be a number of dif­fer￾ent populations in the species that still exist in dif­ferent regions of the world. Superficially, 
that may make the species appear to be in good health. But some of or all the populations in 
the species may be losing a very large percentage of their individual organisms very rapidly, 
thereby putting the species at a much higher risk of extinction than appears to be the case 
(Ceballos et al. 2017).
62. For instance, two other species might pool their Ri
 in a mutualist relationship, and then in 
combination outcompete a focal species for the same Rp
 resources.
63. See Kauffman 2019, 100.
64. Hannah 2021.345 Notes to Chapter 6
65. Hannah 2021, p. 173.
66. Ward and Kirschvink 2015.
CHAPTER 6
1. Cairns-Smith 1985; Fry 2002; Pross 2012; Lane 2015; Deamer 2012, 2019.
2. Hoyle 1983.
3. Mitchell 1961; Martin and Russell 2003; Lane 2015.
4. Deamer 2012, 2019; Damer and Deamer 2020.
5. Lane 2015.
6. Deamer 2019.
7. Mitchell 1961.
8. Martin and Russell 2003.
9. Mitchell 1979.
10. Eigen and Schuster 1977.
11. Pross 2012.
12. Deamer 2019.
13. Deamer 2019.
14. On February 1, 1871, Charles Darwin wrote a letter to Joseph Hooker that included some 
of his speculations on the spontaneous generation of life in “some warm little pond.” To view 
this, see http://www.age-of-the-sage.org/darwin-quotes/warm-little-pond.html.
15. Damer and Deamer 2015, 2020; Deamer 2019.
16. Deamer 2012, 2019; Damer and Deamer 2020.
17. Maguire, Smokers, and Huck 2021; Cornell et al. 2019.
18. Kaufman 1993, p. 120.
19. Woese and Fox 1977, p. 5088; Woese 1998.
20. Bartel and Szostak 1993.
21. Lewontin 1970.
22. Laland, Odling-Smee, and Gilbert 2008; Gilbert, Bosch, and Ledon-Rettig 2015; Chiu and 
Gilbert 2015; Gilbert 2019.
23. Boogert, Paterson, and Laland 2006.
24. Lane 2015.
25. Gilbert 2019.
26. Damer and Deamer 2020.346 Notes to Chapter 7
CHAPTER 7
1. Laland et al. 2014, 2015.
2. SET does recognize that individual organisms can learn, of course, but it does not regard this 
as bootstrapping, as that learning is generally regarded as being under genetic control. This 
point is discussed later in this chapter.
3. Campbell 1960; Plotkin and Odling-Smee 1981; Kirschner and Gerhart 2005; Watson and 
Szathmáry 2016.
4. Kirschner and Gerhart 2005.
5. See Watson and Thies, 2019, for a discussion about the relationships that can occur among 
particles (in this case, individual organisms and dif­ferent kinds of collectives, here evolving 
populations or sociocultural groups).
6. In saying this, I am riding roughshod over two points. First, individual metazoan organisms 
actually comprise collections of cells. Second, biologists have great difficulty in defining what 
is meant by the concept of individuality. It is often blurred, but for the sake of my present
argument, I’m going to ignore both of these points here.
7. I will ignore the effects of somatic mutation and horizontal gene transfer here.
8. I use the term “memory” broadly, to encompass not just memories of events experienced by an 
individual (level 2), but also genetic registers of gene products that produced fit phenotypes 
in ancestral environments (level 1), memories of antibodies that proved effective in fighting 
off pathogens earlier in life (level 2), and cultural wisdom accrued in a population (level 3).
9. Kawai 1965.
10. Whiten et al. 1999.
11. Fisher and Hinde 1949.
12. Whitehead and Rendell 2015.
13. Hauser 1996.
14. Tomlinson 2015, 2018.
15. Olson and Torrance 2009.
16. Cavalli-Sforza and Feldman 1981.
17. Mesoudi 2011.
18. Hamilton 1964.
19. Hoppitt and Laland 2013.
20. Durham 1990; Richerson and Boyd 2005.
21. Durham 1990.
22. Mineka and Cook 1988.
23. Bateson and Martin 2000.347 Notes to Chapter 7
24. West-Eberhard 2003; Laland et al. 2011.
25. Bonduriansky and Day 2018.
26. Laland et al. 2015.
27. Amundson 2005; Muller 2021.
28. Segerstrale 2000.
29. Lewontin 1970.
30. Goldstein 2022.
31. Monroe et al. 2022; Stoltzfus 2019.
32. Campbell 1960; Hull, Langman, and Glenn 2001; Dennett 1995; Watson and Szathmáry 
2016; Gerhart and Kirschner 1997; Plotkin and Odling-Smee 1979, 1981.
33. Plotkin and Odling-Smee 1979, 1981.
34. Waddington 1969, p. 122.
35. Burnet 1957, 1959.
36. Gerhart and Kirschner 1997.
37. The terminology currently in use seems to have dissuaded many other scientists working in 
other disciplines, as well as other psychologists, from wanting to know more about the pro￾cesses of animal learning. It may also have discouraged investigations into the relationships 
between individual animal learning and the underlying processes of individual development 
and population-genetic evolution. For instance, psychologists who have investigated animal 
learning have seldom shown much interest in the evolutionary functions of learning or in 
the contributions that learning makes to the adaptations of individual organisms or to their 
fitness. They primarily have been interested in how learning works in the brains of animals 
rather than why or when learning occurs in the natural world, and in connecting the learning
process to the neurosciences rather than to evolutionary biology.
38. Mayr 1961; Laland et al. 2011.
39. Heyes 1993, 2013.
40. Cavalli Sforza and Feldman 1981; Boyd and Richerson 1985; Henrich 2016.
41. Cavalli Sforza and Feldman 1981; Boyd and Richerson 1985; Henrich 2016.
42. Evershed et al. 2022.
43. Gerbault et al. 2011; Itan et al. 2009.
44. Laland, Odling-Smee, and Myles 2010.
45. For instance, see Popper 1966.
46. Goldstein 2022.
47. Walsh 2015; Uller and Helanterä 2019; Laland et al 2019.348 Notes to Chapter 8
CHAPTER 8
1. Reiners 1986.
2. Erwin and Valentine 2013.
3. Haller and Hendry 2014.
4. Erwin and Valentine 2013; Ward and Kirschvink 2015.
5. Grant and Grant 2014.
6. Alberti et al. 2017.
7. Alberti 2015; Derryberry et al. 2020; Otto 2018; Zeder 2017.
8. O’Neill et al. 1986.
9. May 1973; Thompson 1994.
10. Odling-Smee et al. 2003, chapter 5.
11. O’Neill et al. 1986; Roughgarden 1995.
12. Roughgarden 1995; Ricklefs and Miller 1999; Levin 2012.
13. O’Neill et al. 1986.
14. O’Neill et al. 1986; Reiners 1986; Jones and Lawton 1995; Holt 1995.
15. Odling-Smee et al. 2003, 2013.
16. Jones, Lawton, and Shachak 1994, 1997.
17. Naiman 1988; Wright and Jones 2006.
18. Lewontin 1982.
19. Odling-Smee 1988.
20. Odling-Smee et al. 2003, 2013.
21. Odling-Smee et al. 2003, 2013. It is also captured by the concept of environmentally medi￾ated phenotypic associations, where the phenotypes are not necessarily fully determined by 
naturally selected genes (Odling-Smee et al. 2013).
22. Post and Palkovacs 2009; Hendry 2020.
23. Matthews et al. 2014.
24. Post and Palkovacs 2009; Hendry 2020.
25. Post and Palkovacs 2009; Loreau 2010; Kyfalis and Loreau 2008, 2011; Odling-Smee et al. 
2013; Matthews et al. 2014; Lion 2018.
26. Auer et al. 2017.
27. Schrödinger 1944, p. 70.
28. Laland, Odling-Smee, and Endler 2017.349 Notes to Chapter 9
29. Clark et al. 2020.
30. Interestingly, there might be information in the organism-constructed remains such as the 
artifacts of a planet on which all life has gone extinct.
31. Ward and Kirschvink 2015.
32. Ward and Kirschvink 2015.
33. Kauffman 1993.
34. Weinberg 1993.
35. Schrödinger 1944.
36. Davies 2015.
37. Bejan and Zane 2012.
38. Harold 2014.
39. Davidson and Erwin 2006; Erwin and Valentine 2013.
40. Gould and Vrba 1982.
41. Odling-Smee et al. 2003.
42. Boogert, Paterson, and Laland 2006.
43. Bascompte and Jordano 2014.
44. Bascompte and Jordano 2014.
45. Watson et al. 2016.
46. Watson et al. 2016; Watson and Szathmáry 2016.
47. Judson 2017.
48. Margulis 1970.
49. Maynard-Smith and Szathmáry 1995.
50. Margulis 1970.
51. Lane 2015.
52. Lane 2015.
CHAPTER 9
1. Dawkins 1976.
2. Dawkins 1976.
3. Goldstein 2022.
4. Arguably, it is not really a major problem for the statistical approach of quantitative genetics
that there are dif­ferent mechanisms of inheritance, as it is the relationship between the fitness 350 Notes to Chapter 9
of parents and the phenotypes of offspring that matters. One might reason that so long as it 
is possible to estimate parent-offspring similarity, all is well. However, there is now extensive 
theoretical evidence that extragenetic inheritance makes a substantial difference in evolution￾ary dynamics and can often take populations to alternative equilibria (Fogarty and Wade 2022; 
Gonzalez-Forero 2023). In other words, the mechanistic details of inheritance matter.
5. Bonduriansky and Day 2018.
6. Sultan, Moczek, and Walsh 2021; Bonduriansky and Day 2018; Jablonka and Lamb 2005.
7. Sultan et al. 2021; Bonduriansky and Day 2018; Jablonka and Lamb 1995, 2014; Jablonka 
and Raz 2009; Danchin et al. 2019; Uller 2019; Anastasiadi et al. 2021.
8. Mayr 1974.
9. Sultan 2015.
10. Gilbert and Epel 2009; Schmidt-Huntzel, et al. 2005; Carneiro et al. 2011; Aigner et al. 2000.
11. Bonduriansky and Day 2018.
12. Bonduriansky and Day 2018; Jablonka and Lamb 1995, 2014; Anastasiadi et al. 2021.
13. Cubas, Vincent, and Coen 1999.
14. Schmid et al. 2018; Bonduriansky and Day 2018; Jablonka and Lamb 1995, 2014.
15. For instance, see Bonduriansky and Day 2018; Jablonka and Lamb 1995, 2014.
16. Damer and Deamer 2019.
17. Bonduriansky and Day 2018.
18. Lane 2015.
19. Chiu and Gilbert 2015; Gilbert 2020.
20. Hundreds of published studies now attest to the importance of epigenetic inheritance in a 
wide variety of organisms, including humans. See Jablonka and Raz 2009; Heard and Mar￾tienssen 2014; Bonduriansky and Day 2018 and Anastasiadi et al. 2021 for reviews.
21. Heijmans et al. 2008; Tobi et al. 2018.
22. Durham 1991.
23. Durham 1991; O’Brien and Laland 2012.
24. Jablonka and Lamb 2005; Henrich 2016; Laland 2017.
25. Jablonka and Lamb 2005; Henrich 2016; Laland 2017.
26. Jablonka and Lamb 2005; Henrich 2016; Laland 2017.
27. Woese 1998.
28. Hehemann et al. 2010.
29. Monod 1972
30. Gould and Vrba 1982.351 Notes to Chapter 10
31. Shubin, Daeschler, and Coates 2004.
32. Judson 2017.
33. Maynard Smith and Szathmáry 1995.
34. Lane 2015.
35. Lewontin 1970.
36. Lane 2015.
37. Odling-Smee, Laland, and Feldman 2003.
38. Watson and Thies 2019.
39. Watson and Thies 2019.
40. Mukherjee et al. 2018.
41. Tomasello 2008; Bickerton 2009; Laland 2017.
42. Maynard Smith and Szathmáry 1995.
43. Judson 2017.
44. Wrangham 2009.
45. Wrangham 2009.
46. Aiello and Wheeler 1995.
47. Judson 2017.
48. Sober and Wilson 1998; Godfrey-Smith 2009; Okasha 2018.
49. Odling-Smee 1988; Odling-Smee et al. 2003; Laland et al. 2015.
50. Lewontin 1983; Odling-Smee et al., 2003, 2013; Matthews et al. 2014.
51. See Uller 2023 for a discussion of this point.
52. Riskin 2016.
53. Waddington 1969, p. 122.
54. Walsh 2019.
55. Uller 2023.
56. Pittendrigh 1958.
57. Lewontin 1983; Odling-Smee et al. 2003.
58. Gilbert and Epel 2009.
CHAPTER 10
1. See Witze 2020, and references therein.
2. Albert Einstein Quotes, Goodreads (https://www.goodreads.com/quotes/17014-the-release
-of-atomic-power-has-changed-everything-except-our).352 Notes to Chapter 10
3. Boyd and Richerson 1985; Tomasello 1999; Dunbar 2022.
4. Holldobler and Wilson 1990; Wilson 2020.
5. Dunbar 2022.
6. Lindenfors, Wartel, and Lind 2021.
7. Richerson and Boyd 2005; Turchin 2016.
8. Richerson and Boyd 2005; Turchin 2016.
9. Boyd and Richerson 1985; Richerson and Boyd 2005; Boyd 2018.
10. Turchin 2016.
11. Jeffery 2008; Rohner et al. 2013; McGaugh et al. 2019; Kowalko 2020.
12. Pérez et al. 2009.
13. Wilson 1975.
14. Dawkins 1976.
15. Schneider and Sagan 2005.
16. Odum 1971; Reiners 1986; Odling-Smee et al. 2003, 2013; Duffy 2021.
17. Begon, Townsend, and Harper 2005.
18. Hölldobler and Wilson 1990; Wilson 2020.
19. Hölldobler and Wilson 1990; Wilson 2020; Odling-Smee et al. 2003.
20. Smith 2007a, 2007b; Smith and Zeder 2013; Zeder 2017.
21. Jarrige and Le Roux 2021.
22. Smith 2007a, 2007b; Smith and Zeder 2013; Zeder 2017; Hünemeier et al. 2012.
23. But see Ideen 2023.
24. Erwin 2005, 2008, 2012; Erwin et al. 2011.
25. Jones, Lawton, and Shachak 1994, 1997; Odling-Smee et al. 2003, 2013; Matthews et al 
2014.
26. Boserup 1981.
27. Romer 1990, 1994.
28. Erwin 2008.
29. Solow 1956.
30. Romer 1990, 1994.
31. Duffy 2021.
32. Erwin 2008, see also Ideen 2023.
33. Duffy 2021.353 Notes to Chapter 10
34. Smil 2000; Syvitski et al. 2020.
35. Roughgarden 1979, 1998.
36. Borlaug 1970; Antonelli 2023.
37. Jarrige and Le Roux 2021; Duffy 2021.
38. Wagner et al. 2021; Klein et al. 2007; Aizen et al. 2009, 2019.
39. Antonelli 2023.
40. Roser, Ortiz-Ospina, and Ritchie 2013.
41. Kreager et al. 2015.
42. Russell 1948, 1961.
43. Rhoads et al. 2023.
44. Weinberg 1974.
45. Nurse 2020.
46. Kreibich et al. 2022.
47. Goldstein 2022.
48. Dunbar 2022.
49. Maynard-Smith and Szathmáry 1995.
50. Odling-Smee and Laland 2011.
51. Schrodinger 1944, p. 87.Abushama, F. T. 1974. Water-relations of the termites Macrotermes bellicosus (Smeathman) and 
Trinervitermes geminatus (Wasmann). Zeitschrift für Angewandte Entomologie 75: 124–134.
Aiello, L. C., and P. Wheeler. 1995. The expensive-tissue hypothesis: The brain and the digestive 
system in human and primate evolution. Current Anthropology 36: 199–221.
Aigner, B., U. Besenfelder, M. Müller, and G. Brem. 2000. Tyrosinase gene variants in dif­ferent
rabbit strains. Mammalian Genome 11: 700–702.
Aizen, M. A., S. Aguiar, J. C. Biesmeijer, et al. 2019. Global agricultural productivity is threatened 
by increasing pollinator dependence without a parallel increase in crop diversification. Global 
Change Biology 25: 3516–3527.
Aizen, M. A., L. A. Garibaldi, S. A. Cunningham, and A. M. Klein. 2009. How much does 
agriculture depend on pollinators? Lessons from long-term trends in crop production. Annals of 
Botany 103: 1579–1588.
Alberti, M. 2015. Eco-evolutionary dynamics in an urbanizing planet. Trends in Ecology & Evolu￾tion 30: 114–126.
Alberti, M., C. Correa, J. M. Marzluff, et al. 2017. Global urban signatures of phenotypic change 
in animal and plant populations. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 114: 8951–8956.
Allen, C. E., P. Beldade, B. J. Zwaan, and P. M. Brakefield. 2008. Differences in the selection
response of serially repeated color pattern characters: Standing variation, development, and evolu￾tion. BMC Evolutionary Biology 8: 94. https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2148-8-94.
Amundson, R. 2005. The Changing Role of the Embryo in Evolutionary Thought: Roots of Evo-Devo. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Anastasiadi, D., C. J. Venney, L. Bernatchez, and M. Wellenreuther. 2021. Epigenetic inheritance
and reproductive mode in plants and animals. Trends in Ecology & Evolution 36: 1124–1140.
Anderson, F. E., B. W. Williams, K. M. Horn, et al. 2017. Phylogenomic analyses of Crassiclitellata 
support major Northern and Southern Hemisphere clades and a Pangaean origin for earthworms. 
BMC Evolutionary Biology 17: 123.
References356 References
Antonelli, A. 2023. Indigenous knowledge is key to sustainable food systems. Nature 613: 239–242.
Ashby, W. R. 1956. An Introduction to Cybernatics. London: Chapman & Hall.
Ashby, W. R. 1960. Design for a Brain: The Origin of Adaptive Behavior. London: Chapman & Hall.
Bartel, D. P., and J. W. Szostak. 1993. Isolation of new ribozymes from a large pool of random 
sequences. Science 261: 1411–1418.
Bateson, P., and P. Martin. 2000. Design for a Life. London: Vintage.
Begon, M., C. R. Townsend, and J. L. Harper. Ecology: From Individuals to Ecosystems. 4th ed. 
Oxford, UK: Wiley, Blackwell.
Bejan, A. and J. Peder Zane. 2012. Design in Nature: How the Constructal Law Governs Evolution 
in Biology, Physics, Technology, and Social Organization. New York: Doubleday Books.
Bennet, S. S. S. R. 1987. Name Changes in Flowering Plants of India and Adjacent Regions. Dehra 
Dun, India: Triseas Publishers.
Bhattacharya, V. 2021. An empirical model of R&D procurement contests: An analysis of the 
DOD SBIR program. Econometrica 89: 2189–2224.
Bickerton, A. 2009. Adam’s Tongue. New York: Hill and Wang.
Biro, D., D. J. T. Sumpter, J. Meade, and T. Guilford. 2006. From compromise to leadership in 
pigeon homing. Current Biology 16: 2123–2128.
Blundell, K. 2015. Black Holes: A Very Short Introduction. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Bock, W. J. 1980. The definition and recognition of biological adaptation. American Zoologist
20: 217–227.
Bohm, D. 1957. Causality and Chance in Modern Physics. London: Routledge.
Boltzmann, L. 1974. The second law of thermodynamics. In Theoretical Physics and Philosophical 
Problems: Selected Writings, ed. B. McGuinness. Dordrecht, Netherlands: Springer, pp. 13–32.
Bonduriansky, R., and T. Day. 2018. Extended Heredity. A New Understanding of Inheritance and 
Evolution. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Boogert, N. J., D. M. Paterson, and K. N. Laland. 2006. The implications of niche construction 
and ecosystem engineering for conservation biology. BioScience 56: 570–578.
Boyd, R., and P. J. Richerson. 1985. Culture and the Evolutionary Process. Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press.
Brakefield, P. M. 2010. Radiations of Mycalesine butterflies and opening up their exploration of 
morphospace. The American Naturalist 176: S77–S87.
Brakefield, P. M., and N. Reitsma. 1991. Phenotypic plasticity, seasonal climate and the population 
biology of Bicyclus butterflies (Satyridae) in Malawi. Ecological Entomology 16: 291–303.
Brillouin, L. 1951. Maxwell’s demon cannot operate: Information and entropy. Journal of Applied 
Physics 22: 334–337.357 References
Brodie, E. D. III. 2005. Caution. Niche construction ahead. Evolution 59: 249–251.
Brown, J. H., C. A. S. Hall, and R. M. Sibly. 2018. Equal fitness paradigm explained by a trade-off
between generation time and energy production rate. Nature Ecology & Evolution 2: 262–268.
Burnet, F. M. 1957. A modification of Jerne’s theory of antibody production using the concept of 
clonal selection. Australian Journal of Science 20: 67–69.
Burnet, F. M. 1959. The Clonal Selection Theory of Acquired Immunity. Nashville: Vanderbilt Uni￾versity Press.
Cairns-Smith, A. G. 1985. Seven Clues to the Origin of Life: A Scientific Detective Story. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Campbell, D. T. 1960. Blind variation and selective retention in creative thought as in other 
knowledge processes. Psychological Review 67: 380–400.
Campbell, D. T. 1974. Downward causation in hierarchically organised biological systems. In Stud￾ies in the Philosophy of Biology: Reduction and Related Problems, ed. F. J. Ayala and T. Dobzhansky. 
London: Macmillan Education UK, pp. 179–186.
Carneiro, M., S. Afonso, A. Geraldes, et al. 2011. The genetic structure of domestic rabbits. 
Molecular Biology and Evolution 28: 1801–1816.
Carroll, S. M. 2019. Something Deeply Hidden: Quantum Worlds and the Emergence of Spacetime: 
New York: Dutton.
Catling, D. C., C. R. Glein, K. J. Zahnle, and C. P. McKay. 2005. Why O2
 is required by complex 
life on habitable planets and the concept of planetary “oxygenation time.” Astrobiology 5: 415–438.
Cavalli-Sforza, L. L., and M. W. Feldman. 1981. Cultural Transmission and Evolution: A Quantita￾tive Approach. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Ceballos, G., P. R. Ehrlich, and R. Dirzo. 2017. Biological annihilation via the ongoing sixth mass 
extinction signaled by vertebrate population losses and declines. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences 114: E6089–E6096.
Chaitin, G. 2006. Meta Math: The Quest for Omega. Bloomsbury, UK: Atlantic Books.
Chiu, L. 2019. Decoupling, commingling, and the evolutionary significance of experiential niche 
construction. In Evolutionary Causation, Biological and Philosophical Reflection, ed. T. Uller, and 
K. N. Laland. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp. 299–321.
Chiu, L., and S. F. Gilbert. 2015. The birth of the holobiont: Multi-species birthing through 
mutual scaffolding and niche construction. Biosemiotics 8: 191–210.
Clark, A. D., D. Deffner, K. N. Laland, F. J. Odling-Smee, and J. Endler. 2020. Niche construc￾tion affects the variability and strength of natural selection. The American Naturalist 195: 16–30.
Cooper, N. G. 1983. From Turing and von Neumann to the present. Los Alamos Science Fall. 22–27.
Cornell, C. E., R. A. Black, M. Xue, et al. 2019. Prebiotic amino acids bind to and stabilize pre￾biotic fatty acid membranes. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 116: 17239–17244.358 References
Couzin, I. D., J. Krause, N. R. Franks, and S. A. Levin. 2005. Effective leadership and decision￾making in animal groups on the move. Nature 433: 513–516.
Cubas, P., C. Vincent, and E. Coen. 1999. An epigenetic mutation responsible for natural variation 
in floral symmetry. Nature 401: 157–161.
Damer, B., and D. W. Deamer. 2015. Coupled phases and combinatorial selection in fluctuating
hydrothermal pools: A scenario to guide experimental approaches to the origin of cellular life. 
Life 5: 872–887.
Damer, B., and D. W. Deamer. 2020. The hot spring hypothesis for an origin of life. Astrobiology
20: 429–452.
Danchin, E., A. Pocheville, O. Rey, B. Pujol, and S. Blanchet. 2019. Epigenetically facilitated 
mutational assimilation: Epigenetics as a hub within the inclusive evolutionary synthesis. Biologi￾cal Review 94: 259–282.
Darwin, C. R. 1881. The Formation of Vegetable Mold through the Action of Worms, with Observations 
on Their Habits. London: John Murray.
Darwin, C. R. 1968 [orig. 1859]. On the Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection, or the Preser￾vation of Favoured Races in the Struggle for Life. Reprint of the first edition. London: Penguin Books.
Davidson, E. H., and D. H. Erwin. 2006. Gene regulatory networks and the evolution of animal 
body plans. Science 311: 796–800.
Davies, N. 2015. Cuckoo: Cheating by Nature. London: Bloomsbury Publishing.
Dawkins, R. 1976. The Selfish Gene. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Dawkins, R. 1982. The Extended Phenotype. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Dawkins, R. 1986. The Blind Watchmaker. New York: W. W. Norton & Company.
Dawkins, R. 2006. The God Delusion. London: Black Swan.
Deamer, D. W. 2012. First Life: Discovering the Connections between Stars, Cells, and How Life 
Began. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Deamer, D. W. 2019. Assembling Life: How Can Life Begin on Earth and Other Habitable Planets?
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Dennett, D. 1995. Darwin’s Dangerous Idea: Evolution and the Meanings of Life. London: Penguin.
Derryberry, E. P., J. N. Phillips, G. E. Derryberry, M. J. Blum, and D. Luther. 2020. Singing 
in a silent spring: Birds respond to a half-century soundscape reversion during the COVID-19 
shutdown. Science 370: 575–579.
Dickins, T. E., and Q. Rahman. 2012. The extended evolutionary synthesis and the role of soft 
inheritance in evolution. Proceedings of the Royal Society B 279: 2913–2921.
Duffy, J. Emmett. 2021. Ocean Ecology: Marine Life in the Age of Humans. Princeton, NJ: Prince￾ton University Press.
Dunbar, R. 2022. How Religion Evolved: And Why It Endures. London: Pelican.359 References
Durham. W. H. 1991. Coevolution: Genes, Culture, and Human Diversity. Stanford, CA: Stanford 
University Press.
Eigen, M., and P. Schuster. 1977. A principle of natural self-organization. Naturwissenschaften
64: 541–565.
Endler, J. 1986. Natural Selection in the Wild: Monographs in Population Biology 21. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.
Erwin, D. H. 2005. Seeds of diversity. Science 308: 1752–1753.
Erwin, D. H. 2008. Macroevolution of ecosystem engineering, niche construction and diversity. 
Trends in Ecology & Evolution 23: 304–310.
Erwin, D. H. 2012. Novelties that change carrying capacity. Journal of Experimental Zoology Part 
B: Molecular and Developmental Evolution 318: 460–465.
Erwin, D. H., M. Laflamme, S. M. Tweedt, E. A. Sperling, D. Pisani, and K. J. Peterson. 2011. 
The Cambrian conundrum: Early divergence and later ecological success in the early history of 
animals. Science 334: 1091–1097.
Erwin, D. H., and S. Tweedt. 2012. Ecological drivers of the Ediacaran-Cambrian diversification 
of Metazoa. Evolutionary Ecology 26: 417–433.
Erwin, D. H., and J. W. Valentine. 2013. The Cambrian Explosion: The Construction of Animal 
Biodiversity. Greenwood Village, CO: Robert and Company Publishers.
Evershed, R. P., G. D. Smith, M. Roffet-Salque, et al. 2022. Dairying, diseases and the evolution 
of lactase persistence in Europe. Nature 608: 336–345.
Feynman, R. 1965. The Character of Physical Law. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Fisher, J. B., and R. A. Hinde. 1949. Opening of milk bottles by birds. British Birds XLII: 347–357.
Fogarty, L., and M. J. Wade. 2022. Niche construction in quantitative traits: Heritability and 
response to selection. Proceedings of the Royal Society B 289: 20220401.
Fry, I. 2002. Emergence of Life on Earth: A Historical and Scientific Overview. New Brunswick, NJ: 
Rutgers University Press.
Futuyma, D. J. 2017. Evolutionary biology today and the call for an extended synthesis. Interface 
Focus 7: 20160145.
Gamow, G. 1952. The Creation of the Universe. New York: Viking.
Gardner, A., and S. A. West. 2014. Inclusive fitness: 50 years on. Philosophical Transactions of the 
Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 369: 20130356.
Gerbault, P., A. Liebert, Y. Itan, et al. 2011. Evolution of lactase persistence: An example of human
niche construction. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London B 366: 863–877.
Gerhart, J. C., and M. W. Kirschner. 1997. Cells, Embryos & Evolution. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Gerhart, J. C., and M. W. Kirschner. 2007. The theory of facilitated variation. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences 104: 8582–8589.360 References
Gibbs, J. W. (May 1876—July 1878). On the equilibrium of heterogeneous substances. Transac￾tions of the Connecticut Academy of Arts and Sciences 3: 441–458.
Gibson, J. J. 1950. The Perception of the Visual World. Boston: Houghton-Mifflin.
Gibson, J. J. 1966. The Senses Considered as Perceptual Systems. Boston: Houghton-Mifflin.
Gilbert, S. F. 2019. Evolutionary transitions revisited: Holobiont evo-devo. Journal of Experimental 
Zoology Molecular and Developmental Biology 332: 307–314.
Gilbert, S. F. 2020. Holobionts Can Evolve by Changing Their Symbionts and Hosts. Stanford, CA: 
Stanford University Press.
Gilbert, S. F., and D. Epel. 2009. Ecological Developmental Biology: Integrating Epigenetics, Medicine, 
and Evolution. Sunderland, MA: Sinauer Associates.
Gilbert, S. F., T. C. Bosch, and C. Ledon-Rettig. 2015. Eco-Evo-Devo: Developmental symbiosis 
and developmental plasticity as evolutionary agents. Nature Review Genetics 16: 611–622.
Godfrey-Smith, P. 1996. Complexity and the Function of Mind in Nature. Cambridge, MA: Cam￾bridge University Press.
Godfrey-Smith, P. 2009. Darwinian Populations and Natural Selection. New York: Oxford Uni￾versity Press.
Goldstein, D. B. 2022. The End of Genetics Designing Humanity’s DNA. New Haven, CT: Yale 
University Press.
Gonzalez-Forero, M. 2023. How development affects evolution. Evolution 77: 562–579.
Gould, S. J., and E. Vrba. 1982. Exaptation: A missing term in the science of form. Paleobiology
8: 4–15.
Grant, P. R. 1999. Ecology and Evolution of Darwin’s Finches. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University 
Press.
Grant, P. R., and B. R. Grant. 2014. 40 Years of Evolution: Darwin’s Finches on Daphne Major Island. 
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Griffiths, P. E., and K. Stotz. 2013. Genetics and Philosophy: An Introduction. Cambridge: Cam￾bridge University Press.
Guth, A. 1997. The Inflationary Universe: The Quest for a New Theory of Cosmic Origins. Reading, 
MA: Addison Wesley.
Haller, B. C., and A. P. Hendry. 2014. Solving the paradox of stasis: Squashed stabilizing selection
and the limits of detection. Evolution 68: 483–500.
Hamilton, W. D. 1963. The evolution of altruistic behavior. The American Naturalist 97: 354–356.
Hamilton, W. D. 1964. The genetical evolution of social behaviour. I. Journal of Theoretical Biol￾ogy 7: 1–16.
Hannah, M. 2021. Extinctions: Living and Dying in the Margin of Error. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.361 References
Hansell, M. H. 1984. Animal Architecture and Building Behaviour. London: Longman.
Hansell, M. H. 2000. Bird Nests and Construction Behaviour. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Harold, F. M. 2014. In Search of Cell History: The Evolution of Life’s Building Blocks. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press.
Hauser, M. D. 1996. The Evolution of Communication. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Heard, E., and R. A Martienssen. 2014. Transgenerational epigenetic inheritance: Myths and 
mechanisms. Cell 157: 95–109.
Hehemann, J. H., G. Correc, T. Barbeyron, W. Helbert, M. Czjzek, and G. Michel. 2010. Trans￾fer of carbohydrate-active enzymes from marine bacteria to Japanese gut microbiota. Nature
464: 908–912.
Heijmans, B. T., W. T. Elmar, D. S. Aryeh, et al. 2008. Persistent epigenetic differences associated 
with prenatal exposure to famine in humans. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
105: 17046–17049.
Hendry, A. P. 2020. Eco-Evolutionary Dynamics. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Henrich, J. 2016. The Secret of Our Success: How Culture Is Driving Human Evolution, Domesticating 
Our Species, and Making Us Smarter. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Heyes, C. M. 1993. Imitation, culture and cognition. Animal Behaviour 46: 999–1010.
Heyes, C. M. 2013. What can imitation do for cooperation? In Cooperation and Its Evolution, ed. 
K. Sterelny, R. Joyce, B. Calcott, and B. Fraser. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Hölldobler, B., and E. O Wilson. 1990. The Ants. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Hölldobler, B., and E. O. Wilson. 2009. The Superorganism: The Beauty Elegance and Strangeness 
of Insect Societies. New York: W. W. Norton.
Holt, R. D. 1995. Linking species and ecosystems: Where’s Darwin? In Linking Species and Ecosys￾tems, ed. C. G. Jones and J. Lawton. London: Chapman & Hall, pp. 273–279.
Hoppitt, W. J. E., and K. N. Laland. 2013. Social Learning: An Introduction to Mechanisms, Meth￾ods, and Models. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Hoyle, F. 1983. The Intelligent Universe. London: Michael Joseph.
Hull, D. L. 1981. Units of evolution: A metaphysical essay. In The Philosophy of Evolution, ed. U. J. 
Jensen, and R. Brighton, UK: Harvester Press, pp. 23–44.
Hull, D. L., R. E. Langman, and S. S. Glenn. 2001. A general account of selection: Biology, 
immunology, and behavior. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 24: 511–528.
Hume, D. 1739. A Treatise of Human Nature. London: Clarendon Press.
Hünemeier, T., C. E. G. Amorim, S. Azevedo, et al. 2012. Evolutionary responses to a constructed 
niche: Ancient Mesoamericans as a model of gene-culture coevolution. PLOS ONE 7: e38862.
Hutchinson, G. E. 1957. Concluding remarks. Cold Spring Harbor Symposia on Quantitative 
Biology 22: 415–427.362 References
Huxley, J. 1942. Evolution. The Modern Synthesis. London: Allen and Unwin.
Itan, Y., A. Powell, M. A. Beaumont, J. Burger, and M. G. Thomas. 2009. The origins of lactase 
persistence in Europe. PLOS Computational Biology 5: e1000491.
Jablonka, E., and M. J. Lamb. 1995. Epigenetic Inheritance and Evolution: The Lamarckian Dimen￾sion. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Jablonka, E., and M. J. Lamb. 2005. Evolution in Four Dimensions. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Jablonka, E., and M. J. Lamb. 2014. Evolution in Four Dimensions. Revised ed. Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press.
Jablonka, E., and G. Raz. 2009. Transgenerational epigenetic inheritance: Prevalence, mecha￾nisms, and implications for the study of heredity and evolution. Quarterly Review of Biology
84: 131–176.
Jarrige, F., and T. Le Roux. 2021. The Contamination of the Earth. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Jaynes, D. B. 1996. Improved soil mapping using electromagnetic induction surveys. Proceedings 
of the Third International Conference on Precision Agriculture 169–179.
Jeffery, W. R. 2008. Emerging model systems in evo-devo: Cavefish and microevolution of develop￾ment. Evolution & Development 10: 265–272.
Jones, C. G., and J. H. Lawton. 1995. Linking Species and Ecosystems. New York: Chapman & Hall.
Jones, C. G., J. H. Lawton, and M. Shachak. 1994. Organisms as ecosystem engineers. Oikos 69: 
373–386.
Jones, C. G., J. H. Lawton, and M. Shachak. 1997. Positive and negative effects of organisms as 
physical ecosystem engineers. Ecology 78: 1946–1957.
Judson, O. P. 2017. The energy expansions of evolution. Nature Ecology & Evolution 1: 0138.
Kauffman, S. A. 1993. The Origins of Order: Self-Organization and Selection in Evolution. New 
York: Oxford University Press.
Kauffman, S. A. 2019. A World beyond Physics: The Emergence and Evolution of Life. New York: 
Oxford University Press.
Kawai, M. 1965. Newly-acquired pre-cultural behavior of the natural troop of Japanese monkeys 
on Koshima islet. Primates 6: 1–30.
Kirschner, M. W., and J. C. Gerhart. 2005. The Plausibility of Life: Resolving Darwin’s Dilemma. 
New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Klein, A.-M., B. E. Vaissière, J. H. Cane, et al. 2007. Importance of pollinators in changing 
landscapes for world crops. Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 274: 303–313.
Kondrashov, A. S. 1993. Classification of hypotheses on the advantage of amphimixis. Journal of 
Heredity 84: 372–387.
Kowalko, J. 2020. Utilizing the blind cavefish Astyanax mexicanus to understand the genetic basis 
of behavioral evolution. Journal of Experimental Biology Feb 7; 223(Pt Suppl 1): jeb208835.363 References
Kreager, P., B. Winney, S. Ulijaszek, and C. Capelli. 2015. Population in the Human Sciences: 
Concepts, Models, Evidence. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Kreibich, H., A. F. Van Loon, K. Schröter, et al. 2022. The challenge of unprecedented floods and
droughts in risk management. Nature 608: 80–86.
Laland, K. N. 2017a. Darwin’s Unfinished Symphony: How Culture Made the Human Mind. Prince￾ton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Laland, K. N. 2017b. The origins of language in teaching. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review
24: 225–231.
Laland, K. N., and L. Chiu. 2020. Evolution’s engineers. Aeon. https://aeon.co/essays/organisms
-are-not-passive-recipients-of-evolutionary-forces.
Laland, K. N., F. J. Odling-Smee, and J. Endler. 2017. Niche construction, sources of selection
and trait coevolution. Interface Focus 7: 20160147.
Laland, K. N., F. J. Odling-Smee, and M. W. Feldman. 2019. Understanding niche construction 
as an evolutionary process. In Evolutionary Causation, Biological and Philosophical Reflections, ed. 
T. Uller and K. N. Laland. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp. 127–152.
Laland, K. N., F. J. Odling-Smee, and S. F. Gilbert. 2008. Evodevo and niche construction: Build￾ing bridges. Journal of Experimental Zoology Part B 310: 549–566.
Laland K. N., F. J. Odling-Smee, W. Hoppitt, and T. Uller. 2012. More on how and why: Cause 
and effect in biology revisited. Biology & Philosophy 28: 719–745.
Laland, K. N., F. J. Odling-Smee, and S. Myles. 2010. How culture shaped the human genome:
Bringing genetics and the human sciences together. Nature Reviews Genetics 11: 137–148.
Laland, K. N., F. J. Odling-Smee, and S. Turner. 2014. The role of internal and external construc￾tive processes in evolution. The Journal of Physiology 592: 2413–2422.
Laland, K. N., K. Sterelny, F. J. Odling-Smee, W. Hoppitt, and T. Uller. 2011. Cause and effect in 
biology revisited: Is Mayr’s proximate-ultimate dichotomy still useful? Science 334: 1512–1516.
Laland, K. N., T. Uller, M. W. Feldman, et al. 2014. Does evolutionary theory need a rethink? 
Yes. Nature 514: 161–164.
Laland, K. N., T. Uller, M. W. Feldman, et al. 2015. The extended evolutionary synthesis: Its 
structure, assumptions and predictions. Proceedings of the Royal Society B 282: 20151019.
Lane, N. 2015. The Vital Question. London: Profile books.
Lane, N., and W. Martin. 2010. The energetics of genome complexity. Nature 467: 929–934.
Lenton, T. M., P. P. Pichler, and H. Weisz. 2016. Revolutions in energy input and material cycling 
in Earth history and human history. Earth System Dynamics 7: 353–370.
Levin, S. A. 2012. The Princeton Guide to Ecology. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Levins, R. 1968. Evolution in Changing Environments. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Lewontin, R. C. 1970. The units of selection. Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics 1: 1–18.364 References
Lewontin, R. C. 1982. Organism and environment. In Learning, Development and Culture, ed. 
H. C. Plotkin. Chichester, UK: Wiley, pp. 151–170.
Lewontin, R. C. 1983. Gene, organism, and environment. In Evolution from Molecules to Men, ed. 
D. S. Bendall, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 273–285.
Liao, B. Y., and J. Zhang. 2008. Null mutations in human and mouse orthologs frequently result 
in dif­ferent phenotypes. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 105: 6987–6992.
Lindenfors, P., A. Wartel, and J. Lind. 2021. ‘Dunbar’s numbers’ deconstructed. Biology Letters
17: 20210158.
Lion, S. 2018. Theoretical approaches in evolutionary ecology: Environmental feedback as a unify￾ing perspective. The American Naturalist 191: 21–44.
Loreau, M. 2010. From Populations to Ecosystems. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Lyell, C. 1833. Principles of Geology: Being an Attempt to Explain the Former Changes of the Earth’s 
Surface, by Reference to Causes Now in Operation, Vol. 3. London: John Murray.
Lyko, F., S. Foret, R. Kucharski, S. Wolf, C. Falckenhayn, and R. Maleszka. 2010. The honey bee epig￾enomes: Differential methylation of brain DNA in queens and workers. PLOS Biology 8: e1000506.
Lys, J. A., and R. Leuthold. 1994. Forces affecting water imbibition in Macrotermes workers 
(Termitidae, Isoptera). Insectes Sociaux 41: 79–84.
Maguire, O. R., I. B. A. Smokers, and W. T. S. Huck. 2021. A physicochemical orthophosphate 
cycle via a kinetically stable thermodynamically activated intermediate enables mild prebiotic 
phosphorylations. Nature Communications 12: 5517.
Margulis, L. 1967. On the origin of mitosing cells. Journal of Theoretical Biology 14: 225–274.
Margulis, L. 1970. Origin of Eukaryotic Cells: Evidence and Research Implications for a Theory of the 
Origin and Evolution of Microbial, Plant, and Animal Cells on the Precambrian Earth. New Haven, 
CT: Yale University Press.
Martin, W., and M. J. Russell. 2003. On the origins of cells: A hypothesis for the evolutionary 
transitions from abiotic geochemistry to chemoautotrophic prokaryotes, and from prokaryotes to 
nucleated cells. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 358: 59–83.
Matthews, B., L. De Meester, C. G. Jones, et al. 2014. Under niche construction: An opera￾tional bridge between ecology, evolution, and ecosystem science. Ecological Monographs
84: 245–263.
May, R. M. 1973. Stability and Complexity in Model Ecosystems, Vol. 1. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
Maynard Smith, J., and E. Szathmáry. 1995. The Major Transitions in Evolution. Oxford, UK: 
W. H. Freeman.
Mayr, E. 1961. Cause and effect in biology. Science 134: 1501–1506.
Mayr, E. 1974. Behavior programs and evolutionary strategies. American Scientist 62: 650–659.365 References
Mayr, E. 1982. The Growth of Biological Thought. Diversity, Evolution, and Inheritance. Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press.
McGaugh, S. E., S. Weaver, E. N. Gilbertson, et al. 2019. Evidence for rapid phenotypic and 
behavioural shifts in a recently established cavefish population. Biological Journal of the Linnean 
Society 129: 143–161.
Mesoudi, A. 2011. Cultural Evolution: How Darwinian Evolutionary Theory Can Explain Human 
Culture and Synthesize the Social Sciences. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Mineka, S., and M. Cook. 1988. Social learning and the acquisition of snake fear in monkeys. 
In Social Learning: Psychological and Biological Perspectives, ed. B. G. Galef Jr. and T. R. Zentall. 
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum, pp. 51–73.
Mitchell, P. 1961. Coupling of phosphorylation to electron and hydrogen transfer by a chemi￾osmotic type of mechanism. Nature 191: 144–148.
Monod, J. Y. 1972. Chance and Necessity: An Essay on the Natural Philosophy of Modern Biology. 
New York: Random House USA.
Monroe, J. G., T. Srikant, P. Carbonell-Bejerano, et al. 2022. Mutation bias reflects natural
selection in Arabidopsis thaliana. Nature 602: 101–105.
Moore, J. M., and M. D. Picker. 1991. Heuweltjies (earth mounds) in the Clanwilliam district, 
Cape Province, South Africa: 4000-year-old termite nests. Oecologia 86: 424–432.
Mukherjee, I., R. R. Large, R. Corkrey, and L. V. Danyushevsky. 2018. The Boring Billion, a 
slingshot for complex life on earth. Scientific Reports 8: 443.
Muller, G. B. 2021. Evo-devo’s contributions to the extended evolutionary synthesis. In Evolution￾ary Developmental Biology, A Reference Guide, ed. L. Nuño de la Rosa and G. B. Müller. Cham, 
Switzerland: Springer International Publishing, pp. 1127–1138.
Naiman, R. J., C. A. Johnston, and J. C. Kelley. 1988. Alteration of North American streams by 
beaver: The structure and dynamics of streams are changing as beaver recolonize their historic 
habitat. BioScience 38: 753–762.
Nurse, P. 2020. What Is Life? Understand Biology in Five Steps. Oxford, UK: David Fickling Books.
O’Brien, M. J., and K. N. Laland. 2012. Genes, culture and agriculture: An example of human
niche construction. Current Anthropology 53: 434–470.
Odling-Smee, F. J. 1988. Niche-constructing phenotypes. In The Role of Behavior in Evolution, ed. 
H. C. Plotkin. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp. 73–132.
Odling-Smee, F. J. 2007. Niche inheritance: A possible basis for classifying multiple inheritance 
systems in evolution. Biological Theory 2: 276–289.
Odling-Smee, F. J. 2010. Niche construction. In Evolution: The Extended Synthesis, ed. G. B. Müller 
and M. Pigliucci. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp. 175–208.
Odling-Smee, F. J., and K. N. Laland. 2011. Ecological inheritance and cultural inheritance: What 
are they and how do they differ? Biological Theory 6: 220–230.366 References
Odling-Smee, F. J., D. H. Erwin, E. P. Palkovacs, M. W. Feldman, and K. N. Laland. 2013. 
Niche construction theory: A practical guide for ecologists. Quarterly Review of Biology
88: 3–28.
Odling-Smee, F. J., K. N. Laland, and M. W. Feldman. 2003. Niche Construction. The Neglected 
Process in Evolution. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Odum, E. P. 1971. Fundamentals of Ecology Philadelphia. Philadelphia: Saunders.
Okasha, S. 2018. Agents and Goals in Evolution. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Olson, D., and N. Torrance, N. 2009. Cambridge Handbook of Literacy (Cambridge Handbooks in 
Psychology). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
O’Neill, R. V., D. L. DeAngelis, J. B. Waide, and T. F. H. Allen. 1986. A Hierarchical Concept of 
Ecosystems. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Otto, S. P. 2018. Adaptation, speciation and extinction in the Anthropocene. Proceedings of the 
Royal Society B 285: 20182047.
Paley, W. 1802. Natural Theology: Or, Evidences of the Existence and Attributes of the Deity, Collected 
from the Appearances of Nature. London: R. Faulder.
Pérez, V. I., R. Buffenstein, V. Masamsetti, et al. 2009. Protein stability and resistance to oxidative 
stress are determinants of longevity in the longest-living rodent, the naked mole-rat. Proceedings 
of the National Academy of Sciences 106: 3059–3064.
Pittendrigh, C. S. 1958. Adaptation, natural selection, and behavior. In Behavior and Evolution, ed. 
A. Roe and George Gaylord Simpson. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 390–416.
Plotkin, H. C. 1994. Darwin Machines and the Nature of Knowledge. London: Penguin.
Plotkin, H. C., and F. J. Odling-Smee. 1979. Learning, change, and evolution: An enquiry into 
the teleonomy of learning. In Advances in the Study of Behavior, ed. J. S. Rosenblatt, R. A. Hinde, 
C. Beer, and M. C. Busnel. Oxford, UK: Academic Press, pp.1–41.
Plotkin, H. C., and F. J. Odling-Smee. 1981. A multiple-level model of evolution and its implica￾tions for sociobiology. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 4: 225–235.
Popper, K. R. 1966. Of Clouds and Clocks. An Approach to the Problem of Rationality and the Freedom 
of Man. Washington, DC: Washington University.
Popper, K. R. 1979. Review of E. J. Steele’s Somatic Selection and Adaptive Evolution. Times Literary 
Supplement 1979: 5.
Post, D. M., and E. P. Palkovacs. 2009. Eco-evolutionary feedbacks in community and ecosystem 
ecology: Interactions between the ecological theatre and the evolutionary play. Philosophical Trans￾actions of the Royal Society B 364: 1629–1640.
Pross, A. 2012. What Is Life? How Chemistry Becomes Biology. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Puckett, J. G., A. R. Pokhrel, and J. A. Giannini. 2018. Collective gradient sensing in fish shoals. 
Scientific Reports 8: 7587.
Pullman, P. 1995. His Dark Materials. London: Everyman.367 References
Reeve, H. K., and P. W. Sherman. 1993. Adaptation and the goals of evolutionary research. The 
Quarterly Review of Biology 68: 1–32.
Reid, J. M., W. Cresswell, S. Holt, R. J. Mellanby, D. P. Whitfield, and G. D. Ruxton. 2002. Nest 
scrape design and clutch heat loss in pectoral sandpipers (Calidris melanotos). Functional Ecology
16: 305–312.
Reiners, W. A. 1986. Complementary models for ecosystems. American Naturalist 127: 59–73.
Rhoads, J. E., I. G. B. Wold, S. Harish, et al. 2023. Finding peas in the early universe with JWST. 
The Astrophysical Journal Letters 942: L14.
Riahi, I. A. 2023. Macroevolutionary origins of comparative development. The Economic Journal
(upcoming).
Richerson, P. J., and R. Boyd. 2005. Not by Genes Alone: How Culture Transformed Human Evolu￾tion. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Ricklefs, R. E., and G. L. Miller. 1999. Ecology. New York: W. H. Freeman & Co Ltd.
Riskin, J. 2016. The Restless Clock. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Rohner, N., D. F. Jarosz, J. E. Kowalko, et al. 2013. Cryptic variation in morphological evolution: 
HSP90 as a capacitor for loss of eyes in cavefish. Science 342: 1372–1375.
Romer, P. M. 1990. Endogenous technological change. Journal of Political Economy 98: S71–S102.
Romer, P. M. 1994. The origins of endogenous growth. Journal of Economic Perspectives 8: 3–22.
Roser, Max, Esteban Ortiz-Ospina, and Hannah Ritchie, 2013. “Life Expectancy.” Our World in 
Data, https://ourworldindata.org/life-expectancy.
Rothschild, L. J., and R. L. Mancinelli. 2001. Life in extreme environments. Nature 409: 1092–1101.
Roughgarden, J. 1979. Theory of Population Genetics and Evolutionary Ecology: An Introduction. 
Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Roughgarden, J. 1995. Theory of Population Genetics and Evolutionary Ecology: An Introduction. 
Hoboken, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Roughgarden, J. 1998. Primer of Ecological Theory. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Rovelli, C. 2015. Seven Brief Lessons on Physics. London: Penguin Books.
Rovelli, C. 2018. The Order of Time. London: Allen Lane.
Rovelli, C. 2021. Helgoland: The Strange and Beautiful Story of Quantum Physics. London: Penguin 
Books.
Russell, B. 1948. B.B.C. broadcast transcript, published as “Science as a Product of Western 
Europe,” The Listener 39 (May 27 1948), 865–6 Repr. as “Nature and Origin of Scientific Method,” 
The Western Tradition, a Series of Talks Given in the B.B.C. European Programme, 1949.
Russell, B. 1961. History of Western Philosophy, 2nd ed. London: George Allen & Unwin Ltd.
Russon, A. E. 2003. Innovation and creativity in forest-living rehabilitant orangutans. In Animal 
Innovation, ed. S. M. Reader and K. N. Laland. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 279–306.368 References
Saini, A. 2019. Superior: The Return of the Race Science. London: Fourth Estate.
San Roman, M., and A. Wagner. 2018. An enormous potential for niche construction through bac￾terial cross-feeding in a homogeneous environment. PLOS Computational Biology 14: e1006340.
Sasaki, T., and D. Biro. 2017. Cumulative culture can emerge from collective intelligence in animal 
groups. Nature Communications 8: 15049.
Schmid, M. W., C. Heichinger, D. C. Schmid, et al. 2018. Contribution of epigenetic variation 
to adaptation in Arabidopsis. Nature Communications 9: 4446.
Schneider, E. D., and D. Sagan. 2005. Into the Cool Energy Flow, Thermodynamics, and Life. Chi￾cago: University of Chicago Press.
Schrödinger, E. 1944. What Is Life? Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Scott-Phillips, T. C., T. E. Dickins, and S. A. West. 2011. Evolutionary theory and the ultimate–
proximate distinction in the human behavioral sciences. Perspectives on Psychological Science 6: 38–47.
Scott-Phillips, T. C., K. N. Laland, D. M. Shuker, T. E. Dickins, and S. A. West. 2014. The niche 
construction perspective: A critical appraisal. Evolution 68: 1231–1243.
Seeley, T. D., and P. K. Visscher. 2004a. Group decision making in nest-site selection by honey 
bees. Apidologie 35: 101–116.
Seeley, T. D., and P. K. Visscher. 2004b. Quorum sensing during nest-site selection by honeybee 
swarms. Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology 56: 594–601.
Shubin, N. H., E. B. Daeschler, and M. I. Coates. 2004. The early evolution of the tetrapod 
humerus. Science 304: 90–93.
Sieber, R., and E. D. Kokwaro. 1982. Water intake by the termite macrotermes michaelseni. 
Entomologia Experimentalis et Applicata 31: 147–153.
Slobodkin, L. B., and A. Rapoport. 1974. An optimal strategy of evolution. Quarterly Review of 
Biology 49: 181–200.
Smil, V. 2000. Energy in the twentieth century: resources, conversions, costs, uses, and conse￾quences. Annual Review of Energy and the Environment 25: 21–51.
Smith, B. D. 2007a. Niche construction and the behavioral context of plant and animal domestica￾tion. Evolutionary Anthropology 16: 188–199.
Smith, B. D. 2007b. The ultimate ecosystem engineers. Science 315: 1797–1798.
Smith, B. D., and M. A. Zeder. 2013. The onset of the Anthropocene. Anthropocene 4: 8–13.
Sober, E., and D. S. Wilson. 1998. Unto Others: The Evolution and Psychology of Unselfish Behavior. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Solow, R. M. 1956. A contribution to the theory of economic growth. The Quarterly Journal of 
Economics 70: 65–94.
Soni, J., and R. Goodman. 2017. A Mind at Play: How Claude Shannon Invented the Information 
Age. New York: Simon & Schuster.369 References
Stoltzfus, A. 2019. Chapter 3: Understanding bias in the introduction of variation as an evolution￾ary cause. In Evolutionary Causation, Biologigal and Philosophical Reflections, ed. T. Uller and K. N. 
Laland. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp. 29–62.
Sultan, S. E. 2015. Organism and Environment: Ecological Development, Niche Construction and 
Adaptation. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Sultan, S. E., A. P. Moczek, and D. Walsh. 2021. Bridging the explanatory gaps: What can we learn 
from a biological agency perspective? BioEssays 44: 2100185.
Syvitski, J., C. N. Waters, J. Day, et al. 2020. Extraordinary human energy consumption and
resultant geological impacts beginning around 1950 CE initiated the proposed Anthropocene 
Epoch. Communications Earth & Environment 1: 32.
Szilard, L. 1929. Über die Entropieverminderung in einem thermodynamischen System bei Ein￾griffen intelligenter Wesen. Zeitschrift fur Physik 53: 840–856.
Tebbich, S., K. Sterelny, and I. Teschke. 2010. The tale of the finch: Adaptive radiation and behav￾ioural flexibility. Philosophical Transactions: Biological Sciences 365: 1099–1109.
Tebbich, S., M. Taborsky, B. Fessl, and D. Blomqvist. 2001. Do woodpecker finches acquire 
tool-use by social learning? Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series B: Biological Sciences
268: 2189–2193.
Tegmark, M. 2017. Life 3.0. London: Allen Lane.
Thompson, J. N. 1994. The Coevolutionary Process. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Tobi, E. W., R. C. Slieker, R. Luijk, et al. 2018. DNA methylation as a mediator of the association 
between prenatal adversity and risk factors for metabolic disease in adulthood. Science Advances
4: eaao4364.
Tomasello, M. 1999. The Cultural Origins of Human Cognition. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Uni￾versity Press.
Tomasello, M. 2008. Origins of Human Communication. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Tomlinson, G. 2015. A Million Years of Music. New York: Zone Books.
Tomlinson, G. 2018. Culture and the Course of Human Evolution. Chicago: Chicago University Press.
Towe, K. M. 1970. Oxygen-collagen priority and the early metazoan fossil record. Proceedings of 
the National Academy of Sciences 65: 781–788.
Turchin, P. 2016. Ultrasociety: How 10,000 Years of War Made Humans the Greatest Cooperators on 
Earth. Chaplin, CT: Beresta Books.
Turing, A. M. 1937. On computable numbers, with an application to the entscheidungs problem.
Proceedings of the London Mathematical Society 2.42: 230–265.
Turner, J. S. 2000. The Extended Organism: The Physiology of Animal-Built Structures. Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press.
Turner, J. S. 2005. Extended physiology of an insect-built structure. American Entomologist 51: 36–38.370 References
Turner, J. S. 2017. Purpose and Desire: What Makes Something “Alive” and Why Modern Darwinism 
Has Failed to Explain It. San Francisco: HarperOne.
Uller, T. 2019. Evolutionary perspectives on transgenerational epigenetics. In Transgenerational 
Epigenetics, Second Edition, ed. T. O. Tollefsbol. London: Academic Press, pp. 333–350.
Uller, T. 2023. Agency, goal orientation, and evolutionary explanations. In Evolution “On Purpose”: 
Teleonomy in Living Systems, Vienna Series in Theoretical Biology, ed. P. Corning, S. A. Kauffman, 
D. Noble, J. A. Shapiro, R. I. Vane-Wright, and A. Pross. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, preprint 
10.31219/osf.io/49qrs.
Uller, T., and H. Helanterä. 2019. Niche construction and conceptual change in evolutionary 
biology. British Journal for the Philosophy of Science 70: 351–371.
Uller, T., A. P. Moczek, R. A. Watson, P. M. Brakefield, and K. N. Laland. 2018. Developmental 
bias and evolution: A regulatory network perspective. Genetics 209: 949.
Vedral, V. 2010. Decoding Reality. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Vedral, V. 2018. From Micro to Macro: Adventures of a Wandering Physicist. Singapore: World 
Scientific.
von Neumann, J. 1956. Probabilistic logics and synthesis of reliable organisms from unreliable 
components. In Automata Studies in Annals of Mathematical Studies 34, ed. C. E. Shannon and 
J. McCarthy. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University, pp. 43–98.
von Neumann, J., and A. W. Burks. 1966. Theory of Self-Reproducing Automata. Urbana: University 
of Illinois Press.
von Neumann, J., and O. Morgenstern. 1944. Theory of Games and Economic Behavior. Princeton, 
NJ: Princeton University Press.
Waddington, C. H. 1969. Paradigm for an evolutionary process. In Towards a Theoretical Biology 
2. Sketches, ed. C. H. Waddington. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
Wagner, D. L., E. M. Grames, M. L. Forister, M. R. Berenbaum, and D. Stopak. 2021. Insect 
decline in the Anthropocene: Death by a thousand cuts. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences 118: e2023989118.
Walsh, D. M. 2015. Organism, Agency, and Evolution. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Walsh, D. M. 2019. The paradox of population thinking: First order causes and higher order effects. 
In Evolutionary Causation, Biological and Philosophical Reflections, ed. T. Uller and K. N. Laland. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp. 227–246.
Ward, P., and J. Kirschvink. 2015. A New History of Life: The Radical New Discoveries about the 
Origins and Evolution of Life on Earth. New York: Bloomsbury Publishing.
Watson, J. D., and F. H. C. Crick. 1953. Molecular structure of nucleic acids: A structure for 
deoxyribose nucleic acid. Nature 171: 737–738.
Watson, R. A., and E. Szathmáry. 2016. How can evolution learn? Trends in Ecology & Evolution
31: 147–157.371 References
Watson, R. A., and C. Thies. 2019. Are developmental plasticity, niche construction and extended 
inheritance necessary for evolution by natural selection? The role of active phenotypes in the mini￾mal criteria for Darwinian individuality. In Evolutionary Causation, Biological and Philosophical 
Reflections, ed. T. Uller and K. N. Laland. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp. 197–226.
Watson, R. A., R. Mills, C. L. Buckley, et al. 2016. Evolutionary connectionism: Algorithmic 
principles underlying the evolution of biological organisation in evo-devo, evo-eco and evolution￾ary transitions. Evolutionary Biology 43: 553–581.
Webster, M. M., A. Whalen, and K. N. Laland. 2017. Fish pool their experience to solve problems
collectively. Nature Ecology & Evolution 1:0135.
Weinberg, S. 1993. Dreams of a Final Theory: The Search for the Fundamental Laws of Nature. New 
York: Vintage Books.
West, S. A., C. El Mouden, and A. Gardner. 2011. Sixteen common misconceptions about the 
evolution of cooperation in humans. Evolution and Human Behavior 32: 231–262.
West, W. F. 1970. The Bulawayo Symposium papers: No 2. termite prospecting. Chamber of Mines 
Journal 30: 32–35.
West-Eberhard, M. J. 2003. Developmental Plasticity and Evolution. New York: Oxford University Press.
Whitehead, A. N. 1978. Process and Reality: An Essay in Cosmology, Corrected edition, ed. D. R. 
Griffin and D. W. Sherburne. New York: The Free Press.
Whitehead, H., and Rendell, L. 2015. The Cultural Lives of Whales and Dolphins. Chicago: Uni￾versity of Chicago Press.
Whiten, A., J. Goodall, W. C. McGrew, et al. 1999. Cultures in chimpanzees. Nature 399: 682–685.
Wilczek, F. 1999. Getting its from bits. Nature 397, 303–306.
Williams, G. C. 1966. Adaptation and Natural Selection. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Wilson, E. O. 1975. Sociobiology: The New Synthesis. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Wilson, E. O. 2020. Tales from the Ant World. New York: Liveright.
Witze A. 2020. How a small nuclear war would transform the entire planet. Nature 579: 485–487.
Woese, C. R. 1998. The universal ancestor. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
95: 6854–6859.
Woese, C. R., and G. E. Fox. 1977. The concept of cellular evolution. Journal of Molecular Evolu￾tion 10: 1–6.
Wolfram, S. 2002. A New Kind of Science. Champaign, IL: Wolfram Media.
Wrangham. 2009. Catching Fire: How Cooking Made Us Human. London: Profile Books.
Wright, J. P., and C. G. Jones. 2006. The concept of organisms as ecosystem engineers ten years 
on: Progress, limitations, and challenges. BioScience 56: 203–209.
Zeder, M. A. 2017. Domestication as a model system for the extended evolutionary synthesis. 
Interface Focus 7: 20160133.Page numbers followed by f indicate figures.
Index
Abiotic-by-abiotic interactions, 244, 245, 248
Abiotic life, 229–231
Abiotic systems, 111
Absolute certainty, 72–73
Acidic sea, 179
Active, purposeful work, 5, 31, 213
Adaptation, 67–107
adaptive know-how (Ri
), 72
anticipatory, 71–72, 107
Ashby, Ross (see Ashby’s control theory)
contemporary, 71, 107
control errors, 85, 86
distinguishing between state of being 
adapted in the present and historical
origins of their adaptations, 339n13
earthworm, 101–105
empirical examples, 99–106
feedback, 70, 71
historical, 71, 107
limited regulator failure/fallible regulator 
failure, 83
lizard, 105–106
niche management game (see Adaptive 
niche management game)
novel environmental event, 85
past, present, and future concepts, 72, 73, 
107
Perseverance Mars Rover, 88–89
second law of thermodynamics, 107
superorganism, 92–93
termites, 99–101
three kinds of physiology needed by 
dif­ferent animals in dif­ferent
environments, 102
Adaptive immune system, 217–220
Adaptive immunity, 131
Adaptive know-how (Ri
). See also
Supplementary information-gaining 
processes
active, purposeful physical work, 213
consequences of their own actions, 
133
evolution, 33 (see also Adaptive know-how 
in evolution)
fitness of organisms, 161
importance, 72
Maxwell’s demon, 16
niche construction games, 87
niche construction theory (NCT), 87
one of fundamental resources that 
organisms need to live, 149, 176
Rp
-Ri
 dilemmas (see Rp
-Ri
 relationship)
supplementary information-gaining pro￾cesses, 88374 Index
Adaptive know-how in evolution, 109–137
asymmetric relationship, 125–126
beaver dams, 123–124
biodiversity and complex ecosystems, 
126–127
causal relationships, 113, 120–121
chaotic system, 112, 113
climate change, 131–132
competitive relationship, 125
complex causation, 121–126
day vs. night, 120
developmental bias, 130–131
dif­ferent locations in space and time/
different evolutionary histories, 119
diversity of organisms, 118–120
dynamic kinetic stability (DKS), 136–137
extended physiology, 134, 135
flowing river, 136
gaining knowledge in science, 114–116
greater thermodynamic efficiency, 135, 136
heuristic niche construction, 132–137
homeostasis, 134–135
how do organisms know anything?, 110–114
information-seeking processes, 128–132
interactions between abiota, 122
interactions between abiota and organisms, 
122–124
interactions between purposeful living 
organisms, 124–126
invasions, 127
knowledge gain in biological evolution, 
116–118
mutualistic relationship, 125
new kind of niche construction/disruptive 
consequences for community as 
invading species, 127
rainfall, 123
r-selected organisms/k-selected organism, 
126–127
same environmental factors having
dif­ferent meanings to dif­ferent species,
119
scientific hypotheses/scientific theories, 116
seasonal changes, 120
SET vs. NCT, 124
sexual reproduction, 130
static universe, 112, 113
supplementary fitness goal, 129, 135
supplementary knowledge-gaining 
processes, 128, 131
Adaptive lag, 226, 292, 294, 297, 321
Adaptive niche management game, 75–78, 
93–99, 159
Ashby’s control theory, 94
asymmetries between the two players, 76
feature-factor matching game, 75
interactive O-E niche relationship, 94, 99
mismatch, 75–76
move 1 (E changes E), 94, 95f
move 2 (E changes O), 94–95, 95f, 159
move 3 (E changes O-E in space), 95–96,
95f
move 4 (E changes O-E in time), 95f, 96
move 5 (O changes O), 95f, 96, 97
move 6 (O changes E), 95f, 96, 97, 159
move 7 (O changes O-E in space), 95f,
96, 97
move 8 (O changes O-E in time), 95f, 96
SET vs. NCT, 77–78
synerg (complementary match), 75, 97
Adenosine triphosphate (ATP), 180, 181, 274
Affordances, 45, 336–337n8
Agarose, 269
AGI. See Artificial general intelligence (AGI)
Agricultural Revolution, 303–306
Algae, 84
Algorithmic information, 59–60
Alice and Bob examples
Shannon’s communication theory, 40
watering of Alice’s plants, 63–64
Alzheimer’s disease, 268
Amphiphilic molecule, 187
Animate, purposeful system, 175
Anthropocene, 210375 Index
Antibody, 218, 267
Anticipatory adaptation, 71–72
Antigen, 218
Antiporter molecule, 181, 182
Ants, 92, 303–304
Aphids, 304
Apple-tree example, 161–162
A priori/a posteriori learner, 40, 41
Archaean era, 244
Aristotle, 286–287
Arrow of time, 287
Artifacts, 175–176, 205
Artificial abiotic life, 230–231
Artificial environment, 305
Artificial general intelligence (AGI), 195, 
213, 230
Artificial selection, 304
Artificial trophic levels, 306–308, 310, 311, 
314, 317, 320
Ashby, Ross, 78. See also Ashby’s control 
theory
Ashby’s control theory, 78–81
adaptive immunity, 131
adaptive niche management game, 94
applying, to evolving populations, 90–93
applying, to individual organisms, 81–90
boat example, 80
environmental variety (VE)/organism 
variety (VO), 82
essential variable, 78–80, 157
law of requisite variety (LRV), 79, 82, 94, 
157
lizards, 106
sex, 130
subessential variables, 79
Asian zebra mussels, 127
Assembling Life (Deamer), 179, 187
Associationist learning or conditioning, 222
Associative learning, 198, 202
Asteroid strike (Yucatan Peninsula), 144, 166
Astronomy, 326
Astrophysics, 323
Asymmetric relationship, 125–126, 256
Atmosphere, 27–28
Atom bomb, 292
ATP. See Adenosine triphosphate (ATP)
AT&T, 37
Author. See Niche Construction (Odling-Smee)
Autotrophs, 164, 167, 302
Bacteria
extremophiles, 148
lizard, 106
regenerating very rapidly and in large 
numbers, 86
resistance to antibiotics, 234
Bacterial DNA, 267
Barnacles, 310
B-cells, 218
Beaver dams
animal artifacts, 175–176, 249
ecosystem engineering, 237
purposeful activities of organisms, 249
reducing risk of predation, 123–124
Turner’s extended physiology, 134
upstream and downstream consequences, 
124
Bees, 92
Bejan, Adrian, 250
Bell Labs, 35, 37, 38
Benign eugenics, 228
Bicyclus anynana, 94
Big Bang, 326
Bilateral organisms, 119
Bilaterian organisms, 253
Biodiversity and complex ecosystems, 126–127
Bioenergetics of life, 10
Biogeochemical cycle, 258, 260
Bioinformatics of evolution, 10, 12, 51, 65, 332
Biology vs. physics, 248–249, 282
Biomedical sciences, 318, 319
Biotic-by-abiotic interactions, 247, 248
Bioturbation of burrowing organisms, 234
Birds’ nests, 23. See also Nest (nest building)376 Index
Bits, 37, 52–55
“Bits from its/its from bits,” 39
Blind Watchmaker, The (Dawkins), 338n2
Boat example, 80
Bock, Walter, 339n13
Boltzmann, Ludwig, 6, 155
Bootstrapping, 197, 198, 214–215, 226, 284, 
288
Boring Billion, 277
Boserup, Ester, 309
Bovine spongiform encephalopathy, 209
Breeder’s equation, 262
Brownian motion, 6
Burnet, Macfarland, 217
Burrowing (burrows), 23, 69, 165, 176
Butterfly, 94, 131
By-product niche construction, 28
Cactus (cacti), 154
Caenorhabditis elegans, 53
Cambrian explosion, 166, 327
Campbell, Donald, 216
Carbon dioxide, 171, 313
Carnot, Nicholas, 155
Carrying capacity, 303, 308–321
Causal learning, 222
Causal relationships, 113, 120–121
Cavefish, 299
Chance events, 113
Chaotic system, 112, 113
“Cheating by nature,” 125
Chemical kinetics, 178
Chemical or molecular evolution, 189
Chemiosmosis, 180, 186
Chickenpox, 219
Chicks, 98
Chimpanzees, 203
Chiu, Lynn, 336–337n8
Christianity, 154, 329
Climate change, 131–132
Closed environment, 16–17, 143
Coal, 171
Cold-blooded creatures, 105
Cold War, 292
Collagen, 164
Combinatorial selection, 189
Commensal relationship, 256
Competitive relationship, 125, 254
Complex causation, 121–126
Complex ecosystems, 126–127
Complexification, 184, 193
Compressibility of data, 59, 60
Computer-based memory system, 229
Conan Doyle, Arthur, 321
Consciousness, 231
Constructal law, 250
Consumer societies, 307–308
Contemporary adaptation, 71, 107
Control errors, 85, 86
Cooking, 165, 278
Copernicus, 323
Copier, 28, 30, 147
Copying, 203
Copying mistakes, 27
Cosmology, 323
Counteractive niche construction, 85, 104, 
105, 123
COVID-19 pandemic, 328
Creationists, 67, 282
Creative deity, 154. See also God
Cretaceous-Tertiary mass extinction, 166, 167
Creutzfeldt-Jacob disease, 268
Crick, Francis, 13, 30
Cryptic inheritance, 262
Cuckoos, 125, 207, 249
Cultural fitness, 206
Cultural niche construction, 291
Cultural selection pressures, 207
Culture-to-language transition, 277–278
Cyanobacteria, 28, 163, 169–171, 191
Dairy farming, 225–226
Damer, Bruce, 178, 186–189, 194, 275
Dams, 133377 Index
Dark Materials, His (Pullman), 342n14
Darwin, Charles
design without a designer, 68
earthworm (Lumbricus terrestris), 101
evolution, 323
gradualism of evolution by natural
selection, 234
Lamarckism vs. Darwinism, 211–212
major transition in bioinformatics of 
evolution, 332
Malthusian nightmare, 316
natural selection, 12, 155
On the Origin of Species, 155, 233, 271
population biology, 61
second limitation of natural selection, 25
Darwinian algorithm of generating 
hypotheses, 227
Darwinian selection, 189
Darwin’s warm little pond hypothesis,
186–189, 193, 194
Daughter cells, 266, 275
Dawkins, Richard, 84, 134, 155, 262, 338n2
Day vs. night, 120
Dead organic matter (DOM), 27, 270
Dead planet, 122, 244, 349n30
Deamer, David, 178, 179, 186–189, 194, 275
Death, 330
Decision theory, 336n6, 337n9
Deep-sea hydrothermal vent hypothesis, 
179–186, 192, 194
Deep time, 169
Demographic transition, 319
Dennett, Daniel, 216, 227
Density-dependent selection, 317
Detritivores, 170, 259, 302, 313
Detritus path, 259, 302
Deus, sive natura, 329
Developmental bias, 130–131
Diatoms, 84
Dif­ferent evolutionary histories, 119
Discrete systems, 110, 111
Divine creator, 67. See also God
DKS. See Dynamic kinetic stability (DKS)
DNA
bacterial, 267
mitochondrial, 266, 267
modifying expression of base-pair
sequences, 265
nuclear, 266, 267
properties of quasi-aperiodic crystal, 13
replication, 30
DNA methylation, 265
DOM. See Dead organic matter (DOM)
domesticated plants and animals, 304–305, 
306
Domesticating plants and animals, 304–305, 
306
Drunk driving detection software, 283
Dunbar, Robin, 295
Dunbar number, 295
Dutch Hunger Winter, 267
Dynamic kinetic stability (DKS), 9, 136–137
Earth. See also Life on any planet
biosphere, 166
properties of life on Earth, 141–145
satellite of Sun, 323
time before origin of life, 243–244
time when life first originated, 245–249
Earthworm, 101–105, 127, 134
Eco-evo-devo synthesis, 289
Ecoevolutionary dynamics, 238
Ecoevolutionary feedback, 239
Ecological footprint, 315, 319
Ecological inheritance
additional form of relatedness, 57
defined, 23, 70
modified cultural environments, 268
modified developmental environments, 
268
modified natural selection pressures, 238, 
239, 268
oxygen, 27–28
transmitting energy and matter resources, 27378 Index
Ecological succession, 302
Ecology, 322, 325
Ecospace, 166
Ecosystem engineering, 237
Ecosystem-level ecology, 289
Ecosystems, 233–260
abiotic-by-abiotic interactions, 244, 245,
248
bilaterian organisms, 253
bioenergetic and bioinformatic flows, 242
biogeochemical cycle, 258, 260
biotic-by-abiotic interactions, 247, 248
commensal relationship, 256
constructal law, 250
detritus path, 259
Earth before origin of life, 243–244
Earth when life first originated, 245–249
ecoevolutionary feedback, 239
ecosystem engineering, 237
environmentally mediated genotypic 
associations (EMGAs), 238
evolutionary opportunism, 253
excessive competition between coevolving 
populations, 255
first biotic-by-abiotic interactions, 245, 246
flow of lower entropy to higher entropy, 250
fossil record, 234
fundamental units of life, 240
fungal mycorrhizae and roots of plants, 
253–254
geophysical activities, 243, 244
grazing path, 259
greater thermodynamic efficiency, 257
historical trap, 253
Judson’s five successive energetic epochs, 
259–260
lifeless planets, 242–245, 258
minus-minus relationship, 254
more-parsimonious evolutionary 
algorithms vs. less-parsimonious
algorithms, 257
nitrogen cycle, 249
nonevolving abiota, 235–237
origin of, 242–245
plus-minus relationship, 255
plus-plus relationship, 255
population-community ecology vs. 
ecosystem-level ecology, 237
process-functional ecology, 235
purposelessness, 244
rock tides/volcanism, 244
Rp
-Ri
 relationship, 251–258
second law of thermodynamics, 301
stabilizing selection, 234
trophic pyramid, 258–259
two-way-street interactions, 241, 246, 258, 
260
“Who eats whom?” question, 258
Edaphic soil horizon, 103, 104
Ediacaran era, 167, 327
Eigen, Manfred, 183
Einstein, Albert
atom bomb, 292
entanglement, 55
needing to change the way we think, 
324–325
quantum physics (“God doesn’t play dice”), 
55
theories of special and general relativity, 156
Elsewhere-and-later environments, 83, 
310–312
EMGA. See Environmentally mediated 
genotypic associations (EMGAs)
Empirical science, 128
Endangered species, 344n61
End of Genetics, The (Goldstein), 227
Endogenous growth theory, 309
Endomorphism, 260
Endosymbiosis, 191
Endotherms, 105, 106
Energy and matter, 149. See also Physical 
resources (Rp
)
Enlightened blasphemy, 334
Entanglement, 55379 Index
Entropy, 11, 38, 52, 287
Environmentally mediated genotypic 
associations (EMGAs), 238
Environmentally mediated phenotypic 
associations, 348n21
Environmental variety (VE), 82. See also VE
Epigenetic inheritance, 267, 268, 350n20
Epigenetic processes, 264–266
Epi-mutation, 265
Erwin, Doug, 167, 308–310
Essential variable, 78–80, 157
Eukaryote cells, 260
Europa, 243
European earthworms, 127
Evolutionary biology
behavioral ecology, 223
bridging gaps between ecosystem-level 
ecology and evolutionary biology, 239
creationists, 282
distinguishing empirical from categories of 
natural selection, 124
four billion years of evolution, 329
maladaptations, 297
meaning of information, 56
mortality/helpful analogy, 332–333
needing to change the way we think, 325
origins of dif­ferent adaptations of
organisms, 73
population-community ecology vs. 
ecosystem-level ecology, 237
predicting what evolution will do next, 324
understanding science, 322
unresolved problems, 333
Evolutionary developmental biology, 131
Evolutionary levels, 293
Evolutionary opportunism, 253
Evolution of supplementary information￾gaining processes, 195–231
abiotic life, 229–231
adaptive immune system, 217–220
animal learning, 202–203, 211
artifacts, 205
artificial general intelligence (AGI), 195, 
213, 230
between-level interactions, 208–210
bootstrapping, 197, 198, 214–215, 226
cultural fitness, 206
cultural selection pressures, 207
dairy farming, 225–226
dif­ferent species, 201
fast-acting supplementary evolutionary 
responses, 220
fundamental requirements of all 
knowledge-gaining systems, 199–200
gene-cultural coevolution, 224
histories of the past, 199
instrumental learning, 221–222
language, 204, 224
learning in individual animals, 220–223
level 1 adaptations, 208
level 1 evolution, 201
level 1 knowledge-gaining process, 197
level 2 adaptations, 208
level 2 knowledge-gaining process, 198
level 3 adaptations, 208
level 3 knowledge-gaining process, 198
Life 1.0, 195, 196
Life 2.0, 195, 196, 231
Life 3.0, 195, 196, 228–231
Mayr’s distinction (“How” questions/“Why 
questions”), 212, 223
nature-nurture problem, 209, 211
negative interactions, 208, 209
past developmental experiences, 202, 221
positive interactions, 209
recursive evolutionary algorithm, 215–216
robot-environment (Rob-E) interactions, 
230
science, 204, 227
Skinner box, 221–222
social learning in animals, 224–227
subprocesses of adaptive genetic evolution, 
214–215, 217, 220
surprise, 221380 Index
Evolution of supplementary information￾gaining processes (cont.)
time scales, 199
vertebrate immune system, 217–220
Weismann barrier, 212
writing, 205, 224
Exaptation, 253, 272
Excludable goods, 310
Extended evolutionary synthesis, 196
Extended phenotype, 84, 134
Extended physiology, 134, 135
Extending the synthesis, 261–269
Aristotle’s final cause vs. Pittendrigh’s 
teleonomy, 287
breeder’s equation, 262
culture-to-language transition, 277–278
daughter cells, 266, 275
drunk driving detection software, 283
eco-evo-devo synthesis, 289
epigenetic inheritance, 267, 268, 350n20
epigenetic processes, 264–266
exaptation, 272
fear of God, 282
feedback, 280
fire, 277–278
genetic inheritance, 261, 266
Himalayan rabbit, 263–264
horizontal genetic transmission (HGT), 
269
how and why organisms contribute to 
natural selection?, 280–287
improbability barriers, 271–273
intelligent designer, 284
languages, 269
major evolutionary transitions, 273–278, 
332
Mars Rover, 283–284, 285
nongenetic inheritance systems, 263,
266–269
one cause/two effects dilemma, 284–285
origin of life, 273–276
phenotypes, 261–262
phenotypic plasticity, 263, 264
physics envy, 282
prokaryote-eukaryote transitions, 276–277
purpose (purposeful living organisms vs. 
purposeless abiotic systems), 281–286
shared fate/separate fate natural selection,
278–280
teleonomy vs. teleology, 286–287
tetrapods, 272–273
toadflax, 265
words used to describe “purpose,” 285–286
Externalism, 154
Extinction, 202
Extragenetic inheritance, 262, 350n4
Extremophiles, 148
Facultative epigenetic process, 264
Fallible regulator failure, 83
Fast-acting supplementary evolutionary 
responses, 220
Fear of God, 282
Feedback, 70, 71, 280
Female emancipation, 319
Fertilizer, 305, 317
Fire, 165, 277–278
Fire epoch, 162, 259
First law of thermodynamics, 4, 7
First Life (Deamer), 187
Fitness concepts, 56–58
Fittest variant organisms, 91
Flesh eating, 165
Flesh epoch, 162, 164, 259
FLI. See Future of Life Institute (FLI)
Flowing river, 136
Fore people (Papua New Guinea), 208
Fossil fuels, 170–171, 328
Fossil record, 234, 272
Franklin, Rosalind, 13
Free energy, 9, 12, 68, 180, 311
Free-riders, 296
Fundamental units of life, 240
Funerary cannibalism, 208381 Index
Fungal mycorrhizae and roots of plants, 
253–254
Future of humanity
optimistic view, 294–298, 331, 334
pessimistic view, 292–294, 334
Future of Life Institute (FLI), 195, 196, 213, 
230
Galapagos woodpecker finch, 50, 235, 
338n28
Galileo, Galilei, 323
Gambler’s Ruin, 77. See also Adaptive niche 
management game
Game theory, 75. See also Adaptive niche 
management game
GDD. See Gross domestic detritus (GDD)
GDP. See Gross domestic product (GDP)
Gene-based memories, 12, 146, 202
Gene-cultural coevolution, 224
Gene editing, 323, 328
Gene methylation, 340n37
Generalist species, 311
Generalization vs. specialization, 338n28
Generation of variety, 25
Genetic evolution, 201
Genetic inheritance
adaptive know-how (Ri
), 57, 144
based on inheritance of specific sequences 
of DNA, 266
evolution, 46–51
genetic mutations, 129
niche construction, 58
standard evolutionary theory (SET), 261
Genetic memories, 13, 114, 118
Genetic mutations, 129
Genomes, 337n21
Geochemical epoch, 162, 163, 259
Geophysical activities, 243, 244
Gerhart, John, 216
Giant Web Space Telescope, 326
Gibson, James, 45
Giraffe, 67, 211
Global positioning system (GPS), 309–310
Global warming, 145, 171, 301–308, 313, 
319, 324
God, 67, 154–155, 282, 329
Goldilocks zone of the Sun, 18
Goldstein, David, 227, 228
GPS. See Global positioning system (GPS)
Grant, Peter and Rosemary, 235
Grazing path, 259, 302
Greater thermodynamic efficiency, 135, 136, 
257, 279
Great oxidization event, 162
Greenhouse gases, 313, 321, 322
Green pea universe, 326
Green Revolution, 317
Gross domestic detritus (GDD), 312, 322
Gross domestic product (GDP), 312, 322
Hadean era, 243, 244
Hamilton, Bill, 56, 130, 207, 338n25
Hamlet (Shakespeare), 259
Harvester termite, 100, 101
Heat death of the universe, 287
Herbicide, 305
Here-and-now environments
adapting or failing to survive, 311
discrete abiota, 122
dumping detritus into environment as 
consequence of here-and-now economic 
activities, 312
elsewhere-and-later environments, 83, 
310, 311
immediate here-and-now gratification, 312
“world” in four-dimensional space, 110
Heterotrophs, 302
Heuristic niche construction, 132–137
Heuweltjies, 100, 101
HGT. See Horizontal genetic transmission
(HGT)
High-centering, 283
Himalayan rabbit, 263–264
Hinduism, 334382 Index
Hiroshima, 292
Histone proteins, 265
Historical adaptation, 71, 107
Historical trap, 253
HIV infections, 217
Hodotermes mossambicus, 100, 101
Holmes, Sherlock, 321
Holocene era, 169
Homeostasis, 134–135
Hooker, Joseph, 186
Horizon, 102–104
Horizontal genetic transmission (HGT), 269
Host-parasite relationships, 125
Hot spring hypothesis, 187. See also Darwin’s 
warm little pond hypothesis
“How Culture Shaped the Human Genome: 
Bringing Genetics and the Human 
Sciences Together” (Laland et al.), 
226
How Religion Evolved (Dunbar), 295
Hoyle, Fred, 177
Hull, David, 216, 227, 238, 327
Human complexity, 53
Human contributions to evolution, 291–334
adaptive lag, 292, 294, 297, 321
additional adaptive know-how, 320
Agricultural Revolution, 303–306
artificial environment, 305
artificial selection, 304
artificial trophic levels, 306–308, 310, 311, 
314, 317, 320
barnacles, 310
bioinformatics of evolution, 332
biomedical sciences, 318, 319
carrying capacity, 303, 308–321
consumer societies, 307–308
demographic transition, 319
designing our own babies, 328
destroying habitats of other organisms, 
312, 314
domesticating plants and animals, 
304–305, 306
dumping detritus back into our 
environments, 312–313, 321–322
Dunbar number, 295
ecological footprint, 315, 319
ecological succession, 302
economic activities, 301–303
effective size or growing populations, 314
endogenous growth theory, 309
excludable goods/nonexcludable goods, 310
female emancipation, 319
fertilizer, 305, 317
free-riders, 296
global positioning system (GPS), 309–310
global warming, 301–308, 313, 319, 324
greenhouse gases, 313, 321, 322
Green Revolution, 317
gross domestic product (GDP)/gross 
domestic detritus (GDD), 312, 322
human-induced mass extinction, 291
Industrial Revolution, 306–308
level 1 in-group vs. outgroup adaptations, 
294, 295
level 3 sociocultural adaptations, 294–296, 
300
levels of evolutionary processes, 293
life expectancy, 318
logistic growth equation, 313–315, 319
machines, 306–307
maladaptations, 297–298
Malthusian nightmare, 316–318
meaning of life, 331–334
mortality of human beings, 330
mutually assured destruction (MAD), 292, 
297
needing to change the way we think, 
324–325
negative future, 292–324, 334
nuclear war, 292–301
oil, 312
overpopulation (population overshoot), 
308–321
pesticide/herbicide, 305, 317383 Index
positive future, 324–328, 331, 334
revised logistic growth equation, 315, 318
rivalrous goods/nonrivalrous good, 309
science and technology, 322–324
science vs. religious beliefs, 329–331, 334
self-awareness, 327
social sciences, 300
specialist species/generalist species, 311
substructures, 296
10 percent rule, 303
trophic levels, 302–303
warfare, 297
within-group cooperative alliances, 294
Human cultural evolution, 224
Human genome, 219
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) 
infections, 217
Hume, David, 63, 72
Hutchison, Evelyn, 97, 106, 160
Huxley, Julian, 12
Hypercycle, 183
Imo, 203
Improbability barriers, 271–273, 301
Inanimate, purposeless system, 175
Inanimate objects (inanimate artifacts), 4, 175
Inceptive niche construction, 104, 105, 
144–145, 168
Inclusive fitness theory, 56–57, 91, 207
Individuality, 346n6
Inductive gambles, 21, 63, 72, 216
Industrial Revolution, 306–308
Information, 35–65
affordances, 45, 336–337n8
algorithmic information, 59–60
Alice and Bob, 40, 63–64
binary digits (bits), 52–55
evolution, 45–51
fitness concepts, 56–58
Galapagos woodpecker finch, 50, 338n28
genetic inheritance, 46–51, 57, 58
learning, 48–51
meaning, 42–46
meaningful, 149, 176 (see also Adaptive 
know-how (Ri
))
qubits, 53–55
semantic information, 55–59
Shannon, Claude (see Shannon’s 
communication theory)
Skinner box, 50
social learning, 41–43, 47–48, 336n4
supplementary knowledge-gaining pro￾cesses, 65
three grades of information, 39
within-lifetime acquired characteristics, 49
Information-seeking processes, 128–132
Innate immune system, 217, 218
Innovative niche construction, 104, 223
Insects, 119, 198, 253
Instrumental learning, 221–222
Intelligent designer, 67, 68, 149, 284
Intensive farming, 209
Intentionality, 175
Interactive O-E niche relationship
aspects of change in evolving organism￾environment systems, 158
first O-E relationships, 177
fundamental units of life, 240
niche management game, 94, 99
subprocesses of adaptive evolution, 214, 
215
Interference RNA, 265
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 
313
Internal heat generation, 105
Into the Cool: Energy Flow, Thermodynamics 
and Life (Schneider/Sagan), 301
Intrinsic growth rate, 313
Invasion, 127
Islam, 154
Japanese macaques, 203
Jones, Clive, 237
Judaism, 154384 Index
Judson, Olivia, 162–165, 171, 259, 277
Judson’s five successive energetic epochs, 
162–163, 259–260
Kauffman, Stuart, 13, 145, 168, 187, 244
Killer whale, 203
Kinetic trap, 178, 179, 189, 275
Kirschner, Mark, 216
Knowledge-gaining processes, 48, 49, 61–63,
65
Krakauer, David, 157
k-selected organisms, 126–127
Kuru, 208, 268
Lactose tolerance/intolerance, 225–226
Lamarck, Jean-Baptiste, 211, 261
Lamarckism, 49, 156, 211, 212
Lane, Nick
deep-sea hydrothermal vent hypothesis, 
179–181, 185, 192
prokaryote-eukaryote transition, 152, 162, 
164
Language, 204, 224, 269
Large-scale mega-faunal extinction, 169
Law of requisite variety (LRV), 79, 82, 94, 157
Laws of nature, 113
Laws of physics and chemistry, 139–140
Laws of thermodynamics
building-a-wooden-table example, 6–7
difficult to understand, 5
first law, 4, 7
information, and, 8
Maxwell, James Clerk, 14
potter-making-coffee-mugs example, 7–8
red-ink-in-glass-of-water example, 5–6
second law (see Second law of 
thermodynamics)
third law, 287
universality of, 139
Lawton, John, 237
Leaf cutter ants, 304
League of Nations, 300
Learning, 42
adaptations of individual organisms, 
347n37
animal, 202–203, 211
evolutionary biology, 223
evolutionary functions, 347n37
fundamental role of, 223
instrumental, 221–222
modified phenotypic traits, 49
smart learners vs. dumb learners, 51
subprocesses, 220
supplementary knowledge-gaining 
evolutionary process, 220
supplying more up-to-date information
than inherited genes, 48, 50
Level 1 adaptations, 208
Level 1 evolution, 201, 293
Level 1 in-group vs. outgroup adaptations, 
294, 295
Level 1 knowledge-gaining process, 197
Level 2 adaptations, 208
Level 2 evolution, 293
Level 2 knowledge-gaining process, 198
Level 3 adaptations, 208
Level 3 evolution, 293
Level 3 knowledge-gaining process, 198
Level 3 sociocultural adaptations, 294–296, 
300
Lewontin, Richard, 158
coevolution of organisms with their 
environments, 233
dif­ferent meanings, or significances, of
same events, 44, 46
niche construction, 237
organism-environment coevolution, 242, 
260
organisms only existing relative to their 
selective environments, 240
selective environments existing only 
relative to their organisms, 240
Life 1.0, 195, 196
Life 2.0, 195, 196, 231385 Index
Life 3.0, 195, 196, 228–231
Life 3.0: Being Human in the Age of Artificial 
Intelligence (Tegmark), 195
Life expectancy, 318
Lifeless planets, 242–245, 258
Life on any planet, 139–172
apple-tree example, 161–162
biosphere of Earth, 166
cyanobacterial production of oxygen, 
169–170, 171
dif­ferent sources of adaptive variation, 159
fossil fuels, 170–171
Judson’s five successive energetic epochs, 
162–163
large-scale mega-faunal extinction, 169
life on Earth, 141–145
mass extinctions, 166–167, 169, 171, 172
NCT, 156–161 (see also Niche 
construction theory (NCT))
Newtonian mechanics, 155, 156
novel change, 144–145
organism-environment coevolution, 143, 
156, 158, 172
reproduction, 145–149
Rp
-Ri
 dilemmas, 160–161, 168, 172
SET, 150–156 (see also Standard 
evolutionary theory (SET))
theory of evolution (see Universal theory of 
evolution)
trophic pyramid, 164
two-way-street transactions, 142
VO-E, 159, 160
Lifetime immunity, 219
Limited regulator failure, 83
Linaria vulgaris, 265
Linnaeus, Carl, 265
Living organisms. See Organisms
Lizard, 105–106
Logistic growth equation, 313–315, 319
Lower entropy to higher entropy, 250
LRV. See Law of requisite variety (LRV)
Lumbricus terrestris, 101. See also Earthworm
Macbeth (Shakespeare), 331
Machines, 306–307
MAD. See Mutually assured destruction 
(MAD)
Mad cow disease, 268
Major evolutionary transitions, 273–278, 332
Maladaptations, 297–298
Malaria, 268
Malign eugenics, 228
Malthusian nightmare, 316–318
Mammal burrows, 23. See also Burrowing 
(burrows)
Manhattan Project, 292
Marriage, 299
Mars, 194
Mars Rover, 283–284, 285
Martin, William, 152, 162, 164
Mass extinctions, 166–167, 169, 171, 172, 
291
Matric potential, 103
Maxwell, James Clerk
laws of thermodynamics, 14
second-law-opposing imaginary creature, 
14 (see also Maxwell’s demon)
Theory of Heat, 14
Victorian steam engines, 306
Maxwell’s demon, 14–18
acquiring both Rp
 and Ri
 requirement, 15
closed environment, 16–17, 143
demon being turned into purposive, goal￾seeking system, 41
informational resources (Ri
), 16
intelligent designer, Maxwell giving demon 
all required knowledge a priori, 21, 143, 
149
living organisms, compared, 18–20
open environment, 17, 18, 143
physical resources (Rp
), 16
Schrödinger’s supplementary question, 17, 
18, 143, 147
second law of thermodynamics, 17, 143
Mayr, Ernst, 212386 Index
Mayr’s distinction (“How” questions/“Why 
questions”), 212, 223
Meaning, 42–46
Meaningful information, 149, 176. See also
Adaptive know-how (Ri
)
Meaning of life, 331–334
Measles, 219
Mediational niche construction, 337n8
Mega-faunal extinctions, 169
Memory, 43, 113, 115, 117
gene-based, 12, 146, 202
genetic, 13, 114, 118
levels of knowledge-gaining processes,
346n8
Memory trace, 117
Mendel, Gregor, 267
Mendel’s law of inheritance, 12
Metabolic activities of organisms, 9
Metazoan organisms
collections of cells, 346n6
eukaryotic cellular structure, 119, 191
evolutionary change, 234–235
mitochondria, 260, 327
shared fate, 279
Methane, 145
Methanogens, 145
Michrohodotermes viator, 100, 101
Microbial mat, 191
Microtubular system, 198
Migrating animals, 69–70, 92
Minus-minus relationship, 125, 254
Mitchell, Peter, 179, 180
Mitochondrial DNA, 266, 267
Modern synthesis theory, 12, 214. See also
Extending the synthesis
Molecular biology, 217, 234, 323
Molecular evolution, 189
Monomers, 187
Moon, 244
Morse code, 37
Mountains, 175
Multilevel selection theory, 278
Mutations, 27
Mutualistic relationship, 125, 184, 255–256
Mutually assured destruction (MAD), 292, 
297
Nagasaki, 292
Naked mole rats, 299
Natural automata, 28–31, 146–149
Natural selection
abiotic systems, 254, 270
biasing inheritance, 215
biasing mutations, 214
biotic sources, 254
blind and purposeless process, 20, 109
consistently reoccurring natural selection
pressures vs. inconsistent natural
selection processes, 117
density-dependent selection, 317
dif­ferent kinds of natural selection
pressures due to their dif­ferent origins,
121
earthworm/edaphic soil horizons, 104
failing to detect causal relations occurring 
on scales shorter than a generation, 128
favoring organisms that choose or modify 
environments in which their offspring 
develop, 23
favoring organisms that partly determine 
their own environment, 23
“God delusion,” 155
informing evolving populations directly, 
23–24
informing individual organisms in 
populations only indirectly, 23, 24–25
informing organisms with know-how (Ri
) 
that was adaptive in the past, 21
limitations, 20, 23
niche construction, 270
origin of life, 181
primary source of adaptive know-how, 20
quality control, 30
second law of thermodynamics, 271387 Index
sorting between fit and unfit individual 
organisms, 118
source of adaptations of various species of
organisms, 155
standard evolutionary theory (SET), 73, 
270
supplementary information-gaining pro￾cesses, 87
unmodified pressures vs. pressures modified 
by active purposeful agency, 238
Nature-nurture problem, 209, 211
Nazis, 228, 292
NCT. See Niche construction theory (NCT)
Negative entropy (Negentropy), 11, 12, 240
Negative interactions, 208, 209
Nematode worm, 53
Neo-Darwinism. See also Standard 
evolutionary theory (SET)
acquired characteristics of individual 
organisms not affecting subsequent 
evolution, 49, 51
autonomous natural selection pressures, 45
fear of God, 282
generation of variety of populations, 214
Lamarckism, 49
not attributing capacity to survive to active, 
purposeful agency of organisms, 32
not describing evolution as knowledge￾making process, 32
orthodox evolutionary theory, 13, 32 
(see also Orthodox evolutionary theory)
population genetics, 64–65
Nest (nest building), 23, 84, 123, 133, 165, 
176
Neural degenerative diseases, 268
Newton, Isaac, 8
Newtonian mechanics, 155, 156
Niche construction, 9. See also Niche 
construction theory (NCT)
by-product, 28
choice, 276
counteractive, 85, 104, 105, 123
genetic inheritance, 58
heuristic, 132–137
Hutchisonian niche, 97
inceptive, 104, 105, 144–145
natural selection, 270
origin of life, 189–194
perturbational, 84
relocation, 223, 315
standard evolutionary theory (SET), 241, 
298
start-up niche, 98
term “niche construction” coined by 
author, 237
Niche Construction (Odling-Smee)
author’s limitations, 178
book being inspired by Schrödinger’s 
“What is life?” question, 333
chapter map, 32–33
purposeful agency of organisms playing 
central role in evolution, 32
Niche construction theory (NCT). See also
Niche construction
adaptations depending on both natu￾ral selection and niche construction 
activities, 69, 70
biasing inheritances of later generations
by contributing more than genes to 
descendants, 89
controlling adaptations on basis of Ri
that is derived from individual past 
experiences and developmental histories, 
87
current generations modified by niche￾constructing activities of ancestors, 74
ecological inheritance (see Ecological 
inheritance)
empirical sciences being form of 
sociocultural niche construction, 116
energy component and genetic component,
58
environmentally mediated genotypic 
associations (EMGAs), 238388 Index
Niche construction theory (NCT) (cont.)
evolutionary theory being about organism￾environment coevolution, 70
first biotic-by-abiotic interactions, 245
forerunner for future universal theory of 
evolution, 172
knowledge-gaining capabilities that
allow organisms to improve their fit to 
environment, 74
niche construction being central aspect of 
process of adaptation, 84, 85
orderliness, 241
organism-environment coevolution, 281
relativistic reference device, 158
self-control of inductive gambles, 86
supplementary inheritances, 90
supplementary knowledge-gaining pro￾cesses, 89
two-way-street interactive niche 
relationships, 241
Niche inheritance, 25, 288
Niche management game. See Adaptive niche 
management game
Nitrification, 249
Nitrogen cycle, 249
Noise, 199
Noncoding RNA, 265
Nonergodic evolutionary process, 145
Nonexcludable goods, 310
Nongenetic inheritance systems, 263,
266–269
Nonrivalrous goods, 309
Novel change, 144–145
Novel environmental event, 85
Novel genetic mutations and recombinations, 
215, 216
Nuclear DNA, 266, 267
Nuclear war, 292–301
Nurse, Paul, 327
Obligatory epigenetic process, 264
Occam’s razor, 257
Odling-Smee, John, 178. See also Niche 
Construction (Odling-Smee)
Oil, 312
One cause/two effects dilemma, 284–285
O’Neill, Robert, 235
On the Origin of Species (Darwin), 155, 233, 
271
Open environment, 17, 18, 143
Opportunistic niche construction, 50, 
144–145, 168
Opportunity costs, 106
Orangutans, 132
Order, 12
Order for free, 187, 244
Orderliness, 241
Order of Time, The (Ravelli), 13
Organism-environment coevolution
evolution, 143, 172, 242, 260
Lewontin, Richard, 242, 260
more comprehensive theory of evolution, 
289
niche construction theory (NCT), 281
relativism, 156, 158
standard evolutionary theory (SET), 
281
universal theory of evolution, 172
Organisms
active, purposeful, goal-seeking agents in
their own evolution, 5, 31
adaptations allowing them to perceive or 
sense their environments, 81
adapting to multiple selection pressures 
simultaneously at each place and
moment during their lives, 82
“design” to their environments, 67
determining their own futures, 137
dynamic kinetic stability (DKS), 9
external environments, 21–22
fundamental purposes of living organisms, 
81
interactions between abiota and organisms, 
122–124389 Index
interactions between purposeful living 
organisms, 124–126
Maxwell’s demon, compared, 18–20
meaningful information, 10
mortality of living beings, 145
natural automata, compared, 30–31
niche-constructing activities, 9
not evading laws of physics and chemistry, 
31–32
protecting essential variables by using 
combinations of adaptive gambles and
chance-based mutations, 81
remembering something about ancestors’ 
interactions with past environments, 
113
resources high in free energy, 9
Rp
 and Ri, required, 176
second law of thermodynamics, 9, 42, 176
Organism variety (VO), 82. See also VO
Organ transplant technology, 217
Origin of life, 175–194
antiporter molecule, 181, 182
biotic-by-abiotic interactions/biotic-by￾biotic interactions, 245
chemiosmosis, 180, 186
combinatorial selection, 189
complexification, 184, 193
Darwin’s warm little pond hypothesis,
186–189, 194
deep-sea hydrothermal vent hypothesis, 
179–186, 192, 194
hypercycle, 183
kinetic trap, 178, 179, 189
niche construction, 189–194
Panspermia hypothesis, 177–178
prebiotic evolutionary process, 189
protocells, 179, 192, 193
proton motive force, 180, 185
redox chemistry, 180
replicative chemistry, 182
stromatolites, 190–191
three paramount requirements, 273–276
wet-dry (wet-moist-dry) cycle, 186–189
“Which came first?” dilemma, 185, 194
Orthodox evolutionary theory, 298. See also
Neo-Darwinism; Standard evolutionary 
theory (SET)
bioenergetics of life problem, 13
bioinformatics of life problem, 13
explaining how life got started, 3
interactions between bioenergetic and 
bioinformatics requirements of life, 13
supplementary information-gaining pro￾cesses, 32
Overpopulation (population overshoot), 
308–321
Ovipositing insects, 133
Oxygen
construction of new molecules, 164
ecological inheritance, 27–28
metabolism, 101
production of, by cyanobacteria, 28, 163, 
169, 170
rich source of energy, 163, 344n51
very efficient source of energy, 163
Oxygen epoch, 162, 259, 260
Pacific lionfish, 127
Paleobiology, 122, 166, 167, 169, 310
Paley, William, 67, 284
Panspermia hypothesis, 177–178
Papua New Guinea, 208, 268
Parent-offspring similarity, 350n4
Past developmental experiences, 202, 221
Pastoralist communities, 225–226
Pathogen, 218, 219
Permian era, 170
Permian mass extinction, 166, 167
Perseverance Mars Rover, 88–89
Perturbational niche construction, 84, 223
Pesticide/herbicide, 305, 317
Pesticides, 209
Phagocytosis, 256
Phenotypes, 261–262390 Index
Phenotypic modifications, 49
Phenotypic plasticity, 263, 264
Phenotypic variability, 129–131
Pheromone trails, 204
Photosynthesizing organism, 310
Physical resources (Rp
)
fitness of organisms, 161
Maxwell’s demon, 16
one of fundamental resources that 
organisms need to live, 149, 176
Rp
-Ri
 dilemmas (see Rp
-Ri
 relationship)
work required by humans, 68
Physics, 323
Physics envy, 282
Phytophagous insects, 98
PIM3 gene, 267
Pittendrigh’s teleonomy, 287
Planck, Max, 54
Planck’s constant, 54
Planting crops, 127
Plastic developmental response, 263
Plasticity-led evolution, 209
Plotkin, Henry, 216
Plural inheritance system, 268
Plus-minus relationship, 125, 256
Plus-plus relationship, 125, 255
Polymers, 187, 189
Popper, Karl, 227
Population biology, 61
Population-genetic evolution
animal learning, 211
bootstrapping, 214–215, 288
level 1 evolutionary processes, 293
recursive evolutionary algorithm, 216
Population genetics, 64–65, 200
Population-level genome, 200
Population overshoot (overpopulation), 
308–321
Positive interactions, 209
Power science, 322, 323
Prebiotic evolutionary process, 189
Pre-Cambrian mass extinctions, 167
Predator-prey relationships, 125, 256
Principle of Geology, The (Lyell), 68
Prion-related diseases, 266
Process-functional ecology, 235
Progenote, 188
Prokaryote-eukaryote transitions, 152, 162, 
191, 276–277, 326–327
Pross, Addy, 136, 137, 183, 184
Protocell, 179, 192, 193, 274, 275
Protoniche construction, 189, 190, 192, 193
Proton motive force, 180, 185, 274
Punctuate equilibrium, 272
Punishment, 220, 221, 223
Purpose, 281–286
Purposeful, abiotic life, 176
Purposeless, 244
Purposive (purposeful) system, 42, 175
Quantitative genetics, 349n4
Quantum computer, 337n21
Quantum mechanics, 333
Quantum physics, 53–55
Quasi-aperiodic crystal, 13
Qubits, 53–55
Rabbit, 74
Radiator, 83
Radioactive entities, 111
Rainfall, 123, 247
Random genetic mutations, 129–130, 146
Rappaport, Anatol, 75
Recipe, 204
Recursive evolutionary algorithm, 215–216, 
226
Red giant, 245
Redox chemistry, 180
Reed warbler, 249
Reference device problem, 153
Reinforcement, 220, 223
Relatedness, 338n25
Relativistic reference device, 158
Relativistic theory, 156391 Index
Religious beliefs, 329–331
Relocation, 223, 315
Replicative chemistry, 136, 183
Reproduction, 145–149
adaptive know-how (Ri
), 184
classical component of fitness, 26
elementary kind of niche construction, 
247, 275
modifying selective environments of 
organisms, 183
natural automata, 29
sexual, 31
Reproductive component of fitness, 58
Restless Clock, The (Riskin), 282
Revised logistic growth equation, 315, 318
Reward, 220, 221, 223
Rhesus monkey, 208
Ri
. See Adaptive know-how (Ri
)
Riskin, Jessica, 282
Rivalrous goods, 309
Road building, 127
Robot-environment (Rob-E) interactions, 
230
Rocks, 122, 175
Rock tides, 244
Romer, Paul Michael, 309, 310
Rp
. See Physical resources (Rp
)
Rp
-Ri
 relationship
abiotic vs. biotic sources of selection,
254
adaptive synchrony between Rp
 and Ri
, 
167, 171–172
asymmetry between Rp
 and Ri
 requirements 
of organisms, 27
basic points of the relationship, 161
bootstrapping, 213–214
evolutionary transitions, 161
evolution of ecosystems, 258
importance, 160–161
interaction between Rp
 and Ri
 over time, 
58
rules, 252–258
threatening ongoing evolution of a species, 
168
“Which came first” dilemma, 172, 
176–177, 251
r-selected organisms, 126–127
Russell, Bertrand, 322
Russell, Michael, 179
Saltatory evolutionary events, 272
Same-sex marriage, 299
Scent marks, 132, 204
Schrödinger, Erwin
bioenergetics of life problem, 11
bioinformatics of life problem, 12
biology vs. physics, 248–249, 282
epilogue to 1944 book, 333–334
genetic memories, 13
“Mind and Matter,” 333
negative entropy, 240, 250
Schrödinger’s cat, 53–54
Schrödinger’s equation, 53, 54–55
subordinate question (see Schrödinger’s 
supplementary question)
two outstanding problems that biologists
have to solve, 8–9
universal theory of evolution, 342n12
wave function, 54
What Is Life?, 4, 71, 150
“What is life?” question, 11, 333
Schrödinger’s supplementary question
biology vs. physics, 248–249
content of supplementary question, 4
Maxwell’s demon, 147
Part I of text, 32
relevance of supplementary question, 140
universal theory of evolution, 342n12
von Neumann’s natural automata, 147
Science
Darwinian algorithm of generating 
hypotheses, 227
example of knowledge-gaining process, 204
power, 322, 323392 Index
Science (cont.)
recursive evolutionary algorithm, 227
religious beliefs, 329–331
source of new information, 326
understanding, 322, 323, 325–327
Science fiction writers, 148, 176
Scientific experiments, 116
Scientific hypotheses, 116, 227
Scientific theories, 116, 227
Seasonal changes, 120
Seasonal migrating animals, 61
Seaweed, 269
Second law of thermodynamics. See also Laws 
of thermodynamics
abiotic-by-abiotic interactions, 245
abiotic systems, 270
active, purposeful physical work, 213
adaptation, 107
artificial life, 230
complex or improbable evolving 
populations, 271
dead organic matter (DOM), 270
ecosystems, 301
entropy, 4
greater thermodynamic efficiency, 135, 136
inanimate objects, 4
including measure of temperature, 38
lower-entropy states to higher-entropy 
states, 250
Maxwell’s demon, 17, 143
natural selection, 271
opposing second law without violating it, 
9, 42
processes of evolution, 288
resisting second law by risking future 
survival, 311
satisfying demands of second law in ways 
that allow organisms to survive, 330
Sun, 18
thermodynamic equilibrium, 68
traveling in opposite direction, toward dif￾ferent “attractor,” 136
universe traveling from less probable state 
to more probable state, 6
universe traveling toward state of greater 
disorder, 3
Selective breeding, 323
Self-awareness, 327
Self-controlling systems, 86–87
Selfish Gene, The (Dawkins), 262
Selfish gene approach to evolution, 300
Semantic information, 55–59
Separate fate natural selection, 278
Sequoia trees, 26
SET. See Standard evolutionary theory (SET)
Sex, 130
Sexual reproduction, 31, 130, 146, 215
Sexual violence, 299
Shannon, Betty, 35–36
Shannon, Claude, 38. See also Shannon’s 
communication theory
Shannon’s communication theory, 35–41
application to both evolutionary and 
learning processes, 48, 49, 51
bioinformatics of evolution, 51
entropy, 52
evolutionary process, 46
maze, 39
messages transmitted to receivers who are 
in later versions of themselves, 61, 64
a priori/a posteriori mouse, 41
redundancy, 38
social learning, 42
Theseus, 36–41
turning mouse into purposive, goal-seeking
system, 41
“turtle,” 36
von Neumann, John, 38
Shared fate natural selection, 278
Shell beds, 234
Shoal of fish vs. individual fish/sensitivity to 
gradients of light, 92
Signals, 199
Signal-to-noise (S/N) ratio, 37, 121393 Index
Skinner, B. F., 222
Skinner box, 50, 221–222
Slash-and-burn agriculture, 268
Slobodkin, Lawrence, 75
“Snowball Earth” mass extinction, 167
Social insects, 92
Social learning, 41–43, 47–48, 224–227, 
336n4
Social sciences, 300
Solow, Robert, 309
Southern African harvester termite, 100, 101
Spaniel, 24
Specialist species, 311
Specialization vs. generalization, 338n28
Species, 344n61
Spinoza, Baruch, 329
Stabilizing selection, 234
Standard evolutionary theory (SET). See 
also Neo-Darwinism; Orthodox 
evolutionary theory
abiota, 236
all core assumptions of SET in need of 
revising, 288
apparent purposefulness of organisms 
being mirage or irrelevancy, 153
bioinformatics vs. bioinformatics and 
bioenergetics in combination, 151
bootstrapping, 197, 346n2
extending the theory (see Extending the 
synthesis)
externalism, 154
inclusive fitness theory, 91
Lamarckian inheritance, 263
limitations/shortcomings, 197–208, 
211–213
natural selection, 73, 270
niche construction, 241, 298
not recognizing niche construction as cause 
of evolution, 69, 343n15
not recognizing relevance of laws of 
thermodynamics to biological evolution, 
150
phenotypes, 261–262
phenotypic traits, 281
philosophical and historical overview, 
154–156
reference device problem, 153
shortcomings/limitations, 150–156
supplementary knowledge gain, 89
universal theory of evolution, 150, 152, 
156
Static universe, 112, 113
Stromatolite bacterial mats, 255
Stromatolites, 190–191
Subprocesses of adaptive evolution, 214–215, 
217, 220, 275
Subprocesses of evolution, 229
Substructures, 296
Sun
external source of energy (Rp
), 18, 259
geophysical activity, 244
infinite source of energy, 166
laws of thermodynamics, 4, 18
red giant, 245
Sunshine epoch, 162, 259
Superorganism, 92–93
Superposition, 54
Supplementary fitness goal, 129, 135
Supplementary information-gaining pro￾cesses. See also Adaptive know-how 
(Ri
)
adaptive immunity, 131
allowing organisms to remember their own 
past interactive experiences, 144
capacity to learn, 131
deductive Ri
, 88
evolutionary origin, 65 (see also Evolution 
of supplementary information-gaining
processes)
natural selection, 87
niche construction theory (NCT), 89
orthodox evolutionary theory, 32
supplementary Ri
-gaining processes, 128
Supplementary inheritances, 89–90394 Index
Supplementary knowledge-gaining processes. 
See Supplementary information-gaining
processes
Surprise, 221
Survival, 25
Swallows, 84
Swifts, 84
Synerg, 75, 97
T-cells, 218
Tegmark, Max, 195, 196, 213, 228–231, 
333
Teleology, 286–287
Teleonomy, 286–287
Telescope, 243, 325
10 percent rule, 303
Termite mounds, 23, 134
Termite nest, 92
Termites, 92, 99–101, 159
Terns, 84
Tetrapods, 272–273
Theory of Heat (Maxwell), 14
Thermodynamic equilibrium, 68, 111
Thermodynamics. See Laws of 
thermodynamics
Theseus, 36–41
Third law of thermodynamics, 287
Thorndike, Edward, 222
Time scales, 199
Titanic, 4
Toadflax, 265
Tracks and trails, 132
Trial-and-error information gaining process, 
129
Trophic pyramid, 164, 258–259, 302–303
Turing, Alan, 29
Turing machine, 29, 147
Turner, Scott, 99, 101, 102, 105, 134
Turnstile molecule, 181
“Turtle,” 36
Turtles, 26
Two-person game, 339n12
Two-way interactive niche relationship, 182
Two-way-street interactions, 142, 241, 246, 
258, 260
Ulam, Stanislaw, 28
Understanding science, 322, 323, 325–327
United Nations, 300
Universal computer, 29, 147
Universal constructor, 28, 29, 147
Universal controller, 28–30
Universal copier, 28, 30, 147
Universal theory of evolution
Maxwell’s demon, 149
must life anywhere else in universe be same 
as life on Earth?, 147
niche construction theory (NCT), 161, 172
organism-environment coevolution, 172
Schrödinger, Erwin, 342n12
standard evolutionary theory (SET), 150, 
152, 156
von Neumann’s automata, 149
Vacuole-protein genes, 26
VE, 82, 118, 129–131
Vertebrate genomes, 219
Vertebrate immune system, 217–220
Vertebrate vascular and muscular systems, 198
Viruses, 256
Vital Question, The (Lane), 179
VO, 82, 118, 129–131
VO-E, 159, 160, 1660
Volcanism, 244
von Neumann, John
author of equation that described entropy 
in physical systems, 38
comparing human brain to conventional 
computer, 337n21
natural automata, 28–31, 146–149
Shannon, Claude, 38
Waddington, Conrad, 107, 110, 137, 158
Walsh, Dennis, 284, 336n8395 Index
Warfare, 297
Warm little pond hypothesis, 186–189, 193,
194
Wasps, 92
Watson, James, 13, 30
Watson, Richard, 257
Wave function, 54
Webs, 133
Weinberg, Stephen, 244
Weismann, August, 212
Weismann barrier, 212
Wet-dry (wet-moist-dry) cycle, 186–189
What Is Life? (Schrödinger), 4, 71, 150
What Is Life? How Chemistry Becomes Biology
(Pross), 136
What Is Life? Understanding Biology in Five 
Steps (Nurse), 327
Wheeler, John, 39
“Which came first?” dilemma, 185, 194
“Who eats whom?” question, 164, 258
Within-group cooperative alliances, 294
Within-lifetime acquired characteristics, 49
Woese, Carl, 188
World beyond Physics, A (Kauffman), 13
Writing, 205, 224
Yellowstone National Park, 186
Zane, Peder, 250
