Praise for No Bullsh*t Change:
‘A punchy, practical and inspiring guide for all leaders who wish to
transform and grow their team or organisation’
Justine Roberts, founder and CEO of Mumsnet ‘No Bullsh*t Change
challenges the status quo and uproots entrenched ideas of what leadership
looks like. Chris Hirst offers a bold and inspiring vision of what the future
of business can and should be. We are entering a new era of business where
consumers are demanding more, and where the leaders who understand this
will be the ones whose companies not only survive but also thrive. No
Bullsh*t Change offers clear tools on how to do this’
June Sarpong
‘A practical and authoritative guide – perfect for our complicated times’
Nicholas Hytner, artistic director and founder of the Bridge Theatre ‘I’ve
seen countless business leaders with fantastic pedigrees make career￾defining mistakes when managing change in a business. Chris’s book
provides the sort of leadership lessons and actionable advice that will prove
invaluable to the next generation of business leaders’
Andy Silvester, editor of City A.M.
‘I highly recommend this book to anyone looking for an inspiring and
thought-provoking read. The author’s personal experiences and insights
bring a unique perspective to the topic at hand and make for a truly
engaging read. This is a book from somebody who has truly been there and
done it, and it shows in the depth and authenticity’
Jack Parsons, CEO of Youth Group
‘Not only does Chris Hirst have the experience of leading a remarkable
turnaround, he has the wisdom to understand why it worked. This book
issues a rallying cry for leaders burdened by permacrisis to take control of
their future. As Hirst writes, “if in doubt, do”’
Kate Magee, editor of Management Today‘There are many books about leading change. You may recoil at the thought
of yet another one. Don’t. This book is an easy read, offering simple,
pragmatic and achievable prompts. Whether you be novice or expert in the
subject, you will find insight throughout its pages’
General Sir Chris Deverell
‘Highlighter pens to the ready – practical, plain-speaking and
unputdownable guide to inspire you to make change a reality’
Katie Vanneck-Smith, CEO of Hearst UK
‘An excellent guide to real-world leadership. Perfect for our turbulent time’
Anthony Scaramucci, founder of Skybridge Capital and former White
House Director of Communications ‘Clear, punchy, practical and very
enjoyable’
Philip Collins, speechwriter, author and entrepreneur ‘This book tells me so
many things I wish I’d known before. Clear and witty, Chris Hirst brings his
experience and insight to the task of leadership in a world changing at a
startling pace. He is the ultimate No Bullsh*t Merchant’
John Kampfner, author of Why the Germans Do It Better
Praise for No Bullsh*t Leadership:
‘A punchy, plainly written guide, offering a readable and enlightened view
of what leaders do and how they should do it’
Financial Times
‘A new rubric on leadership’
Evening Standard
‘A brilliant set of leadership tools that will help you succeed whatever your
goal’
Sir Clive Woodward‘Gets to the point of crucial leadership challenges in a simple and engaging
way – it’s rare to find a book that does this so beautifully. Yes, it’s no
bullshit, but it’s also really elegant in its directness and uses beautiful
stories to illustrate the points’
The Business Book Awards JudgesChris Hirst has spent over a decade in CEO positions, including as Global CEO for Havas Creative
Group. Once an engineering graduate working in a glass factory, his career path has taken him to the
boardroom via Harvard Business School. Named in the Evening Standard’s Progress 1000 list and
ranked one of the industry’s most influential CEOs, Chris is a regular commentator in national and
international press including BBC News, The Politics Show, the Evening Standard, CNBC, the
Financial Times and Sky News. He also hosts the Intelligence Squared No Bullsh*t Leadership
podcast. His book No Bullsh*t Leadership won Best Business Book of the Year 2020: Leadership for
the Future, at the Business Book Awards. Visit his website www.chris-hirst.com for training, podcast,
blogs and speaking. Follow him on Twitter @chrishirst.No Bullsh*t Change
An 8 Step Guide for Leaders
Chris HirstFirst published in Great Britain in 2023 by Profile Books Ltd
29 Cloth Fair
London
EC1A 7JQ
www.profilebooks.com
Copyright © Chris Hirst, 2023
1 3 5 7 9 10 8 6 4 2
Typeset by CC Book Production The moral right of the author has been asserted.
All rights reserved.
Without limiting the rights under copyright reserved above, no part of this publication may be
reproduced, stored or introduced into a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means
(electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise), without the prior written permission
of both the copyright owner and the publisher of this book.
A CIP catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
ISBN 978 1 80081 569 8
eISBN 978 1 80081 571 1To DadCONTENTS
Introduction
1. Baseline
2. Communication
3. Objective
4. Breaking Free
5. Teams
6. Schwerpunkt
7. Culture
8. OODA
CodaINTRODUCTION
To lead change, you must be able to achieve effective
results in constantly changing environments, against
unpredictable forces with imperfect information.
There is nothing more difficult to take in hand, more perilous to
conduct or more uncertain in its success than to take the lead in
the introduction of a new order of things.
Niccolò Machiavelli
HOW SHOULD WE RESPOND when the unimaginable happens?
On 28 February 2020, I was in the back of a taxi in Mumbai on my way
to speak at a conference. I was last on, a little nervous, and I’d had less time
than usual to prepare. Habitually, in such a situation I would sit in silence
and remind myself of the key points I wanted to hit, but this time I didn’t
have the opportunity. For the whole hour my companions and I talked
breathlessly of a mysterious new disease that was racing across the world.
Surely it couldn’t be as serious as was claimed, or as contagious, or as
difficult to contain. Surely it would come and go like so many other crises
we’d known through our lives – storms that appeared on the horizon but
blew quickly by. We drew comfort from familiarity – everything looked
normal, nothing had changed, it would all be fine.
The conference came and went, as they do. The room was large,
windowless, airless and full. The hotel lobby teemed with people; the bar
and buffet afterwards full of jostling delegates. From there we went straight
to the packed airport terminal and hunted for seats in the lounge, all thewhile looking around with wide eyes – noticing, as if for the first time, the
sheer enormity and proximity of humanity. Unbeknown to us, the tectonic
plates had already split and rendered, the world irrevocably altered. The
shock just hadn’t reached us yet.
At whatever point in the future you read these words, one thing is for
certain: never again will we unthinkingly assume that the near future, never
mind the distant, will look mostly indistinguishable from the near past.
Leading change is the leader’s ultimate test. During the pandemic we
experienced the impact of those leaders able to rise to the challenge and the
consequences of those who were not.
All leadership is about change, but in this book we will consider the
specific circumstance when the fundamentals of the existing order are, or
must be, upended. In this context, leading change is not, certainly not
initially, a process of steady, measured progress, but should be considered
little short of a revolution, approached with all the urgency, zeal and clarity
that that description implies.
Successful change programmes are not, as often portrayed, activities
pursued in splendid isolation like an academic exercise. To succeed, leaders
must be able to achieve effective results in constantly changing
environments, against unpredictable forces, with imperfect information.
Many of the most significant factors a leader must contend with will be
beyond their control, from macro-economic pressures and geo-politics to
the responses of competitors and even sometimes employees. Leading
change requires that leaders both respond effectively to those factors
beyond their control and mould those that are within.
Dreadnoughts and valves
All leaders at some point will be faced with a circumstance where the
methods, tools and thinking that had proved successful thus far can no
longer be relied upon to succeed in the future. This point of inflexion is one
of great challenge. For many, the greatest hurdle, at least initially, is in
overcoming the cognitive dissonance of this circumstance: outwardly all
may seem as it did yesterday, as it did last year, yet clouds gather on a
horizon that had previously been sun-bleached blue. Perhaps, many silently
hope, it will blow past.In 1906, the Royal Navy launched one of the most revolutionary ships
ever built, so much so that its very name, HMS Dreadnought, became
synonymous with an entirely new breed of huge and awe-inspiring
machine. The Dreadnought brought together for the first time an entire
range of revolutionary technologies, from steam turbine engines to all-steel
construction, and much more besides. However, her inception had posed a
terrible dilemma for their Lordships of the Admiralty.
Only a year earlier, Britain had celebrated the hundredth anniversary of
the Battle of Trafalgar, where its most feted son, Admiral Nelson, had
defeated a Napoleonic fleet, heralding a century of global dominance.
Through the intervening years, the British had held on to their top-dog
position through an uncomplicated, yet expensive expedient, one they
called the ‘two-power standard’. This dictated that they must maintain a
naval fleet of a size at least as large as that of the next two biggest powers
combined. By 1906, that was a lot of ships, and had cost a lot of money.
The Dreadnought represented a technological leap equivalent to that
between propeller and jet. From the moment that King Edward VII smashed
the wine bottle on its prow and the behemoth slid into Portsmouth Sound all
existing battleships in the world were rendered obsolete. However, Britain’s
adversaries, though awed, were unlikely to be cowed.
Every action stimulates a reaction; every reaction demands a response.
Their Lordships’ dilemma had been that, though they may have moved first,
where they trod others would surely race to follow. And the first
consequence of their decisiveness? They now possessed more obsolete
battleships than anybody else. HMS Dreadnought represented the start of a
new era, and they had at that instant a total superiority over their opponents
of just one.
The Admiralty, faced with the potential erosion of their position through
technological change, opted for pre-emption, deciding that they must take
control and act rather than allow external circumstances to dictate to them.
If revolutionary change was coming, they reasoned, better to be in its
vanguard than baggage car. Yet the decision, easy with hindsight, was far
from it at the time. HMS Dreadnought represented the instantaneous
erasure not simply of an old technology (wooden-sided, sail-powered
fighting ships), but the entire training, staffing, procurement, strategy and
fighting doctrine of the Royal Navy. The launch of the Dreadnought was
nothing short of the end of Nelson’s Royal Navy and the beginning of oneentirely new, though with a consequently far less certain and pre-ordained
future. Their Lordships, in their own way, had initiated a revolution,
something that, in the ordinary run of affairs, cossetted in their Mayfair
clubs, they very much frowned upon.
In the 1960s, electronic machines ran on valves. These look to us today a
little like the oval lightbulbs found above the bars of modish Soho watering
holes (New York or London – take your pick). The electronic valve industry
was huge, but increasingly threatened by the new disruptive technology of
the silicon transistor (which evolved into what we now know as the
microchip). The leading valve manufacturers weren’t dumb – far from it.
Like the Royal Navy, they saw change coming, but reached a different
conclusion. Rather than revolutionary change, they chose evolution. After
all, they reasoned, embracing the transistor was a perilous, fraught and
dangerous undertaking, one far from certain to succeed, and with
unknowable future prospects. Such a pivot would erase all they had up to
that point created.
In their chosen strategy, they were, by one measure, very successful. At
the point where the entire industry disappeared (almost overnight) they
were producing the smallest and fastest valves they’d ever made. Becoming
better and better at what they had always done was a highway to oblivion.
They were building fabulous sailing ships while the world wanted
Dreadnoughts.
For leaders, the catalyst for change can be reactive, such as responding
to the pandemic or technological innovation (the test faced and failed by the
valve manufacturers). Or it can be proactive, a revolution of their own
making, such as that instigated by the Royal Navy. More commonly it will
be something of both push and pull. Ideally, as a leader you would be able
to manage and control events, choose your own moment to act. Yet, as we
know, the real world rarely affords such a luxury.
The need for change is often obvious with hindsight, but making the leap
from status quo to reinvention is rarely easy. Many leaders find themselves
in situations analogous to those discussed yet fail to grasp the urgency of
the need. They are like the proverbial frog in warming water, failing to
notice the incremental deterioration of their situation until it is too late. Or,
more commonly, they see the signs but lack the clarity, determination or
courage to act. The warming water is, after all, comfortable. Until the very
end.Those organisations that saw the danger but failed to act, or acted and
failed anyway, are legion; many of them household names. In 2009, I
worked with Nokia, then far and away the world’s largest and most
successful mobile phone manufacturer. It is easy now to forget that they
were the poster child of the mobile revolution, a genuinely loved and
aspirational brand. In one meeting we raised with them the possible threat
of the Apple iPhone (launched eighteen months earlier), then a super￾premium product. Though Nokia had been one of the first to develop
touchscreen technology, they dismissed the iPhone as a premium niche: ‘we
sell more handsets in a day than they do in a year,’ they boasted. The
internal inertia – cultural, contextual and financial – was just too great to
overcome. What began as a failure of imagination ended as a failure of their
business. By 2012, they faced bankruptcy.
Some examples we can consider in contrasting pairs. Blockbuster Video,
once on every British high street, rented out its final DVD in 2010, yet a
close contemporary, Netflix, shifted from postal DVD delivery to online
delivery and ultimately to the vanguard of a global revolution in not simply
content distribution (where, like Blockbuster, they began) but creation. For
Blockbuster, read valves; for Netflix, Dreadnoughts.
Failure to act guarantees failure
These and many others are examples not of businesses that failed because
their product or brand was poor – in many cases they remain, even today,
very well-known. They failed because, though they saw the threat, they
were unable or unwilling to act.
Leaders in all roles and at all levels are assailed from without and within
by reasons (often good reasons) why they should do nothing, to stick with
the status quo, the most compelling often being the risk and uncertainty that
change inevitably brings. However, the surest guarantee of failure is the
failure to act; their faltering first steps foreshadow their eventual defeat.
Too many leaders never really begin at all. They meet the fork in the
path and choose that which is more familiar and seemingly safer. Many tell
themselves that of course change is needed, just not today. They opt instead
for what they know – to make better and better valves, or faster and faster
sailing ships.All leaders, at one time or another, find themselves at this point of
inflexion: status quo or revolution.
Status quo because most of what you have done and known in the past
will continue to serve you well into the medium future. For all leaders, most
of their time is spent here. Nobody, no matter what they claim in their TED
Talks, can exist in a state of permanent revolutionary change.
Revolution because sometimes a slightly better, faster, smaller version
of the status quo won’t do. Because the behaviours, culture, process and
thinking that have served to this point are no longer fit for purpose.
Revolution because your greatest certainty is simply that the past can no
longer serve as your guide. All leaders must at one time or another face up
to this sometimes startling reality. Leading change is their greatest and yet
most rewarding test.
Overcoming the warm inertia of the status quo is the leader’s first battle.
Leadership is primarily the act of influencing the behaviour and
performance of others, but leading change begins with you. First, you must
be convinced of the need to change. Hesitation is understandable,
impulsivity to be resisted.
The consequent demand for those who can effect meaningful change has
never been greater. The best, and the teams or organisations they lead, will
grasp these opportunities rather than wilt before them. This ability, in an
ever-shifting world, to steer your own course is the ultimate route to
personal and professional fulfilment and, dare I say, happiness.
A story of change
For the past fifteen years I have been responsible for leading, advising and
ultimately transforming hundreds of businesses, big and small, on every
continent. In 2019, I wrote a book about what I’d learnt.
In the early part of the century, I was hired as part of a new change
management team tasked with turning round a dull, dying business, by
general consensus considered unfixable. I was the Managing Director, No. 2
to the CEO. He was the brightest and most exciting star of his generation. I
and my new colleagues considered ourselves to be an unbeatable team,
reassured by our collective expertise, experience and confidence. The
business may be unfixable, but we knew we couldn’t fail. Except we did.Within six months the CEO who had hired us had gone. Within twelve
months the new team had begun to shatter, and by twenty-four months there
were few of us left. Over the next four years new CEOs came and went, but
the business stayed stubbornly unchanged, its gradual decline unabated. By
2009, after six years as Managing Director, once part of the solution, I had
become part of the problem. I believed, with good reason, that I had
screwed my once promising career. It had been a salutary and painful
lesson, a case study in how not to do it. How simply being talented isn’t
enough. How nemesis follows hubris.
At length and perhaps somewhat too late, I decided that I must take my
future into my own hands. If I was no longer part of the solution, then I
would have to start afresh. It almost didn’t matter where; perhaps I would
leave the industry altogether. It was a scary prospect. By now I had a young
family, a mortgage and all the other responsibilities that freight our
decisions and incentivise inertia.
Then, suddenly, a piece of luck. I found myself with a new boss, who
unexpectedly offered me the opportunity to take charge. The question was,
could I take it? After six years of failure, could we fix the unfixable?
I found myself as CEO with little thought of what the role demanded.
However, I was determined of one thing above all others: that I would make
the best possible use of the one resource I had – my six years of failure. I
had seen first-hand how to fail at the task that now lay before me. From this
I drew three important lessons that would provide the energy to fuel our
new beginning:
1. Leading change is a team sport
I couldn’t do it alone. We needed a close team at the top if we wanted to
build a high-performing organisation.
2. Sometimes, revolution is the only way
The scale of the challenge we faced demanded an iconoclastic approach.
We resolved there would be no sacred cows in our reinvention of the
organisation.
And, most importantly,
3. Success is a consequence of learning from failureWe may not have been clear exactly how we were going to go about our
task, but we were certain what we were not going to do. We were not
going to repeat the mistakes we and others had made over the preceding
six years. If mistakes were going to be made (and they inevitably were),
we were going to make new ones, all of our own.
So began my own personal journey of change.
Within three years we had gone from being a dog of a business to one of
the hottest in the world. What follows is the distillation of the lessons I
learnt during the dark years of failure and bright years of success, and what
I have learnt since leading change programmes for businesses around the
world.
No bullsh*t change
You’re here because something’s wrong, broken or slowing down. Things
just don’t quite feel right; dark clouds are gathering on the horizon. And
you’re here because you’re going to fix it. In this eight-module programme,
broken into respective chapters, I intend to give you the confidence, the
clarity and the tools to do just that.
This then is a manual to allow you to effect rapid and lasting change,
whatever your circumstance – whether leading a team of six or a
multinational of sixty thousand, a government department or a mid-table
sports team, a shop floor or a showroom. The principles of leading
successful change programmes are universal.
In writing this book, my objective is two-fold: clarity and action. Though
I have organised my ideas in a deliberate order, one that I believe makes for
most ready comprehension and utility, their real-world application will
necessarily be more fluid. Consider leading change as the gradual
illumination of a darkened room. As each subsequent row of lights are
switched on, the effect is cumulative, but the order in which you switch
them on matters less than that they are all eventually lit. And of course, if
they begin to go out again, darkness returns as quickly as it retreated. It’s
your task not simply to switch them on, but to keep them alight.
All change must begin with an honest understanding of your current
context. In Chapter 1, 
‘Baseline’, we explore how to understand the
situation you find yourself in today and use that to overcome theinternal inertia that resists change. It’s not difficult, but it’s very
important.
In Chapter 2 we look at why effective communication is so important
when leading change. We will consider some common (and easily
avoided) mistakes and introduce a straightforward and universally
applicable guide to doing it well.
Objective-setting is often misunderstood, unnecessarily
overcomplicated, ineffective and even self-defeating. Yet a clear objective is
essential to any change programme. In Chapter 3 we explore how to
define effective objectives, why it’s not as difficult as we are often told,
how to use them for maximum effect and why they are critical for building
effective teams.
The most difficult part of any change programme is the start. Your
greatest challenge is often not that people don’t believe change would be
desirable, but that they don’t believe it is ever going to happen. In Chapter
4, ‘Breaking Free’, we learn why urgency and energy are critical to
getting started, help you build credibility as an action-oriented change￾leader, and most importantly build confidence that your programme can and
will succeed.
Chapter 5 considers the importance of teams and coalitions and why
the more great leaders you have, the quicker you’ll achieve your goals.
We are all good at being able to see the things that are broken,
dysfunctional or could be improved. However, attempting to tackle
everything at once will only guarantee failure. Chapter 6 introduces the
concept of Schwerpunkt, the point of maximum effort (you don’t need to
be able to pronounce it, just understand it) as a means of focusing your
effort, and how this will accelerate you towards your goal.
Chapter 7 explains why, ultimately, all organisational change is
culture change. It is also a no bullshit primer on what culture is, why it
matters and how to build the effective and enduring culture you need in
order to succeed.
Finally, in Chapter 8 we arrive at the end of the beginning. Most
change programmes consider what is in reality only the start, but in the real
world, effective change demands consistent effort, a great deal of
determination and a willingness to learn from failure. Change doesn’thappen in isolation, but is a contingent process that must adapt as it
progresses.
This programme is designed to be a tool to help you lead effective
change from the smallest team to the largest organisation. It is intended to
inspire, inform and, most importantly, enable. The steps, tools and examples
are not formed from simple academic study, but rather decades of practical
experience – from great victories and crushing, tears-in-the-eyes defeats.
I don’t present this programme as the only way, but recommend it to you
as a proven way. You wouldn’t learn to fly from someone who had never
left the ground, and nor should you learn to lead change from those who
have never walked in your shoes. In leading change, the best you can hope
for is intelligent, but imperfect progress. And if in doubt, do.1
BASELINE
You can’t fix something if you don’t understand what it is
you’re trying to fix.
You can’t lead change if you haven’t made a compelling
case for why change is needed.
You can’t use an old map to explore a new world.
Albert Einstein
The first principle is that you must not fool yourself, and you are
the easiest person to fool.
Richard Feynman
IN 1783, NEVIL MASKELYNE, the Astronomer Royal, received an
inflammatory letter. In it the author claimed that Greenwich, the site of the
Royal Observatory, wasn’t where Maskelyne thought it was, that its latitude
and longitude had been calculated incorrectly. Worse still, it had been sent
by Cassini de Thury, of all horrors, a Frenchman.
The French had recently completed a revolutionary map of the then (but
not for much longer) Kingdom of France. It was the first map to be
produced on modern scientific lines using the latest technology, geodesic
triangulation, delivering a degree of accuracy that would be recognisable
even today. Nothing like it existed outre-Manche, and Maskelyne, though
dismissive of the criticism, smelt opportunity. Using the pretext of the letter,he rapidly obtained government funding for a British version of just such a
project.
Today we think little of maps. GPS allows us to know precisely where
we are at all times. However, accurate maps changed the world. The
problem is, before it is possible to create such a map, you must know with
great certainty where you are starting from. Thus, De Thury’s message was
more than simply a passing swipe at the accuracy of English measurement,
it was a warning that not only did they lack an accurate map of the
kingdom, but they were in no position to create one.
So began the first modern survey of the whole of Great Britain and
Ireland, a project that took fully sixty-two years to complete, yet one that
stood the test of time, only being fully revised in the mid-twentieth century.
Triangulation is, as its name suggests, a model of mapping based on the
specific geometric properties of a triangle, and the division of the territory
to be mapped into accurately measured versions of the same. The greater
the accuracy of each triangle’s measurements, the greater the accuracy of
the maps produced. The distinctive white ‘trig points’ still to be found
dotted across the British landscape were the original reference points
chosen for the corners of these triangles.
The first task of any such survey is to establish a baseline, the point from
which all other calculations will be made and the first side of the first
triangle, and this foundational work was undertaken by the Scottish military
engineer Major-General William Roy. A site was chosen, one end of which
is located on what is today a perimeter road of Heathrow airport. These first
measurements were taken with painstaking care, using twenty-foot glass
rods in 1,370 individual stages, each of which was required to be accurate
to within a thousandth of an inch. Only once this baseline was complete
could mapping begin.
The importance of a baseline
Maps help us determine how we might get to our future destination, but as
anybody who has attempted to use one will know, their first and most
important task is to tell you where you already are.
To lead change you need a baseline. This is the foundation on which
your future actions will be built. It performs two critical roles that we will
consider in this and the following chapter.1. It is an accurate and universal understanding of where you are to
begin – specifically, the current status of the organisation and its
challenges, be they internal, external or, most commonly, a mix of the
two.
2. It forms the basis from which you build alignment amongst all
your relevant stakeholders. Within many organisations there is a
widespread (if incomplete) understanding of its problems – problems
that multiply the longer they are left unattended. The baseline is a
critical step in building a powerful and aligned coalition that will
support the actions required to achieve your goal. Without this
alignment progress will be difficult, if not impossible.
If it’s broke, first understand it
All successful change begins with a clear and accurate description of the
situation that you and your team find yourselves in today. This is your
baseline. Mostly, unlike that faced by Major-General Roy and his thermally
sensitive glass rods, this is not a difficult question to answer. It is, however,
like his, an important one. You can’t fix something if you don’t know what
it is you’re trying to fix. You can’t improve a system that you don’t fully
understand. Perhaps most importantly, you can’t lead change if you haven’t
made a compelling case for why change is needed.
Internal and external context
When drawing up the baseline, there are two broad areas to consider and
understand. Either, or both, of these may provide the motive force for
change. They are:
1. External context
This includes such things as the macro-economic environment (as a
consequence of the pandemic, for example), geopolitics (Brexit or the
Ukraine war), competitor activity (pricing or product innovation) and
legislative change (such as GDPR). This is not an exhaustive list, but it’s
a good snapshot of the multitude of factors a leader must contend with
that are largely or wholly beyond their control.2. Internal context
This includes everything from product quality, new product
development, marketing, production processes, structure and workflow
to culture, pricing, employee relations, talent retention and talent
attraction. Again, not an exhaustive list, but a good cross section of the
areas that are mostly or wholly within a leader’s control. At least in
theory.
It’s obvious, but important to remember, that even if external factors are
the driver of your organisation’s need to change, only those within your
control are available to you to try and fix it.
The challenges of being an insider
The process of understanding your baseline is one that most obviously
applies to someone new to an organisation, team or department. However,
in the majority of situations, change is led by leaders who are already in
place.
As an incumbent, you too must be able to define and communicate your
baseline. Indeed, it could be argued that by being an insider, the processes
of baseline setting is even more important and potentially difficult, as much
of what must be changed may have been instigated or maintained by you.
Consequently, incumbent leaders typically face two challenges.
The first is that they view the process as threatening – an unwanted
referendum on their performance. This logic is understandable, but flawed;
you must, as far as is possible, control the impulses of your ego. If you are
going to fix something, you have to understand it, and that applies whether
you’re newly appointed to the position or not. If you are the incumbent and
you don’t fix it, it’s a reasonable assumption that sooner or later somebody
else will be asked to try. This can be a threatening, but also liberating
realisation; action, as always, is your most certain route to success. A
common cause of leadership failure is the unwillingness to recognise that
what has worked in the past will no longer work in the future.
Secondly, a leader must by definition be part of the solution, not part of
the problem. A regular and objective re-evaluation of the baseline is critical
to ensuring that this is the case – one that is performed, as far as is possible,
without preconception or precondition. For a change-focused leader thisisn’t a process that happens to you, but one you lead, learn from and use as
the basis for the next actions you must take. You have to be prepared to
challenge the assumptions that have served you well to this point, and in
establishing your baseline be willing to confront and, if necessary, overturn
existing patterns, habits and beliefs – including your own. Perhaps
especially your own. Easier said than done, but that is what change entails.
All successful leaders must be prepared to conduct objective, periodic
reappraisals of their organisation’s performance, objectives and strategy – to
shed their team’s skin and start again. In fact if they don’t, they risk being
replaced by someone who will. Very often the first act of a change
programme is to replace the leader, because those in post are unable or
unwilling to act.
One of this book’s primary ambitions is to stop this being you.
Symptoms and diagnosis
Symptoms are easy to see; diagnosis can be less straightforward. Horror
films make great play on this, and their protagonists’ initial naïvety. The
four teenagers in an isolated lodge for a birthday weekend assume the
strange noises in the night must just be owls, or bears or the wind. So
confident are they that the least famous actor wanders off to check it out.
Blood, gore and screaming ensue. In Aliens, the jock space marines scoff at
the Cassandra-like Ripley and, muscles bulging, head out to swat the bugs
beneath the nuclear power plant. Blood, gore and screaming ensue. In each
case they see the symptoms but, fatally for the minor characters,
misdiagnose the source.
Commonly in all organisations, problems are similarly easy to spot.
However, new and incumbent leaders have almost directly opposing
challenges in deciding their course of action. Incumbent leaders must
beware the assumption that what has always worked in the past will
continue to work in the future – and not ignore the flashing red lights on the
dashboard until it is too late (certainly too late for them). And in contrast, it
is common for new leaders to simply damn all that went before and set
about slinging the baby out with the bathwater. In both instances a clear and
well-defined baseline would save an awful lot of trouble, heartache and,
perhaps in some instances, blood, gore and screaming.A decline in sales, for example, is an obvious, and a clear red flag for
any organisation. But finding out why is often more difficult and, despite
the siren voices you may hear, can rarely be attributed to one cause alone.
Some may be convinced that it’s all because your pesky, bigger, more
ruthless, better-funded competitor has dropped their prices. It is certainly
always tempting to blame your woes on others. But might it also be because
the cachet that once surrounded your brand, and for which your loyal
customers were willing to pay a premium, has faded? A rather more subtle,
difficult and potentially unpopular message to deliver, not least because for
this you can blame nobody but yourselves. However, what may initially be
unpopular (specifically the discovery that the problem is predominantly
your fault) may in fact be good news. If it’s you that has gone astray, then it
is wholly within your gift to fix it. All you now have to do is work out how.
Understanding is the prelude to solving
When storm clouds gather, it is tempting yet potentially fatal to simply
blame others. And though external factors are real, they are also, by
definition, beyond your control. If your big, ruthless competitor has copied
your marketing, hired your head of R&D and cut their prices, what are you
going to do about it? Feeling sorry for yourself and moaning about them in
the pub will achieve nothing. You must be brutally honest about the
problems you face and realistic when considering the factors you can
control. Only then can you begin to find a solution.
We live in a world of growing polarisation. Our problems multiply; we
damn those with whom we disagree rather than seeking to understand.
Compromise is increasingly portrayed as weak, uncaring or worse. But
understanding is not agreeing. Understanding is the prelude to solving. This
is why a clear baseline is of such fundamental importance. Without a
thorough understanding of a problem it cannot be solved, and understanding
very often requires the finding and sharing of uncomfortable truths. As
Nevil Maskelyne discovered.
Your first job is to ask lots of questions and, most importantly, to listen
carefully to what you’re told, whether you’re new to the role or not.
The perils of confirmation biasIn reaching understanding, the effective collection and interpretation of data
is critical. Done well, it can be the cornerstone of your thinking. However, it
is no panacea. Data is simply another tool and, as with any tool, only as
effective as those who use it. Throughout the Covid pandemic, we became
all too familiar with how two equally well-intentioned and qualified experts
can look at the same data and draw very different conclusions. And, of
course, how others carefully sifted through the findings to cherry-pick those
points that supported their existing views.
Confirmation bias is the tendency to search for, prioritise or favour
information that supports our existing views or opinions. We all suffer from
it. It causes us to give undue weight to certain sources of information and
downplay or ignore others. It is no minor factor to be acknowledged and
forgotten. It is a powerful force, capable of shaping the very fundamentals
of our beliefs and behaviour, sometimes leading even the most experienced
astray.
In 1955, in one of his final acts, Albert Einstein wrote an effusive
foreword for a book called Earth’s Shifting Crust: A Key to Some Basic
Problems of Earth Science. Written by an eminent geologist named Charles
Hapgood, the book aimed to demolish what the author saw as a crazy, even
heretical, idea that had begun to gain traction – an idea we now call plate
tectonics. First posited in 1908 by an amateur American geologist, Frank
Bursley Taylor, it was dismissed immediately by almost the entirety of the
scientific community as self-evidently ridiculous: how could continents
move?
In writing his book nearly half a century later, Hapgood considered it an
idea he must kill off once and for all. Some gullible and excitable souls, he
observed, thankfully little more than a noisy minority, had noticed ‘an
apparent correspondence in shape between certain continents … that South
America might be fitted together with Africa, and so on’. He reassured his
readers that extensive research, as well of course as centuries of received
wisdom, showed the notion to be groundless. Well into the 1970s,
influential geological textbooks continued to dismiss plate tectonics as a
physical impossibility.
It is a seductive fallacy to dismiss Hapgood as a fool; he was anything
but. Lest we forget, the century’s greatest mind had endorsed his work.
Rather, he saw only the evaporating pool of evidence that supported theorthodoxy and was blind to the, by then, huge and growing lake of that
which did not.
Confirmation bias is a powerful force indeed, often, as in the example
above, driven by vested interest, ego and status as much as innocent
misinterpretation. Consequently, although research, statistics and modelling
have the potential to bring great insight and understanding, they often
unintentionally end up being used simply to reinforce or support the status
quo.
It is visible everywhere (if we look for it). The media love ‘research’, but
isn’t it strange how the research produced always appears to support and
endorse the views of the people who paid for it? Wouldn’t it be refreshing
to read a headline that ran, ‘We’ve done some research and we were wrong,
says expert.’ It doesn’t often happen.
We all have biases and, in the context of research and data, confirmation
bias is possibly the most pervasive. It’s not the evidence that’s wrong, it’s
our unwillingness or inability to use it effectively that is at fault. It takes a
brave and open-minded person to accept the overturning of their long-held
beliefs, irrespective of how strong the evidence is. Therefore, when defining
your baseline you must ensure you aren’t simply seeing what you want to
see. Or being told what people think you want to hear.
A great example is customer feedback. Perhaps you have surveyed a
major customer and with relief see that the CEO has given you a very
positive response – naturally, the response you want. You glance quickly
down the list and note that some of the other people on her team appear to
be far less complimentary, but you’ve got the headline: the person at the top
is happy. Move on. This is dangerous, and is the cause of many fractured
relationships and, ultimately, lost customers. The reasons are obvious and
legion: the CEO may leave, she may not be the main day-to-day contact,
she may actually be interested in what the rest of her team think, and so on.
Like so much else, it’s obvious when written down, but it’s a mistake we’ve
all made.
Another might be feedback on a team member. The collection of data for
performance reviews is time-consuming and consequently often a hurried
task. No judgement here, it’s just how it is.
In our thought experiment we collect five pieces of feedback on Freya,
four of which align with each other and one that takes a contrary point of
view. Though a qualitative exercise, the temptation is to treat it asquantitative. Furthermore, do we simply align with the opinions (whether
those in the majority or minority) that fit with our own? Many do.
Of course, if we want our feedback to be effective in helping Freya
progress, the correct answer is none of the above. We need to use the
responses as a tool that helps us to help her. But it takes time, thought and,
in this example, further work to be able to do so effectively.
As an aside, simplistic example though this is, it is typical of how 360-
degree feedback often operates in practice, and it is the failure (often
through lack of time and judicious application of confirmation biases) to get
beneath the headline data that makes so many such programmes little more
than box-ticking exercises and, consequently, missed opportunities.
Selecting the data that matters most
A baseline provides a universally understood definition of the foundations
upon which you will build. It is an individualised snapshot in time, one that
will be specific to the circumstances your team faces. There can, by
definition, be no generalised answers. All football teams play by identical
rules under all but identical circumstances. However, two teams locked
together at the top of the league may find themselves with completely
different baselines: one may have the challenge that they let in too many
goals, the other that they fail to score often enough. To achieve their
ultimate objective they must clearly understand not simply the symptom but
the specific underlying problem.
The interdependence between baseline and objective
Now that we have considered the importance of a carefully constructed
baseline, we will next consider how to find it, free, as far as possible, of our
preconceptions, biases and (dare I say) insecurities.
Electrons are complicated and counter-intuitive things. One of their
many mind-bending tricks is that they are able to be in two places at once.
(In fact they can be in an infinite amount of places at once, but let’s not go
there right now.) When considering your baseline, it is useful to learn a little
from my simplified electron in order to clarify and simplify your task.
All organisations collect data, lots of it, all of the time. Customer data,
sales data, financial data, viewing data, website visits, employee data – thelist is all but endless and the volume continues to climb. However, the
simple act of collecting data is no guarantee that you or anybody else is
learning anything useful from it. Indeed, for many organisations the sheer
amount of data collected is in itself a barrier to its effective use. Even in
small teams leaders can become overwhelmed. A key choice leaders need to
make is to decide, of all the data that is available, which is most useful in
determining their baseline. One way to do so is to imagine yourself like the
electron, in two places at once – at both the start and the end of your
journey.
A baseline is a means to an end. And if it is a means to an end, it is
useful to have some idea of what your end might be. Though change is non￾linear, books generally are and we will explore the setting of effective
objectives in more detail in Chapter 3. Nevertheless, in the real world your
baseline and objective are two points on the same journey. A sketched
outline of your likely desired destination is therefore one of the most
powerful ways to understand what data inputs will be most useful when
defining your beginning.
You need to be able to look forward to describe a motivating and
exciting future, but you also need to be able to imagine looking backward
from that future to today in order to help decide, of all the data points you
might choose, which will be most helpful in describing the initial nature of
your task.
This interdependence between beginning and end is why change is best
understood as a series of loops, something we will explore in more detail in
Chapter 8. The initial definition of your objective is likely to be imperfect,
but it is equally unlikely to be completely inaccurate; you’ll refine it as you
progress. Similarly, and inevitably, the ways you define your baseline will
come into sharper focus as you learn, develop and advance.
In order to cut through the data clutter and be able to focus on what will
be most useful for the journey ahead, be more like an electron and imagine
yourself in two places at once.
Sharing builds comprehension, engagement and alignment
Though organisations collect a huge amount of data, they are often reluctant
to share it. This is an example of a phenomenon common in organisations
of all types: the infantilisation of their employees. This stems from a wrong-headed and patronising belief that the majority would not be interested in,
able to understand or would even be made anxious by the widespread
sharing of key performance metrics.
Nothing could be further from the truth. The leader should encourage
widespread sharing of key data points – both the good and the bad. She will
be given a multitude of reasons for not doing so. A common one is the fear
of leaks to competitors, which, though valid in some circumstances, is
neither insurmountable nor usually good enough a reason to outweigh the
benefits of the whole team being clear about the exact status of the wider
organisation and therefore being better able to improve their own personal
contribution: your ultimate objective.
In my experience, there is very little important data that cannot be
widely shared within an organisation, and yet commonly the reality is the
opposite. Often I have sat in leadership meetings discussing the fact that
many of our people don’t understand how we make money (yes really), and
debating whether we should share how much money we are or aren’t
making (yes really) – truly the most basic of all data points. It sounds so
crazy written down that I deleted and replaced that sentence several times.
It stays in because if it is true for me, it is true for many others also. And if
it is a problem for the teams I have been responsible for, it is also a problem
for others.
That all but the most sensitive information can be shared is not to say
that it should be shared. Simply blocking up people’s emails won’t help
comprehension, but effective sharing of metrics that tell a clear story are an
important part of widening understanding of your baseline position and
building your coalition. Organisations don’t function well if department
boundaries are impermeable, and the sharing of status and progress are a
powerful way to engage everybody in the tasks that matter rather than those
that simply sit within their perimeter.
What gets measured gets done; what gets shared gets attention
I have frequently used the deliberate business-wide sharing of key
performance indicators (KPIs) as a driver of baseline comprehension and,
ultimately, of course, of change. In a recent role we identified five data
points that we considered to be the most significant in measuring our
progress (in addition to financial performance). They were:• Employee engagement
• Customer satisfaction
• New customer acquisition
• Diversity, equity and inclusion (DE&I) – in our case we identified a
number of key metrics around the ethnic and gender composition of
our employee base in addition to pay gap analysis
• Environmental impact.
We shared these widely and included them in all business planning
sessions. They provided both an initial baseline and milestones to measure
progress. Like my imaginary electron, our end point helped define our start.
There are many organisations for whom similar metrics would work, but
it’s not only the measuring that matters. It’s what you do with them: how
you share them; how you bake them into individual objectives; how you
define individual responsibilities as a consequence; how you use them to
troubleshoot and to continually refine your strategies and next steps. As we
progressed we learnt and evolved what we measured. A key task is to find
the right metrics for you.
Data means little, without action
The effective dissemination and discussion of data should become a cultural
totem. Debriefs should not be simply events that are awaited with fingers
crossed and then forgotten until next time, but rather opportunities to share
learning, best practice and to refine strategies for improvement. Across the
various businesses I have led and worked with, we see a clear correlation
between those that are smart and inventive about how they manage the
dissemination of data and their ability to learn and grow.
It’s so obvious, I question myself in writing it down. However, obvious
though it may be, occasions where the careful collection of accurate and
useful data has made absolutely no difference whatsoever to the
performance of a team are commonplace. The data arrives, but is regarded
much as a poor yachtsman might regard the wind: it would be wonderful if
it would go in the right direction, but until it chooses to we must drift along
as best we can. For an effective leader at any level, all forms of business or
organisational insight are merely the prelude to action. As we will see in a
later chapter, clarity counts for nothing without action.Effective sharing and discussion helps ensure that everyone is focused
on the same ultimate goals, spurs teams into action through the positive
example of others and aids problem-solving, as it is common for different
teams to be confronted with similar challenges, for example, a poor
customer relationship. Meetings such as these create opportunities for
serendipity that simply would not happen were the data kept siloed, quiet
and private. It genuinely is true that great ideas can come from anywhere
and if everybody is invested in, and aware of, the numbers that matter, they
are all more likely to focus on the personal actions they can take to help.
Having defined the data points that matter most to your baseline, set
about sharing as much of those as you can.
Three simple principles for effective dissemination of data:
1. Remember why you’re sharing it
People’s inboxes and diaries are already full, so be sparing and focused.
In this instance your objective is to build comprehension of your
baseline, alignment around the shared task at hand and cross-pollination
of ideas, so consider what data best lands those points and what
collective forums will have the most effect.
2. Over-communicate: fewer facts, but more often
People can only remember so much, so say less, but more often.
3. Explain why
A previous boss of mine once said to me when preparing a presentation
to her biggest client: he likes his food predigested, so do the work for
him.
It’s a great rule of thumb here and elsewhere. Make what you share
easy to understand, help people draw the relevant conclusions and, as far
as possible, spell out the actions you and they should take.
Qualitative research: two-way focus groups
Though numbers tell stories, they rarely tell you all. Data, though powerful,
makes it easy to forget that change, at heart, is an activity concerned with
behaviours: persuading people, sometimes lots of people, to do thingsdifferently. Formal or informal focus groups put your people at the centre.
There are a multitude of ways they can be used and, though for clarity I
have treated them here primarily as an internal tool, you should use them
with whichever audiences best help you achieve your objectives. Used well
they are a very powerful and effective way to get deep insight into the
nature of an organisation and its challenges.
Qualitative research provides you with an opportunity to both listen and
communicate with your most important stakeholders, always a clarifying
experience. And, like much else, though glaringly obvious, it is often
forgotten.
However, this is a book about change, not research, and we are interested
in how we can use these sessions in a way that will move us most
effectively towards our goal. I therefore propose that the groups you run are
treated as a two-way process.
In nearly every change programme I have run I have used this variation
of qualitative research. They can simultaneously fulfil three critical
objectives:
1. Learning
This is what all well-run focus groups do. They add a much-needed
human dimension to inform the development of your baseline.
Note: Given the necessarily fluid nature of leading through change,
focus groups can be used at any stage throughout your journey, and there
will certainly be future occasions when they will again be useful. Indeed,
you may decide to make them a fixed feature of the culture.
2. Sharing
Qualitative interactions provide an opportunity to gain feedback on what
you’ve learnt and, as your journey progresses, to help refine your
thinking. Be open and inclusive. Share, question and listen. Sense-check
your assumptions and road-test hypotheses.
At their best, they are not simply opportunities to get feedback on
what you’ve done, but a powerful way to get new and different voices
from outside your bubble (more to come on that in a moment) to actively
shape your thinking.
3. Collective ownershipPerhaps the most overlooked and important role they can play is in
achieving buy-in to your project. Change isn’t about you, it’s about
everybody else (certainly everybody else in the teams you are
responsible for), and to succeed your baseline must ultimately be
everybody’s baseline, your objective everybody’s objective.
Run well, these groups allow you the chance to build and develop your
coalition for change and to begin the process of sharing ownership of what
began as your project. In the long run, if it remains only yours, you will fail.
It is important to emphasise that in order to fulfil their potential these
three objectives must be clear upfront, both to those running the sessions
and to those taking part. Effective preparation and clarity of objectives will
make for great and powerful sessions that can form a cornerstone of your
programme throughout.
All the light you cannot see: uncovering what’s hidden
This final section is perhaps the most important, most frequently
overlooked and most difficult.
A feature of healthy cultures is that people feel able to be open and
honest with one another. In many organisations this is not the case.
Furthermore, you would be well advised not to casually assume this doesn’t
apply to yours.
Organisations need hierarchies in order to function well, but hierarchies
also create barriers that can make it difficult for leaders to get a true sense
of what is happening. In 1787, Grigory Potemkin built a series of fake
villages to line the route of Empress Catherine II as she travelled from
Moscow to the Crimea to show the apparent health and wealth of the
country. The villages were disassembled after she had passed and
reassembled at her next planned stop. Like the infamous Potemkin
attempting to win the Empress’s favour, in poor cultures people up and
down the hierarchy judge it personally beneficial to avoid telling
inconvenient truths. Consequently, for many leaders, existing or new, much
of what is really happening in the organisation is hidden from them; they
don’t know what they don’t know.
The higher up in the hierarchy you are, the more important it is for you
to be sure people are telling you what you need to hear and not what theythink you want to hear: that they disagree; that they have a new solution;
that all is not as it should be; that the biggest customer is unhappy; that they
have a problem they need help fixing. But too often, this is not our
experience. We find ourselves unknowingly in a bubble. Or perhaps we do
know, but quite like it; they are, after all, nice, comfortable places to be.
In your bubble, everybody seems to agree with you, laughs at your jokes
and nods at all your ideas. The problem is, this isn’t real. And, whisper it,
they might not really agree, and may not actually find you funny. Culture, it
is sometimes said, is what happens when you’re not in the room.
If you want to know what’s really happening you need to be prepared to
see things, hear things and be told things that you might not want to hear.
However, not hearing them doesn’t mean they aren’t being said, or done, or
not done, and if you want to create a revolution you have to know where to
start.
For some leaders, geography can be a key driver of separation and
dislocation. The executive floor with its plush carpets and Aesop scents is
alive and thriving in many organisations. But beware – even if you sit in
amongst your team, that doesn’t necessarily mean you are hearing all you
need to hear.
Cutting through the hierarchy
It is amazing what you learn when you leave your desk and the effect it can
have on the people you find yourself talking to as a result. Perhaps if
Empress Catherine had spoken to one of the villagers she would have
discovered they were actors – although members of the Russian nobility
didn’t do a lot of pressing the flesh.
I recently asked General Sir Chris Deverell, a former member of the
British Army’s Chiefs of Staff, how he dealt with this problem in an
organisation as stratified as the army. How, I wondered, did he find out
what was really going on and in turn make sure his messages were cutting
through?
‘I did it myself,’ he told me. ‘I think a leader of today cannot rely on
hierarchical message delivery … you also have to find ways of taking in
information that is not dependent on that hierarchy. There were too many
rungs in that ladder, too many possibilities for people who didn’t agree with
me not communicating my message … I felt very strongly that I needed tocommunicate direct to what you might call the workforce. And to that end, I
did a lot of visiting units, and town halls where you stand up and deliver
your message.’
The post-pandemic rise in remote and hybrid working has exacerbated
this problem. Though hybrid working can be a win-win for employer and
employee, it means leaders run the risk of being even more disconnected
from different voices and different opinions. Modern technology and its
promise of greater connectivity has instead had the effect of disconnecting
more and more leaders from their teams. An email is not the same as a
phone call, a Zoom call not the same as meeting face to face, and the kind
of connection you make in a meeting not the same as a chat over dinner. All
have their place, but too often we end up defaulting to the medium that is
most convenient rather than most effective.
A culture that facilitates the effective sharing of ideas and information
should be a priority for all leaders. Hierarchy matters, but it can’t be
allowed to become an impermeable barrier. You and your leaders need to go
out of your way to ensure you regularly hear a range of different voices,
opinions, ideas and even criticisms. Some organisations institute forums,
surgeries or meetings that are deliberately constructed with this in mind. At
BBC Radio 1, they used to call these meetings pizza meetings (because they
provided free food); at Pixar they call them Braintrust meetings. It’s
obvious when said out loud, but so often isn’t done. If you don’t provide
opportunities for light to be shone into even the darkest corners, what is
hidden will remain hidden.
The most important thing with bubbles is to be aware that they exist. You
can’t fully escape, but self-awareness gives you the opportunity to get
beyond them at least some of the time. And beware, the less visible or
aware you are of your bubble, the thicker its walls.
So set about getting out.
Now write it down
Your baseline is not only for you – in fact it may not even primarily be for
you – but it is a critical tool.
Your baseline describes your challenge and is the basis for building the
case for change among your relevant stakeholders (who we will meet in the
next chapter).It also identifies a key set of metrics that act as markers along your route.
They should be shared as widely as possible and updated regularly. This
ensures that your entire team or organisation are clear on what areas matter
most and, crucially, that they too can see and feel the progress you are
making.NO BULLSH*T BASELINE
You can’t fix something if you don’t know what it is you’re trying
to fix.
You can’t lead change if you haven’t made a compelling case for
why change is needed.
Clarity and accuracy are key
Change begins with a clear and accurate description of the situation that you and your team find
yourselves in today.
This is your baseline, the foundation on which your future actions will be built.
Why your baseline is so important
1. Without a thorough understanding of a problem it cannot be solved.
2. It is a powerful tool when building alignment with key stakeholders.
Beware confirmation bias
Be sure you aren’t simply seeing what you want to see – or being told what people think you want to
hear.
Uncover what is hidden
In poor cultures people avoid telling inconvenient truths. Consequently, for many leaders, much of
what is really happening in the organisation is hidden from them.
Hierarchy cannot be an impermeable barrier
If necessary, create forums and opportunities to cut through the layers of the organisation.
The collection and interpretation of data is no panacea
It is a tool, and only as effective as those who use it.
Share what you learn
Effective and frequent sharing of what you learn is critical in building widespread comprehension
and engagement with your project, and alignment with your stakeholders.
Principles for dissemination of informationBe selective.
What gets measured gets done; what gets shared gets attention. Over-communicate – fewer facts, but
more often.
Explain why – predigest the meal.
Write it down; share it widely
Write down what you learn, identify key metrics to measure and shape your route, and share it widely
and frequently.2
COMMUNICATION
Communication is critical to success. In order to succeed,
effective and frequent communication is required of you
and those around you at every stage. Take care to do it well.
Communicate, communicate, communicate.
General Sir Chris Deverell
In teamwork, silence isn’t golden, it’s deadly.
Mark Sanborn
THE MAJORITY OF THIS BOOK’S most important topics can be
divided into self-contained modules: Baseline, Objective and so on. There
are two, however, that must instead be considered as leitmotifs, in that they
run throughout. These are Communication (Chapter 2), which we will cover
now, and Culture (Chapter 7).
Both Communication and Culture are indispensable considerations at all
stages of your change programme. It is impossible to lead without
consistent, effective communication; likewise, it is impossible to build
effective teams without an understanding of the power and constraints of
their cultural context.
In the interests of clarity, I have decided to treat Communication and
Culture as stand-alone chapters even though neither can ever be consideredwholly in isolation. Though a degree of repetition is therefore inevitable and
necessary, I hope by this approach to keep it to a minimum.
At the time of writing, Russia’s nihilistic war in Ukraine grinds on. Horrific
though it is, it has given us an inspiring and enduring leadership icon in
Volodymyr Zelensky. If ever there was a case of cometh the hour, cometh
the man, it is he. Zelensky was initially dismissed as literally a joke (he was
previously a comedy actor) by the West, his political opponents at home and
by his enemies; there were few who didn’t fear the worst when the invasion
began.
However, Zelensky understood that modern warfare is fought in many
dimensions, only one of which is the battlefield. His superpower is that he
is a brave and effective communicator. His words, no less than those of
Churchill in 1940, inspired his nation to fight back and galvanised the world
to aid Ukraine in its plight, the clarity of his message thrown into relief by
his opponent’s leaden lies.
‘I don’t need a ride, I need ammunition,’ he replied to Joe Biden’s
entreaties to escape. It is difficult to imagine a more perfect encapsulation
of personal bravery, defiance, clarity and packaging.
Effective communication works.
When tackling any challenge, you must be clear-eyed and clear-headed
about your baseline. However, you are not the only person who needs to
understand the current situation. To succeed you must get buy-in from all
your most important stakeholders, and ensure you keep them engaged
throughout. This could be your team, bosses, board, colleagues, customers,
clients or investors. Like much else, obvious but often not done well. Or
even at all. This is why communication matters.
Jocko Willink, a former US Navy SEAL and now pod-caster
extraordinaire, tells how, after joining the SEAL Teams as a testosterone￾fuelled youth, he realised that to progress he needed to learn to
communicate effectively. In order to do so, he did a degree in English
Literature and studied Shakespeare, amongst others. Learning to
comprehend enabled him to learn to write well. Learning to write well, for
him, became the basis for organised and clear thinking. Communication is
about a lot more than being able to write snappy emails.Use your baseline to get stakeholder alignment
Your initial objective is to ensure all stakeholders are aware of the
reasoning that underpins your change programme (your baseline) and, most
importantly, begin to build understanding of what is required of them and a
case for what is in it for them. This is important because for some, if not all,
it will entail an extended period of upheaval.
Your message should not simply be ‘We need to change because …’
Instead, over time, it must include why change is necessary, why that
change is in the interests of the various groups who will need to endorse
and support it, and what is likely to be required of them. Change is a team
sport and you need as many people as possible on your side – a point we
will return to in more detail in Chapter 5.
This communication is critical, and therefore requires a degree of care
and attention. It is not a great idea to email all your customers and tell them
you’ve decided your product is subpar and therefore you’re going to change
it. This may sound a ridiculous example, but my own industry, marketing
services, has a long, inglorious (and, I hasten to add, unintended) history of
taking exactly this approach.
How not to do it
Several years ago, one particularly venerable advertising agency set about a
much discussed (in the bar of the Groucho Club, at least) change
programme. The agency’s clients (at the time) filled the nation’s cupboards,
fridges, driveways and front rooms. Many had been clients for decades.
However, times had changed, and the leadership correctly recognised that
they needed to reset their reputation and product. They needed to change.
To this end they hired a (very) big-shot new global leader.
So far, so good.
He then set about doing what new leaders the world over love to do:
telling anyone who would listen that everything that preceded him was
rubbish – that the problem was that everything was shit, and that he was the
solution.
The consequence of this approach was that the company’s large and
long-standing clients interpreted this as the new CEO turning his back on
the campaigns they had invested hundreds of millions of dollars in.
Campaigns that they loved. They felt that not only did he have no respectfor what his own business had being doing for years, but by extension, he
also had none for theirs.
This business no longer exists, and it is far from an isolated example.
This is a classic and, if extreme, familiar example of (very) poor
stakeholder management. It is not enough to simply identify the nature of
the problem and the need to change. As we’ve discussed, this is nearly
always quite easy. In this example, everyone familiar with the business
would have agreed that change was needed – even their clients, who were
faced with similar challenges. The new CEO’s fatal mistake was his failure
to explain to some of his most important stakeholders why and how his
change programme was in their interest. Instead, from his statements they
concluded that he considered them to be the problem. Which, in truth, is
exactly what I believe he really thought.
Identify your stakeholders and treat them extremely well
Effective stakeholder management is critical to your success. You must
identify who yours are and ensure you communicate effectively with them.
For anyone leading change their most important stakeholders are often the
most neglected: the people in the team(s) that work for them. The vast
majority will also have at least two others.
• Boss(es) – those above you in the hierarchy
This group are rarely neglected, but often poorly managed. Make sure
you have an honest and transparent relationship with them.
• Customers and clients
Companies spend a lot of time communicating with their customers,
but they often don’t treat them as stakeholders. Make sure you bring
them along with you. By asking their opinions, seeking their feedback
and being clear why change is in their interests you avoid the pitfalls
described above. Do this well and you may even turn them into your
greatest advocates.
You must ensure your primary stakeholders are familiar with not just the
nature of the challenges to be faced, but why it is in their interests to partner
with you on the journey. Change is never a one-off event; rather it is acontinuous and often lengthy process. An informed, intelligent and ongoing
dialogue with all stakeholders is a powerful and effective way to build a
coalition who are invested emotionally and physically, and who will remain
firmly on your side throughout.
A simple guide for effective business communication
Effective communication is a large and important topic, one that goes
beyond the scope of this book. However, the ability to do it well, or
conversely the failure to do so, will have a significant bearing on your
success. Throughout, you will need to ensure your teams and stakeholders
are aligned, everybody is clear on their roles and objectives; obstacles must
be overcome and lessons learnt. At every stage, effective and frequent
communication will be required of you and those around you. It is a topic
you should take care to do well. The following eight-point checklist* will
ensure you stay on track.
1. State your objectives
Don’t make the audience guess what the purpose of your communication
is. Ask yourself:
• Why am I communicating?
• What do I want to achieve?
• Who am I primarily talking to?
• What do I want them most to remember?
• What do I want them to do as a result?
Remember my old boss’s advice: sometimes predigested is the way to
go.
2. Be focused
A common problem with all communication (and especially business
communication) is the desire to say too much. It’s understandable – you
have much you’d like to say. However, if you want your message to cut
through and stick, you must focus on the most important aspects; make
it as long as it needs to be, and no longer.A good rule of thumb when standing before an audience is that, even
for the most well-written and interesting presentation, they will
remember no more than three things. You need to ensure these are the
three things that matter to you. You can be wordy and self-indulgent
when you’re crafting your novel, but not when writing all-staff emails.
3. Identify your red thread
In Greek myth, Theseus escaped the Minotaur’s labyrinth by following a
red thread that he unravelled from his cloak as he went.
To avoid making your communications as confusing as a Cretan
labyrinth, keep to a consistent theme. This is one reason why the KPIs of
your baseline are so important – they can become your red thread.
Through continual reinforcement you will rapidly build awareness
and comprehension of the task in hand.
Identify your red thread, ensure you have enough content to achieve
your objective and cut everything else.
4. Be clear
This is a prerequisite for all effective communication, yet one that is very
often abandoned, particularly in the parallel universe of business￾bullshit.
In his book To Be Clear, Philip Collins, former speech writer for Tony
Blair, bemoans the poor quality of much business communication. The
best thing you can do, he argues in his introduction, ‘is to be as simple,
as precise and as brief as you can, consistent with saying all of what you
mean and not a word more, or indeed less’.
Collins concludes, ‘[Business executives] need to stop talking in code
and have the courage to be plain, in the knowledge that they have
something to say and it would be better for the world to understand
what it was.’
Enough said.
5. Put your audience first
Communication is not about you (irrespective of how nervous you may
feel as you step up to the stage). It’s about your audience. You want them
to think, understand or feel something, which is why you’re there. And,even more importantly, you want them to remember it and you. Make
sure you are writing for them, not yourself.
If you lead large teams, then, for many, your public communication
may be the most regular – and perhaps the only – connection they have
with you. If you’ve done your homework well you will readily be able to
describe the nature of your baseline and, in time, your objectives and the
stages along the way. However, at every step you must consider not just
the functional and rational but the human and emotional. All change
ultimately comes down to changing the behaviours of people; therefore
you must be able to connect with your teams in language and terms that
matter to them. This isn’t as difficult as it might sound if you just spend a
little time thinking about your communication from their perspective.
This is another reason why your data collection, focus groups and
bubble-bursting matter so much: the better you know your audience, the
better you can communicate with them. A little empathy goes a long
way.
6. Tell a story
We all understand stories. At their most basic, they need a start, middle
and end. You must be able to describe the light as well as the shade, the
sunlit uplands as well as the struggles that may lie ahead. Here, balance
matters. You cannot simply trowel on all the bad news; you need to
create a narrative that links problem to solution even if, at points of your
change journey, the solution might appear somewhat threadbare.
Good communicators are good story tellers, and good stories aid
comprehension, relevance and recall.
7. Communicate frequently and consistently
Say a relatively small number of things, be clear, consistent and say
them often. It’s the easiest (as well as the most under-appreciated and
frequently forgotten) aspect of business communication – not least when
it comes to the implementation of change programmes.
You are only a small part of people’s lives (sorry to break it to you).
They receive thousands of messages every day, from Instagram ads to
angry emails from clients. You have to make sure you cut through this,
and doing so requires consistency and frequency.
Don’t overcomplicate, but do over-communicate.8. Get help if you need it
This is probably the most important piece of advice I can offer, and one I
also believe will be the most widely ignored. Communicating effectively
is a skill; like any other skill it can be learnt, and with practice it can be
improved. (We cover learning in more detail in Chapter 8.)
Communication comes in many forms: written and spoken,
presentations and speeches, meetings formal and informal, media
interviews and so on. All have their place. You must first ask yourself
which are most important to your success right now and also how good
you are at them. If you’re not sure – ask somebody. For example, if you
rarely need to do media interviews, don’t waste time getting media
trained. In my experience, senior executives love getting media trained
but they rarely use it, and they rarely get presentation training even
though very many would benefit from it. If you lack confidence speaking
in front of large groups yet need to do it often, then get coaching in how
to do it. It’s obvious, but so many just blunder their way through. Don’t.
It really is that important. If there are parts of communication that you
aren’t good enough at, then get help. We routinely do this in other areas.
Some people are excellent writers, for example; if you’re not, ask for
help or find someone who is. It will be time and money well spent.NO BULLSH*T COMMUNICATION
Communication is critical to success. In order to succeed,
effective and frequent communication is required by you and of
those around you at every stage. Take care to do it well.
State your objectives
Don’t make your audience guess the purpose and role of your communication.
Be focused
Make it as long as it needs to be, and no longer.
Identify your red thread
Typically this is comprised of the themes defined by your baseline.
Be clear
Avoid jargon, buzzwords, verbosity and fluff.
Put your audience first
The better you understand your audience, the better you can communicate with them. A little
empathy goes a long way.
Tell a story
It will aid comprehension, relevance and recall.
Communicate frequently and consistently
Don’t overcomplicate, but do over-communicate.
Get help if you need it
Seek help and training in the skills you lack but need.
* For more on the power of checklists, see my previous book, No Bullsh*t Leadership.3
OBJECTIVE
To lead a successful change programme you must have a
clear, ambitious objective, one that is motivating,
persuasive and easily understood. This will provide a focal
point around which your strategy, culture and team align.
There are times when a leader must move out ahead of the flock,
go off in a new direction, confident that he is leading his people
the right way.
Nelson Mandela
Make your vision so clear, your fears become irrelevant.
Anonymous
WHERE THE BASELINE IS ROOTED in observation, data and fact,
the objective should be lofty and ambitious, delineating an outcome that is
possibly quite distant at first, and that may evolve over time. It is not
necessarily a response to the baseline, but the baseline is indispensable in
determining how your journey toward it will begin.
Critical and self-evident though this task is, there is more bullshit taught
on the subject than perhaps any other in the mountain of literature on
change. This bullshit not only inhibits clear thinking and decision making;
at its worst, it can derail change programmes before they’ve even begun. In
defining their objective, leaders are encouraged to believe that they muststrive not just for direction, but for elegance, poetry and even (and many
well-known programmes insist on this) uniqueness. This chimeric search
for a clever, pithy and elegant definition makes it harder for leaders to settle
on a useful set of words to describe their objective and obscures its full
utility and purpose.
A no bullsh*t objective
An objective is the leader’s north star. The baseline is so important because
it describes context, typically a mix of internal and external factors. The
objective is where your change programme will take you.
It’s impossible to generalise a solution, but it is possible to describe a
few clear and simple rules:
• Don’t overcomplicate.
• Be bold and ambitious.
• Favour clarity over brevity.
• Aim for a territory rather than the head of a pin.
Useful and clear examples include:
• Be the biggest.
• Have the best customer service.
• Be the most innovative.
• Have the largest market share.
• Have the best Ofsted score*
 in the county.
• Win the league.
• Transition from a leading valve manufacturer to a leading microchip
manufacturer.
• Achieve a valuation of $100 million at sale.
• Start getting vaccines into arms in under twelve months.
All of these are incredibly easy to say (this list took me about two
minutes to write), and for the vast majority of teams and organisations they
would be a significant improvement on where they are today. However,
because all are as difficult to do as they are easy to write, they would alsobe dismissed by as many as being unrealistic. Hence the pressing need for
more leaders capable of leading change.
The last on the list is one you will be familiar with. Here the baseline
was (as is often the case) easy. The world faced a generational threat from a
new and deadly disease. There was lots of data, but it was all saying pretty
much the same thing: that the creation, manufacture, testing and distribution
of vaccines is, as we all now know, fiendishly complicated.
The UK government made, with exemplary speed, three good decisions:
1. They recognised that their usual processes and systems were
completely unsuited for such an objective. They had to change.
2. They needed the right leader in charge, someone with both category
expertise and proven leadership experience. Crucially, they also
quickly recognised that they did not have that person in their current
structure and would have to look outside.
3. They would give that person the necessary authority to make decisions
and get things done; the achievement of the objective would justify
the means.
Their appointment of Kate Bingham wasn’t without controversy.
However, in our no bullshit world, we’re interested only in results, and
Bingham’s programme to select, procure and manufacture vaccines was a
classic example of what can be achieved when baseline, objective,
leadership ability and culture align.
The uniqueness trap
So much energy and money has been thrown into the search for ‘perfect’
objectives that many leaders come to see this as a quest not for direction but
wit and wisdom, to the extent that this search can become an end in itself –
a demonstration of intelligence and leadership virility. As a consequence, I
have seen teams (and indeed been part of teams) that have spent so long
agonising over this decision that they have failed to ever truly move beyond
it. This I urge you to avoid at all costs; it, by definition, guarantees failure.
A common pitfall is the search for uniqueness. Not only is this
unnecessary, it is nearly always impossible. The vast majority of
organisations are simply seeking to do a common thing better than thecompetition. This is certainly the case in a business or sporting context, and
by analogy it also applies to an array of other areas, such as education or
research. In none of these is there a requirement to be unique, and it is never
a prerequisite for success. The search for uniqueness when trying to clearly
define an objective is a time consuming (and energy-sapping) distraction
from the task in hand. Yet it is a common reason that so many change
programmes fail before they have even begun.
Trigger warning
The level of hyperbole and nonsense the Leadership Industrial Complex can
reach in ‘helping’ leaders find their ‘objective’ knows no limit. I was once
invited to attend a two-day residential course to define the ‘purpose’ for a
well-known household brand. It was run by outside consultants using their
‘proprietary’ methodology. This, it was explained, relied on using the
methods and spiritualism of Native Americans (in case you were
wondering, they were all British, and it was held in a residential hotel in
Surrey, a rather posh county conveniently close to London). I’ve managed
to blot most of the experience from my memory, but I do clearly remember
one task. We were sent off individually to walk the grounds and collect
items from nature – flowers, pebbles, feathers and the like – from which we
would, through some mystical process, gain inspiration, allowing us to
define the brand’s purpose. On our return we placed our chosen item
reverentially in the middle of the circle of attendees and … oh God.
Anyway, it’s too horrible to have to relive it.
In that example I was simply an attendee, but before I become too smug
and all-knowing, I must first remove the plank from my own eye. I too have
sat in many off-sites and spent hours, sometimes with just the team,
sometimes with outside consultants, desperately searching for clever and
unique words to describe what it is we wished to become. I thought it was
what leaders were supposed to do. Spoiler alert: it isn’t.
So defining has this task become, in the minds of many – that of
identifying the objective (or whatever word you wish to use: ambition,
vision, purpose, etc.) – that it is the first thing they leap into when presented
with a new role or challenge. Not in itself a bad thing, assuming they also
pay attention to their baseline as well, of course. The problem is, because
we are told that it has to be clever, snappy and unique, many never getbeyond trying to answer this question at all. Round and round they go,
trying to find that illusive set of words that, once found, will unlock
everything.
It’s a classic opportunity for group-think. At the end of a long two days,
and desperate for the weekend, the group finally agrees on a set of words.
Freed, everyone heads home, glad to have agreed on something, anything,
and relieved to escape. However, when Monday comes they discover to
their dismay that they all have a different recollection of what it was that
had been decided. And worse, when shared with someone who hadn’t been
in the room, the response is underwhelmed blank stares. We’ve all been
there. Maybe you’re reading this because you’re stuck there right now.
Take a common task and do it uncommonly well
Every task is different, and in some (perhaps many) cases it may be possible
and/or necessary for your objective to be very specific. For example, the
task in hand may, by its very nature, require a clearly defined set of
parameters. In this case, defining the end point is easier than usual: simply
spell them out. For example, a sports team may wish to win the league. Or
an engineering team may have to remedy a specific fault in a new R&D
project. That’s it. Done. That wasn’t so hard. What is hard, as always, is
getting on and doing it.
Alternatively, and more commonly, your goal may be both broad and
distant, in time and in ambition. Here it may be difficult and even
undesirable to attempt to be too specific too early. A team may decide, as I
once did in a company I ran, that the primary task is to create a culture
capable of outperforming its competitors. In our case, we had an initial go
at defining the culture we wanted, but this inevitably evolved over time – as
you would expect. But at the start it was enough to know two things. The
first was that the focus of our strategy was in the implementation of the
culture we believed would enable us to succeed, and the second was that we
would give our culture a name, ‘Open’.
We knew that its defining characteristic would be the opposite of a top￾down hierarchy – the situation that we found ourselves in at the beginning
and that we had determined to rip apart. Having very clearly defined our
start point, broadly outlined our objective and spent a lot of time
communicating and seeking buy-in from the company, we initially movedwith great urgency and focus. Then, over the following years, we refined
and adjusted our objective – not discarding it, but sharpening how we
described it, while keeping our, and everybody else’s, eyes firmly fixed on
the unifying concept of ‘Open’.
There was nothing at all unique about the idea (at the time of writing, if
you google ‘open culture’ you get 4.15 billion results), nor about the
behaviour or language we gradually built around this ambition. However,
we were convinced that if we did this well we would thrive, and that indeed
proved to be the case. Before long, we and others were writing case studies
about our version of ‘open culture’, and even the World Cup-winning rugby
coach Sir Clive Woodward was impressed, saying, ‘I love working with
[this business]. Anybody who has an interest in a team’s culture and its
impact should spend a couple of hours listening to their story.’
I’m sure many will quibble about what is objective and strategy, or even
that to have a culture as an objective made no sense. Feel free. But there’s
no right and wrong, only what works and what doesn’t. Although nothing
we did was original or unique, we took a common thing and did it unusually
well – which in nearly all circumstances will put you very close to the top
of the pile.
Migration
Sometimes it is useful to imagine change as analogous to a railway journey,
one that follows a set path between two clear and tightly defined points.
However, in large, complicated organisations or situations, this can impose
a rigidity of thought and deed that may ultimately be unhelpful. Certainly
you don’t have to be as precise in your language as this approach implies.
A CEO of a large retailer, who at the time was in the foothills of their
change programme, described their plan to me as a migration. She imagined
the organisation as a huge flock of birds, loosely but clearly bound together
by their common direction. They knew exactly where they were at the
beginning (of course), and were clear on their direction, but were initially
very broad in defining their destination. Her level of specificity declined the
further into the future she looked. I imagine it as looking down a cone,
holding the narrow end near your eye.
This is a very practical, action-focused and therefore useful thought
experiment. It encourages immediate action, has a built-in acceptance ofcourse corrections en route, and allows the destination to be sharpened and
brought into increasingly clear focus as the journey progresses. Most of all,
it has the (perhaps unusual) merit of honesty. It is how change works in
practice, whether business schools like it or not.
The four critical roles an objective should play
The objective is most easily understood as the end point of your change
journey. This is self-evident. Various words are used here, among them
ambition, vision and purpose, but they all aim to do the same thing. Don’t
get hung up on language, just use the words and description that work best
for you, and which can be clearly and easily understood by everyone
involved. Brevity is good, but clarity is more important. Clarity aids
comprehension and recollection. A clear and well-written objective should
provide a signpost for decision-making and an ongoing guide for action.
And remember, you can always sharpen your thinking over time.
In leading change there are four important roles that your objective
should play:
1. Set destination and direction
This is obvious, and needs little explanation. It should be a simple and
clearly understood description of what it is you are attempting to
achieve, allowing you to set milestones and to course-correct along the
way.
2. Aid decision-making
A clear, universally understood objective provides a framework for the
critical decisions that must be taken for your programme to succeed.
3. Build coalitions
Whatever the size of your organisation or challenge, there are multiple
stakeholders you need to communicate with regularly. A simple, clear
objective is critical to building the coalition you need for success.
4. Enable alignment
This is one of the most important, and yet possibly the most commonly
overlooked, advantages of a clear objective. Your immediate team are
your most important allies, and a clear objective allows you to keep thatteam tightly aligned and effective. Crucially, it provides a framework for
the difficult and challenging conversations that all teams need to have in
order to keep them fit and healthy.
Dealing politely with double faults
In tennis, doubles is a rather different game to singles, as anyone who has
played knows. In singles, as the name suggests, you face your opponent
alone (along with your inner voice, of course, all too often reproachful,
judgemental or even angry). In doubles, however, you are part of a team,
and the most effective teams find a way to outperform.
I recently joined a tennis team that plays in a league and comprises four
people playing in two pairs. It started as a bit of a lark (I hadn’t played team
tennis for a decade), and it was just a relief to be out of the house after
endless lockdowns. However, we started to do quite well, and suddenly it
began to matter whether we won or not.
Tennis is a difficult game. One of the problems with doubles is that your
internal voice, what Dr Steve Peters in his book The Chimp Paradox refers
to as our ‘Inner Chimp’, now starts chattering away, not just about your
own game, but that of your partner also. There are few things more
annoying than when, at 30–30, after you hit a great first serve, your partner
dumps a gimme volley into the net. Odds are you’re so pissed off (chimp
chattering away) that you hit a double fault next, and that’s your serve gone.
‘And none of it was your fault, was it?’ the chimp gleefully points out,
before stuffing another banana in his mouth.
My partner and I decided we needed to take it all a bit more seriously.
We bought those awful energy gels beloved of cyclists, and he ordered extra
packets of Fisherman’s Friends (for the uninitiated, they are a very strong
and somewhat odd-flavoured lozenge – he claimed they helped him
concentrate). Most importantly we began to talk to each other. Not only
during the game, but before it.
Before every match we would discuss what we were each going to try to
do. This was simple stuff: serve-volley (or not), return cross court (rather
than glory shots down the line), be patient, be aggressive and so on. These,
as you will have noted, were not complicated match strategies. However,
what was revolutionary (for us at least) was that, in openly sharing our
objectives (with the implicit collective aim of winning the match), we eachgave the other permission to talk about our game, during the game. The
purpose of the pre-match discussion was therefore directed not at our
opponents but at ourselves. There is no hierarchy in a doubles team – no
boss, leader or follower, simply peers, even if they barely know each other.
Our pre-match alignment allowed us to have quite difficult conversations at
points of tension and pressure – with ease.
The power of alignment
An aligned team doesn’t just know where it’s trying to get to; it uses that
common objective to outline individual roles and define interpersonal
relationships. This alignment provides the team’s members with a
framework for powerful and otherwise difficult conversations.
Imagine this as depersonalising the personal. The reason some
conversations are difficult, and therefore often avoided, is because we
perceive them to be personal. And in a team, they often are. Yet an effective
team needs to be able to have difficult conversations without falling out. It’s
easy to say but difficult to do, especially if the context is pressured and
stressful. However, clear buy-in and alignment to the shared objective
allows difficult conversations to be had in the context of the objective,
rather than appearing to be an unwanted, perhaps even unwarranted,
personal critique. Without alignment, these conversations quite often either
are not had at all, become rows or simmering resentments, and of course
can lead to the toxicity of office politics. Just because things aren’t being
said doesn’t mean they aren’t being thought.
Back on the court, we were aligned; we weren’t two individuals, we
were a team. It became OK to ask why the other had hit a particular shot, or
indeed to tell them to stop doing it if it went against what they had said they
were going to try to do. It allowed us to discuss honestly how we were each
playing and feeling (in tennis these two are essentially one and the same), to
coach each other, to change our minds and to problem-solve as the match
progressed. It allowed us to have effective conversations about how we
were going to achieve our objective.
The primary role the pre-match conversation played was not to clarify
the overall task (that was glaringly obvious); rather, in sharing personal
objectives, we created alignment between us. And alignment affords teams
that invaluable tool: effective communication. Alignment allowed us to talkto each other about things that had previously not just been unspoken, but
caused us to seethe and negatively affected our own game. Although here I
have to admit, it is still infuriating if your partner dumps a simple volley
into the net on your serve – the only worse feeling being if it is you who has
missed the volley.
In my experience, leaders and leadership teams, even those who have
successfully agreed on their objective, often fail to use that clarity to align
themselves with one another. A clear objective gives you the opportunity to
build effective relationships within your leadership group, which in turn
form the basis for an effective organisational culture.
A four-point programme to align your team
1. Have a clear objective
Ensure you have a common and clearly understood objective.
2. Ask what’s in it for them
Discuss with the team what their personal ambitions are and work to
ensure that you have a mutual understanding of what it is about the
shared vision that motivates them personally.
3. Anticipate conflict
Conflict and disagreement are an essential part of an effective,
functioning team. Discuss how you want to deal with conflictual
situations before they arise. How will you hold each other to account?
4. Keep doing it
Practice makes perfect. Get used to reviewing your progress. Giselle
Mather, Director of Rugby at Wasps (a Premiership rugby club) and a
World Cup winner, talks of how, after every match, her team has a full
and frank debrief. They are, she says, incredibly powerful, but only
really work if everyone is able to be completely honest. The more often
you have honest and respectful conversations, the easier and less
conflictual they become.
The five rules for powerful and effective objectivesThe objective of this book is to liberate you from orthodoxy and the
drudgery of conventional change theory, to inspire you to think differently
about how to define effective objectives, and how to use them well. What
follows are five simple and universal rules to help you find an objective that
does what you need it to do and hopefully reduces the chances of you
finding yourself wandering around a field in Surrey wondering if taking
back a lump of cow shit on a stick as your source of inspiration will get you
fired by the client.
1. Be (very) ambitious
An objective must be imbued with genuine, perhaps unreasonable,
ambition. Here at least, the Leadership Industrial Complex and I almost
agree.
Your objective should be for your organisation to be the best, the
fastest, the most innovative; to reverse a precipitous decline; to achieve
results never before thought possible; to change entrenched behaviours
or beliefs; to lift people’s eyes from the day-to-day to believe that things
can be different, and that they themselves will be part of making that
happen.
It’s scary, of course, but also invigorating, even thrilling. Who
wouldn’t want to be responsible for that? The more explicit you are
about the scale of your ambition, the more you can be seen to fail. That’s
why leadership – great leadership – is hard. But that’s why you’re here,
right? You don’t want to be a manager, you want to create an earthquake,
a revolution. And that requires a big, scary statement of ambition right at
the start.
2. Be inspiring and sincere
It is of fundamental importance to all change programmes that everyone
(or as many as are realistically possible) feels engaged and inspired by
the task at hand. To achieve anything worthwhile requires a combination
of culture and ambition that inspire your teams to outperform. Easy to
say, difficult to do.
Inspiration in a leadership context is a rather difficult concept to wrap
our arms around. This is one of the reasons that leaders tie themselves in
knots trying to navigate their desire to make their business better, while
promising their employees magnificent high-order reasons to come towork – promises they often struggle to keep. An obviously self-defeating
outcome. The best advice I can give is to be honest and sincere, and to
not overthink it. It is perfectly possible for your teams to feel inspired
without being told they are also saving the world.
A more realistic, effective and, indeed, honest approach is to aspire to
be an organisation that achieves success in its own right, while also
taking a responsible and engaged approach to wider society, to the local
community and to its employees. Such an objective, done with sincerity,
will represent a very serious and responsible stretch target. if everyone
actually did this (rather than talking vaguely about it), the collective
societal transformation would be enormous. And it goes without saying
that, for many employees, this would be a dramatic improvement on
their current experience.
So be ambitious, honest and sincere. If you manage that, then you’re
well ahead of the pack.
3. Choose clarity over brevity
If in doubt, opt for clarity over brevity. So much of what we are told
encourages leaders to do the opposite. If you need to take a couple of
sentences to get it right, don’t worry about it. As you live with it and
begin to make progress you’ll be surprised how quickly you sharpen
your thinking and therefore wording. And as people become more
familiar with it, you can shorthand, as we did with Open. Indeed,
counter-intuitively, we discovered that the more we tried to explain
Open, the more complicated and less comprehensible it seemed to
become.
Clarity allows for more than just comprehension. It enables
recollection and, crucially, accelerates the process by which members of
the wider team are able to understand their individual roles in the change
programme.
Whatever you decide, it is critical that all stakeholders can understand
it, remember it and, ideally, see how achieving it will be of benefit to
them.
4. Over-communicate
We covered communication in the previous chapter, but it is critical in
bringing your vision to life.Too many leaders spend way too long deciding what it is they want to
do, and then way too little time and effort explaining their thinking to
their stakeholders. Consistent, clear and regular communication is
possibly the single easiest action leaders at all levels could take that
would dramatically improve their likelihood of success.
This is why clarity and simplicity matter so much. It is so much easier
to communicate your objective if it is easy to explain and remember. But
even so, you will need to communicate at every opportunity and far
more frequently than you think. This can sometimes be shorthand,
sometimes in greater detail, but far better that people get bored of the
repeated message than forget it or aren’t aware of it. And to be clear,
you’ll get bored long before everyone else does, so keep going.
I once wrote our company’s objectives in three words on a simple
piece of polyboard, and at every company meeting, no matter the topic,
at some point I would hold it up and link what we were discussing back
to our three words. It was deliberately low-tech, and over time the board
became dog-eared and worn, my waving it around being a source of
amusement and ribbing. But it worked. The more people joked about it,
the more the three words became part of our language and lore. I meet
people fifteen years and two jobs later who ask if I still have it. (Of
course I don’t. It was only a bit of polyboard.)
So don’t overthink, but do over-communicate.
5. Foster collective ownership
The objective can’t simply belong to you, even if in reality this is
initially the case. For you to be successful you have to take it on a
journey from comprehension, through relevance, to collective
ownership. In fact, it has often struck me that one measure of a
successful change programme is the ownership journey of the objective
itself. If it can morph from the possession of one (you or, more
commonly, a small group) to the possession of all, and if, as I do, you
consider change to be primarily about changing individual behaviours,
then you really are well on your way.
The big challenge, as ever, is how. In small teams it should be
relatively easy, but in larger organisations this can require significant
effort and time. But this will be time well spent.The first step is awareness. The second is comprehension and, more
specifically, comprehension of what it means for each individual,
shifting the objective from a corporate aspiration to a source of
individual action.
This can be difficult. You need to be realistic; people are not sitting
expectantly waiting to catch your distant-uttered pearls of wisdom. You
need a programme of awareness, comprehension and buy-in. This is
often mis-characterised as helping everybody understand what you think.
Instead, through smart consultation, communication and discussion, you
should aim to make everyone feel like they own a share in the objective.
Don’t be afraid of discussion or even disagreement – indeed you
should encourage and enable both. It is better for people to have a
chance to voice their opinions than to keep them hidden away or moaned
about in secret. Furthermore, discussion enables comprehension and
engagement encourages shared ownership, both of which are hugely
beneficial to your chances of success. This doesn’t require you to agree
with all that is said, but it does give you an opportunity to explain your
thinking and help people understand what’s in it for them. And, of
course, sometimes you will agree; great ideas will emerge if you allow
them the time and space to do so. Here again, beware the effects of
hierarchy. And to be asked questions at all demonstrates a relatively high
degree of engagement and understanding.
In all but the smallest teams it is impossible for you to directly engage
with the majority of people in this process. Nor is the point for there to
be decision by committee – anything but. Rather you should find ways to
enable people to independently discuss, share and build on your
leadership team’s thinking. We have already covered (in Chapter 1) some
straightforward ways to do this, and I would encourage you to explore
some of these (such as small focus groups) at this stage. These can be
used to explain your thinking, get feedback and listen to ideas and
suggestions, many of which will be very helpful and would otherwise
remain unsaid, or be kept hidden from you.
Your objective in achieving widespread buy-in is not only to ensure
everybody understands the collective direction, but also to enable
everyone to understand what their individual role will be. Collective
ownership gets you more than followers, it builds advocates and
evangelists for your revolution.A means to an end
Leaders are people. Leaders are you and me. It’s easy for me to claim that
objective-setting is straightforward, but in reality, perhaps it isn’t. I can
imagine some wanting to believe, but reflecting on the challenges they face
right now, and it not feeling anything like so straightforward.
I’m not trivialising the challenge, I’m simply arguing that setting an
effective objective, one that allows you to begin, that can galvanise your
team and get you all going in the same direction, need not be as daunting as
we are led to believe.
The more we build it up, the more setting an objective becomes an end
in itself. Many leaders make this process so complicated that they never get
beyond it. Finding an objective that is ambitious and succinct, one that
everybody agrees to, one that is useful and unique, is all but impossible; it
is certainly very time consuming and difficult. Therefore it often doesn’t get
done at all. And, if it doesn’t get done, how do you know where you’re
going, never mind describe your journey to anybody else. It is a common,
yet often unseen cause of failure.
If you find yourself in this place, don’t beat yourself up. You’re far from
alone. I’ve been there many times. Take the pressure off. Make the problem
more manageable by making it smaller. Think of it as the creation not of a
set of stone tablets but of sheets of paper; rather than a beautifully crafted
aphorism, a paragraph of simple prose; rather than a postage stamp, a
ballpark.
Write first in pencil
For an action-focused leader, as you must be, it is better to write your
objective in pencil, quickly, and set about executing against it, than to tread
with leaden feet towards a corporate-speak set of stone-carved words,
examples of which we are all familiar.
Defining a clear objective is a critical aspect of any leader’s task, and (as
with understanding the nature of your challenge) while it certainly requires
effort, boldness and imagination, it isn’t a difficult task. Change requires
great urgency and energy (as we shall see), and it is better to get quickly to
an objective that over time you refine and improve than to slog slowly
toward an unlikely version of perfection – while your competitors, ortechnology, or your employees slowly leave you behind. So write first in
pencil and be prepared to improve (and learn) as you go.
Your objective is not disposable, but nor is it unchangeable. It is a tool,
and you should see it as such. It isn’t the end, it is simply a means to
describe your journey. Make the task of defining your objective (if not its
ambition) feel smaller, less permanent and you’ll find yourself liberated to
begin. Because something impermanent can change and evolve, which in
reality is exactly what you want.NO BULLSH*T OBJECTIVE
To lead a successful change programme you must have a clear,
ambitious objective, one that is motivating, persuasive and easily
understood. This will provide a focal point around which your
strategy, culture and team align.
Take a common task and do it uncommonly well
Don’t overcomplicate.
Be bold and ambitious.
Favour clarity over brevity.
Aim for a territory rather than the head of a pin.
The four critical roles an objective should play
1. Set destination and direction.
2. Aid decision-making.
3. Build coalitions.
4. Achieve team alignment.
Achieving alignment within your team
Ensure you have a common and clearly understood objective. Understand what it is about the shared
objective that motivates them personally.
Discuss how to deal with conflictual situations before they arise. The more often you have honest
conversations, the easier and less conflictual they become.
Five rules for powerful and effective objectives
1. Show genuine, perhaps unreasonable, ambition.
2. Be inspiring, honest and sincere.
3. Choose clarity over brevity.
4. Over-communicate.
5. Foster collective ownership.
Write first in pencil
Your objective is not disposable, but nor should it be unchangeable. It is simply a means to describe
your journey.* A UK-based system of measuring school performance.4
BREAKING FREE
Change is a physical activity that does not begin until you
act. The leader’s most immediate task is convincing their
team that change is not just desirable, but that it is going to
happen. And fast. That whatever else, tomorrow is going to
be different to today, that next week will be different to this
week, that they are not the latest in a long line doomed to
fail.
Ere we are, Monday morning; day after tomorrow Wednesday and
nowt done yet.
Anonymous Yorkshire farmer (c. 1960), as quoted in The Times
I’m not interested in your stories about the past or any crap of
that kind because the woods are burning, boys, you understand?
Arthur Miller, Death of a Salesman
THERE’S A SCENE IN ARMANDO IANNUCCI’S superb satire of
Westminster party politics, The Thick of It, where the minister of state,
Hugh Abbot, is threatened yet again with being fired by Peter Capaldi’s
terrifying super-sweary spin doctor, Malcolm Tucker.
While Hugh frets, sweats and grovels, his PR director, Terri, gossips
maliciously on her desk phone in the office outside. We watch her as though
glimpsed through a half-open door: ‘It’s probably going to be Hugh that hasto go this time,’ she whispers sotto voce, before rocking back and belly
laughing at the unheard reply. ‘Oh it’ll be fine in the end. We’ll just get
another middle-aged man in on Monday morning; come through the door,
stride around a bit, spunk off and I’ll have to clear up the mess. It’ll be
business as usual,’ she concludes reassuringly. A cri de cœur for civil
servants everywhere.
The Thick of It, a hardly veiled commentary on the Blair years, aside
from being one of the most sharply observed and best-written shows of the
early noughties, is a study in cynical incompetence. A government
department elected to drive change focuses on nothing but their own
paranoia. Policy is simply a means to their personal end. There is no
objective, strategy or action that goes beyond the preservation of their
position for twenty-four more hours. With hindsight, it seems a more
innocent time.
For a leader it is the anti-manual, the wax that vanishes from the mould.
However, we would be wise not to laugh (or judge) without a little self￾reflection. Who among us hasn’t been Terri, gossiping and damning the new
and incoming tribe, the next in a long line of noisy, opinionated and
ultimately doomed leaders.
I have many times stood before an audience, their arms folded, and
described the need to change – why I was there, the challenges the business
faced and my new ambitions. Hundreds of pairs of eyes look back at me as
though they’d heard it all before. And I’m sure they had. For some I am an
object of curiosity perhaps, maybe interest, maybe opportunity. Others fret
and worry.
However, at such moments my greatest fear is to be dismissed by the
audience as simply ‘Hugh’s successor’, the latest in a long line doomed to
fail; that my audience calculates (based on their past experience) that I’m
just like all the others, that in fact they don’t need to engage with me or my
words at all. They can just hunker down, try to keep out of the way and,
soon enough, I too will be gone. After the initial flurry of enthusiastic
emails and perhaps a few glasses at a warm-sauvignon get-together, it will
be, as Terri described, business as usual.
Your task as a leader of change is, above all else, to ensure it will be
anything but.The leadership equation
If you remember only two words as a change leader, make them ‘clarity’
and ‘action’. In my previous book, No Bullsh*t Leadership, I described
their relationship as the ‘leadership equation’. It is a powerful tool for all
leaders:
impact = clarity × action
In the equation, clarity is represented by all the topics we usually think
of when we think about leadership (and change), for example: strategy,
values, culture, research, focus groups, competitor analysis, market context,
structure and so on.
However, the primary purpose of the equation is to encourage leader’s
bias toward action. Clarity, though critical, is not leadership. Without
action, the sum total of change is zero, and failure is guaranteed:
impact = clarity x action
If action = 0, impact = 0.
Simple maths, but a powerful conclusion.
The 40/70 rule
The US general and politician Colin Powell perfectly captured the balance
effective leaders must strike. In No Bullsh*t Leadership, I also introduced
Powell’s 40/70 rule:
Don’t take action if you have only enough information to give you a
less than 40 per cent chance of being right, but if you have waited
until you’re more than 70 per cent certain then you’ve waited too
long.
The 40/70 rule is a smart encapsulation of how to take action in the real
world, one where contexts change, where external and internal forces pull
to and fro. A decision is a choice taken when the outcome is uncertain, and
the 40/70 rule encourages leaders to recognise this and act anyway. Because
without action, failure is guaranteed.Clarity
In the specific case of change programmes, Clarity can be understood as
being the sum of two primary tasks that are the distillation of the outputs
from Chapters 1, 2 and 3:
1. Direction: the imaginary line drawn from baseline to objective.
2. Communication: ensuring that all your stakeholders are clear on
the need to change, the direction you are headed and why that is a
good thing for them (in the extreme, perhaps the only way to avoid
ruin).
The liberation of action
The point of the leadership equation is that change does not begin until you
take action. Objectives and strategy are crucial – if you don’t know where
you’re going then you’re never going to get there. But if you don’t take
action then objectives and strategy are just fantasy.
If clarity is the sum of direction and communication, then:
impact = (direction + communication) × action
Wonderful and clever thinking is worthless without action. But even if
your strategy is imperfect, as it inevitably will be, or your communication is
inelegant, as it sometimes will be, a bias toward action will still deliver
impact and change.
Many change programmes founder not for want of ideas and sincere
intentions, but effective, consistent and long-term action. Much of which
cannot be pre-baked, but is a consequence, as we will see in Chapter 8, of
continual learning and reorientation. The absence of effective action,
evaluation and reaction is the surest guarantee of failure.
Some change leaders fear action because they fear error; it’s human and
normal to do so. Missteps can be painful, and action, far more than writing
PowerPoint decks, is where change programmes can be seen to stumble.
However, leaders must recognise ‘errors’ as a necessary part of the process.
An unexpected outcome does not mean failure, whereas inaction inevitably
does.Far from being a risk, action liberates. If a decision is a choice made
when uncertain of the outcome, it is axiomatic that sometimes the outcome
will not be as you hope or expect. Yet take them we must if we are to
progress. As military staff colleges teach the world over, no plan survives
contact with the enemy. For a change programme, the status quo is failure,
and without effective action that is where you will remain.
Be less Hugh
As we established in Chapter 1, the greatest challenge in these moments is
rarely that of explaining the nature of the task that lies before you. Nor is it
difficult to explain the benefits of an improvement in that situation, even if
for some this represents a worrying or uncertain prospect.
Change is a physical activity, and the leader’s most immediate task is
convincing their team that change is not just desirable, but that this time, it
is going to happen. And fast. That whatever else, tomorrow is going to be
different to today, that next week will be different to this week; that they are
not, like the hapless Hugh Abbot, simply the latest in a long line doomed to
fail.
Overcoming sticking friction
It’s easier to move a sledge once you’ve freed it from the ice. Scientists
refer to these two states as sticking friction and kinetic friction:
sticking friction > kinetic friction*
No matter the size, shape or weight of an object, the energy required to
get it moving is always greater than the energy required to keep it in
motion. Change works in the same way. As you begin, you may have to
kick and struggle to get going, but once underway it becomes just that bit
easier to keep moving.
Initially, direction matters less than movement
The first and most important action in leading a successful change
programme is to break free. Breaking free means preparing the ground for
the changes you must make to reach your objective. Here, somewhatcounter-intuitively, direction matters less than movement. This is the
opposite to what traditional change theory tells us.
Your first priority is to ensure that everyone believes that change, any
change, is possible, that it is anything but business as usual. Words alone
just won’t cut it, no matter how inspiring and persuasive your speech.
This is freeing the sledge, and to do so you will have to push, pull, rock
it from side to side, chip the ice from the runners, heave, shout and kick.
Once free, altering direction is easier, it’s getting the thing moving that’s so
damn difficult. So it is with change. Teams don’t just appear out of thin air.
Your arrival may be new, but belief, culture, trust, respect and confidence
take time to develop. This is kinetic friction: these things will come in time
through your strategy and determined actions. To start, however, you need
to focus on freeing the sledge and overcoming the resistance, cynicism,
scepticism and inertia of the group.
At this stage some of the actions you take may not be directly related to
your ultimate goal, but are simply designed to create an expectation, an
understanding, that the status quo is no more; that you’re not all talk, and
change isn’t simply coming, it’s already here; that action and urgency are
the order of the day.
Note: Just as with much else in this book, this approach can apply to
individuals (you) as well as organisations.
Five powerful approaches to freeing the sledge
1. Environment
Environment is an underutilised and very powerful driver of change.
Perhaps it’s underutilised because it seems a little trivial, not Harvard
Business School enough to count as a proper business strategy. But nobody
who has been responsible for the redesign of an office seating plan and
experienced the ensuing uproar would ever make such a mistake.
Freeing the sledge can best be understood as the breaking of (often very
ingrained) habits. We couldn’t get through life if we didn’t do some things
on autopilot, tasks our brains perform with a minimum of conscious effort.
That’s why, it is said, successful people wear the same style of clothes every
day; it’s just one less decision to take. To free the sledge, however, we must
strive to push familiar tasks from the subconscious to the conscious. And a
great way to do this is to use the environment.Several years ago I was tasked with moving fifteen businesses in the
same group into a single location. It was met with variable levels of
enthusiasm by the leaders of the businesses concerned. I had been brought
in halfway though the planning process and was assailed with strategy
documents and lobbied relentlessly by CEOs determined to change as little
as they possibly could. I threw them all out. The move was, as I saw it, an
opportunity to reset the most fundamental principles of our culture, strategy
and objectives. And I was determined to use the new location as a totem for
that future.
It was an initially painful and difficult process, but within six months not
only could everyone see and feel the almost immediate benefits, but the
business’s reputation and performance were on the way to a total
transformation. The shouting, gnashing of teeth and threats of resignation
were never mentioned again. Like all good ideas, it had become
everybody’s idea.
Where and how we work is a powerful cultural marker. There are very
many quick, simple and effective ways to use geography and the
environment to break habits and signal change. You can learn much about
an organisation from its physical environment, everything from the decor
and seating plan, to where people eat and meet. Does everyone have an
office, just some people or no one? Where are the offices? Is the building
quiet or noisy, full or empty, colourful or monochrome, messy or tidy,
corporate or chaotic? The physical environment of an organisation tells you
much about how it feels and thinks. Yet it is often overlooked, or seen as
incidental to change programmes, put last on the list, rather than offering an
early opportunity to break free. Put it first.
In recent years there has been much debate about open-plan working vs
offices, fixed desks vs hot desks, home vs hybrid, etc., but these decisions
are usually couched in terms of functional efficiency, rather than how they
impact (for good or bad) the organisation’s culture. An effective leader
should use all the tools available to create the culture they need (and shake
off those things they wish to leave behind). The environment is an
overlooked and powerful lever.
It’s an approach that works for teams and individuals, and in all
environments. It’s not about having a ‘good’ or ‘bad’ space, it’s about
physical change as a precursor to wider, more strategic changes that will
come later. All teams develop (consciously or not) habits, shared behavioursand unwritten codes. Often these are so familiar that they are invisible even
to ourselves. Your task is to break these by helping yourself and others see
the familiar anew, making the unconscious, conscious. You’ll be surprised
how even small changes to the team environment can alter how it thinks,
feels and acts.
In the opening passage of Creativity, Inc., Ed Catmull, co-founder of
Pixar, describes how seemingly insignificant details can mutate into
enduring habits and negative behaviours. In their boardroom they had a
large, beautiful table that had been designed and built specifically for the
space. It was long, narrow and very expensive. For over a decade it was the
hub around which they worked. All important meetings related to movie
production were held in the room, meaning there were often more than
thirty people squeezed along the table’s sides.
The problem was, it made communication very difficult. If you were at
either end you were effectively cut out of the discussion. Therefore, because
it was critical that the producers, director, lead writers and other senior
executives could contribute, they had to be placed in the centre. In time, to
make this easier still, somebody had the idea of producing name cards to
mark the ‘important’ people’s places. As the company grew they
incrementally and unintentionally found themselves with a caste system:
those seated in the centre, those at the ends, and those unable to get places
at the table at all, who sat round the edge of the room. A meeting designed
to be about the free, open and unstructured flow of ideas had gradually and
unwittingly introduced a hierarchy that actively inhibited discussion. The
further you were from the centre the less important you appeared to be, and
the more difficult and less likely it was for you to contribute.
Catmull observes: ‘The seating arrangements and place cards were
designed for the convenience of the leaders, including me. Sincerely
believing that we were in an inclusive meeting, we saw nothing amiss
because we didn’t feel excluded. Those not sitting at the centre … saw quite
clearly it established a pecking order, but presumed we – the leaders – had
intended that outcome.’
By chance, they happened one day to have the meeting in a smaller room
with a square table and immediately saw what was wrong: ‘The interplay
was better, the exchange of ideas more free-flowing, the eye-contact
automatic. Every person … felt free to speak up.’Catmull demanded the dismantling of the expensive designer table. Place
cards, now unnecessary, were discarded. He concludes: ‘Unhindered
communication was key [to Pixar’s success], no matter your position. At
our long skinny table, comfortable in our middle seats, we had utterly failed
to recognize we were behaving contrary to that basic tenet.’
Be prepared here for cynicism and possibly even rebellion. But that’s the
point. An organisation’s physical environment is something that affects
everyone within it and has consequences, intended and unintended, for how
people think, feel and behave. You want to use it to make people sit up and
pay attention, to see that you’re serious, to feel something new and
different. This does not define your strategy, but it is a tangible new
beginning.
People become very attached to where they sit, who they sit with, how
they navigate the space and build their habits accordingly. Often, the more
senior they are the more attached they become. But if you want to break
free, here lies opportunity. By changing seating plans, department
boundaries, meeting rooms and communal spaces, old habits and old
customs can be shattered (I use that word deliberately) and renewal can
begin. Change, at its core, is lots of individuals doing their thing differently.
Your challenge is to find ways for your programme to cut through on an
individual level. Initiating change to the physical environment is a powerful
and effective way to achieve this. There will be opportunities everywhere if
you are imaginative, clear-eyed and bold enough to hunt them out, whether
in the home office or corporate HQ, classroom or lab.
2. Routines
Routines have their place, but they are also how we ingrain and sustain
habits. Our objective here is to break habits, therefore we must break our
routines.
The pandemic was the great breaker of routines. We had to let go of so
much while simultaneously and rapidly learning new habits we would
previously never have dreamed of: wearing masks, washing our hands for
twenty seconds, not shaking hands, working from home, holding meetings
by video, standing two metres apart – all became, and in some cases
remain, the new normal.The pandemic didn’t just force us to break familiar routines; to our
collective surprise, we discovered that many of them had not been
necessary at all. I doubt if commuting and office life will ever return to
exactly how they were, to pick two examples of many.
If habits as fundamental as these can change, how many more
opportunities, big and small, surround you and your team right now? Some
will be so ingrained that you will not initially notice them, others appear so
fundamental that you may not dare do away with them; many so small that
they seem hardly worthy a mention. But what if you hunted them out and
changed them all? One a week. What would that unlock?
Ten years ago I was CEO of a London advertising agency. At that time
(and, to an extent, still) the creative director of an ad agency ruled the roost,
and getting his or her ‘sign-off’ was a prerequisite for anything that was
shown to the client. It was the thing that advertising agencies did and had in
common. This wasn’t considered a nice-to-have, it was considered
sacrosanct and inviolable.
What, we wondered, would happen if, overnight, we did away with this
rule, and instead allowed individual multidisciplinary teams to define their
own processes? What if the ‘sign-off’ was stifling us and holding us back?
It’s easy to write now, but at the time it was a terrifying heresy. Yet we did
it. And were transformed.
What are your equivalents?
The objective in freeing the sledge is shifting more of the team’s
everyday from the subconscious to the conscious. Doing this does not
necessarily require a great effort or leap of imagination. If you have a
regular meeting, hold it somewhere else, at a different time and different
place. Invite different people. It’s an example we could all do right now. In
fact, even if you are not running a change programme this is a good idea. To
be effective we need to be present and engaged, and regular shaking up of
routine is a simple and effective way to keep us all fresh.
And remember, you can always change your mind. There are many
routines I have blithely smashed away only to realise that there was a very
good reason why it was as it was. On these occasions, we just switched
back to how things had been previously. But even in doing this, we broke
the casual acceptance of longstanding norms and habits, embedding instead
a culture that questioned itself, asked why, was prepared to experiment,even fail, in search of new solutions. Even in these instances, the message
to all became: there are no sacred cows, try it and see what happens.
3. Structures
Structures, job titles, hierarchies, committees and departments determine so
much of how an organisation functions, and are necessary for it to work
well. However, they also embed behaviours, culture, relationships and
thinking. It is not necessary to be an iconoclast to wish to reset some or all
of these structures. The simple addition (or removal) of one or two people
from a particularly influential committee can be enough to create immediate
change. The power of decisions like this are seen and understood by all.
Changes such as this often result in significant resistance, but remember,
overcoming sticking friction is why we’re here.
Whatever your first step, it’s unlikely to be the last team change you’ll
make, but it is of critical importance that you break the shape, patterns and
habits of the team as it stood before. Before you can re-form it, you must
break it, even if that too was a team you built – perhaps especially if it was
a team you built. This was the genius of Sir Alex Ferguson, the iconic
former Manchester United head coach: to be able to successfully build,
break and rebuild.
Virtually everyone in all organisations is a member of a team. The
leadership, structure, purpose, culture and objective of these teams shapes
how they and, collectively, the whole organisation functions. These teams
also set and maintain the routines that have become ingrained in the culture.
Much routine is shorthand, a way of getting the familiar done in an
efficient and accepted way. To change these habits you must change how
your teams work. Changing the cadence or location of meetings, clarifying
(or re-orienting) their objective, duration or frequency – and in some cases
simply cancelling them altogether – will demonstrate unequivocally that
things aren’t as they used to be. This breaking of structures and, therefore,
routines also allows people around you to begin to understand the areas and
behaviours you consider, even at this early stage, to matter the most.
There are, of course, far more dramatic interventions, from firing or
reassigning people to the removal of roles and overturning of whole
department structures. The time for this will come, but first you mustquickly break habits and patterns with determined and clear action to begin
to free the sledge.
4. Sensorium
The colour, design and layout of our environment has a dramatic effect on
mood, behaviour and performance. Changing it is a relatively easy but very
effective way to signal intent.
This is supported by a wealth of academic research. To pick but two of
many:
‘In clothing, interiors, landscape, and even natural light, a colour can
change our mood from sad to happy, from confusion to intelligence,
from fear to confidence.’
– Aves & Aves (1994)
‘The design of an environment through a variety of means such as
temperature, sounds, layout, lighting and colours can stimulate
perceptual and emotional responses in consumers and affect their
behaviour.’
– Kotler (1973) quoted in Yildirim, Akalin-Baskaya and Hidayetoglu
(2007)
I even happened across a Scandinavian study that showed that students
performed better in a given task if they had a view of a pot plant rather than
a magazine rack. You’re welcome – I’ve done the reading so you don’t have
to.
Real hidden persuaders stuff, but humankind has known this for
centuries. The great cathedrals were designed to awe and inspire their
congregations; the purpose of a Japanese water garden is to bring serenity
into our lives. In a modern office, low ceilings, loud noises, glare, poor air
quality, uncomfortable temperatures and unpleasant smells are proven
sources of stress and anxiety. All so obvious, they need no explanation.
In Chapter 1, we considered those factors that are within and without our
control. In freeing the sledge we are concerned with those factors that are
not only within our control, but where change can be quickly made.
Sensorial changes to environment and context are very often easy and cheap
to do, yet are frequently overlooked, not least because they fail to make itonto the Leadership Industrial Complex’s list of activities ‘suitable for
grown-up leaders’. Serious leaders, however, get stuff done.
Some organisations consider the sensorial experience of their employees
and clients as a matter of course. Supermarkets the world over pay great
attention to this. In the UK, fresh fruit and veg are nearly always at the
entrance. I can think of no example in Europe and the US where you enter
the store to be confronted by the fish counter. However, when I visited a
high-end supermarket in Shanghai, the store opened onto row upon row of
tanks of live fish, crabs, lobsters – even frogs. Yet supermarkets in China
and Europe have the same objective. In the UK, fresh veg is a shorthand for
the freshness and quality of their goods; in China it is fresh (living) fish.
First impressions matter.
Supermarkets also understand the other side of environment and context.
It is a tough and competitive world, one where marginal pricing makes a
huge difference to their market share and sales. Therefore, successful
negotiations with major suppliers are a critical part of their business model.
An executive from a major packaged goods company once described to me
their experience of negotiating with a large supermarket chain. The
meetings were held in a small, windowless room containing a hardwood
table and uncomfortable chairs. Only water in a disposable plastic cup was
offered. The mood was described as being like an interrogation room. If
others dedicate so much time and attention to the topic, is it crazy if you do
too?
In a team I once led, we built a completely glass-walled meeting room in
the middle of the office to use for all our new prospect meetings. We
wanted to create an effect of light, energy and movement. It was awkward
to organise and seemed to many an unnecessary expense; ‘What was wrong
with all the other fabulous meeting rooms we had?’ they argued. But it
worked like a charm.
Why not try something similar by brewing real coffee in reception? We
all do it when we’re trying to sell our house, why not when we’re trying to
impress our clients or welcome our employees? Often, large buildings feel
uninspiring because of their uniformity. Create radically different spaces
within the building, spaces that look, feel, smell and sound different to each
other:
• Welcoming and warm• Quiet and studious
• Energetic and inspiring
• Communal and sociable.
It’s not difficult to do. So get on and do it.
I once worked with a creative director who, at the end of a new business
meeting, if it took place at the client’s office, would waft the room with a
scented joss stick called ‘Sleepy Time’ before the arrival of our competitor.
I have no idea if it worked or not, but it still makes me laugh to think about
it.
5. Embody the change you want to see
Physical actions matter. I often refer to the type of actions described above
as making each Monday feel different to the preceding Friday. I like this
because it suggests a continuous drive to signal change as a companion
piece to larger, more strategic actions you plan to make or that are already
underway.
The final piece is you. Ultimately, people must be persuaded to follow
you. You must immediately set the tone and the pace of change. To be
effective, you should consider how you plan to be the embodiment of the
change you want to see.
This doesn’t mean attempting to become somebody you’re not, but it
might mean pushing yourself out of your comfort zone, to challenge
yourself to speak, act and behave in new or unfamiliar ways. You too may
need to first examine, understand and then break some of your habits.
Certainly this is not a business-as-usual situation, and therefore you, more
than anybody else, cannot behave in a business-as-usual manner. This does
not mean being inauthentic, but it does mean you should think carefully
about how you use your behaviours to create the urgency and liberation of
thought that you need going forward.
Justin Langer, the former coach of the Australian cricket team, tells a
story of a lunch he had with one of his heroes, Sir Alex Ferguson, who we
met a few pages earlier. The fiery Glaswegian was famous for his
uncompromising style. No respecter of reputations, in anger he once kicked
a boot across the dressing room with such force that David Beckham, who
was the unintended recipient, required stiches above his eye. He memorablydescribed his half-time dressing-downs as ‘the hairdryer treatment’. An
image that requires no elaboration.
Ferguson, however, knows a thing or two about leadership, egos and
change, having created not just one championship-winning team but several
over a period of two decades. He is one of the most successful football
managers of all time. In the ultimate results business, for many, he remains
the leader’s leader.
Ferguson’s advice to Langer was, ‘the truth works’. It’s a profound
observation. It’s not simply speaking your mind, it’s describing a situation
accurately, confronting difficulties, putting your hand up when you’re
wrong or unsure, when you’re sad or happy, when you think things aren’t as
they should be. It is about being truthful without fear or favour.
The truth can be difficult and scary, but it doesn’t have to lack empathy
or compassion. It is possible to tell somebody something they really don’t
wish to hear in a way that enables them to come to terms with it and even
grow and thrive as a result.
You can create change through how you communicate. Not simply what
you say, but how and when you say it. You’ll be surprised the effect this can
have. People don’t like bullshitters, so don’t be one.
Urgent action builds confidence and belief
Freeing the sledge isn’t primarily about movement, it is about the creation
of collective energy, belief and confidence. For a leader and a leadership
team, confidence isn’t simply about winning or losing (because losing is an
occupational hazard), it is about being in control. A confident team is one
that feels it is in control of events, rather than events controlling them.
We began this chapter with an equation showing the relationship
between change and action. We’re going to end the chapter by exploring the
relationship between confidence and action.
The confidence of an individual leader, and ultimately the team or
organisation, is directly proportional to action taken. For the fellow maths
geeks, it can be written as follows:
confidence ∝ action*In simple terms, this means that if action doubles, confidence doubles; if
action halves, confidence halves. The more you are able to impose your will
on the situation through effective action rather than allowing the situation to
dictate to you, the greater your confidence and self-belief and the greater
the belief others will have in you.
It’s an easy-to-observe and self-evident truth, one we see and experience
every day. The opposite proves the point. There are few things more
dispiriting and confidence sapping than working for a leader who appears
unwilling or unable to act.
Yet this is a common position teams of all shapes and sizes find
themselves in. They meet every week and find themselves discussing the
same problems. Round and round they go: better and better at describing
the problem, yet further and further from being prepared to act to solve it. It
is amazing how quickly indecision destroys the confidence of a team and
conversely how quickly action can build it up.
The consolation of action
Like being in a car accelerating from the lights, urgency is something you
can feel; even with your eyes closed you know you’re moving. Belief, then,
is a quantity that you can readily build. You can build it through tiny,
frequent steps. The determination to act will build belief in your ability to
shape events. And shaping events is what change is all about.
You must believe that you can create change if you are to lead it. To free
the sledge, you not only must build confidence through action; you must
also be impatient. Not kick-the-doors down, tear-your-hair-out impatient,
but impatient nevertheless. You must ask: by when, who will be
responsible, what’s our next step, why not now? You don’t have to be the
leader to do this, however; by being the motive force you become a leader.
Don’t leave a meeting without actions, don’t start a meeting without an
objective.
There’s no better or more liberating feeling than getting that sledge
slowly sliding forward. The time for thinking, if not over (there’s always
time for thinking), must now be paired with action. And action begets
action. The more you do, the faster you feel change happening, the greater
your confidence to continue what will be a long and difficult journey.Though those around you may not show it, they too will feel the change,
the new energy and the release from old orthodoxies and habits. Some may
mourn their passing, some may remain fearful, some may not like the
direction you have chosen, but all will feel it and will begin their own
process of change. Like flowers following rain in the desert, energy will
appear where none existed before; people who had been written off or who
were previously invisible will come to life. Ideas will come from places
they never had before; you’ll start to feel others walking at your side.
The crucial insight the leader must grasp when rebuilding a broken team
or organisation is that initially the direction of travel matters less than the
creation of belief that change is possible. At this stage, your destination is
sufficiently distant to be far less important than the need to create the
necessary energy and belief to free the sledge.
Don’t allow your natural fear of being wrong deter you from action. In
beginning change, urgent action is a prelude to direction. Be afraid of
inaction. You must make your organisation, and yourself perhaps, believe
that change is possible, and that change is happening. Right now. It proves
that you’re not just another doomed leader full of talk and empty on action,
to be laughed at on the phone by Terri. You’re different.
You’re still a long way from the finish line, but now the sledge is
moving, you’re on your way. This is how change begins.NO BULLSH*T BREAKING FREE
Change is a physical activity that doesn’t begin until you act. The
leader’s most immediate task is convincing their team that change
is not just desirable, but that it is going to happen. And fast. That
whatever else, tomorrow is going to be different to today, that
next week will be different to this week; that they are not the
latest in a long line doomed to fail.
Change impact = (direction + communication) × action
Many change programmes founder not for want of ideas and sincere intentions, but for want of
effective, consistent and long-term action.
Sticking friction > kinetic friction
The energy required to get an object moving is always greater than the energy required to keep it in
motion. So it is with change.
Initially, direction matters less than movement
Your first priority is to ensure everyone believes that change, any change, is possible, that it is
anything but business as usual. It’s going to happen, and it’s going to happen fast.
Five powerful ways to free the sledge
1. Environmental change.
2. Break routines and habits.
3. Deconstruct and reconstruct organisational structures.
4. Sensorial change.
5. Most importantly, lead by example.
Confidence ∝ action
Confidence is proportional to action taken.
The more you are able to impose your will on the situation rather than allow the situation to dictate to
you, the greater your confidence and self-belief, and the greater the belief others will have in you.
* For the non-geeks, this means that confidence is directly proportional to action taken.
* Sticking friction is always greater than kinetic friction.5
TEAMS
What unites successful leaders is their understanding that they
cannot do it alone.
They need to find their First Five, build effective teams that
endure and encourage the development of other great leaders
throughout their organisation.
If I have seen further, it is by standing on the shoulders of giants.
Sir Isaac Newton
Individual commitment to a group effort – that is what makes a
team work, a company work, a society work, a civilisation work.
Vince Lombardi
A COMPELLING CASE CAN BE MADE that Dwight D. Eisenhower was
the greatest and most important leader of the twentieth century. Ike, as he was
universally known, was appointed Supreme Commander of the Allied
Expeditionary Force in early 1944, tasked with leading the liberation of
occupied Europe.
The D-Day landings remain the largest and most complex single military
operation ever undertaken, a complexity that cannot be understood in
numbers alone, although they are mind-boggling. By the conclusion of the
war in Europe in May 1945, Eisenhower commanded 5.5 million men and
women, 28,000 aircraft and 970,000 vehicles. These numbers tell only part of
the story. Armies from eight nations took part in D-Day, all with their own
egos, customs, doctrines, strengths, weaknesses and, of course, jealousies. Or,as General George Patton, one of Eisenhower’s deputies, put it, ‘God deliver
us from our friends. We can handle the enemy.’ It was Ike’s leadership genius
that held this coalition together through the long and gruelling eleven months
from Normandy to VE Day.
By 1944, there were many very capable and proven battlefield
commanders in the Allied ranks, and many more who firmly believed they
were. Inter-service, inter-regiment and international rivalries were ingrained
facts of Allied military life. For the men at the top (and they were all men),
this was their career, chosen long before war began. Many actively sought
advancement, were unafraid to use fair means or foul to achieve it and viewed
the war’s denouement as a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity. Many field
commanders actively courted fame, and some even had their own PR teams
who, operating not unlike modern spin doctors, would brief for their boss and
covertly against their rivals.
In the eye of this storm stood Eisenhower, promoted in some cases above
the heads of those once senior to him and tasked with the greatest and most
important mission of his – arguably any – lifetime. There were undoubtedly
other more competent soldier-generals, those who could better read the ebb
and flow of modern battle, but there were none who possessed his coalition￾building, political and leadership skills. No other who could see, feel and
experience the mighty egos and, rather than wilt, mould them into a
formidable and unified whole.
Eisenhower was an excellent judge of men, being prepared to overlook
imperfection of character in return for appropriateness of capability. Brilliant
at selecting the right person for the job, he was also ruthless enough to
remove those who failed. He had the ability to see through the variations of
personality to the individual’s most core strength and enable him to maximise
it for the benefit of the whole.
In total war, the line between politics and military strategy is blurred. As
the face of the Allied military effort, Eisenhower also had to be a politician –
he too had bosses. Churchill and Roosevelt were men unafraid (indeed in
Churchill’s case eager) to share their opinion on strategies. Stalin, an
uncomfortable ally, twisted their tails. In democracies, governments must get
re-elected, their citizens prepared to make sacrifice, but only if they believe
that sacrifice to be proportional; that their blood and gold are expended with
great care. All this also lay on Eisenhower’s shoulders.
Eisenhower’s record is unimpeachable. The coalition he built and
maintained was one of daunting internal tensions but, ultimately, formidablestrength. Never forgetting he headed a citizen army, one that was led by
consent rather than coercion, he did more than simply hold the egos in check.
He forged a mighty and unified fighting force, one able to perform feats of
arms, logistics and after the war’s end, political rebuilding, that are
unmatched before or since.
Eisenhower was the right man for the most important job of the age. Even
today we have reason to remain grateful for his ability to forge a team from
the most complicated ingredients and prevail. He remains the only man in
history for whom becoming US president is only the second greatest
achievement of his life.
None of us will face the challenges Eisenhower faced. His objective was
obvious, and he understood that his single most important task in achieving it
was to build and maintain powerful and effective teams. Teams strong enough
to contain men of vaulting ambition, huge egos and who bore terrible
responsibility. Whatever their personal feelings toward each other, and at
times these were toxic, he was utterly intolerant of behaviours that damaged
the coherence of the whole and therefore that would undermine the mission.
‘You can call him a son of a bitch,’ he once chided a subordinate, ‘but not a
British son of a bitch.’
Brilliant teams everywhere
In this chapter, we will consider the three aspects of team building that you
will need to lead effective change and achieve enduring success. Like much
else concerned with change, these are unlikely to be consecutive activities;
however, they are presented here in a deliberate order of priority:
1. First Five: a coalition for change
2. Building a high-performing organisation: aligning individuals with the
collective
3. Effective leaders everywhere: the accelerant of change
1. First Five: a coalition for change
In leading change, time is not on your side. Whether pressured by customers,
bosses, shareholders, owners, employees, the bottom line or, commonly, a
combination of some or all of these, you need to move fast. To do so, your
first and most important action is to build about you a coalition who will
rapidly multiply your impact. The First Five is a very simple concept andsounds a familiar, even obvious idea, yet its importance is often overlooked. It
is the kernel for all that will follow.
I have often spoken of the idea to groups of leaders around the world. If
you regularly do presentations and speeches you begin to get a sense from the
room of which points really hit home; people scribble notes or photograph the
screen. This is invariably one of those moments.
Your First Five (or two or three or six) is a small, tight-knit group of
people, ideally some of whom you already know and have worked with
before, although that isn’t a prerequisite. Above all else, you must trust each
other implicitly. It is a group who you can be vulnerable with, who can help
you problem-solve without fear or favour, who share your ambition and
values, who will be honest with you and each other and, most importantly,
who you know can deliver. It’s more a gang than a conventional team.
It cannot simply be the people who through luck and circumstance you
happen to find yourself surrounded with; they cannot be just any old group
who you attempt to mould like reluctant clay. Those who you choose cannot
be defined simply by job titles, seniority or experience, and especially not by
politics. There’s plenty of time for all that as you go (I’m not naïve to these
demands), but not now.
Though not necessarily entirely comprised of the most senior people, some
will need to be, and all will need the requisite seniority and experience to be
able to get stuff done and directly impact the areas of the business you have
initially identified as most in need of attention. They must all be proven, high￾quality practitioners in their field, as they will help you lead change through
doing. You may evolve and grow this group over time, but if you find them
and find them fast they will catalyse your rate of change.
We see First Fives all the time in top-level sport. New managers brought
into Premiership football clubs never come alone; they bring a small, tight
and trusted team with them. This isn’t laziness or jobs for the boys, it’s a
recognition that time is short, that change is a team sport, and that they need a
multiplier effect right from the off. Giselle Mather, Director of Rugby at
Wasps Rugby Club (who we met previously), describes each weekly team
selection announcement as a cultural hand grenade. In an environment of such
unrelenting pressure, where results are both immediate and unforgiving, the
irresistible pressure of the fixture list means leaders simply do not have the
luxury of starting completely from scratch. They need to come with an
objective, a leadership philosophy and quickly assemble a core team who can
begin to execute from day one.First Five principles
The idea of a First Five resonates so strongly with people because it doesn’t
work like a traditional team; it is both looser and tighter, less formal and
potentially more powerful.
• Find them fast
Your First Five are the team who, with you, will begin to free the sledge, so
you need to prioritise finding them. Of course in the real world you cannot
simply conjure up the right people, but you must put finding the first of them
at the top of your to-do list. It will be time well spent.
• Trust
Trust is critical to the success of your First Five. You like each other,
implicitly trust each other and always have each other’s backs. If you’ve got
this, you’re well on your way.
• Vulnerable and safe
Change is difficult, demanding and sometimes lonely. The First Five is a safe
space, where the whole is greater than the sum of the parts. It’s a place where
you can problem-solve, where doubts, fears and worries can be shared, eased
and always listened to.
• Great core skills
This is the most basic and fundamental requirement. Ideally, their skill sets
will be complementary, but don’t think about this group in the way you would
a normal team. They do not need to be able to do everything, but what they
do, they need to do well.
• Divide up tasks and lead through doing
Whatever the opposite is of a talking shop, the First Five is it. This team is a
team of doers. Getting stuff done is hard, but as we discovered in the previous
chapter is the only way change happens. The First Five helps drive change
through their core skills, their behaviours and getting their sleeves rolled up
and doing it.
• Frequently re-commit to each other
Effective relationships, like a healthy garden, need love and nurture. It is easy
to take close relationships such as these for granted. Don’t. You mustregularly meet, discuss, re-commit and share. Partly to ensure you retain your
alignment (Chapter 3) and partly to ensure your interpersonal relationships
remain strong. Don’t assume everyone is OK.
• Work hard
Leading change is a demanding task. To succeed, you and your First Five will
need to work hard in order to achieve your goals. This may be obvious, but
you need those who are able and willing to take this on.
2. Building a high-performing organisation
An effective team is a group of individuals capable of achieving something
none would be able to do on their own. To succeed, you must build powerful
and thriving teams across your organisation.
Teams, because they are always made up of people, are difficult and
complicated things. Every team has its own culture, be it good, bad,
indifferent – or much worse. We will consider the critical role of culture in
more detail in Chapter 7, but in short, an effective culture is one that enables a
team to achieve a level of performance that otherwise would be beyond it.
In order to build and sustain brilliant teams, it is important to understand
individuals’ relationship to their leader(s) and the organisation as a whole.
This can be shown using the grid below.
• Vertical axis: In my Interests
A rational assessment of what is best for an individual’s career at a
particular life stage. For example, the role may be well paid, it may
provide opportunity for promotion, career advancement, specific training
or experience.
• Horizontal axis: Aligns with my values
The extent to which the role aligns with their personal values, is
emotionally fulfilling and that they are engaged with the organisation’s
ambitions (and, in the context of change, yours).Thriving, cruising, disconnected, stalled
Everyone sits somewhere on this grid, and they will move around over time
depending on a range of factors, from salary, career ambitions and status to
leadership, culture or the demands of relationships and family. It is impossible
to distil the human condition to a single grid, but it’s a useful tool and
illustrates the change-leader’s challenge when considering the motivations
and performance of those in their teams. In general terms, you must strive to
move people in the direction of the arrow shown, from bottom left to top
right, though of course the vast majority exist in all the spaces in between
these two extremes.
1. ThrivePeople who are in the top-right quadrant believe that the fulfilment of the
team ambition is fully aligned with the fulfilment of their own personal career
ambitions. People here feel inspired by their leaders, the task at hand and that
they have control over their career and the choices they make. We want as
many people as possible to be in this quadrant. People here feel that, on the
whole, they are able to control events rather than events controlling them.
2. Cruise
People in the bottom-right quadrant typically are comfortable in their roles
and like, even admire, the organisation. They may be very diligent and hard
working, but are well within their personal comfort zone. Though they may
feel valued, they are aware that they could achieve more, yet personal or
organisational barriers are in the way. For many in this quadrant, work life is
comfortable and familiar, but when it comes to making change there is little
room for cruising, and consequently people here may feel particularly
threatened by your programme.
You need to find compelling reasons for these people to fully re-engage
and align their ambitions with yours. Having too many people in Cruise may
be the very reason the organisation needs to change in the first place.
I once had a rather fractious conversation with a potential employer. ‘I can
see why it’s in your interests to hire me, but I can’t see why it’s in my
interests to take the role,’ I observed, after several long and, in truth,
interesting conversations. I think they thought it rather rude of me to be so
blunt. However, it is a perfectly reasonable question. I didn’t just want to
know about how fabulous their organisation was, I wanted to know why it
would be fabulous for me. It seemed to be something they hadn’t really
considered.
3. Disconnect
There are economic and other perfectly valid professional reasons for people
to be in the top-left quadrant. I have called it Disconnect because here the
individuals may work hard, may be valued and consider they get a good
financial return for their effort, but have little love, passion or enthusiasm for
their job or the organisation. They may even, at worst, be holding their nose to
avoid the smell.
There are very good and compelling reasons why somebody may choose to
do a job they do not love or even like, or why they might work for somebodythey find uninspiring, unimpressive or worse. At its most positive, this is a
choice the individual has made rather than a situation they find themselves in.
However, it is obviously the case that there are many examples (perhaps
more) of the latter.
4. Stall
Nobody wants to be here, however many are, particularly in failing teams.
Here people are bored, underutilised, disenfranchised and demoralised. For
any organisation they are essentially wasted resource. They exist on the
spreadsheets of HR, payroll and the P&L, but you get from them only a
fraction of what is possible.
First and foremost, this isn’t their fault, it is yours.
Your task as a leader is to move as many people from the bottom left to the
top right as possible. And then keep them there.
At different times in our career we might find ourselves in any one of the
four boxes, though hopefully, not too often in the bottom left. We should also
not assume that people are irrational actors – quite the opposite. Many choose
to be in Disconnect or Cruise at different times (few choose to be in Stall).
If we are about to buy a house, we may happily tolerate being top left for a
while in return for a higher salary or greater security. Many people of whom
we might say, ‘they stayed in that job too long’, do so because they are in
Cruise; it’s not necessarily doing much for their career, but it’s comfortable
and familiar.
Nevertheless, in both cases, as leaders of change, we need people to feel
the gravitational pull of the top right. Much of successful change can be
simplified to increasing this pull and removing the barriers that inhibit
movement, thus drawing more and more people into Thrive.Ambitious people desire both purpose (a move to the right) and/or progress
(a move upwards), as shown above. Smart organisations are not blind to this.
Many of the more remunerative sectors (to avoid offence and stereotypes, I
will allow you to decide who they are) commit huge amounts of money to
community outreach programmes, CSR and other such activities because they
recognise their employees’ desire for purpose, but feel unable to provide it
from within. I’m all for this, but it is rather like carbon offsetting: better than
nothing, but imagine how much better it could be for their company, the
employees’ sense of emotional reward and society as a whole if this was
baked in rather than simply bolted onto the side.
Then, of course, there’s bottom left. Stalled. I can think of no good reason
to be here, but I know I have been at various points in my career, and you may
have been too. It’s not terminal, but if you’re here, you need to do something
about it, even if that means just stepping out and spending time rethinking
what you really want to do.
A mistake many leaders make, however, is to conclude that the people they
find in Stall are here by choice, that it’s their fault. This often is not the case.
They are here because the organisation has allowed them to drift into this
position, or even pushed them into it (as a result of a toxic culture, for
example). For many companies, they represent their most wasted asset. It
costs little if anything more to have somebody top right than it does bottom
left, yet the difference in return between the two is enormous.
The individual’s journey of changeIn leading change, you should consider the concentration of individuals in the
top-right quadrant as a defining part of your task. Inevitably, you will have
people who are in different places across the grid, and this is a powerful way
of imagining their journey.
Great change is the aggregation of many hundreds, perhaps thousands, of
individuals breaking habits and being inspired to do the familiar in a new or
different way. Ultimately, if all change happens at an individual level you also
need to work hard to break your ambitions down to ensure they have meaning
and relevance at that level also. Change is personal before it’s collective.
We are all very good at identifying the things around us that we consider to
be done badly, or people who don’t cut it, or processes that could be
improved. The problem is, not only does this not necessarily help, it can
actively hinder. You don’t want the response, ‘Yeah, she’s right, if only
everybody else would buck their ideas up.’ What you need is for people to
spend very little time thinking about all the things everyone else could do
better and instead to think only of the things that they themselves plan to do
differently – from ‘What are they going to do?’ to ‘What am I resolved to do?’
Don’t hope people get the message; be explicit. When concluding a
presentation that demands action, spell it out, leave no room for ambiguity.
You need to cut through to the person who was thinking about last night’s
date or this morning’s argument. Ask your audience to think right now, before
they stand up and leave, what they are going to do. Just one thing, but one
thing related to the task and that is wholly in their control. Just imagine how
much would get done, so much more quickly, if everyone did that, and kept
doing it. If you’re going to succeed, then this must be the case eventually. So
you might as well start now.
The more dysfunctional and broken your organisation, the more people
you are likely to have toward the bottom left, stalled and stuck. The higher￾performing it is, the more who will be in the top right; your task is to get as
many there as possible. Obvious stuff. Depending on the nature of your task,
the concentration of individuals in the Thrive quadrant can be either the
objective or the enabler of your change programme. In a failing or moribund
team, the leader’s task can be easily understood and simply illustrated by the
migration of individuals from the bottom left to the top right.
Transforming teamsThis is a classic example of a virtuous circle. People who are thriving are
more motivated, directed and effective. Consequently, they are likely to stay
with you longer and be powerful advocates for others you wish to bring in,
further strengthening the whole; the team will perform better, and with a
wider dispersal of effective leaders throughout the organisation the more
people will, in turn, be drawn into Thrive. Which will lead your organisation
more effectively toward its goal. Furthermore, such an organisation is far
more able to re-orient and change in response to the kind of internal and
external challenges we considered in Chapter 1.
It is your ability to get as many people as possible into the top right that is
a true measure of people’s willingness to follow you, and why. This is why
successfully leading change is rather more complicated than just being liked
or being a nice person. There are plenty of people who work for ‘nice guys’
who are in the bottom of the bottom left box. Without effective leadership we
all drift gradually to the bottom left, as sediment sinks in stationary water.
Bottom left to top right: migrating toward Thrive
Imagine going for a job interview where the person you met could tell you
only one thing in order to persuade you to join. (Assume, for the purpose of
the exercise, that the functional aspects of role – money, title, etc. – are taken
care of.) What would it be?
In leading change it’s not so hypothetical; in some senses change poses this
question in reverse. The vast majority of the people you must connect with are
not applying for a role; they are, however, evaluating their relationship with
you. Are you Hugh Abbot, or something entirely different? And, dare they
even hope, better. What would better even mean for them? This is the
calculation your teams will make as you stand before them, and them before
you. I long mulled these questions. Their solution is ultimately how you help
move people toward Thrive, and the answer is both clarifying and
uncomplicated.
Be great for the careers of those who work for you
Leaders who want individuals to stay and thrive, and teams that outperform,
must find answers to one critical challenge. They must be great for the careers
of those who work for them. It’s a high bar. This does not mean only great for
those who stay with them, but those who thrive with them, who thrive after
them and who ultimately thrive beyond them.In my idealised job interview, I would want to know only one thing: will
they be great for my career? It is the ultimate expression of change on the
individual level: getting from where I am now to a better point in the future,
one that aligns with my functional aspiration and my values.
From Disconnect to Thrive (purpose)
In Disconnect, the individuals may work hard, be valued and consider they
get a reasonable return for their effort. This could most obviously be financial,
but could also be related to status, job security, opportunity for rapid
advancement, training, attainment of professional qualifications and so on.
However, they have little love, passion or enthusiasm for the organisation and
in many cases their job; it is simply a means to their own end. Some may
consider this to be enough; others only tolerate their position. However, their
lack of engagement with the collective and focus on individual position
and/or status makes them a missed opportunity and at worst a barrier to your
change programme.
Those who work only for a functional benefit lack emotional engagement
with their role and the organisation as a whole. They are there solely for them,
which is fine up to a point. But great organisations need great teams and
effective cultures, a combination of the individual and the collective. In
leading change, you require a high degree of engagement from the majority:
they must believe in your mission, your vision and your strategies. You need
people to see the personal benefit that lies in collective achievement. This is
the journey from Disconnect to Thrive.
Disconnect to Thrive can be considered as re-balancing an individual’s
perspective of their role in the organisation, from the individual toward the
collective.
Disconnect → Thrive (purpose) example actions you can take
• Quantitative employee surveys to understand levels of comprehension,
engagement and overall satisfaction with the organisation or team vision.
• Qualitative surveys to expand on the above. As discussed in Chapter 1,
these can be used for far more than simply listening.
• Be clear that your ambition sees no conflict between value and values, that
both are necessary for your organisation to thrive. There is no need to have
to make a choice.• Ensure you have been consistently clear in your communication (Chapter
2) on the organisation’s societal role and cultural ambitions.
• Emphasise the centrality of effective teams to the organisation’s future
success.
• Ensure you walk the walk regarding the desired cultural behaviours
(Chapter 7). For example, the establishment of KPIs that are shared
throughout the organisation that cover a range of indicators beyond the
purely functional. All come with both targets and progress markers.
• Identify the most important and influential individuals in Disconnect and
build personal development plans to give them active roles in your
programme.
• Identify key individuals who may be blockers, delivering results (for you
and themselves) but who will not or cannot align their behaviours with the
desired culture. Ultimately, if you cannot convert these people, you may
need to remove them (see Jack Welsh’s Grid in Chapter 7: Culture).
From Cruise to Thrive (progress)
People in Cruise are generally quite content. Their role suits them, they know
what they’re doing and they are familiar with their surroundings. They may
have been at the organisation for some time, long enough to know its foibles,
its strengths and weaknesses, how it thinks, what it likes and dislikes, and
how to get their job done with the minimum of fuss. Some are frogs in
warming water, but this implies a degree of ignorance or even denial about
their circumstance. This is not always the case. For some it is simply that the
circumstance suits them; they maybe would like to do something about it. But
not today.
• Many people here may like the organisation, but are stuck in its routines, its
habits and its behaviours. They would perhaps like it to perform better, but
that desire is out-weighed by their fear that change may destroy their
comfortable and familiar world. They have a high level of organisational
engagement, but often with the existing order and therefore may be barriers
to your programme. Ultimately many here prefer everything as it is, warts
and all.
• Cruise to Thrive can be considered as re-balancing an individual’s
perspective of their role in the organisation as from the collective toward
the individual.Cruise → Thrive (progress) example actions you can take
• Quantitative employee surveys to understand levels of comprehension and
belief that your programme will deliver positive individual benefits (such as
better training, better pay or improved prospects for promotion), as well as
understanding levels of anxiety that exist around it.
• Qualitative surveys to understand resistance, fears and questions regarding
your vision. As discussed in Chapter 1, these can be used for far more than
simply listening.
• Be clear that a thriving organisation provides fresh opportunity for all,
opportunities to fulfil personal as well as collective ambitions.
• Ensure you have been consistently clear in your communication (Chapter
2) that nobody will be left behind, that you do not intend to throw the baby
out with the bathwater, that you value existing knowledge and experience,
that you need great leaders everywhere.
• Identify key individuals and build personal development plans to give
them active roles in your programme.
• Demonstrate through your behaviours that a thriving organisation provides
opportunities not previously available – and that you plan to run a
meritocracy. The best will rise to the top. Build clear pathways that all
can see. For example: refresh influential leadership groups and teams;
invest in coaching for individuals you consider to have untapped potential;
develop next generation leadership schemes.
3. Effective leaders everywhere: the accelerant of change
What unites great leaders is the understanding that they cannot do it alone,
that they too need great leaders for their programme to succeed. The
identification and development of leadership talent is key to leading change.
Though this is obvious, in practice many organisations fail to take the
development of their leaders seriously, not least because they misunderstand
what leadership is.
In the same way that you can consider change to be the accumulation of as
many people as possible in Thrive, so too you should actively consider the
identification and development of leadership talent as a key part of your
programme. Great leaders, at all levels, create a positive cycle of
improvement, talent attraction, cultural change, talent retention and further
performance improvement. It is therefore possible to gain active competitiveadvantage through doing this well, not least because so few do. Stretch
people, treat them like adults, push their careers forward, shove them into the
top right. Some may stumble, but those who thrive are worth double.
Leadership is difficult but not complicated, and like any other skill it can be
learnt, so set about enabling people to do just that.
This is a primary task for the First Five: who and where are the next
advocate-leaders? As with all other aspects of change, the most effective way
to achieve forward momentum is to focus on the positive rather than the
negative, those most able and willing to help, rather than fretting over those
likely to get in the way. The selection and development of effective allies is
far more powerful in moving your programme forward than the drag of the
naysayers.
You must quickly make an assessment of the leadership strength of the
organisation you are responsible for. Obviously, the likely answers to this
question will look very different in a high-performing team than it will in a
low-performing one, but it is a critical exercise nevertheless, and though
potentially time consuming, it is time well spent; there is always lots of room
for improvement. Honesty, here, is an indispensable ally.
Because in leading change time is not on your side, I have outlined below
a simple and quick approach that will give you a clear baseline for your
organisation’s leadership potential and, once you have it, a plan for how to
proceed.
Assess
Identify those already in important leadership roles and assess their current
performance against the following four criteria:
1. Results
Leadership is a results business. If they are delivering against their
objectives then it’s a great start. If they aren’t, it’s important to find out
why. For example, are they clear what their objectives are?
2. Cultural alignment
Do they exhibit the behaviours you believe define the future organisational
culture (see Chapter 7). If not, do you think they can, and will, change?
3. TeamHow effective are the teams they run? And why? An effective, well-run
team is a sure marker of a leader who is doing an awful lot right.
4. Talent
How strong is the calibre of people who work for them? A strong team that
contains great people is a powerful signifier of effective leadership.
Here, confirmation bias can sometimes lead you astray. First impressions
matter, but they are not always a reliable guide. Often, I have seen examples
where effective and potentially valuable people have been pulled adrift,
forced out or even fired because their face didn’t fit. And similarly, those good
at playing the game but little else, remain. If you want to make fast progress,
it’s in your interests to make sure this doesn’t happen.
This four-point checklist provides hard metrics to help you make clear￾eyed decisions, as well as giving the individuals themselves every opportunity
to become integral to your programme. If they don’t want to, then ultimately,
one of you needs to decide that they must go.
Investing in leadership
Great and effective leadership always involves other people, often people you
don’t know very well, and sometimes great numbers of people who you have
not met and likely never will. Perhaps one of the reasons there is so much
mysticism around the subject is this ability of effective leaders to impact,
enthuse, motivate and inspire people who they don’t know and who are very
different to them.
You and your First Five must quickly build a programme, perhaps a
number of programmes depending on size, to develop a long-term culture of
high-performance leadership. It is the surest investment you can make for the
development and future health of your organisation. It should be close to the
top of your list, and though many organisations say they do it, few do it well.
Therefore, the opportunity for competitive advantage by building a
programme that your employees are eager to join, your customers value and
your competitors envy is significant.
A simple but effective leadership development programme
1. An integrated approachMany organisations invest in leadership, but do it piecemeal. Instead, you
should take a single, integrated approach. Leaders at different levels will
access the programme at different points; employees will work their way up it
as they progress.
This approach has four important benefits that strengthen and deepen your
organisation’s leadership capability:
i. It embeds understanding of your organisation’s leadership philosophy:
what it is, why it matters and how to do it well.
ii. It engenders cumulative learning. Each step builds on the last.
iii. It creates a culture of aspiration and retention. A programme that has rea
and tangible career benefits will aid retention and attraction of talent.
iv. It embeds a shared leadership language across the organisation.
2. Make it somebody’s job
If it’s going to get done and done well, it needs to be close to the top of
somebody’s to-do list. Reduce other programmes to find space and funding to
do this well. Everything else flows from effective leadership.
3. Agree metrics
So much that is spent on training and development is wasted for want of clear
alignment with the organisation’s priorities and clear success criteria. You
need to understand which parts of your leadership programme are working
and which are not. Agree some metrics (for example, retention of the brightest
talent, rates of promotion of the course’s alumni, and staff engagement scores)
as well as asking for frequent feedback from its participants. Align at least
some of the programme’s metrics (KPIs) with those of the organisation as a
whole.
Leadership isn’t a separate activity. It is the activity.
4. A sample four-tier programme
Don’t overcomplicate it; for example, you could consider four tiers:
i. C-Suite Executives
An individualised programme including coaching and externally
accredited partners to build a best-in-class senior leadershipprogramme. Partner with a leading business school to do so.
ii. Senior Leaders
An accelerator programme designed to prepare people for executive￾level roles.
iii. High Fliers
Mid-level executives identified as the organisation’s future leaders. This
internal and/or externally led mini MBA programme will accelerate
growth and aid retention of this critical group.
iv. Next Gen
A programme to identify and accelerate the development of your junior
leaders.
5. Exclusivity drives aspiration and value
Places on the programme should be valued and not just come by right. It is
possible to create a virtuous circle of exclusivity driving perceived value. The
greater the competition for places, the stronger your leadership base.
The Matthew effect
There is a rubric, beloved of Silicon Valley, known as the Matthew effect. It is
derived from a verse in the Bible:
‘For unto every one that hath shall be given, and he shall have
abundance: but from him that hath not shall be taken away even that
which he hath.’
– Matthew 25:29 (KJV)
The Matthew effect describes the idea of accumulated advantage: those
who start ahead gain continued benefit from having done so. It has been
applied to many areas of life, including the accumulation of capital, fame and
status.
It applies also to talent in your organisation. As that great and
misunderstood Florentine sage Niccolò Machiavelli noted 1,400 years after
Matthew, ‘The first measure of the intelligence of a ruler is the quality of the
men he has around him.’ The surest way for you to get great talent into your
team is through having great leaders in your team. Great leaders beget great
leaders, great talent attracts great talent. You want more than your fair share of
both. However, as we know, it’s not easy; progress demands consistent anddetermined effort. But an organisation that successfully invests in great
leadership at all levels and has a programme to migrate and maintain as many
employees as possible into Thrive will win far more than it loses.
Who among us wouldn’t want to work there?
Naysayers
John Kotter, of Harvard Business School, a great guru of organisational
change, wrote a book on the subject in the manner of a children’s story called
Our Iceberg Is Melting. It has the gift of brevity and is a smart idea, his
argument being that too many books about change are just too dull to get
through. I couldn’t agree more.
In Our Iceberg Is Melting, he describes a penguin colony faced with the
melting of their iceberg home and wrestling with how to change in response.
Its most memorable aspect is that the format allows him to sketch each
character, Fred, Alice, Louis, Buddy, the Professor and NoNo, as archetypes
familiar to us all. The story is of crisis, heroic action, resistance and, of
course, redemption.
I once, many years ago, when tasked with what seemed an unfixable team,
bought five copies of the book and handed them round. I deliberately bought
too few and asked each member, having read it, to leave their name inside the
cover and then pass it on. It was a neat little exercise in symbolism and
collectivity. As I watched the list of names grow and the covers become more
tattered, one penguin stood out.
Poor old NoNo’s nominative determinism means his role in the story needs
little explanation, but for my team he became the talking point. Briefly he
became shorthand for naysayers of all shades. Amongst teasing and laughter,
people speculated who our NoNo was (or were). In all teams there are those
for whom the resistance to change is innate.
NoNo: triage, ignore, convert, cauterise
I’m not a business school professor and have a very pragmatic approach to
those who stubbornly resist. This stems in part from the leadership equation
introduced in Chapter 4:
impact = clarity × action
If action = 0 then change doesn’t happenFor this reason, those who resist change have the potential to be an
existential threat to those tasked with leading it. Teams intuitively understand
this, hence NoNo’s brief anti-hero status. Stasis and change are incompatible.
And if you’re the leader and your programme fails, then you’ve failed. So you
need a plan.
1. Triage
Identify the most stubborn areas of resistance and establish their
importance to your mission, or more specifically the level of threat their
non-alignment poses. For example, if it’s the finance director or COO you
have a pretty big problem; other roles may be important but are less likely
to derail. Address the challenges in order of priority. It’s always tempting
to try to fix everything at the same time. Don’t.
2. Ignore
Your motivating principle should be to move at the pace of the fastest.
Where possible, those who resist should be treated like a rock in a stream;
the water will flow round them. Many, as with NoNo in Kotter’s fairy tale,
will gradually catch up. Some may not, but most (though not all) of those
who don’t will rapidly become irrelevant to your programme as it moves
beyond them.
3. Convert
I once worked with someone who described a colleague as being in the
tent, pissing in. We all know them; active detractors are no laughing
matter, and can be corrosive to your plans and team morale. If you deem
them to be important actors, then you need to understand their concerns,
some of which may be reasonable, and form a view over time on whether
these can be addressed. These people may be in any one of the three
suboptimal quadrants we identified earlier – Stall, Disconnect or Cruise –
and the steps outlined earlier are applicable here. You must help them
understand the eventual benefits for them personally, even if the process is
uncomfortable or difficult in the short term.
Not everyone moves at the same speed; not everyone sees things as you
do. Here, sometimes, patience can be a virtue (not something I often say).
In a team that has a clear vision and real change momentum, many will
gradually move from active detractor to advocate as a tail pursues a comet.If these people are key to the running of the organisation then you
ultimately need them as part of your coalition. If they remain outside they
will remain at best an anchor and at worst a wrecker.
4. Cauterise
There may be some people who will never be reconciled with you, your
team or your programme. If these people hold key roles then ultimately the
only realistic solution, for you and them, is that they go elsewhere. They
may be persuaded of this by you, may reach this conclusion themselves or
it may be a very messy divorce. But leading change is difficult enough
without your biggest fights being with your own team. Eventually, enough
will be enough. Once you know, get on with it.
Ultimately, your success will be built upon effective, motivated
teams
Successful change is a team sport. First you must build a tight coalition
around you, your First Five. With this group you agree your initial objectives,
divide up priority tasks, lead through doing and begin to mould yourselves
and then others into a tight-knit and effective team. Ultimately, a culture of
great, well-led teams is the surest way to achieve and sustain success.
Effective teams are powerful and self-supporting entities capable of
moving fast and changing direction quickly. Their creation should not be left
to chance but should be a deliberate and careful process, one that is more art
than science, but is the ultimate task of all leaders. This is why the
identification and development of effective, motivated leaders throughout
your organisation is so important. Great leaders have a greater percentage of
their people in Thrive, which is why their teams outperform. You can’t
succeed without them.NO BULLSH*T TEAMS
What unites successful leaders is their understanding that they
cannot do it alone.
They need to find their First Five, build effective teams that endure
and encourage the development of other great leaders throughout
their organisation.
Find your First Five
Your First Five are a small, tight-knit group who you trust implicitly, who you can be vulnerable with,
who you can problem-solve with without fear or favour, who share your ambition and values, who will
be honest with you and each other and, most importantly, who you know can deliver.
Find them fast.
They must be people you trust and who trust you.
Create an environment where you feel safe with each other.
They must have great core skills.
Divide up responsibilities and lead through doing.
Frequently re-commit to each other.
Be prepared to work hard.
Thriving, cruising, disconnected, stalled
Much of successful change can be simplified to increasing the pull of the top-right quadrant of the grid
(Thrive) and removing the barriers that inhibit people’s movement towards it.
In leading change, you should consider the concentration of individuals in the top-right quadrant as a
defining part of your task.
Be great for the careers of those who work for you
With you, after you and beyond you.
Build great leaders everywhere
Great leaders, at all levels, create a positive cycle of improvement, talent attraction, cultural change,
talent retention and further performance improvement. Gain active competitive advantage through doing
this well.
Assessing leaders
• Results: Do they deliver?
• Culture: Do their behaviours enhance the culture?• Team: Do they run strong teams?
• Talent: Can they attract and retain great people?
A simple and effective leadership development programme
Take an integrated, organisation-wide approach.
Make it someone’s job.
Agree metrics in order to learn and develop.
Implement a unified programme from top to bottom.
Exclusivity drives aspiration and value.
Naysayers
Triage.
Ignore.
Convert.
Cauterise.6
SCHWERPUNKT
How do you decide where to begin? Attempting to do
everything results in achieving nothing. Focusing on the point
of maximum effect (the schwerpunkt) is how you break free
and move rapidly towards your goal.
The sun’s rays do not burn until brought to a focus.
Alexander Graham Bell
I don’t focus on what I’m up against. I focus on my goals and I try
to ignore the rest.
Venus Williams
At the end of the Napoleonic Wars in the early nineteenth century a Prussian
general, Carl von Clausewitz, wrote a seminal work on military strategy
entitled Vom Kriege (On War). It is a rather long and turgid tome, but has
within it a number of revolutionary ideas. It is now considered the first
modern work on military strategy. So influential does it remain that his
thinking is routinely taught not just in military academies, but in business
schools around the world to this day.
The central thesis of Von Clausewitz’s thinking was the concept of
Schwerpunkt, the point of greatest pressure, or maximum effort. In a
nineteenth-century military world, where armies would form up in great
opposing lines (at the time of the Napoleonic Wars these could be several
miles long) and blast away at each other, Schwerpunkt was a revolutionaryidea. Great generals of the past had previously considered the idea, but Von
Clausewitz was the first to describe and codify it.
At its heart, like all great ideas, lies simplicity. Von Clausewitz argued that,
rather than spreading their forces evenly along the battle front, pushing
equally hard at every point, generals should focus their effort at one specific
point, to position the mass of their force at a place of their choosing. This may
be based on a perceived weakness of their opponent’s line, a place where they
have a geographical advantage, or for the tactical exploitation of a situation
that emerges through the course of the battle.
In battles such as these, where great forces are arrayed against each other
in mostly static positions, the general’s objective is to break through their
opponent’s line and out into the open land behind. This was the aim of the
titanic battles of the First World War (but not achieved by either side until
1918) and of General Eisenhower in Normandy. Once through their enemy’s
line, the cavalry (in the early 1800s) or the tanks (in the 1940s) could wreak
havoc, able to destroy their opponents as they broke in disarray. The battle all
but won. A successfully executed Schwerpunkt is a decisive move for generals
and leaders of change alike.
If everything’s broken, where do you begin?
I recently took a call from a newly promoted CEO. She’d done the fun bit: the
press releases, the pay rise, the company meetings, the rounds of applause and
occasional bouquet. She’d made a couple of big hires and had taken the
formation of her leadership team seriously. They’d all now had a couple of
months to get to know each other, their new positions and the dynamics of the
business. But reality had begun to bite. They had the titles and the authority,
but also the responsibility, and the problems were now all theirs. What on
earth were they now actually going to do? Where should she start?
She knew (as nearly everyone does) roughly where she wanted to get to.
As we’ve established, this is very important, but relatively easy, and after six
months in the role she was well versed with all that needed doing. She and her
team were working very hard, and they cared deeply about the task in hand.
However, for all their fire and fury they had covered almost none of the
ground between baseline and objective. I listened to her talk and was
reminded of those scenes in horror films where the unfortunate protagonists
walk all day through the forest only to find themselves passing the same
crooked tree they had camped beneath the night before.She had, she felt, done all the sensible things right. But despite that,
nothing important seemed to change. They continued to struggle to find new
customers, they lost money on those they already had, their product was
ordinary and her team was ambitious but fractious. Most debilitating of all,
she was still too busy fighting fires to do much of anything else.
Her challenge, and that for all leaders of change, is where on earth should
she begin?
Schwerpunkt is a fundamentally simple concept to understand, but done
well it is how you effect change and change fast. Like my despairing client,
you too want to break out of the grinding stalemate and into the clear green
fields beyond, where you can accelerate toward your goal. Deciding upon and
executing your schwerpunkt is where you start. You don’t need to be able to
pronounce it, but if you use it well it’ll turbo-charge your progress. It does,
though, I advised her, require clarity of thought, determination and a strong
will to make it work.
Finding the time to change
The great challenges with attempting to change an organisation, whether one
that is failing and needs to pick itself up from its knees, or one that is high￾performing but needs to alter direction, are: lack of time, constrained
resources and, consequently, the difficulty of finding space to think rather
than simply react.
It is easy in books or at business schools to lay out the simple principles of
change. I’ve done it here. They really are quite straightforward. The problem,
as always, is that carrying them out is very difficult.
This is especially the case when it comes to a broken business; leaders find
themselves swamped with a seemingly unending list of problems and crises.
They get up at 6 a.m. and work until 8 p.m. They’re tired. It’s draining.
Customers, bosses and employees demand their time. They are dragged hither
and thither, working harder and harder, not just failing to progress, but
perpetual victims of circumstance, unable to take control of events. The
harder they work, the deeper the hole seems to become, the urgent so pressing
that there is never the time or energy for the important. This is the situation
my client found herself in.
Recognising the factors that you can controlThere is a famous legend of the Danish King of England, Cnut (careful with
the pronunciation). His name, even a thousand years on, is still used to
describe those who are blind to the limits of their power. The story has it that,
after a protracted and bloody struggle to win the crown, such was his sense of
divine authority that he set his throne on the shore and forbade even the tides
to approach him. ‘I command you not to rise onto my land, nor presume to
wet the clothing or limbs of your master,’ he thundered.
Cnut has, however, been mischaracterised. Rather, as the spume began to
dampen his robes he was making the opposite point to his sycophantic
courtiers. There was that which he could control, and that which even he
could not.
An effective leader of change has no more control over the tides, winds
and currents than any other, but is able to take effective control of their
circumstances. Leaders must be able to successfully navigate toward their
goal despite the continual suck and draw of external forces – or indeed
internal forces. It is this, more than any other single factor, that will determine
whether your programme will succeed.
There is no task that is more important than you
Books can be hyperbolic; authors make an extreme case to allow themselves
the rug-pull reveal of their uncomplicated solution. It’s a strategy not without
risk for the author who wishes to make a difference. You may read my
example above and recognise some, but not all of it. Your situation, you tell
yourself, is difficult, but it’s not the disaster zone described – it’s not The
Blair Witch Project. You do sometimes have the opportunity to raise your
head and look into the future; you do from time to time meet as a team.
But if you want to succeed, sometimes is not enough. Fixing the
organisation you run does not require you and your team to work harder; dare
I say, maybe you need to work less hard. It is just as difficult running a poor
team as a great team. The difference is, the latter is so much more enjoyable
and rewarding. To get there, however, you have to put your organisation first;
you have to treat yourselves as your most important customer.
This is another of those things I say frequently to CEOs, and they always
nod: of course. But many of those who nod don’t put their organisation first –
not because they don’t care, but because the incessant demands of a team
creaking at the seams never seems to allow them the luxury (as they see it) to
do anything but fight fires.Change favours the brave
Many of us progress through our careers by learning to be good firefighters.
We become increasingly adept at spotting the glowing embers and jumping on
them, beating them out before they can take hold. When, occasionally, a
conflagration erupts, we throw ourselves at it, sweating the evenings and
weekends until it’s extinguished. It is undoubtedly an important skill to have.
It also gives a great deal of satisfaction – who could deny that a firefighter is a
critical worker? And we learn it’s good for our careers. Useful, hard-working
people get promoted, and rightly so.
But it’s a habit you now have to break. You can’t be only a firefighter if
you’re going to lead change. You have to find the time to focus on the next,
not simply the now.
In Chapter 4, we learned to break free of our routines and habits in order to
create the time and space for new ones to form. Finding time does not mean
working harder. It means having the courage, the strength and the will to stop
doing a significant amount that currently consumes your day and using that
time to build something completely new.
If you are serious about change, then incrementalism doesn’t
work
Imagine the organisation you wish to change is represented as a graphic
equaliser, perhaps like those on the stack systems beloved of 1980s music
fans or found in recording studios today. There, each of the sliders controls
the prominence of a specific wavelength of sound or instrument in the overall
mix. By adjusting each one you arrive at your desired overall effect.
In your organisation, each slider represents an aspect of the business you
believe must be improved or even revolutionised in order to achieve your
goal. The majority of leaders will find themselves in this position, faced by
any number of significant challenges, all with an equally good case for
immediate attention, all of which draw down on their team’s resources. Often,
teams divide responsibility for such tasks without much clear strategic
thought; they are done that way because that’s how they’ve always been done.
If, in seeking to tune the sound-mix to your taste, you simply edge every
slider forward by 1 per cent, it is likely few but the most trained ears will
notice. Indeed, the overall mix will be unchanged, as each slider will remain
in the same position relative to the others. If instead you imagine moving justone slide from the bottom to the very top, leaving the others as they were,
even the most tin-eared will discern the difference. The challenge is to decide
which slide to move for the most immediate overall effect. If you are serious
about change, then incrementalism doesn’t work. This is the schwerpunkt.
Change everything: change nothing
To achieve transformation there will be many tasks demanding your attention,
each with their advocates. The temptation for change leaders, indeed often the
reflex, is to simply throw themselves into trying to fix everything.
The problem is, no matter their energy and effort, this doesn’t work, and
such an approach dooms many ambitious leaders to failure. It is the
equivalent of moving all the slides forward by 1 per cent. Of course, they’d
like to move them by more, but in practical terms, constrained by time and
resources, this is impossible. By attempting to focus everywhere they focus
nowhere. By attempting to change everything, they change nothing.
There is a compelling case for incrementalism at a later stage of the
journey, perhaps as best exemplified by Sir Dave Brailsford’s philosophy of
incremental gains with the all-conquering British Olympic Cycling Team, but
it is important to remember that this reached its apogee in a team that was
already at the absolute peak of its performance. At this early stage, you need
large, decisive movements, not baby steps.
Furthermore, this isn’t simply lack of thought, care or attention on their
behalf. Many of these challenges do need to be addressed, and various of their
stakeholders, not least their bosses, often demand action. It is a difficult
balance to strike. But strike it you must.
The alchemy of change: achieving more with the same
There would have been no need for Von Clausewitz to have written his book
if there were no practical constraints on the armies he led. If he had unlimited
time and unlimited manpower, then there would be no need for strategy and
tactics. Victory would be inevitable.
Likewise, the reason leadership in general, and change in particular, is so
damn difficult is because it asks the person in charge to achieve greater results
from an essentially unchanged pool of resources, an alchemical effect, turning
base metal to gold.Of course you can alter some of the pieces on the board, hire a new
general, raise a new regiment, change the managing director, make an
acquisition, but all leaders are united in the central nature of their task, how
they achieve a better outcome without more resources. Resources (money and
time) are always constrained. If they weren’t there would be little skill
required.
It is this dual pressure of constrained resource and heightened expectation
that make Schwerpunkt so critical to your success.
Breaking through
In established markets, the leading brands attempt to maintain their position
by blocking out those who would seek to steal their crown, just as the canopy
of the rain-forest stifles fresh growth below. In some sectors this has been
achieved and maintained with considerable success for decades, Coca-Cola
and McDonald’s being familiar examples.
Companies such as these are, first and foremost, very good at what they
do. Market-leading brands will typically attempt to define and own the values
and language of their entire category, thus, by forcing everybody else to play
by their rules, making it far easier for them to maintain their pre-eminence.
McDonald’s, through decades of successful product innovation (the food,
but also store locations, service levels and so on) and marketing, has shaped
our understanding of what a great fast-food restaurant should be. And guess
what – it’s them. In many categories such as these, well over 50 per cent of
the market is held by just two or three dominant brands, with a comet’s-tail of
others left to scrap over what’s left. We see it in laundry, soft drinks, toilet
tissues, razors and many more.
These brand leaders sit across their categories like great Napoleonic
armies, their enormous lines attempting to block off every possible avenue a
competitor may take in order to gain a foothold. For a challenger to simply
line up opposite and batter their way past the leader is impossible; the barriers
to entry are too high, and the anaconda-like dominant players will squeeze the
life from them.
Those that succeed recognise that their large opponents, by spreading
themselves across the whole category, are vulnerable to a well thought-out
and focused attack aimed at a specific point in the line, a point of their
choosing – their schwerpunkt.Colgate defined and dominated the toothpaste market, but Sensodyne, by
focusing very tightly on what was initially a tiny niche (sensitivity), managed
to carve out a huge global market for themselves. Colgate remain number one
overall, but they are almost entirely absent from the sensitivity category that
Sensodyne now owns, and where there is a significant price premium.
Focusing tightly on one specific aspect of the whole category has enabled
Sensodyne to become the second-largest toothpaste brand in the UK.
Andrex and Gillette, both longstanding and dominant brand leaders, have
recently been attacked by brands each using the same focal point, their sales
model. Maintaining a high share of shelf space in supermarkets has always
been a critical objective for brand leaders, effectively blocking out the
competition. Both brands have been disrupted by competitors that have by￾passed this channel and focused on selling direct, relying on subscription
models to provide significantly lower price points and convenience to their
customers with huge success, and consequently redefining the dynamics of
two very established categories.
The greatest current example of the power of a well-executed
Schwerpunkt, however, is in the automotive sector. The global car market is
huge and dominated by a relatively small number of manufacturers. Over
many years, cut-throat competition has driven down prices while heightened
customer expectations and regulation has driven up the costs of manufacture.
As a result, car makers have been forced into a series of mergers to achieve
economies of scale. It has become harder and harder to produce money￾making cars and, as the companies grew larger and larger, seemingly
impossible to enter the market.
If all that wasn’t bad enough, the industry has known for many years that
the heart of their product, the internal combustion engine, is a big problem. As
every school child knows, they create short-term air quality problems and
contribute significantly to climate change. The car companies need to switch
to electric, but that is easier said than done. And very, very expensive.
Consequently, most opted to talk a lot about it, but to kick the can down the
road. Like the valve manufacturers of the 1960s, they saw it coming, but were
unwilling or unable to act.
Richard Branson once said that the quickest way to become a millionaire
was to start out as a billionaire and launch an airline. The same now surely
applied to the motor industry.
From launch in 2003, Tesla went all in on electric, but at the time there
were almost no public charging points, buyers were nervous about the newtechnology, the cars were expensive, they didn’t have showrooms and were
available in very few colours with almost no optional extras. They appeared
to be at best a west coast fad, at worst a billionaire’s vanity project. However,
like Sensodyne, Tesla knew what they were and what they weren’t. They
weren’t interested in taking on the massed lines arrayed in front of them;
instead they fought on a very narrow front, on territory unfamiliar and
difficult for the established multinationals. At first, so difficult was it for the
major manufacturers to respond, they hardly tried. Tesla seemed unlikely to
survive, and if they did they would surely remain a small player.
However, it turned out that significant numbers of people were prepared to
buy electric if the product and brand were right, and that having no
showrooms, no salesmen and few variants was, to many buyers, a plus, not a
minus. It is a classic Schwerpunkt. The established manufacturers had the
technology, they even had a few products, but for them it was just one of
many things on their growing to-do lists. They were locked in their familiar
battles with familiar foes and saw neither the opportunity nor the threat.
As Von Clausewitz had urged, Tesla’s narrow and focused attack had
enabled their cavalry to crash out into the wide, empty, green fields beyond. It
is estimated that in the US Tesla now has a massive 75 per cent of the electric
car market, the sector where all the growth is, and at the time of writing, with
a market capitalisation of $930 billion, they are the sixth most valuable
company in the world. For reference, the next most valuable car company is
Toyota, at $200 billion, while the once mighty Ford Motor Company
languishes at $62 billion.
Making Schwerpunkt work
To lead change, you need to be focused and deliberate in deciding your
actions. Tackling everything at once will fail to move you toward your
objective. However, fires will continue to smoulder away, demanding your
attention, so you need to find an effective balance between the short term and
the long. Deciding upon and executing your Schwerpunkt is the most effective
way to move forward, but doing it well requires of you and your team much
that we have covered so far; clarity of objective, alignment and mutual
support will help you stay on track as events beyond your control attempt to
pull you from your path.
1. A clear objectiveBy this point you know what this is. It should be clear, bold and ambitious, as
we covered in Chapter 3.
Remember, Schwerpunkt is the means to the end, not the end in itself.
Considering Von Clausewitz’s origins for the idea is an important reference
point to keep in mind. It is a powerful and transformational means, rather than
the objective.
2. Identify the key areas that are within your control that may be
important in achieving your goal
This may be a long list and is very specific to your situation. I list some
examples below for various types of organisations. In no case is it intended to
be an exhaustive list.
A typical business:
• Product quality
• Customer retention
• Customer service
• New product innovation
• Customer acquisition
• Pricing
• Culture
• Staff turn-over and/or engagement scores
A school:
• Position on exam performance league tables
• Quality and/or quantity of university places gained by students
• Attendance records
• Staff turnover
• External evaluation scores
A sports team:
• Goals scored
• Goals conceded
• Ball possession percentage
• Pass completion percentageThough these are examples only, there are a few important points to draw
out.
First, it is important not simply to identify the key areas that lie within
your control, but to make an honest assessment of your team’s current
performance in each area. You should know this from your baseline. Which
areas, if any, are you good or great at presently? Therefore, do you decide to
focus on areas of relative strength or relative weakness?
Second, few teams or organisations can do only one of these and totally
ignore the others. There’s no point scoring more goals per game but
conceding even more.
The aim of your Schwerpunkt is to achieve relative improvement of
performance when measured against your other KPIs.
3. Choosing your schwerpunkt
There are two primary drivers in deciding upon your schwerpunkt, and we
have so far in this chapter considered both.
The first is to consider it as an entirely internal decision, made without
direct consideration of an individual competitor. In oversupplied markets,
where there are many organisations competing on roughly equal terms, this is
likely to be your best approach. For example, if you are an mid-table football
team, there is little point deciding your schwerpunkt based on the relative
weakness of a single competitor – what about the other eighteen in the
league?
This is the case in my own industry, marketing services. Every business
within the sector is essentially identical in its make-up and ambition (much as
they like to claim otherwise). And it is enormously oversupplied. There are,
however, businesses within it that significantly outperform (or underperform)
others. For those who pay attention, there are clear areas where a dramatic
relative improvement of performance pays disproportionate dividends.
We have already met Pixar, and will study them in a little more detail in
Chapter 7. Their ambition was to be a hugely successful film-maker and
consequently a hugely successful business. Their schwerpunkt is their culture.
The entirety of Catmull’s book describes their relentless striving to refine
their culture, freeing it of the constraints of hierarchy and enabling it to attract
the very best and brightest. This is a wholly inward-focused schwerpunkt, one
where they set their own standards, and the metrics are primarily relative to
internal performance. It is also one of great and enduring success.Tesla and Sensodyne, on the other hand, in markets with relatively high
barriers to entry, chose weak points in their competitor’s line. The actions
they took were internal, but the focus was at least partly driven by the external
conditions (and opportunities) they saw.
4. Focus
If your overall objective provides direction, Schwerpunkt provides the means.
Your schwerpunkt is the cornerstone of your strategy. You must
communicate clearly and frequently what you have chosen and why. You
must then orient yourselves around two questions:
i. What does it take to execute it brilliantly?
ii. What can we let go of?
5. What does it take to be brilliant?
There is an implicit understanding in Von Clausewitz’s work, that for a
Schwerpunkt to be successful, it must be executed well. There are, of course,
many examples of them failing. Wellington prevailed at Waterloo not through
the genius of his attack (he certainly had no schwerpunkt) but rather through
his ability to negate that of Napoleon. It was enough in this instance for
Wellington not to lose; his opponent had to win. Much is the same for many
market-leading businesses. They don’t always have to win, they just have to
not lose (and therefore maintain their dominant position).
Schwerpunkt only works if it is done well, with full-fat, full-blooded
ambition. The key questions you must now ask are what does it mean to do it
brilliantly and how are you going to do that. As we’ve established, that
requires you and your teams to make choices around not only where you will
focus your efforts, but where you will not.
Tesla’s success is not simply a result of being an electric car company,
rather, their most important early investor, Elon Musk, challenged them to
launch a revolutionary electric car. Prior to Tesla, electric cars had been seen
much like low-alcohol beer: better for you (and the environment) but not a
patch on the original. Musk turned that concept on its head. Tesla succeeded
because they chose a ground where their competitors found it hard to fight
and they executed the idea brilliantly.
Your ambition should be not simply improvement but, at this one thing, to
be the best. If you fall short, and are only second or third best, then for mostorganisations, most of the time, that would be an immeasurable improvement.
Aim for better and you’ll hardly move.
6. What can you let go of?
Point 6, and we finally get to the nub.
My CEO client may well have done a reasonable job at most of the above.
But what she really wanted to know was how could she ever hope to achieve
meaningful long-term change when the urgent demands of the present seemed
so unrelenting.
It is the central question for change leaders: how to achieve greater results
with an essentially unchanged resource pool.
The answer is not to keep driving yourself harder and harder (this, for
obvious reasons, is a bad idea) or vainly dream of more resources, but rather
to redistribute the resources you have more effectively. (In this context,
resources are always some combination of time, people and money.) If, on
your graphic equaliser, one slider goes up, another, somewhere, must go
down. If you don’t acknowledge this fact, then you won’t move forward.
You therefore have to decide how to redeploy and refocus the resources at
your disposal: maintaining the status quo in some areas, affording you the
time, space and energy to foment revolution in your one most important other.
These are choices only you can make, but make them you must.
This is why focus, communication and alignment are so important. Unless
everyone is clear on the schwerpunkt, they (and you) will continue to be
dragged to and fro by the demands of the everyday. You must make and
collectively buy in to a single simple statement of intent. For example:
The thing that matters most to us, above everything else, and the surest
way to get us to number one, is to have the best customer service.
This doesn’t mean other demands on time and resources are unimportant;
they are just clearly agreed to be less important than this. Resource allocation
can be made accordingly.
7. Be remorseless, determined, and settle in for the long haul
Tides and currents will attempt to pull you from your course. Fires will break
out that must be extinguished. Stakeholders will poke their noses in and ask
annoying questions. But to succeed you have to be thick-skinned, clear-headed, determined and settle in for the long haul. Being great at anything
doesn’t happen overnight, though with the right level of determination and
effort you’ll be surprised how quickly you can progress.
It may even be that you decide you have made a wrong call. Even this isn’t
entirely bad news; change your mind. And if, in the intervening period, you
have focused hard and made good progress in one important area, it is hardly
wasted effort.
Just don’t do it too often. Not many organisations are truly best-in-class at
anything, so if yours comes close in one important area you’re doing a lot of
things right.
Postscript
If you execute well you will propel your team or organisation forward. If you
run a sports team and your proportion of goals scored to goals conceded
increases, you will, without doubt, improve your league position. Does it
guarantee you will win the league? Of course not. Not least because a
competitor may outperform you.
You will, however, have delivered dramatic and visible change that moved
you significantly closer to your ultimate objective, change that has
fundamentally improved the landscape of your organisation, meaning
subsequent actions can be taken against an already altered (and improved)
backdrop.
In Chapter 8, we consider change as a loop, a contingent process that does
not happen in isolation. Sensodyne carved out a huge global market for
themselves, but their success means that they too are now being disrupted and
so must respond. And Colgate didn’t sit still; they are, after all, still number
one.NO BULLSH*T SCHWERPUNKT
How do you decide where to begin? Attempting to do everything
results in achieving nothing. Focusing on the point of maximum
effect (the schwerpunkt) is how you break free and move rapidly
towards your goal.
Change everything: change nothing
• The temptation for change leaders is simply to throw themselves into
trying to fix everything. The problem is, this doesn’t work.
• The dual pressures of constrained resources and heightened
expectations make Schwerpunkt critical to your success.
Implementation
• Create a clear, bold and ambitious objective.
• Schwerpunkt is a powerful and transformational means, rather than the
end.
• Identify the key areas within your control.
• The aim of your schwerpunkt is to achieve a relative improvement of
performance when measured against your other KPIs.
• Decide on your point of maximum pressure.
• Communicate your reasons, ambitions and actions widely.
• What does it take to execute it brilliantly?
• Identify what you can let go of (at least for now).
• Be remorseless.7
CULTURE
You must understand what culture is, what you need yours
to be and how you can change it. An effective
organisational culture enables people to achieve things for
themselves, for others and for the team that would not
otherwise have been possible.
Ultimately, beyond all these abstractions of strategy, of
organisation, of processes. At the end the issue is, how do we
change the context … How do we create Fontainebleau Forest
inside [our] companies.
Professor Sumantra Ghoshal
The single biggest factor behind the resurgence was that [the
captain] played the way he asked the team to play. He has never
waivered [sic] from that, even when he hasn’t been scoring …
The Times
Fontainebleau in springtime
On film, the late Professor Sumantra Ghoshal appears a slight figure, but
with room-filling charisma. Even through the filter of grainy, low-res video,
his eyes sparkle with a mischievous energy. A native of Kolkata, Ghoshal
served, amongst other roles, at INSEAD, as Professor of Strategic andInternational Management at London Business School, and was the
founding Dean of the Indian School of Business in Hyderabad.
An expert on organisational culture, he argued that, despite the best
efforts of leaders and development programmes, people don’t
fundamentally change. Context, he believed, was everything. Speaking at
the World Economic Forum, he illustrated his argument with a simple
parable.
Every year, he told his audience, he would return to visit his native city
in the month of July, the timing dictated by his children’s school holidays.
‘Now Calcutta is a wonderful town in winter, autumn and spring,’ he
begins, ‘but summer? Well. The temperature is 102 to 103, the humidity is
about 99 per cent, and [when I visit] I feel very tired. Most of my vacation
I’m tired, I’m indoors.’
By contrast, he continues, ‘I used to live in Fontainebleau, and this I
genuinely challenge you. Go to the forest of Fontainebleau in spring; go
with a firm desire to have a leisurely walk. And you can’t. The moment you
enter the forest there is something about the crispness of the air, there is
something about the smell of the trees in spring: you want to run, you want
to jog, you want to catch a branch, do something.’
This, he argued, was comparable to the environment inside so many of
the organisations he studied. ‘Most companies … have created downtown
Calcutta in summer … then complain [that the employees] are lazy, [they]
don’t take initiative, [they] don’t take cooperation … Ultimately, beyond all
these abstractions of strategy, of organisation, of processes; at the end the
issue is, how do we change the context? How,’ he concluded, ‘do we create
Fontainebleau Forest inside companies?’
It’s a beautifully simple thought experiment. As you listen, you can smell
the damp moss, the high notes of pine and low of wild garlic, feel the
warmth and chill between the dappled patches of sunlight. Even his brief
description is invigorating.
There’s an eight-minute video online of the full speech. It’s easy to find.
My most honest advice is to put this book down, find it and watch it. I have
only one caveat. In the version I found, somebody had thoughtfully laid his
words over a stock montage featuring smiley, plastic people high-fiving
accompanied by a soundtrack from an insurance commercial. All of which
invoked a smell more redolent of manure than Big Sur after rain. So
perhaps switch the screen off and simply listen to his words.For Ghoshal, culture is the red thread that links high corporate strategy,
‘with me, the salesman in Lyon’ – his putative distant, but hard-working
employee on the receiving end of head office’s missives and mired in their
dysfunctional culture. Companies, he argues, have a smell, one you can
distinguish immediately on entering. What does that smell tell you of the
place? Too often, strategy, rather than liberating, simply becomes a box to
constrain, the dimensions of which become smaller and smaller the further
down the organisational hierarchy you go.
‘Companies create this elaborate infrastructure of systems; planning
systems, budgeting systems, financial systems, all of it boils down, by the
time it travels down to me [the hypothetical salesperson in Lyon], the smell
it creates for me, is compliance, control. It exists to control me.’
Resistant to change or unable to change?
Constraint, compliance, control and contract, he argues, are all too often the
smell that ‘management’ creates. In this world, leaders complain that their
people lack energy and initiative, that they don’t cooperate. They blame the
company’s struggles on their workforce rather than looking to themselves.
However, it is they, through the cultural context they create (the smell, to
use Ghoshal’s language) who are the real constraint. People’s behaviours,
he argues, are entirely contextual. Management complain that their people
are resistant to change, yet where and how, he wonders, are they going to
find the new behaviours change demands if they remain trapped in their
ever-shrinking boxes?
Does this sound familiar? For many, it will. And if it doesn’t, beware that
it isn’t simply because you are not the salesperson in Lyon, but the person at
the top, blissfully unaware, or unwilling to accept, that their behaviours are
Ghoshal’s four Cs: constraint, compliance, control and contract.
All change is culture change
It is impossible to undertake a change programme without also considering
culture. All change resolves to people’s behaviours: individuals doing
things differently, interacting differently, behaving differently to how they
had before. If culture is the sum of individual behaviours, then all
organisational change is in large part concerned with changing the culture.Of course, there will always be many other (often significant) aspects to
consider: the integration of an acquisition, the development of a new
capability or product, the revision of long-established systems, processes
and structures. However, in practice it is impossible to disentangle these
from an accompanying cultural change. Even if the culture you begin with
is broadly one you believe to be healthy and well-suited to its task, you
should ensure you are taking nothing about it for granted and that you
understand it well.
In circumstances where you feel the culture is either poorly understood
or more Kolkata in July than Fontainebleau in April, you could (perhaps
should) consider it to be at the heart of your change programme. If your
culture is weak, then your organisation will not become strong without
changing it. It’s as simple as that. There may be other things you wish to do,
but you cannot be strong without a strong culture. If you consider your
culture to be already strong, then you need to understand it and carefully
sustain it.
Ghoshal’s ideal culture
There were, though, some companies Ghoshal met who he said smelt
different, who smelt like we imagine the forest might. In these companies
he found the defining behaviours are not control and constraint, but stretch,
discipline, trust and support.
I don’t share these as the only answers; you must find your own
understanding of what a great culture means to you. Nevertheless, whatever
you decide, it will be defined by behaviours, not words.
• Stretch
We refer here not to stretch in the sense of financial scale, but to stretch
as an ambition, where every employee is trying to achieve more rather
than less. These are the people we met in the Thrive quadrant in Chapter
5.
• Discipline
Rather than control and compliance, collective respect and alignment.
Decisions, once taken, are embraced, rather than being undone in thecorridor immediately when the dissenters leave the room; if a meeting is
due to start at 9 a.m., everybody is there, ready to go at 9 a.m.
Here, discipline manifests as mutual respect.
• Support
The opposite of control. The role of leaders, throughout the organisation
is to help their teams win, through access to resources, coaching and
effective guidance.
• Trust
The opposite of contract. You may be my closest colleague in the
organisation, or you may be on the other side of the world, but if you
carry the same card that’s good enough for me.
These should not be confused with corporate values. They are not how
the organisations describe themselves, but rather are Ghoshal’s own
descriptions of common behaviours he finds where effective cultures
enhance rather than constrain individual, and therefore collective,
performance. Furthermore, he concludes by urging us not to intellectualise
or get hung up on his four words, but rather to imagine the smell that can be
created in your organisation if those were the norms of behaviour.
Imagine if your organisation smelt like Fontainebleau in springtime.
Culture is the environment a leader creates in order for their
team to outperform
Though all organisations have a culture, many are blissfully unaware what
theirs actually is. Some think they know, but are wrong; a great many are in
denial and convince themselves that the culture is whatever is described in
the annual report or on the website. Others have a vague sense of what they
would like it to be, but little idea about how to get there.
It is therefore no surprise that, at all levels, it is possible to find great
cynicism when the subject of culture arises. Not because people don’t think
it matters, but because cynicism exists in the gap between what is said and
what is done. And when it comes to culture, in many organisations this gap
is very large indeed.The best way to understand what shapes real culture is through
behaviours rather than values. Values might matter as a statement of
corporate intent, but often do little to directly shape a culture, mostly
because they are difficult for people to translate into their working lives,
other than in a very general sense. Effective culture is shaped by,
understood through and primarily concerned with influencing the
behaviours of the individuals in your team(s).
Pixar: a culture of relentless self-improvement
Pixar are today one of the best-known and most admired companies on the
planet, co-founded by Steve Jobs, presumably when he had a little time
over lunch in between transforming the computer market, the
communications market and the music industry. Their first feature film, Toy
Story, was the first to be produced entirely by computer animation, and
their name is now a byword for quality and creativity. In his book
Creativity, Inc., Jobs’s co-founder Ed Catmull describes the secrets of their
enduring success.
Creativity, Inc. is a book entirely about the commercial power of an
effective culture. What is striking is the seriousness and effort the company
took over a long period of time to understand and continually develop their
culture, carefully and thoughtfully analysing their own successes and
failures to refine how they worked, improve the relationships between their
employees, explore how the hierarchy helped or hindered their progress and
more.
Their ambition was lofty (which comes as no surprise with Jobs and the
helm) and culture-driven. Catmull is explicit about both the liberating and
(at times) the constricting effects of their culture, and the book’s primary
theme is the continuous efforts they made to accentuate its positive and
address its negative effects on their product.
‘We were blessed with a remarkable group of employees who valued
change, risk and the unknown … How,’ he asks, ‘could we enable the
talents of these people, keep them happy, and not let the inevitable
complexities that come with any collaborative endeavour undo us?’
The following passage is about creativity, but has almost universal
application.People tend to think of creativity as a mysterious solo act … [but]
creativity involves a large number of people from different disciplines
working together effectively to solve a great many problems …
what’s tough is getting talented people to work effectively with one
another. That takes trust and respect which we as managers can’t
mandate; it must be earned over time. What we can do is construct an
environment that nurtures everyone’s creativity.
Pixar determined to do this through identifying three clear behaviours.
What is interesting is the prominent role communication, candour and
change play in how they describe their most important cultural objectives:
1. Everyone must have the freedom to communicate with anyone.
2. It must be safe for everyone to offer ideas.
3. Change is a continuous process.
Through their journey from tiny start-up to global powerhouse, they
came to understand that talent is a construct that exists within a cultural
context, and that neither can be understood without the other. Their
endeavour to maintain a high-performing creative culture is their version of
Professor Ghoshal’s stroll through Fontainebleau Forest. What Creative,
Inc. leaves the reader with, however, is not only the power of such a culture,
but the determination, single-mindedness, effort and collective honesty it
takes to get there.
The performance equation
Culture change – indeed arguably all change – has at its heart the ambition
to improve the performance of groups of individuals against a defined
objective. Team performance can be understood as the product of two
variables, both of which are largely, if not wholly, within your control: the
cultural environment and the sum of talent in the team. It can be expressed
as shown below:
team performance = talent x culture
In leading change it is likely, if not certain, that you will seek to change
at least one, if not both, of these variables at different points. We havealready seen how, in their different ways, Ghoshal and Catmull understood
the centrality of this equation to organisational performance, and that, for
both, culture is the dominating factor.
Over many years I have come to the belief that we need to ask ourselves
three questions in order to optimise our teams. The first two are as follows:
1. Are people working in an environment that allows them to perform at
their best?
2. Are they clear what their personal objectives are?
Only after we have answered these can we ask:
3. Are they good enough and/or the right person for the role?
Questions 1 and 2 should dominate all considerations when evaluating
individual performance.
It is for this reason that a person moving from team A to team B might
find that their happiness, satisfaction and performance changes
dramatically. They move from a hero to a zero, or vice versa. We’ve all seen
it, maybe even experienced it. It’s not the individual who has changed, but
the context. As Ghoshal observed, some leaders complain that their people
aren’t team players, that ‘they don’t get it’, that they’re slow, impulsive, or
careless; they blame the workforce rather than looking to themselves.
I have come to believe that, in an organisational or team context, the idea
of an absolute measure of somebody’s ability is all but impossible to obtain.
For any of us, there is only contextual performance: how well an individual
is able to perform given the environment they find themselves in.
We see this everywhere and intuitively take it for granted, yet when it
comes to our own teams we seem so often to forget. This morning, sipping
tea, I came across the following headline: ‘Erik ten Hag: Happiness is key
to Marcus Rashford’s revival’, in reference to the Manchester United
manager’s comments on their faltering striker. What else is that, but a
comment on their culture?
Are penalty shoot-outs a lottery?
In 2022, Liverpool beat Chelsea in a penalty shoot-out in the FA Cup final,
the oldest football competition in the world. Truth be told, it was, as theysay, a game for the purists, 0–0 after 120 minutes of play. As always, the
penalty shoot-out seemed an unsatisfactory way to settle the contest,
containing none of the essential elements that make the beautiful game just
that, trading elegance and skill for drama and a guaranteed conclusion. It’s a
lottery, isn’t it, goes the eternal debate.
Several days after the final, an article written by Professor Geir Jordet of
the Norwegian School of Sport Sciences took my eye. Jordet lauded the
winning manager Jürgen Klopp and criticised the loser, Thomas Tuchel. He
argued that, far from being a lottery, culture, as personified by the manager,
could make all the difference.
‘A penalty shoot-out is a psychological game starting with how the
manager communicates,’ he began. Klopp, Jordet claimed, told his players
who amongst them would be stepping up within sixty seconds of the full￾time whistle, and he did it individually, conducting private conversations
with each rather than in the adrenaline-fuelled chaos of a post-match
huddle. ‘The process [was] intimate, safe and loving,’ he observed.
According to Jordet, Klopp had completed this within two minutes,
while his opponent was still deciding his takers. Tuchel, having finally
drawn up his list, told his team collectively from the middle of a mass
huddle – a common mistake in such situations Jordet believes. ‘What could
have been a smooth and final reminder to the team becomes erratic, rushed
and stressed.’ In addition, Tuchel then discussed their individual tactics in
front of their teammates, increasing the pressure further.
‘Liverpool were 1–0 up before the shoot-out had even begun,’ Jordet
concluded.
Post-rationalised? Possibly. Impossible to prove? Certainly. However, if
after 120 minutes of football the two teams find themselves tied, then where
might they find the edge to complete from the spot what they could not
conclude in open play?
The shoot-out is an interesting petri dish. For professional footballers, it
is hardly a measure of skill, rather a measure of nerve and the ability to
perform those skills under extreme pressure. Such is the relative simplicity
of the functional aspect of the task, it effectively rules out ability as a
differentiator and shifts it to a battle of will and nerve. If performance is the
product of talent and culture, then it is reasonable to conclude that the
ability to create a more effective (in this case, scoring more penalties)
culture will be the deciding factor. Which, Professor Jordet argues, isexactly what Jürgen Klopp did. Culture may appear to be soft, squishy and
intangible; however, its effects can be anything but.
Optimising team performance
I recently took up golf. For someone who has played tennis since they were
nine, the idea of hitting a ball that just lay there waiting to be struck was an
enticing prospect. It transpired, however, that the sullen, alluring, static ball
was the very essence of the game’s fiendishness. Technology has, of course,
got a gadget for that. These days, every coach worth their salt uses a
TrackMan (other equally expensive brands are available). Possessing the
same Doppler shift radar systems as fifth-generation fighter aircraft, it
tracks around forty different aspects of your swing and ball contact, all of
which confirming what you already knew – that you’d shanked it into the
gorse.
A key data point it provides is how close you were to hitting your
optimum shot, measured against the machine’s baseline assessment of your
ability. Relative to your current skill level, did you over- or under-optimise?
It is possible to consider how teams work in a similar way. They have a
collective maximum potential, the sum of the abilities of those in the team.
But how often do those individuals reach their personal best, never mind the
team over-optimising? I have regular conversations with leaders of teams
big and small, and an inevitable topic will be a gripe about some member or
other, sometimes a passing frustration, sometimes something of far greater
significance – many not dissimilar to those Professor Ghoshal encountered.
A common complaint relates to a person’s specific skills, attitude or
work ethic: ‘They just need to learn to be better at …’ But conversations
such as these nearly always miss the point. A person’s performance is a
function of their baseline skills and the environment they find themselves
in. Indeed, it is one of the reasons, I believe, that traditional performance
reviews achieve very little, or at least are misused and misunderstood. The
issue is not whether your team’s skills can be developed. Of course they
can. The more pressing strategic issue for you as the change leader is
whether you have managed to optimise the performance of your team as a
whole. In many cases where I see teams underperform, the issue is
diagnosed by the leader as a skills deficit or poor attitude; in reality, theteam’s optimum state is easily good enough to achieve all that is asked of
them. So why don’t they reach it?
Imagine your team as those 1980s Top Trumps cards. A bit crass? Of
course. But we do it all the time; we often evaluate people against a set of
semi-scientific measures. Look at your team right now. Score them, just a
simple measure – out of five, perhaps? You need to strip out your emotions,
your own baggage (as best you can). Consider them at their very best rather
than their most irritating, perhaps the hopes you had the day you hired
them. The day you had a row with them in the morning and then saw them
absolutely smash a client presentation in the afternoon. Consider this their
individual optimum.
What’s your team’s optimum?
In a team of five, sketch it out on the back of an envelope like this:
William: 3.5
Megan: 4
Harry: 3
Fergie: 4.5
Kate: 4
Total: 19/25 (76 per cent)
So your team’s optimum score is 76 per cent. That’s an A/B. That’s
pretty, good right? If you perform at that level, you’re going to win way
more than you lose.
Of course, you could do better. You could switch out Harry. You could
coach and cajole William. You could train them to raise their baseline
performance. All of which is sensible and professional. I know you’re also
saying to yourself, ‘Yes, but this isn’t real! Fergie might be a 4.5 at her best,
but most of the time she’s a 2. She drives me mad. She’s always moaning
about wanting to be promoted and complaining behind our backs.’ But
you’ve beaten me to it. Just like the golf ball that I hit sweetly out of the
middle of the club but hooked yards to the left, your team is way under￾optimised.
Now score your team as a collective. How are you doing? You need to be
honest. There’s no risk, there’s only you here. A-, B+, C? Worse?The difference between your optimal and your reality is the extent to
which, like my golf swing, your team is under-optimised. A team that has a
theoretical max of 76 per cent, however unscientifically measured, is good
enough. Good enough to win most pitches, crack most problems, perform
alongside the best in class. But if the real-world performance of that team is
a C, then you’re way off the pace.
Few leaders find themselves blessed with a team of stellar talents. Yet
great leaders lead teams that consistently outperform. Their people seem
more satisfied and more productive; they get promoted and go on to have
better careers. This is because great leaders don’t obsess about the nuance
of the skill sets of the individuals. They do matter; it’s just that, from a team
performance point of view, they matter less than the leader’s ability to get
the team to optimise its performance.
A culture is as strong as its weakest point
A strong culture enables organisations to withstand significant shocks, but
every culture is vulnerable to those within it who are unwilling to buy in to
the behaviours that it demands. These people are not mavericks; a strong
culture has room for them and many other types. Rather, they are
individuals who, rather like NoNo, do not buy in to your vision of why
culture is so important and the role all (including them) must play in its
maintenance. Culture isn’t something for the little people, or for everyone
else, it’s for all. Or else it is severely diminished. The more senior these
people, the bigger the problem – as always. Individuals such as these who
have no interest in fitting within the culture will ultimately not just damage
team performance, but fundamentally undermine the work you have done to
date.
So important are these people that sometimes their simple removal is
sufficient to catalyse change. Jack Welch was an iconic but polarising
leader, so much so that my previous book received several one-star reviews
simply for mentioning him. Nevertheless, one of his ideas is so useful in
understanding the power of culture that it’s impossible not to revisit it. So
here goes again.
Welch was the CEO of General Electric when it was the largest company
in the world. He demanded very high levels of performance from his
businesses, and was uncompromising in his expectations. However, he wasno simplistic cost-cutter. He understood, and ensured that his leaders
understood, the importance of culture to their success, and how this should
be maintained. Or could be undermined.
Welch’s grid, shown above, is mostly self-explanatory, but it carries a
single very powerful message. Under-performing units, he claimed, only
began to change when they removed people in the top-left box, those who
delivered results, but did not fit with the culture. He put cultural consistency
ahead of short-term profit, in the belief that by staying true to the culture,
and demonstrating so through their behaviours, they would ultimately be a
higher-performing business. It’s another of those slides that when I share it
people sit up and pay attention. Not least because we can all think of
examples of our own.
It’s a powerful example of how cultural change works and a recognition
that any culture is only as strong as its weakest point. If you tolerate those
who refuse to stay true to the culture then the cynicism grows and you
yourself are judged to have fallen short of the behaviours you have said are
important. If you act, your culture changes. Words alone, when it comes to
culture, are cheap in the short term, but expensive in the long.
It is a perfect, simple and everyday example of culture being the
behaviour of leadership and how leaders can quickly and easily drive
cultural change. Just this act, simple, yet often difficult to do, can transform.
Indeed, Welch argued that transformation was impossible without it.We’ve all faced situations such as this. We have all heard the reasons
why such a step would be impossible. But at least some among us will
recall the liberation, freedom and the fresh scents of moss and pine when at
last such action was taken. This is how and why cultural change can be
achieved a lot more quickly than many believe.
Culture starts (and ends) with you
The easiest way to understand the culture of an organisation is to realise
that it is an expression of the behaviour of the leaders. In the examples
given earlier, the cultures of the two football clubs are expressed via the
behaviour of their managers; Welch, by publishing his grid, insisted that
culture came first. In many situations, it is something we instinctively
accept, yet often leaders do little to consciously understand or shape their
own behaviours in ways that will positively influence the culture and, by
direct implication, their own success.
Changing culture is both as simple and difficult as that, but there is no
change you can make that will have an impact as great or as enduring.
I am, however, aware that an injunction to simply behave differently
may sound daunting. But what I have attempted to show, through Ghoshal’s
forest stroll, Catmull’s relentless focus and Welch’s determination to walk
the walk, is that it need not be as difficult as it sounds. The requirement is
not for you, or those around you, to be different people. That is not just
unrealistic, it is mostly not possible. Rather, it is about being clear about the
culture you need in order to succeed, and working out how you will
establish some fundamental principles that everyone, should they set their
minds to it, can employ. Starting, of course, with you.
The five universal features of great cultures
What I have come to believe, and what is interesting about Ghoshal and
Catmull’s examples, is that, despite their contrasting language – Catmull
that of a West Coast start-up, Ghoshal of a business school professor –
many of the features of a successful culture are universal. Not just that, but
these are things we can all do, indeed, they are things we all like to think we
already do (even though, with a little self-reflection we will certainly
recognise room for improvement). The problem is, left to our own devices,
we also do lots of other things as well. We need to understand whichbehaviours are most important in sustaining a high performance culture and
set about working out how to be the personal embodiment of them.
I believe all great cultures have these behaviours at their heart: language
may vary, the mix and manifestation may vary, but these traits are there in
all. And anyone can do them should they choose to. I don’t present this as
the only solution, but I do know that any leader who follows these five
principles will build a very effective and high-performing culture.
1. Great cultures don’t just happen
All great and enduring cultures must exist at the front, not the back, of
the leader’s mind. And arguably that of everybody in the organisation.
In too many organisations, understanding of culture is vague and ill￾formed. Simply by bringing it into the light, stating what you believe and
that it matters, will create change. It must remain high on your to-do list;
neglected, it will shrivel, but with regular attention it will grow,
strengthen and adapt as you do.
Great cultures are a restless hive mind, always hunting ways to build
their strengths, plug their gaps and fix their flaws.
2. High trust
Trust requires everyone to feel they are part of the same team, with the
same objective and being judged by the same criteria. Most organisations
are full of ambitious, bright people who want to do well, yet the ‘smell’
slowly squeezes the life from them.
Trust, we’re told, must be earned, but if you’re the leader and you
want change, trust is a choice. This doesn’t mean trusting person A over
person B; rather it is a behaviour that you do or don’t choose to exhibit.
A culture that lacks trust ultimately is a culture that constrains
performance through the imposition of unnecessary structure, process
and bureaucracy. Chop these away and trust must fill the gap.
Ultimately, if you don’t trust the people you have, don’t simply
impose a set of limiting and constraining structures and behaviours.
Instead, get people you do trust. But then get out of their way and enable
them to thrive.
3. Safety and supportA strong culture feels safe and supportive; it feels as though it’s got your
back. Leaders, rather than constraining, strive for ways to help their
teams and the individuals within them grow, to be great for their careers.
Everyone is clear on their objectives and clear on the behaviours that
the organisation says it values, which must include respecting each other,
effective conflict management, mutual support and the importance of
being a great team member, no matter what your job title.
If a great culture enables people to achieve things they otherwise
wouldn’t, it is a prerequisite that they are able to say things, do things,
try things and, from time to time, make errors they otherwise wouldn’t.
In the wrong culture these actions are too risky for people to take, and
they shrink, the performance of the whole diminished.
Average cultures value not losing over winning. Great cultures value
winning over not losing. Change leaders are here to win, and to do so
you need an environment where the fear of ‘getting it wrong’ doesn’t get
in the way.
4. Great communication
Communicating well is how people remain connected to each other,
understand each other, have a clear understanding of their individual
role, the collective ambition and the progress that is being made. It is
also how conflicts are resolved, problems solved and great ideas come to
the fore. Organisations need hierarchy, but the best leaders don’t allow it
to get in the way of effective communication, either upwards or down.
Without a determination to encourage and enable great, clear and
honest communication throughout the organisation, many people,
especially those outside its highest ranks, will be constrained and limited
in their ability to fully contribute and achieve their full potential.
5. Consistency and predictability
Cultures must be consistent. Their behaviours apply to everybody, all the
time.
We are all human. This doesn’t mean people never say things, do
things or behave in a way that is counter to the culture – they will, and
it’s normal. However, these need to be recognised as such. This is why
effective communication matters.The behaviours must apply to all, and the more senior you are the
more responsibility you have to walk the walk. We all makes mistakes;
in fact, in great cultures these are accepted as an important part of future
success. However, those who consistently refuse to embrace the culture
must go. Great cultures can be very powerful, but they are only as strong
as their weakest point.
Organisations have many different ways to describe their culture. As
we’ve established, many more hardly bother at all. I think there are
compelling reasons to use language specific to your situation; it can make
your messaging easier to remember, help internal branding and aid
connection with your stakeholders. However, it certainly doesn’t have to be
unique to be successful. As always, the ultimate key to success is not in the
snazzy words but the quality of execution.
Becoming the culture
As a leader, of a team big or small, you must be the physical embodiment of
the change you want to create. These days I often work in our communal
café rather than at my desk. It is surprising how many people stop by to
talk, raise questions or make suggestions. It’s one way I cut through the
layers of hierarchy, something we have returned to throughout this book.
These connections really matter, as Deverell, Ghoshal and Catmull all
recognised. It doesn’t on its own define the culture, but it does play a role,
and is a conscious and deliberate choice.
It is rather unfashionable to say it in a world of ‘authentic’ leaders, but
leadership is a performance, one determined by the culture you aim to
build. Your actions will always speak stronger than your words; therefore, if
you’ve had a row with your partner that morning and need to give an
inspiring talk to your team before they meet a new client, you simply have
to shake it off; if you lose a major bid, you cannot sit with your head down
on the desk. At least not for very long.
• You can be disappointed, but not despairing.
• You can be angry, but not capricious or spiteful.
• You can be economic with the truth, but not lie.
• You can not know the answer, but not appear lost.• You can celebrate, but must be inclusive.
• You can be close to some, but not exclude others.
If you set yourself these personal markers then the culture will follow.
It’s not all you must do, but by being the change you want to see you will
be well on your way.
A five-step programme for cultural change
In talking to leaders about culture I often encounter a kind of fatalism: a
belief that though it may be critical to how a team or organisation functions,
it is all but impossible to change.
This is a classic misunderstanding (or excuse, take your pick). Culture is
simply an aggregation of individual behaviours; change the behaviours,
change the culture. Potentially difficult? Yes. A long, drawn-out process?
Not necessarily.
There is, however, little point in doing all the sensible business-schooly
stuff associated with change management if you don’t consider the culture
you need in order to succeed, have a clear view of how that differs from
what exists currently and have a plan for how to get there.
As with all change, cultural change has three stages:
• Understand the start.
• Know where you want to get to (initially an approximation will do).
• Undertake decisive and focused action to instil change.
1. Understanding today
You must have a clear-eyed understanding of what the culture is today. This
is possibly the most important and significant piece of work you can
undertake as a leader of change. Most organisations and team leaders are
not able to answer this question.
Action: Dedicate time, resource and energy to get an impartial read on
the real culture in your team. Understand specifically the ways in which it
works well and ways in which it hinders performance. Use the principles
outlined in the previous sections as markers. As with any baseline,
understanding is the prelude to solving.2. A cultural ambition
Values are almost entirely useless when attempting to understand or define
culture. Culture is shaped by and expressed through how people behave.
Action: Write out longhand the kind of environment you would like to
create. It should be a straightforward, easy-to-understand ambition – your
version of Fontainebleau in spring. Use Ghoshal’s and Catmull’s examples
to identify the markers that will define your progress.
3. Consult, communicate, let go
Communicate, communicate, communicate. Culture must be understood
and owned by all. It is a living, breathing entity, not a fixed point. Just the
act of focusing on it will begin to evolve and improve it.
Action: Be explicit about why culture matters and publish your
recommendations.
Take feedback. Let go. Allow the culture to evolve beyond your full
control. Publish what you believe and what you learn.
Keep it simple, actionable and clear. Avoid jargon and management
speak. Be humble and acknowledge where you are today and areas where
the change may be most difficult.
4. Moments and totems
What are the most important moments when your culture manifests?
Evaluate how these must change as the culture changes. Make totems of
new ones.
Action: Identify key moments that will signify the culture you want.
These could include many of the areas we have discussed so far. Just a few
examples:
• The internal environment
• Where people sit and how the space is used
• A review of processes and structures – what will need to change?
• Culture-focused training (for example, conflict resolution)
• How performance reviews are run
• How key meetings are organised and run
• Social events• How new joiners are inducted
• The focus of your website and internal communications
• KPIs
You must introduce opportunities for new behaviours to be seen and to
impact, as well as signifying intent and change through action.
5. Perpetual motion
Culture is a living, breathing thing.
The surest way to embed cultural change and, ultimately, the culture you
want is to make it part of your business strategy. By publicly focusing on it
and leading an ongoing conversation around it you will ensure it changes
for the better. Most cultures are felt, but forgotten. Make sure yours is
understood and owned by all. It will necessarily be in permanent evolution,
but an ongoing dialogue about what it is, what you’d like it to be and the
varying ways it helps and hinders the delivery of the results you need is the
best way to mould it into the powerful force for change that you need.
Whatever else you decide, openness and honesty are the surest way to build
a great culture.
Action: The term the Observer Effect means that the act of observing
will influence the phenomenon being observed. Nowhere is this more true
than with organisational culture.
• Understand that the culture will be a permanent work-in-progress.
Expect to not have all the answers and that it will develop in
unexpected ways, some good, some bad. Left untended, beware: it
will evolve in ways you may not like.
• Name it, describe it, discuss it, share it and keep it on your to-do list.
• Invite feedback, criticism and fresh ideas.
• Listen, observe and, most importantly, learn.
• Make it a priority and keep it a priorityNO BULLSH*T CULTURE
You must understand what culture is, what you need yours to be
and how you can change it. An effective organisational culture
enables people to achieve things for themselves, for others and for
the team that would not otherwise have been possible.
Fontainebleau in springtime: Professor Ghoshal’s ideal culture
From: constraint, compliance, control and contract.
To: stretch, discipline, support and trust.
Team performance = talent × culture
Ask yourself two critical questions before evaluating individual performance:
1. Are they in an environment that enables them to perform at their best?
2. Are they clear about what their personal objectives are?
Five universal features of great cultures
1. Great cultures don’t just happen
They are a restless hive mind, always hunting for ways to build their strengths, plug their gaps and
fix their flaws.
2. High trust
Everyone feels part of the same team, working towards the same collective objective, being
judged by the same criteria.
3. Safety and support
Leaders, rather than constraining, strive for ways to help their teams and the individuals within
them grow, to be great for their careers.
4. Great communication
Without clear and honest communication, many people will be constrained and limited in their
ability to fully contribute and achieve their maximum potential.
5. Consistency and predictability
Cultures must be consistent. Their behaviours apply to everyone, all the time.
A five-step programme for cultural change
1. Understand the culture today
Most organisations are not able to answer the question, ‘What defines our culture?’
2. A cultural ambition
Culture is shaped by and expressed through behaviours, not values. Write out longhand the kind of
environment you would like to create.
3. Consult, communicate and let goCommunicate, communicate, communicate. Be explicit about why culture matters and publish
your recommendations.
4. Moments and totems
What are the most important moments when your culture manifests? Evaluate how these must
change as the culture changes. Make totems of new ones.
5. Perpetual motion
The surest way to embed cultural change and, ultimately, the culture you want is to make it part of
your business strategy. Most cultures are felt, but forgotten. Make sure yours is understood and
owned by all.8
OODA
Change is not a smooth, linear process. It is a series of
loops that must be completed, each requiring a fresh cycle
of observation, orientation, decision and action.
You thought you’d finished? You’ve only just begun.
revolution (/rɛvəˈluːʃ(ə)n/)
noun
1. A significant change in the way people do things.
2. A movement in a circle or curve around a central point.
I have not failed. I’ve just found 10,000 ways that won’t work.
Thomas A. Edison
IN 1953, THEN SECOND LIEUTENANT John Boyd completed an
unremarkable tour of duty for the US Air Force in Korea. His tour, before
being rotated home, had been short: twenty-two missions rather than the
usual 100, and during which he never once fired his guns in anger. On his
return, Boyd was invited to attend the US Air Force’s Fighter Weapons
School, where he graduated top of his class. He stayed on as an instructor
and rapidly rose to head the academic section where he wrote the school’s
tactical manual, an instruction book for aerial fighting.
From his biography, it seems Boyd wasn’t an easy man, having been
variously nicknamed Genghis John (for his confrontational style), the
Ghetto Colonel (for his spartan life) and the Mad Major (for his leadership).However, the moniker that best captured his subsequent legend was Forty
Second Boyd.
As an air combat instructor, Boyd’s party piece was to challenge all
comers to an aerial combat, in which he would start from a position of
disadvantage (for example, at a far lower altitude than his opponent) and
defeat them in under forty seconds. It’s the equivalent of a boxer offering to
fight with one hand tied behind their back and win in a single round. Boyd
always won. Forty seconds is less time than it took you to read the first
three paragraphs of this chapter. He was a real-life Maverick, Tom Cruise’s
character in Top Gun.
Aviation history is dotted with charismatic individuals like Boyd –
pilots, warriors who were somehow just that bit better than the others, and
consequently lived longer and destroyed more opponents. Perhaps still the
best known of these is the Red Baron, the German flying ace Baron
Manfred von Richthofen, so named for his characteristic scarlet painted
aircraft. The highest-scoring ace of the First World War, he remains a semi￾fabled figure even today, over a hundred years later (although he is now
perhaps best known as Snoopy’s imaginary foe in the Peanuts comic strips).
What set Boyd apart is that he wondered what it was, beyond simple
flying ability, that these individuals and indeed that he himself possessed
that enabled them to consistently win in the ultimate zero-sum game. And
could it be taught and learnt?
Boyd, by now a full colonel, was a man of rare talent, and not simply for
aerial combat. He outlined the answer to his own question in his central
work, a presentation of several hundred slides entitled Discourse on
Winning and Losing, which he also summarised in a short paper,
Destruction and Creation (1976). I’ve read it so you don’t have to, and
understood barely a word. It’s on the internet, hunt it out. His central thesis
combines Gödel’s incompleteness theorems, Heisenberg’s uncertainty
principle and the second law of thermodynamics (I’m not kidding).
However, Colonel Boyd’s conclusions are profound, and go well beyond
the gladiatorial arena of dogfighting.
Observe, orient, decide, act
Boyd’s ideas are now far better known than the man. In air combat Boyd
described the process of the two flyers as a loop made up of four stages:observation, orientation, decision and action – what is now known as the
OODA loop.
In the three-dimensional arena of the sky, the respective pilots must
move along the stages of this loop in order to position their aircraft in a way
that enables them to defeat their opponent; their decisions, however, are not
taken in isolation but are contingent on those of their opponent. It’s a kind
of deadly dance; the fighters’ two OODA loops intertwined. However, in
simple terms, Boyd’s theory is that the pilot able to get their loop inside that
of their opponent – in other words, the pilot who can respond to their
changing environment the fastest – wins.
OODA is not a nice snappy acronym, which in some ways is refreshing.
It suggests the words have been chosen for utility and accuracy rather than
as a catchy book title:
• Observe
• Orient
• Decide
• ActYou thought you’d finished? You’ve only just begun
Many books on change conclude at the beginning. They tell you all the
steps to get started and then stop right after the real hard work begins. I
have encouraged you to start quickly, but sustainable change is neither a
quick process nor, in many real-world situations, one with a clear finish
line. For many leaders and organisations, the end point is more like that of a
rainbow, you can see it, you can move toward it, you can cover a great
distance, but you might never hold it in your hand.
There are, of course, many examples where this may seem not to be the
case. Some projects have, initially, a very clearly defined end point. This is
true also of Boyd’s primary interest. At the end of a dogfight, the loser gets
shot down.
However, even if you achieve your goal of winning the league, for
example, your process cannot stop. Your opponents will have observed,
oriented, decided and continued to act. They will respond to your success
by altering their orientation and action to improve their chances next time
you meet, in the next quarter, the next marketing campaign or the following
season.
Boyd’s model describes the difference between aerobatics and air
fighting. The former is a solo demonstration of the pilot’s pure flying
ability; the latter is about winning. Consideration of the behaviour of the
competition is baked into Boyd’s model, which is what gives it its enduring
power.
Change is not linear, but a series of loops
It is unhelpful and unrealistic to consider change as a smooth, linear
process; rather, imagine it a series of loops that must be completed, each
requiring a fresh cycle of observation, orientation, decision and action.
Leading change in the real world is not an abstract event pursued within a
closed system; it is a contingent process, executed within an open system,
one characterised by unpredictability, uncertainty and even chaos. Your
moves create responses that you cannot fully predict or control. Boyd
advises that the faster you can complete the loops, the more likely it is that
you will be able to control events and force those slower than you to
respond to your actions rather than you to theirs.In so much of what it is written and taught about change it is treated as a
solo act, one that happens in isolation, like aerobatics. This is useful up to a
point, but in almost any real-world context, whatever your objective: to
attract better people, to win the new client, to win the league, to win more
customers, to improve the department’s performance, it is important, if not
critical, to remember that your competition also get a vote. For each move
of yours they will make their own. To prevail, you must get inside their
OODA loop.
Loops of change
1. Kaizen
In the 1970s and 1980s, rapidly growing new economies led by Japan
developed revolutionary new methods for organising and operating large
organisations. Their nimble, decentralised processes, of which Kaizen
remains the most widely known, fundamentally challenged the received
post-war wisdom of how organisations could be run and, ultimately,
inverted the world economic order.
Not specifically a business term, Kaizen is a Japanese philosophy aimed
at continual improvement through all aspects of life. When applied
properly, it goes beyond simple productivity improvements (how it is often
characterised) and humanises the workplace. It reduces workload,
eliminates unnecessary tasks and waste, and specifically aims to reduce
repetitive work (and its consequent risk of errors and mistakes).
Kaizen is a neat conjunction of two of this book’s most important
strands:
• The process of continuous observation, orientation, decision and
action (as articulated by John Boyd)
• The quest to remove hierarchical barriers in order to liberate creative
problem-solving (as exemplified by Ed Catmull at Pixar)
Kaizen succeeds through bringing together the expertise of all workers to
continually find better solutions to problems and spot opportunities for
improvement based on the assumption that those doing a task every day
best know the problems they face and how to fix them.It is a sophisticated and powerful tool that is part process, part culture.
Although wary of oversimplification, I have overlaid it onto Boyd’s loop
for illustrative purposes.
Observe: Begin with a careful and informed analysis of the current
situation. This could be, for example, people on a production line
regularly coming together to discuss how the process is working,
through their assessment of recurring problems, flaws or mistakes.
Orientate: All involved make suggestions for possible improvements
and changes.
Decide: The team makes a decision based on the best information
available to them. Kaizen reduces the weight of this decision, as it
implicitly recognises that this is simply a step in a process, not a one￾off event.
Act: Once action is taken, both Kaizen and OODA regard it as simply
a position on a loop. Its effects, and the actions that follow, are
(re-)observed, and the process repeats.
2. Winning ugly
Brad Gilbert was a top-ten tennis player in the late 1980s and early 1990s.
In his bestselling book, Winning Ugly, he makes a virtue out of his ability to
maximise his abilities and defeat many of the more naturally talented
players of his era. The book is not about the technical aspects of the game,
such as how to hit a forehand or serve; rather it is concerned entirely with
how to play the game to win.
Most sport is contingent, the players responding to each other’s moves
(an obvious exception being golf). Gilbert’s book has two recurring
questions:
• Do you understand what your opponent is trying to do to you?
• Are you clear what you are trying to do to them?
This is a classic example of an OODA loop. Each player should have an
initial plan for victory based upon an assessment of their own relativestrengths and weaknesses. However, this will inevitably run up against their
opponent’s strategy, the two interweaving as the game develops.
Rather than simply blunder on, as many players do, Gilbert encourages
the reader to think about the circumstance they find themselves in as the
game plays out – obvious, but surprisingly difficult to do. In sport and life
we become consumed with our own performance, rather than understanding
it as being only half of the story. Though he does not use Boyd’s language,
the commonalities are clear:
Observe: How is the match progressing? Are you winning or losing?
How do you feel? (Emotion is a key driver of performance in sport.)
Orientate: What is your opponent doing that is working? What are
they doing that is not? Similarly, with your own game, are you hitting
your forehand well today, for example? Is your opponent getting
under your skin?
Decide: In the light of your assessment of your relative performance,
how should your game plan adapt? Should you start to serve-and￾volley? Hit more to their backhand? Hit more slice? Play more slowly
or quickly?
Act: Implement your evolved plan as best you are able.
(re)-Observe: Has the score shifted in your favour?
(re)-Orientate: … and so on.
Written down, these are obvious, but Gilbert’s success in regularly
overcoming the odds show that in real life they are very effective, if
difficult to do well.
The OODA loop is a powerful visualisation of how change works in
practice – cycles of observation, orientation, decision and action driven by
the consequential outcomes of the previous loop and the responses of your
various stakeholders, competitors, colleagues and team members.
Once upon a time: the story of changeThe hero’s journey is a storytelling archetype that may pre-date Homer. In it
our antagonist, often an ordinary, everyday soul, is called to adventure by a
challenge that interrupts their life. At first they may be reluctant, then
finding inspiration or unavoidable threat, they cross a threshold, in some
examples such as Bilbo Baggins, literally so. Beyond this point they, and
we, are drawn inexorably forward. We join them on their quest as they face
great trials and conflicts, transient highs and crushing lows.
Turning back is now impossible; neither we nor they know if the world
they left even remains, yet the scale of their task at times seems beyond
them. They sink to their knees, head in hands. We will them on, but share
their despair, their struggle seeming unwinnable. Our hero’s trials present
temptations that threaten to lure them from the path. In Odysseus’s
eponymous tale, he spent a casual twenty years diverted by all manner of
threats and sexually alluring distractions on his way home from Troy. Yet at
each stage our antagonist learns, gaining wisdom and skills to fortify him
for the challenges to come.
At length, in the great climactic struggle that we know must come, good
triumphs over evil. Our hero is ultimately victorious but is, like their world,
irrevocably changed.
It is also the story of leading change.1. Equilibrium
We meet our hero in their familiar world
Bilbo Baggins in the Arcadian idyll of the Shire.
2. Challenge
Their world is disrupted by need, threat or desire
After ten years outside Troy, Odysseus wants to get home to see his wife,
Penelope. (Although, at times it doesn’t feel like he’s trying very hard.)
3. Resolve
Our hero decides to leave their familiar surroundings and journey into
an increasingly unfamiliar, unpredictable even chaotic new world.
Anna and Kristoff set out to the North Mountain to find Elsa and bring back
summer. (One for the purists.)4. Quest
As their old life drifts into distant memory they face great trials of will
and endurance.
Marlin and Dory survive a jellyfish, escape a shark and ride the East
Australian Current with stoner turtles.
5. Attain
At length after a climactic struggle, they achieve their goal.
Jane Eyre attains personal liberty (at least by the standards of mid￾nineteenth-century Britain) by standing up to and rejecting her cruel foster
mother.
6. Return
Our hero has paid a price for their victory, but at length they return to
what was home.
Katniss returns from the games having survived the arena.
7. Transform
We still recognise our hero, but they are fundamentally changed by
their experience.
Neo is the one who will awaken the humans trapped within the Matrix.
Examples are obvious and plentiful, from Harry Potter and The Lord of the
Rings to The Handmaid’s Tale and Dan Harmon’s modern classic (yes,
really), Rick and Morty.
Failure: an embedded feature of great success
Whole careers have been built telling tales of failure, some, it seems,
achieving greater success repackaging what went wrong than they ever did
in pursuit of their original goal. TED Talks and bestseller lists bulge with
examples. We enjoy these stories because we learn from them, because they
inspire us, but also because they fit a model with which we are very
familiar.
Failures are an embedded feature of great successes. The often unspoken
problem is that, when it’s happening to you, right now in public, it can bedeeply unpleasant, even scarring. The hole, when in it, can often feel very
deep indeed. As with fictional heroes, the process will, indeed must, change
you. You too need to resist the temptation to give up or to water down your
ambitions, but also ensure you learn in order to fortify yourself for the trials
to come.
I once asked Anthony Scaramucci if he had been naïve to take on the job
of Donald Trump’s press secretary, a role he famously held for just ten days.
Scaramucci had to that point achieved an enviable level of career success.
From a blue collar Long Island family, he had battled his way first into
Harvard University and then into the investment bank Goldman Sachs,
before establishing his own finance company, SkyBridge Capital – the
embodiment of the American dream.
‘Okay, so that’s a funny question,’ he replied. ‘I was not naïve. I was
naïve to the twentieth power. Any level of naïvety that you think I had, it
was exponentially worse than that.’
Scaramucci had believed that he could bring order to the chaos of the
Trump White House. He was quickly disabused, his public failure bringing
down upon him international ridicule and opprobrium. ‘When I got blown
from the White House, ejected into Pennsylvania Avenue,’ he told me, ‘[it
felt like I’d been] skinned alive and then rolled in margarita salt by the late￾night comedians.’
I asked him if he suffered from self-doubt, a reasonable question given
this experience. ‘Of course I suffer from self-doubt,’ he replied. ‘I’m like
every other human being. But here’s the thing. I’ll tell you what I don’t
suffer from: the [un]willingness to take risk.’
Failure is hard, even if, thankfully for most of us, it is not as public as
that which Scaramucci endured. However, what you must ensure is that you
can experience the lows, but remain fit, healthy, happy and able to go on.
As he discovered, it is not always an easy balance to maintain.
Great success is impossible without failures, often multiple and frequent.
The Australian cricketer Shane Warne, arguably the greatest player of all
time, understood failure as a ball-by-ball possibility, yet took each setback
as an opportunity for another go. ‘No matter how far they hit it, the ball
always comes back,’ he would laugh.
All success, including yours, will entail failures along the way. It is an
unavoidable, sometimes painful, but ultimately survivable part of theprocess; we too will be altered at our programme’s conclusion. Indeed, this
must necessarily be the case, as change requires us to learn and develop in
order to prevail; the new us is a consequence of all that we experience along
the way. However, as John Boyd’s OODA loop shows us, for our failures to
move us forward, we must learn from them.
Learn to learn
When I first became a CEO, a title I had long coveted, and for which I’d
been passed over several times (probably correctly, but much to my
chagrin), I had, with hindsight, little idea of what I intended to do next. The
title for me at that point was an end in itself, an objective gained rather than
the beginning of a journey. There was, however, one thing of which I was
absolutely sure. I may not have known what I was going to do, but I was
100 per cent certain what I was not. We were not going to repeat the
mistakes I and others had made before me, we at least were going to make a
whole load of new mistakes, ones all of our own.
John Cleese once said that success may be built upon failure, but that
failure without learning remains simply that. Failure. The business I found
myself in charge of was a dog, the chances of my succeeding considered by
most to be slim, but I was determined that, if nothing else, we would learn –
learn from what we’d got wrong in the past and be quick to learn from the
inevitable missteps we would make along the way.
Sir Clive Woodward once told me that as coach he would travel
anywhere, to meet anybody if he thought he could learn from them. He
described himself as a sponge, eager not simply to absorb and assimilate,
but to experiment and fail in pursuit of victory – victory being for him the
consequence of his and his team’s continual search for applicable learning
and, therefore, growth.
For leaders then, it is not failure that should be feared, but rather the
repetition of the same errors: the inability to learn. You’re not going to be
able to avoid things going wrong, but you can control the speed at which
you learn.
The more I learn of leading change, the more clearly I see success being
rooted in nurture rather than nature. The greatest leaders, the most
successful programmes of change, are those that are able, or perhaps more
importantly willing, to learn and learn fast. In the context of change,perhaps Boyd’s OODA loop is simply a measure of the speed at which you
learn. Woodward would assiduously analyse victory rather than agonise
over defeat, a deliberate inversion of our instincts, though I’m sure defeat
hurt him as much as it does the rest of us.
We enjoy hearing the hero tales of the failures of others at least partly
because we gain inspiration and hope from the missteps and struggles of the
successful. It’s no cliché that few have achieved anything worthwhile
without their share of failures along the way. A more important lesson to
learn, though, is not just that it is certain to happen to each of us at different
times, but to prepare ourselves and our teams for its inevitability and plan
for how you’re going to react. Its consequences are often not easy to
overcome, quite the opposite, but at the same time, it is rarely terminal.
Failure is inevitable and survivable, which is really at the heart of Cleese’s
and Scaramucci’s message. In leading change, we must aim high, think big
and learn to learn.
Change is unlearning and learning
Chapter 1 described the uncomplicated but critical process of defining and
communicating your baseline. Now, finally in Chapter 8, Boyd tells us we
must continually re-evaluate our position. Just as when following a map, it’s
not enough to know our start point and destination; we must also keep track
of where we are throughout our journey. Our decisions drive action and
action drives results, in outcomes both expected and unexpected, desired
and undesired.
Periodic failure is an inevitable and unavoidable prerequisite of success.
And failure remains just that unless we learn from it. Success must be
understood, and therefore reinforced. Never, sage generals advise, re￾enforce failure.
If decision drives action, then observation drives (re-)orientation.
Change can therefore be understood as a process of unlearning and
learning. Unlearning old habits, processes, patterns and behaviours and
learning new ones.
How we learnImprovement at any skill is determined by three universal factors.
Imagine that you, I and a group of eight others decided today to learn a new
musical instrument, one we had no previous experience of. We then
reconvene a year hence and publicly compared our progress. We already
know with certainty that over that time there would be significant variation
in our levels of performance. This variation, however, would be driven
primarily not by the chance effects of natural ability, but by three factors
wholly within our control:
1. The quality of tuition
For the purpose of this thought experiment, we would each find a tutor for
the duration of the year. The relative quality of this teaching would be a
significant factor in our improvement. The choice of tutors has a degree of
chance about it – after all, we’re not experts. Nevertheless, the decision
ultimately rests with us.
2. Willingness to learn
Each of us at different times would hit difficulties; we would fail, make
mistakes, be unable to grasp a particular aspect of our teaching and so on.
Some would be more willing or able to take direction and instruction,allowing them to more rapidly move past these blocks. This is almost
wholly within our control.
3. Hard work
Some would simply try harder than others. They would turn up to all their
lessons and diligently practise between them. This is wholly within our
control.
At the end of the year, when we re-convened, we would discover the
obvious. Some, perhaps a majority, would have made almost no
improvement. They would remain complete novices. Yet some would be
dramatically improved. Of course, there may be those who, through a quirk
of fate, have some natural ability that pushes them on more quickly.
However, as Hamilton College professor Daniel Chambliss (whose work
we studied in some detail in No Bullsh*t Leadership) concluded, talent is
simply an excuse we use to explain the performance of others.
The real difference would be determined by these three factors. Those
with effective tuition, the willingness to learn and who put in the effort
would perform the best. The same applies to teams, and leaders of change.
It’s a straight-line correlation.
In No Bullsh*t Change I aim to cut through the bullshit and provide
direction. The other two parts are up to you. In successfully leading change,
you need:
1. A clear programme (Tuition)
2. A willingness and openness to learn from mistakes (Will to learn)
3. An acceptance that successfully leading change is a marathon, not a
sprint (Hard work).
The hero’s journey is the change leader’s journey. The OODA Loops are
the steps you take along the way. The learning triangle shapes your baseline
at the end of each loop and is how you re-orient.NO BULLSH*T OODA
Change is not a smooth, linear process. It is a series of loops that
must be completed, each requiring a fresh cycle of observation,
orientation, decision and action.
The OODA loop is a powerful visualisation of how change works in practice – cycles of observation,
orientation, decision and action driven by the consequential outcomes of the previous loop and the
responses of your various stakeholders, competitors, colleagues and team members. For each move
you make they will make their own. To prevail, you must get inside their OODA loop.
Failure is an embedded feature of great success
Error is an unavoidable, but ultimately survivable part of the process of change. However, for our
failures to move us forward, we must learn from them.
Learn to learnThe hero’s journey is the change leader’s journey
In successfully leading change, you need:
1. A clear programme (Tuition)
2. A willingness and openness to learn from mistakes (Will to learn)
3. An acceptance that successfully leading change is a marathon, not a sprint (Hard work).
The hero’s journey is the change leader’s journey. The OODA Loops are the steps you take along the
way. The learning triangle shapes your baseline at the end of each loop and is how you re-orient.CODA
The danger when leading change, is that we allow our fears
to attenuate our ambition, shrinking our horizons to fit what
we think we can achieve, rather than expanding them to
what might be possible.
Dream no small dreams for they have no power to move the
hearts of men.
Johann W. von Goethe
The secret of getting ahead is getting started.
Mark Twain
I WAS RECENTLY INVITED to take part in a panel discussion. I was
late and arrived to find a rather high-brow crowd, the Chair an esteemed
philosopher. Towards the end of the evening he asked each of the guests the
same question: ‘If you could choose with complete freedom, what would
you do in life?’
I was stumped. I honestly couldn’t answer. First, I tried: ‘Well, I think I
would spend time trying to work out the answer to that question.’
But he wasn’t put off so easily. Having crossed off being a fighter pilot
or an international cricketer on the basis of age (and of course ability), I
eventually plumped for being either a historian or a novelist (careful to add
the caveat, ‘a successful novelist’). He followed up with the obvious next
question, which, of course, was the real point of the exercise.
‘So what’s stopping you?’The night is dark and full of terrors
The fear of failure holds many of us back. I know it does me. Yet it’s mostly
ill formed and shapeless: the unseen that lurks beyond the light of the
campfire. These are limitations and boundaries we impose on ourselves and
the ambition we have for our careers and projects. In leading change we
have to accept the possibility of failure, and act anyway. As we’ve
established, the only sure route to failure is inaction.
Like Gulliver, assailed by thousands of Lilliputians, we can find
ourselves gradually, incrementally tethered by our fears and personal
baggage. Often, we kid ourselves that these are the fault of others. Or bad
luck. We find rational excuses to explain our negative internal narrative,
making false effigies of our beliefs, blaming them for our situation.
Sometimes events happen that are beyond our control, but all too often this
is not the case, and of course these happen to everyone. Ever noticed how
everybody else’s problems always seem so much easier to solve than your
own?
The danger is that our baggage and our fears attenuate our ambition. We
unconsciously shrink our horizons to fit what we think we can achieve,
rather than expanding them to what might be possible. In leading great,
effective, enduring programmes of change, it is the latter that must drive us.
The truth is that nobody cares as much about your ambitions as you do
(except perhaps your mum). This is not because people are heartless and
uncaring, it’s just they each have their own shit to deal with. Great mentors,
great leaders, friends and colleagues can lift you up and inspire you, but
ultimately it is you who must decide whether you’re going to get up and do
it. Doing is what takes objectives, hopes and dreams and makes them a
reality. If our individual ambition is to fulfil our own potential (which, after
all, is the best any of us can hope for), then we must be ever watchful that,
even if we can never completely be free of the baggage in our heads, we at
least limit its ability to restrain us.
It is, of course, easy to say, but difficult to do. In dark moments I
imagine my foes swarming back, beavering away, tying me down. And I
envisage ripping out the ropes, the tiny men flung hither and thither. Their
only power is the strength I afford them and, deprived of that, they once
more retreat and cower. But our watch word must be vigilance. They arenothing if not determined, and given a moments inattention the sound of
tiny hammers will return.
This is not a book about career advice, and I’m certainly not about to
parrot those soul-destroying Instagram memes telling you how easy it is to
simply throw everything away and run off chasing your dreams. It’s
perfectly normal to not know the answer, or to have lots of answers, or to
change your mind. Or to want be a fighter pilot. When it comes to humans,
anything can be normal. And everyone wrestles with the same sort of stuff
that you do.
The real question, however, is what’s stopping you?
Change: an ambition with both magnitude and direction
Change can be considered the consequence of effective leadership and, in
turn, all leadership concerned with effecting purposeful change. At the
beginning of this book I set out the specific conditions with which it would
be concerned, those when the existing order must be overturned, when
revolution was needed. The modules of this programme are the steps you
must take to upend that order, to set a new direction, to break free of the
organisational and cultural inertia that makes change so difficult. They will
guide you on how to focus on the areas that will take your programme most
rapidly from ambition to reality.
These steps need not be consecutive; in fact, they are unlikely to be so. A
successful change programme is typically neither linear nor quick. It is not
a single giant leap, but rather a continual process. You must define
direction, break free, control velocity, identify milestones and course￾correct. You will take decisions that don’t work, indeed it is a precondition
of finding those that do. You will make bad hires, find unexpected barriers,
run up against external forces (and often internal forces) that prove too
difficult to shift, forcing you to think again. Markets will move, products
will fail, competitors will simply outperform you from time to time. These
and numberless other events are inevitable, unavoidable and, counter￾intuitively, a necessary price of progress. The only way of avoiding them is
to take no decisions or actions at all, to live in a permanent state of
observation and orientation – we all know people who do. These are the
people you want as your competitors, not on your team.If you have got this far, you will know that the surest guarantee of failure
is the failure to decide and to act. OODA loops are a simple and easy way to
understand this continual interplay between action and reaction, between
error and learning.
Time to begin
Here we are, all of us, standing at the beginning of a new undertaking:
learning a new skill; the first day in a new role; deciding whether to change
careers; with an idea for a business; just lost our job; a new project at work.
We stand at the start, and the mountains tower above us.
Though we may feel alone, in fact we rarely are, we have an audience:
our teams, our peers, our bosses, our preconceptions, our internal
Lilliputians, watching and waiting, wondering what we will do, speculating
on how we will fare. However, despite their presence, when the talking
stops you must take that first step alone. The change leader’s skill is finding
ways to ensure that others follow – a growing and confident coalition, some
of whom will in time take their turn in front.
The only sure way to avoid failure is to act; your greatest ambition,
intelligent, but imperfect, progress. But that first step? That first step is
always alone. Let’s take it now, together.
Mail me and tell me how you get on.
Chris
