Noise Resistance 
Enhancement in 
Aircraft Navigation 
and Connected
Systems
Springer Aerospace Technology
Dmitry Alexandrovich Zatuchny
Ruslan Nikolaevich Akinshin
Nina Ivanovna Romancheva
Igor Viktorovich Avtin
Yury Grigorievich ShatrakovSpringer Aerospace Technology
Series Editors
Sergio De Rosa, DII, University of Naples Federico II, NAPOLI, Italy
Yao Zheng, School of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Zhejiang University,
Hangzhou, Zhejiang, ChinaThe series explores the technology and the science related to the aircraft and
spacecraft including concept, design, assembly, control and maintenance. The
topics cover aircraft, missiles, space vehicles, aircraft engines and propulsion units.
The volumes of the series present the fundamentals, the applications and the
advances in all the fields related to aerospace engineering, including:
• structural analysis,
• aerodynamics,
• aeroelasticity,
• aeroacoustics,
• flight mechanics and dynamics
• orbital maneuvers,
• avionics,
• systems design,
• materials technology,
• launch technology,
• payload and satellite technology,
• space industry, medicine and biology.
The series’ scope includes monographs, professional books, advanced textbooks,
as well as selected contributions from specialized conferences and workshops.
The volumes of the series are single-blind peer-reviewed.
To submit a proposal or request further information, please contact:
Mr. Pierpaolo Riva at pierpaolo.riva@springer.com (Europe and Americas)
Mr. Mengchu Huang at mengchu.huang@springer.com (China)
The series is indexed in Scopus and Compendex
More information about this series at http://www.springer.com/series/8613Dmitry Alexandrovich Zatuchny ·
Ruslan Nikolaevich Akinshin ·
Nina Ivanovna Romancheva ·
Igor Viktorovich Avtin ·
Yury Grigorievich Shatrakov
Noise Resistance
Enhancement in Aircraft
Navigation and Connected
SystemsDmitry Alexandrovich Zatuchny
Moscow, Russia
Nina Ivanovna Romancheva
Moscow, Russia
Yury Grigorievich Shatrakov
Saint Petersburg, Russia
Ruslan Nikolaevich Akinshin
Moscow, Russia
Igor Viktorovich Avtin
Moscow, Russia
ISSN 1869-1730 ISSN 1869-1749 (electronic)
Springer Aerospace Technology
ISBN 978-981-16-0629-8 ISBN 978-981-16-0630-4 (eBook)
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-16-0630-4
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature
Singapore Pte Ltd. 2021
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are solely and exclusively licensed by the Publisher, whether
the whole or part of the material is concerned, specifically the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse
of illustrations, recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on microfilms or in any other physical way, and
transmission or information storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar
or dissimilar methodology now known or hereafter developed.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this publication
does not imply, even in the absence of a specific statement, that such names are exempt from the relevant
protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.
The publisher, the authors and the editors are safe to assume that the advice and information in this book
are believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication. Neither the publisher nor the authors or
the editors give a warranty, expressed or implied, with respect to the material contained herein or for any
errors or omissions that may have been made. The publisher remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional
claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
This Springer imprint is published by the registered company Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd.
The registered company address is: 152 Beach Road, #21-01/04 Gateway East, Singapore 189721,
SingaporeIntroduction
The present time is characterized by the almost ubiquitous widespread introduc￾tion of modern satellite technologies designed to accurately and reliably locate all
types of vehicles. The solution to this problem is of particular relevance in relation
to civil aircraft, when it is necessary to ensure the proper reliability and quality
of navigation signals received from satellite systems. The efficiency and accuracy
of determining the coordinates can be significantly influenced by both objective
circumstances related to weather conditions, industrial activities and the nature of
the underlying surface of the Earth and subjective factors resulting from interstate and
regional military conflicts and the actions of militarized terrorist groups. In this case,
there is a real threat of a shutdown of navigation systems and even the radio-technical
suppression of signals.
Classically, the noise stability of an aircraft’s navigation system is the ability
to provide stable reception of useful signals even if it is affected by natural and
man-made interference. In this case, the main thing under these conditions is the
possibility of high-quality functioning of the system in the presence of interference
at the input of receiving channels. Noise immunity refers to the ability of a system to
maintain tactical characteristics at a given level when conducting electronic warfare,
to function successfully (effectively) in the presence of natural interference and
jamming, and also to counteract reconnaissance of its radio signals by the enemy.
Thus, the concept of noise immunity includes noise stability and secrecy. In accor￾dance with the requirements of the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO),
all radio frequency parameters shall be open to all interested airspace users. There￾fore, the terms of noise stability and noise immunity can be considered identical for
civil aviation.
In general, the noise stability of the consumer receiving device is determined by the
logic and operating stages of the receiving equipment, the structure and algorithms
for processing navigation radio signals, their energy characteristics, the number of
channels in the consumer receiver, methods of integrating navigation information,
and the time–frequency structure of the interference at the receiver input.
It should be noted that the main factor in achieving superiority over competitors in
the twenty-first century, according to some experts, will be the availability of cutting￾edge information technologies as the basis for the development and application of
vvi Introduction
highly efficient global monitoring, communication, and control systems. Therefore,
the relevance of scientific research to solve the problems of ensuring information
superiority has increased dramatically.
All of this is directly related to the problem of the smooth and accurate functioning
of modern flight-navigation systems and connected systems of civil aircraft, which
currently have to perform not only their direct tasks but are, in fact, information
and control and information and computer systems, as well as information security
systems of civil aircraft.
To improve the noise stability of civil aircraft under modern conditions, it is
necessary not only to use all the navigation and communication resources currently
available in civil aviation but also to actively develop new architectural and software
solutions ensuring the integration of navigation, communication, information, and
computer resources, as well as their effective use.
This book is dedicated to solving these problems through the development of
appropriate methods and algorithms.Contents
1 Analysis of the Problem of Ensuring the Noise Stability
of the Civil Aircraft Navigation Systems .......................... 1
1.1 Formalization of the Unintentional Interference Space
of the Civil Aircraft Navigation Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
1.2 Analysis of the Noise Stability of the Civil Aircraft
Navigation Systems Using the Example of the Sukhoi
Superjet 100 Aircraft . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
1.3 Mechanisms for the Use of Expert Systems in the Design
of Aircraft Airborne Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
2 Mathematical Models of Information Security in Civil Aircraft
Flight-Navigation and Computing Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
2.1 Development of Models and Methods of Structural
and Technological Redundancy of Software and Information
Support of Civil Aircraft Flight-Navigation and Computing
Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
2.1.1 General Mathematical Model of Structural
and Technological Redundancy of Software
and Information Support of LAN-Based
Flight-Navigation and Computing Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
2.1.2 Analysis of the Features of the Problem
of Synthesizing Structural and Technological
Redundancy and Its Representation as a Structural–
Set Combinatorial Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
2.1.3 Decomposition of the Problem of Synthesizing
Structural and Technological Redundancy of Software
and Information Support of Civil Aircraft LAN-Based
Flight-Navigation and Computing Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
2.2 Development of Virtual Recovery Data Redundancy
Models of Civil Aircraft LAN-Based Flight-Navigation
and Computer Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
viiviii Contents
2.3 Methods for Decomposing Civil Aircraft Flight-Navigation
and Computing Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
2.4 Mathematical Model for Optimizing Recovery Information
Backup in Modern Civil Aircraft Flight-Navigation
and Computing Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
2.4.1 General Mathematical Model for Optimizing
Recovery Information Backup in Modern
Flight-Navigation and Computing Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
2.4.2 Consideration of the Functioning of Flight
and Computer Systems in the Context of Functional
Network Degradation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
2.4.3 Decomposition of the General Problem
of Optimization of Recovery Information Backup
in Modern Flight-Navigation and Computer Systems . . . . . . 58
2.5 Selection of the Composition of Information Security Systems . . . . 63
2.6 Mathematical Models for Optimizing the Composition
of Information Security Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
2.7 Mathematical Model of Accounting for the Influence
of Information Protection Means and Methods
on the Functional Characteristics of the Protected Navigation
System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73
References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75
3 Methods to Improve the Noise Immunity of Civil Aircraft
Navigation Systems Using Satellite Radio Navigation Systems . . . . . . 77
3.1 Classification of Errors Related to Aircraft Positioning
by Onboard and Ground-Based Navigation Devices . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77
3.2 Working Constellation Selection Algorithm of Navigation
Spacecraft in Excessive Data Load Conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 90
3.3 Algorithm of Selection of the Working Constellation
of Navigation Spacecraft Taking into Account the Probability
of Errors in Determining Its State for Each of the Satellites . . . . . . . 96
3.4 Shortcomings in the Integrity Monitoring Algorithm
in the Receiver . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 103
References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107
4 Quality Enhancement of Data Transmission via Civil Aircraft
Communication Systems by Proper Use of Communication
Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 109
4.1 Principle of Guaranteed Sufficiency of Communication
System Using . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 109
4.2 The Principle of “Zonal” Use of Communication Systems . . . . . . . . 116
References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 122Contents ix
5 Increase of Noise Immunity of Navigation and Communication
Systems of Civil Aircraft During Flights in Mountainous
and Urban Areas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 123
5.1 Method of Increasing Noise Immunity During Civil Aviation
Flights in Urban Areas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 123
5.2 Increase of Noise Immunity of Navigation
and Communication Systems of Civil Aircraft
During Flights in Mountainous and Urban Areas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 140
References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 149
Appendix A . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 151
Appendix B . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 169Chapter 1
Analysis of the Problem of Ensuring
the Noise Stability of the Civil Aircraft
Navigation Systems
1.1 Formalization of the Unintentional Interference Space
of the Civil Aircraft Navigation Systems
It should be noted that, despite all the advantages of using satellite-based radio
navigation systems (SRNS) for the problem of navigational sighting of civil aircraft,
there are so-called unstable navigation zones in the satellite navigation field. In
some of such zones, interruptions in SRNS signals can reach one or even tens of
minutes. The analysis showed that the cause of these phenomena was unintentional
interference with the civil aircraft navigation systems. This interference can be of
two main types [1]:
(1) in the form of harmonic components from radio facilities operating in adjacent
radio wavebands;
(2) from radio facilities located within the navigation signal spectrum.
It appears possible to divide all unintentional interference with the civil aircraft
navigation systems into three source-based groups [2]:
(1) natural,
(2) radio electronic, and
(3) associated with the flight of the aircraft (flight-related).
The first group includes interference associated with reflection from the under￾lying surface, mountains, and buildings. This interference is most meaningful during
low-altitude flights between 400 and 1000 m. The danger of these reflections lies in
the fact that such flights take place at those stages of the aircraft route, which require
a limited time resource (landing approach). In addition, interference related to the
specifics of flights in the polar latitudes can be attributed to this group. The lack of
satellite technologies is most clearly seen in these areas, which is mainly determined
by the fact that navigation satellites are very low above the horizon in the zone of the
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2021
D. A. Zatuchny et al., Noise Resistance Enhancement in Aircraft Navigation
and Connected Systems, Springer Aerospace Technology,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-16-0630-4_1
12 1 Analysis of the Problem of Ensuring the Noise …
Far North, which leads to a sharp deterioration in the basic accuracy characteristic
of SRNS-based aircraft positioning—a geometric factor.
Other interference that shall be attributed to the first group as natural interference
also should be noted [3]:
(a) Interference due to ionospheric effects. This effect is most unfavorable in the
region of the geomagnetic equator and the auroral regions (near the magnetic
poles). Inhomogeneities in the ionosphere are caused by solar activity and lead
to daily changes in the passage of radio waves (day/night), and more adverse
changes are caused by the 11-year solar cycle. Rapid changes in the ionosphere
can lead to loss of the SRNS signal.
(b) Interference due to atmospheric effects. It should be noted that the impact
of these effects on the functioning of the civil aircraft navigation systems is
relatively small. For example, intense precipitation leads to a weakening of
SRNS signals only by fractions of a decibel. This fact does not have a special
impact on the system operation. Tropospheric effects shall be taken into account
already in the development of the system.
The second group shall include unintentional interference with the civil aircraft
navigation systems associated with noise and industrial interference. These interfer￾ences most effectively affect small wavelength navigation signals, which corresponds
to signals received from the navigation spacecraft (NS) transmitted in the decimeter
range, as well as the transmission of information from civil aircraft board to the
ground data receiving stations via VDL-4 or 1090 ES data lines in the automatic
dependent surveillance mode (ADS).
Based on the analysis of statistics accumulated for the period of using SRNS
for navigation support of civil aircraft, a conclusion can be made about the phys￾ical nature of the sources of such unintentional interference related to the onboard
systems: leakage radiation or harmonics of VHF communication equipment, out-of￾band and leakage radiation of satellite communication equipment, etc. Ground-based
sources of such interference currently include mobile and fixed VHF communication
equipment, radio links operating in the SRNS frequency band, harmonic components
of radiation from television transmitting centers, some radar systems, and mobile
satellite communication systems. It should be noted that the probability of such
interference depends on the following factors: a set of state-formulated rules and
recommendations in the field of spectrum use and frequency distribution, and level
of compliance with these rules and recommendations in each state or region.
The third group includes unintentional interference related to the maneuver of the
aircraft and, as a result, the shading of the NS signal by aircraft structural elements,
as well as the aircraft landing on bare space.
There are two fundamental aspects that should be taken into account when
assessing the threat arising during the civil aircraft flight associated with unintentional
interference with civil aircraft navigation systems [4]:
(a) probability of interruptions in SRNS work;
(b) consequences of interruptions in SRNS work.1.1 Formalization of the Unintentional Interference Space … 3
A detailed study of these aspects can determine the need to use methods to reduce
the effect of unintentional interference on the civil aircraft navigation systems and
to determine the level of threat associated with this interference. Such an analysis is
necessary when flights are characterized by varying degrees of probability of serious
consequences.
The probability of an SRNS interruption can be assessed based on operating
experience. At the same time, the specifics of a particular civil flight region are to
be taken into account. It should be noted that large cities with a significant number
of sources of radio frequency interference, industrial areas, etc. are more susceptible
to unintentional interference than sparsely populated areas. Thus, the probability of
unintentional interference for industrial reasons in the European part of the Russian
Federation is much higher than, for example, in Eastern Siberia.
It should be noted that ionospheric errors have a slight effect on the functioning of
the civil aircraft navigation systems in the middle latitudes. However, in the equatorial
region, and to a lesser extent in the near-polar latitudes, these errors can cause a loss
(or poor-quality transmission) of a signal from one or several NSs. This situation
can be compensated by the fact that there is a relatively large number of satellites
observed in the equatorial region [5].
SRNS interruption is proposed to be considered not a complete system failure,
which is an unlikely event, but a situation when the determined radio navigation
parameters exceed certain tolerances, i.e. a failure to comply with the following set
of inequalities:
(1.1)
where x—error caused by unintentional interference (interferences) when using
SRNS, —maximum permissible error when using SRNS, tep —SRNS
interruption, and —permissible SRNS interruption.
Let us introduce the following notations:
X = (x1,..., xn)—set of civil aircraft flight conditions,
Y = 
y1,..., xm

—set of regions differing in industrial production and
underlying surface,
Z = (z1,..., zk)—set of civil aircraft flight stages, and
 = (1,...,l)—set of unintentional interference with civil aircraft naviga￾tion systems.
It is assumed that an unintentional interference can introduce an error in the
navigational sighting of the civil aircraft only with a certain population of elements
from sets X, Y, and Z. If D = {X, Y, Z}, then it makes sense to introduce a relation
i → Ci, where Ci—set of elements belonging to set D and conducive to an SRNS
interruption due to unintentional interference i.4 1 Analysis of the Problem of Ensuring the Noise …
Let’s denote Qi—an event of SRNS interruption due to unintentional interference
i. The probability of SRNS interruption due to unintentional interference i is
found as follows:
P(Qi) = P(Ci)P(Qi/Ci), (1.2)
where P(Qi/Ci)—probability of SRNS interruption due to i with a certain set of
factors.
When assessing the effects of interruptions in the civil aircraft navigation support
provided by the SRNS, the following factors should be taken into account:
(a) Type of airspace. The limited time resource for corrective actions is more vital
for the aerodrome area than for the airspace in which civil aircraft are flying
on high-altitude routes.
(b) Air traffic intensity. For example, in areas with high air traffic intensity, the
use of radar surveillance or the use of appropriate procedures by pilots may be
impractical due to a workload.
(c) Level of service. For example, in the case of a flight through a zone where,
for some reason, there is no SRNS-based navigation support, and when less￾stringent requirements for the civil aircraft crew are presented, dead reckoning
will be sufficient.
(d) Availability of other navigation systems. If it is possible to carry out naviga￾tional sighting using equipment based on civil aircraft navigational sighting
using not only SRNS but also its integrated use (integration) with the inertial
navigation system (INS), civil aircraft navigation systems will not be affected
by SRNS interruptions.
(f) The scale of impact due to an interruption in navigation service is determined by
the size of the geographic area, within which high-quality navigation support
for the aircraft is impossible, and by the duration of this interruption.
(g) The ability of the civil aircraft crew and ground services to quickly assess the
navigation service interruption threat level.
Table 1.1 provides a list of measures to improve the resistance of consumer
onboard equipment to unintentional interference.
1.2 Analysis of the Noise Stability of the Civil Aircraft
Navigation Systems Using the Example of the Sukhoi
Superjet 100 Aircraft
According to the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) standards “Avi￾ation Telecommunication”, Volume 1, Appendix 10, GPS SRNS signals or an inte￾grated GLONASS SRNS and GPS signal or a GLONASS SRNS signal can be used.1.2 Analysis of the Noise Stability of the Civil Aircraft Navigation … 5
Table 1.1 Potential measures to improve the resistance of consumer onboard equipment to
unintentional interference
Item No Interference
immunity measures
Possible gain in
relation to standard
SRNS receivers, dB
Possible gain in
relation to standard
SRNS receivers, %
Notes
1 Improvement of the
receiving antenna
directional pattern
at low elevation
angles
12–14 27 Can be used in
civil navigation
systems
2 Control of
directional pattern
reducing sensitivity
in the interferer
direction
21–23 up to 85 For use,
information on the
direction of
interference is
required
3 Antenna array with
signal polarization
11–13 up to 45 Not to be used
under all operating
conditions
4 Improved receiver
signal processing
17–19 6–9 More research is
needed to explore
the possibilities of
using
5 Integration of SRNS
receiver with INS
12–14 25–35 Cost depends on
INS level
6 Use of
dual-frequency
receivers L1, L2
7 25–40
7 Use of
triple-frequency
receivers
9 37–45
However, the following should be noted. With GPS flights introduced, interruptions
in SRNS signals in some zones can reach one or even tens of minutes.
The revealed fact that GPS SRNS is subject to various kinds of interference causes
its inapplicability for navigation problems in some cases. In contrast, GLONASS
SRNS satisfies the requirements for noise stability. This is determined by the fact
that GPS SRNS provides code division of signals, and GLONASS SRNS—frequency
division of signals [6]. Thus, to degrade the quality of GPS SRNS, it is enough to put
interference at the same frequency, and to achieve this result in the case of GLONASS
SRNS—to put several interferences in the frequency range.
The characteristics of GLONASS and GPS SRNS, which affect the noise stability
of the system to some extent, are presented in Table 1.2.
The advantages of GLONASS SRNS over GPS SRNS in terms of noise stability
are quite difficult to use for the following reason. To date, civil aviation practi￾cally does not use domestic aircraft. Out of about a thousand aircraft operated by
airlines operating flights to/from the Russian Federation, 7 Yak-42 airplanes, another6 1 Analysis of the Problem of Ensuring the Noise …
Table 1.2. Characteristics of
GLONASS and GPS SRNS
determining the noise stability
of consumer receivers
Parameter GLONASS GPS
Signal division
method
Frequency-based Code-based
Signal carrier
frequencies, MHz
1602.5625 to
1615.5
1246.4375 to
1256.5
1575.42
1227.6 to 1176.45
Signal band, MHz,
standard precision
1.022
10.22
2.046 (C\A-code)
20.46 (P-code)
Repetition cycle, ms 1 ms 1 ms (C\A-code)
7 days (P-code)
Clock frequency,
MHz
0.511 1.023 (C\A-code)
10.23 (P-code)
Signal level at L1,
L2 receiver input,
dBW
−165.5 to −157*
−162
−164.5 (P-code)
−163 (C\A-code)
−166 (P-code)
−166.8
(C\A-code)**
Signal polarization Right-hand
circular
Right-hand circular
Orbital altitude, km 19,100 20,145
*—at the output of an isotropic receiving antenna with linear
polarization, i.e. with a loss of 3 dB
**—in the long term
3 airplanes developed at Gromov FRI according to the design of the Yakovlev Design
Bureau (these aircraft have the ability to use GPS/GLONASS/GBAS signals), 1
aircraft equipped with all possible navigation receivers (the RF President board), and
2 aircraft of Special Flight Department “Rossiya” are used. The main civil aircraft
(Boeing Airbus 320) uses a GPS signal.
There is an indigenous Russian aircraft—Sukhoi Superjet 100 shown in Fig. 1.1.
But this aircraft is also equipped with old foreign avionics by Thales, which only
confirms the existence of the problem outlined earlier.
It has been affirmed that it is necessary to be able to receive signals from two
constellations on board, but proposals for real sharing of GLONASS and GPS signals,
although there is such an opportunity in the ICAO Standards, elicited no response
from representatives of foreign aviation services.
The flight-navigation equipment of the Sukhoi Superjet 100 aircraft.
provides the crew with the data necessary for the flight.
The flight-navigation equipment includes the following systems:
– systems and instruments for measuring flight parameters,
– instruments for measuring the spatial position and direction of flight,
– systems and instruments for landing and taxiing,
– non-cooperative flight-navigation systems,1.2 Analysis of the Noise Stability of the Civil Aircraft Navigation … 7
Fig. 1.1 Aircraft “Sukhoi Superjet 100”
– cooperative flight-navigation systems, and
– navigation computers.
We will analyze the problem of meeting the noise stability requirements taking into
account the fact that modern civil aircraft are almost fully capable of navigating with
the use of consumer navigation equipment (CNE) operating on a signal received from
navigation spacecraft (NS) included in SRNS. Also, many CNE examples are capable
of locating the civil aircraft on the basis of SRNS and INS integration (integrated
use) [7].
The GLONASS global navigation satellite system is a satellite navigation radio
system that provides an approach and a continuous determination of the aircraft’s
navigation parameters using satellite navigation system signals, as well as informa￾tion received from onboard equipment (navigation data), ground-based augmentation
system, and augmentation satellite systems.
The global navigation satellite system includes the following equipment:
GLONASS receiver–computer unit, GLONASS amplifier, and GLONASS antenna.
The Global Positioning System (GPS) is an auxiliary radio navigation system
that provides the crew and FMS computers with navigation information about the
position, heading, and speed of the aircraft. To this end, the system uses signals
from the satellite constellation. The calculated navigation information, as well as the
number of visible satellites and the integrity of the system, is displayed on the FMS
computer consoles. The system includes two antennas that receive radio signals from
satellites. The signals received are sent to multi-mode receivers of the instrument
landing system.8 1 Analysis of the Problem of Ensuring the Noise …
The inertial system installed on the Superjet 100 civil aircraft consists of three
independent channels. Each channel includes an inertial computer and an inertial
computer configuration module. The inertial system provides the crew and other
aircraft systems with information about its spatial position (pitch angle, roll angle,
and yaw angle), heading, ground speed, and current location. The values of angular
velocity and linear acceleration of the aircraft are calculated by the inertial computer
and sent to the automatic flight control system, the flight data recording system,
the flight management system, and the central computer system. The calculated
information is displayed on the display.
When calculating the spatial position and flight direction parameters, the inertial
system interacts with aircraft systems and receives data directly from sensors or
computers. Depending on the coordinate system used, the inertial system provides
the following data to the aircraft systems:
(1) In the body-fixed coordinate system:
– longitudinal, transverse, and normal accelerations;
– roll, pitch, and yaw angular velocity.
(2) In the local coordinate system:
– pitch and roll;
– angular pitch and roll rate;
– inclination angle of the flight path inclination angle and linear acceleration along
the flight path;
– baroinertial vertical velocity and inertial vertical acceleration;
– platform azimuth.
(3) In the Earth-fixed coordinate system:
– latitude and longitude;
– ground speed, north and east components of ground speed;
– baroinertial altitude;
– true and magnetic heading;
– true and magnetic track angle;
– angular track angle rate;
– true velocity and true wind direction;
– drift angle;
– acceleration along the track and perpendicular to the track;
– acceleration along the heading and perpendicular to the heading.
The inertial system has the following modes of operation:
– activation,
– stationary alignment,
– navigation,
– spatial position (backup mode), and
– flight termination.1.2 Analysis of the Noise Stability of the Civil Aircraft Navigation … 9
The inertial computer consists of a chassis and a front casing with the three main
components inside: inertial sensor unit, secondary power supply with electromag￾netic interference and transient protection board, computer board and ARINC I/O
interface.
The inertial sensor unit consists of three digital laser gyroscopes and three compen￾sating accelerometers; each of the components is equipped with its own electronics,
which allows it to be isolated from faults in adjacent sensors.
The inertial calculator uses the Q-FLEX QA950 accelerometer by Honeywell.
Built-in electronics generate an output current proportional to the acceleration, which
provides a measurement of both static and dynamic accelerations. The technologies
of existing Honeywell products that have been certified by the US Federal Aviation
Agency and the European Certification Center are applied in the computer and the
ARINC I/O board. The microprocessor and application-specific integrated circuits
(ASIC) have been tested in other commercial applications. The software is certified
in accordance with DO-178B, level A. The computer and ARINC I/O interface board
are designed with the possibility of expanding the memory capacity and throughput
rate.
The inertial computer configuration module (ARM) is a non-volatile memory
device that stores configuration data of the ARM inertial system [8].
“Activation” mode.
After feeding the power supply from the aircraft onboard network and activating
the inertial system, it enters the “Activation” mode, which lasts approximately five
seconds. During this time, the built-in monitoring tools perform a function check
that can detect over 90% of the failures, and the configuration data is loaded from
the ARM memory.
“Stationary alignment” mode.
If there are no failures, the INS switches to the “Stationary alignment” mode,
during which the INS determines the current position of the aircraft taking into
account the latitude/longitude coordinates received from GPS or entered by the
crew. The spatial position mode is activated simultaneously with the stationary align￾ment mode. Thus, the indication of the spatial position parameters (roll, pitch, etc.)
is provided immediately after the INS is turned on, but before it switches to the
navigation mode.
The duration of the “Stationary alignment” mode varies from 3 to 20 min, and
depends on the current latitude and type of alignment selected: standard or fast (to be
set in the ARM-stored configuration file of the aircraft). During the alignment, the
INS calculates the latitude coordinate and the North line after aligning the INS axes
with the local vertical according to the components of the Earth’s rotational speed
corresponding to each axis. If the aircraft moves during the alignment, the alignment
is terminated. Re-switching to the stationary alignment mode occurs 30 s after the
end of the movement, and the whole alignment process begins anew.
If the latitude and longitude coordinates were entered by the crew, then, after the
alignment is completed, the INS conducts a compliance check of the entered values
and the last memory-stored values measured before the previous power-off. If the
difference exceeds 1°, the crew receives a message about the need to re-enter the10 1 Analysis of the Problem of Ensuring the Noise …
coordinates. If the coordinates re-entered also do not coincide with those stored in
the INS memory, but differ by less than 0.1° from the ones entered for the first time,
they are accepted. A compliance check is not carried out for the entered values if the
INS worked in the spatial position mode before power-off or the “Ground service”
flag was set in the INS memory.
Upon alignment termination, the INS conducts alignment correctness verification;
for this, the values of the cosine and sine of the given latitude (obtained from GPS or
entered by the crew) and the INS-calculated latitude are compared. If the difference
in values does not exceed 0.01234 for cosine and 0.15 for sine, and the compliance
check for the coordinates entered by the crew is successfully completed, then the
INS switches to the navigation mode. Otherwise, the INS issues a message about the
need to re-enter the coordinates.
Instruments measuring the spatial position and direction of flight of the aircraft
are designed to calculate the spatial position and navigation parameters of the civil
aircraft for the unambiguous perception of the air situation, civil aircraft position, and
flight mode by the crew, as well as to work with automatic flight control equipment.
Parameters calculated by spatial position and flight direction instruments:
– current spatial position,
– ground speed,
– heading angle,
– current values of wind direction and force,
– drift angle,
– track angle error,
– across-track displacement,
– design heading,
– values of current navigation characteristics,
– required navigation characteristics in accordance with the flight mode,
– inertial vertical velocity, and
– magnetic and true heading.
On the basis of the parameters listed, the spatial position and flight direction
instrument system calculates the spatial position of the aircraft in accordance with
the 3D Earth-positioning coordinate system (WGS-84) (Fig. 1.2).
“Navigation” mode.
If the alignment correctness verification and the verification of coordinates entered
(if they were entered by the crew) are successful, the INS switches to the “Navigation”
mode and remains there until the discrete input is opened or the power supply is
interrupted.
“Spatial position” mode.
The spatial position mode is a backup mode, which provides minimal initialization
of the inertial system data during the flight and is automatically activated after a short
power supply failure of the inertial system.
“Flight termination” mode.1.2 Analysis of the Noise Stability of the Civil Aircraft Navigation … 11
PED DISPLAY EWD DISPLAY
Fig. 1.2 Controls and indicators
In the first 5 s of the “Flight termination” mode, INS records and saves the
following information in its internal non-volatile memory: navigation quality data,
service data (in accumulation mode), auto-calibration data, and other parameters.
Based on the data provided in this section, we can draw the following conclusions:
(1) The noise stability of the GLONASS system is higher than that of the GPS
system.
(2) The use of foreign avionics on board the civil aircraft including
“Sukhoi Superjet 100” does not enable taking advantage of these benefits [9–11].12 1 Analysis of the Problem of Ensuring the Noise …
1.3 Mechanisms for the Use of Expert Systems
in the Design of Aircraft Airborne Systems
This section sets the task of forming an approach that involves consideration of
specific uncertainties arising from the use of the results of the development of civil
aircraft flight-navigation systems (FNS) in terms of ensuring noise stability. A feature
of the proposed mechanism for organizing such developments is the use of expert
assessments as important components of soft computing [12].
According to the proposed methodology, an expert description of the design
outputs creates conditions for project management based on qualitative assessments,
just as is done in the project management and scheduling theory. We will assume that
the basis for compensating for specific uncertainties in the civil aircraft FNS design
outputs is the assessment of the operational reliability of the FNSs created.
An important feature is the absence of criteria that characterize the importance of
parameters determining the sustainability of the results of individual works, as well
as the reliability assessment of the project as a whole. Therefore, to compensate for
such uncertainties, the actual design of civil aircraft FNSs will be considered as a
complex system.
The term “complex” system will be used not in contrast to “not complex”, but
as its characteristic. Since the design involves the operation of facilities with fuzzy
characteristics of an indefinite number of parameters, to describe a complex system
we will not use the parameters of the interrelations between the project stages, but
the characteristics of the functions that implement these interrelations.
For example, we will consider the design technology as a complex system taking
into account the impact of the “human factor”, the impact of uncertain natural factors,
etc. A special feature of the proposed approach is not only the development of
qualitative methods for evaluating the effectiveness of the FNS project, but also
the optimization of aircraft operation taking into account indicators of resistance to
external influences [13].
Traditionally, the design completeness has to be evaluated using the data obtained
from an experiment with the probability of work success calculated by the Monte
Carlo method. We will assume that the stability of FNS work is characterized by
assessments of the functional characteristics defined in the design specification
provided that the previous works ensuring the commencement of operation have
been completed. In this regard, in contrast to the structural reliability determined by
time to failure, recoverability, and maintainability of FNS, it is proposed to consider
functional reliability determined by the performance of regular functions under the
condition of the dynamics of external influences.
In this paper, for the algorithmization of the examination of the acceptability of
design results (as a complex system), the task is to form a system that allows ensuring
the functional reliability of developments, i.e. the reliability of obtaining a regular
result of the use of FNS in a given time interval, under given conditions.
The analysis of FNS work showed that causes of dangerous failures also include
incorrect requirements: to limitations in the achievement of the development target1.3 Mechanisms for the Use of Expert Systems … 13
function, to hardware and/or software; to reliability (lack of development of the
necessary functions to ensure the stability of work in various modes); in addition:
accidental failure of mechanical devices; software errors; disturbances in the power
supply system (power failure, voltage reduction, power switching); environmental
influences (electromagnetic, thermal or mechanical phenomena); operator errors,
etc. This requires an expert solution to the two problems: introduction of the stability
criterion of the designed FNS and identification of factors affecting the performance
of its regular functions.
The considered problem of taking into account the specific uncertainties arising
from the use of the design outputs of the civil aircraft FNS requires the analysis
of external influences on the results of achieving the process design objectives, as
well as the service life of the aircraft. Estimates of such uncertainties are commonly
referred to as “risk”. In this paper, we quantify the risk using the product of the
probability of a risk event by the amount of damage from its occurrence.
The significance of the impact of uncertainties on the sustainability of the FNS
creation results confirms the relevance of the risk management task at each stage of
the civil aircraft life cycle, from design to removal from service. In this consider￾ation, risk management is proposed to be conducted by identifying threats, setting
countermeasures, and analyzing the results of compensation for external influences.
For this purpose, the problem to establish whether the changes in risk correspond to
the standard FNS reliability values is set.
One of the risk management models based on the relationships between threats,
countermeasures, and risks, given in GOST R ISO/IEC 15,408-1, is shown in Fig. 1.3.
GOST R ISO/IEC 15,408-1-2002 “Information Technology—Security tech￾niques—Evaluation Criteria for IT Security” defines the “General Criteria” (GC)
designed to assess the safety performance of IT tools and systems. By establishing a
common base of criteria, GC make FNS functional stability assessments significant
for the formation of expert conclusions on the sustainability of the design results. The
completeness of these conclusions is achieved through the analysis of the fulfillment
of the general set of requirements for the safety functions of the civil aircraft tools
and systems, as well as in accordance with the degrees of confidence in the results
of such an analysis [14].
According to the formulation of the problem being solved, a more detailed consid￾eration of the specifics of ensuring the FNS design sustainability determines the need
to apply expert assessments of the risks of their work under external influences on the
aircraft. Due to the fact that the aircraft is considered as a man–machine system, it is
proposed to characterize it as an object of protection dividing into physical, logical,
and personnel components [15]:
(a) Physical objectsinclude material components or a group of components within
the aircraft. Such objects may include FNS technical means, transmitting and
receiving equipment, special tools installed on the aircraft, etc.
(b) Logical objects are informational in nature. They may include process data,
control algorithms, and specialized information that ensures the functional14 1 Analysis of the Problem of Ensuring the Noise …
Fig. 1.3 Risk management model according to GOST R ISO/IEC 15,408-1
performance of the FNS. Indirectly, objects of this type may include indicators,
whose reduction affects the FNS operational and production efficiency.
Civil aircraft control processes are a special form of logical objects. They contain
the automation logic used in the respective systems. Failures of FNS and computer
systems may occur both at the physical level (for example, destruction of a memory
element as a result of electrophysical effects) and at the logical level (for example,
change in the contents of a memory cell). Such effects can lead to violations of the
control signal integrity or the stability of the very FNS operation process.
(c) Personnel objects include professionals characterized by knowledge and skills
relevant to their production activities. For example, failures of FNS and
computer complexes can significantly affect the functioning of the civil aircraft
as a whole, despite the integrity of physical and logical components.
Thus, it can be assumed that one of the central problems in the technology of main￾taining the sustainability of the FNS design outputs under the influence of external
factors is minimizing the risks of faults or failures of each of the components of
the protected object. An important feature in solving such a problem is the frequent
inconsistency between the FNS reliability requirements defined by their design spec￾ification and the possibilities of design solutions proposed by developers. In this1.3 Mechanisms for the Use of Expert Systems … 15
case, the optimization of the solution to the inverse reliability calculation problem is
required, which implies the development of recommendations for the refinement of
the FNS design based on the provisions of their design specifications for this aircraft.
An essential characteristic of inverse reliability calculation problems is the funda￾mental incorrectness of their formulation due to the multivariance of possible solu￾tions. As applied to FNS, the uncertainty of the formation of proposals for the design
refinement as a result of the lack of rigidity in determining the parameters of the
influence of external factors on the civil aircraft during flight is added.
The uniqueness of the onboard equipment requires the strict consideration of its
characteristics. However, in practice, there is often a spread in their values due to
deviations from the required manufacturing technology. At the same time, resources
for the implementation of improvements are always limited [16].
Thus, it requires the introduction of expert recommendations for the introduction
of design improvements, minimizing the uncertainty in FNS works in relation to the
requirements of their design specification, while minimizing the resources spent, i.e.
optimization of the expert solution to the inverse CA reliability calculation problem
is required.
In this section, uncertainty refers to the characteristic of a situation in which the
estimates of decision-making constraints are described by random processes. In our
consideration, the following uncertainties are to be identified:
– stochastic (there is information available about the distribution of the failure
probability over a set of solution outputs);
– operational (there is information available about the FNS work results, but there
is no information about external influences);
– natural (there is information available about possible external influences, and there
is no data on the results of these impacts with the proposed design solutions);
– a priori (there is no information about both external influences and the results of
the proposed design solutions).
It is proposed to reduce the problem of justifying solutions under the conditions of
uncertainty of these types, all but a priori, to narrowing the initial set of alternatives
based on the information provided to the decision maker. Due to the need to take
expert decisions, we will assume that the quality of recommendations increases under
conditions of stochastic uncertainty when taking into account such characteristics of
the decision maker’s personality, such as attitude to the outputs of his/her decisions
and risk appetite.
It is possible to use automated decision support systems under the conditions of a
priori uncertainty in predicting the CA FNS stability. One of the promising directions
in the construction of such systems is the use of adaptive control algorithms [17].
Practice shows that traditional prediction methods work if the interaction process
between functional blocks is stationary or its characteristics change little in time. In
this paper, design requirements for the FSN, which ensures the efficiency of response
to external influences in case of uncertainty of the processes affecting functional
blocks, determined the need to consider the value of the protected object taking into
account the efficiency of interaction between the blocks of the FNS being created.16 1 Analysis of the Problem of Ensuring the Noise …
In our consideration, it is proposed to take the fault or failure risk assessment
as the measure of the value of CA FNS components. Recall that risk assessment
is considered as the product of the risk event probability by the amount of damage
caused as a result of its occurrence. In this case, the damage may be direct or indirect
[18]:
(a) direct damage: reflects the cost of replacing the failed object;
(b) indirect damage: reflects the damage caused by the failure of the object for
which the designer or manufacturer is responsible. For example, such damage
may include losses associated with process downtime caused by object failure.
Indirect damage in relation to physical objects usually includes the conse￾quences of an aircraft flight mission failure. Indirect damage in relation to
logical objects often includes a loss of confidence in a designer or manufac￾turer, a loss of competitive advantage once achieved through the realization of
intellectual property (for example, a groundbreaking technology), etc.
Risk assessment involves the step-by-step analysis of all functional blocks
involved, starting with the ones immediately accessible to the threat, and further
to the less accessible ones. We will assume that the risk assessment scheme consists
of the following stages:
(1) assessment of the initial risk;
(2) implementation of risk mitigation countermeasures;
(3) assessment of the residual risk.
If necessary, the second and third stages may be repeated, which is one of the
ways to reduce the residual risk to an acceptable level. In particular, the second stage
may include an assessment of existing measures for protecting and implementing
plans to add corrective or additional countermeasures.
As the basic risk analysis stage, we will take a study of vulnerabilities in the aircraft
design solutions, i.e. identification and characterization of weak points in the FNS
components from the point of view of external influences. Such vulnerabilities may
be forced into the design of the control system or be random, that is, they may be the
result of the FNS design customer’s misunderstanding of the functional environment
features.
In this consideration, vulnerabilities are not limited to electronic components.
Similar to the regularities of changes in the reliability of man–machine systems, the
vulnerabilities of a civil aircraft can also increase if the characteristics of the envi￾ronment change, if the components of the protected object fail, if such components
cannot be replaced, etc.
Impacts that may occur in relation to civil aircraft will be considered as threats. In
the practice of operating FNS, they appear in various forms, but the most common
forms of external influences are as follows:
(a) accidental natural: radiation and solar flares. These factors are poorly
predictable and modelable.1.3 Mechanisms for the Use of Expert Systems … 17
((b) predictable natural: ionizing electromagnetic radiation, geomagnetic distur￾bances of the Earth’s magnetic field, geomagnetic storms, and thunderstorm
fronts.
(c) unintentional artificial influence.
The current regulatory documents that determine the maximum estimates of
acceptable risks are very non-specific. Therefore, we assume in this section that
a list of objects or scenarios with estimates of the probability of risk events and a
gradation of the importance of their consequences shall be formed for each type of
aircraft and each flight mission. This list shall be a database for qualitative analysis
of actual risk. Based on the information from such lists, it can be assumed that the
reliability of personnel protection objects is largely determined by the management’s
ability to identify measures that influence physical and logical components [19].
In accordance with the specifics of their activities, some developers accept rela￾tively high levels of risk (in particular, research organizations), and some are, in
fact, conservative and refuse risks. Therefore, an assessment of the risk level of
the same man–machine system may be acceptable for one organization and unac￾ceptable for another. Even individual units within the same organization may have
different opinions regarding risks or their acceptability. The responsibility of decision
makers implies the need for the most objective assessment of risks and their accept￾ability to prepare a response to risk events. Depending on the circumstances, decision
makers may resort to one or another combination of risk-influencing measures in each
situation. For example [20],
(a) elimination of risk from the design: one form of risk mitigation is to amend the
FNS design so as to eliminate this risk. The risk can be mitigated by completely
canceling an unnecessary function or blocking access to it. Such an influencing
measure may provide for conscious refusal from specific positions in the flight
mission;
(b) risk reduction: risk can be reduced to an acceptable level by taking counter￾measures that reduce the likelihood of external influences or limit the conse￾quences of a risk event. In this case, the principal limitation is the possibility of
achieving an acceptable level of risk on the understanding that the risk cannot
be completely eliminated;
(c) transfer or distribution of risk: it is possible to enter into any insurance contract
or agreement on transferring all or part of the risk to a third party. A typical
example is a subcontract for certain operations or services. Such a solution may
not always be effective, since it may not apply to all aircraft components. An
insurance contract may compensate for some types of damage, but not damage
related to logical components, for example, loss of confidence from consumers
of FNS functional blocks;
(d) elimination or revision of ineffective protective measures:within the framework
of minimizing the effects of risk events, protection measures used shall be
identified and harmonized so as to focus on the improvement of the most
effective and efficient measures; and18 1 Analysis of the Problem of Ensuring the Noise …
(e) risk acceptance: there is always an option to accept the risk considering it as
part of the aircraft operating costs. Developers shall take some risks if they
cannot be mitigated or transferred at optimal costs.
In these cases, the following solutions can be used as countermeasures taken to
reduce the risk of external influences to an acceptable level:
– redundancy of information channels without changing the operational character￾istics of the FNS functional blocks;
– algorithmization of control in the man–machine system assuming that the decision
maker chooses a command, for example, “sleep”—a temporary interruption of
the active functioning of a specific FNS block, “key”—switching to a redundant
channel, set, power source, and “shift”—implementation of aircraft maneuver;
– automation of control in the technical system involves issuing commands to
activate the actuators of the external influences protection system;
– automation of control in the emergency system—involves emergency shutdown
of the functional block and, if necessary, its isolation.
According to the objective of this section to ensure the sustainability of the CA
FNS design outputs, we will consider the characteristics of the expert system (ES)
allowing to ensure the functional reliability of complex human–machine systems. In
our case, we will assume that the main functions of such an ES can be divided into
three main groups:
– formation of an expert group;
– ensuring the interaction of experts within the group;
– development and adoption of a technical solution to the target problem.
To date, many international organizations have the most advanced interface with
control functions in the ES. As a reference system, we can call the expert manage￾ment system adopted by the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC). The
standard expert management functions in such a system are the following:
– formation of an expert group (expert management system);
– ensuring the interaction of experts within the group (meeting registration system
(MRS), web conferencing, etc.);
– development and adoption of a technical solution to the target problem (collabo￾ration tool, electronic vote, and comment).
The work of such an expert management system is based on an expanded set
of functions: for example, access to a database and reference information about
previously developed documents (library server, standard in database format, and
electropedia); and system administration (technical server, management server, etc.).
The expert is provided with documents currently used, list of committees (expert
groups) he/she being a member of, available standard set of actions (delete, create,
notify, etc.) for working with documents.
An important advantage of using such a computer system is the virtualization
of ES collections. The video conference function allows organizing the interaction1.3 Mechanisms for the Use of Expert Systems … 19
of experts in real time without the need for their presence in one place. The expert
administration system allows for the registration of experts appointed to participate
in the ES work. This model allows monitoring all the changes associated with the
personal data of experts and coordinating their work.
To organize documentary support for the ES Decision Support (ESDS), this paper
proposes mechanisms that are determined by the features of managing the reduction
of risks associated with the influence of the external environment on the sustainability
of the FNS design outputs. This form of documentary support involves a set of func￾tions of planning and implementation of the three stages of information processing
[21]:
– operational problem-oriented collection of documents that are integrated from
various external sources;
– documented multi-user analysis;
– formation of corporate documentary reporting.
The specificity of the problem we are considering determines that the documentary
data received in the ESDS is characterized by a high scaling level and complexity of
multi-level indexing, using their semantic interpretation, with transaction complexity
and other features that require thorough verification, maintenance and support of
relevance, timeliness, and reliability. Therefore, the proposed model offers a software
service for working with large volumes of documentary information, which provides
the following solutions:
1. Decomposition approach focused on the document flow administration of small
and large networks. In this case, it is possible for single developers to plan offline
business processes and update personal digital libraries.
2. As a formal model of an ESDS information infrastructure, it is proposed to use a
“cataloged system”, the elements of which are object-oriented, process-oriented,
event-oriented catalogs, registers, directories, and repositories of multidimen￾sional monitoring data that will be able to sufficiently take into account the
specificity of the application area.
After registration, information about competencies (input data is presented in
Fig. 1.5) is entered for each participant (Fig. 1.4). The executive roles of the network
SDS participants are distributed according to the results of the competency analysis.
At the same time, documentation done in a systematic and consistent manner will
allow the ESDS to receive the status of a formal organizational system.
An important aspect of ensuring the functional reliability of the ESDS is the algo￾rithmization of building information and communication policies taking into account
the distribution of expert functions in accordance with their competence levels. One
of the solutions to this problem is shown in Fig. 1.6. Data for entering information
presented in this form allow navigating through the nomenclature list of documents,
thus providing an opportunity to select the performer of a particular business trans￾action. In this paper, for example, such an operation is to ensure the sustainability of
the CA FNS design outputs during external electrophysical influences (EEI).20 1 Analysis of the Problem of Ensuring the Noise …
Current state of book of reference
Role in DSS
2 Subjective system analyst
Enter new element of the book of reference
Organization
FULL NAME
Position
Area of competence
Role in DSS
Web address
Enter
Delete
1 System analyst 3.2 Responsible decision-maker ЛПР
External informatory (data) 
Area of competence 
Fig. 1.4 ESDS participant registration screen
Code Reference
System analyst
Problem identification. Intersubjective statement
Subjective problem statement
Tasks definition of expert groups
Decomposition of initial task and description of initial sub-tasks for expert groups
Determination of composition and sequence of applying root algorithm (solving graph)
Determination of temporary and other regulations
Correction of sub-tasks formulation at their consecutive solving
Subjective system analyst
System analyst for document support
Expert for supporting online database by EI
Operator of electronic library
Operator of problem-oriented analysis of telemetric data
Operator for support of online database on incidents
Operator for support of online database on protection equipment
Operator for support of online database on products lifecycle
Operator for support of online database on field components
Expert for supporting online database by EI
Operator for configuration of information sources
Operator for problem-oriented setup of intellectual functions and means of expert analysis
Fig. 1.5 Data to enter information about the competencies of the network SDS participants
This service allows the network document management administrator to program
the procedures of network expertise process management, distribution of respon￾sibilities, and organizational management of the generation of corporate reporting
documents.
It should be noted that, in contrast to the classical ES building systems, the
proposed model of ESDS supports the indexing of fragments of the CA FNS infor￾mation infrastructure, which makes it possible to use the entered structuring schemes
not only for human–machine (interactive) but also automatic (software) navigation1.3 Mechanisms for the Use of Expert Systems … 21
Current state of book of reference Delete
Mailout Performe
Document group code
Delivery type code
Special notes code
Procedure code
Enter new element of the book of reference:
Group of documents
Specify the type of document delivery
Specify special notes
Specify the recommended 
procedure
Specify the recommended performer
Specify the requirements for terms of performance
Reference code Enter
TS 6-10-21-16-90 Conducting coatings
TS 12-0173356.009-88
STANDARD
Calendar period Number of periods
GOST 19005-81 Means to ensure protection of missile and 
GOST 6433.3-71 Solid electroinsulating materials.
GOST 18707-81 Jumpers to ensure protection of items
TS 6-10-19-76-84 GOST 19005-81Means to ensure protection
Referenc Document group code Documents group Delivery 
Fig. 1.6 Entering the regulations of network business processes
in the information field of directories, catalogs, registries, etc. in the interests of
automated applications, services, and intellectual functions [18, 19].
Consideration of the features of using information technologies in ensuring the
stability of CA FNS work under external influences has shown some possibilities
of expert support for the management of the FNS development. In the proposed
methodology of information support for forecasting the aircraft response to external
influences, an attempt was made to combine methods of computer data processing and
expert analysis of the operation of functional modules. Such an approach shall ensure
the effectiveness of decision-making based on improving the accuracy and speed of
data processing, and, accordingly, choosing the scenario for adapting the overall
work of the civil aircraft to external influences taking into account the preferences
of decision makers.
System consideration of the aircraft creation and work organization technologies
showed that the semantics of interfaces largely determines the stability of the inter￾action between the FNS functional blocks and their relationships with the human
operator, and pragmatic aspects affect the dynamics of the FNS improvement. At
the same time, the friendliness of the semantics of interfaces in the form of positive
feedback often entails the improvement of pragmatic components, which, in turn,
can determine the conditions for improving the semantics of interactions, etc.
Application of the conditions of thermodynamic equilibrium in a complex system
to the problem under consideration allowed formulating the principles of ensuring
the homeostasis of the functional characteristics of CA FNS [14]:
The first principle: harmonization of the mutual influence of the results of the
pragmatic and semantic aspects of interactions between FNS elements. Harmony
refers to the isomorphic balance of the value of information interactions between22 1 Analysis of the Problem of Ensuring the Noise …
FNS elements determined by the sum of pragmatic and semantic components. An
example of harmonization is the equality of the rate of adaptation of the passage of
information signals between FNS elements and the rate of the operator’s adaptation
to the perception of data under changing external conditions.
The second principle: formation of the target-based focus in improving the
semantic aspects of FNS work in a changing external environment. As a result of the
use of such a principle, the possibility of fulfilling the complex system survivability
condition is formed: the time of adaptation of the system to changing conditions shall
not exceed the time of the onset of irreversible changes in its work occurring due to
the influence of external environmental factors.
As the experience of operating domestic and foreign FNSs shows, the develop￾ment of science and technology in terms of solving problems of reducing the causes
of a dangerous situation on a civil aircraft under the complex effect of external factors
remains a priority. This is due to the fact that at present there is no single ideology
of building complex information processing for CA technical condition indication
systems and efficiently solving the problems of intellectual assessment and fore￾casting of the development of a dangerous situation during the degradation of FNS
characteristics.
When applying existing methods, the well-known assessments and forecasts are
the results of complex processing of strongly averaged-in-size parameters and time
intervals of some generalized external influence and other factors manifested in the
respective operational conditions of the aircraft.
The practical value of the assessments and forecasts under consideration for taking
timely measures to prevent the occurrence of a dangerous situation on the aircraft
caused by external influences remains very low at the present time. These assessments
and forecasts are suitable mainly for analyzing the causes of the unusual events that
have already occurred on the aircraft in the course of work of the operational group
during the aircraft operation and in the course of work of the flight development test
commission. In real time, such assessments and forecasts allow to reliably assess and
predict only the “strongest” effects of degradation of characteristics, such as those
associated with “solar flares”, passage of civil aircraft in known areas of enhanced
radiation, and long-term operation.
A more detailed specification of the assessments and forecasts of the causes of a
dangerous situation on the aircraft and the parameters causing its effects is associated
with the high complexity of modeling the processes under consideration and the
changing availability of data for this modeling during the aircraft operation. At the
same time, the most effective method for a particular operation stage is a specific
assessment and forecasting method. The selection of such a method from a set of
possible methods is associated with the introduction of certain rules and is a smart
solution. As the analysis of practical experience gained from the available information
sources for assessing the FNS reliability shows, expert systems, which are functional
blocks of the Industrial Internet (IIoT), can advance the use of the proposed solutions
to improve the complex system design processes.References 23
References
1. Aeronautical Telecommunications Annex 10 to the Convention on International Civil Avia￾tion—Montreal, ICAO, Sixth Revision (2006)
2. Avtin IV (2017) On remote determination of complex dielectric permeability using radiopo￾larimetry methods. Collected book: VII All-Russian armandovskiye readings. Current prob￾lems of remote sounding, radio detection and ranging, wave propagation and diffraction.
Materials of the All-Russian scientific conference, pp 384–386
3. Avtin IV (2017) On building-up a polarization image of a radar target. Collected book: VII All￾Russian armandovskiye readings. Current problems of remote sounding, radio detection and
ranging, wave propagation and diffraction. Materials of the All-Russian scientific conference,
pp 387–391
4. Avtin IV, Trushin AV (2015) On detection and resolution of low-contrast low Doppler radar
targets within the resolution cell. Nauchniy Vestnik of the Moscow State Technical University
of Civil Aviation 222(12):80–84
5. Akinshin NS, Bystrov RP, Menshikov VL, Potapov AA (2018) Specifics and methods of avionic
equipment jam resistance improving. Uspekhi sovremennoy radioelektroniki 2, 3–21
6. Akinshin RN, Zatuchnyy DA, Shevchenko DV (2016) Reducing the multi-path propagation
impact when transmitting data from the aircraft. Informatizaciya i svyaz 3, 6–12
7. Akinshin NS (2001) Data protection in avionic data transmission and processing systems. In:
Conference proceedings “Voprosy radiotekhniki i radiolokacii” TulSU, TAII, Tula
8. Didenko NI, Eliseyev BP, Sauta OI, Shatrakov AY, Yushkov AV (2017) Radio-technical support
of civil and military aviation flights: strategic problem of the arctic region of Russia. Nauchniy
Vestnik of MSTUCA 20(5):8–19
9. Zatuchnyi DA (2018) Analysis of various jamming impact on the civil aircraft navigation
systems. Informatizaciya i svyaz 2, 7–11
10. Zatuchnyi DA (2012) Reducing errors in data transmission from the aircraft in mountainous
areas for the VHF band by improving the transfer point selection. Nauchniy Vestnik of
MSTUCA 176, 150–153
11. Zatuchnyy DA, Logvin AI, Nechayev EE (2012) Problems of ADS mode implementation in
the Russian Federation. Printing and publication department MSTU CA
12. Kozlov AI, Sergeyev VG (1998) Radio waves propagation along natural paths. MSTUCA
13. Kozlov AI, Garanin SA (2005) On the development of mathematical simulations reflecting
impact of radio jamming and random effects affecting the aircraft on the navigation parameters
to be determined. Nauchniy Vestnik of MSTUCA, series Radiofizika i radiotekhnika, 93
14. Romancheva NI (2018) Inverse problem of complex systems elements quality evaluation. In:
Proceedings of the international symposium “Nadyozhnost i kachestvo”, Penza, vol 1, pp 71–75
15. Romancheva NI, Yurkevich EV, Kryukova LN (2018)Mechanisms for development of technical
documentation for the means of maintaining the aircraft survivability. Nauchniy vestnik of Saint
Petersburg state technical university of civil aviation 3(20):39–48
16. Romanchev IV, Bannov VY, Romancheva NI, Yurkov NK (2008) Evaluation and anticipation of
software reliability. In: Proceedings of the international symposium “Nadyozhnost i kachestvo”,
Penza, vol 2, pp 41–44
17. Romanchev IV, Yurkov NK, Romancheva NI, Bannov VY, Trusov VA (2006) Statistical analysis
and diagnosis of malfunctional elements of the object. In: Proceedings of the international
symposium “Nadyozhnost i kachestvo”, Penza, vol 2, pp 44–45
18. Manual of air traffic services data link applications (1999) ICAO, Second revision
19. Required navigation performance (RNP) Manual (2008) Third revision
20. Severcev NA, Beckov AV (2009) System analysis of the theory of security. M.: Lomonosov
Moscow State University
21. Yurkevich EV (2007) Introduction to the theory of information systems. M.: LLC Izdatelskiy
dom Tekhnologii, 272 pChapter 2
Mathematical Models of Information
Security in Civil Aircraft
Flight-Navigation and Computing
Systems
The problem of ensuring the necessary level of information security under the condi￾tions of an ever-expanding list of threats, means, and methods for their implemen￾tation is very complex, requiring for its solution not just the implementation of a
certain set of scientific, R&D, technical and organizational measures but also the use
of specific tools and methods of data security to create their entire system. At the
same time, ensuring the information security in modern flight navigation systems
(FNS) and computing systems (CS) shall be not a one-time action, but a continuous
process purposefully carried out throughout the creation and operation of the system
with the complex application of all available tools, methods, and measures.
The most effective approach to solving the problem is redundancy. However, due
to the large time input for recovering destroyed information and the large material
costs of storing the recovery backup, it is necessary to determine how and in what
cases it is advisable to use a computational resource of information [1].
2.1 Development of Models and Methods of Structural
and Technological Redundancy of Software
and Information Support of Civil Aircraft
Flight-Navigation and Computing Systems
2.1.1 General Mathematical Model of Structural
and Technological Redundancy of Software
and Information Support of LAN-Based
Flight-Navigation and Computing Systems
The design of the optimal logical structure of software and information support
of the LAN-based civil aviation (CA) FNS and CS is carried out on the basis of a
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2021
D. A. Zatuchny et al., Noise Resistance Enhancement in Aircraft Navigation
and Connected Systems, Springer Aerospace Technology,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-16-0630-4_2
2526 2 Mathematical Models of Information Security …
structural approach, involving a complex procedure for “fitting” the problem-solving
technology to the architecture of a specific or hypothetical local area network.
The structural approach is founded on the methods for designing the logic-level
components of software and information support based on the use of a set of proce￾dures for the sequential transformation of matrix and graph models of the canonical
structure of the computing system into the logical structure of the computing system.
This approach allows to formalize, algorithmize, and computerize the problem of
designing the optimal logical structure of the computing system [2, 3].
Let us assume that F = {f h; h = 1, h} is a set of data processing problems in FNS
and CS; hth problem from F is considered to be implementable, if the transformation
of the set of values of Xh vector of input variables of the problem into the set of values
of Yh vector of output variables exists or can be synthesized:
Y h = πn
Xh
;
where Xh = 
x h
1 , x h
2 ,... x h
i ,... x h
I

—vector of input variables of the hth problem,
and
Yh =

yh
1 , yh
2 ,... yh
j ,... yh
J

—vector of output variables of the hth problem.
It should be noted that the distributed processing of information makes sense
only if the transformation πh does not satisfy a number of design specification
requirements.
Domain Dh and range Eh of transformation πh are defined as follows:
Dh = Dh
1 ∗ Dh
2 ∗···∗ Dh
i ∗···∗ Dh
I , Eh = Eh
1 ∗ Eh
2 ∗···∗ Eh
j ∗···∗ Eh
J ,
where Dh
i —domain of variable x h
i of vector xh, and Eh
j —range of variable yh
j of
vector yh, x h
i ∈ Dh
i , yh
j ∈ Eh
j , i = 1, I,j = 1, J .
Transformation πh can be associated with multigraph G = (A, D), which is an
integrated structural graph and provides the vector of output variables yh. Vertices
A = {ar; r = 1, R} of the multigraph are data processing procedures, and edges are
variables that are common to the corresponding procedures. It should be noted that
any procedure ar ∈ A provides transformation Yr = ar(Xr
), for which
Dr
1 ∗ Dr
2 ∗···∗ Dr
i ∗···∗ Dr
I ⇒ Er
1 ∗ Er
2 ∗···∗ Er
j ∗···∗ Er
J ,
where Xr = 
xr
1 , xr
2 ,... xr
i ,... xr
I

—vector of input variables of procedures ar,
Yr =

yr
1 , yr
2 ,... yr
j,... yr
J

—vector of output variables of procedures ar,
Dr
i —domain of input variable xr
i of procedures ar, and
Er
j—range of output variable yr
j , procedures ar.
xr
i ∈ Dr
i , yr
j ∈ Er
j,i = 1, I, j = 1, J ,r = 1, R.2.1 Development of Models and Methods of Structural … 27
Procedure ar is a transformation of the set of input or intermediate variables of
the problem into the set of intermediate or output variables of the problem. Set-based
combination of procedures for the population of input and output variables defines
set D of input, intermediate, and output variables of the problem, i.e.
Let us assume that Q(A) = {Qα; α = 1, (2r − 1)}—set of subsets A, where Qα
= 
aα
r

.
Let us assume that Q1(A) is some subset of set Q(A), whose Qα elements satisfy
the condition

α
Qα = A, where Qα ∈ Ql(A). (2.1)
In some cases, a constraint on the absence of duplication of elements (procedures)
may be further imposed, i.e. Qα
	 Qα = 0, α = α
.
Subset Q1(A) can be associated with aggregated graph G = (Gα,S), the vertices of
which are subgraphs Gα = (Qα, Dα), Qα ∈ Q1(A), Dα—set of arcs incident to vertices

aα
r

; and arcs S ∈ D—set of variables connecting the procedures of different Gα
subgraphs between themselves.
Subgraphs Gα can be placed in matrix F with dimensionality N * M for α =
1, N ∗ M.
F =
















Γ11 Γ12 ... Γ1m ... ΓM M
Γ21 Γ22 ... Γ2m ... Γ2M
... ... ...
ΓN1 ΓN2 ... ΓNm ... ΓN M
















Let the elements of the matrix be subgraphs Gnm = (Qnm, Dnm) forming graph G
= (Gnm, S), in which arc set S is as follows [4]:
S =
N
−1
n=1

M
m=1

Dnm 

M
m=1
Dn+1,m
;
and the following condition is satisfied:

M
m=1
⎧
⎨
⎩
Dnm 
m=m
Dnm
⎫
⎬
⎭ = 0, ∀n, n = 1, N (2.2)
where N—maximum number of stages of the integrated structural graph of the
problem, and M—maximum number of parallel data processing branches.28 2 Mathematical Models of Information Security …
Each subset Q1(A) and its corresponding graph G define a specific implementation
of transformation πh of the vector of input variables Xh into the vector of output
variables Yh.
Subgraphs Gnm = (Qnm, Dnm) correspond to the transformations of the vectors of
input variables Xnm into the vectors of output variables Ynm of the G data processing
graph. If transformation Yh = πh(Xh) is representable as a graph
G = (Γmm, S) = ((Qmm, Dmm), S),
then Gnm = (Qnm, Dnm) are called the operating module (OM) of graph G = (A, D) of
the problem corresponding to transformation πh; the nth stage of the data processing
graph is called set
In this case, transformation πh has the property of parallelism along M parallel
branches. In accordance with the definition, the external interface of the integrated
structural graph of the problem is Xh  Y h.
Arc set S of graph G is called the interoperational information interface of the
OM system of the data processing graph. Sets Dnm define the internal interface of
OM [5].
Let us assume that Υ —the set of subsets Q1(A) satisfying condition (2.1). Then, in
the general case, the problem of synthesizing the logical structure of the software and
information support of the LAN-based CA FNS and CS can be written as follows:
where f [Q1(A)]—function defined on set Υ, and Υ D—set of admissible partitions of
graph Γ . Depending on the type and properties of the function, and the limitations
that determine set Υ D, various problems of synthesizing the optimal logical structure
of software and information support of the LAN-based FNS and CS can be set and
solved.
The logical structure of software and information support of FNS and CS shown
in Fig. 2.1 can be represented in the general case as a distributed data processing
block diagram (“serial–parallel time grid”).
A distinctive feature of FNS and CS relative to the ordinary ones is the information
interconnection and interdependence of logical structures from the point of view of
execution order. Non-receipt of information for at least one of the modules of the
FNS and CS logical structure makes it impossible to solve the problem [2, 6].
Non-receipt of the input information array for the program module of the logical
structure of the software and information support of the problem is possible for the
following reasons: failure of the node in which the module, whose output information2.1 Development of Models and Methods of Structural … 29
NODES
ST
AG
ES
Fig. 2.1 Logical structure of software and information support of LAN-based FNS and CS
array is the input for the specified module, was executed; failure of the data transmis￾sion system connecting the nodes; destruction of the module, the output information
array of which is the input for this module; and destruction of the information array.
Therefore, the redundancy of any part of the software module in other nodes of
FNS and CS cannot lead to a noticeable increase in the problem-solving likelihood.
In this situation, the use of known redundancy models of a software module in
data processing systems is hampered by the need to fulfill the requirements imposed
on the parallelized problem-solving time. To overcome this difficulty, it is proposed
to use structural and technological redundancy.
Taking into account the structural and technological redundancy of the software
module, the composition of the logical structure is fully described by vector line A
= |A1, A2, A3, …, Am*, …, AM | consisting of Boolean matrices:
Am∗ =
















A11 A12 ... A1M
A21 A22 ... A2M
... ... ...
AN1 AN2 ... AN M
















where30 2 Mathematical Models of Information Security …
Let the set of LAN topologies be determined by a structured failure matrix:
B =
















B11 B12 ... B12M
B21 B22 ... A22M
... ... ...
BM1 BM2 ... BM2M
















where
Bi j =

0, if i node in j combination is fault y
1, otherwise.
Then the integrated structural–technological matrix is determined by the following
formula:
H = A × B = 


H1, H2, H3,..., Hj,..., H2M



.
The structural and technological security of the software and information support
of the problem being solved in the CA FNS and CS is determined by the following
formula:
K = 100%
2
M
j=1
yj /2M
where
yj =

1, if Hj-unit vector,
0, otherwise.
The structural and technological security determines the percentage of the number
of network topologies that satisfy the user’s requirements for solving the problem
regarding the total number of LAN topologies.
The problem of structural and technological redundancy, in general, has the
following form.
Find
where Q—set of matrices A that determine the composition of the software module
of the logical structure taking into account duplication, and QD—set of admissible
matrices A taking into account the limitations on the problem-solving time, the
amount of external memory, etc.
Thus, the design of the optimal logical structure of software and information
support of LAN-based CA FNS and CS is carried out on the basis of a structural2.1 Development of Models and Methods of Structural … 31
approach that allows to formalize, algorithmize, and automatize the problem of
designing the optimal logical structure of the CA FNS and CS. Since the redun￾dancy of any part of the software module in other nodes of the FNS and CS cannot
lead to an increase in the probability of solving the problem set, it is proposed to
use a general mathematical model of structural and technological redundancy of the
software and information support of the LAN-based CA FNS and CS [7].
2.1.2 Analysis of the Features of the Problem of Synthesizing
Structural and Technological Redundancy and Its
Representation as a Structural–Set Combinatorial
Problem
The problem of synthesizing the structural and technological redundancy of the
software and information support of the LAN-based CA FNS and CS refers to the
combinatorial arrangement problems and has a number of features associated with
constraints on the procedure arrangement variants. For example, constraint (2.2)
prohibits the placement of information-related procedures at all stages due to the
prohibition of the information transfer between LAN nodes within each of them.
The same constraint prohibits placing, in a stage with a given sequence number, a
procedure for which the input information elements are output information elements
for procedures placed in stages with large sequence numbers. It should be noted
that these features, which determine the technology of distributed data processing,
greatly affect the system reliability indicators of quality.
Thus, taking into account the structural constraints in the problems of synthesizing
the structural and technological redundancy of the software and information support
of the LAN-based CA FNS and CS is reasonably necessary, and the effectiveness of
the algorithm depends on how well it organically fits into the solution algorithm.
The proposed problems of synthesizing the optimal logical structure of FNS and
CS are presented in the form of analytical models with Boolean variables. This
form of representation is certainly not the only one. Many scientists emphasize the
importance of combinatorial representation of certain classes of discrete optimiza￾tion problems. In particular, it is noted that the set-theoretical approach contributes
to the achievement of the greatest commonality of results; here are some combina￾torial optimization problems: optimal error-correcting codes, block diagrams can be
considered as extreme sets of subsets that satisfy certain set-theoretic constraints;
this includes divisibility problems.
Combinatorial models can also be used to represent optimization problems that
arise when optimally placed on graphs.
The analysis of the problems of synthesizing the structural and technological
redundancy of the software and information support of the LAN-based CA FNS and
CS shows the feasibility of studying them in a combinatorial representation taking
into account the existing structural constraints.32 2 Mathematical Models of Information Security …
The power of the combinatorial space of these problems has a significant impact on
the efficiency of solving combinatorial problems. Therefore, a qualitative account
of the natural features of the problems and, in particular, of structural constraints
allows in many cases to significantly reduce the power of the combinatorial space
and, therefore, improve the qualitative characteristics of the algorithm.
For the general statement of the problem of synthesizing the structural and tech￾nological redundancy of the software and information support of the LAN-based CA
FNS and CS in the form of a structural set-based combinatorial problem, a number
of definitions is to be introduced [8].
Definition 1 Let us assume that A—some discrete set. Set A is called structural if it
is uniquely represented as a partition: A = {A1, A2, …, An, …, AN};
An ⊂ A, ∀n, n = 1, N; A = 
N
n=1
An; A/
n

n/=n
An = 0, ∀n/
, n, n/ = 1, N, n = 1, N.
Definition 2 Combinatorial space X is the collection of all combinatorial objects
of a certain type from the elements of subset An, An ⊂ A; X—combinatorial space
corresponding to set A.
In general, the following expression is true:
X\X∗ = 0, where X∗ = 
N
n=1
Xn.
Set A = {a1, a2, …, ar, …, aR} sets the ordered “seats” of elements bm, m = 1, M
of set B. And |A| ≥ |B|, i.e. R ≥ M (the number of procedures is not less than the
number of network nodes); X—common space of arrangements with repetitions of
M to R elements of set B, |X| = MR. Obviously, for M = 1 space X coincides with
set B, and for M = R it covers the subspace of all permutations of elements of set B.
Then the problem of synthesizing the structural and technological redundancy of
the software and information support of the LAN-based CA FNS and CS shows the
feasibility of studying them in a combinatorial form as follows.
Find x* from the equation:
where XD—region of feasibility set by the constraints of the problem, including
structural constraints. Points x, x ∈ X are set by tuples x = (α, …, αr, …, αR), where
αr = bm with αr ∈ A, and bm ∈ B; in this case, αr = αm for αr ∈ A is allowed.
The value of R plays the role of the parameter of set B when dividing the latter into
subsets B(R). Let also setN component values for parameter R, such that 
N
n=1
Rn = N.
The values of Rn correspond to subsets An ⊂ A, for which Rn = |An| (in this case,2.1 Development of Models and Methods of Structural … 33
An is the set of procedures that make up the nth tier of the canonical structure of the
software and information support of CA FNS and CS). Then set B(R) can be divided
into disjoint subsets Bn(Rn) ⊂ B(R), for which Mn = |Bn(Rn)|, while it is advisable
to divide the set of procedures of each tier into an equal number of components
corresponding to the number of LAN nodes, i.e. Mn = M, ∀n, n = 1, N.
In this case, combinatorial space X is divided into a number of independent
combinatorial subspaces.
Each subset Bn(Rn) corresponds to some partial subspace Xn formed by the
arrangement of elements and bn ∈ Bn in Rn positions, |Xn| = M Rn
n .
Taking into account the structural constraints of the original problem, the objective
functional, of which is defined on space X, allows replacing it with a similar problem
of smaller dimension, the objective functional of which is defined on set X
of selection
arrangements of dimension N from a product of the form X1 × X2 × ··· × Xn × ···
× XN. Let us assume that x˜ = 
x 1
1 ,..., xs
N

∈ X—points of subspace X ⊂ X, whose
components are xn ∈ Xn, n = 1, N. In this case, it is obvious that X coincides with
the set of all permutations of Xn,



X



 = N!

N
n=1
M Rn
n .
The gain from taking into account structural constraints can be determined by a
value representing the power ratio of the combinatorial spaces of both problems:
(N × M)R/N!

N
n=1
M Rn
n = N R/N!
Thus, the analysis of the problem of synthesizing the structural and technological
redundancy of the software and information support of the LAN-based CA FNS and
CS showed the feasibility of studying it in a combinatorial representation taking into
account the existing structural constraints. The power of the combinatorial space of
these problems has a significant impact on the efficiency of solving combinatorial
problems. Therefore, a qualitative account of the natural features of the problems
and, in particular, of structural constraints allows in many cases to significantly
reduce the power of the combinatorial space and, therefore, improve the qualitative
characteristics of the algorithm.
2.1.3 Decomposition of the Problem of Synthesizing
Structural and Technological Redundancy of Software
and Information Support of Civil Aircraft LAN-Based
Flight-Navigation and Computing Systems
The synthesis of the optimal structural and technological redundancy of the software
and information support of the LAN-based CA FNS and CS can be carried out34 2 Mathematical Models of Information Security …
using precision and approximate methods. The exact solution to the problem can be
obtained through its linearization.
However, the introduction of new (additional) problem variables leads to an
increase in additional constraints and conditions related to their introduction, to
an increase in the dimension of the original problem, which is not always justified
and permissible from a practical point of view, since the use of standard computer
software for solving linear programming problems may be ineffective and even unac￾ceptable. That’s why, for the problem of synthesizing the optimal structural and tech￾nological redundancy of the software and information support of the LAN-based CA
FNS and CS, it is more feasible to use special methods for its solution reflecting the
specifics of the problem.
The analysis of the set problem of synthesizing the optimal structural and tech￾nological redundancy shows that it is equivalent to the problem of dividing a graph
into subgraphs while simultaneously taking into account the weights of vertices and
arcs in the target function. Existing precise methods allow dividing a graph into no
more than three subgraphs [9].
Methods for solving the problem of synthesizing the optimal structural and techno￾logical redundancy can be significantly simplified if there is at least one subproblem
in the overall problem.
Therefore, it makes sense to distinguish between particular variants of the general
problem in each specific case. For example, practice shows that there are possible
variants for setting a general problem depending on the presence or absence of the
possibility to choose the number of LAN nodes, as well as using a given logical
structure of the software and information support of the LAN-based CA FNS and
CS.
The proposed combinatorial form of the problem of synthesizing the optimal
structural and technological redundancy makes it possible to most fully take into
account its specifics due to structural constraints and to develop decomposition-based
algorithms.
The parallel decomposition algorithm is based on the fact that for all points x˜ ∈ X,
functional f (x) can be represented as
f (x˜) = 
N
n
fn(xn) + f (x˜), (2.3)
where f n(xn)—functional defined on partial subspace Xn, and f (x˜) is defined for
all x˜ ∈ X. In this case, the original problem with target functional f (n) is replaced
by a similar one with functional f (x˜).
The parallel decomposition algorithm of the problem with the constraints intro￾duced can be constructed in two forms: as single-stage, according to which functional
f (x) is minimized on the whole subspace X, and as two-stage, according to which
f (x) is minimized in parts, respectively, on the right side of expression (2.3).
The second type of algorithm is faster. It allows parallelizing the computational
process and is reduced to solving a number of auxiliary and one main decomposition2.1 Development of Models and Methods of Structural … 35
problems. Auxiliary combinatorial problems have the following form:
The solution to these problems for n = 1, N is the following: x∗
1 ,..., x∗
n ,..., x∗
N .
The main decomposition problem is constructed to minimize functional f (x˜),
the value of which depends on the sequence of components x j
n ∈ X j . However,
it is solved only in part X0 of space X, X0 ⊂ X consisting of points x =
(x∗
1L ,..., x∗
N s), x∗
1L ∈ XL , x∗
N s ∈ xs, and its combinatorial form is as follows:
Along with the above-noted positive properties of the combinatorial form of repre￾senting the problem of synthesizing the optimal structural and technological redun￾dancy, we should note its negative property of masking specific features of descriptive
components expressing their physical meaning. Therefore, the proposed decompo￾sition models for synthesizing the optimal structural and technological redundancy
shall be represented in the form of discrete optimization models.
At the first stage, N problems for synthesizing the optimal logical structure of
the software and information support of CA FNS and CS are solved for each tier
according to the criterion of uniform complexity. The result of solving these prob￾lems is the procedural and informational structure of the operational modules, as well
as their total number. Then, the problem of synthesizing the optimal logical struc￾ture of the software and information support of the LAN-based CA FNS and CS is
solved taking into account duplication of software modules. Copies of the software
module and the information array arranged in LAN nodes will be a structural and
technological redundancy [10].
In the case when the possible topologies of a homogeneous LAN are not equally
probable, the synthesis of the structural and technological redundancy shall be
performed taking into account the probabilities of a failure of the LAN nodes and the
probability of a failure of communication channels between the LAN nodes. Then,
it is advisable to accept the minimum probability of a failure to solve the user’s
problem as a criterion for the structural and technological redundancy optimization
problem.
Formulation of the problem requires determining the following values:
P*
m—probability of failure of the m*th LAN node;
Pm1m2—probability of failure of the information channel connecting the nodes
m1, m2;
V = (V m*)—vector of the amount of external memory of the LAN nodes, where
V m*—amount of available external memory of the m*th LAN node;36 2 Mathematical Models of Information Security …
F = (f nm)—vector of volumes of the CA FNS and CS logical structure modules,
where f nm—volume of the nmth module;
F = 
ϕn
m
nm 
—vector of volumes of the information array, where ϕn
m
nm —volume
of the information array common to the modules nm and n
m
;
C = 
Cm∗
1m∗
2

—vector of the bandwidth of the communication channels between
LAN nodes m*
1, m*
2, where Cm∗
1m∗
2—bandwidth of the communication channel
between nodes m*
1, m*
2;
Λ = (λm*)—vector of the performance of LAN nodes, where λm*—performance
of the m*th LAN node;
Q = (Qnm)—vector of the complexity of the modules of the logical structure of
software and information support, where Qnm—complexity of the nmth module;
Pnmn
m
m∗
1m∗
2 =

1,i f ϕn
m
nm = 0,
Pm∗
1m∗
2 ,i f ϕn
m
nm = 0 u X m∗
1
nm + X m∗
2
nm = 1 .
Values Pnmn
m
m∗
1m∗
2
establish the relationship between the information array trans￾mitted from module nm to module n
m and the probability of failure of the infor￾mation channel connecting nodes m*
1, m*
2, through which this information array is
transmitted.
The problem variables are [5, 11]
X m∗
nm =

1, if nm module is placed at m∗ node BC,
0, otherwise
ϕm∗
nm =
 Pm∗ ,if X m∗
nm = 1,
1,if X m∗
nm = 0 .
The mathematical model of optimization of the structural–technological redun￾dancy of the software and information support of the CA FNS and CS in a homoge￾neous LAN according to the criterion of the minimum probability of failure to solve
the problem has the following form.
Find [12]
min
{Xm∗
nm }

N
n=1

M
m=1
⎡
⎣

M
m∗
ϕm∗
nm 
N
n
=1

M
m
=1

M∗
m∗
1=1

M∗
m∗
2=1
Pnmn
m
m∗
1m∗
2
⎤
⎦,
under the following constraints:
– on structural duplication of modules X m∗
1
nm X m∗
2
n
m = 0 for ∀n, m, n/
, m/
, m*
1, m*
2, for
which conditions Cm∗
1m∗
2 = 0, ϕn
m
nm = 0 are met;
– on the distribution of individual modules for individual nodes X m∗
nm = 1, for the
selected nmth operational modules and m*th nodes;2.1 Development of Models and Methods of Structural … 37
– on the longest possible time to solve the problem (2.4).

N
n=1
max
!
m∗
m
"
#
X m∗
nmθnmλnm$
+
N
n=1

N
n/

M
m=1

M
m/=1
max

m∗
1
m∗
2
%
&
X m∗
1
nm X m∗
2
n/m/ϕn/m/
nm
1
Cm∗
1m∗
2
'
≤ T ∗,
where T*—maximum possible time to solve the problem;
– on the maximum amount of external memory of LAN nodes

N
n=1

M
m=1
xm
mn fmm ≤ Vm∗, ∀m∗, m∗ = 1, M. (2.4)
The problem set is a non-linear programming problem with Boolean variables.
It can be reduced to an integer optimization linear programming problem by
logarithming the target function and simplifying constraint (2.4) to a linear one.
That’s why the problem of synthesizing the optimal structural and technological
redundancy of the software and information support of the LAN-based CA FNS
and CS can be solved through its linearization. The analysis of the problem set
shows that it is equivalent to the problem of dividing a graph into subgraphs while
simultaneously taking into account the weights of vertices and arcs in the target
function. The proposed combinatorial form of the problem under consideration made
it possible to most fully take into account its specifics due to structural constraints and
to develop decomposition-based algorithms. The developed decomposition models
for synthesizing the optimal structural and technological redundancy are represented
in the form of discrete optimization models.
Due to the fact that possible topologies of a homogeneous LAN may not be equally
probable, a mathematical model has been developed for optimizing the structural
and technological redundancy of the FNS and CS software and information support
according to the criterion of the minimum probability of failure to solve the problem.
Thus, the use of structural and technological redundancy of the software and infor￾mation support of the problems being solved in FNS and CS allows increasing the
security of the logical structures of CA FNS and CS under the effect of destabilizing
factors taking into account the constraints on the maximum time to solve problems.
The implementation of the proposed model for synthesizing the structural and tech￾nological redundancy allows, for specific LANs, determining the redundancy rates
for the structure and amount of redundancy of the software and information support
of the distributed problems of LAN-based CA FNS and CS taking into account the
established lower security limit. In the case of parallel processing, such rates can be
also defined for the reserve amount of external memory.38 2 Mathematical Models of Information Security …
2.2 Development of Virtual Recovery Data Redundancy
Models of Civil Aircraft LAN-Based Flight-Navigation
and Computer Systems
LAN-based CA FNS and CS are sometimes used as organizational and technical
forms of managing real-time processes. Such systems demand a higher speed of data
processing under real-life conditions. For example, quick-response FNS and CS built
to support decision-making in emergency situations demand both higher integrity
of the data used in these systems and higher speed of their processing. As a rule,
these systems are used as an organizational–technical form of the interconnection of
geographically distributed controls of various kinds of activity within one or several
duty dispatcher services.
The solution to the problem of data integrity in such systems is relevant and
requires consideration of a number of factors, such as distributed data processing,
severe time constraints for receiving a query response when making a decision, and
large amounts of data for visualizing the learning environment.
The output information refers to information obtained as a result of the FNS
and CS functions and issued to the object of its activity, users, or other systems.
The quality of the output information in the FNS and CS is a set of information
features that determine its suitability to meet the users’ requirements when solving
the problems facing them.
One of the main system methods for improving the quality of the output informa￾tion in the FNS and CS aimed at improving the probability–time characteristics of
the systems’ functioning is backup and recovery of data.
When solving problems of improving the quality of output information using
backup and recovery methods, functioning properties of the LAN-based FNS and
CS allow, in addition to traditional redundancy introduction means, introducing and
effectively using redundancy, which can be defined as a virtual recovery one. It takes
into account the property of information reliability not only as a property of accuracy
(i.e. compliance of data received by the consumer with data generated at the source),
but also as a property of relevance (maintaining a sufficient degree of compliance
with the real state of accounting objects at the time of using this information).
The essence of the virtual recovery backup is that in most cases the problems
solved by geographically distributed controls allow pre-allocating the necessary data
sets (intermediate arrays) and distributing them to the aircraft nodes for immediate
use in the future. In contrast to the structural and technological backup, the virtual
recovery backup can include both the data itself and its copies and/or pre-history.
Thus, in some cases the following is allowed:
|X(t) − X(t − τ )| ≤ δ, δ > 0, ∀τ,τ ∈ [0, t], (2.5)
where X(t), X(t − τ )—the corresponding values of any parameter of the information
element at time t and (t − τ ), and δ—absolute threshold of the permissible limits of
deviations of the used information from the real one. The fulfillment of inequality2.2 Development of Virtual Recovery Data Redundancy Models … 39
(2.5) determines the relevance of the information element at interval T = [0, t]. In
this case, the degree of backup virtuality is the probability of irrelevance of all its
constituent elements at interval T.
One of the main problems of virtual recovery data backup solved at the pre￾project analysis stage is the problem of determining the optimal content of the virtual
recovery backup and its arrangement on the LAN nodes.
Let us assume that M—number of LAN nodes, N—number of information
elements of the system, αn—relative frequency of adjustments of the nth infor￾mation element (number of adjustments for a given time period T), t
n
mm—time of
transmission of the nth information element from the mth to the m
th LAN node, bn—
volume of the nth information element, W = λnm—matrix of interconnections of
information sources (LAN nodes) and information elements,
λnm =
⎧
⎨
⎩
1, if the source of the n-th information element
is the m-th network node;
0, otherwise
and C = cnm—gain matrix, where cnm—weighted estimates of the gain obtained
by the user as a result of placing the nth information element in the mth LAN node
network, cnm ∈ [0.1], ∀n, n = 1, N, ∀m, m = 1, M. Methods for constructing matrix
C are determined by the specific conditions of the use of FNS and CS. In particular,
an estimate of the gain obtained by the user as a result of placing the nth information
element in the mth LAN node can be made up of objective estimates (for example,
time of transfer of the nth information element to the mth node from other LAN
nodes) and the subjective estimate of negativism in relation to the need to transfer
the nth information element to the mth LAN node.
Then, using the following variables [13]
xnm =
⎧
⎨
⎩
1, if the n-th information element is placed
in the m-th LAN node;
0, otherwise,
the degree of backup virtuality P(xnm) can be determined by the following formula:
P(xnm) = 1 − 
N
n−1
(
1 − an

M
m=1

M
m
xnmλnmt
n
mm
)
.
In cases when geographically distributed systems consist of elements that are
homogeneous in terms of the degree of risk of emergency situations, it is advisable
to use the maximum criterion of uniform gain distribution over the LAN nodes, the
criterion of the minimum degree of backup virtuality, etc. as the virtual recovery
backup synthesis criteria.
The problem of designing a virtual recovery backup according to the first criterion
is as follows.40 2 Mathematical Models of Information Security …
Find
max minm

N
n=1
cnm xnm, (2.6)
under the following constraints:
– on the degree of backup virtuality
1 − 
N
n=1
(
1 − αn

M
m=1

M
m=1
xnmλnmt
n
mm
)
≤ P∗, (2.7)
where P*—maximum allowable degree of backup virtuality;
– on the relative time of adjustments of information elements

N
n=1

M
m=1

M
m
=1
xnmαnλnmt
n
mm ≤ T ∗
cor, (2.8)
where T ∗
cor—maximum allowable relative time of adjustment of the information
element (at interval T);
– on the amount of external memory of the mth LAN node

N
n=1
xnmbn ≤ B∗
m, ∀m, m = 1, M, (2.9)
where B∗
m—maximum allowable amount of memory of the mth node for storing
information;
– on the lack of duplication of the information element in the LAN nodes

N
n=1
xnm = 1, ∀m, m = 1, M. (2.10)
Statement 1
The solution to problems (2.6)–(2.10) is admissible, if P* ⇒ 1 and constraints (2.8)–
(2.10) are met.2.2 Development of Virtual Recovery Data Redundancy Models … 41
Evidence
Let us assume that ϕn = 
M
m=1

M
m
=1
xnmαnλmmt
n
mm . Then constraints (2.7), (2.8) will
have the following form:
⎧
⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎩
1 − 
N
n=1
(1 − ϕn) ≤ P∗

N
n=1
ϕn ≤ T ∗
κop
. (2.11)
After taking the logarithm of the first system inequality (2.11) and expanding the
logarithm function in a power series, we will consistently get
⎧
⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎩

N
n=1
ln(1 − ϕn) ≤ ln(1 − P∗);

N
n=1
ϕn ≤ T ∗
κop ;
⎧
⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎩

N
n=1
ϕn ≤ − ln(1 − P∗) − ε,

N
n=1
ϕn ≤ T ∗
κop,
where ε—residual member of the series.
Obviously, constraint (2.8) is more stringent withP* ⇒1. The proposed constraint
rigidity analysis can be used to reduce the dimensionality of problems with specific
input data.
Modern LAN-based FNS and CS of an organizational type are critical to the
amount of information transmitted via communication channels. Therefore, the most
urgent problem can be the problem of finding
max
xnm
min
m

N
n=1
cnm xnm
with constraint (2.8). This problem is reduced to the maximization problem by
introducing additional variables ym = {0.1}. It has the following form.
Find
max
{xmm ym }

M
m=1
ym

N
n=1
cnm xnm
under the following constraints:
− 
M
m=1
ym

N
n=1
cnm xnm ≤ 
N
n=1
cnm xnm, ∀m, m = 1, M
− 
M
m=1
ym = 142 2 Mathematical Models of Information Security …
−
N
n=1

M
m=1

M
m
=1
xnmαnλnmt
n
mm ≤ T ∗
κop.
Let us assume that t
n
mm = const, ∀m, m = 1, M, ∀m
, m = 1, M, m = m*, ∀n,
n = 1, N. Then the solution to the problem of determining the optimal content of
the virtual recovery backup and its placement in the aircraft is reduced to solving M
multi-dimensional knapsack problems, which are formulated as follows.
Find
max
N
n=1
cnm∗ xnm∗ , ∀m∗, m∗ = 1, M
under the following constraints
− 
M
m=1
n
n=1
αn xnm ≤ D; D = T ∗
κop/t
n
mm
−
N
n=1
(cmm∗ + αn) +
N
n=1
(αn − cnm)xnm
+ 
M
m = 1
m = m
m = m∗

N
n=1
αn xnm ≤ D, ∀m
, m = 1, M, m = m∗.
The result of solving the problem of synthesizing virtual recovery backup is the
optimal information set of data arrays arranged on LAN nodes according to specified
criteria. The use of virtual recovery data backup in the LAN-based FNS and CS, based
on a more flexible use of the concept of information quality, improves the speed of
data processing, as well as its integrity under the effect of destabilizing factors.
Thus, the solution to the problem of data integrity in the CA FNS and CS is
based on the backup and recovery of data. When solving the problem of information
integrity using backup and recovery methods, it is proposed to use a virtual recovery
backup, which includes both the data itself, as well as its copies and/or pre-history. As
a result, the problem of determining the optimal content of the virtual recovery backup
and its arrangement on the LAN nodes is solved at the stage of pre-project analysis.
In cases when FNS and CS consist of elements that are homogeneous in terms of the
degree of risk of emergency situations, it is proposed to use the maximum criterion of
uniform gain distribution over the LAN nodes, the criterion of the minimum degree
of backup virtuality, etc. as the virtual recovery backup synthesis criteria [14].2.3 Methods for Decomposing Civil Aircraft Flight-Navigation … 43
2.3 Methods for Decomposing Civil Aircraft
Flight-Navigation and Computing Systems
The problem of network synthesis is simplified if the specifics of the conditions for its
creation and operation are taken into account. The specificity is that the organizational
structure of the network includes a number of objects located at a considerable
distance from each other. The specified objects, in accordance with the set information
needs, are equipped with communication (data transmission) facilities and CS of the
required performance, thus naturally forming network nodes. These circumstances
suggest that the overall structure of the network is as set.
The structure and parameters of the flow intensity in computer networks largely
depend on the organizational solutions that determine the distribution of software
and data in the network taking into account the provision of the necessary degree of
system survivability, as well as the corresponding informational interchange during
its operation. Such organizational solutions can be taken on the basis of the anal￾ysis of the corresponding optimization models only. Due to the multidimensionality
of the information needs of FNS and CS objects and the complexity of informa￾tion processing procedures, the optimization problems arising in this case have
a higher dimension, and their solution is associated with overcoming significant
computational difficulties.
One of the essential factors determining the stability of the computational flow
intensity and the functioning of the system as a whole against the action of desta￾bilizing factors is the rational arrangement of information resources of the network
(software, information array, and their recovery backup). The solution to this problem
shall contribute to the selection of optimal engineering solutions at various stages
of design, operation, improvement, and development of networks. Their solution
shall be ensured by both analysis and optimal synthesis of the system of computa￾tional tools and their components. In addition to that, there are complex problems
of optimal system synthesis. In particular, this refers to the network-level synthesis
of the system. Such a synthesis, taking into account the choice of the topology
of the data transmission network, leads to a model of such a high dimensionality
that it presents considerable difficulties with the existing level of development of
mathematical methods and computer technology. Consequently, sufficiently compact
statements of the corresponding optimization problems can be obtained only with the
introduction of some simplifying assumptions. These assumptions are determined
by the specifics of the organizational support of the FNS and CS, where the main
solutions on the topology and means of a certain subsystem are taken based on the
needs of the higher level, and are mandatory for the FNS and CS. In addition, it is
necessary to take into account that the structure of network nodes, in general, is a
homomorphic image of the structure of the corresponding objects of the CA FNS
and CS. In this situation, the main problems of static optimization of computing flow
intensity at certain levels of their representation are greatly simplified and can be
formulated as mathematical programming problems.44 2 Mathematical Models of Information Security …
To reduce the dimensionality of the computational flow intensity optimization
problems, it is proposed to consider the FNS and CS as a set of nested control loops.
The main purpose of this partition is such an organization of the system which leads
to the need to make changes either in one of its elements, or, in extreme cases, in the
minimum number of them [4, 7, 15].
The system shall be partitioned in such a way as to provide the territorial distri￾bution of the aircraft ensuring the necessary survivability by expanding its recon￾figuration capabilities and increasing its reliability. This kind of partition can be
called vertical. With vertical partition, the data flow cross-section is recommended
to be performed at those points where the amounts of transmitted or stored data are
minimal. These points are often associated with major events or solutions about the
ways of transmission.
In many applications, a number of data processing functions can be implemented
in parallel without mutual time synchronization. In such cases, horizontal partition
can be used. It is advisable with full autonomy of processing steps, i.e. if they do
not have a data link or precedence-following relationship in managing data flows.
Horizontal partitioning is also possible in the case of parallel event processing when
the processing of any of them is not correlated with the processing of others.
Each control loop shall correspond to its own detailed description of the compu￾tational flow intensity, which increases as it moves downward (in the direction of
a more detailed description of the processes), which allows the harmonization of
the main elements of the computational flow intensity at an appropriate level. The
number of control loops shall be determined based on the practical needs of the study
being conducted. With this approach, the solution to any rather complex problem can
be achieved as a result of the consistent refinement of the values of the system param￾eters and its structural components using calculations through a set of mathematical
models.
Representation of the control system as a set of nested loops greatly facilitates the
organization of network design and reduces the duration and cost of development.
It becomes possible to rationally distribute the efforts of developers to solve private
problems depending on their importance. The number of components at different
levels, taking into account the complexity of relationships, can be analyzed to estimate
the amount of the work done and predict its prospects in terms of time and complexity,
as a result of which the reliability of the state control and design process is improved.
The proposed approach allows designing complex information computing flows
on a “top-down” basis from the perspective of purpose and the best solution to the
main target problem of the entire system. This ensures the conceptual unity of the
information computing flow and the possibility of rational allocation of resources as
the system is decomposed. Although the division into levels requires some costs, in
general, resources are used more efficiently due to the economical arrangement of
the information computing flow at each level. At the same time, possible partitioning
criteria may include the minimum cost of data processing and transmission, the total
time of solving problems, network bandwidth, failure probability, and other criteria.
At the design stage, it is proposed to solve the problems of optimizing the intensity
of the computational flow (distribution of software modules and information arrays,2.3 Methods for Decomposing Civil Aircraft Flight-Navigation … 45
as well as their backup) according to the “top-down” principle. For the network level,
they are generally defined as problems of the optimal distribution of the storage and
processing functions within the system taking into account the appropriate choice
of the type of computing tools in the network nodes. At the same time, the cost
of network resources for the implementation of a given set of the intensity of the
computational flow is selected as the target function of the problem. For a given level,
these costs can be associated with the average amount of information transmitted in
the network when all the computational flow intensities from the set are met. The
latter is explained by the fact that meeting a certain computational flow intensity
is associated with a quite definite scope of computation, so that any gain in opti￾mizing the intensity of the computational thread can be obtained only by reducing
the amount of information transmitted within the network. And this, in turn, becomes
possible with such distribution of information in the system when frequently used
programs and data are stored wherever possible, where the need for them arises. The
solution of this task allows reducing the time of data transmission and recovery of
the destroyed information, and, consequently, the time for the implementation of the
applied functions of CA FNS and CS. In addition, estimating the amount of trans￾missions with the optimal arrangement option allows making an economical choice
of data channels of a certain bandwidth at the FNS and CS building stage and reduce
the damage from the implementation of attacks on aircraft based on the analysis of
the activity of network nodes [16].
In the lower level control loops, the problems of static optimization of the compu￾tational flow intensity are based on the determination of composition and structure of
the CS and the distribution of problems (software), information array (databases), and
their recovery backup between several complexes taking into account their priority
and intensity of the solution, constraints on the amount of memory, and time to solve
each problem, as well as on the determination of the volume of recovery backup
of each software module and information required to ensure the specified level of
the information integrity indicator. Moreover, the problem of optimization of the
computing resource at this level shall be solved depending on the operating condi￾tions of the FNS and CS, according to the criteria of maximum probability of solving
all problems and the minimum time to solve them, which will make it possible to
select the media required for storing software modules, information arrays, and their
backups at the network design stage.
Thus, the solution to the sequence of optimization problems allows determining
and specifying the arrangement of information resources at the CA FNS and CS
design stage.
At the stage of operation, the problem of distributing software, information arrays,
and their computing resources is solved when individual components of the system
fail and when new application software is commissioned. To increase the stability
of the computational flow intensity at the stage of network operation, it is advis￾able to distribute (redistribute) information resources according to the “bottom-up”
principle.
The main problem in optimizing the intensity of the computational flow is the
organization of problem distribution on efficient computers. The solution to this46 2 Mathematical Models of Information Security …
problem is associated with the characteristics of the problems and the requirements
for the type of degradation. In case of a failure of individual computers, problems
solved by the system may be redistributed among operable computers. This allows
maintaining the operability of the system by reducing any operational quality indi￾cators within acceptable limits. Systems in which this feature is realized are called
gradual degradation systems. There are two types of degradation that are possible
during the transition of the system from one state to another and the redistribution
of problems within it:
• performance degradation, i.e. decrease in system performance due to a decrease
in the number of parallel-operating computers. When redistributing problems in
the system, the number of problems solved successively by each of the operable
computers may increase due to the fact that it takes on the problems of the failed
computers. Hence, an increase in the time for processing problem-solving appli￾cation is possible, and for a control system—increase in the time of response to a
change in input actions of the system;
• algorithmic (functional) degradation, which can be characterized by the following:
– decrease in the number of problems solved by the system or decrease in their
total weight, where the weight of each problem refers to a value characterizing
the importance or criticality of each problem in terms of management processes
performed;
– decrease in the complexity of the algorithms performed by reducing their
“quality”.
The following problem distribution method is proposed. Initially, the problems
solved by the computing system are distributed according to the criterion of uniform
computer loading. With a decrease in computing resources due to failures of indi￾vidual computers, when the distribution by the criterion of uniform loading is impos￾sible, the distribution is carried out by the criterion of the maximum importance of
problems.
In case of a failure of the significant number of computers of the control loop, i.e. a
significant reduction in computing power, the distribution (redistribution) of software
modules, information arrays, and their recovery backup on operable computers is
performed depending on the need and feasibility of problem-solving, i.e. situational
management of computing resources is carried out. If it is impossible to solve the
problem in this control loop, a transition to the adjacent “horizontal” or “vertical”
level occurs.
The distribution of software, information arrays, and their backup between the
highest level loops is carried out taking into account the minimum amount of trans￾mitted information. In this case, the correct and timely solution to these problems
contributes to maintaining the operability of the system with the same performance
and throughput.
The proposed approach and methods for the distribution of information resources,
definitely, do not cover all possible situations related to static and dynamic optimiza￾tion of the computational flow intensity at various levels of their presentation. These2.3 Methods for Decomposing Civil Aircraft Flight-Navigation … 47
problems demonstrate a general idea, which consists in a preliminary determination
of such a computational flow intensity organization at the system design and setup
stage, which would allow in a certain sense implementing the computational flow
intensities set in the system in an optimal way.
Thus, one of the essential factors determining the stability of the CFI and the
functioning of the system as a whole against the effects of destabilizing factors is the
rational allocation of information resources of the computer network. To reduce the
dimensionality of the CFI optimization problems, it is proposed to consider the MAN
as a set of nested control loops. With this approach, the solution can be achieved as
a result of the consistent refinement of the values of the system parameters and its
structural components using calculations through a set of mathematical models.
2.4 Mathematical Model for Optimizing Recovery
Information Backup in Modern Civil Aircraft
Flight-Navigation and Computing Systems
2.4.1 General Mathematical Model for Optimizing Recovery
Information Backup in Modern Flight-Navigation
and Computing Systems
Let a network consisting of L elements, each of which hasmj (j =1,…, L) information
processing points, be given.
The network solves K problems that use data from M information arrays. At each
hth point, jth element (j = 1, 2, …, L) (h = 1, 2, …, mj), a strictly defined range of
problems is solved using certain information arrays and generating the corresponding
requests (messages).
The distribution of software modules and information arrays over network nodes
is determined by the distribution plan defined by the matrices
X = +
+xkj
+
+, Y = +
+y f j
+
+,  = +
+ψkj
+
+,  = +
+ϕ f j
+
+,
where
xkj =

1, if k program module is placed on j element,
0, otherwise
y f j =

1, if f information array is located on j element,
0, otherwise
ψkj =

1, if reserve of k program module is placed on j element,
0, otherwise48 2 Mathematical Models of Information Security …
ϕ f j =

1, if reserve of f information array is placed on j element,
0, otherwise
k = 1, 2,..., K, f = 1, 2,..., M, j = 1, 2,..., L.
Let’s define zk, z¯ f —volume of the recovery backup of the kth software module
and the f th information array (number of copies (pre-histories) of the kth software
module, the f th information array) (k = 1, 2, …, K; f = 1, 2, …, M), respectively.
The destruction of a software module or an information array means its state in
which the module or array can no longer be used by the system to obtain the required
output as a result of the loss of part or all of the information contained in it.
In case of destruction of the software module (information array), it is restored
using its first copy (pre-history). If a copy is destroyed, it is restored using the next
copy (pre-history), etc.
A request (message) for solving the kth task (k = 1, 2, …, K) may not be processed
due to the following:
• destruction of the kth software module or the lth information array used in its
solution, and the impossibility of its restoration due to the destruction of the
recovery backup during storage or use;
• unsatisfactory state of the data transmission channels during the transmission of
the request or the restoration of corrupted information.
Then, according to the above scheme, the expressions for determining the prob￾ability of a successful solution Pjhk , the time to solve problems, and the amount of
information flow circulating in the network when each problem is being solved by
each subscriber
Λjhk (j = 1, 2,..., L; k = 1, 2,..., K; h = 1, 2,..., m j)
have the following forms:
Pjhk = τ jhk 
L
l=1
PP
jhkl Pn
jlhk xkl 
M
f =1

L
r=1
y f r
P0
lkf r Pn
lrkf qjhkf
, (2.12)
(2.13)
Λjhk = λjhk
⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎝
L
i=1
⎧
⎪⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎪⎩
xki&
Fji 13
jhk + Fi j l
c
jhk + Q jhki L
1=1
ψkl 
Fil1k B + Fli uk

'
+
+ M
f =1
Lq

jhhf
r=1g=1
y f r&
Fri 1¯3
kgf + Fir 1
c
kgf + Qikfr L
l=1
ϕ f l
Frll
B
f + F1r δk
'
⎫
⎪⎪⎪⎬
⎪⎪⎪⎭
(2.14)2.4 Mathematical Model for Optimizing Recovery Information Backup … 49
where PΠ
jihk (PΠ
lrkf )—probability of successful transmission of information between
nodes j(l) and i(r) in the solution to the kth problem (reference to the f th information
array) by the hth subscriber (reference from the kth software module) of the jth
element (located in the lth node).
PΠ
jihk = P3
jihk Pc
ijhk ,
PΠ
irkf = P3
lrkf Pc
rlkf ;
P3
ijhk (P3
lrkf ), Pc
ijhk (Pc
rlkf )—probability of communicating a request for the solu￾tion of (access to/reference to) and the message containing solution (reference) results
of the kth problem (reference to the f th information array) by the hth subscriber (refer￾ence from the kth software module) of the jth element (located in the lth node) in
the ith network node (located in the rth node), respectively;
P p
jhkl, P0
lkf r—probability that the kth software module stored on the lth element
is not run when referenced by the hth subscriber, the jth element is not destroyed or
will be successfully restored, and probability that the f th information array stored
on the rth element is not run when referenced by the kth software module located at
the lth element, not destroyed or will be successfully restored, respectively:
P p
jhkl = 1 − Q jhkl
⎡
⎣1 −
L
g=1
ψkg
1 − Qp
kg
PΠ B
lg k

1 − ρk
kl
⎤
⎦, (2.15)
Po
jhkl = 1 − Qlkf r
⎡
⎣1 −
L
g=1
ϕ f g
1 − Qp
f g
PΠ B
rgf 
1 − ρk
kl
⎤
⎦, (2.16)
where Q jhkl, QP
kgs—probability that the kth software module stored in the lth node
will be destroyed before being referenced by the hth subscriber of the jth element,
and probability of destruction of the backup of the kth software module stored in the
gth node, respectively:
Q jhkl = rkl + (1 − rkl)gjhkl,
QP
kg = #
rkg + 
1 − rkg
ρkd $
Zk ;
(2.17)
Qlkf r, QP
f g—probability that the f th information array stored in the rth node will
be destroyed before being referenced by the kth software module stored on the lth
element, and probability of destruction of the backup of the f th information array
stored on the gth node, respectively:
Q1kfr = ¯rf r + (1 − ¯rkl)g¯1kfr,
QP
f g = #
r¯f g + 
1 − ¯rf g
ρ f g$
Z f ;
(2.18)50 2 Mathematical Models of Information Security …
PΠ B
ijk —probability of successful transfer of a copy of the kth software module
from the jth node to the ith node:
PΠ B
rgf —probability of successful transfer of a copy of the f th information array
from the gth node to the rth node:
Ck (C f )—number of messages containing the kth software module (the f th data
array);
P3B
ijk (P3B
rgf )—probability of communicating the request for the restoration of the
kth software module (f th information array) from the ith (gth) node to the jth (rth)
node;
P OT B
ijk (P OT B
gr f )—probability of communicating the message containing the part
of the kth software module (f th information array) from the ith (rth) node to the ith
(gth) node;
t B
kj—average recovery time of the kth software module in the jth node:
t B
kj = 
L
g=1
ψkg
T 3B
jgr + T C B
gjk Ck +
z
k−1
n=0
#
rkg + 
1 − rkg
ρkg$n
(n + 1)τ B
kg
;
t
¯B
f r—average recovery time of the f th information array in the rth node:
T 3B
jgk (T 3B
rgf )—average time to communicate the request for the restoration of the
kth software module (f th information array) from the ith (rth) node to the gth node;
T cB
gjk (T cB
gr f )—average time to communicate the message containing the part of
the kth software module (f th information array) from the gth node to the rth node;
τ B
kg(τ B
f g)—time to produce the copy of the kth software module (f th information
array) in node g;
rkl(r¯B
f g)—probability of failure of the kth software module (f th information array)
when stored on the lth (gth) node until its use;
gjhkl(g¯lkf r)—probability of destruction of the kth software module (f th informa￾tion array) distributed to the lth (r-th) node, when referenced by the hth subscriber
(kth software module) of the jth node (located on the jth node);
ρkg(ρ f g)—probability of destruction of the copy (pre-history) of the kth software
module (f th information array) in the gth network node during the recovery process;2.4 Mathematical Model for Optimizing Recovery Information Backup … 51
ρk
jl(ρk
f g)—probability of failure of the restored copy of the jth software module
(f th information array) when restored in node l(g);
Fij—number of information messages transmitted during transmission from the
ith network node to the jth node;
Tijhk (Tlrkf )—average time to transfer the message from the ith (lth) node to the
jth (rth) node in the solution (reference) to the kth problem (reference to the f th
information array) by the hth subscriber (reference from the kth software module)
of the jth element (located in the lth node):
Tjihk = T 3
jihk + T c
ijhk
Tlrkf = T 3
lrkf + T c
rlkf ;
T 3
jihk (T 3
lrkf ), T C
ijhk (T C
rlkf )—average time to communicate a solution request
(reference) and a message containing solution (reference) results of the kth problem
(reference to the f th information array) by the hth subscriber (reference from the kth
software module) of the jth element (located in the lth node) in the ith network node
(located in the rth node), respectively [17];
qjhkf —number of references from the kth software module to the f th information
array when solved by the hth subscriber of the jth element;
—time to solve the kth software module to the lth element by the hth
subscriber of the jth node in the presence of all the input data;
τ jhk = 1, if the hth subscriber of the jth element has the rights to solve the kth
problem, τ jhk = 0, otherwise;
λjhk—intensity of the solution to the kth problem by the hth subscriber of the jth
element;
l
3
jhk (l
3
kgf )—length of the request for the solution to (reference to) the kth problem
(f th information array) by the hth subscriber (kth software module) of the jth element
(with the gth reference to it);
l
C
jhk (l
C
kgf )—length of the message received as a result of the solution of (reference
to) the kth software module (f th information array) by the hth subscriber (kth software
module) of the jth element (with the gth reference to it);
l B
k (l
B
f )—length of the request to restore the kth software module (f th information
array);
uk—volume of the kth software module;
δ f —volume of the f th information array.
The following criteria can be used in the formulation of network information CR
optimization problems in the network: maximum probability of solving all prob￾lems, minimum time for solving all problems, and minimum amount of information
circulating in the network.
As a result of solving each problem, it is necessary to determine a subset of
network nodes, while the placement of a program module (information array) and
their backup in each of them ensures the extreme value of the optimization criterion
used. In addition, when solving optimization problems of a computing resource by52 2 Mathematical Models of Information Security …
the criteria of maximum probability of solving all problems and the minimum time
to solve them, it is necessary to determine the backup amount.
The problems of optimizing the computing resource of information by each of
the listed criteria are given as follows.
1. Determine values xkj, y f j, ψkj, ϕ f j,zk ,z¯ f (k = 1, 2, …, K; j = 1, 2, …, L; f =
1, 2, …, M) such that
P = max
L
j=1
m

j
h=1

k
k=1
Pjhk (x, y, ψ, ϕ,z,z¯) (2.19)
under the following constraints:
(a) on the time to solve the kth problem by the hth subscriber of the jth element
(2.20)
(b) on the amount of information circulating in the network when the hth subscriber
of the jth node solves the kth problem
(2.21)
(c) on the volume of the external storage device of the jth network element

K
k=1
(xkj + ykjzk )uk +
M
f =1
(y f j + ϕ f jz¯ f )δ f ≤ Vj, j = 1, 2,..., L; (2.22)
(d) on the values of variables

L
j=1
xkj = 1, k = 1, 2,..., K;

L
j=1
ygj = 1, g = 1, 2,..., M, (2.23)
xkj = {0, 1}; ygj = {0, 1}; k = 1, 2,..., K; g = 1, 2,..., M; j = 1, 2,..., L,
(2.24)2.4 Mathematical Model for Optimizing Recovery Information Backup … 53

L
j=1
ψkj = 1, k = 1, 2,..., K;

L
j=1
ϕgj = 1, g = 1, 2,..., M, (2.25)
ψkj = {0, 1}; ϕgj = {0, 1}; k = 1, 2,..., K; g = 1, 2,..., M; j = 1, 2,..., L,
(2.26)
xkj + ψkj < 2; y f j + ϕ f j < 2, k = 1, 2,..., K; f = 1, 2,..., M; j = 1, 2,..., L,
(2.27)
zk ,zf = (0, 1, 2, 3, . . .) (k = 1, 2,..., K; g, f = 1, 2,..., M), (2.28)
where Vj—volume of the external storage device of the jth network element,
—maximum time for the hth subscriber of the jth computer to solve the kth
problem, and
—maximum allowable amount of information circulating in the network
when the hth subscriber of the jth computer solves the kth problem.
2. Determine values
xkj, y f j, ψkj, ϕ f j,zk ,z¯ f (k = 1, 2,..., K; j = 1, 2,..., L; f = 1, 2,..., M),
such that
(2.29)
under constraints (2.21–2.28) and the probability of solution to the kth problem by
the hth subscriber of the jth element
(2.30)
where—minimum allowable value of the probability of solving all problems in the
network.
3. Determine values
xkj, y f j, ψkj, ϕ f j,zk = 1,z¯ f = 1 (k = 1, 2,..., K; j = 1, 2,..., L; f = 1, 2,..., M),
such that
Λ = min
L
j=1
m

j
h=1

K
k=1
Λjhk (x, y, ϕ,ψ) (2.31)54 2 Mathematical Models of Information Security …
under constraints (2.20), (2.22)–(2.28), (2.30).
In order to ensure more reliable operation of some network nodes, as well as
the possibility of autonomous operation of individual computational tools, forced
distribution of software modules and information arrays over network nodes can be
provided [18].
To account for this feature, the following notations are introduced:
B = +
+bkj
+
+—matrix of the preferred distribution of the information array over the
network nodes, k = 1, 2,..., K, j = 1, 2,..., L;
B = +
+b f j
+
+—matrix of the preferred distribution of the information array over
the network nodes, k = 1, 2,..., K, f = 1, 2,..., M, where
bkj =

1, if k program ... module is intended to be placed on j element,
0 − otherwise;
b¯ f j =

1, if f information array is intended to be placed on j element,
0 − otherwise.
Then, when the subscribers of the jth node solve the kth problem (reference
from the kth software module to the f th information array), if bkj = 1 
b f j = 1

,
message transmission time Tjihk (Tlrkf ) is zero, probability of information transfer
PΠ
jihk (PΠ
lrkf )—unity, and expression (2.22) is converted to the form

K
k=1
(ζkj + ψkjzk )uk +
M
f =1
(ξ f j + ϕ f jzf )δ f ≤ Vj, j = 1, 2,..., L,
where
ζkj = xkj ∨ bkj;
ξ f j = y f j ∨ b f j .
In addition, the following constraints will be added to the specified statements of
problems to optimize the computing resource in the network, which are imposed on
the number of software modules and information arrays distributed to the jth network
element.

K
k = 1
xk j ≥ 
K
k = 1
bk j,

M
m = 1
ym j ≥ 
M
m = 1
b¯
mj, j = 1, 2,..., L.2.4 Mathematical Model for Optimizing Recovery Information Backup … 55
Due to the complexity of dependencies (2.12)–(2.14), a large number of variables
and constraints, solution to problems (2.19)–(2.28), (2.29), (2.21)–(2.28), (2.30) and
(2.31), (2.20), (2.22)–(2.28), and (2.30) by traditional methods is difficult.
To obtain an approximate solution to the problem, the algorithm below can be
used.
To simplify the proposed algorithm, the set of Boolean variables

xkj, y f j, ψkj, ϕ f j 
and integer variables

zk ,z¯ f

(j = 1, 2,..., L; k = 1, 2,..., K; j = 1, 2,..., M, )
are replaced by a set of integer variables{γi}(i = 1, 2,..., 3(K + M))taking values
1, 2, …, γ max
i , while for i = 1, 2, …, K, γi correspond to xkj ; for i = K + 1, K +
2, …, K + M—y f j; for i = K + M + 1, K + M + 2, …, 2K + M—ψkj ; for i = 2K
+ M + 1, 2K + M + 2, …, 2(K + M)—ϕ f j ; for i = 2(K + M) + 1, 2(K + M) + 2,
…, 3K + 2M—zk . At the same time, when i = 1, 2, …, 2(K + M), γ max
i = L, and
with i = 2(K + M) + 1, 2(K + M) + 2, …, 3(K + M) values, γ max
i represent the
maximum allowable volume of recovery backup determined by the characteristics
of the system.
In this case, expressions (2.12)–(2.18), (2.22), as well as dependencies to define
t B
kj and t
¯B
f r, are transformed into the following form:
PP
jhkγk = 1 − Q jhk γk
/
1 − (1 − QP
kγK+M+k
)P
 B vkγK+M+kk (1 − ρk
kγk
)
0
;
P0
γkk f γK+ f = 1 − Qγkk f γK+ f
/
1 − (1 − QP
f γ2K+M+ f
)P
 B
γK+ f γ2K+M+ f f (1 − ρk
f γ2K+M+ f
)
0
;
QP
k γK+M+k = #
rk γK+M+k + (1 − rk γK+M+k )ρk γK+M+k
$γ2(K+M)+k
;56 2 Mathematical Models of Information Security …
Q P
f γ2K+M+ f =
/
r¯f γ2K+M+ f + (1 − ¯rf γ2K+M+ f )ρ f γ2K+M+ f
0γ3K+2M+ f
;

K
k=1

signf (γk , j) + signf (γK+M+k , j)γ2(K+M)+k

uk+
+
M
f =1
(signf (γK+ f , j) + signf (γ2K+M+ f , j)γ3K+2M+ f )δ f Vj,
t
¯B
f γK+ f = T 3B
γK+ f γ2K+M+ f + T C B
γ2K+M+ f γK+ f f C f
+
γ3K+
2M+ f −1
n=0
/
r¯f γ2K+M+ f + (1 − ¯rf γ2K+M+ f )ρ f γ2K+M+ f
0n
(n + 1)τ B
f γ2K+M+ f
;
where
signf (γi, j) =

1, ifγ1 = j.
0 − otherwise l = 1, 2,..., 3 (K + M).
In this case, an approximate algorithm for solving the problem of optimizing
computational flow intensity by the criterion of the maximum probability of solving
all problems can be formulated as follows.
Step 1.
Take P0, P1 = 0, γ 0
i , γ 1
i = 0 (γ 0
i ∈ Γ 0, γ 1
i ∈ Γ 1), i = 1, 2,..., 3(K + M).
Step 2. Take i = 1, u¯ = 0.
Step 3. At each ith step of the algorithm, perform the following actions:
Step 3.1. Determine values P, T, Λ at γi = 1, 2,...,γ max
i , excluding γi = ¯u.
Step 3.2. Take γ 1
i = γi , at which parameter P1 = P takes the maximum value
while satisfying all constraints. If there are no such values, that is, at any value
γiΓ 1 does not fall within the range of acceptable values, go to step 3.3, otherwise,
to step 4.
Step 3.3. Take i = i − 1. If i > 0, put u¯ = γi and go to step 3, otherwise go to step
7.
Step 4. Take i = i + 1.
Step 5. If i ≤ 3(K + M), go to step 3.
Step 6. If P1 > P0, take P0 = P1, Γ 0 = Γ 1 and go to step 2, otherwise go to
step 7.
Step 7. Finish the calculations. Γ 0—solution to the problem.2.4 Mathematical Model for Optimizing Recovery Information Backup … 57
An approximate solution to this problem according to the criteria of the minimum
time for solving all problems in the network and the minimum amount of information
circulating in this case can be found by a similar scheme.
However, for systems operating in real time (in the case of distribution (redis￾tribution) of the software module, information array, and their computing resource
at the stage of operation and functioning), solving this problem within a reasonable
time even by an approximate method does not seem to be possible due to the large
number of variables and constraints [19].
In this regard, it is necessary to propose a decomposition-based approach to
reducing the dimensionality of the general problems of optimizing the computational
resource of information in the CA FNS and CS.
Thus, a general mathematical model to optimize the computational resource of
information in modern CA FNS and CS has been developed. The problem of opti￾mizing the computational resource of network information is proposed to be solved
by the criterion of the maximum probability of solving all problems, the minimum
time to solve all problems, and the minimum amount of information circulating in the
network. As a result of solving the problem, a subset of network nodes is determined,
while the placement of a program module (information array) and their backup in
each of them ensures the extreme value of the optimization criterion used. In addi￾tion, when solving optimization problems of a computing resource by the criteria of
maximum probability of solving all problems and the minimum time to solve them,
it is necessary to determine the backup amount.
2.4.2 Consideration of the Functioning of Flight
and Computer Systems in the Context of Functional
Network Degradation
One of the requirements for modern CA FNS and CS is the need for their operational
stability under the conditions of functional network degradation, which is typical of
systems operating under extreme conditions. In this case, in the event of a significant
deterioration in the aggregate characteristics of computing facilities (for example,
the total capacity of information storage devices), it is necessary to ensure priority
distribution (redistribution) of software modules and information arrays and their
backup having the greatest importance for the system in terms of performance of its
problems, among network nodes.
The following cases are possible:
(1) decrease in computing power of FNS and CS;
(2) decrease in the total storage capacity;
(3) reduction of the total number and bandwidth of data transmission channels.
To take into account this possibility, it is advisable to introduce the criticality coef￾ficients for software modules and information arrays—βk , β f (k = 1, 2,..., K, f =58 2 Mathematical Models of Information Security …
1, 2,..., F), respectively, such that

K
k=1
βk = 1, 
F
f =1
β f = 1.
In this case, the normalizing dependence will have the following form for the
criticality coefficient of the kth software module and the criticality coefficient of the
f th information array, respectively,
βk = β
k
K
1

K
k=1
β
k
; β f = β
f
F
1 
F
f =1
β
f
.
In this case, dependence (2.12) will take the following form:
P = 
K
k=1
βk

L
j=1
m j
h=1
τ jhk 
L
l=1
P p
jhkl PΠ
jlhk xkl 
M
f =1
β f

L
r=1
y f r 
Po
lkf r PΠ
lrkf qjhkf
.
The use of this approach will make it possible, in the first place, to distribute
(redistribute) software modules and information arrays that are of primary importance
to the CA FNS and CS functioning processes [20].
2.4.3 Decomposition of the General Problem of Optimization
of Recovery Information Backup in Modern
Flight-Navigation and Computer Systems
To reduce the dimension and computational complexity of the general problem of
optimizing the computational resource of information in modern and future FNS and
CS, it is proposed to decompose it into three interrelated subproblems: distribution
of software modules and information arrays over network nodes, distribution of
recovery backup of software modules and information arrays over network nodes,
and determination of the backup amount for each software module (information
array).
The proposed decomposition of the general problem of optimizing the compu￾tational resource of information in the CA FNS and CS simplifies the optimization
calculations, but requires the development of mathematical statements of the prob￾lems formed in the decomposition process and rational algorithms for solving them.
Below are the results of studies conducted in this field.2.4 Mathematical Model for Optimizing Recovery Information Backup … 59
2.4.3.1 Mathematical Model for Distributing Software Modules
and Information Arrays Over the Nodes of the Network
of Flight-Navigation and Computer Systems According
to the Criterion of Minimum Transmitted Information
Assuming that the probability of destruction of software modules and information
arrays during operation and storage is equal to zero, we will obtain expressions
(2.12)–(2.14) for Pjhk , Λjhk , and as
Based on the expressions obtained, the problem of distributing software modules
and information arrays by the criterion of the minimum amount of information circu￾lating in the network can be formulated as follows. Determine values xkj and y f j (k
= 1, 2, …, K; j = 1, 2, …, L; f = 1, 2, …, M) such that
Λ = min
L
j=1
m j
h=1

K
k=1
Λjhk (x, y) (2.32)
under constraints (2.9), (2.12), (2.13), (2.19) and

K
k=1
xkjuk +
M
f =1
y f j δ f ≤ Vj, (j = 1, 2,..., L). (2.33)
The problem refers to linear discrete programming problems with mixed
constraints.
2.4.3.2 Mathematical Model for Distributing the Recovery Backup
Over the Nodes of the Network of Flight-Navigation
and Computer Systems According to the Criterion
of the Maximum Probability of Solving All Problems
Using the results of solving the problem of the distribution of software modules and
information arrays over network nodes, and assuming that the probability of failure of60 2 Mathematical Models of Information Security …
the recovery backup is equal to zero (zk ,z¯ f = 1, ∀k, f ), expressions (2.12), (2.17),
and (2.18) can be represented as follows:
Pjhk = 
L
l=1
PP
jhkl Pn
jlhk x∗
kl 
M
f =1

L
r=1
P0
lkf r(Pn
lrkf y∗
f r)
qjhkf ;
QP
kg = rkg + (1 − rkg)ρkg ;
QP
f g = rf g + (1 − ¯rf g)ρ f g,
where x∗
kl and y∗
f r (k = 1, 2, …, K; f = 1, 2, …, M; l, g = 1, 2, …, L)—result of the
distribution of software modules and information arrays over network nodes.
In this case, the problem of the backup distribution over the network nodes by the
criterion of the maximum probability of solving all the problems can be formulated
as follows.
Determine values ψkj and ϕgj (k = 1, 2, …, K; g = 1, 2, …, M; j = 1, 2, …, L)
such that
P = max
L
j=1
m j
h=1

K
k=1
Pjhk (ϕ, ψ) (2.34)
under constraints (2.20), (2.21), (2.25), (2.26) and

K
k=1
(x∗
kj + ψkj)uk +
M
f =1
(y∗
f j + ϕ f j)δ f ≤ Vj, j = 1, 2,..., L (2.35)
x∗
kj + ψkj < 2; y∗
f j f j + ϕ f j < 2, k = 1, 2,..., K; f = 1, 2,..., M; j = 1, 2,..., L
(2.36)
This problem is a non-linear discrete programming problem, and approximate
methods can be used to solve it. To find the exact solution, it is necessary to transform
target function (2.34) to a linear form.
It follows from the analysis of expressions (2.12), (2.15), (2.16), (2.23), and (2.24)
that
P1
P0 = 
L
l=1

K
k=1
kl 
M
g=1
 gl, (2.37)
where
kl = PB
kl
P0 ;2.4 Mathematical Model for Optimizing Recovery Information Backup … 61
kl = PB
gl
P0 ;
PB
kl , (PB
gl)—probability of solving all problems with the kth software module
(kth information array) placed in the lth network node;
P1—probability of solving all problems with the volume of the recovery backup
of each software module (information array) equal to one copy (pre-history);
P0—probability of solving all problems without a computing resource
(zk ,z¯ f = 0, k = 1, 2,..., K; f = 1, 2,..., M).
Taking the logarithm of (2.37) gives
ln2 P1
P0
3
= 
L
l=1

K
k=1
⎡
⎣ln(kl) +
M
g=1
ln(gl)
⎤
⎦.
In this case, taking into account the fact that the function y = ln(x) is non￾decreasing, problems (2.34), (2.20), (2.21), (2.25), (2.26), (2.35), and (2.36) are
transformed into the following form.
Determine values ψkj(k = 1, 2,..., K) and ϕgj(g = 1, 2, . . . ., M) (j =
1, 2,..., L) such that
ln2 P(ψ, ϕ)
P0
3
= max 
L
l=1
⎡
⎣

K
k=1
ψkl ln(kl) +
M
g=1
ϕgl ln(gl)
⎤
⎦.
under constraints (2.20), (2.21), (2.25), (2.26), and (2.35), (2.36).
The problem refers to linear discrete programming problems and can be solved
by the branch and boundary method.
2.4.3.3 Mathematical Model for Determining the Amount of Recovery
Backup of Information According to the Criterion
of the Maximum Probability of Solving All Problems
Using the results of solving problems (2.20), (2.23), (2.24), (2.25), (2.26), (2.27),
(2.30), (2.32), (2.33), (2.35), and (2.36), expressions (2.15) and (2.16) can be
represented as follows:
PP
jhkl = 1 − Q jhkl
⎡
⎣1 −
L
g=1
ψ∗
kg(1 − QP
kg)PnΠ B
glk (1 − ρk
kl)
⎤
⎦ ;62 2 Mathematical Models of Information Security …
where ψ∗
kg and ϕ∗
f g—results of solving the problem of the recovery backup
distribution over network nodes.
Based on the expressions obtained, the problem of determining the recovery
backup volume is formulated as follows.
Determine values zk and z¯ f (k = 1, 2, …, K) (f = 1, 2, …, M) such that
P = max
L
j=1
m j
h=1

K
k=1
Pjhk (z,z¯)
under constraints (2.20), (2.28) and

K
k=1
(x∗
kj + ψ∗
kjzk )uk +
M
f =1
(y∗
f j + ϕ∗
f jz¯ f )δ f ≤ Vj, j = 1, 2,..., L. (2.38)
This problem is a non-linear discrete programming problem. In order to simplify
the solution, it is necessary to transform it to standard discrete programming
problems.
Based on the analysis of expressions (2.12), (2.15), (2.16)-(2.18), (2.25) and
using the results of solving problems of distributing software modules (information
arrays) over network nodes and their recovery backup, an expression to determine
the probability of solving all problems can be represented as follows:
P(z,z¯) = 
L
j=1
m j
h=1

K
k=1
⎡
⎣PP1
jhk (zk )Pn1
jhk 
M
f =1
(P01
k f (z¯ f )Pn1
k f )
qjhkf ⎤
⎦,
where PP1
jhk (zk ), P01
k f (z¯ f ), PΠ1
jhk , PΠ1
k f have the same physical meaning as
PP
jhkl, P0
kflr, PΠ
jlhk , PΠ
lrkf , respectively, but with a known distribution of software
modules and information arrays and their recovery backup over network nodes.
In this case, the problem of determining the volume of the recovery backup of the
software module and information array can be divided into two subproblems: deter￾mining the volume of the recovery backup of the software module and determining
the volume of the recovery backup of the information array.
The first problem is formulated as follows
Determine values zk , k = 1, 2, …, K such that2.4 Mathematical Model for Optimizing Recovery Information Backup … 63
P(z) = max
L
j=1
m

j
h=1

K
k=1
PP1
jhk (zk , )Pn1
jhk (2.39)
under constraints (2.20), (2.21), (2.28), and (2.38).
The second problem is formulated as follows
Determine values z¯ f , f = 1, 2, …, M such that
P(z¯) = max
L
j=1
m

j
h=1

K
k=1

M
f =1
P01
k f (z¯ f )Pn1
k f )
qjhkf (2.40)
under constraints (2.20), (2.21), (2.28), and (2.38).
Problems (2.20), (2.21), (2.28), (2.38), (2.39), and (2.40) are optimal redun￾dancy problems and can be solved by solving the dynamic programming functional
equations.
Thus, the problems of optimizing the distribution of software modules and infor￾mation arrays, as well as their recovery backup, over network nodes, and optimizing
the volume of recovery backup of software modules and information arrays formed
during the decomposition of the general problem of optimizing the information
computing resource in FNS and CS are reduced to the standard form of discrete
programming problems, which allows using existing methods for solving them.
2.5 Selection of the Composition of Information Security
Systems
The availability of information on the structure of the intensity of the computational
flow of CA FNS and CS, analysis of possible threats to information, and means of
neutralizing them allows modeling the attacker’s actions in this system in order to
select the composition of the information security complexes.
Let the FNS of known purpose and configuration have the possible attacker’s
goals identified and a complete list of possible threats to information and means of
neutralizing them (protection tools) compiled. Security tools that neutralize a specific
threat constitute a line of defense.
Let’s denote the total number of information threats through M; A—set of infor￾mation threat numbers; F—number of possible attacker’s goals in the FNS and CS;
D—set of security tool numbers that can be used in the security system; Bf —set
of numbers of information threats implemented by the attacker when reaching the
f th target; N f
j —set of numbers of security tools that could potentially be used to
counteract the attacker’s implementation of the f th goal at the jth line of defense (for
neutralizing the jth threat included in the f th goal) (f = 1, 2, …, F; j = 1, 2, …, M).64 2 Mathematical Models of Information Security …
Fig. 2.2 Example of a system state graph
At the same time, Bf ⊂ A,

F
f =1
Bf = A, n f = 


Bf



, and 
F
f =1
n f
j∈Bf ,
N f
j ⊂ D.
In this case, the process of the attacker’s implementation of each of his goals can
be represented as a directed graph, an example of which is shown in Fig. 2.2.
The vertices of the graph represent the state of the system corresponding to the
attempt of the attacker to implement some information threat. The state of the S0
system is initial, that is, one in which no information threat has yet been implemented.
State Sj

j ∈ Bf

corresponds to an attempt to implement the jth threat. In case of its
successful implementation, the transition to the next state of the system is carried out,
otherwise (with the normal response of the ISS, the security service of the system)
transition to state Sn f +1 is carried out (in Fig. 2.2, Sn f +1 ≡ S8).
State Sn f is finite, and corresponds to the achievement of the f th attacker’s goal
(f = 1, 2, …, F). Arcs of the graph correspond to the directions of transitions
between states. Each arc is characterized by the value of the probability of transition
between the corresponding states of the system. The dotted line indicates the arcs
corresponding to the transition from this state to state Sn f +1.
For further reasoning, it is advisable to rank the state graph. At the same time, the
set of graph vertices is divided into a number of levels, which will allow the step-by￾step construction of the solution to the problem of optimizing the composition of the
security complex. To ensure strict sequential order of transition between the vertices
of adjacent levels, it is possible to include dummy vertices into the structure of the
graph. An example of state graph ranking is shown in Fig. 2.3.2.5 Selection of the Composition of Information Security Systems 65
Level 0 Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Level 4
Fig. 2.3 Example of state graph ranking
Let’s include dummy element 0 corresponding to system state S0 to set A and
to each of the Bf sets. In this case, the probability of finding the system in the kth
state while the attacker is trying to implement the f th goal will be determined by the
following expression [21]:
P f
k = 
l∈G f
i−1
P f
l p f
lk , k ∈ G f
i ,i = 1, 2,..., I f f = 1, 2,..., F,
where If —number of levels in the ranked state graph describing the activity of the
attacker when attempting to implement the f th goal; G f
i —set of numbers of the
vertices making up the ith level of the state graph describing the activities of the
attacker when attempting to implement the f th goal, and
I
f
i=0
G f
i ⊂ Bf ; p f
lk = ρ f
lkg f
l ;
g f
j —probability of overcoming the jth line of defense when the attacker attempts
to achieve the f th goal
g f
j = 
1 − e−ωf
 
m∈N f
j

1 − r f
jm x jm
;66 2 Mathematical Models of Information Security …
r f
jm—probability of successful functioning of themth security tool to counteract the
attacker’s activities at the jth line of defense while the attacker attempts to fulfill his
f th goal (j ∈ Bf ; f =1, 2,…,F; m ∈ N f
j );ωf —mean (maximum/minimum) level of
attacker’s skills in the implementation of the f th goal, ωf ∈ [0, 1], when the attacker
attempts to implement the f th goal (f = 1, 2, …, F), x jm = {0, 1}, xjm = 1, if the mth
tool is used at the jth line of defense, xjm = 0 otherwise, (j ∈ Bf , j = 0, j = M +1;
m ∈ N f
j ); ρ f
lk—probability of transition from the lth state of the graph to the kth one
when the attacker attempts to implement the f th goal.
At the same time,

k∈G f
i+1
p f
lk = 1,l ∈ G f
i ,i = 1, 2,..., I f − 1, f = 1, 2,..., F.
Proceeding from the above, the values of the probabilities of the attacker’s
implementation of information threats (system finding in each of the states) can
be calculated step-by-step in If steps.
At the initial moment of time (at the initial step),
Po = 1; P f
j = 0; Pn f +1 = 0;(j ∈ Bf ; f = 1, 2,..., F); x jm = 0, ∀ j, m.
When assigning security tools that neutralize the corresponding information
threat, each jth vertex of the ranked graph (with the exception of dummy vertices)
will have the probability of the system’s transition from the specific state to state
Sn f +1 calculated from the following expression:
pj,n f +1 = 1 − g f
j .
It’s obvious that

j∈G f
i
P f
j = 1, (i = 0, 1, 2,..., I f
; f = 1, 2,..., F).
Hence, at the If th step, regardless of whether the information security tool is
assigned to each of the lines of defense or not, we obtain the following:
Pn f + Pn f +1 = 1.
On this assumption and given that state Sn f +1 along with state Sn f is finite, there is
no need to make intermediate calculations of the values representing the probability
of the system finding in state Sn f +1 and the corresponding dummy vertices of the
ranked graph.
The effectiveness of the navigation information security system can be determined
using the following parameters:2.5 Selection of the Composition of Information Security Systems 67
1. Average losses of FNS and CS from the implementation of all attacker’s goals:
C p = 
F
f =1

j ∈ Bf ,
j = 0
P f
j c j f ,
where c j f = c1
j f +c2
j f +c3
j f ; c1
j f , c2
j f , c3
j f —amount of system losses from breach of
information confidentiality, volume of losses from the failure to perform a number
of tasks, and cost of restoring the security system if the attacker implements the jth
threat while attempting to achieve the f th goal, respectively.
2. Probability of achievement of all attacker’s goals:
P p = 
F
f =1

j∈G f
I f −1
P f
j pjn f .
3. Probability of a successful counteraction of the security system to the attacker’s
actions to implement all of his goals:
P3 = 
F
f =1
⎛
⎜
⎝
1 − 
j∈G f
I f −1
P f
j pjn f
⎞
⎟
⎠.
4. Total cost of the security system:
C3 = 
F
f =1

j∈Bf

m∈N f
j
c3
jm x jm,
where c3
jm = s0
m +s1
jm—cost of using the mth tool at the jth line of defense, s0
m—cost
of the mth tool, and s1
jm—cost of installation and maintenance of the mth tool at the
jth line of defense.
Thus, the developed mathematical model of the attacker’s actions makes it possible
to evaluate the effectiveness of the system and can serve as the basis for building
models for optimizing the composition of the complexes of information security
tools in FNS and CS.68 2 Mathematical Models of Information Security …
2.6 Mathematical Models for Optimizing the Composition
of Information Security Systems
In accordance with the goals of the security system, the problem of determining the
optimal composition of the complex of security tools can be solved by the criterion of
the minimum probability of the achievement of all the attacker’s goals, the minimum
of the average losses of the system due to the attacker’s implementation of all the
goals, and the maximum probability of successful counteractions of the security
system to the implementation of all attacker’s goals. According to the first and second
criteria, it is advisable to solve the problem in the case when the main goal of the
security system is the maximum possible reduction in the level of implementation
(predominance of software and hardware security tools). According to the third
criterion, when the main problem of the security system consists in the maximum
possible level of successful recognition of the fact of intrusion or actions of the
attacker in the FNS with the aim of taking further measures to counter it (it is advisable
to use this criterion with the predominance of physical security tools). In addition, this
problem in some cases can be solved by the criterion of the minimum of the “cost–
risk” integral indicator, which represents the total costs of organizing information
security and the corresponding losses due to the attacker’s actions. According to the
above criteria, mathematical models for optimizing the composition of the complex
of information security tools can be formulated as follows:
1. According to the criterion of the minimum probability of the attacker achieving
all his goals, determine such values xjm (j ∈ Bf , j = 0; m ∈ N f
j ; f = 1, 2, …,
F) that
P p = P p(X) = min
X

F
f =1

j∈G f
I f −1
P f
j pjn f (2.41)
under the following constraints:
(2.42)
(2.43)
x jm = {0, 1}, (j ∈ Bf , j = 0; m ∈ N f
j ; f = 1, 2,..., F), (2.44)
where—maximum allowable value of the cost of the security system.
2. According to the criterion of the minimum average level of system losses due
to the attacker’s actions, determine such values xjm (j ∈ Bf , j = 0; m ∈ N f
j ; f
= 1, 2, …, F) that2.6 Mathematical Models for Optimizing the Composition … 69
C p = C p(X) = min
X

F
f =1

j ∈ Bf ,
j = 0
P f
j c j f (2.45)
under constraints (2.42)–(2.44).
3. According to the criterion of the maximum probability of successful counterac￾tion of the security system to the attacker’s actions, determine such values xjm
(j ∈ Bf , j = 0,; m ∈ N f
j ; f = 1, 2, …, F) that
P3 = P3
(X) = max
X

F
f =1
⎛
⎜
⎝
1 − 
j∈G f
I f −1
P f
j pjn f
⎞
⎟
⎠ (2.46)
under constraints (2.42)–(2.44).
4. According to the criterion of the minimum of integral indicator, named “cost￾risk”, to determine such values xjm (j ∈ Bf , j = 0; m ∈ Nf
j; f = 1, 2, …, F)
that
S = S(X) = min
X
⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎝
= 
F
f =1

j∈Bf

m∈N f
j
c3
jm x jm +
F
f =1

j ∈ Bf ,
j = 0
P f
j c j f
⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎠
(2.47)
under constraints (2.43), (2.44),
where S—value of the “cost–risk” integral indicator, and —permissible
value of the probability of the attacker’s implementation of the f th goal.
For the purpose of the protection system, we propose to solve the task of deter￾mining the optimal composition of the information protection system for FNS and CS
with respect to the maximum probability of successful countering of the protection
system to the intruder’s goal accomplishment.
Tasks (2.41)–(2.44), (2.42)–(2.44), (2.45), (2.42)–(2.44), (2.46), (2.43), (2.44),
and (2.47) relate to the tasks of optimization of composition of technical means
complex. It is possible to use dynamic programming methods to solve them.
The computational experiment was conducted to test the performance of the devel￾oped mathematical models and algorithms. A system consisting of a server and a
workstation connected by a communication channel was assumed as a system under
protection.70 2 Mathematical Models of Information Security …
In case the distance between the FNS and CS is insignificant, the information in
the system is transmitted through a cable connection, otherwise using the radio data
channel.
The analysis of the principles of the protected system functioning, the list of tasks
to be solved, and the peculiarities of storage, processing, and transfer of information
allowed us to identify four possible targets of the intruder, the list and brief descrip￾tion of which are given in Table A.1 of Appendix A. On the basis of the accumulated
statistical data on the activity of intruders, analysis of possible ways of implementa￾tion of the allocated purposes by them, the list of possible threats of the information
in the considered system is made, which is given in Table A.2 of Appendix A. This
list is notable for its wide range and variety of threats. The greatest danger, from the
point of view of the damage caused, are the threats associated with the disruption
of the system’s functioning (blocking of information, violation of its integrity, etc.),
which requires more focus on their neutralization.
On the basis of the analysis of available statistical data, characteristics of the
allocated threats of the information, the columns of conditions of the protected system
are constructed at implementation by the intruder of each of the purposes presented
in Figs. A.1, A.2, A.3 and A.4 of Appendix A from which it is visible that there is a
considerable quantity of ways of realization by the intruder of each of the purposes
that makes practically impossible the decision of a problem of definition of the
structure of a complex of means of protection of the information without use of
means of computing techniques [22].
The analysis of ways of implementation of the allocated threats has allowed
making the list of means and the methods of protection of the information potentially
suitable for inclusion in a protection system. The list of means and methods—appli￾cants for inclusion in a protection system—is given in Table A.3 of Appendix A. The
characteristics of the means of protection on the basis of which they were selected
were the cost of the means and the probability of successful functioning to neutralize
the relevant threat of information.
The algorithm and the program of the solution to the problem of optimization of
the information protection system by the method of counter solution of functional
equations of dynamic programming in Borland C++ v.5.0 language have been devel￾oped. The solution to the problem was performed for different values of limitation on
the cost of protection system under OC MS Windows 98 SE control, on the aircraft
with the following characteristics:
– Processor—Intel Celeron 400 MHz;
– Chip set—Intel 440 BX;
– RAM—32 MB;
– Hard disk capacity—10 GB.
The solution time was from 20 s for the lowest values to 5 min 10 s for the
maximum value of the protection system cost.
The results of the solution to the problem of optimization of the information
security complex composition are presented in Tables A.4, A.5 and A.6 of Appendix
A and Figs. 2.4, 2.5 and 2.6.2.6 Mathematical Models for Optimizing the Composition … 71
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
2627 7881 13135 23640
32
12
9
6 0.3 0.2 0.1 0
P*1000
С
Fig. 2.4 Dependence of probability of implementation of all objectives by the intruder on the cost
of the protection system
Costs for arrangement of protection system Loss from violators activities
Fig. 2.5 Dependence of the expenses for the organization of the protection system and the amount
of losses from the actions of the intruder on the probability of the implementation of all the goals
by the intruder72 2 Mathematical Models of Information Security …
Fig. 2.6 Dependence of the total system costs on the probability of successful functioning of the
protection system
Table A.4 of Appendix A and Fig. 2.4 summarize the overall results of the
modeling exercise, which show that, as the amount of protection funding increases,
the likelihood that an intruder will achieve all of his/her objectives is significantly
reduced. Moreover, this dependence has an obviously expressed exponential char￾acter with a negative coefficient. At the same time, Table A.4 of Appendix A shows
that the system is least protected against the implementation of goals Nos. 2 and
4 by the intruder, which is due to the relatively high cost of means of protection
neutralizing threats 7–17 with their insufficiently high efficiency [17, 20, 21].
In Table A.5 of Appendix A and in Fig. 2.5, results of modeling are given taking
into account a possibility of the use of the same information protection means (that
is characteristic for means used in the computer techniques) for neutralization of
several threats of the information simultaneously. Table A.6 of Appendix A shows
the compositions of protection complexes for different values of imposed restrictions
on the cost of the protection system. The numbers of protection means, which are
included in the protection system for neutralization of other threats, but can be used
for overlapping this one, are given in brackets. From the received data, it is clear
that the satisfaction of the requirement for a decrease in the probability of successful
realization by the intruder of all purposes leads to a sharp increase in the cost of the
protection system. Thus, since some moment of loss from actions of the intruder,
despite a considerable increase in the general cost of information protection means
decreases insignificantly that speaks about the necessity of definition of the rational
volume of expenses for the organization of protection of the information for the set
initial conditions.2.6 Mathematical Models for Optimizing the Composition … 73
Figure 2.6 shows the dependence of the integral indicator of the total costs of
the system of transmission and processing of information related to losses from the
actions of the intruder and the costs of organizing the information protection system,
the probability of successful counteraction to the system of protection of the actions
of the intruder. From the given figure, it can be seen that the given dependence has a
pronounced minimum where the costs of organizing the protection system and losses
from the intruder’s actions are equal. This suggests that from this point onwards, the
cost of the protection system starts to exceed the level of losses due to the intruder’s
actions, and therefore the bulk of the integrated indicator value is the total cost of
the protection means.
Thus, it is possible to draw a conclusion that the rational volume of expenses for
the organization of the information protection system lies a little to the right of a
point of a minimum of the given dependence. Thus, it can be seen from Fig. 2.6
that the increase in the volume of investments in the protection system by only three
times compared to the corresponding value at this point reduces the amount of losses
from the actions of the intruder by five times. At the same time, the further increase
in the cost of the protection system no longer leads to a significant reduction of these
losses. Hence, the corresponding option of construction of the structure of a complex
of the protection means given in Table 6 (option No. 3) can be accepted as the base.
Results of experimental check of the developed mathematical models and algo￾rithms of optimization of the structure of complexes of protection means have shown
their working capacity and practical importance for working out recommendations
and offers for the creation of new and improvement of existing information protection
systems in systems of its transfer and processing [10.19].
2.7 Mathematical Model of Accounting for the Influence
of Information Protection Means and Methods
on the Functional Characteristics of the Protected
Navigation System
Building an information protection system in modern FNS and CS is a complex
problem that requires solving a whole range of scientific and technical problems.
An information security system will only be effective if it is an integral part of the
protected system. The information protection system is an auxiliary subsystem of
FNS and CS and does not participate directly in the solution of tasks. Its organization
requires certain resources, including material ones. The purpose of the information
protection system is to ensure the reliable and stable functioning of FNS and CS in a
harsh noise environment. On the one hand, each of the information protection means
and methods used influences external or internal destructive factors neutralizing them
to a certain extent, and, on the other hand, influences the parameters of FNS and CS
functioning. Therefore, one of the requirements for information protection systems74 2 Mathematical Models of Information Security …
is as follows. The set of information protection means and methods used should not
significantly degrade the characteristics of the protected system.
Let FNS perform W functional tasks in the course of functioning. These tasks
can be divided into a number of elementary actions of information processing, the
execution of which in a certain sequence leads to the solution of the corresponding
task or the whole complex of tasks.
Let us denote through V—a set of numbers of elementary actions, vi—a set of
numbers of elementary actions which make up the ith task (i = 1, 2, …, W),
vi ⊂ V,

W
i=1
vi = V.
The process of FNS functioning is characterized by a set of functional characteris￾tics H = {he}, e = 1, 2,..., E, where E is the number of functional characteristics.
In order to meet the tactical and technical requirements of the system to be protected,
the value of each eth characteristic must exceed (be less than) a certain permissible
value:
(2.48)
where—maximum permissible value eth functional characteristics of FNS and CS.
The formation of each eth functional characteristic contributes to the set of elemen￾tary actions, which is defined by the matrix He = +
+h¯ije
+
+, i = 1, 2, …, W; e = 1, 2,
…, E; j ∈ vi , where h¯ije is the contribution of the jth elementary action when solving
the ith problem to the formation of eth functional characteristic. Then
he = Fe

He

,
where Fe() is a functional dependence of the value of the eth functional characteristic
on the matrix of contributions of elementary actions in solving each of the problems
in its formation.
The presence of an information protection system has an impact on the functional
characteristics of FNS and CS.
Each of the information protection means influences the parameters of perfor￾mance of elementary actions that can be set by the matrix Zije = +
+zmije
+
+,i =
1, 2,... W; j ∈ vi; m ∈ D
; e = 1, 2,..., E, where D is a set of numbers of means
of protection included into the complex of information protection means, and zmije
is the size of change of the contribution of jth elementary action at the solution to
ith problem on the formation of eth functional characteristic at inclusion into the
information protection system of mth means. In this case
h¯ije = Gije
h¯0
ije, Zije
,2.7 Mathematical Model of Accounting for the Influence … 75
where h¯0
ije is the contribution of the jth elementary action in the solution of the ith
task to the formation of the eth functional characteristic without taking into account
the influence of protection means, Gije() is the functional characteristic of the value
of the contribution of the jth elementary action in the solution of the ith task to the
formation of the eth functional characteristic of the value of this contribution without
taking into account the influence of protection means and the Zije matrix.
In the simplest cases, Fe() and Gije() function dependencies are additive (for
example, when determining the time of solution of each task) or multiplicative (for
example, when determining the probability of solution of each task). It is expedient
to use dependence (2.48) in the form of additional restriction in mathematical models
of optimization of the structure of complexes of information protection means.
The use of this mathematical model at the stage of design of FNS and CS will allow
making reasonable decisions on the choice of the composition of the information
protection system.
References
1. Akinshin RN, Esikov OV, Baryshnikov DY, Taburov DY (2004) Analysis of disturbing factors
affecting data in DCN (distributed computing networks). News from the Tula State University,
series “Vychislitelnaya Tekhnika. Informatsionnye tekhnologii. Sistemy Upravleniya” 1(3)
(Tula)
2. Akinshin RN, Karpov IE, Samsonov AD (2013) Simulation and software package for evaluation
of the flight safety system effectiveness. Nauchniy Vestnik Moscow State Tech Univ Civil Aviat
193(7):126–133
3. Akinshin RN, Andreyev AV, Rumyancev VL, Esikov OV (2016) Application of a genetic algo￾rithm for selection of air traffic control system radio-technical facilities operating frequencies.
Nauchniy Vestnik Moscow State Tech Univ Civil Aviat 19(5):126–187
4. Baburov VI, Bestugin AR, Ivancevich NV, Kirshina IA, Sauta OI, Filin AD, Shatrakov YG
(2016) Comprehensive evaluation of navigation data with regard to expected uncertainty.
Voprosy radioelektroniki (6):66–70
5. Bakulev PA, Sosnovskiy AA (2011) Radio navigation systems. Radiotehnika
6. Balyberdin VA (1987) Data processing systems evaluation and optimization. Radio i Svyaz
7. Balyberdin VA, Belevcev AM, Stepanov OA (2002) Optimization of information processes in
automated systems with distributed data processing. Technologia
8. Zima V, Moldavyan A, Moldavyan N (2001) Global network technologies security. BHV
9. Kiselyov VD, Esikov OV, Kislitsyn AS, Theoretical basis for data processing process opti￾mization and the structure of information protection means complexes in computing networks
(edited by Sukharyov EM). JSC “Poligraphservis XXI vek”
10. Mihalevich VS, Volkovich VL (1982) Computing methods for complex systems research and
engineering. Nauka
11. Pestryakov VB, Kuzenkov VD (1985) Estimation of the reliability characteristics boundary
values of avionic switching system functional units according to the field performance data.
Radio i Svyaz, 376 pp
12. Pestryakov VB (1990) Avionic equipment engineering. Sov. radio
13. Silin AI, Zakovryashin AI (1988) Automatic prediction of the control and monitoring
equipment state. Energia
14. Trakhtengerc EA, Ivanilov EL, Yurkevich EV (2007) Modern computer technology for
information analytics management. SINTEG, 320 pp76 2 Mathematical Models of Information Security …
15. Falkov E, Shavrin S (2017) Cyber security of aircraft information and communication systems.
Inf Analyt J “Radioelektronnye tekhnologii” (5)
16. Frolov SI, Goryachev NV, Tankov GV, Kochegarov II, Yurkov NK (2017) On some problems
of reliability-oriented design of on-board avionic systems. In: Proceedings of the international
symposium “Nadyozhnost i kachestvo”, vol 1, pp 155–156
17. Khoroshevskiy VG (1987) Engineering analysis of computers and systems functioning. Radio
i Svyaz
18. Shahtarin BI, Aslanov TG (2014) Average time to cycle slip in continuous and discrete auto￾matic phase-lock. Vestnik of the Moscow State Technical University named after N.E. Bauman,
no 1(52)
19. Yurkevich EV (2007) Introduction to the theory of information systems. LLC Izdatelskiy dom
Tekhnologii, 272 pp
20. Yurkevich EV, Kryukova LN (2013) Problems of functional reliability adjustment of instru￾mentation and control devices in industrial processes. Izmeritelnaya Tekhnika, no 1, pp
19–23
21. Yurkov NK, Goryachev NV, Kuzina EA (2018) Physical basis of catastrophic malfunction in
electrical avionic components and systems. In: Proceedings of the international symposium
“Nadyozhnost i kachestvo”, vol 1, pp 102–107
22. Yanbyh GF, Stolyarov BA (1987) Optimization of information computing systems. Radio i
SvyazChapter 3
Methods to Improve the Noise Immunity
of Civil Aircraft Navigation Systems
Using Satellite Radio Navigation Systems
3.1 Classification of Errors Related to Aircraft Positioning
by Onboard and Ground-Based Navigation Devices
Requirements that are determined by the use of the SRNS for calculating aircraft
coordinates are considered necessary to ensure the operability of aircraft naviga￾tion systems. The need to comply with the accuracy characteristics, as well as the
reliability characteristics of aircraft navigation support should be attributed to these
requirements [1]:
(1) availability understood as the probability of a radio-navigation system (RNS)
functioning a priori or in the process of performing a certain task;
(2) integrity as a probability that a failure will be detected in the SRNS within a
time interval that is less than or equal to that of the SRNS;
(3) continuity of service is defined at the most important intervals of time as the
probability of operation of the SRNS.
The Required Navigation Performance Concept (RNP) formulates the require￾ments for aircraft navigation aids within a given airspace zone (AZ).
The accuracy of the navigation characteristics of all users within a certain amount
of AZ is determined by the type of RNP. RNP are defined as follows:
(1) for the route;
(2) for several routes;
(3) district;
(4) for the AZ volume.
The following formula is used to estimate the noise error in the measurement of
pseudo-range, which depends on the quality of the receiver and the constellation of
the navigation spacecraft [2]:
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2021
D. A. Zatuchny et al., Noise Resistance Enhancement in Aircraft Navigation
and Connected Systems, Springer Aerospace Technology,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-16-0630-4_3
7778 3 Methods to Improve the Noise Immunity of Civil Aircraft …
(3.1)
where  = 10−2c is the duration of one element of the code for the equipment of
SRNS consumers (CE), fcc3, fn4––the width of the bands, which are assumed
to be equal to 3 and 100 Hz; K1 and K2––constant coefficients, which are equal to
0.25 and 0.5 taking into account incoherent processing adopted in the SRNS CE,
P/N0––the ratio of signal power to the spectral density of noise power.
On the basis of available statistical data, it was assumed in the calculations that
.
By placing the relevant data in (3.1), we obtain
The dependence of the noise error in pseudo-range measurement on the signal￾to-noise ratio is shown on the graph in Fig. 3.1.
As it can be seen from Fig. 3.1, the dependence of the noise error in the measure￾ment of pseudo-range on the signal-to-noise ratio has a nonlinear character and
decreases sharply with increasing the signal-to-noise value.
The aircraft coordinates for the SRNS are determined on the basis of their calcu￾lation by pseudo ranges (PR) prior to the navigation spacecraft. The pseudo range
Fig. 3.1 Dependence of noise error on the signal-to-noise ratio3.1 Classification of Errors Related to Aircraft Positioning … 79
measured in a request-free measuring station (RFMS) is as follows [3]:Du(t)
Du(t) = cτ (t) = D(t) + cτδ (t) + δD(t),
where D(t) is the true distance from the RFMS to the navigation spacecraft, c is the
speed of light, δD(t) is the measurement error in the RFMS, τδ (t) is the difference in
the onboard time scale (OTS) compared to the single time scale (TS) of the SRNS.
Systematic errors occur when using the pseudo-dimensional method. They are
caused by the difference in clock scales between the aircraft and navigation space￾craft. Thus, the determined ranges (pseudo ranges) will differ from the actual ranges
by a value that is proportional to t, where t is the difference between the time
scales onboard the satellite and the aircraft. This is shown in Fig. 3.2.
As it can be seen from Fig. 3.2, the difference between the true and measured
range is a value proportional to t.
The formula used to determine pseudo range is as follows:
Diu = 
(X − Xi)2 + (Y − Yi)2 + (Z − Zi)2 + cT + δDi,
where X, Y, and Z are aircraft coordinates calculated within the geocentric coordi￾nate system, Xi, Yi, and Zi are the a priori known coordinates of the ith navigation
spacecraft, c is the speed of light, T is the difference between the time scales of the
navigation spacecraft and the consumer, δDi are the errors that occur when deter￾mining the PR, i = 1, 2, … N, N––the number of navigation spacecraft providing
information for PR determination.
It should be noted that the value of T will be equal for all Diu in the assumption
that all navigation spacecraft are synchronized in time with each other.
Based on the above, it becomes clear that a system of equations should be formed
to determine the place and correct the time scale. Three aircraft coordinates and an
error of the consumer time scale are unknown in this equation system.
From the fact that there are four unknown equations in this system, there arises the
need for at least four navigation spacecraft, which will make it possible to measure
four PRs. It should be noted that, as a rule, the consumer has the opportunity to use
no more than 8 navigation spacecraft. Consequently, the task of determining the best
constellation of four navigation spacecraft becomes relevant.
Similar nonlinear equations for pseudovelocities should be created to determine
the components of aircraft speed. For pseudo-velocity calculation, we use measure￾ments of the shifts resulting from the movement of the navigation spacecraft and
the consumer based on the Doppler effect, carrier frequencies of the navigation
spacecraft signals. To perform some tasks, X, Y, and Z coordinates obtained in the
geocentric coordinate system are converted to the following coordinates: H-height,
L-longitude, and B-latitude.
The following formulas define the relationship between these coordinates [4]:80 3 Methods to Improve the Noise Immunity of Civil Aircraft …
Start of 
countdown 
at orbital 
vehicle 
Start of 
countdown 
at the 
aircraft 
t 
t 
Signal reception moment 
True range = сτ
Pseudo range = с(τ-∆t)
τ
τ-∆t 
∆t 
∆t – 
aircraft 
time scale 
departure 
Fig. 3.2 To the notion of pseudo range
X = (N + H) cos B cos L,
Y = (N + H) cos B sin L,
Z = 1 − e2
N + H
sin B,
N = a

1 − e2 sin2 B
− 1
2 ,
e2 = 2α − α2
,3.1 Classification of Errors Related to Aircraft Positioning … 81
where α-is the compression, a is the largest half-axis of an ellipsoid.
After determining B, L, and H, the next step is the transformation of the aircraft
velocity components, which becomes possible because the transition matrix is
calculated from the geocentric coordinate system to a rectangular horizontal one.
The accuracy of the pseudo-range increment resulting from the measurement
noise is influenced by the quality of operation of the SRNS.
The following expression allows us to determine the error of estimation of pseudo￾range increment:
(3.2)
It is assumed that the wavelength is , and the bandwidth for SRNS
is 20 Hz.
, thus we get the following:
In Fig. 3.3 dependence of the error of estimation of pseudo range increment on
the signal-to-noise ratio is given.
Fig. 3.3 Dependence of pseudo range increment estimation error on the signal-to-noise ratio82 3 Methods to Improve the Noise Immunity of Civil Aircraft …
As it is seen from Fig. 3.3, the dependence of the error of estimation of an
increment of pseudo-range from the signal-to-noise ratio has nonlinear character
and sharply decreases with an increase in the signal-to-noise value. After the
signal-to-noise value exceeds , the noise error becomes insignificant [5].
When determining the dynamic error of measurement of coordinates, it should be
divided into two types of errors. The first type includes the actual error of pseudo range
measurement, as well as the error resulting from the implementation of sequential
measurement of pseudo ranges up to four navigation spacecraft in time.
The following expression is used to estimate the first type of dynamic error [4]:
, (3.3)
where is the rate of change in Doppler frequency shift.
Let us insert the above values in formula (3.3). Thus we get the following:
The following expression is used to identify the second type of dynamic error δRi
:
δRi =

V

Ri − VRi
	
t + 
a

Ri − aRi
t
2
2 , (3.4)
where VRi
, aRi are the true values of speed and acceleration in the direction of the
ith navigation spacecraft, V

Ri
, a

Ri are the velocity and acceleration estimates in the
direction of the ith navigation spacecraft, t is the time interval from measuring
the corresponding pseudo range to the moment of solving the problem of locating
aircraft.
On the basis of statistical data, it is assumed that the difference between the
estimation of speed and its true value is equal to 0. 20 м/ c, and the difference between
the estimation of acceleration and its true value is equal to 2 0. 20 / м c . Figure 3.4
shows the graph of the dependence of the dynamic error on the time interval.
As a rule, the time interval t sufficient to solve the navigation problem is equal
to t = 10c. Thus,
In civil SRNS CE, a single frequency is usually used. Thus, compensation for
ionospheric delay is based on the use of the ionospheric model. The model error is
influenced by the accuracy of electron concentration accounting, which in turn is
influenced by the geographical latitude, time of day and year, and the solar activity
cycle phase. Corrections for ionospheric delays are determined based on geograph￾ical, daily, seasonal, and cyclic changes. This makes it possible to reduce the iono￾spheric error by 50–75%. The following expression gives an opportunity to estimate
the residual error [3, 4]:3.1 Classification of Errors Related to Aircraft Positioning … 83
Fig. 3.4 Dependence of the dynamic error on time interval
, (3.5)
where τu is the uncompensated ionospheric delay, γ is the angle of the navigation
spacecraft location, and c is the speed of light. Given that the smallest angle of the
navigation spacecraft location is γ = 50, we obtain the following: .
The following fact should be noted. Errors resulting from the propagation speci￾ficity of the ionosphere signals are compensated for by the two-frequency equipment
on the basis of the known assumption that the errors of pseudo range and the square
of the carrier frequency for this case are inversely proportional.
During the propagation of radio waves in the troposphere, their velocity and
trajectory are determined by the refractive index. The group delay in the troposphere
has a quasidetermined character and is also compensated by using the troposphere
model. The residual error δmp. is described by the expression:
δmp. = τmc exp

−0.034
T0

cosec γ ≈ 0.1 exp

−0.034
T0

cosec γ, (3.6)
where τm is the uncompensated tropospheric delay (according to the accepted model),
T0 = 3000K is the absolute temperature at the receiving point.
Given that the smallest angle of the navigation spacecraft location is γ = 50, we
obtain the following: .
Figure 3.5 shows the signal-to-noise ratio via the voltage at the transceiver’s output
to the angle of spacecraft position at different values of bank angles and aircraft flight84 3 Methods to Improve the Noise Immunity of Civil Aircraft …
Fig. 3.5 Dependence of the
signal-to-noise ratio on the
output voltage of the
transceiver on the angle of
the spacecraft
heights. It can be seen from the diagrams that at the increased flight height, the signal￾to-noise ratio slightly increases, which is determined by a smaller absorption of radio
waves in the atmosphere [6].
When the aircraft rolls toward the spacecraft, a typical feature is the presence of
a maximum of 90°, angles ε°.
Figure 3.6 shows the results of the pseudo-range dependence of the RMS of
pseudo range under the influence of own and external noises on the spacecraft angle.
These results are given for the aircraft flight altitude of about 1 km, when the
interference caused by the influence of the underlying surface can be neglected. It
Fig. 3.6 Dependence of the
root-mean-square deviation
(RMS) of the pseudo-range
error on the spacecraft angle
under the influence of own
and external noises3.1 Classification of Errors Related to Aircraft Positioning … 85
can be seen from the figure that the highest RMS value for the 5° satellite angle
limitation does not exceed 20 m, and for 15°–16 m.
The calculation results of the characteristic expressed by the signal-to-noise ratio
are shown in Fig. 3.7 for different location angles of the navigation aircraft (γ ),
aircraft flight height, and aircraft tilt angles relative to the navigation aircraft (ε).
The graphs show that the signal/interference ratio does not exceed 2 at an angle
of 5° and aircraft flight at a flight altitude of up to 1 km.
The degree of impact on the value of the error in the location of aircraft noise
caused by reflections from the underlying surface, the flights of aircraft at low alti￾tudes, and the placement of the antenna on the top of the fuselage strongly depends
on the angle of the location of the navigation spacecraft and the angle of the bank of
the aircraft relative to the navigation spacecraft. From Fig. 3.7, it can be seen that,
if the permissible angle of the aircraft roll toward the spacecraft is limited to 30°,
if the angle of the spacecraft is equal to 20°, the effect of the underlying surface is
manifested at altitudes less than 700 m, whereas if the angle of the spacecraft is equal
to 45° at altitudes less than 100 m.
Table 3.1 shows the values of all errors.
The tropospheric correction can be calculated by means of a ratio:
DTr,i = 8.8cosecEi, where Ei is the angle of elevation of the ith navigation
spacecraft. Application of such a correction allows you to significantly reduce the
residual error.
Thus, based on the calculations presented, the following conclusion can be made:
the greatest error occurs because of the noise error in the pseudo range measurement
[7].
The power of the signal reflected from the underlying surface is influenced by the
nature of the surface. Beckmann’s model is one of the main mathematical surface
models used to calculate the characteristics of the reflected signal. According to the
model, the surface is rough, consisting of randomly oriented facets.
Each facet of the surface is a “shiny point” mirroring the incident wave. At that,
the reflection coefficient is assumed to be equal to the Fresnel reflection coefficient.
It is believed that the size of the facet is much larger than the wavelength of the
Fig. 3.7 Dependence of the signal/interference ratio on flight altitude (taking into account the
influence of reflections from the Earth)86 3 Methods to Improve the Noise Immunity of Civil Aircraft …
Table 3.1 Error values Error name Error value
Noise error in pseudo range measurement
Accuracy of pseudo range increment
estimation
First type of dynamic error
Second type of dynamic error
Residual error due to ionospheric delay
Residual error due to tropospheric delay
incident wave (l >> λ). The input signal will be the total of waves reflected by
facets with similar orientation. The density of probabilities of distribution of the
roughness heights is assumed to be normal.
Forestlands can be considered as one of the most common types of the underlying
surface. Currently, there is no single mathematical model that can describe all types
of forests. The following models of forests were built: thick leafless forest; rare
leafless forestland (Teyk model); Klaps model describing shrubs; various models
of dense deciduous forest; Teyk model for coniferous forest; snow-covered dense
winter forest model [8].
With the Teyk model, the rare, coniferous forest should be regarded as a set of long
and thin dielectric cylinders. These cylinders are oriented perpendicular to the plane
of their location, and their distribution in this plane is random. This model belongs
to the class of geometric models describing the underlying surface with roughness
and is used to calculate the effective normalized areas of vegetation scattering, forest
areas, etc. The following conditions are imposed in this model:
1. All cylinders are infinite in length. The scattering is usually determined by the
upper part of the forest cover and does not depend on the surface underneath it.
2. The diameter of the cylinders is small compared to the wavelength. Since
the main scattering occurs on tree crown branches with diameters of about
0.52 cm, this condition is fulfilled for the considered VHF range. Densities of
probabilities of orientation of cylinders relative to an angle of an inclination and
an angle of rotation are described by expressions:
W(ϕci) = π
2
sin ϕci,
W(θci) = 3
2
π cos2 θci,3.1 Classification of Errors Related to Aircraft Positioning … 87
where ϕci is the angle of inclination of the cylinders, and θci is the angle of rotation
of the cylinders.
The Teyk model is shown in Fig. 3.8.
The effective signal scattering area is as follows:
, (3.7)
Fig. 3.8 To the explanation of Teyk model88 3 Methods to Improve the Noise Immunity of Civil Aircraft …
where is the effective scattering area for the horizontal and vertical
components.
As an electromagnetic wave passes through, its amplitude fades exponentially as
it penetrates inland.
Forest cover often cannot be described by one particular surface model. Large￾scale model with sufficient accuracy is able to describe only the tree crowns covered
with snow caps. Coniferous and leaf forests with closed tops will be complex surfaces
combining large and small-scale models. The effective scattering area of a complex
model can be represented by the sum of the effective scattering areas computed from
private models.
Deciduous forest can be described jointly by large-scale and small-scale statistical
models. At the same time, the large-scale model describes tree crowns from RMS of
roughness heights of about 2 m and correlation interval of about 5 m. The small-scale
model will describe the roughness caused by the foliage covering the trees. RMS of
the roughness heights will be taken as 5 cm, and the interval of correlation is 8 cm.
Note that the RMS of roughness heights and correlation interval in these models are
mainly determined by the size of tree crowns and leaf sizes.
Radio wave scattering from coniferous forest can be described by a joint Teyk
model and a small-scale model. The Teyk model describes the scattering from the
trunks of coniferous forest trees and the small-scale model from branches.
The greatest level of interference is the bare terrain, and the lowest level is the
bare rare forest, which can be explained by the fact that most of the electromagnetic
waves penetrate the forest, where it is absorbed by multiple re-reflections Fig. 3.9
shows the change in the signal/interference ratio when flying over rugged terrain
and bare, rare forest at two altitudes: and . Line 1 shows this
dependency for height. Line 2 shows this dependency for
height. The area to the left of the shaded line shows the change in the signal-to-noise
ratio on the rough terrain depending on the altitude of the aircraft flight, and the area
to the right of the shaded line shows this change in a bare, rare forest. A forest with
an average tree height of 3 m and a proportion of water in the branches mass of −
0.7 was considered as a bare, rare forest.
The rest of the forest cover occupies the intermediate position. Figure 3.10 shows
the dependence of the signal-to-noise ratio on the aircraft flight height when flying
over the coniferous forest and flying over winter forest with “caps” of snow. A
coniferous forest was considered to be a coniferous forestland, with an average
tree height of ≈ 3 m and a percentage of water content in the branches mass of
≈ 70%. The winter forestland was considered to be a winter forest, with an average
tree height of ≈ 3 m. The linear dependence, which is represented by line 1, is
decreasing and can be considered a characteristic at the aircraft altitude
of the signal/interference ratio. The linear dependence, which is shown in line 2, is3.1 Classification of Errors Related to Aircraft Positioning … 89
q,dB
12
19
Rugged terrain Bare rare forest
16
21
N=1000m
N=5000m
1
2
Fig. 3.9 Change in the signal/interference ratio q when flying over rugged terrain and bare rare
forest
increasing and can be considered a characteristic of the signal/interference ratio at
aircraft altitude of . The lines to the left of the shaded line characterize
data that are relevant to coniferous forests. The lines to the right of the shaded line
represent data that are relevant to the winter forest.90 3 Methods to Improve the Noise Immunity of Civil Aircraft …
q,dB
13
Coniferous forest Winter forest
14
15
H=5000m
1
2
Fig. 3.10 Dependence of the signal/interference ratio on aircraft flight height when flying over
coniferous forest and flying over winter forest
3.2 Working Constellation Selection Algorithm
of Navigation Spacecraft in Excessive Data Load
Conditions
Integrated (complex) use of SRNS GPS and GLONASS navigation signals is consid￾ered an important endeavor for the improvement of AC position location accuracy.3.2 Working Constellation Selection Algorithm … 91
Table 3.2 The influence of the number of navigation spacecraft on the geometric factors
Number of navigation spacecraft HDOP VDOP TDOP
8 GLONASS navigation spacecraft 1.03 1.34 0.80
10 GLONASS navigation spacecraft 0.84 1.24 0.72
All navigation spacecraft
GLONASS + GPS
0.58 0.84 –
Table 3.3 Coordinates and altitude calculation accuracy using SRNS GLONASS and GPS
Mode Coordinates; drms; m Altitude; RMS deviation; m
All GLONASS navigation
spacecraft, nom*
9.0 13.5
16 GLONASS + GPS navigation
spacecraft (selective access); nom
8.5 12.6
All GLONASS + GPS navigation
spacecraft (selective access); nom
8.4 12.5
All GLONASS navigation
spacecraft; dif*
1.8 2.6
16 GPS navigation spacecraft +
GLONASS
1.36 1.9
All GLONASS + GPS navigation
spacecraft (selective access); dif
1.24 1.82
The main tasks of integration (integrated use) are to improve the accuracy and relia￾bility comprised of meeting the conditions for integrity, availability, and continuity
of service during AC position determination [9].
Accuracy characteristics received with the help of GLONASS and GPS navigation
signals (GLONASS + GPS) integrated use are given in Tables 3.2 and 3.3.
Analysis of the Table shows that for the differential mode, use of all navigation
spacecraft comprising SRNS GLONASS and GPS gives an improvement in altitude
and coordinates calculation accuracy in 1.4 and 1.6 times compared to the use of
Cases 8 and 10 GLONASS navigation spacecraft, respectively.
Analysis of the Table shows that when using GLONASS navigation spacecraft
in the nominal mode in integration with GPS navigation spacecraft with selective
access, the accuracy is increased only by 5–10% with regard to coordinates and 8%
with regard to altitude.
When using the differential mode for both SRNS, the accuracy in determining
PR was considered to be 2 m. Analysis of Table 3.3 shows that in case of using
the differential mode, considering the measurement data obtained via GPS gives a
1.3…1.5 times increase in the accuracy of determining coordinates and altitudes.
It should be noted that for original GPS-users, the use of SRNS GLONASS
navigation signals gives approximately a three times increase in accuracy.92 3 Methods to Improve the Noise Immunity of Civil Aircraft …
Table 3.4 SRNS availability evaluation at various periods of AC flight, %
SRNS or combination of
various SRNS
Aircraft routing Aircraft local flight Aircraft non-precision
approach
GPS 98.58 96.53 67.26
GPS + GLONASS 100 99.99 98.87
GPS + GLONASS 100 100 100
Table 3.5 The longest period of inactivity, min
SRNS or combination of
various SRNS
Aircraft routing Aircraft local flight Aircraft non-precision
approach
GPS 35 70 295
GPS + GLONASS 0 15 30
Tables 3.4 and 3.5 provide availability evaluations and the longest period of inac￾tivity when using the navigation data obtained only via SRNS GPS and SRNS GPS
+ GLONASS.
Analysis of Table 3.4 data shows that integrated (complex) use of GPS and
GLONASS provides a considerable improvement of availability. It is the most
pronounced in situations of aircraft non-precision approach (from 67 to 100%).
Analysis of the data in Table 3.5 shows that integrated (complex) use of GLONASS
together with GPS during the AC track route flight leads to the absence of periods
of inactivity.
To improve the AC coordinates calculation accuracy, one of the most effective
ways is to select the best working constellation of the SRNS navigation spacecraft.
The criterion for choosing such a working constellation shall be considered the lowest
possible geometric factor in the constellation.
The accuracy characteristics of the SRNS GLONASS are influenced by the
geometric location of the consumer and used navigation spacecraft, as well as
allowances and errors resulting from the navigation parameters calculation process.
ηT = 
XYZT

–vector of navigation parameters.
The covariance matrix Rg of errors η is the most common characteristic of the
determination accuracy η [10]:
Rg =

HT
g R∗−1
Hg
	−1
, (3.8)
where T is the matrix transposition operation,−1 is the inverse matrix designation, R*
is the PR determination covariance matrix of errors, Hg is the differential derivative
matrix of the pseudo-range determination function collection.
When determining the planimetric and altitude coordinates of the consumer, an
expression in the form of a covariance matrix is used:3.2 Working Constellation Selection Algorithm … 93
R = 
HT
ζ R∗−1
Hζ
−1
. (3.9)
Hζ depends on two values: Hg and a matrix demonstrating the error vector trans￾position η in the geostationary coordinate system into “the north-east-normal to
the tangent plane” vector Tgp with consideration of the variables T and f 
.
ζ1 = Tgpη implies that Hζ = HgT −1
gp .
If we consider only the accuracy characteristics of the position coordinates
calculation, then (3.9) shall be written in the form:
, (3.10)
where is the covariance matrix associated with the PR determination.
In the case when the errors have a similar physical nature and are mutually inde￾pendent, and also have equal variances of the summary error , then ,
where I-is a unit matrix.
, (3.11)
Γ = 
HT
M ζHM ζ
−1
, (3.12)
where Γ is a geometric factor.
Now let’s define various geometric factors. The nature of a geometric factor is in
relation to the root-mean-square errors arising when calculating the coordinates to
the root-mean-square errors of determining the vector of radio-navigation parameters
[11].
GDOP = (trace Γ ) 1
2 is a common geometric factor for the navigation parameters
determination accuracy changing, where trace Γ is the square root of the sum of
numbers located on the main diagonal line of the matrix Γ .
PDOP = (γ11 + γ22 + γ33)
1
2 ––geometric factor considered when calculating the
spatial coordinates,
HDOP = (γ11 + γ22)
1
2 ––geometric factor considered when determining the
coordinates in the horizontal plane,
V DOP = γ
1
2
33––geometric factor considered when determining the altitude,
TDOP = γ
1
2
44––the geometric factor considered in determining the time,
where γij are the elements of the matrix G.
Next we consider various RMS deviations [11]:
(1) RMS deviation when determining the planimetric coordinates:
, .
(2) RMS deviation when determining the height:94 3 Methods to Improve the Noise Immunity of Civil Aircraft …
(3) RMS deviation when determining the time:
It should be noted that the geometrical factors are functions only for the
geometrical arrangement of a navigation spacecraft and the object being determined.
, ,
where CPO is the root-mean-square radial error, CCO is the root-mean-square
spherical error.
Now we list the basic errors in PR determination:
(1) errors related to obtaining ephemeris data (ED);
(2) errors related to clock error predictions calculation;
(3) errors related to set noise and external jamming;
(4) errors related to multi-path propagation and peculiarities of the ionospheric
and tropospheric propagation of radio waves.
, (3.13)
where δ2
—errors due to ED errors, δ2
c−—errors due to synchronization, δ2
mp—errors
due to knowledge of the radio waves tropospheric propagation speed, δ2
ion—errors
due to knowledge of the radio waves ionospheric propagation speed, —errors due
to multi-path propagation, —errors due to set noise and jamming.
Totally in the worst-case scenario, by applying the modern multi-channel
NCE with narrow-band single-range (≈ 1600 MHz) radio-navigation signals of
GLONASS system, it is possible to provide operational global navigation with the
following maximum error values in three-dimensional coordinates determination:
60 m in plane and 100 m in height during the periods of maximum solar activity,
30 m in plane and 50 m in height during the periods of minimal solar activity. For
comparison, in GPS system, the error with a probability of 0.95 is 100 m in plane
and 156 m in height. GPS navigation accuracy is 2.5 times lower than in GLONASS
[12].
In order to perform the selection procedure for the working constellation, it is
necessary to look through all possible combinations of the navigation spacecrafts
and calculate the geometrical factor for each combination. This calculation shall be
done fairly often, because as a result of the relative motion of the AC and the NS,3.2 Working Constellation Selection Algorithm … 95
operational configuration of the system constantly changes resulting in the situation
where the working constellation ceases to be the best choice according to the criterion
of the lowest possible geometric factor with the restriction to the angle of the NS
relative to the consumer.
In addition, NSs comprising the working constellation may temporarily go beyond
the receiving aerial pattern, which requires a fast transition to a new working constel￾lation without a sharp decrease in the position determination accuracy. Therefore, it is
necessary to reduce the amount of calculations required to select the working constel￾lation. It is possible to simplify this procedure by excluding from the processing the
NS signals with narrow elevation angles. The limiting elevation angle is usually
chosen in the range of 5–100. This often leads to a decrease in the geometric factor
for a specific point in time and AC position, since NS with narrow angles of elevation
often comprise constellation of four with the lowest geometric factor. Therefore, it
is possible to use simplified methods for selecting the optimal working constellation
by searching only those combinations that include NS with the broadest elevation
angle.
Positioning with the help of an excess number of NSs (for all NSs with an elevation
angle bigger than the limiting angle) has several advantages. During the period of
incomplete system deployment or a failure of one or several NSs, in other words, in
case the geometric factor of even the best four is decently sufficient, this gain may
be quite significant.
In order to evaluate the positioning error when working with an excess amount
of navigation spacecrafts, it is necessary to broaden the definition of the geometric
factor in the face of redundant measurements. In this regard, the concept of matrices
pseudoinversion shall be used. If n spacecrafts are observed, then the cosine matrix
has dimensions n × 4.
Maximum likelihood evaluation of the AC state vector is
X = 
HT
n R−1
n Hn
−1
HT
n R−1
n ρn,
where ρn is the measurement vector, the components of which are n of the measured
pseudoranges, and Rn is the covariance matrix of this vector measurement errors.
If the observations are equal and independent, then
X = 
HT
n Hn
−1
HT
n ρn = H +ρn,
where H +—is a matrix preudoinverse to H.
Provided that the RMS deviation of the pseudo-range measurement error equals
δp, the covariance matrix of positioning error by the least squares technique with
regard to n pseudoranges is equal to
R(n)
x = δ2
pH +
n

H +
n
T
.96 3 Methods to Improve the Noise Immunity of Civil Aircraft …
Therefore, the geometric factor is determined for positioning by an excessive
number of single-step measurements n:
Γ =

Tr

H +
n

H +
n
T 1/2
,
where Tr—is the spur of a matrix designation.
To determine the coordinates of AC included into the sum of components of the
vector X , and to calculate the geometric positioning factor, it is necessary to calculate
the pseudoinverse matrix H + as well. Apart from that, it is necessary to calculate
expressions of the form:
H +
n R+
n

H +
n
T
.
It should be noted that to operate using all visible NSs, it is necessary to have
modern NCE equipped, which is currently provided for a smaller part of the aircraft
fleet. For that reason, the working constellation selecting procedure of four navigation
spacecrafts is still relevant to this day.
Apart from that, as mentioned above, the procedure for finding the geometric
factor when operating with all visible NSs is quite a labor-intensive task requiring a
large amount of calculations in a small amount of time and causing difficulties even
for modern computing systems.
3.3 Algorithm of Selection of the Working Constellation
of Navigation Spacecraft Taking into Account
the Probability of Errors in Determining Its State
for Each of the Satellites
This section will provide a criterion for selecting the best working constellation of
the navigation spacecraft based on the probability of errors in the determination of its
state for each satellite. For this purpose, the procedure for determining these values
is given below.
Two indicators are used to assess the status of navigation spacecrafts, Bi and Ci.
In the process of assessing the state of the navigation spacecraft in relation to these
two attributes, errors of the 1st and 2nd kind may occur:
(1) The navigation spacecraft is recognized as not conforming to the above features
provided that it satisfies them. The probability of this event is indicated through
εi for Bi and through ε
/
i for Ci.
(2) The navigation spacecraft is considered to be non-complying with the above
criteria provided that it does not satisfy them. The probability of this event is
indicated through δi for Bi and through δ
/
i for the Ci.3.3 Algorithm of Selection of the Working Constellation … 97
Let us suggest the following values to assess the state of each navigation
spacecraft:
(a) To assess the state on the basis of Bi:
xi = 0—the satellite is accepted as functionally operative;
xi = 1—the satellite has been declared inoperable;
(b) To assess the state on the basis of Ci:
yi = 0—the satellite is accepted as functionally operative,
yi = 1—the satellite has been declared inoperable.
As mentioned above, the n-th navigation spacecraft is considered suitable for
inclusion in a working constellation only if two Bn = 0 and Cn = 1 conditions
are met simultaneously. Since the estimates of the state of the navigation spacecraft
for each of the attributes are independent, it can be assumed that the errors that
occur during the process of determining the state of the navigation spacecraft arise
independently of each other.
Thus, a navigation spacecraft is suitable for inclusion in a working constellation
provided that the assessment of its condition does not allow it to be considered as
satisfying the selection conditions:
P = P(Bi = 0,Ci = 1/xi = 1, yi = 0)
+ P(Bi = 0,Ci = 1/xi = 1, yi = 1)
+ P(Bi = 0,Ci = 1/xi = 0, yi = 0)
= εiε
/
i + εi(1 − ε
/
i ) + (1 − εi)ε/
i .
A navigation spacecraft is not suitable for inclusion in a working constellation
provided that the assessment of its condition allows it to be considered as satisfying
the selection conditions:
P = δiδ
/
i + δi(1 − ε
/
i ) + δ
/
i (1 − εi).
Let us introduce the following symbols:
ε1,2,i = εiε
/
i + εi(1 − ε
/
i ) + (1 − εi)ε/
i ,
δ1,2,i = δiδ
/
i + δi(1 − ε
/
i ) + δ
/
i (1 − εi).
Let us denote the probability of selecting an navigation spacecraft as pi provided
that the assessment of its condition is erroneous.
Consequently, pi = ε1,2,i = 1 − δ1,2,i.
Let us introduce functional dependence:
f (xi, yi) = 1, if xi = 0, yi = 1,
f (xi, yi) = 0 in other cases.98 3 Methods to Improve the Noise Immunity of Civil Aircraft …
To indicate the status of the entire working constellation, let us introduce Φ.
For the working state of the working constellation of the navigation spacecraft we
will consider that Φ = 1. Provided that the working constellation is in a state of
inoperability, we will consider that Φ = 0.
The state of the working constellation will be considered as a function of Φ(B,C),
where (B,C) = ((B1,C1), (B2,C2), . . . , (Bn,Cn))is a vector of the working constel￾lation state. The dimension of this vector n is the number of navigation spacecraft in
the SRNS.
Next, the concepts of path and cross-section should be introduced [13].
The pathway is the navigation spacecraft set for which the following rule
is followed: if each navigation spacecraft in the set satisfies a set of attributes
Bi = 0,Ci = 1, then Φ(B, C)= 1 regardless of the state of the other navigation
spacecraft that make up the system. The set of navigation spacecraft, for which the
following rule is followed, will be considered as a cross–section: if each navigation
spacecraft in this set satisfies one of the feature sets: (Bi = 1,Ci = 0), (Bi = 1,Ci =
1), (Bi = 0,Ci = 0), then Φ(B, C)= 0 regardless of the state of the other navigation
spacecraft that make up the system.
Next, the minimum path and minimum cross section should be defined. This is
essential in order to find the minimum set of satellites that will provide or disrupt the
normal operation of the entire system. It is considered that the work of all navigation
spacecraft in the working constellation is independent of each other. Consequently,
P(B,C) = n
i=1
p
f (Bi,Ci)
i (1 − pi)
1−f (Bi,Ci)
,
where P(B,C) is the probability of the event that the working constellation consists
of navigation spacecraft, for which the state vector (B,C) is executed.
For the entire working constellation, let us introduce a function R(p) that
characterizes the probability that Φ(B,C) = 1.
R(p) is described by the formula:
R(p) = EΦ(B,C) = 
X ,Y
P(B,C)(B,C) = 
X ,Y :Φ(X ,Y )=1
n
i=1
p
f (Bi,Ci)
i (1 − pi)
1−f (Bi,Ci)
, (3.14)
where EΦ(B,C) is the mathematical expectation of a working constellation.
Consequently, for the entire working constellation, which includes n navigation
spacecraft, the error probabilities ε1,2,s and δ1,2,s are determined by formulas:
ε1,2,s = R(ε1,2,1, ε1,2,2,...,ε1,2,n) = R(p1, p2,..., pn)
= 
X ,Y :Φ(X ,Y )=1
n
i=1
p
f (xi,yi)
i (1 − pi)
1−f (xi,yi)3.3 Algorithm of Selection of the Working Constellation … 99
= 
X ,Y :Φ(X ,Y )=1
n
i=1
ε
f (xi,yi)
1,2,i (1 − ε1,2,i)
1−f (xi,yi) (3.15)
1 − δ1,2,s = R(1 − δ1,2,1, 1 − δ1,2,2, 1 − δ1,2,n) = R(p1, p2,pn)
= 
X :Φ(X )=1
n
i=1
p
f (xi,yi)
i (1 − pi)
1−f (xi,yi)
= 
X :Φ(X )=1
n
i=1
(1 − δ1,2,i)
f (xi,yi) δ1,2,i
1−f (xi,yi)
. (3.16)
In the asymptotic case, the errors ε1,2,i and δ1,2,i are recorded as follows:
ε1,2,i = ti · ε, (3.17)
δ1,2,i = t
/
i · δ, (3.18)
where ti, t
/
i are some positive constants. ε → 0, δ → 0.
This clearly applies to the solution of the problem, as it is considered that each
navigation spacecraft is very reliable together with the control equipment and ground
control system. Thus, the probability of errors for them is unlikely.
Including (3.14)–(3.18), ε1,2s and δ1,2,s take the following form:
ε1,2,s = C1
s εαs + C2
s εαs+1 +···+ Cn−αs+1 s εn
; (3.19)
δ1,2,s = C/1
s δβs + C/2
s δβs+1 +···+ C/n−βs+1 s δn
. (3.20)
Next, we should define the values αs and βs, as well as the constants Ci
s, C/i
s .
Let us introduce the following symbols:
m the weight of the minimum path from the navigation spacecraft in the working
constellation, i.e., the number of navigation spacecraft in this minimum path,
m/ the weight of the minimum cross section of the working constellation, i.e.,
the number of navigation spacecraft in that minimum cross-section,
Nmin a lot of all the minimum paths made up of navigation spacecrafts being part
of the working constellation,
N/
min multitude of the minimum cross-sections of a working constellation.
Then
αs = min m Nmin
,
βs = min m N/
min
.100 3 Methods to Improve the Noise Immunity of Civil Aircraft …
For ti = t
/
i = 1 case, the first two constants in expansion εs and δs for any i-th
satellite are defined as follows:
C1
s = Nminαs,
C2
s = −(n − αs) + N(αs + 1),
C/1
s = N/
minβs,
C/2
s = −(n − βs) + N(βs + 1),
where
Nminαs the total number of minimum paths of the working constellation
consisting of αs navigation spacecrafts,
N/
min βs the total number of minimum cross-sections of the working constella￾tion consisting of βs navigation spacecrafts.
N(αs + 1) the total number of all paths of the working constellation consisting of
αs + 1 navigation spacecrafts.
N(βs + 1) the total number of all cross-sections of the working constellation
consisting of βs + 1 navigation spacecrafts.
Let us introduce the designation of functionality and write down its formula taking
into account (3.19), (3.20):
Fs(ε, δ) = ε1,2,s + δ1,2,s = 1 + R(ε1,2,1, ε1,2,2,...,ε1,2,n)
− R(1 − δ1,2,1, 1 − δ1,2,2,..., 1 − δ1,2,n)
= C1
s εαs +···+ Cn−αs+1 s εn + C/1
s δβs +···+ C/n−βs+1 s δn
. (3.21)
Let us formulate a criterion of a choice of an optimum working constellation: the
working constellation is the best if the sum of errors of definition of a condition on
each of signs will be minimum, at restriction on the geometrical factor, that is the
decision of a problem consists in the performance of the following set of conditions:
min Fs(ε, δ),
,
where γ is a certain tolerance value for the geometric factor.
This problem is further solved for the case of heterogeneous navigation spacecraft
in the meaning of reliability, which arises when combining heterogeneous systems.3.3 Algorithm of Selection of the Working Constellation … 101
Only an asymptotic case is considered when ε, δ → 0 as it is assumed that the
probability of incorrect determination of the state of the navigation spacecraft is
small enough.
Let us formulate and justify the following result, which is of value for the choice
of the working constellation:
Let us assume that ε, δ → 0, ε = Lδz
, where L is any constant, δ → 0,z > 1.
In this case min s∈S
Fs(δ) = Fs∗ (δ), where s∗ is the working constellation of type  n+z
z+1

out of n.
In this case, the given dependence between errors in the assessment of the state
of each navigation spacecraft, the solution of the problem is a working constellation,
which is a system in which the above conditions are satisfied by at least  n+z
z+1

from
n navigation spacecraft, where  n+z
z+1

is a whole part of the number, z is an indicator
of the degree of dependence between errors in the assessment of the state of the
navigation spacecraft [14].
Taking into account (3.21), Fs(δ) functionality characterizing the suitability of an
arbitrary working constellation can be rewritten as follows:
Fs(δ) = C1
s δαsz + ϑ(δαs z
), αsz < βs,
Fs(δ) = C/1
s δβs + ϑ

δβs

, αsz > βs,
Fs(δ) = 
C1
s + C/1
s

δαsz + ϑ(δαsz
), αsz = βs.
Herewith we obtain the ratio for the best working constellation:
Fs∗ (δ) = C1
s∗ δz
 n+z
z+1

+ ϑ

δz
 n+z
z+1
	
,
if.
 n+z
z+1

< n+z
z+1 or  n+z
z+1

= n
z+1 .
Case  n+z
z+1

< n+z
z+1 could occur, for example, if n = 5, z = 2.
Case  n+z
z+1

= n
z+1 could occur, for example, if n = 6, z = 2.
Fs∗ (δ) = C/1
s∗ δ
z(n+1)
z+1 + ϑ

δ
z(n+1)
z+1
	
,
This case could occur, for example, if n = 5, z = 2.
Two cases should be considered.
(1)  n+z
z+1

= n
z+1 .
(a) αsz < βs, then αsz <  n
2

where  n
2

is the whole part of n
2 number and n is
the number of navigation spacecrafts in the working constellation. By means
of Fs(δ) − Fs∗ (δ) > 0 transformations we come to a conclusion that, i.e., the102 3 Methods to Improve the Noise Immunity of Civil Aircraft …
offered working constellation with the account that it satisfies the restriction
on the geometrical factor, really is the best according to the offered criterion.
(b) αsz > βs, then βs <  n
2

.
Let us consider the same ratio and come to the conclusion that Fs(δ) − Fs∗ (δ) > 0,
i.e., in this case, the proposed working constellation is also the best according to the
proposed criterion.
(c) αsz = βs, then αsz ≤  n
2

.
Fs(δ) − Fs∗ (δ) > 0.
Thus, in the case of (1), only the proposed working constellation is the best according
to the proposed criterion for the whole range of possibilities.
(2)  n+z
z+1

= n
z+1 .
(a) If αs < βs, then αsz <  n
2

< z(n+1)
z+1 .
Let us consider the difference
Fs(δ) − Fs∗ (δ) = C1
s δαsz − C1
s∗ δ
z(n+1)
z+1
− ϑ

δ
z(n+1)
z+1
	
+ ϑ

δαsz

= δαsz


C1 − ϕ(δαsz
)
δαsz

,
where C1 = C1
s , ϕ(δαsz
) = C1
s∗ δ
z(n+1)
z+1 + ϑ

δ
z(n+1)
z+1
	
− ϑ(δαsz
).
By mathematical transformations with the use of the device of infinitely small
functions we obtain
Fs(δ) − Fs∗ (δ) > 0.
Therefore, the proposed working constellation is the best according to the proposed
criterion.
(B) αsz = βs, then αsz ≤  n
2

< z(n+1)
z+1 ,
where C//
1 = C/1
s + C1
s , ϕ(δαsz
) = C1
s∗ δz n+1
z+1 + ϑ

δz n+1
z+1
	
− ϑ(δαsz
).
Further, taking into account that ε = C//
1
2 , and, taking into account that ϕ(δαsz
) is the
function infinitely small relative to δαsz we obtain the following:3.3 Algorithm of Selection of the Working Constellation … 103
C//
1 − ϕ(δαsz
)
δαsz > 0 ⇒ Fs(δ) − Fs∗ (δ) > 0.
Therefore, the proposed working constellation is the best according to the proposed
criterion.
Thus, min s∈S
Fs(δ) = Fs∗ (δ) where s∗ is a working constellation, which is a system
of type  n+z
z+1

out of n. Consequently, the above criterion shows that the working
constellation, which is the system of type  n+z
z+1

out of n is the best according to the
proposed criterion.
In order to select the best working constellation, the user needs to have information
about the angle of position of the navigation spacecraft, which can be provided by
his or her receiving and indicating equipment and information about the accuracy
of the characteristics, which can be taken from past statistical data of the use of the
navigation spacecraft or navigation spacecraft data from various SRNS in the past.
Once the onboard systems have been informed of all the navigation spacecraft that
meet the above ratios, the pilot chooses the working constellation, which will be used
to determine the aircraft coordinates as follows [15]:
(1) the navigation spacecraft that do not meet the geometric and accuracy
requirements are discarded;
(2) the best four navigation spacecraft are selected among the remaining ones by
the traditional geometric factor method.
The time factor to be taken into account is as follows: in the event of retransmission
of the navigation information from the aircraft, the working constellation on which
the previous information was transmitted may no longer be the best, as during this
time the navigation spacecraft may go over the horizon or change the configuration
of other working constellations [16, 17].
3.4 Shortcomings in the Integrity Monitoring Algorithm
in the Receiver
RAIM used to calculate aircraft coordinates
Currently, the predominant use of satellite techniques onboard an aircraft is through
the use of the receiver integrity monitoring algorithm (RAIM). RAIM makes several
assumptions regarding the characteristics of the satellites it uses. The key ones are
as follows: the possibility of erroneous data and complete absence of malfunctions
in more than one satellite at the same time [10, 16].
A recent analysis of the GLONASS characteristics has shown that the probability
of malfunctions on GLONASS satellites can be quite high, as well as the presence
of events where several satellites had large errors at the same time. The RAIM
algorithms currently in use would not be able to meet the required levels of integrity104 3 Methods to Improve the Noise Immunity of Civil Aircraft …
if they processed GLONASS satellite data in the same way that they processed GPS
satellite data [18–20].
RAIM modifications are available to allow different assumptions to be applied
to GPS and GLONASS. The proposed changes allow the user to benefit from this
second constellation while maintaining the required level of integrity. In particular,
the possibility of several failures in the constellation GLONASS is taken into account.
Horizontal guidance is the service that RAIM provides today. However, we recom￾mend that the onboard equipment algorithm can provide assurance that the horizontal
positioning error (HPE) is less than 0.3 m. mile within the required integrity level.
This is the value that RAIM currently provides for flights from the route to the airfield
phase and is currently provided by RAIM.
The Global Positioning System Standard Location Service specifications provided
assurance that there would be no more than three major operational failures per year.
In 2008, the Characteristics Standard of the Standard Location Service of the Global
Positioning System was updated and redefined, with a significant operational failure
being a signal in space error (SIS) of 4.42 times the transmittable accuracy of the
range measurement (URA) of 2.4 m.
The onboard equipment RAIM algorithm uses measurement redundancy to iden￾tify SIS errors. The measurement data for each satellite are compared with aggregate
information from other satellites in turn. Should data inconsistencies be found, the
algorithm will try to link this error to a specific satellite and then remove this satellite
from the sample. If the algorithm is unable to detect this satellite, an error message
will be displayed. The algorithm also evaluates the largest possible non-detectable
error and limits it to a value called the horizontal protection level (HPL). The higher
is the SIS accuracy and the higher is the measurement redundancy, the lower is the
HPL value. Specific flight stages involve corresponding maximum permissible errors
called horizontal alarm limits (HAL). If the HPL is lower than the HAL, the flight is
assumed possible [13, 21].
In order to add GLONASS to the onboard RAIM algorithms, it is essential
to understand how GLONASS works in comparison with GPS and the assump￾tions of the algorithm. The accuracy and reliability of SIS are two very important
characteristics.
GPS satellites have relatively smaller errors. SIS GLONASS errors have statis￾tically high mean values and a larger spread. Average GPS errors are usually a few
centimeters or less, while average GLONASS errors can be more than a meter. Stan￾dard GPS deviations are close to half a meter for recently launched satellites. The
range of standard deviations of GLONASS is from less than one meter to almost
two meters. On average, GLONASS errors are two or three times greater than GPS
errors. This is partially reflected in the transmitted URA values. The most common
URA GPS value is 2.4 m (the lowest possible value), while the most common URA
GLONASS value is 4 m.
The malfunction frequency for GLONASS is at least an order of magnitude
higher than the malfunction frequency for GPS. It is also obvious that GLONASS is
improving and the overall malfunction rate is decreasing. It is possible that in a few
years the malfunction rates of these two constellations will be comparable. It should3.4 Shortcomings in the Integrity Monitoring Algorithm in the Receiver 105
be assumed beforehand that the probability that the GPS is in a malfunctioning state
is 10−5(an approximate value used by the existing RAIM algorithms), and for the
corresponding probability for GLONASS we will use the value 10−4.
The ARAIM concept is based on the fact that in the future multistellar (multiple
satellite systems) and multifrequency signals will decrease the dependence on the
ground infrastructure and, as a result, will further reduce the implementation and
operation costs. The user will be provided with an augmentation system signal (ISM
integrity support message), which is updated and transmitted with a long waiting
time (delay). This is the main idea of advanced autonomous control in the receiver
[22–24].
The aim of the ARAIM concept is to provide aviation users with the ability
to orientate themselves vertically up to an accurate approach based on multistellar
Global Navigation Satellite System (GNSS) signals. Navigation systems that support
the possibility of vertical guidance of aircraft are subject to several requirements that
determine their characteristics.
These requirements are presented below:
(1) Reliable vertical accuracy of 4 m at 95% and 10 m at 10−7,
(2) Vertical accuracy with 15 m failure probability at 10−5,
(3) Vertical error limit of 15 m with a risk of integrity loss of 0.5 (vertical alert,
VAL),
(4) Risk of damage to the integrity equal to 2·10−7 of the landing approach (150 s),
(5) The trigger alert time (TTA) is 6 s.
The purpose of a terrestrial system in ARAIM is to provide integrity parameters
for users known as integrity support message (ISM). In comparison to the classical
RAIM, which represented a constant assumption on the characteristics of signals in
space (SIS), the ARAIM architecture is more flexible: a special ground-based system
monitors the characteristics of GNSS and adapts the integrity parameters.
The ARAIM algorithm works by evaluating different malfunction modes with
predetermined malfunction probabilities and determining the optimal probability
of non-detection for each mode (some modes may already be quite unlikely and
do not require special testing). For those of them that do require an assessment,
an appropriate subset of satellites is selected and the resulting location solution is
compared to the “all visible satellites” solution. A subset of satellites is formed,
and all satellites that have malfunctions as a result of the assessment are excluded.
Thus, a subset is created to be free from malfunctions and, being compared with
the “all visible satellites” solution, detects a failure of the integrity of the suspected
malfunction. Provided that the results of all comparisons are satisfactory, the HPL is
calculated, as well as the location “all visible satellites” solution. If one of the scores
is unsatisfactory, the algorithm needs to make an exception to remove the defective
satellites or declare that a safe solution is not possible [14, 22].
In developing ARAIM, the aim was to carefully consider all the threats that are
likely to be identified. As mentioned earlier, the RAIM option used today takes into
account only one rather probable threat: a malfunction of one satellite leading to a
range measurement error greater than the calculated one. A case where one reason106 3 Methods to Improve the Noise Immunity of Civil Aircraft …
causes great errors in distance measurement on more than one GPS satellite is consid￾ered to be quite unlikely. For GLONASS, both a malfunction affecting the operation
of one satellite and a malfunction affecting several satellites are considered. Like
traditional RAIM, special malfunction modes are considered for ionospheric, tropo￾spheric, or local multi-path effects. It is assumed that all of them create horizontal
positioning errors, which are significantly lower than the horizontal alarm threshold
of 556 m.
Table 3.6 shows the malfunction modes.
The ARAIM algorithm evaluates the subsets corresponding to each mode. Each
check will have a reasonable chance of being undetected. Safety is ensured if the
product of the non-detection value and a priori probabilities is less than the required
value [23].
The first malfunction mode (Mode 1) should be assessed in the same way as
currently performed in RAIM. Due to the fact that the threat of malfunction on
a constellation-wide GPS scale is not considered, Modes 3, 8, 10, and 12 have a
zero a priori probability of occurrence and do not need further assessment. The
malfunction on the constellation scale of GLONASS is assessed by comparing the
location solution with a location solution obtained only using GPS satellites.
This creates a subset that is not affected by any of the GLONASS malfunction
modes. This test evaluates not only the entire constellation-wide malfunction mode,
Table 3.6 Malfunction modes
Mode Description
0 No malfunction
1 Malfunction of single SV GPS
2 Malfunction of single SV GLONASS
3 Malfunction of multiple SV GPS
4 Malfunction of multiple SV GLONASS
5 Two independent single malfunctions of SV GPS
6 Two independent single malfunctions of SV GLONASS
7 Malfunction of single SV GPS and
Malfunction of single SV GLONASS
8 Malfunction of single SV GPS and
malfunction of multiple SV GPS
9 Malfunction of single SV GPS and
malfunction of multiple SV GLONASS
10 Malfunction of single SV GLONASS and
malfunction of multiple SV GPS
11 Malfunction of single SV GLONASS and
malfunction of multiple SV GLONASS
12 Malfunction affecting several SV GPS and malfunction affecting several SV GLONASS
13 Three or more partially overlapping independent malfunctions3.4 Shortcomings in the Integrity Monitoring Algorithm in the Receiver 107
but also any malfunction mode that affects any number of GLONASS satellites.
Consequently, Modes 2, 4, 6, 11 and any associated higher order fault modes affecting
only GLONASS are included in this assessment. Therefore, the a priori probability
of this malfunction mode is the total number of these modes [17].
The remaining Modes 5, 7, and 9 may not need assessment provided that there
are not too many satellites.
It is recommended that the ARAIM algorithm assess the trouble-free mode (all
satellites included in the location calculation) with an a priori probability margin
of one. It also evaluates the subsets from which each individual GPS satellite is
removed, with an a priori probability margin of 10−5.
If there are no visible GLONASS satellites, there is no need to evaluate this
additional mode, and the default algorithm returns to the mode that corresponds to
modern algorithms. If there are not enough visible GPS satellites (N GPS < 4) to
calculate the location, the algorithm cannot work because the high probability of
a GLONASS malfunction covering the entire constellation requires prevention of
consequences by comparing the GPS-only location solution with the “all visible
satellites” solution.
References
1. Bakulev PA, Sosnovskiy AA (2011) Radio navigation systems. Radiotehnika
2. Didenko NI, Eliseyev BP, Sauta OI, Shatrakov AY, Yushkov AV (2017) Radio-technical support
of civil and military aviation flights: strategic problem of the arctic region of Russia. Nauchniy
Vestnik of MSTUCA 20(5):8–19
3. Zatuchnyy DA (2008) Build-up method for an optimized working constellation based on relia￾bility criteria with regard to two methods of integrity control. In: Proceedings of the international
symposium “Nadyozhnost i kachestvo”, Penza, vol 1, pp 307–309
4. Zatuchnyy DA (2007) Building-up of an optimized SRNS based on reliability criteria -
Nauchniy Vestnik of MSTUCA, series “Radiofizika i radiotekhnika”. No. 112, pp 106–108
5. Zatuchnyy DA (2010) Optimized controller-pilot data link communications system build-up.
In: Proceedings of the international symposium “Nadyozhnost i kachestvo”. Penza, vol 1, pp
430–431.
6. Zatuchnyi DA (2018) Analysis of various jamming impact on the civil aircraft navigation
systems. Informatizaciya I Svyaz. 2:7–11
7. Zatuchnyy DA, Logvin AI, Nechayev EE (2012) Problems of ADS mode implementation in
the Russian Federation. Printing and publication department MSTU CA
8. Karyukin GE (2005) Improvement of the navigation sighting methods in satellite radio navi￾gation systems when solving civil aviation navigation problems. Interuniversity collection of
scientific works “Problemy ekspluatacii i sovershenstvovaniya transportnyh sistem”, vol. XI.
St. Petersburg: Academy of CA
9. Kozlov AI, Garanin SA (2005) On the development of mathematical simulations reflecting
impact of radio jamming and random effects affecting the aircraft on the navigation parameters
to be determined. Nauchniy Vestnik of MSTUCA, series Radiofizika i radiotekhnika, no. 93.
10. Kuzmin BI, Meshalov RO (200) Implementation of CNS/ATM systems in the RF CA. Magazine
“Elektrosvyaz”, no. 5
11. Logvin AI, Orlov OE (2002) Satellite radio navigation and communication systems for ATC
system. M.: MSTUCA
12. Nechayev EE, Budykin YA (2005) Aerial devices in civil aviation. Kursk, “PRESS-FAKT”108 3 Methods to Improve the Noise Immunity of Civil Aircraft …
13. Manual on airspace planning methodology for the determination of separation minima (1998)
ICAO, First Revision
14. Required navigation performance (RNP) Manual (2008) Third Revision
15. Sizyh VV, Shahtarin BI, Shevcev VA (2017) Cycle slip mechanism in stochastic analog systems
of first- and second-orders of phase-lock. Mekhatronika, avtomatizaciya, upravlenie, vol 18,
no. 1
16. Solovyov YA (2000) Satellite radio navigation system. Moscow
17. Solomencev VV, Garanin SA (2003) Ways to improve reliability of AK and AS ATC software.
Nauchniy Vestnik of MSTUCA, series Informatika. Prikladnaya matematika, no. 65
18. Solomencev VV, Fedotova TN, Garanin SA, Ignatenko OA (2003) ATC automation systems
complexes reliability. Nauchniy Vestnik of MSTUCA, series Informatika. Prikladnaya matem￾atika, no. 65
19. Tikhonov VI (1982) Statistical radio engineering. M.: Radio i Svyaz, p 624
20. Tikhonov VI, Kulman NK (1975) Non-linear filtering and quasi-coherent signal reception. M.:
“Sov. Radio”, p 704
21. Tikhonov VI, Mironov MA (1977) Markoff processes. M.: Sov. Radio, p 488
22. Tikhonov VI, Kharisov VN (199) Statistical analysis and synthesis of radiotechnical devices
and systems. M.: Radio i Svyaz, p 608
23. Falkov E, Shavrin S (2017) Cyber security of aircraft information and communication systems.
Informational and analytical journal “Radioelektronnye tekhnologii”, no. 5
24. Filin AD, Shatrakov YG, Yakovlev VT, Yushkov AV (2017) The impact of flight support
subsystems reliability on probability of aircraft accidents. Nauchniy Vestnik of Russian
military-industrial complex, no. 3, pp. 68–74.Chapter 4
Quality Enhancement of Data
Transmission via Civil Aircraft
Communication Systems by Proper Use
of Communication Resources
4.1 Principle of Guaranteed Sufficiency of Communication
System Using
In accordance with the principle of guaranteed sufficiency, a rational demand for
communication resources to support aircraft flights shall be determined. This demand
is determined, on the one hand, by the intensity of air traffic and the jamming envi￾ronment, and, on the other hand, by the intensity of data transmission determined by
the accepted service procedure and the current flight environment.
The principle of guaranteed sufficiency presupposes a qualitative assessment
of the required communication resources to support aircraft flights under certain
conditions. However, the probabilistic nature of these parameters does not allow
unambiguous determination of the required resources [1].
As the principle of guaranteed sufficiency suggests, quantitatively determined
resources should provide requirements for ensuring flight safety with a given
probability. This condition can be defined by the following formula [2]:
P(d = 0) ≥ γ , (4.1)
where γ is a specified probability of ensuring compliance with the safety require￾ments, and d is the number of service failures.
The intensity of air traffic is related to the message transmission rate by the non￾linear functional dependence. The non-linear nature of this dependence is due, on the
one hand, to the finite bandwidth of the communication channel, and, on the other
hand, to the limited psychophysical capabilities of a traffic controller. The simplest
convenient mathematical model that allows considering the non-linear nature of the
functional dependence of the “upper bound” type is the exponential dependence [3]
Y = Ym ∗

1 − e−x/xm

. (4.2)
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2021
D. A. Zatuchny et al., Noise Resistance Enhancement in Aircraft Navigation
and Connected Systems, Springer Aerospace Technology,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-16-0630-4_4
109110 4 Quality Enhancement of Data Transmission via Civil …
There are indications for the following: Ym is the maximum possible message
transmission rate for this type of communication channel, xm is the highest
possible intensity of air traffic providing no overload of the communication channel.
Considering the relation that follows from (4.2)
dY
dX |x=0 = Ym
Xm
, (4.3)
Xm can be determined through Ym, and the specific message transmission rate per
unit of measurement of the air traffic intensity when there is no data channel overload
V0 = dY
dX |x=0. (4.4)
Additionally, considering (4.3) and (4.4), we have
Xm = Ym
V0
. (4.5)
The parameters Ym and V0 are sufficiently physical. In particular, Ym depends on
the communication channel bandwidth and psychophysical capabilities of a traffic
controller. As for the parameter V0, it is determined by the operating conditions
and may vary depending on the flight conditions (normal conditions, a thunder￾storm bypass, etc.), for example. Factually, V0 determines the amount of data to
be transmitted via data transmission lines from a single aircraft for the given oper￾ating conditions. With respect to the above, the parameter V0 may be determined as
follows:
V0 = q1
ycp
, (4.6)
where q1 is the amount of data to be received from the aircraft within the air traffic
control (ATC) zone, and ycp is the average time of aircraft stay within the zone.
Thus, considering (4.5), we have
Xm = Ym ∗
ycp
q1
. (4.7)
Functional communication characteristics are usually calculated for centered
random processes. In this case, they are calculated for deviations in air traffic intensity
and message transmission rate from the average values of X0 and Y0 as

ξ = X − X0
ν = Y − Y0
. (4.8)4.1 Principle of Guaranteed Sufficiency of Communication System Using 111
At the same time, if we take ξ and ν as the parameters for which the functional
communication characteristics are calculated, considering (4.2) and (4.8), the direct
and inverse functional transformations may be represented as
ν = Ym ∗ exp{−X0/Xm}

1 − exp{−ξ/Xm}
 (4.9)
ξ = −Xm ln
1 − (ν/Ym) ∗ exp{X0/Xm}
 (4.10)
or, considering (4.7), as
ν = f (ξ ) = Ym ∗ exp
−X0/Ym ycp1 − exp
−ξ ∗ q1/Ym ycp, (4.11)
ξ = ϕ(ν) = [Ym ycp/q1] ∗ ln[1 − (ν/Ym) ∗ exp{X0q1/Ym ycp}]. (4.12)
Figure 4.1 shows the dependence between the radio exchange and the air traffic
intensity.
The mathematical model of functional communication can be significantly simpli￾fied if we take the standardized maximum possible intensity of air traffic as the
parameters when there is no data channel overload (air traffic intensity is measured
from the average value) [4]:
Fig. 4.1 Dependence between the radio exchange and the air traffic intensity112 4 Quality Enhancement of Data Transmission via Civil …
X = ξ/Xm = (X − X0)/Xm = (X − X0)q1/Ym ycp, (4.13)
and the ratio of the average messaging reserve to the actual.
μ = (Ym − Y0)/(Ym − Y0 − ν) = (Ym − Y0)/(Ym − Y ). (4.14)
In this case, the direct and inverse transformations that connects X and μ are
determined by the expression
μ = f (X) = ex , (4.15)
X = ϕ(μ) = lnμ. (4.16)
The situations considered during flight are classified into four groups according
to the coordinate data update rate:
(1) data update rate for the first group is 5 c;
(2) data update rate for the second group is 7 c;
(3) data update rate for the third group is 30 c;
(4) data update rate for the fourth group is 180 c.
The number of channels required to comply with the requirements for flight safety
can be determined by the formula [5]:
l = f (n, α, τ ), (4.17)
where n is the number of aircraft within the control area of the traffic controller, α is
the aircraft flight situation (α = 1,..., 4), and τ is the period required to reassign
the communication channel from one aircraft to another one. We assume that the
redundant communication channels are loaded, i.e. the communication channel is
reassigned from the aircraft not transmitting the message to the aircraft, which shall
transmit the message. Assume that τ = const.
Now let’s formulate a criterion for determining the number of channels required
to comply with the requirements for flight safety, in accordance with the principle
of guaranteed sufficiency:
l → min (4.18)
with the following limitation:
P(d = 0) ≥ γ.
One of the components of the number of communication channels that are perma￾nently assigned to the aircraft being in 1–3 situations is a value calculated by the
formula:4.1 Principle of Guaranteed Sufficiency of Communication System Using 113
n1 = n(p1 + p2 + p3), (4.19)
where p1, p2, p3 are the probabilities of finding the aircraft in the first, second, and
third situations, respectively, and n is the number of aircraft under the control of the
traffic controller.
Let us introduce the following symbols:
p/
i is a probability of malfunction-free operation i of channels assigned to i
aircraft, i = 0,..., n1;
q/
i is a probability of malfunction i of channels assigned to i aircraft,i = 0,..., n1.
Then the mathematical expectation of the number of malfunction-free communi￾cation channels is calculated by the formula:
m = n1
i=0
i p/
i . (4.20)
We conclude that m = n1, since the probability of malfunction-free operation of
the communication channel is a value that can be considered approximately equal to
one.
Let us introduce the following value:
m1 = max i : q/
i > 1 − γ. (4.21)
Accordingly, the required number of redundant channels required to comply with
the flight safety requirements equals m1.
The event consisting in the failure-free servicing of the requirements comprises
one of two events: malfunction-free operation of the communication channel or
failure of the communication channel and malfunction-free switching to another
channel:
P(d = 0) = Pop. + Pmalf.

k−1
i=0
(1−Pswitch.)
i
Pswitch., (4.22)
where
Pop is a probability of communication channel malfunction-free operation;
Pmalf. = 1 − Pop. is a probability of communication channel malfunction;
k is the maximum number of communication channels available;
Pswitch. is a probability of malfunction-free switching to another channel.
The number of terms within expression (4.22) is determined by expression (4.1).
Let us introduce the following symbols:

k−1
i=0
(1 − Pswitch.)
i
Pswitch. = Q,114 4 Quality Enhancement of Data Transmission via Civil …
Fig. 4.2 Distribution of messages from the aircraft during the period of a traffic controller operation
q = min i : Pop. + Q ≥ γ.
For aircraft in the first, second, and third situations (the communication channel
is assigned to the aircraft permanently), the number of communication channels can
be determined by the formula:
l1 = n1 + m1 · q. (4.23)
For the aircraft in the fourth situation, we introduce the following designations:
T is a period of a traffic controller operation;
t is a message duration.
Figure 4.2 shows the distribution of messages from the aircraft in the fourth
situation during the period of a traffic controller operation.
Let us introduce the following symbols:
T1 = [t1;t1 + t], T2 = [t2;t2 + t],..., Tm = [tm;tm + t].
There is a set of conditions under which, for a given aircraft 1 flight situation, the
communication channel serves m aircraft:
⎧
⎪⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎪⎩
T1 ∩ T2
T3 ∩ (T1 ∪ T2)
........................
Tm ∩  Ti

,i = 1,..., m − 1
. (4.24)4.1 Principle of Guaranteed Sufficiency of Communication System Using 115
Let us introduce the following symbols: g1 = P

T1 ∩ T2
 = 1 − t
T , g2 =
P(T3 ∈/ T1 ∪ T2), …, gm−1 = P(Tm ∈ ∪/ Ti,i = 1,..., m − 1), G = g1g2 ... gm−1.
Then, if G ≥ γ , then according to the principle of guaranteed sufficiency, taking
into account (4.1), channel 1 can serve m aircraft in the fourth situation. As a rule,
taking into account the frequency of messages, their average duration, and the traffic
controller operation period, this situation may be considered impossible; thus, more
than one communication channel has to be available. The following rule may be used
to determine the number of channels:
(1) Calculate the probabilities of all possible combinations of intersections per 2
messages, 3 messages, etc.;
(2) Select the situation with the maximum probability;
(3) The number of redundant channels shall correspond to the number of
intersections for the situation with the maximum probability.
Let us introduce the following symbol:
m2 is the number of redundant channels.
Now we determine the number of channels required to comply with the safety
requirements of flights, in accordance with the principle of guaranteed sufficiency for
the aircraft in the fourth situation provided that one communication channel serves
all aircraft:
l2 = 1 + m2q. (4.25)
Then the total number of channels required to ensure the principle of guaranteed
sufficiency is calculated by the formula:
l = l1 + l2. (4.26)
There is an example showing the calculation of the required number of channels
to ensure the principle of guaranteed sufficiency using the example of the Moscow
region. There are the required initial data:
(1) traffic controller operation period ‘ ’;
(2) average message transmission period t = 5c;
(3) probability of communication channel malfunction-free operation 0.999;
(4) probability of malfunction-free switching to another channel 0.999;
(5) γ = 0.999999;
(6) number of aircraft under the control of the traffic controller n = 11.
The number of aircraft in the first three situations equals 3, and the number of
aircraft in the fourth situation equals 8.
Calculate the terms included in expression (4.22):
1 term equals 0.999 and according to the formula (4.22):
P(Pomk = 0) = 0.999 + 0.001 · 0.999 = 0.999999.116 4 Quality Enhancement of Data Transmission via Civil …
Thus q = 1.
Calculate the value m1 according to the formula (4.23):
q/
0 = 0.9993 = 0.997, q/
1 = 3 · 0.9992 · 0.001 = 0.003, q/
2 = 3 · 0.999 · 0.0012 =
0.000003,
q/
3 = 0.0013 = 0.000000001.
As only q/
3 < 1 − γ , then m1 = 2.
Thus,
l1 = 3 + 2 · 1 = 5.
Considering that the frequency of message transmission for the fourth situation
equals 180c and the number of aircraft in the fourth situation equals 8, then the
number of messages from all aircraft for the period of the traffic controller operation
is calculated as follows:
14400 : 180 = 80 is the number of messages transmitted from one aircraft;
80 · 8 = 640 is the number of messages transmitted from all aircraft.
As g1 = 1 − t
T = 1 − 5
14400 < γ , 1 communication channel to service all aircraft
is insufficient.
Among all intersection probabilities, the situation with two intersections has the
biggest value 0.84. Then
m2 = 1,
l2 = 1 + 1 · 1 = 2,
l = 5 + 2 = 7.
The program for selecting the data transmission line is given in Appendix B.
4.2 The Principle of “Zonal” Use of Communication
Systems
The principle of “zonal” use of civil aircraft flight support communication systems
is based, on the one hand, on the concept of joint resources, and, on the other hand,
on the basis of consideration of all features of the airspace of a given zone in order
to ensure the rational use of these resources in the relevant zone [6].
The concept of joint resources is built on the basis of integration of all resources
in a given zone and the resources of all communication systems in order to fulfill the4.2 The Principle of “Zonal” Use of Communication Systems 117
general task of aircraft flight support. In this case, it is supposed to integrate all the
resources involved in processing and transmitting data, in particular, communications
and computing resources, within each system.
The concept of joint resources leads to a strategy for the integrated use of different
communication systems in combination with each other, as well as their integrated
use with navigation and surveillance systems. The features of each airspace zone shall
include an individual set of ground-based technical equipment. Tactical performance
of communication equipment, for example, range of action, initially determined only
by technical parameters, largely depends on the quality of the equipment itself [3, 7].
Currently, there is an objective necessity to manage joint resources. At the same
time, the aircraft flight support system for the management of these resources shall
be an integral subsystem of a large technical system, which is the system of air traffic
control. Such systems have the following specific features: complexity of behavior,
hierarchy of behavior, and multi-purpose nature of external impacts.
Based on the foregoing, it may be affirmed that the flight support management
system of joint resources shall have a hierarchical structure with a multi-purpose
control character. At least two objectives of such management can be distinguished,
which shall define, respectively, two stages of management. The first stage is a system
structural management stage, which determines the number of communication chan￾nels used. The second stage is a channel control stage, which manages the level of the
assigned channels’ occupancy ensuring the transmission of both basic and non-basic
data.
In the aircraft flight support management system of joint resources, change in the
air traffic intensity serves as the main external influence, which actually determines
the whole system operation algorithm.
The probabilistic nature of this change is a major obstacle to solving the problem
of managing joint resources. In this case, one of the main issues is to forecast load
changes within the communication system. Since the data load at aircraft flight
support is constantly changing, and not only due to changes in the intensity of air
traffic, but also due to changes in flight conditions (changes in weather conditions,
aircraft approach, etc.), the control system of joint resources shall be a system for
information collection and transmission. One of the main issues in the system for
information collection and transmission is the accuracy of forecasting the required
communication resources and selection of service procedures. A priority service
procedure which provides servicing of top-priority sources takes a special place.
Thus, such a principle of managing communication resources implies an auto￾matic redistribution of communication channels’ number and their bandwidth
depending on the volume of data load, activity of data sources, and data load value.
The principle of zonal use of communication systems at aircraft flight support
involves forecasting the message transmission rate within the zone and assessing the
influence of jamming situation within the zone on the intensity of communication
systems’ use.
The data exchange rate λ
p in the ith zone depends on the intensity of air traffic
X(t)i in this zone and its ground support characterized by the equipment status factor
Ki , i.e. [8].118 4 Quality Enhancement of Data Transmission via Civil …
λ
p = f [X(t)i, Ki], (4.27)
where f is a certain function. For the forecasting of λ
p, it is necessary to predict the
intensity of air traffic in this zone.
The resulting forecast λ
p is further multiplied by the corresponding coefficient Ki
characterizing the necessary increase in the transmission of messages in the ith zone
depending on its equipment status. According to the obtained message transmission
rate, the necessary joint resources are determined.
It is reasonable to trace the jamming environment’s influence on the operating
performance problem when determining the accuracy of the aircraft position tracking.
The system operation quality can be characterized by the probability P that
the error in the aircraft position tracking shall not be exceeded at ADS xA3H of
permissible error ‘ ’ with the preset value ‘ ’, e.g. [5, 9]
(4.28)
The accuracy of the aircraft location tracking by any navigation equipment is
determined by the measurement error xu. The measurement error depends on the
accuracy of the navigation equipment and the nature of the navigation data processing
using the onboard navigation instrumentation (ONI). This error is random and is
included in the summary error of the aircraft position tracking.
The second group of factors affecting the error x is associated with the trans￾mittance discreteness of data on the aircraft position. According to the transmitted
discrete messages, the continuous trajectory of the aircraft movement is restored by
extrapolation in the ATM center.
In real-world conditions, the aircraft can perform a controlled maneuver and be
exposed to atmospheric disturbances. The error in position tracking ‘ ’ arising from
this shall be called dynamic since it is determined by the dynamics of the aircraft
motion. In this case, there shall be a maximum dynamic error ‘ ’ in case of an
assumption that the aircraft carries out the maximum allowable maneuver under the
most adverse atmospheric effects immediately after the transmission of the message.
When the civil aircraft is moving along the route, the only allowable maneuver, apart
from altitude level change, is the horizontal orbit, which is carried out by the aircraft’s
circular motion by changing the roll angle. In this case, the maximum intensity of
the orbit is determined by the minimum turning radius R0 determined, in turn, by
the maximum allowable roll angle γ and the maximum true airspeed Vu :
R0 =
V2
u
g

tg γ , (4.29)
where g = 9.8 is the gravity acceleration.
The most unfavorable atmospheric impact in respect of the effect on the aircraft
lateral divergence from the assigned track (AT) is the wind directed along the normal
to the extrapolation line with the greatest speed. The maximum lateral divergence of4.2 The Principle of “Zonal” Use of Communication Systems 119
β A’1
A A0 -1
t-1 t0
Δψ0
t1 A1
Δψ0+
R0
yd
A”1
Δyd
Fig. 4.3 Aircraft maneuvering
the aircraft from the extrapolation line within the period of t is determined by the
expression
(4.30)
where ψ0 is the maximum possible deviation angle of the aircraft from the extrapo￾lation line during the transmission of the previous message, β is the maximum angle
of rotation of the aircraft within the period t determined by the expression
β = Vu · t/R0, (4.31)
Umax is the maximum wind speed directed along the normal to the extrapolation
line, t is the period from the moment of the message transmission start to the
moment of the next message reception, and the other designations are the same. An
example of the aircraft maneuvering is shown in Fig. 4.3.
Another group of factors affecting the x is associated with a delay in the message
transmission via communication channels τ3 resulting from a delay in the signal
propagation τp, delays in processing the message by the equipment τan, delays in the
analysis τaH determined by the time required by the ATM center for data compre￾hension, and delays when sending a message via the communication network τc
associated with the message re-transmission when errors are detected, queueing
delay at network overload, message switching when sending them over traffic that
contains several heterogeneous communication channels.
As a result of the delay during message transmission, the extrapolation time shall
increase and equal
t = T + τ3, (4.32)
where T is the update period,
τ3 = τp + τan + τaH + τc. (4.33)120 4 Quality Enhancement of Data Transmission via Civil …
Accordingly, the dynamic position tracking error of the aircraft shall increase,
which shall lead to an increase in the summary error:
(4.34)
The most uncertain is the delay when transmitting a message via communication
network τc since it depends on many factors. So, the Bose–Chaudhuri–Hocquenghem
(BCH) code commonly used in data transmission channels, during error detection in
the message, does not allow correcting them. In this case, it becomes necessary to
re-transmit the message, which prolongs the delay for the data update period T, with
automatic transmission of messages within approximately 10 s. The probability of
such a random delay is determined by the probability of the message transmission
malfunction and depends on the noise immunity of the communication channel used
[10].
Let us make the following remark: in order to reduce the total error during ADS,
it is necessary to reduce two types of errors:
(1) error caused by the navigation equipment error xu;
(2) dynamic aircraft position tracking error ‘ ’.
Since it is assumed that the wind speed Umax is a value that does not depend on
the actions of the aircraft crew, then the dynamic error can be reduced in three ways:
(1) reduce the minimum turning radius R0;
(2) reduce the value cos ψ0 − cos(ψ0 + β);
(3) reduce the period from the moment the message is sent
to the moment the next message is received.
To reduce the value R0, it is necessary to reduce the aircraft true speed and roll
angle; to reduce the value cos ψ0 − cos(ψ0 + β), it is necessary to reduce the
angle di . In this case, the greatest contribution to the dynamic error of the aircraft is
made by the true speed of the aircraft, then an increase in the roll angle, and then an
increase in the message transmission period.
It is desirable to reduce the value,
R0 in the first place, as it may increase without limit, and cos ψ0 −
cos(ψ0 + β) ≤ 2.
Let us introduce the following symbols:
G(Vu, γ ) = R0 = V2
u
g
tgγ ,
F(ψ0, β) = cos ψ0 − cos(ψ0 + β).
After making the necessary transformations, we get
F(ψ0, β) = 2 sin β
2
sin
ψ0 + β
2

. (4.35)4.2 The Principle of “Zonal” Use of Communication Systems 121
Obviously, this value shall be minimal if β → 0. This condition coincides with
the condition of reducing the minimum turning radius, as well as reducing the
time interval for message transmission. In case if ψ0 ≈ 0, then F(ψ0, β) =
β
2

ψ0 + β
2

, and if the ratio limit of ψ0 to β is zero, then F(ψ0, β) ≈ β2
4 . If we
take other variables Vu and γ , by making a replacement F(ψ0, β) = F(Vu, γ ) = t 2 g2
4V2
u tg2γ , then we can formulate a criterion, following which the aircraft crew can
reduce the dynamic error:
min G(Vu, γ )
F(Vu, γ ) ≤ α,
where α is a certain number.
The following recommendation follows from this criterion: in order to reduce the
dynamic error, it is necessary to reduce the true speed and the roll angle of the aircraft
to the acceptably possible level that satisfies the boundary condition.
If we suppose that the true speed of the aircraft is a relatively constant value, then
the value R0 may be represented as R0 = C1tgγ , and given that it is desirable to
minimize the roll angle, then tgγ ≈ γ and R0 = C1γ . In this case, the value β can
be represented as β = C2
t
γ . Then the criterion for reducing the dynamic error can
be represented as
γ → 0,
t
γ
≤ α.
Thus, we draw the following conclusions [11–14]:
(1) In general, the dynamic error depends on the true speed of the aircraft, the roll
angle of the aircraft, and the period from the moment of the ADS message
transmission start to the moment of the next message reception.
(2) The dynamic error of ADS is directly proportional to the roll angle of the
aircraft and has a quadratic dependence on the true speed of the aircraft.
(3) To reduce the dynamic error at an identified true speed of the aircraft, it is
necessary to reduce the roll angle of the aircraft to a level that satisfies the
restriction of the ratio between the period from the moment of the message
transmission start to the moment of the next message reception and the roll
angle.122 4 Quality Enhancement of Data Transmission via Civil …
References
1. Aeronautical Telecommunications Annex 10 to the Convention on International Civil Avia￾tion—Montreal, ICAO, sixth revision, July 2006
2. Zatuchnyy DA (2010) Optimized controller-pilot data link communications system build-up.
In: Proceedings of the international symposium “Nadyozhnost i kachestvo”, Penza, vol 1, pp
430–431
3. Akinshin RN, Menshikov VL, Sushkov AV, Shamanayev AV, Pogrebezhskiy AG (2006) Evalu￾ation of jam resistance of wideband radio communication systems during internal and external
jamming. In: XXIV-th scientific conference dedicated to the Radio Day (collection of scientific
works), Tula, pp 82–86
4. Akinshin NS, Tarkhov NS (2007) Hardware and software complex for research of aerial systems
and communication channel via orbital artificial satellite. In: XV-th international conference
proceedings “Radiolokaciya i radiosvyaz”. Institute of Radio Engineering and Electronics RAS,
Moscow, pp 502–506
5. Zatuchnyy DA, Logvin AI (2013) Determination of data links optimal number for ADS mode
implementation. Nauchniy Vestnik of MSTUCA 189:9–13
6. Akinshin RN, Andreyev AV, Rumyancev VL, Esikov OV (2016) Application of a genetic algo￾rithm for selection of air traffic control system radio-technical facilities operating frequencies,
vol 19, no 5. Nauchniy Vestnik of Moscow State Technical University of Civil Aviation, pp
126–87
7. Vdovichenko VN (2001) Relationship between data transmission channel load in ATC
systems with air traffic density. Abstracts of the RTS “Koncepciya sozdaniya integrirovannogo
oborudovaniya, navigacii, posadki, svyazi i nablyudeniya”, pp 23–24
8. Kuzmin BI, Meshalov RO (2008) Modern means of aviation telecommunications. Elektrosvyaz
5
9. Logvin AI, Vdovichenko VN (1999) Functional effectiveness of communication channels in
ATC system with a random nature of radio traffic density. Abstracts of the IRTC “Sovremennyye
problemy GA”, pp 195–196
10. Logvin AI, Vdovichenko VN (2001) Functional effectiveness evaluation of communication
channels in ATC system with a random radio traffic density. Abstracts of the IRTC “GA na
rubezhe vekov”, pp 170–171
11. Pestryakov VB (1983) Modern problems of radio engineering and telecommunications,
problems of probabilistic and systemic approaches in research and equipment quality evaluation
12. Pestryakov VB, Kuzenkov VD (1985) Estimation of the reliability characteristics boundary
values of avionic switching system functional units according to the field performance data.
Radio i Svyaz, 376 pp
13. (1999) Manual of air traffic services data link applications. ICAO, second revision
14. Falkov E, Shavrin S (2017) Cyber security of aircraft information and communication systems.
Inf Anal J “Radioelektronnye tekhnologii” 5Chapter 5
Increase of Noise Immunity of Navigation
and Communication Systems of Civil
Aircraft During Flights in Mountainous
and Urban Areas
5.1 Method of Increasing Noise Immunity During Civil
Aviation Flights in Urban Areas
Since the data line from the aircraft operates within the line of sight, the errors
associated with the signal propagation medium generally occur at the unfavorable
terrain. For example, for the case when the transmitting antenna fixture height is
200 m, the average field strength in the urban area is 10–12 dB lower than in open
space, and halving the height will increase the attenuation by 6 dB. The additional
attenuation depends on the polarization of the radiation, the properties of the building
materials and the location of the buildings.
Large structures, significantly larger than the wavelength of VHF radiation, create
extensive shadow zones, and the scattered and reflected waves contribute to the
propagation of radio waves in the city with a significantly multi-path character and
form a complex interference field structure with deep and sharp spatial fading. This
creates significant difficulties both in predicting the operating conditions of radio
facilities and in providing reliable radio communications, especially in broadband
digital communication systems and when communicating with mobile objects [1].
The polarization of the signal is changing significantly in urban conditions. Multi￾path propagation and interference of radio waves cause strong variability of signal
polarization.
Modern cities, in terms of radio wave propagation, represent such a complex
environment that its mathematical description is inconceivable without the simplifi￾cations determined by the goals of a particular task. For VHF, large city buildings
are almost opaque, and their size is many times greater than the wavelength. This
leads to the formation of extensive shadow zones in the city and largely determines
the properties of the emerging field.
As a model of urban development, we will take a lot of large opaque objects
randomly located on a flat surface of the ground. Let us build a Cartesian rectangular
coordinate system (x, y, z) by aligning the coordinate plane z = 0 with the ground
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2021
D. A. Zatuchny et al., Noise Resistance Enhancement in Aircraft Navigation
and Connected Systems, Springer Aerospace Technology,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-16-0630-4_5
123124 5 Increase of Noise Immunity of Navigation …
surface. In the accepted model, the urban topography will be described by a sharply
crossed surface with steep irregularities, and the surface of a continuous or being the
limit of the sequence of continuous surfaces, which can be described by the equation
z = Z(x, y),
clearly defining the height of the relief z relative to the ground surface.
Let us build a characteristic function
χ(r) =

0, z > Z(x, y),
1, z ≤ Z(x, y).
At z > 0, we will introduce here as follows:
χ(r) = 
N
n=1
χn(x, y)χ
hn
0 (z),
where N is the number of buildings in the area; χn(x, y) is the function equal to one
if the projection of (x, y, z) point on z = 0 plane falls inside or on the boundary of
the n-th building, and zero otherwise; hn is the height of the n-th building; χb
a (z) is
the characteristic function equal to one on (a, b) interval and zero outside it.
Let us calculate the average value χ(r) from the ensemble of possible implemen￾tations. Let us consider that heights{hn}, n = 1, 2,..., N have identical distributions
for all n and do not depend on the form of projections of buildings on z = 0 plane,
and also on their total number N. The result of averaging can be recorded as follows
[2]:
< χ(r) >=< 
N
n=1
χn(x, y) >< χ
hn
0 (z) >,
because under the assumption < χ
hn
0 (z) > is not a function of n. Let us denote the
density of the distribution of building heights through w(hn), then
< χ
hn
0 >=
∞
z
w(hn)∂hn = Ph(z)
and determines the likelihood of z < hn. χ(x, y, 0) == ∞
n=1 χn(x, y) function
takes unit values in z = 0 plane on the set, which is the union of all buildings’
projections, and is equal to zero outside this set. Its average value,5.1 Method of Increasing Noise Immunity During Civil Aviation … 125

N
n=1
χn(x, y) = M
Determines, the probability that the projection of the point on z = 0 plane belongs
to the specified set, i.e., falls inside a building. Thus,
< χ(r) >= M Ph(z).
If differential corrections are transmitted via the ground-to-air transmission
channel, single-scattered waves make the main contribution to the formation of the
received signal. Their number is a random value distributed by Poisson’s law, the
only parameter of which is the average number of observed reflection points N, i.e.
the probability of upcoming N of reflected waves is determined by the formula
P(N) =

N
N
N! e−N . (5.1.)
The calculated value N is approximated by the sum N = N1 + N2 in which the
summands N1 and N2 are defined in the following formulas:
N1 = πνd2
(1 − ξ ) exp
−1
ξ
(1 − ξ )
	
tg
v1
2 . (5.2)
In this formula, ν is the average number of buildings per unit area,
d the distance between the aircraft and the data station;
ξ = (γ0d)
−1
;
γ0 = 2νL/π,
where L is the average length of buildings, ν is the average number of buildings per
1 km2.
v1 value is determined by the equation:
cos v1 = (1 + ξ )/ξ
1 + (1 + ξ )/ξ = 1 + ξ
1 + 2ξ
. (5.3)
N2 = πν
γ 2
0
ξ
1 − ξ
tg
v2
2 . (5.4)
v2 value is determined by the equation:126 5 Increase of Noise Immunity of Navigation …
tgv2 = π2
2 (γ0d)
−3/2 = π2
2 ξ 3/2
. (5.5)
Let us introduce the following value: P1 = 1 − e−N . P1 value determines the
probability of the arrival of single reflected waves at the observation point [3]. P1
value should be considered as the lower limit when estimating the probability of
arrival of single reflected waves. The dependencies of P1 probability of the distance
between the aircraft and the data reception point are given with the values of the
aircraft height equal to 300 m (curve 1), 400 m (curve 2), 500 m (curve 3), and
600 m (curve 4). The height of the urban development layer is assumed to be 20 m;
γ0 = 6 km−1.
As it can be seen from Fig. 5.1, the probability of reflected waves arrival decreases
with the increase in the distance between the aircraft and the data transfer point. This
function is nonlinear. It should be noted that at a fixed distance between the aircraft
and the data point, the probability of reflected waves increases with the height of the
aircraft flight.
As mentioned above, the main contribution to the signal formation is made by the
scattered waves once. Let us draw a conclusion [4]:
P1 → 0, if N → 0.
It follows from (5.2) that this event occurs if
ν → 0,
d → 0,
ξ → 0,
ν1 → 0.
Fig. 5.1 Relationship between the probability of receiving reflected waves and the distance between
the aircraft and the data reception point5.1 Method of Increasing Noise Immunity During Civil Aviation … 127
Since exp

−1
ξ (1 − ξ )

value decreases faster than the ν and d values, and the
conditions ξ → 0 and ν1 → 0 are equivalent, let us propose the condition of
obtaining the minimum N1 value:
ξ → 0,
d ≤ d1,
ν ≤ V1, (5.6)
where d1, V1 are some admissible values related to the conditions of a particular city.
It follows from (5.4) that
ν → 0,
ξ
1 − ξ → 0,
ν2 → 0.
Since the ξ → 0 condition follows from the ξ
1−ξ → 0 condition, and ν2 → 0
and ξ → 0 conditions are equivalent, let us propose the condition of obtaining the
minimum N2 value [4, 5]:
ξ → 0,
ν ≤ V2, (5.7)
where V2 is some admissible value related to the conditions of a particular city.
The criterion for choosing a data transmission location to mitigate the effects of
wave reflection follows from conditions (5.6) and (5.7):
ξ → 0,
d ≤ d1,
ν ≤ V,
where V = min(V1, V2).
Measurements have shown that the signal strength decreases back proportionally
to the third degree of the distance at distances up to 15–20 km. Subsequent increase in
range leads to a faster decrease in signal strength. In radial streets, the signal level is
10–15 dB higher than in transverse streets in relation to the route. However, this ratio
depends on the distance: the difference decreases as the distance increases. It should
be noted that as the distance increases, the role of the wave propagating over urban
development increases. Its contribution becomes decisive at distances exceeding 1.5–
2 km and depends on the angles of aircraft shelter and the data reception point created
by close-knit buildings [6].128 5 Increase of Noise Immunity of Navigation …
Typically, the reflective surfaces of buildings are significantly heterogeneous due
to the presence of windows, balconies, and other elements that also have different
electrical properties. Approximately reflecting surfaces of buildings are described by
a complex reflection coefficient with a phase evenly distributed in [0, 2π]interval and
correlation scales in horizontal lΓ and vertical lB directions. Thus, building surfaces
can be considered as amplitude-phase screens, which are widely used to describe
the scattering process on statistically heterogeneous building surfaces. The actual
surface itself is not continuous, but is composed of many amplitude-phase screens of
finite dimensions, randomly and independently located on the surface of the ground,
i.e. the scattering surface is a set of discrete statistically independent amplitude-phase
screens.
Let the relief of urban development be described by some random surface S. The
field above the surface according to Green’s theorem can be represented as an integral
equation:
U(r2) = Ui(r2) +

S

U(rs)
∂G(r2,rs)
∂ns
− G(r2,rs)
∂U(rs)
∂ns

∂ S, (5.8)
where Ui(r) is the falling field; G—Green’s function; nS—normal to the surface S
at rS point.
Surface S is formed by a horizontal flat surface of the ground S1 and a random
surface S2, which is the combined surface of many urban objects, orthogonal to S1
and located on it in a random way. Let us build the Green’s function G(r2,r1) as
follows:
G(r2,r1) = 1
4π
⎧
⎨
⎩
eik|r2−r1|
|r2 − r1|
− e
ik


r2−r
/
1





r2 − r
/
1



⎫
⎬
⎭, k = 2π
λ , (5.9)
where r
/
1 is the point mirroring the r1 from the ground surface; S1, λ is the wavelength
of radiation.
Assuming that the wave emitted by the source located at r1 point is described by
taking into account the influence of the earth by the formula (5.9), we transform the
ratio (5.8) to the form:
U(r2) = G(r2,r1) +

S

U(rs)
∂G(r2,rs)
∂ns
− G(r2,rs)
∂U(rs)
∂ns

∂ S. (5.10)
In (5.10), the Green’s function is defined by the formula (5.9) and thus excludes
integration by S1. The boundary values U(rS) and ∂U(rS )
∂nS include the contribution
of Ui(rS) element falling on ∂ S element and reflected (scattered) Ur(rS) emission.
Since the object of urban development is opaque, the radiation Ui(rs) that comes5.1 Method of Increasing Noise Immunity During Civil Aviation … 129
only from the part of the half-space where the aircraft is located may fall on its side
facing the aircraft. Integral to (5.10) has such a value, that in this case

S2

Ui(rs)
∂G(r2,rs)
∂ns
− G(r2,rs)
∂Ui(rs)
∂ns

∂ S = 0.
Ur(rs) refers to radiation scattered on the side of the screen facing the aircraft.
Thus,
U(r2) = G(r2,r1) +

S2

Ur(rs)
∂G(r2,rs)
∂ns
− G(r2,rs)
∂Ur(rs)
∂ns

∂ S,
or this ratio can be represented in the form of
U(r2) = G(r2,r1) + 2

S2
Ur(rs)(nS∇s)G(r2,rs)∂ S,
where ∇s =

 ∂
∂xs
, ∂
∂ys
, ∂
∂zs

.
In Fig. 5.2, the geometry of the problem of calculation of once scattered waves is
shown.
Fig. 5.2 Geometry of the
problem of calculation of
once scattered waves130 5 Increase of Noise Immunity of Navigation …
Ur(rs) value is defined as a product of the coefficient of reflection R(ϕs,rs) on
the boundary value of the incident radiation Ui(rs) and on the shading function
Z(r2,rs,r1), which is equal to one if rs point is visible from the points r2 and r1
simultaneously, and zero in all other cases. In approximation of single scattering, we
will write down the last formula in the following form [2, 7]:
U(r2) = Z(r2,r1)G(r2,r1) + 2

S2
Z(r2,rs,r1)R(ϕs,rs)G(rs,r1)(ns∇s)G(r2,rs)∂ S,
at that sin ϕs =


nS rs−r1
|rs−r1|

Let us write the following:
(nS∇S)G(r2,rs) ≈ ik
ns
r2 − rs
|r2 − rs|
	
G(r2,rs) = ik sin ψsG(r2,rs).
Taking into account the last ratio, let us rewrite the expression for U(r2) field in
the form
U(r2) = Z(r2,r1)G(r2,r1)
+ 2ik 
S2
Z(r2,rs,r1)R(ϕs,rs)sin ψsG(r2,rs)G(rs,r1)∂ S.
Suppose that the reflective properties of buildings are random and independent,
but statistically the same; the reflection coefficient value is complex, and the phase
with equal probability can take any value on [0, 2π] interval, so that the average
value is < R(ϕS,rS) >= 0. This leads to the fact that after averaging the reflection
properties and position of all buildings, the following expression may be written for
U(r2):
< U(r2) >=< Z(r2,r1) > G(r2,r1) = P21G(r2,r1),
where P21 is the probability of receiving a signal directly from the aircraft.
Therefore, the average value of the field at the receiving point during the propaga￾tion of radio waves in city conditions will be defined by the probability of receiving
the signal directly from the aircraft.
The average intensity of the field above urban development is equal to the sum
of the intensity < I > of the scattered waves and the intensity of the coherent wave
< Ik > coming directly from the aircraft, the calculation of which should take into
account the probability of direct visibility between the aircraft and the data reception
point.
Within the framework of a statistically homogeneous urban area model with an
average building height h, the probability of a line of sight between the aircraft located5.1 Method of Increasing Noise Immunity During Civil Aviation … 131
at the coordinatesr1(x1, y1,z1) and the data reception point at the pointr2(x2, y2,z2)
at 0 < z1,z2 < h is defined by the expression
P(r1,r2) = exp
−γ0

(x2 − x1)
2 + (y2 − y1)
2
	
,
where
γ0 = 2νL/π,
where L is an average length of buildings, ν is an average number of buildings per
unit area
At 0 < z2 < h and z1 > h,
P(r1,r2) = exp
−γ0

(x2 − x1)
2 + (y2 − y1)
2 h − z2
z1 − z2
	
.
Table 5.1 presents the dependence of the line-of-sight probability on the average
number of buildings per unit area. When calculating, the average length of buildings
was assumed to be 20 m, the average height of buildings was assumed to be 20 m,
the height of the data reception point was 10 m, x2 − x1 = 10, y2 − y1 = 10..
As it can be seen from the table above, the probability of the line of sight decreases
as the number of buildings per unit area increases. However, this trend is increasing
with the increase in the number ν. If the value decreased by 2.46 times during the
transition from ν = 0.5 to the ν = 1, the value decreased by 222.27 times during
the transition from ν = 3 to ν = 6.
Based on the analysis of the results of Table 5.1. The following conclusion can
be made: when placing the data reception point, it is necessary to take into account
the number of buildings in the selected area: it is desirable to choose the location of
this point in the area with the smallest development [8].
Table 5.1 Dependence of the
line-of-sight probability on
the average number of
buildings per unit area
ν P(r1,r2)
0.1 0.835
0.5 0.406
1 0.165
2 0.027
3 4.49 · 10−3
4 7.42 · 10−4
5 1.23 · 10−4
6 2.02 · 10−5132 5 Increase of Noise Immunity of Navigation …
Table 5.2 The probability of
the line of sight as a function
of the aircraft flight altitude
z1 P(r1,r2)
ν = 1
500 0.025
700 0.074
1000 0.165
1200 0.221
1500 0.298
2000 0.402
ν = 0.1
500 0.694
1000 0.835
2000 0.917
Table 5.2 presents the dependence of the line-of-sight probability on the aircraft
flight altitude. The average length of buildings was assumed to be 20 m, the average
height of buildings was assumed to be 20 m, the height of the data reception point
was 10 m, x2 − x1 = 10, y2 − y1 = 10, ν = 1 and ν = 0.1.
As it can be seen from Table 5.2, the probability of the line of sight increases with
the increase in the altitude of the aircraft flight. This trend slows down as z1 value
increases. If the value increased by 6.6 times during the transition from z1 = 500 to
z1 = 1000, the value increased by 2.44 times during the transition from z1 = 1000
to z1 = 2000.
The probability of the line of sight as a function of distance between the ground
plane projection of the aircraft and data acquisition facility location points is shown
in Table 5.3. For the calculation goals, the average length of buildings was assumed
to be 20 m, the average height of buildings was assumed to be 20 m, the height of
the data reception point was 10 m, the height of the aircraft 1,000 m.
As can be seen from Table 5.3, the probability of the line of sight decreases with
increasing distance between projections of points on the ground plane. This trend is
increasing as 
(x2 − x1)
2 + (y2 − y1)
2 value increases. If this value decreases by
Table 5.3 The probability of
the line of sight as a function
of the distance between the
ground plane projection of the
aircraft and data acquisition
facility location points

(x2 − x1)
2 + (y2 − y1)
2 P(r1,r2)
0.5 0.938
1 0.880
2 0.773
4 0.597
8 0.357
16 0.1285.1 Method of Increasing Noise Immunity During Civil Aviation … 133
1.066 times during the transition from 0.5 to 1, the value decreases by 2.789 times
during the transition from 8 to 16.
Based on the analysis of Tables 5.2 and 5.3, we will propose a criterion for selecting
the point of the aircraft route for transmitting information to the data reception point
located in the city [6, 9]:
P(r1,r2) → max,
h ≥ α,

(x2 − x1)
2 + (y2 − y1)
2 ≤ β,
where α, β are some values.
In Figs. 5.3, 5.4 and 5.5 the graphical type of dependencies given in Tables 5.1,
5.2 and 5.3 is shown.
Let us draw a conclusion: the main contribution to the accuracy and reliability
of the navigation support of the aircraft over the layer of urban development is the
distance between the aircraft and the data reception point. Thus, it is necessary for the
Fig. 5.3 The probability of the line of sight as a function of the average number of buildings
Fig. 5.4 The probability of the line of sight as a function of the aircraft flight altitude134 5 Increase of Noise Immunity of Navigation …
Fig. 5.5 The probability of the line of sight as a function of distance between the ground plane
projection of the aircraft and data acquisition facility location points
aircraft crew to reduce the distance to the point of transfer of differential corrections
as much as possible (to the extent that urban conditions allow), while at the same
time making sure that the aircraft’s flight altitude does not fall below 500 m.
The dependence of the average field intensity on the aircraft flight height is
described by the function
f (k) =



1 + k
√2π exp
i
 π
4 + 2k2

1 + er f 

k
√2 exp
i π
4



k +


k2+
√k4+1
2
1
2
,
where k = √π
2
z1−h
(λ r˜/2)
1
2
, where r˜ is |r2 − r| projection on the plane z = 0, er f (x) is
the integral of the probability. The graph of f (k) function is shown in Fig. 5.6 (curve
1).
This expression is cumbersome and is not quite convenient for analysis. Let us
use f (k) instead of its approximation ∼
f (k) = 
2 + (4π k)
2
, which coincides with
f (k), and k = 0 and k → ∞ in the extreme cases. The graph of ∼
f (k) function is
shown in Fig. 5.3 (curve 2).
When the height of the aircraft’s flight decreases, the diffraction of the scattered
field over the building layer starts to play a significant role and leads to the fact that
< I > does not turn to zero at z1 = h (dashed line in Fig. 5.3).
At a small difference of heights (z1 − h), the influence of the curvature of the
ground surface on the character of shading generated by buildings is noticeable
already at a distance of several kilometers from the aircraft. This fact can be taken
into account by introducing the following value instead of (z1 − h) difference [3,
10]:
H = (z1 − h) − d2
2R , H > 0,5.1 Method of Increasing Noise Immunity During Civil Aviation … 135
Fig. 5.6 The dependence of
mean wave intensity on the
height of the observation site
where R = 6370 km is the Earth’s radius, d is the distance between the aircraft and
the data reception point.
However, the introduction of H value is valid only for distances shorter than the
radio-horizon range dR. It is necessary to take into account the diffraction of waves on
the spherical surface of the Earth and the scattering of waves on inhomogeneities of
the troposphere with d > 0.8dR. Figure 5.7 qualitatively illustrates the contributions
of these mechanisms to the formation of the field beyond the horizon. A solid line in
the figure shows the relative attenuation of the diffraction wave field, and a dashed
line shows the relative attenuation of the scattering wave field.
At distances of less than 100 km, the main contribution is made by the effects
of diffraction, and wave scattering in the atmosphere can be disregarded. Since the
distance from the aircraft to the receiving point does not actually exceed 100 km, it
is necessary to propose a method of calculating the diffraction field.
Introduces the concept of “scale of distances” and “scale of heights” as defined
by the ratios
L1 = 
λ R2/π 1
3 and H1 = 1
2

λ2R/π2
 1
3 .
The following values are entered:
x = d
L1
,
where
y1 = z1
H1
, y2 = z2
H1
.136 5 Increase of Noise Immunity of Navigation …
Fig. 5.7 Contribution of
wave diffraction on the
spherical surface of the Earth
and wave scattering on
troposphere inhomogeneities
to the formation of the field
beyond the horizon
90
100
110
120
130
140
150
160
170
180
190
20 70 120 170 220
Relative field attenuation, dB 
d, km 
The attenuation multiplier looks as follows:
F = 2
√π x





∞
s=1
eixts
ts + q2
h2(ts + q1)
h2(ts)
h2(ts + y2)
h2(ts)





,
where q = i(π R/λ)
1/3
/
√εk ; εk is a complex dielectric permeability of the earth;
h2(t) is Airy function, ts are the roots of the equation
h/
2(t) − qh2(t) = 0.
In the shadow zone, the number of lines quickly converges and can be limited
only to the first term, which has a clearly defined structure of the species
F = U(x)V(y1)V(y2),
the first multiplier of which depends only on the distance:5.1 Method of Increasing Noise Immunity During Civil Aviation … 137
U(x) == 2
√π x




eixt1
t1 + q2




,
and the second and third are from aircraft heights and data reception points,
respectively, and are called height multipliers:
V(y) =




h2(t1 + y)
h2(t)




,
at that, if the antenna is at a ground level, then y = 0 and the height factor V(0) is
equal to one.
The given formulas allow to calculate the field weakening due to diffraction on
the spherical surface of the Earth both in the area of its geometrical shade and in
the area of a penumbra. However, where high accuracy is not required, simpler and
more convenient calculation methods can be used to calculate the attenuation factor
F. One of them is a Bullington’s nomogram in Fig. 5.8.
For the communication line withllength shown in Fig. 5.9. First determine the
“illumination” zones with respect to the height of the aircraft and the data reception
point according to the formula:
li = √mzi, i = 1, 2,
where m is the ratio of the effective radius of the Earth to the true radius R, which
equals to approximately 4
3 . l1 always indicates the smallest of the distances, i.e.
l1 < l2. The shadow zone l3 is found from the ratio
l3 = l − l1 − l2.
Then according to the nomogram depicted in Fig. 5.8. There is a field attenuation
coefficient for each of the zones l1,l2,l3.
The mentioned field calculation methods can be used to calculate the average
intensity of a VHF field above the urban development layer, which, considering
the phenomenon of wave diffraction on a spherical surface of the Earth, can be
represented as follows [8, 9]:
< I(r2) >= Γ
8π
λ lB
λ2 + 
2π lBγ0(z1 − h)
2
h − z2
d3 F. (5.11)
From (5.11), there follows the criterion of data transmission from the aircraft:
d → min,
F ≤ γ138 5 Increase of Noise Immunity of Navigation … Megacycles at vertical polarization above sea m- relation of effective radius of the Earth to actual radius L1 or l2. km L1 (attenuation), dB at a distance l1 L1 (attenuation), dB at a distance l 2 L1 (attenuation), dB at a distance l 3 Megacycles at vertical polarisation above land or horizontal polarization above land and sea
Fig. 5.8 Nomogram of signal attenuation during radio waves propagation over the smooth spherical
surface of the Earth
Fig. 5.9 To shadow zones determination5.1 Method of Increasing Noise Immunity During Civil Aviation … 139
where γ is a certain constant.
To show the influence of the urban development profile on the field decay nature,
consider the following profile:
Ph(z) = χ(h1 − z) + χ(z − h1)
 h2 − z
h2 − h1
	n
,z ∈ (0, h2), n > 0.
The formula χ(x) designates the Heaviside step function; h1 and h2 are minimum
and maximum heights of buildings, respectively. The form Ph(z) depending on n is
shown in Fig. 5.10.
When n  1, Ph(z) corresponds to the case when high buildings are relatively
rarely dominating above the urban development area with the height of approximately
h1, and at n  1, it corresponds to the case of high-rise buildings within the urban
development area with the height mainly close to h2. In extreme cases (n → 0 and
n → ∞) Ph(z) corresponds to the model of a single-level building, and in the first
case, all buildings have a height of h2, and in the second case, height of h1.
Fig. 5.10 Ph (z) view as a function of n140 5 Increase of Noise Immunity of Navigation …
Thus, the selected representation describes a wide class of urban high-rise models:
from s single level to a model with an equal height of buildings in the range from h1
up to h2 at n = 1.
5.2 Increase of Noise Immunity of Navigation
and Communication Systems of Civil Aircraft During
Flights in Mountainous and Urban Areas
Inability of VHF waves to bend around the earth’s surface requires geometric visi￾bility between the transmitting and receiving antennas (Figs. 5.11 and 5.12) to provide
communication.
Since the waves are reflected from the earth’s surface at the reception site, as we
can see from Fig. 5.13, ray interference may happen; as a result, interference fading
and distortion of transmitted messages occur. The influence of ground irregularities
and soil inhomogeneity on the lower air layers, the difference and, accordingly, the
ACF
T 
Grou
nd 
point 
Fig. 5.11 The case of data transmission failure in mountainous areas5.2 Increase of Noise Immunity of Navigation … 141
ACF
T 
Grou
nd 
point 
Fig. 5.12 The case of data transmission in mountainous areas
ACF
T 
Grou
nd 
point 
Fig. 5.13 Ray interference
unequal influence of vegetation cover in certain areas of the territory of waves propa￾gation, presence of rivers and water reservoirs, as well as settlements and engineering
structures, etc., lead to the formation of atmosphere zones with various temperature
and humidity, local air flows, etc. In these zones formed at altitudes up to several
kilometers, wave diffusion occurs, as it is schematically shown in Fig. 5.14. In this
case, the part of the wave energy reaches points spaced from the transmitting antenna
by a distance several times greater than the range of geometric visibility.
With a significant transmitter power, sharply directed antennas and a receiver with
high sensitivity, the scattering of waves in tropospheric irregularities at altitudes of 2–
3 km allows to receive radio communication at distances of hundreds of kilometers,
which is 5–10 times greater than the distance of geometric visibility.
The line-of-sight distance can be calculated with the equation [11]:142 5 Increase of Noise Immunity of Navigation …
ACF
T 
Grou
nd 
point 
Fig. 5.14 Wave diffusion
R0 = 4.12

h1 + 
h2

, (5.12)
where R0 is a line-of-sight distance, h1 is the transmitting antenna height, h2 is the
receiving antenna height.
Table 5.4 shows data on the change of the line-of-sight distance depending on the
altitude of the aircraft. During calculation, it was assumed that h2 = 2000 m. Data
on R0 are given in km, data on h1 are given in.
Field intensity at the reception point within free space, i.e. in the case when there
are no obstacles in the radio waves path, can be calculated with the equation:
(5.13)
Table 5.4 Data on the
change of the line-of-sight
distance depending on the
altitude of the aircraft
h1 R0
2.5 390.25
3 409.90
3.5 427.99
4 444.84
4.5 460.62
5 475.575.2 Increase of Noise Immunity of Navigation … 143
Table 5.5 Data on the
dependence of the field
intensity on the distance
within open space for various
values of the effective
radiated power
R E0
1 70,202
5 31,395
10 22,200
20 15,698
30 4053
50 3140
1 222,000
5 99,281
10 70,202
20 49,640
30 40,531
50 31,395
1 702,025
5 313,955
10 222,000
20 156,977
30 128,171
50 99,281
where E0 is the field intensity, μV/m; is the effective radiated power, kW, R is the
distance, km.
Table 5.5 shows data on the dependence of the field intensity on the distance
within open space for various values of the effective radiated power.
One of the factors affecting data transmission in mountainous regions is multi-path
propagation due to the reflections from the ground surface. Errors due to multi-path
propagation are difficult to assess due to their strong dependence on the type and
relative position of the antennas, the type and nature of the reflecting surface.
Direct wave and the wave reflected from the ground surface get to the acquisition
facility. If these wave phases coincide, the field intensity doubles; when they are
antiphasic, then the intensity decreases down to zero.
The phase ratio between the direct and reflected waves is determined by their path
difference and the fact that when reflected from a conducting surface the wave phase
is inverted. Field alteration due to the reflection influence can be calculated with the
equation [11]:144 5 Increase of Noise Immunity of Navigation …
Table 5.6 Data on the field
alteration depending on the
distance between the aircraft
and the data acquisition
facility
R Y (dB)
5000 −41
3000 −39
1000 −34
500 −31
Y = 10 lg
4 sin2
(2π h1h2)/(Rλ)

, (5.14)
where Y is the field intensity alteration due to reflections, dB; R is the distance, m; λ
is the wavelength, m; h1, h2 is the aircraft altitude; and the ground data acquisition
facility, m.
From (5.14), it follows that the distance between the aircraft and the data acqui￾sition facility as well as the data transmission wavelength has the primary influence
on the field alteration due to the influence of reflection.
Table 5.6 shows data on the field alteration depending on the distance between the
aircraft and the data acquisition facility. The following data were taken into account
in the calculations: the altitude of the aircraft flight h1 = 3000 m, the height of the
data reception point h2 = 2000 m.
Let us introduce the following symbols [12]:
4 sin2
(2π h1h2) = y1,
Rλ = y2.
Let us note that Y → max if y1 → max, y2 → min.
We should also note that y1 → max, if 2π h1h2 = π
2 + 2π k or h1h2 = 1
4 + k
2 ,
where k is an integer number.
Let us propose a criterion for the aircraft flight altitude selection and the distance
to the ground acquisition facility for minimal field change due to reflection effect:
Rλ → min,
h1h2 = 1
4 +
k
2
,
where k is an integral number.
The criterion includes a recommendation to the pilot of the aircraft: reduce the
distance to the data acquisition facility during data transmission as far as the terrain
conditions and the flight situation allow, while adhering to the flight altitude that
satisfies the above restriction.
The reflected radio waves enter the receiving point with a t delay determined
by the difference in travel L [13]:5.2 Increase of Noise Immunity of Navigation … 145
t = L
c
, (5.15)
where c is radio wave velocity equal to the speed of light; L—travel difference.
The specific character of multi-path signal propagation consists in dependence of
the reflected signal amplitude from its delay. This function is as follows:
(5.16)
where τ ∗ is the estimate of the delay time, is the data sequence autocorrelation
function width, is the delay time of the reflected signal, UOTP is the amplitude of
the reflected signal.
According to formula (5.16), the reflected signals, with a delay greater than
relative to the direct signal, shall not affect data transmission via data transmission
line.
As it follows from (5.15), the difference in the travel path affects the reflected
radio wave delay. In this case, taking into account (5.16), the following ratio shall
be fulfilled:
L > cTk (5.17)
An example of multi-path wave propagation is shown in Fig. 5.15.
Let us draw a conclusion: in case of multi-path radio waves propagation, it is
necessary to ensure that data acquisition facility receives only those waves, the travel
path difference of which fulfills the condition (5.17). To fulfill this condition, it is
necessary, in turn, to fulfill the requirements related to the aircraft flight altitude,
signal propagation angle, and location of the data acquisition facility [14].
To calculate the errors associated with multi-path nature, it is necessary to build a
mathematical model of the mountainous region. Consider the region of the Caucasus
Mountains. This is a high-mountain region that contains a number of single ridges;
the area of the region is 43 thous. km2. Mathematical modeling is performed by
an overlay method. Mountain structures are described by the following points: the
vertex coordinates and the base coordinates of the facets. It is assumed that all the
facets start from the summit and go down to the base. The current height of the
mountain structure within this model is described by the formula [12]:146 5 Increase of Noise Immunity of Navigation …
ACFT 
Data 
acquisition 
facility 
Direct 
signal 
Reflected 
waves 
Mountain 
peaks 
Fig. 5.15 Example of multi-path wave propagation
h(x, y)|hm,x1,x2,y1,y2 =
⎧
⎪⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎪⎩

hm 
1+

 y
y1(2)
2
1+

 x
x1
2
 , x ≥ 0, y ≥ 0(y ≤ 0)

hm 
1+

 y
y1(2)
2
1+

 x
x2
2
 , x < 0, y ≥ 0(y < 0)
(5.18)5.2 Increase of Noise Immunity of Navigation … 147
where hm is the maximum height of the mountain structure, x1, x2 is the width
of the mountain structure along the X-axis at a level hm
√2 in the positive (x1) and
negative (x2) directions, y1, y2 is the width of the mountain structure along
the Y-axis. The height values and parameters of the mountain structure bases are
determined by the physical map. In addition to the coordinates of the summit and
base points, it is necessary to know the angle of rotation of Cartesian axes associated
with this structure in the Cartesian frame of reference associated with the considered
region.
The result is eight parameters that completely describe the mountain structure.
This can be represented as follows:
hi(x, y) = h(u, v)|hmi,x1i,x2i,y1i,y2i ,
where u = (x − xBi) cos ψi + (y − yBi)sin ψi , v = (xBi − x) cos ψi +
(y − yBi)sin ψi , i is the number of mountain structure, xBi and yBi is the coor￾dinates of the ith summit, ψi is the angle of rotation of Cartesian axes associated
with the mountain structure around the Z-axis in the Cartesian frame of reference
associated with the considered region.
The mathematical model of the mountainous region was entirely formed by
combining separate mountain structures according to the following algorithm:
hi(x, y) = max{hi(x, y)},i = 1 ... N,
where N is the number of mountain structures.
The combination of mountain structures into a single mountain area according to
this algorithm allows obtaining a model of the selected mountainous terrain region.
The attenuation coefficient for diffraction is calculated using the ray optics
methods, the applicability of which in this case is determined by the wavelength
dimensions, which are smaller than the mountainous formations dimensions.
The attenuation factor relative to free space is calculated by the formula [15]:
F =
C2(μ) + S2(μ)
2 , (5.19)
where C(μ) = 1
2 −  μ
0 cos π x2
2 ∂x, S(μ) = 1
2 −  μ
0 sin π x2
2 ∂x, μ = h
√2
b , h is the
obstacle height, b ≈ √
l λ, l is the distance from the reflecting surface to the aircraft,
λ is the wavelength.
Table 5.7 shows the dependence of the attenuation factor on the rock formation
height. The distance to the reflecting surface was taken equal to 500 m for the
calculations.
Table 5.8 shows the dependence of the attenuation factor on the distance from the
reflecting surface to the aircraft. The height of the obstacle was taken equal to 500 m
in the calculations [16].148 5 Increase of Noise Immunity of Navigation …
Table 5.7 Dependence of the
attenuation factor on the rock
formation height
H (m) F
500 7.73
1000 17.42
1500 25.46
2000 35.46
2500 41.62
3000 58.66
Table 5.8 Dependence of the
attenuation factor on the
distance from the reflecting
surface to the aircraft
l (m) F
500 7.73
1000 6.73
1500 4.55
2000 4.66
2500 3.85
Considering Tables 5.7 and 5.8, we can draw the following conclusions:
(1) The attenuation factor with respect to free space increases in proportion to the
height of the mountainous obstacle.
(2) The attenuation factor with respect to free space decreases when the distance
to the reflecting surface increases, but more slowly than the increase of this
indicator value.
Consequently, we propose a criterion for data transmission from the aircraft:
h → min,
l ≥ L,
where L is a certain limiting value.
According to the proposed criterion, considering the data given in Tables 5.7 and
5.8, the data acquisition facility shall be located behind the mountainous formations
at the altitude of 500 m maximum, while the distance to this obstacle shall be 2500 m
minimum.References 149
References
1. Akinshin RN, Zatuchnyy DA, Shevchenko DV (2016) Reducing the multi-path propagation
impact when transmitting data from the aircraft. Informatizaciya i svyaz 2018(3):6–12
2. Zatuchnyy DA, Logvin AI (2013) Criteria for reducing dynamic errors in ADS mode. Nauchniy
Vestnik of MSTUCA 189:5–8
3. Zatuchnyy DA, Logvin AI, Nechayev EE (2012) Problems of ADS mode implementation in
the Russian Federation. Printing and publication department MSTU CA
4. Zatuchnyy DA, Slad ZhV (2015) About the impact of build-in area type on radio waves
propagation in the city. Nauchniy Vestnik of MSTUCA (222):37–43
5. Karyukin GE (2005) Improvement of SRNS signal processing algorithm in multi-path propaga￾tion reception condition. Interuniversity collection of scientific works “Problemy ekspluatacii
i sovershenstvovaniya transportnyh sistem”, vol XI. Academy of CA, St. Petersburg
6. Kozlov AI, Sergeyev VG (1998) Radio waves propagation along natural paths. MSTUCA
7. Pestryakov VB (1990) Avionic equipment engineering. Sov Radio
8. Required navigation performance (RNP) Manual, Third Revision (2008)
9. Sizyh VV, Shahtarin BI, Shevcev VA (2017) Cycle slip mechanism in stochastic analog systems
of first- and second-orders of phase-lock. Mekhatronika, avtomatizaciya, upravlenie 18(1)
10. Tikhonov VI (1982) Statistical radio engineering. Radio i Svyaz 624 pp
11. Tikhonov VI, Kulman NK (1975) Non-linear filtering and quasi-coherent signal reception. Sov
Radio 704 pp
12. Zatuchnyi DA (2012) Reducing errors in data transmission from the aircraft in mountainous
areas for the VHF band by improving the transfer point selection. Nauchniy Vestnik of
MSTUCA (176):150–153
13. Tikhonov VI, Kharisov VN (1991) Statistical analysis and synthesis of radio-technical devices
and systems. Radio i Svyaz 608 pp
14. Filin AD, Shatrakov YuG, Yakovlev VT, Yushkov AV (2017) The impact of flight support
subsystems reliability on probability of aircraft accidents. Nauchniy Vestnik of Russian
military-industrial complex 3:68–74
15. Kharin EG (2002) Complex information processing of aircraft navigation systems. Moscow
16. Shahtarin BI, Aslanov TG (2014) Average time to cycle slip in continuous and discrete auto￾matic phase-lock. Vestnik of the Moscow State Technical University named after N.E. Bauman,
No. 1(52)Appendix A
See Table A.1.
See Table A.2.
See Table A.3.
See Table A.4.
See Table A.5.
See Table A.6.
See Figs. A.1, A.2, A.3, A.4.
Table A.1 The list of possible goals of the intruder
Item no. Name Action Nos. of delivered
threats
Notes
1 Breach of
confidentiality of
information
Unauthorized copying of
confidential information
or any other security
leakage
1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 13,
15, 16, 17
2 Downgraded service Deterioration of temporal
or other parameters of
user requests servicing
process
1, 3, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14,
16, 17
3 Unauthorized
modification of
information
Unauthorized deletion or
modification of
confidential information
1, 2, 3, 6, 7, 8, 9, 13
4 Malfunction of system
or individual elements
thereof
Transition of the system
in the inoperable state or
degrading its operating
parameters below the
allowable limit
1, 2, 3, 10, 11, 12, 14,
15, 16, 17
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s), under exclusive license
to Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2021
D. A. Zatuchny et al., Noise Resistance Enhancement in Aircraft Navigation
and Connected Systems, Springer Aerospace Technology,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-16-0630-4
151152 Appendix A Table A.2 List of information threats Item no. Name Source of threat Possible ways of implementation Threat action Average loss from implementation Number of means and methods of neutralization Notes 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 1 Password theft or password search. Internal and external 1. Tracking the authorized user 2. Obtaining a password from a user file or from a system OS file, magnetic media or other source (notebook, smart card, etc.) by unauthorized or legal access or theft. 3. Full search of password variants. 4. Optimized password search (using special lists of the most common passwords) Compromising the password of a legal user, appearance of a potential possibility of unauthorized access to the information available to the corresponding user Potentially high 4–5 3, 6, 11, If a password theft (search) is not detected, the possibility of the repeated unauthorized access and bug setting is retained (continued)Appendix A 153 Table A.2 (continued) Item no. Name Source of threat Possible ways of implementation Threat action Average loss from implementation Number of means and methods of neutralization Notes Infection with viruses 2 Introduction of bugs (Trojan programs) Internal and external 1. Use of unlicensed software. 2. Running unknown programs by an authorized user. 3. Introduction of Trojan programs from global networks (through legal users) Possibility of remote control of the infected computer system and unauthorized access to the confidential information 3 9, 8, 6 May lead to more severe consequences, e.g., threat No. 1 (continued)154 Appendix A Table A.2 (continued) Item no. Name Source of threat Possible ways of implementation Threat action Average loss from implementation Number of means and methods of neutralization Notes 3 Infecting BS elements with viruses Internal and external 1. Use of unlicensed software, files, and media from unreliable sources. 2. Using infected files from external and global networks Declining quality of service (deterioration of temporal indicators), loss of control over information flows, violation of confidentiality of information and, in some cases, denial of service 3 9, 8, 6, 4 (as confirmation of reliability of information and sources) May lead to more severe consequences Unauthorized access without infringement of authority (continued)Appendix A 155 Table A.2 (continued) Item no. Name Source of threat Possible ways of implementation Threat action Average loss from implementation Number of means and methods of neutralization Notes 4 Audio interception of information traffic External and internal Due to the peculiarities of implementation of some network protocols, the intruder will have access to all information exchange between computers of this segment when connecting to a certain segment of the local network Breach of confidentiality of information 4–5 1, 2, 5, applying the switching equipment 5 Collection of gibberish Internal and external The intruder reads and analyzes deleted files, swap files, etc. Compromising passwords, breach of information confidentiality 3, 10 6 Media scanning Internal, external The intruder consistently tries to open files and folders in order to detect network administration errors Breach of confidentiality of information 3–4 6, 7 (continued)156 Appendix A Table A.2 (continued) Item no. Name Source of threat Possible ways of implementation Threat action Average loss from implementation Number of means and methods of neutralization Notes Infringement of authority 7 Starting the program as a system (driver) or on behalf of the user who has the necessary permissions. Internal, external Using errors in the software or OS administration, the intruder obtains powers exceeding those granted to him under the current security policy. Breach of confidentiality of information, unauthorized modification of information 4 6, 8 8 Substitution of a dynamically loaded library used by system programs or change of environment variables describing the path to such libraries. External, internal By obtaining privileged access to system resources, the intruder introduces a modified version of the system library into the system Breach of confidentiality of information, unauthorized modification of information 4 6, 8 (continued)Appendix A 157 Table A.2 (continued) Item no. Name Source of threat Possible ways of implementation Threat action Average loss from implementation Number of means and methods of neutralization Notes 9 Modifying the code or data of the OS protection subsystem Internal, external By obtaining privileged access to OS software and resources, the intruder has the ability to change some of the OS components and protection systems in order to facilitate privileged access to data in the future Breach of confidentiality of information, unauthorized modification of information 4 6, 8 Denial of service 10 Resource locking Internal, external The intruder’s program locks all the resources available in the OS and then enters an infinite loop Total or partial OS failure 2–3 6, 7 (continued)158 Appendix A Table A.2 (continued) Item no. Name Source of threat Possible ways of implementation Threat action Average loss from implementation Number of means and methods of neutralization Notes 11 Inquiry attack Internal, external The intruder’s program constantly sends inquiries to the OS, the response to which requires significant resources of the computer system Decrease in channel capacity, deterioration of temporary system performance indicators 2–3 5, 6, 7 12 System malfunction Internal, external Sending a message that disables a BS element temporarily or for a long period of time Disabling the system or its components 2–3 5, 6, 7 13 Using errors in software or administration Internal, external Errors in network administration, network software, etc. give the intruder access to confidential information Violation of information confidentiality, unauthorized change of information, violation of the system functioning process 4–5 5, 6, 7 (continued)Appendix A 159 Table A.2 (continued) Item no. Name Source of threat Possible ways of implementation Threat action Average loss from implementation Number of means and methods of neutralization Notes 14 Replay attack Internal, external By sending messages to the network with a false network address, the intruder fraudulently switches to his or her computer already established network connections and as a result obtains the rights of users of these connections Imposing false information, introducing a virus, a Trojan program, disrupting the system’s operation 4–5 5, 6, 7 15 Getting access to the router table (reading) Internal, external Getting information from the router table to provide the ability to send false messages (masquerades) Breach of confidentiality of information, redirection of information flows 4–5 1 (of control traffic), 5, 6, 7 16 Changing the router table Internal, external Getting privileged access to the router in order to change one or more network addresses of its table to redirect the packet flow. Breach of confidentiality of information, violation of information exchange 4–5 1 (of control traffic), 5, 6, 7 (continued)160 Appendix A Table A.2 (continued) Item no. Name Source of threat Possible ways of implementation Threat action Average loss from implementation Number of means and methods of neutralization Notes 17 Creating a false router Internal, external By obtaining privileged access to system resources, the intruder creates a false router and is capable of intercepting all messages passing through the router, and while it is impossible to capture all the messages that pass through the router due to the volume of information that is too large, selective interception of messages containing users’ passwords and e-mail is a huge attraction Breach of confidentiality of information, violation of information exchange 4–5 1 (of control traffic), 5, 6, 7Appendix A 161
Table A.3 List of information security tools and methods
Item No. Name Cost Efficiency Notes
1 Packet encryption
(traffic)
2500 High Path, VIPNet,
Continent, Thorn,
Needle
2 Means of encrypting
individual messages
(mail, transmitted
files, blocks)
250 High Secure VIPNet mail
service, Courier
3 Cryptographic
protection of
information on
magnetic media
High Cryptomania,
StrongDisk
4 Tools for electronic
digital signature
High CryptoPro CSP,
VCERT PKI
5 Firewalls From 1,500 to
40,000.
Average Zastava-Jet, FortE+
(Zastava-Elvis),
FW-1, Cisco PIX,
Black Hole (SecurlT
Fire-Wall), Cyber
Guard, AltaVista
6 Audit/recording tools
(security analysis)
7505 (segment)
720 (for 1 comp.)
1535 (for 1
segment)
Average RealSecure Network
Sensor
RealSecure OS Sensor
RealSecure Manager
fr Open View
7 Security scanners 1439 (for 10 dev.)
1001 (for 1 dev.)
2,868 (1-100 users
per server)
Above average Internet Scanner
System Scanner
Server
Database Scanner for
Oracle
8 Integrity controls 1000 High
9 Antivirus tools 30 and above (for
one user)
Low Dialogue Science
DrWeb, AVP
Kaspersky Labs, NAV
for Windows 9x v5.0
Symantec, VirusScan
v4.0.0 McAfee1
10 Tools for guaranteed
file deletion
High Shredder programs
11 Countermeasures
against password
search
As a rule, the T&P
software settings are
used162 Appendix A
Table A.4 Results of solution of the task of optimization of the protection system
No. of
option
Total cost of
the protection
system
Total losses
caused by
the
intruder’s
actions
Probability of
accomplishment
of all goals by
the intruder
Probability of accomplishment of
individual goals
Goal No.
1
Goal
No. 2
Goal
No. 3
Goal
No. 4
1 1190 8156 0.106 0.4063 0.706 0.548 0.679
2 2627 5220 0.032 0.407 0.7 0.16 0.678
3 4100–5254 5145 0.012 0.217 0.7 0.123 0.651
4 6730–7881 5145 0.00911 0.217 0.7 0.123 0.487
5 10508 5081 0.006067 0.22 0.574 0.071 0.678
6 12200–13135 3993 0.000317 0.029 0.569 0.029 0.651
7 14800–21000 3993 0.000236 0.029 0.569 0.029 0.487
8 23640–25000 3983 0.00012 0.023 0.569 0.014 0.651
9 26300 3983 0.00009 0.0023 0.569 0.014 0.487
Table A.5 Results of solution of the task of optimization of the protection system taking into
account the possibility of joint use of protection means
No. of
option
Total cost of
the protection
system
Total
losses
caused by
the
intruder’s
actions
Probability of
accomplishment
of all goals by
the intruder
Probability of accomplishment of
individual goals
Goal
no. 1
Goal
no. 2
Goal
no. 3
Goal
no. 4
1 1190 8156 0.106 0.4063 0.706 0.548 0.679
2 2627 1022 2.916 10−5 0.2154 0.0341 0.0691 0.0575
3 4100–5254 366 5.801 10−7 0.0251 0.0309 0.0273 0.0276
4 6730–7881 344 4.802 10−7 0.0251 0.0309 0.0273 0.0227
5 10508 289 3.391 10−7 0.0422 0.0074 0.0064 0.0345
6 12200–13135 199 4.921 10−8 0.0175 0.0043 0.0235 0.0247
7 14800–21000 188 4.016 10−8 0.0175 0.0096 0.0235 0.0112
8 23640–25000 83 1.207 10−8 0.0111 0.0032 0.0082 0.0038
9 26300 83 1.116 10−8 0.0111 0.0032 0.0082 0.0038Appendix A 163 Table A.6 Composition of the protection system for different options of solution of the corresponding optimization task No. of threat to information. No. of means and methods of protection included in the system Option no. 1 Option no. 2 Option no. 3 Option no. 4 Option no. 5 Option no. 6 Option no. 7 Option no. 8 Option no. 9 1 11 11 3.11 3.11 11 3.11 3.11 3.11 3.11 2 9 9 8.9 8.9 9 8.9 8.9 8.9 8.9 3 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 2 2 2 2 – 2 2 2 2 5 10 – 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 6 – 7 7 7 7 7 7 6.7 6.7 7 – – (8) (8) (6) (6,8) (8) (6,8) (6,8) 8 – – (8) (8) (6) (6,8) (8) (6,8) (6,8) 9 – – (8) (8) (6) (6,8) (8) (6,8) (6,8) 10 – (7) (7) (1,7) (6,7) (6,7) (7) (6,7) (6,7) 11 – (7) (7) (1,7) (6,7) (6,7) (5,7) (5,6,7) (5,6,7) 12 – (7) (7) (1,7) (6,7) (6,7) (5,7) (5,6,7) (5,6,7) 13 – (7) (7) (1,7) 6 (7) 6 (7) 5 (7) (5,6,7) 5 (6.7) 14 – (7) (7) (1,7) (6,7) (6,7) (5,7) 5 (6.7) (5,6,7) 15 – (7) (7) 1 (7) (6,7) (6,7) 1 (5.7) (5,6,7) 1 (5,6,7) 16 – (7) (7) (1,7) (6,7) (6,7) (1,5,7) (5,6,7) (1,5,6.7) 17 - (7) (7) (1,7) (6,7) (6,7) (1,5,7) (5,6,7) (1,5,6.7)164 Appendix A
1
0.13
1
0.14
0.14
0.13
0.13
0.13
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0.2
0.16
0.16
0.2 
0.16
0.16
0.16 
7
0
1
2
4
5
6
13 
8
9
15
16
17
z
Fig. A.1 State bars for the description of the intruder’s target No 1. The vertex number 0 corresponds
to the initial state of the system when none of the threats is implemented. The state with the number
z corresponds to the implementation of the target by the intruder. The remaining vertices of the bars
correspond to the threats being implementedAppendix A 165
0.14
0.14
0.25 
0.35
0.4
1
1
1
1
1
1
0.14 1 1
0.14
0.16 
0.14
0.14
3
10
11
12
13
14
16
1
0
17
z
Fig. A.2 System state bars for the description of the intruder’s target no. 2166 Appendix A
0.1
0.2
0.1
0.4
0.2
1
1
1
0.4
1
1
0.2
1
0.3
0.1
1
0
1
2
3
6
13
9
8
7
z
Fig. A.3 System state bars for the description of the intruder’s target no. 3Appendix A 167
0.1
0.5 
0.5
0.25 
0.35
1
1
1
1
1
1
0.14
0.12 0.14
1
0.12
0.4
0.2
0.18
1
0
12
11
10
2
3
16
17
z
15
14
1
Fig. A.4 System state bars for the description of the intruder’s target no. 4Appendix B
Data Channel Selection Program
Certificate of state registration of the computer program
No. 2018664835
Date of request receipt October 01, 2018
Date of state registration in the Register of computer programs November 22,
2018.
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s), under exclusive license
to Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2021
D. A. Zatuchny et al., Noise Resistance Enhancement in Aircraft Navigation
and Connected Systems, Springer Aerospace Technology,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-16-0630-4
169170 Appendix B
Language: JavaScript
$(function() {
var funcs = [];
var systems = [];
function updateSystemCount() {
var sysCount = $("#sysCount");
sysCount.html(systems.length);
}
updateSystemCount();
var $funcTab = $("#initFunt");
var $systTab = $("#initSyst");
var $choSys = $("#chooseSyst");
function unique(arr) {
var obj = {};
for (var i = 0; i < arr.length; i++) {
var str = arr[i];
obj[str] = true;
}
return Object.keys(obj); 
}
$("#addNewFunk").on('click', function () {
var $wrap = $(".functions-block");
var template = '<label class="form-label func-template"> Enter the name 
of the function that the system should perform (Example: Working with 
passengers) ' +
'<input type="text" class="form-control system-func">' 
+
'</label>';Appendix B 171
$wrap.append(template);
});
$("#createFuncs").on('click', function () {
var $funcBlock = $(".system-func");
funcs = [];
var error = false;
$funcBlock.each(function () {
if($(this).val().length < 1){
alert("Fill in the required fields! ");
error = true;
}
});
if(!error){
$funcBlock.each(function () {
var value = $(this).val();
funcs.push(value);
});
funcs = unique(funcs);
$funcTab.hide("medium");
$systTab.show("medium");
}
});
$("#addNewSystemBtn").on('click', function () {
$(".system__array").html("");
$(".system__inner").each(function () {
$(this).find('input[type="checkbox"]').eq(0).prop('checked', true);
$(this).find('input[type="radio"]').eq(0).prop('checked', true)
});
var $systems = $(".systems");
$systems.html("");172 Appendix B
//var data = $("#template").clone();
$("#template").clone().appendTo($systems);
//$systems.append(data);
console.log(funcs);
for(var i = 0; i < funcs.length; i++){
var chClass = "";
if(i === 0) {
chClass = "checked";
}
var template = ' <label class="function-check" data-fid="'+i+'">' +
funcs[i] + ':' +
'<input type="checkbox" class="input-function" ' + chClass + '
title="'+funcs[i]+'" data-fid="'+i+'">' +
'</label>';
$(".system__array").append(template);
}
});
$("body").on('keyup', '[name=level]', function () {
var $c = $(this);
if($c.val() < 0) {
$c.val(0);
}else if($c.val() > 100){
$c.val(100);
}else {
$c.val($c.val());
}
});Appendix B 173
$('body').on('click', '.saveSystemBTN', function () {
var $systems = $(".system__array");
var checkedFuncs = [];
var chekCount = 0;
$systems.find('.input-function').each(function () {
console.log($(this));
console.log($(this).prop('checked'));
console.log($(this).val());
console.log(chekCount);
console.log("----");
if($(this).prop('checked') === true) {
chekCount++;
var currFunc = {
id: $(this).attr('data-fid'),
val: $(this).attr('title')
};
checkedFuncs.push(currFunc);
}
});
console.log("Saved features ");
//unique(checkedFuncs);
checkedFuncs.splice(0, 1);
console.log(checkedFuncs);
console.log("---");
var errors = false;
var title = $(".input-title").val();
if(title.length < 1){
alert("Specify the name of the system!");
errors = true;174 Appendix B
}
if(chekCount < 1) {
alert("Select the functionality of the system! ");
errors = true;
}
if(!errors){
var system = {
title: title,
funcs: checkedFuncs,
endStand: $('[name="standart"]:checked').val(),
orvd: $('[name="garmon"]:checked').val(),
level: $('[name="level"]').val(),
cost: $('[name="cost"]').val(),
rusAdapt: $('[name="have-russ"]:checked').val(),
evo: $('[name="have-evo"]:checked').val()
};
systems.push(system);
alert("The system was successfully added! ");
$(".systems").html("");
updateSystemCount();
}
});
$("#createSyst").on('click', function(){
if(systems.length >= 2){
$systTab.hide("medium");
//
var $fuList = $(".systems__allowed-func-list");
$fuList.html("");
for(var i = 0; i < funcs.length; i++){Appendix B 175
var li = "<li class='systems__analyse-fulitem'><label class='form￾label'>"+funcs[i]+" :<input type='checkbox' value='"+funcs[i]+"' data￾fid='"+i+"' class='in-sy'/></label></li>";
$fuList.append(li);
}
$choSys.show("medium");
}else {
alert("Insufficient systems for analysis! Please add at least 2 systems!
");
}
});
$("#podbor").on('click', function(){
var $li = $(".systems__analyse-fulitem");
var checked = 0;
var needleFun = [];
$li.each(function () {
var $in = $(this).find('input');
if($in.prop('checked') === true) {
checked++;
var fun = {
id: $in.attr('data-fid'),
val: $in.val()
};
needleFun.push(fun);
}
});
if(checked === 0){
alert("Select at least one function that the system must perform! ");
return false;176 Appendix B
}else {
console.log(needleFun);
console.log(systems);
var $analyseBlock = $(".systems__analyse");
$analyseBlock.html("");
for(var i = 0; i < systems.length; i++){
var isFuncs = false;
var isStd = false;
var isORVD = false;
var isLevel = false;
var isCost = false;
var isNoRf = false;
var isNoPrem = false;
var curFuncs = systems[i]['funcs'];
for(var j = 0; j < curFuncs.length; j++){
for(var k = 0; k < needleFun.length; k++){
if(curFuncs[j]['id'] === needleFun[k]['id']){
isFuncs = true;
}
}
}//--
if(curFuncs.length < needleFun.length) {
isFuncs = false;
}
if(systems[i]['endStand'] === "Да"){
isStd = true;
}
if(systems[i]['orvd'] === "Да"){
isORVD = true;Appendix B 177
}
console.log("System Level: " + parseInt(systems[i]['level']));
console.log("Required level: "+ parseInt($("#needLVL").val()));
if( parseInt(systems[i]['level']) >= parseInt($("#needLVL").val())){
isLevel = true;
}
if( parseInt(systems[i]['cost']) <= parseInt($("#needCOST").val())){
isCost = true;
}
if(systems[i]['rusAdapt'] === "Yes"){
isNoRf = true;
}
if(systems[i]['evo'] === "Yes"){
isNoPrem = true;
}
var funStr = "";
for(var kek = 0; kek < systems[i]['funcs'].length; kek++){
funStr += "<li>" + systems[i]['funcs'][kek]['val']+ "</li>";
}
var wrnClass = "";
var errorDesc = "";
var descStr = "";
if(isFuncs === false){
wrnClass = "is-none";
errorDesc += " - No functionality required <br/>";
}178 Appendix B
if(isStd === false){
wrnClass = "is-hz";
var stCost = 1000;
errorDesc += "<br/> - The process of international standardization 
is not over. Options:<br/> -- The system is not used<br/> -- The process of 
international standardization is coming to an end soon and the system is being 
used (the cost is increased by" + stCost + " rub)<br/><br/>";
var kekes = parseInt(systems[i]['cost']);
kekes += stCost;
systems[i]['cost'] = kekes;
}
if(isORVD === false){
wrnClass = "is-hz";
var stCost = 5000;
errorDesc += "<br/> - There is no factor in harmonizing the 
services of ATM systems in Russia, the United States and Europe. Variants: 
<br/> - The system is not used <br/> - The system is used on the basis of 
temporary arrangements <br/> - The system is being finalized for the identity 
of the services being presented, which leads to an increase in the cost of its 
operation by "+ stCost +" rubles.<br/><br/>";
var kekes = parseInt(systems[i]['cost']);
kekes += stCost;
systems[i]['cost'] = kekes;
}
if(isLevel === false){
wrnClass = "is-hz";
errorDesc += "<br/> - Level of system performance does not 
correspond to the required level. Variants: <br/> - The system is not used 
<br/> - The system is being finalized in the near future with the increase in 
cost and is used. <br/> <br/>;
}Appendix B 179
if(isCost === false){
wrnClass = "is-hz";
errorDesc += "<br/> - The cost of using the system exceeds the 
allowable limit. Variants: <br/> - The system is not used <br/> - The system is 
used in especially necessary cases. <br/> <br/> ;
}
if(isNoRf === false){
wrnClass = "is-hz";
errorDesc += "<br/> - The system is not adaptable to the 
conditions of the Russian Federation.Variants: <br/> - The system is not used 
<br/> - The system is used in areas with increased traffic intensity as an 
additional independent source of surveillance. <br/> <br/>;
}
if(isNoPrem === false){
wrnCl ass = "is-hz";
errorDesc += "<br/> - The system does not satisfy the condition of 
continuity.Options: <br/> - The system is not used <br/> - the system can be 
used in the future when it will satisfy the condition of continuity. <br/> - The
system is used as a backup option. <br /> <br />;
}
if(!isFuncs){
wrnClass = "is-none";
//errorDesc = " - No functionality required<br/>";
}
if(isFuncs && isStd && isORVD && isLevel && isCost && isNoRf 
&& isNoPrem){
wrnClass = "is-ok";
}
var tmp = '<div class="col-sm-6">'+
'<div class="systems__analyse-block '+wrnClass+'">' +
'<div class="systems__analyse-180 Appendix B
title">'+systems[i]['title']+'</div>' +
'<div class="systems__analyse-error">' + errorDesc 
+'</div>' +
'<div class="systems__analyse-funcs">' +
'<span class="systems__analyse￾span">Functional:</span>' +
'<ul class="systems__analyse-funlist">' + funStr + 
'</ul>' +
'</div>' +
'<div class="systems__analyse-stand"> Completeness 
of the international standardization process: <span>'+ systems[i]['endStand']
+'</span></div>' +
'<div class="systems__analyse-stand">
Harmonization of ATM services in Russia, the United States and Europe: 
<span>'+systems[i]['orvd']+'</span></div>' +
'<div class="systems__analyse-stand"> Level of 
technology (%): <span>'+ parseInt(systems[i]['level'])+'%</span></div>' +
'<div class="systems__analyse-stand"> Cost (rub):
<span>'+ parseInt(systems[i]['cost'])+'</span></div>' +
'<div class="systems__analyse-stand"> Adaptability 
to Russia:<span>'+ systems[i]['rusAdapt'] +'</span></div>' +
'<div class="systems__analyse-stand"> Evolutionary 
and continuity of the process of creating and implementing AZN-B in Russia: 
<span>'+ systems[i]['evo'] +'</span></div>' +
'</div>' +
'</div>';
$analyseBlock.append(tmp);
}
$(".systems__analyse-block ").matchHeight();
}
});
});
