The Pedagogy
Nursing Informatics and the Foundation of Knowledge, Sixth
Edition, drives comprehension through a variety of strategies
geared toward meeting the learning needs of students while also
generating enthusiasm about the topic. This interactive approach
addresses diverse learning styles, making this the ideal text to
ensure mastery of key concepts. The pedagogical aids that appear
in most chapters include the following:World Headquarters
Jones & Bartlett Learning
25 Mall Road
Burlington, MA 01803
978-443-5000
info@jblearning.com
www.jblearning.com
Jones & Bartlett Learning books and products are available through most bookstores and
online booksellers. To contact Jones & Bartlett Learning directly, call 800-832-0034, fax 978-
443-8000, or visit our website, www.jblearning.com.
Substantial discounts on bulk quantities of Jones & Bartlett Learning publications are
available to corporations, professional associations, and other qualified organizations.
For details and specific discount information, contact the special sales department at
Jones & Bartlett Learning via the above contact information or send an email to
specialsales@jblearning.com.
Copyright © 2025 by Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC, an Ascend Learning Company All
rights reserved. No part of the material protected by this copyright may be reproduced or
utilized in any form, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or by any
information storage and retrieval system, without written permission from the copyright
owner.
The content, statements, views, and opinions herein are the sole expression of the
respective authors and not that of Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC. Reference herein to any
specific commercial product, process, or service by trade name, trademark, manufacturer,
or otherwise does not constitute or imply its endorsement or recommendation by Jones &
Bartlett Learning, LLC and such reference shall not be used for advertising or product
endorsement purposes. All trademarks displayed are the trademarks of the parties noted
herein. Nursing Informatics and the Foundation of Knowledge, Sixth Edition is an
independent publication and has not been authorized, sponsored, or otherwise approved by
the owners of the trademarks or service marks referenced in this product.
There may be images in this book that feature models; these models do not necessarily
endorse, represent, or participate in the activities represented in the images. Any
screenshots in this product are for educational and instructive purposes only. Any
individuals and scenarios featured in the case studies throughout this product may be real
or fictitious but are used for instructional purposes only.
The authors, editor, and publisher have made every effort to provide accurate information.
However, they are not responsible for errors, omissions, or for any outcomes related to the
use of the contents of this book and take no responsibility for the use of the products andprocedures described. Treatments and side effects described in this book may not be
applicable to all people; likewise, some people may require a dose or experience a side
effect that is not described herein. Drugs and medical devices are discussed that may have
limited availability controlled by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for use only in a
research study or clinical trial. Research, clinical practice, and government regulations often
change the accepted standard in this field. When consideration is being given to use of any
drug in the clinical setting, the healthcare provider or reader is responsible for determining
FDA status of the drug, reading the package insert, and reviewing prescribing information
for the most up-to-date recommendations on dose, precautions, and contraindications, and
determining the appropriate usage for the product. This is especially important in the case
of drugs that are new or seldom used.
29348-7
Production Credits
Vice President, Product Management: Marisa R. Urbano Vice President, Content Strategy
and Implementation: Christine Emerton Manager, Content Strategy: Donna Gridley Director,
Product Management: Matthew Kane Product Manager: Marc Bove
Content Strategist: Christina Freitas
Content Coordinator: Samantha Gillespie Director, Project Management and Content
Services: Karen Scott Manager, Project Manager: Jackie Reynen Project Manager: Eliza
Lewis
Digital Project Specialist: Dan Stone
Senior Product Marketing Manager: Lindsay White Content Services Manager: Colleen
Lamy Rights and Permissions Manager: John Rusk Rights Specialist: Maria Leon Maimone
Senior Media Development Editor: Troy Liston Cover Design: Michael O’Donnell
Text Design: Michael O’Donnell
Manufacturing: Wendy Kilborn
Cover Image (Title Page, Part Opener, Chapter Opener): © nadla/E+/Getty Images Printing
and Binding: Lakeside Crawfordsville Cover Printing: Lakeside Crawfordsville Library of
Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data Names: McGonigle, Dee, author. | Mastrian,
Kathleen Garver, author.
Title: Nursing informatics and the foundation of knowledge / Dee McGonigle, Kathleen G.
Mastrian.
Description: Sixth edition. | Burlington, MA : Jones & Bartlett Learning, [2025] | Includes
bibliographical references and index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2023035578 | ISBN 9781284295184 (paperback) Subjects: MESH:
Nursing Informatics | Knowledge | Knowledge Management |
Nursing Research
Classification: LCC RT50.5 | NLM WY 26.5 | DDC
610.730285--dc23/eng/20231026
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2023035578
Printed in the United States of America 28 27 26 25 24 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1Special
Acknowledgments
We want to express our sincere appreciation to the staff at
Jones & Bartlett Learning, especially Joanna Gallant, Marc
Bove, Christina Freitas, Madelene Nieman, Eliza Lewis, and
Erin Cler, for their continued encouragement, assistance, and
support during the writing process and publication of our
book.1
2
Contents
Acknowledgments
Preface
Authors’ Note
Contributors
SECTION I: BUILDING BLOCKS OF NURSING
INFORMATICS
Nursing Science and Concepts of Knowledge
Introduction
Nursing Science
Foundation of Knowledge Model
The Nature of Knowledge
The Nurse as a Knowledge Worker
Getting to Wisdom
Summary
References
Introduction to Information, Information Science,
and Information Systems3
4
Introduction
Information
Information Science
Information Processing
Information Science and the Foundation of Knowledge
Introduction to Information Systems
Summary
References
Computer Science and the Foundation of
Knowledge Model
Introduction
The Computer as a Tool for Managing Information and
Generating Knowledge
What Is the Relationship of Computer Science to Knowledge?
How Does the Computer Support Collaboration and
Information Exchange?
Mobile Computing
Bandwidth, Broadband, and Mobile Broadband Versus
Wireless Broadband
Cloud Computing
Looking to the Future
Summary
Working Wisdom
Application Scenario
References
Introduction to Cognitive Science and Cognitive
Informatics
Introduction5
6
Cognitive Science
Sources of Knowledge
Nature of Knowledge
How Knowledge and Wisdom Are Used in Decision-Making
Cognitive Informatics
Cognitive Informatics and Nursing Practice
What Is AI?
Summary
References
Ethical Applications of Informatics
Introduction
Ethics
Bioethics
Ethical Issues and Social Media
Ethical Dilemmas and Morals
Ethical Decision-Making
Theoretical Approaches to Healthcare Ethics
Applying Ethics to Informatics
Case Analysis Demonstration
New Frontiers in Ethical Issues
Summary
References
SECTION II: PERSPECTIVES ON NURSING
INFORMATICS
History and Evolution of Nursing Informatics
Introduction
The Evolution of a Specialty7
8
What Is Nursing Informatics?
The DIKW Paradigm
Capturing and Codifying the Work of Nursing
Nursing Informatics Education
Quality and Safety Education for Nurses
The Future
Summary
References
Nursing Informatics as a Specialty
Introduction
Nursing Contributions to Healthcare Informatics
Scope and Standards
Nursing Informatics Roles
Specialty Education and Certification
Nursing Informatics Competencies
Value and Rewards of Nursing Informatics Practice
Nursing Informatics Organizations and Journals
The Future of Nursing Informatics
Summary
References
Legislative Aspects of Nursing Informatics: HIPAA,
HITECH, and Beyond
Introduction
HIPAA Came First
Overview of the HITECH Act
How a National Health IT Infrastructure Was Developed
How the HITECH Act Changed HIPAA
Implications for Nursing Practice9
10
Recent Laws and Regulations
Summary
References
SECTION III: NURSING INFORMATICS ADMINISTRATIVE
APPLICATIONS: PRECARE AND CARE
SUPPORT
Systems Development Life Cycle: Nursing
Informatics and Organizational Decision-Making
Introduction
Waterfall Model
Rapid Prototyping, or Rapid Application Development
Object-Oriented Systems Development
Dynamic System Development Method
Agile
Computer-Aided Software Engineering Tools
Open Source Software, Free/Libre Open Source Software, and
Free/Open Source Software
Interoperability
Summary
References
Administrative Information Systems
Introduction
Principles of Interoperability
Types of Healthcare Organization Information Systems
Core Business Systems
Order Entry Systems
Patient Care Support Systems11
12
13
Aggregating Patient and Organizational Data
Department Collaboration and Exchange of Knowledge and
Information
Summary
References
The Human–Technology Interface
Introduction
The Human–Technology Interface
The Human–Technology Interface Problem
Improving the Human–Technology Interface
A Framework for Evaluation
Future of the Human–Technology Interface
Summary
References
Electronic Security
Introduction
Securing Network Information
Authentication of Users
Blockchain
Use Case for Blockchain Technology
Threats to Security
Security Tools
Off-Site Use of Portable Devices
Summary
References
Achieving Excellence by Managing Workflow and
Initiating Quality Projects14
15
Introduction
Purpose of Workflow Analysis
Workflow and Technology
Workflow Analysis and Informatics Practice
Informatics as a Change Agent
Measuring the Results
Quality Improvement Initiatives
Future Directions
Summary
References
SECTION IV: NURSING INFORMATICS PRACTICE
APPLICATIONS: CARE DELIVERY
The Electronic Health Record and Clinical
Informatics
Introduction
Setting the Stage
Components of Electronic Health Records
Advantages of Electronic Health Records
Standardized Terminology and the EHR
Ownership of Electronic Health Records
Flexibility and Expandability
Accountable Care Organizations and the EHR
The Future
Summary
References
Informatics Tools to Promote Patient Safety, Quality
Outcomes, and Interdisciplinary Collaboration16
17
Introduction
What Is a Culture of Safety?
Strategies for Developing a Safety Culture
Human Factors and Systems Engineering
Informatics Technologies for Patient Safety
Role of the Nurse Informaticist
Interdisciplinary Collaboration
Summary
References
Patient Engagement and Connected Health
Introduction
Consumer Demand for Information
Health Literacy and Health Initiatives
Healthcare Organization Approaches to Engagement
Promoting Health Literacy in School-Age Children
Supporting Use of the Internet for Health Education
Future Directions for Engaging Patients
Summary
References
Using Informatics to Promote Community and
Population Health
Introduction
Public Health Essential Services
What Is Public Health Informatics?
Community Health Risk Assessment: Tools for Acquiring
Knowledge
Processing Knowledge and Information to Support
Epidemiology and Monitoring Disease Outbreaks18
Applying Knowledge to Health Disaster Planning and
Preparation
Informatics Tools to Support Communication and
Dissemination
Using Feedback to Improve Responses and Promote
Readiness
Summary
References
Telenursing and Remote Access Telehealth
Introduction
The Foundation of Knowledge Model and Home Telehealth
Nursing Aspects of Telehealth
History of Telehealth
Driving Forces for Telehealth
Telehealth Care
Telenursing
Telehealth Patient Populations
Home Telehealth Software
Home Telehealth Practice and Protocols
Legal, Ethical, and Regulatory Issues
The Patient’s Role in Telehealth
Telehealth Research
Evolving Telehealth Models
Parting Thoughts for the Future
Summary
References
SECTION V: EDUCATION APPLICATIONS OF NURSING
INFORMATICS19
20
Nursing Informatics and Nursing Education
Introduction: Nursing Education and the Foundation of
Knowledge Model
Knowledge Acquisition and Sharing
Evolution of Learning Management Systems
Delivery Modalities
Technology Tools Supporting Education
Internet-Based Tools
Promoting Active and Collaborative Learning
Knowledge Dissemination and Sharing
Exploring Information Fair Use and Copyright Restrictions
The Future
Summary
References
Simulation, Game Mechanics, Virtual Worlds, and
the Realities in Nursing Education
Introduction
Examples of Simulation in Nursing Informatics Education
Nursing Informatics Competencies in Nursing Education
A Case for Simulation in Nursing Informatics Education and
Nursing Education
Incorporating EHRs into the Learning Environment
Challenges and Opportunities
The Future of Simulation in Nursing Informatics Education
Game Mechanics and Virtual World Simulation for Nursing
Education
Game Mechanics and Educational, or Serious, Games
Virtual Worlds in Education21
22
Choosing Among Simulations, Serious Games, and Virtual
Worlds
The Future of Simulations, Serious Games, Virtual Worlds, and
the Realities in Nursing Education
Summary
References
SECTION VI: RESEARCH APPLICATIONS OF NURSING
INFORMATICS
Nursing Research: Data Collection, Processing, and
Analysis
Introduction: Nursing Research and the Foundation of
Knowledge Model
Knowledge Generation Through Nursing Research
Acquiring Previously Gained Knowledge Through Internet and
Library Holdings
Fair Use of Information and Sharing
Informatics Tools for Collecting Data and Storing Information
Tools for Processing Data and Data Analysis
The Future
Summary
References
Informatics-Based Research Processes: Data
Mining and Artificial Intelligence
Introduction: Big Data, Data Mining, and Knowledge Discovery
Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining and Research
Data Mining Concepts
Data Mining Techniques
Data Mining Models23
24
Benefits of Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining
Data Mining and Electronic Health Records
Ethics of Data Mining
Artificial Intelligence, Machine Learning, and Deep Learning
Bioinformatics, Biomedical Informatics, and Computational
Biology
Summary
References
Generating and Translating Evidence for Practice
Introduction
Clarification of Terms
History of Evidence-Based Practice
Evidence
Bridging the Gap Between Research and Practice
Barriers to and Facilitators of Evidence-Based Practice
The Role of Informatics
Developing Evidence-Based Practice Guidelines
Meta-Analysis and Generation of Knowledge
Expanding Research Boundaries and Effects on Clinical
Translation
The Future
Summary
References
SECTION VII: IMAGINING THE FUTURE OF NURSING
INFORMATICS
The Art of Caring in Technology-Laden
Environments25
Introduction
Caring Theories
Presence
Strategies for Enhancing Caring Presence
Reflective Practice
Caring in the Future
Summary
References
Our Expanding Realities and the Metaverse
Introduction
Overview: Informatics and the Realities
Nursing Informatics and the Realities
Realities
Telemedicine
Big Data
Internet of Things (IoT), Intelligence of Things (IoT), and
Artificial Intelligence of Things (AIoT)
Artificial Intelligence (AI)
Robots
Smart Devices
Haptic Technology: Reach Out and Touch Someone—
Evaluating the Viability of Haptics
Transcending Reality—Exploring the Promise of the Metaverse
The Four Foundational Pillars of the Metaverse
Use Cases: How the Metaverse Is Affecting and Will Affect
Health Care
Challenges Facing the Realization of the Metaverse
Summary
ReferencesAbbreviations
Glossary
IndexAcknowledgments
We are deeply grateful to the contributors who provided this text with
a richness and diversity of content that we could not have captured
alone. Joan Humphrey provided social media content integrated
throughout the text. We especially wish to acknowledge the superior
work of Alicia Mastrian, graphic designer of the Foundation of
Knowledge model, which serves as the theoretical framework on
which this text is anchored. We could never have completed this
project without the dedicated and patient efforts of the Jones &
Bartlett Learning staff, especially Joanna, Marc, Christina, Madelene,
Eliza and Erin, all of whom fielded our questions and concerns in a
very professional, respectful, and timely manner.
Dee acknowledges the undying love, support, patience, and
continued encouragement of her best friend and husband, Craig,
and her son, Craig, who has made her so very proud. She sincerely
thanks her dear friends for their support and encouragement.
Kathy acknowledges the loving support of her family: husband,
Chip; children, Ben and Alicia; and sisters, Carol and Sue. She
dedicates her work on this edition to her dad, Robert, who died on
September 17, 2016, and to her mother, Rosalie Garver, who died
on January 29, 2023. Kathy also acknowledges those friends who
understand the importance of validation, especially Katie, Lisa,
Kathy, Maureen, Anne, Barbara, Roxanne, and Sally.Preface
The idea for this text originated with the development of nursing
informatics (NI) classes, the publication of articles related to
technology-based education, and the creation of the Online Journal
of Nursing Informatics (OJNI), which Dr. Dee McGonigle cofounded
with Dr. Renee Eggers. Like most nurse informaticists, we fell into
the specialty; our love affair with technology and gadgets and
willingness to be the first to try new things helped to hook us into the
specialty of informatics. The rapid evolution of technology and its
transformation of the ways of nursing prompted us to try to capture
the essence of NI in a text.
As we were developing the first edition, we realized that we could
not possibly know all there is to know about informatics and the way
in which it supports nursing practice, education, administration, and
research. We also knew that our faculty roles constrained our
opportunities for exposure to changes in this rapidly evolving field.
Therefore, we developed a tentative outline and a working model of
the theoretical framework for the text and invited participation from
informatics experts and specialists around the world. We were
pleased with the enthusiastic responses we received from some of
those invited contributors and a few volunteers who heard about the
text and asked to participate in their particular area of expertise.
In the second edition, we invited the original contributors to revise
and update their chapters. Not everyone chose to participate in thesecond edition, so we revised several of the chapters using the
original work as a springboard. The revisions to the text were guided
by the contributors’ growing informatics expertise and the reviews
provided by textbook adopters. In the revisions, we sought to do the
following:
Expand the audience focus to include nursing students from
bachelor of science (BS) through doctor of nursing practice
(DNP) programs as well as nurses thrust into informatics roles in
clinical agencies.
Include, whenever possible, an attention-grabbing case scenario
as an introduction or an illustrative case scenario demonstrating
why the topic is important.
Include important research findings related to the topic. Many
chapters have research briefs presented in text boxes to
encourage the reader to access current research.
Focus on cutting-edge innovations, meaningful use, and patient
safety as appropriate to each topic.
Include a paragraph describing what the future holds for each
topic.
New chapters that were added to the second edition included
those focusing on technology and patient safety, system
development life cycle, workflow analysis, gaming, simulation, and
bioinformatics.
In the third edition, we reviewed and updated all the chapters,
reordered some chapters for better content flow, eliminated
duplicated content, split the education and research content into two
sections, integrated social media content, and added two new
chapters: Data Mining as a Research Tool and The Art of Caring in
Technology-Laden Environments.
In the fourth edition, we reviewed and updated all the chapters
based on technological advancements and changes to the
healthcare arena, including reimbursement mechanisms for services.In the fifth edition, we added specific information on informatics
contributions to quality improvements, interprofessional
collaboration, and pandemic response. We pared the fifth edition
down to 26 chapters from the previous edition’s 29; one chapter
each was deleted from Sections II, V, and VII. Section I includes
updates to the same five chapters on the building blocks of nursing
informatics, with extensive changes to Chapter 3, Computer Science
and the Foundation of Knowledge Model. To improve flow, we
combined content. There was a section describing a virtual reality
product with access information for the reader; this product can be
accessed in 2D as well as 3D. Chapter 24, The Art of Caring in
Technology-Laden Environments, was enhanced, and Chapter 25
was replaced with Our Expanding Realities.
In this sixth edition, we have once again reviewed and updated all
the chapters based on technological advancements and changes to
the healthcare arena, including reimbursement mechanisms for
services. We have added specific information on informatics
contributions to quality improvements and interprofessional
collaboration. The section describing a virtual reality product
remains, with access information for the reader; this product can be
accessed in 2D as well as 3D. This edition has been decreased to
25 chapters. Chapter 24. Bioinformatics, Biomedical Informatics, and
Computational Biology, was eliminated by integrating this content
appropriately throughout the textbook.
The major revisions follow:
Chapter 1 was enhanced by exploring the impacts of AI, cognitive
systems, machine learning and predictive analytics on knowledge
management in organizations, the importance of knowledge co￾creation, and the characteristics of knowledge work.
Chapter 2 emphasizes the need to ethically implement ISs to
mitigate impacts on users and institutions, discusses the issues
associated with asset classification (i.e., drug or device), and
explores issues related to IoT (Intelligence of Things; Internet of
Things) and AIoT (Artificial Intelligence of Things).
Chapter 3 was heavily revised and shortened. Tables were created
for computer components, summarizing major types of software andinput devices. The following were added: haptics for immersive
technologies and VR (Virtual Reality), VPN (Virtual Private Network)
with encryption, and the introduction of the concept of the
metaverse.
Chapter 4 explores AI (Artificial Intelligence), machine learning,
and natural language processing.
Chapter 5 discusses the ethics of using robots as substitutes for
human carers, identifies challenges and opportunities related to
social media use by patients and providers, and discusses motives
for seeking information and emotional support online.
Chapter 6 explores the evolution of NI definitions and shares the
current NI definition. It also updates AACN education guidelines and
shares 2021 informatics competencies identified in Essentials: Core
Competencies for Professional Nursing Education.
Chapter 7 shares updates from the third edition of the ANA’s
Nursing Informatics: Scope and Standards of Practice (2022),
presents ways in which INSs (Informatics Nurse Specialist) provide
value, and explores trends influencing the future of NI (Nursing
Informatics).
Chapter 8 was updated to reflect the concerns related to the use
of personal devices in the workplace and BYOD policies, notes that
CMPs (Civil Monetary Penalties) associated with PHI (Protected
Health Information) breaches may increase with inflation, alerts that
Privacy Rule changes are expected in mid-2023, and provides
access to the global health legislation tracker.
Chapter 9 updates the description of object-oriented modeling,
CASE (Computer-aided Software Engineering), and differentiates
between free software and open source software.
Chapter 10 expands the discussion of interoperability and the use
of metadata tagging in the interoperability context, discusses
documentation integrity, introduces and defines unified
communication for health care, updates ADT (Admission, Discharge,
and Transfer System) description and use, and introduces CDI
(Clinical Documentation Improvement).
Chapter 11 explores data visualization as a tool to model complex
healthcare data and clarifies NFC (Near-field Communication)transactions. Also added is a detailed description of VR headset use
and a discussion of the importance of managing HTI (Human￾Technology Interaction) with new technologies.
Chapter 12 provides updated tips for creating strong passwords,
expands the discussion of electronic data vulnerability, and reviews
recent data breaches.
Chapter 13 emphasizes the value of process improvement
theories, introduces the Patient Room ‘Next’ (PRN) strategy for
providing high-quality healthcare regardless of patient location, and
reviews the seven key steps for a quality improvement project.
Chapter 14 updates EHR (Electronic Health Record) adoption
statistics and explores how interoperable EHRs facilitate data
sharing.
Chapter 15 shares 10 common medical errors leading to patient
deaths and access to global strategies for safety. It also explores the
contributions of wearable technologies to safety and early detection
of issues.
Chapter 16 shares changes in the fitness app market, explores the
use of an AI-powered web-based symptom checker and medical
misinformation during the pandemic, discusses the digital divide via
an interactive map tool, identifies wearable technology as consumer￾centric technology, and introduces virtual and augmented reality
tools for engagement.
Chapter 17 describes the EPA (Environmental Protection Agency)
risk assessment, introduces AI as a prediction tool for disease
outbreaks, and explores quality public health messaging.
Chapter 18 provides updated healthcare spending costs. It offers a
definition and explains its use to help reduce disparities. It also
explores medical and nurse licensure compacts as well as telehealth
support and regulations changes post-pandemic.
Chapter 19 acknowledges the pandemic’s impact on
telecommunications, virtual technology use, and the paradigm shift
with the shutdowns. It reviews clinical replacement and
augmentation with simulation, explains how adaptive learning is
integrated into LMS (Learning Management System), and provides
updates on Gen Z, AI, and the learning disruption caused byChatGPT. It also provides an actual, unedited interaction with
ChatGPT about AI and explores some faculty’s reactions to
ChatGPT or other AI products students are using.
Chapter 20 acknowledges the role of the pandemic in the
escalated integration of virtual simulation and explores a new
initiative at a children’s hospital with VR on every unit.
Chapter 21 identifies the information literacy competency
standards specific to nursing and acknowledges the role of the
pandemic in accelerating the commitment to collecting healthcare
data in a standardized way to facilitate data sharing and treatment
outcomes.
Chapter 22 expands the former data mining chapter to include
artificial intelligence, bioinformatics, and computational biology
contributions to data analytics. It acknowledges the contributions of
the former BD2K (Big Data to Knowledge) program, advocates for
the use of EHR data for comparative effectiveness research, and
identifies three main types of data analytics. Finally, this chapter
incorporates information from the former Chapter 24 from the fifth
edition on bioinformatics and computational biology and their
contributions to data analysis.
Chapter 23 explores the potential contributions of bioinformatics
and computational biology to evidence for practice, introduces the
NCATS (National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences)
translational science spectrum, and incorporates information from
the former Chapter 24 from the fifth edition on bioinformatics and
computational biology and their effects on clinical translation
Chapter 24 advocates for adding technology as a fifth dimension
of the nursing paradigm, considerations for conveying caring while
wearing PPE (Personal Protective Equipment), and caring
encounters as communion-in-caring. It also emphasizes reflection to
improve caring encounters.
Chapter 25 examines the emerging technologies evolving our
sense of reality that will affect the future of health care, nursing
practice, nursing informatics, and patient care. To help the reader
consider the disruptive forces affecting our realities, we have
provided a glimpse of patient experiences in future health care, carebots, cyborgs, and artificial intelligence. Through our use of nursing
informatics in the integration of evolving technologies, we affect our
reality, the reality of the healthcare industry, the reality of our
patients, and the reality of the concept of the metaverse, and all of
these concepts are explored in this chapter. In addition, the chapter
explores haptic technology and its future in nursing, encourages the
reader to think about the impact AI will have on our reality, and
includes a new section on the metaverse in which the following
topics are discussed:
Complex definition of the metaverse is provided and then a
simplified one
ChatGPT interaction: describe the concept of a metaverse to a
nursing student
The promise of the metaverse
Four facets
Three components
Use cases: how the metaverse is impacting and will impact
healthcare
Challenges facing the realization of the metaverse
Nursing role-specific challenges
In addition, the ancillary materials have been updated and
enhanced to include competency-based self-assessments, mapping
the content to the current NI standards, activities for both
undergraduate and graduate nursing students, and 10 interactive
case studies.
We believe that this text provides a comprehensive elucidation of
this exciting field. Its theoretical underpinning is the Foundation of
Knowledge model. This model is introduced in its entirety in the first
chapter, which discusses nursing science and its relationship to NI.
We believe that humans are organic information systems that are
constantly acquiring, processing, and generating information or
knowledge in both their professional and their personal lives. It istheir high degree of knowledge that characterizes humans as
extremely intelligent, organic machines. Individuals have the ability
to manage knowledge—an ability that is learned and honed from
birth. We make our way through life interacting with our environment
and being inundated with information and knowledge. We
experience our environment and learn by acquiring, processing,
generating, and disseminating knowledge. As we interact in our
environment, we acquire knowledge that we must process. This
processing effort causes us to redefine and restructure our
knowledge base and generate new knowledge. We then share
(disseminate) this new knowledge and receive feedback from others.
The dissemination and feedback initiate this cycle of knowledge over
again, as we acquire, process, generate, and disseminate the
knowledge gained from sharing and reexploring our own knowledge
base. As others respond to our knowledge dissemination and we
acquire new knowledge, we engage in rethinking and reflecting on
our knowledge, processing, generating, and then disseminating
anew.
The purpose of this text is to provide a set of practical and
powerful tools to ensure that the reader gains an understanding of NI
and moves from information through knowledge to wisdom. Defining
the demands of nurses and providing tools to help them survive and
succeed in the Knowledge Age remains a major challenge. Exposing
nursing students and nurses to the principles and tools used in NI
helps to prepare them to meet the challenge of practicing nursing in
the Knowledge Age while striving to improve patient care at all
levels.
The text provides a comprehensive framework that embraces
knowledge so that readers can develop their knowledge repositories
and the wisdom necessary to act on and apply that knowledge. The
text is divided into seven sections.
Section I, Building Blocks of Nursing Informatics, covers the
building blocks of NI: nursing science, information science,
computer science, cognitive science, and the ethical
management of information.Section II, Perspectives on Nursing Informatics, provides
readers with a look at various viewpoints on NI and NI practice
as described by experts in the field.
Section III, Nursing Informatics Administrative Applications:
Precare and Care Support, covers important functions of
administrative applications of NI.
Section IV, Nursing Informatics Practice Applications: Care
Delivery, covers healthcare delivery applications, including
electronic health records (EHRs), clinical information systems,
telehealth, patient safety, patient and community education, and
care management.
Section V, Education Applications of Nursing Informatics,
presents subject matter on how informatics supports nursing
education.
Section VI, Research Applications of Nursing Informatics, covers
informatics tools to support nursing research, including data
mining and bioinformatics.
Section VII, Imagining the Future of Nursing Informatics, focuses
on the future of NI, emphasizes the need to preserve caring
functions in technology-laden environments, and explores our
expanding realities and the metaverse.
The introduction to each section explains the relationship between
the content of that section and the Foundation of Knowledge model.
This text places the material within the context of knowledge
acquisition, processing, generation, and dissemination. It serves
both nursing students (BS to DNP/PhD) and professionals who need
to understand, use, and evaluate NI knowledge. As nursing
professors, our major responsibility is to prepare the practitioners
and leaders in the field. Because NI permeates the entire scope of
nursing (i.e., practice, administration, education, and research),
nursing education curricula must include NI. Our primary objective is
to develop the most comprehensive and user-friendly NI text on the
market to prepare nurses for current and future practice challenges.In particular, this text provides a solid groundwork from which to
integrate NI into practice, education, administration, and research.
The goals of this text are as follows:
Impart core NI principles that should be familiar to every nurse
and nursing student.
Challenge novices to experts concerning NI’s competencies and
impact on every area of nursing practice.
Help the reader understand knowledge and how it is acquired,
processed, generated, and disseminated.
Explore the changing role of NI professionals.
Demonstrate the value of the NI discipline as an attractive field
of specialization.
Challenge the reader to expand personal horizons to embrace
emerging technologies and new realities.
Meeting these goals will help nurses and nursing students
understand and use fundamental NI principles so that they efficiently
and effectively function as current and future nursing professionals to
enhance the nursing profession and improve the quality of health
care. The authors would also like to challenge nursing informatics
experts to continually expand their horizons and passion for
appropriate integration of technology in all facets of nursing care.
The overall vision, framework, and pedagogy of this text offer
benefits to readers by highlighting established principles while
drawing out new ones that continue to emerge as nursing and
technology evolve.Authors’ Note
This text provides an overview of nursing informatics from the
perspective of diverse experts in the field, as well as current and
seminal research and literature, with a focus on nursing informatics
and the Foundation of Knowledge model. We want our readers and
students to focus on the relationship of knowledge to informatics and
to embrace and maintain the caring functions of nursing—messages
all too often lost in the romance with technology. We hope you enjoy
the text!Contributors
Ida Androwich, PhD, RN, BC, FAAN
Loyola University Chicago School of Nursing
Maywood, IL
Steven Brewer, PhD
Assistant Professor, Criminal Justice East Carolina University Greenville, NC
Nicholas Hardiker, PhD, RN
Senior Research Fellow University of Salford School of Nursing & Midwifery Salford, UK
Glenn Johnson, MLS
Pennsylvania State University University Park, PA
Julie Kenney, MSN, RNC-OB
Clinical Analyst
Advocate Health Care
Oak Brook, IL
Craig McGonigle, MBA, BSB, CGA Virtual Immersive Simulation Solutions Architect
Whitemouse Productions, UK
Auburndale, FL
Jackie Ritzko
Pennsylvania State University Hazelton, PA
Jeff Swain
Instructional Designer Pennsylvania State University University Park, PA
Denise D. Tyler, MSN/MBA, RN-BC
Implementation Specialist Healthcare Provider, Consulting ACS, a Xerox Company
Dearborn, MIThe editors wish to acknowledge the work of the following first
edition contributors (original contributions were updated by
McGonigle and Mastrian for the second through the sixth editions):
Kathleen Albright, BA, RN
Strategic Account Manager GE Healthcare
Philadelphia, PA
Emily Barey, MSN, RN
Director of Nursing Informatics Epic Systems Corporation Madison, WI
Lisa Reeves Bertin, BS, EMBA Pennsylvania State University Sharon, PA
Brett Bixler, PhD
Pennsylvania State University University Park, PA
Jennifer Bredemeyer, RN
Loyola University Chicago School of Nursing
Skokie, IL
Jon Brouchoud
CEO, Arch Virtual, Developers of Acadicus Madison, WI
Sylvia M. DeSantis, MA Pennsylvania State University University Park, PA
Judith Effken, PhD, RN, FACMI University of Arizona College of Nursing
Tucson, AZ
Nedra Farcus, MSN, RN
Retired from Pennsylvania State University, Altoona Altoona, PA
Kathleen M. Gialanella, JD, RN, LLM
Law Offices
Westfield, NJ
Associate Adjunct Professor Teachers College, Columbia University New York, NY
Adjunct Professor
Seton Hall University, College of Nursing & School of Law South Orange & Newark, NJ
Denise Hammel-Jones, MSN, RN-BC, CLSSBB
Greencastle Associates Consulting Malvern, PA
Schuyler F. Hoss, BA
Northwest Healthcare Management Vancouver, WA
June Kaminski, MSN, RN
Kwantlen University College Surrey, British Columbia, Canada Audrey Kinsella, MA, MS
Information for Tomorrow Telehealth Planning Services Asheville, NCMargaret Ross Kraft, PhD, RN
Loyola University Chicago School of Nursing
Maywood, IL
Wendy L. Mahan, PhD, CRC, LPC
Pennsylvania State University University Park, PA
Heather McKinney, PhD
Pennsylvania State University University Park, PA
Nickolaus Miehl, MSN, RN
Oregon Health Sciences University Monmouth, OR
Peter J. Murray, PhD, RN, FBCS
Coachman’s Cottage
Nocton, Lincoln, UK
Lynn M. Nagle, PhD, RN
Assistant Professor
University of Toronto Susan M. Paschke, MSN, RN
The Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland, OH
Sheldon Prial, RPH, BS Pharmacy Sheldon Prial Consulting Melbourne, FL
Nancy Staggers, PhD, RN, FAAN
Professor, Informatics University of Maryland Baltimore, MD
Marianela Zytkowsi, MSN, RN
The Cleveland Clinic
Cleveland, OH© nadla/E+/Getty ImagesChapter 1
Chapter 2
Chapter 3
Chapter 4
Chapter 5
SECTION I
Building Blocks of Nursing Informatics
Nursing Science and Concepts of Knowledge
Introduction to Information, Information Science, and
Information Systems
Computer Science and the Foundation of Knowledge
Model
Introduction to Cognitive Science and Cognitive
Informatics
Ethical Applications of Informatics
Nursing professionals are information-dependent knowledge
workers. As health care continues to evolve as a data-driven and
information-dependent enterprise, professionals—that is, the
knowledge workers—must be well prepared to make significant
contributions by harnessing informatics concepts and tools. Nursing
informatics (NI), a product of the scientific synthesis of information in
nursing, encompasses concepts from computer science, cognitive
science, information science, and nursing science. NI continues to
evolve as more and more professionals access, use, and develop
the information, computer, and cognitive sciences necessary to
advance nursing science for the betterment of patients and the
profession. Regardless of their future roles in the healthcare milieu, it
is clear that nurses need to understand the ethical application of
information, computer, and cognitive sciences to advance nursing
science and build the nursing knowledge base.
To implement NI, one must view it from the perspective of both the
current healthcare delivery system and the specific, individual
organizational needs while anticipating and creating futureapplications in both the healthcare system and the nursing
profession. Nursing professionals should be expected to discover
opportunities to use NI; participate in the design of solutions; and be
challenged to identify, develop, evaluate, modify, and enhance
applications to improve patient care. This text is designed to provide
the reader with the information and knowledge needed to meet this
expectation.
Section I presents an overview of the building blocks of NI: the
nursing, information, computer, and cognitive sciences. Also included
in this section is a chapter on ethical applications of NI. This section
is central to understanding the content in subsequent chapters.
Chapter 1, Nursing Science and Concepts of Knowledge,
describes nursing science, explores concepts of knowledge and
knowledge development, and introduces the Foundation of
Knowledge model as the conceptual framework for the book. In this
chapter, a clinical case scenario is used to illustrate the knowledge
concepts central to nursing science and practice. A definition of
nursing science is derived here from the American Nurses
Association’s definition of nursing. Nursing science is the ethical
application of knowledge acquired through education, research, and
practice to provide services and interventions to patients to maintain,
enhance, or restore their health and to acquire, process, generate,
and disseminate nursing knowledge to advance the nursing
profession. Knowledge derived from information is a concept central
to nursing, and knowledge is health care’s most valuable resource.
Informatics technologies support individual and organizational
knowledge management. Information science and systems, together
with computers and other technologies, are constantly changing the
way that professionals practice and healthcare organizations
conduct their business, which will continue to evolve.
To prepare for these innovations, the reader must understand
fundamental information and computer concepts, covered in
Chapters 2 and 3, Introduction to Information, Information Science,and Information Systems and Computer Science and the Foundation
of Knowledge Model, respectively. Information science deals with the
interchange (or flow) and scaffolding (or structure) of information and
involves the application of information tools for solutions to patient
care and business problems in health care. To be able to use and
synthesize information effectively, an individual must be able to
obtain, perceive, process, synthesize, comprehend, convey, and
manage the information. Computer science deals with understanding
the development, design, structure, and relationship of computer
hardware and software. This science offers extremely valuable tools
that, if used skillfully, can facilitate the acquisition and manipulation
of data and information by nurses who can then synthesize these
resources into an ever-evolving knowledge and wisdom base. This
synthesis not only facilitates professional development and the ability
to apply evidence-based practice decisions within nursing care, but if
these resources are disseminated and shared, it can also advance
the nursing science knowledge base. The development of
knowledge tools, such as the automation of decision-making and the
strides being made in artificial intelligence, has altered the
understanding of knowledge and its representation. The ability to
structure knowledge electronically facilitates the ability to share
knowledge structures and enhance collective knowledge.
As discussed in Chapter 4, Introduction to Cognitive Science and
Cognitive Informatics, cognitive science deals with how the human
mind functions. This science encompasses how people think,
understand, remember, synthesize, and access stored information
and knowledge. The nature of knowledge, including how it is
developed, used, modified, and shared, provides the basis for
continued learning and intellectual growth. Cognitive science
principles underpin computer and software development as well as
more advanced informatics topics such as artificial intelligence (AI)
and robotics. Chapter 5, Ethical Applications of Informatics, focuses
on ethical issues associated with managing private information with
technology and provides a framework for analyzing ethical issues
and supporting ethical decision-making. This chapter providesworking wisdom by allowing the reader to experience an expert’s
practical application of knowledge and experience as they address
specific situations; it walks the reader through an expert’s application
of the ETHICAL model.
The material in this book is placed within the context of the
Foundation of Knowledge model (shown in Figure I-1, which is more
fully introduced and explained in Chapter 1, Nursing Science and
Concepts of Knowledge). The Foundation of Knowledge model is
used throughout the text to illustrate how knowledge is used to meet
the needs of healthcare delivery systems, organizations, patients,
and nurses. Through interaction with the building blocks of
knowledge—the theories, architecture, and tools—one acquires the
bits and pieces of data necessary to synthesize them into
information and then generate and disseminate the resulting
knowledge. Through this dynamic exchange, which includes
feedback, individuals continue the interaction with and use of these
sciences to input, or acquire; process; and output, or disseminate,
generated knowledge. Humans experience their environment and
learn by acquiring, processing, generating, and disseminating
knowledge. When they then share (disseminate) this new knowledge
and receive feedback on the knowledge they have shared, the
feedback initiates the cycle of knowledge all over again. As
individuals acquire, process, generate, and disseminate knowledge,
they are motivated to share, rethink, reflect on, and explore their own
knowledge base. This complex process is captured in the
Foundation of Knowledge model. Throughout the chapters in Section
I, Building Blocks of Nursing Informatics, readers are challenged to
think about how the model can help them to understand the ways in
which they acquire, process, generate, disseminate, and then
receive and process feedback on their new knowledge of the
building blocks of NI.Designed by Alicia Mastrian
Figure I-1 Foundation of Knowledge Model
DescriptionC H A P T E R 1
Nursing Science and
Concepts of Knowledge
OBJECTIVES
1. Define nursing science and its relationship to nursing informatics.
2. Introduce the Foundation of Knowledge model as the organizing conceptual
framework for the text.
3. Explore the complex relationships among nursing informatics principles, concepts of
knowledge, and knowledge co-creation.
KEY TERMS
borrowed theory
building block
clinical database
clinical practice guideline
conceptual framework
data
data mining
evidence
feedback
Foundation of Knowledge model
information
knowledge
knowledge acquisition
knowledge dissemination
knowledge domain process (KDP) model
knowledge generation
knowledge management system (KMS)knowledge processing
knowledge worker
nursing informatics (NI)
nursing science
nursing theory
relational database
transparent wisdomIntroduction
Nursing informatics (NI) has been traditionally defined as a
specialty that integrates nursing science, computer science, and
information science to manage and communicate data, information,
knowledge, and wisdom in nursing practice. This chapter focuses on
nursing science as one of the building blocks of NI. As depicted in
Figure 1-1, the traditional definition of NI is extended in this text to
include cognitive science. The Foundation of Knowledge model is
also introduced as the organizing conceptual framework of this
text, and the model is tied to nursing science and the practice of NI.
We conclude the chapter with an overview of key knowledge
concepts and establish that nurses are knowledge workers.Figure 1-1 Building Blocks of Nursing InformaticsNursing Science
Consider the following patient care scenario as a basis for
understanding nursing science:
Tom H. is a registered nurse in a busy metropolitan hospital emergency room. He
has just admitted a 79-year-old man whose wife brought him to the hospital
because he is having trouble breathing. Tom immediately clips a pulse oximeter to
the patient’s finger and quickly assesses the patient’s other vital signs. He
discovers a rapid pulse rate and a decreased oxygen saturation level in addition to
rapid and labored breathing. Tom determines that the patient is not in immediate
danger and that he does not require intubation. Tom focuses his initial attention on
easing the patient’s labored breathing by elevating the head of the bed and
initiating oxygen treatment; he then hooks the patient up to a heart monitor. Tom
continues to assess the patient’s breathing status as he performs a head-to-toe
assessment of the patient that leads to the nursing diagnoses and additional
interventions necessary to provide comprehensive care to this patient.
Consider Tom’s actions and how and why he intervened as he did.
Tom relied on the immediate data and information that he acquired
during his initial rapid assessment to deliver appropriate care to his
patient. Tom also used technology (a pulse oximeter and a heart
monitor) to assist with and support the delivery of care. What is not
immediately apparent, and some would argue is transparent (done
without conscious thought), is the fact that during the rapid
assessment, Tom reached into his knowledge base of previous
learning and experiences to direct his care so that he could act with
transparent wisdom. He used both nursing theory and borrowed
theory to inform his practice. Tom certainly used the nursing process
theory, and he may have also used one of several other nursing
theories, such as Rogers’s science of unitary human beings, Orem’s
theory of self-care deficit, or Roy’s adaptation theory. In addition,
Tom may have applied his knowledge from some of the basic
sciences, such as anatomy, physiology, psychology, and chemistry,
as he determined the patient’s immediate needs. Information from
Maslow’s hierarchy of needs, Lazarus’s transaction model of stress
and coping, and the health belief model may have also helped Tom
practice professional nursing. He gathered data and then analyzedand interpreted those data to form a conclusion—the essence of
science. Tom illustrates the practical aspects of nursing science.
The focus of nursing is on human responses to actual or potential
health problems and advocacy for various clients. These human
responses are varied and may change over time in a single case.
Nurses must possess the technical skills to manage equipment and
perform procedures; the interpersonal skills to interact appropriately
with people; and the cognitive skills to observe, recognize, collect,
analyze, and interpret data to reach a reasonable conclusion, which
forms the basis of a decision. At the heart of each of these skills lies
the management of data and information. Nursing science focuses
on the ethical application of knowledge acquired through education,
research, and practice to provide services and interventions to
patients to maintain, enhance, or restore their health and to acquire,
process, generate, and disseminate nursing knowledge to advance
the nursing profession.
Nursing is an information-intensive profession. The steps of using
information, applying knowledge to a problem, and acting with
wisdom form the basis of nursing science practice. Information is
composed of data that were processed using knowledge. For
information to be valuable, it must be accessible, accurate, timely,
complete, cost-effective, flexible, reliable, relevant, simple, verifiable,
and secure. Knowledge is the awareness and understanding of a
set of information and ways that this information can be made useful
to support a specific task or arrive at a decision. In the case
scenario, Tom used accessible, accurate, timely, relevant, and
verifiable data and information. He compared that data and
information to his knowledge base of previous experiences to
determine which data and information were relevant to the current
case. By applying his previous knowledge to data, he converted
those data into information and information into new knowledge—
that is, an understanding of which nursing interventions were
appropriate in this case. Thus, information is data made functional
through the application of knowledge.
Humans acquire data and information in bits and pieces and then
transform the information into knowledge. The information-processing functions of the brain are frequently compared to those of
a computer and vice versa. (See a discussion of cognitive
informatics in Chapter 4, Introduction to Cognitive Science and
Cognitive Informatics, for more information.) Humans can be thought
of as organic information systems that are constantly acquiring,
processing, and generating information or knowledge in their
professional and personal lives. They have an amazing ability to
manage knowledge. This ability is learned and honed from birth as
individuals make their way through life interacting with the
environment and being inundated with data and information. Each
person experiences the environment and learns by acquiring,
processing, generating, and disseminating knowledge.
Tom, for example, acquired knowledge in his basic nursing
education program and continues to build his foundation of
knowledge by engaging in such activities as reading nursing
research and theory articles, attending continuing education
programs, consulting with expert colleagues, and using clinical
databases and clinical practice guidelines. As he interacts in the
environment, he acquires data that must be processed into
knowledge. This processing effort causes him to redefine and
restructure his knowledge base and generate new knowledge. Tom
can then share (disseminate) this new knowledge with colleagues,
and he may receive feedback on the knowledge that he shares. This
dissemination and feedback build the knowledge foundation anew as
Tom acquires, processes, generates, and disseminates new
knowledge as a result of his interactions. As others respond to his
knowledge dissemination and he acquires yet more knowledge, he is
engaged to rethink, reflect on, and reexplore his knowledge
acquisition, leading to further processing, generating, and then
disseminating knowledge. It should be clear at this point that
knowledge management is a fundamental part of nursing science.
What will become even clearer as the text unfolds is how informatics
supports knowledge management.Foundation of Knowledge Model
We developed the Foundation of Knowledge model to illustrate
these ongoing knowledge processes. The model (Figure 1-2) is
used as an organizing framework for this text and as a way to help
the reader focus on how we develop and use an individual
knowledge base.
Designed by Alicia Mastrian
Figure 1-2 Foundation of Knowledge Model
DescriptionAt its base, the model contains bits, bytes (computer terms used to
quantify data), data, and information in a random representation.
Growing out of the base are separate cones of light that expand as
they reflect upward; these cones represent knowledge acquisition,
knowledge generation, and knowledge dissemination. At the
intersection of the cones and forming a new cone is knowledge
processing. Encircling and cutting through the knowledge cones is
feedback, which acts on and may transform any or all aspects of
knowledge represented by the cones. One should imagine the model
as a dynamic figure in which the cones of light and the feedback
rotate and interact rather than remaining static. Knowledge
acquisition, knowledge generation, knowledge dissemination,
knowledge processing, and feedback are constantly evolving for
nursing professionals. The transparent effect of the cones is
deliberate and intended to suggest that as knowledge grows and
expands, its use becomes more transparent, meaning people use
this knowledge during practice without even being consciously aware
of which aspect of knowledge they are using at any given moment.
To simplify the understanding of the Foundation of Knowledge
model, it may be helpful to think back on an early learning
experience. Recall the first time you got behind the wheel of a car.
There was so much to remember to do and so much to pay attention
to, especially if you wanted to avoid an accident. You had to think
about how to start the car, adjust the mirrors, fasten the seat belt,
and shift the car into gear. You had to take in data and information
from friends and family members who tried to “tell” you how to drive.
They disseminated knowledge, and you acquired it. And they most
likely provided lots of feedback about your driving. As you drove
down the street, you also had to notice multiple bits of data in the
environment, such as stop signs, traffic signals, turn signals, and
speed limit signs, and try to interpret these environmental data into
usable information for the current situation. You had to pay attention
to several things simultaneously to drive safely. As your confidence
grew with experience, you were able to drive more effectively and
generate new knowledge about driving that became part of your
personal knowledge structure. After many driving experiences, theprocess of driving became transparent and seamless. Think about
this example in relation to a skill that you have acquired or are
acquiring in your nursing education. How does or did your learning
experience mirror the components of the Foundation of Knowledge
model? Experienced nurses, thinking back to their novice years, may
recall feeling like their heads were filled with bits of data and
information that did not form any type of cohesive whole. As the
model depicts, the processing of knowledge begins a bit later
(imagine a timeline applied vertically, with early experiences on the
bottom and expertise growing as the processing of knowledge
ensues). Early on in nurses’ education, conscious attention is
focused mainly on knowledge acquisition, and beginning nurses
depend on their instructors and others to process, generate, and
disseminate knowledge. As nurses become more comfortable with
the science of nursing, they begin to independently perform some of
the other Foundation of Knowledge functions. However, to keep up
with the explosion of information in nursing and health care, they
must continue to rely on the knowledge generation of nursing
theorists and researchers and the dissemination of their work. In this
sense, nurses are committed to lifelong learning and the use of
knowledge in the practice of nursing science.
Knowledge management and transfer in healthcare organizations
are likely to be studied in greater depth as our understanding of
professional knowledge increases and our processes to capture and
codify it improve. We must strive to facilitate the data, information,
and knowledge exchange in the right format between the right
people when they need it to proficiently create value for and add
value to the organization (APQC, 2022). The Foundation of
Knowledge model is not perfect, and others have developed models
of knowledge that are more complex. For example, Evans and
Alleyne (2009) constructed the knowledge domain process (KDP)
model to represent knowledge construction and dissemination in an
organization. Yet they caution as follows:
[T]he KDP model, like all models, is an abstraction aimed at making complex
systems more easily understood. While the model presents knowledge processesin a structured and simplified form, the nature and structure of the processes
themselves may be open to debate. (p. 148)
As we will learn later in this chapter, getting the knowledge to the
user and creating a culture where new knowledge is seamlessly
integrated into health care remain a challenge. Mason (2020) offered
this insight:
Simply put, knowledge management undertakes to identify what is in essence a
human asset buried in the minds and hard drives of individuals working in an
organization. Knowledge management also requires a system that will allow the
creation of new knowledge, a dissemination system that will reach every
employee, with the ability to package knowledge as value-added in products,
services and systems. (para. 1)
Other impacts that currently challenge knowledge management
and will become necessary to synthesize into a comprehensive
knowledge management process are the technologies advancing
cognitive computing, artificial intelligence (AI), cognitive systems,
machine learning, and predictive analytics. These ongoing
advancements will “radically transform how we learn and interact in
the digital world” and within our organizations (APQC, 2022, para.
18). Figure 1-3 depicts the life cycle of knowledge management in
an organization. Note the informatics tools that are integral to
knowledge management, particularly in its knowledge dissemination,
knowledge development, and knowledge processing aspects.Figure 1-3 The Knowledge Management Life Cycle
Description
For nurse knowledge workers, information is their primary
resource, and when they deal with information, they do so in
overlapping phases. That is, the nurses are continually acquiring,
processing, assimilating, retaining, and using this information to
generate and disseminate knowledge. However, the phases are not
sequential; instead, a constant gleaning of data and information fromthe environment takes place, with the data and information
massaged into knowledge bases so that knowledge can be applied
and shared (disseminated).
The Foundation of Knowledge model permeates this text,
reflecting the understanding that knowledge is a powerful tool and
that nurses focus on information as a key building block of
knowledge. The application of the model is described to help the
reader understand and appreciate the foundation of knowledge in
nursing science and see how it applies to NI. All the nursing roles
(i.e., practice, administration, education, research, and informatics)
involve the science of nursing. Nurses are knowledge workers,
working with and generating information and knowledge as a
product. They are knowledge acquirers, providing convenient and
efficient means of capturing and storing knowledge. They are
knowledge users, meaning individuals or groups that benefit from
valuable, viable knowledge. Nurses are knowledge engineers,
people who design, develop, implement, and maintain knowledge.
They are knowledge managers by capturing and processing
collective expertise and distributing it where it can create the
greatest benefit. Finally, they are knowledge developers and
generators, people who change and evolve knowledge based on the
tasks at hand and the information available. McGowan et al. (2018)
described a similar model, the Knowledge Worker Knowledge
Enhancement Process, a process whereby knowledge workers
actively seek, apply, embed, and share newly acquired knowledge
with others. Knowledge workers “apply their mental competencies”
(MasterClass, 2022, para. 1).
More recently introduced in popular literature was the concept of a
“learning worker,” one who has the ability to learn quickly and
continuously (Salisbury, 2017) and “extract the learning from their
work experiences” (Euro Digital Systems, 2021, para. 25), a
designation that is not as frequently seen in the popular literature as
the term knowledge worker even though many healthcare
organizations are transitioning to learning organizations.
In the case scenario, at first glance one might label Tom as a
knowledge worker, acquirer, and user. However, stopping theremight sell Tom short in his practice of nursing science. Although he
acquired and used knowledge to help him achieve his work, he also
processed the data and information he collected to develop a
nursing diagnosis and a plan of care. The knowledge stores Tom
used to develop and glean knowledge from valuable information are
generative (having the ability to originate and produce, or generate).
For example, Tom may have learned something new about his
patient’s culture from the patient or his wife, which he will keep by
filing it in the knowledge repository of his mind to be used in a similar
situation. As he compares this new cultural information to what he
already knows, he may gain insight into the effect of culture on a
patient’s response to illness. In this sense, Tom is a knowledge
generator. If he shares this newly acquired knowledge with another
practitioner as he records his observations and conclusions, he is
then disseminating knowledge. Tom also uses feedback from the
various technologies he has applied to monitor his patient’s status. In
addition, he may rely on feedback from laboratory reports or even
other practitioners to help him rethink, revise, and apply the
knowledge that he is generating about this patient.
To have ongoing value, knowledge must be viable. Knowledge
viability refers to applications (most of them technology based) that
offer easily accessible, accurate, and timely information obtained
from a variety of resources and methods and presented in a manner
so as to provide the necessary elements to generate new
knowledge. In the case scenario, Tom may have felt the need to
consult an electronic database or a clinical guidelines repository that
he has downloaded on his tablet or smartphone or that resides in the
emergency room’s networked computer system to assist him in the
development of a comprehensive care plan for his patient. In this
way, Tom uses technology and evidence to support and inform his
practice. It is also possible in this scenario that an alert might appear
in the patient’s electronic health record or in the clinical information
system to remind Tom to ask about influenza and pneumonia
vaccines. Clinical information technologies that support and inform
nursing practice and nursing administration are an important part of
NI.The Nature of Knowledge
Knowledge may be thought of as either explicit or tacit. Explicit
knowledge is the knowledge that one can convey in letters, words,
and numbers. It can be exchanged or shared in the form of data,
manuals, product specifications, principles, policies, and theories.
Nurses can disseminate and share this knowledge publicly, or on the
record, and scientifically, or methodically. A nursing model or theory
that is well developed and easily explained and understood is an
example of explicit knowledge. In contrast, tacit knowledge is
individualized and highly personal, or private, including one’s values
or emotions. Knowing intuitively when and how to care is an example
of tacit knowledge. This type of knowledge is difficult to convey,
transmit, or share with others because it consists of one’s own
insights, or slant on things; perceptions; intuition; sense; hunches; or
gut feelings. Tacit knowledge reflects skills and beliefs, which is why
it is difficult to explain or communicate to others.
Farr and Cressey (2015) used grounded theory methodology to
study how professionals perceive the quality of their performance,
and they found that intangible, tacit knowledge was just as important
to the perception of quality of performance as more standardized
rational measures of quality based on organizational policy:
This paper illuminates the importance of the tacit, intangible and relational
dimensions of quality in actual practice. Staff values and personal and professional
standards are core to understanding how quality is co-produced in service
interactions. Professional experience, tacit clinical knowledge, personal standards
and values, and conversations with patients and families all contributed to how
staff understood and assessed the quality of their work in everyday practice. (p. 8)
Along these same lines, references to the co-creation of
knowledge have been surfacing in the literature in the last decade.
Bagayogo et al. (2014) suggested that knowledge co-creation is
increasingly important to innovation in organizations and that
knowledge is co-created as individuals collaborate on a shared task
and share their experiences and perceptions. They reported on theuse of social media support for breast and prostate cancer patients:
“Individuals work together and co-create knowledge through a
process that evolves temporally and is embedded in a web of
interactions. Both temporal and interactional dimensions have been
considered in the study of knowledge co-creation” (p. 627). The
importance of knowledge cocreation is noted worldwide as
evidenced in the program of study for teachers to enhance effective
learning in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM) education in the knowledge co-creation program in Zambia
(Ministry of Education, 2022).
How nursing students and practicing nurses learn is directly
affected by their practice experiences within their own personal
frame of reference. The quality of clinical decision-making is directly
related to experience and knowledge. Knowledge is situational.
Explicit and tacit knowledge are used to conduct assessments,
diagnoses, intervention implementation, and evaluation of nursing
actions for each individual patient. Knowledge management
systems (KMSs) must blend these knowledge needs and provide
knowledge bases and decision support systems to inform clinical
decision-making. Each person processes and assimilates knowledge
in a unique way, which is influenced by their unique perspective.
What is needed is an explicit way of surfacing these nuggets of
knowledge so that they can be shared among practitioners.The Nurse as a Knowledge Worker
As we have already established, all nurses use data and information.
This information is then converted to knowledge. The nurse then
acts on this knowledge by initiating a plan of care, updating an
existing one, or maintaining the status quo. Does this use of
knowledge make the nurse a knowledge worker?
The term knowledge worker was first coined by Peter Drucker in
his 1959 book, Landmarks of Tomorrow (Drucker, 1996). Knowledge
work is defined as nonrepetitive, nonroutine work that entails a
significant amount of cognitive activity (Sorrells-Jones & Weaver,
1999). Drucker described a knowledge worker as one who has
advanced formal education and can apply theoretical and analytical
knowledge. According to Drucker, the knowledge worker must be a
continuous learner and a specialist in a field.
Characteristics of Knowledge Workers
According to Gent (2007), there are three types of knowledge
workers: (1) knowledge consumers, (2) knowledge brokers, and (3)
knowledge generators. This breakdown of knowledge workers is not
mutually exclusive; instead, people transition between these states
as their situations and experience, education, and knowledge
change.
Knowledge consumers are mainly users of knowledge who do
not have the expertise to provide the knowledge they need for
themselves. Novice nurses can be thought of as knowledge
consumers who use the knowledge of experienced nurses or
search information systems for the knowledge necessary to
apply to their practice. As responsible knowledge consumers,
they must also question and challenge what is known to help
them learn and understand. Their questioning and challenging
facilitate critical thinking and the development of new knowledge.Knowledge brokers know where to find information and
knowledge; they generate some knowledge but are mainly
known for their ability to find what is needed. More experienced
nurses and nursing students become knowledge brokers out of
necessity because they need to know something.
Knowledge generators are the “primary sources of new
knowledge” (para. 2). They include nursing researchers and
nursing experts—the people who know; they can answer
questions, craft theories, find solutions to nursing problems or
concerns, and innovate as part of their practice.
As knowledge work continues to stay in the forefront for healthcare
professionals, it is important to realize that knowledge work
grows and evolves with the individual, their profession, and the
colleagues who invigorate them and whom they invigorate;
requires the individual to use their knowledge in interpreting
each specific patient context or situation to leverage their
wisdom to initiate the appropriate action and continuously
reassess the patient or situation; and
is a catalyst for change and must be shared and honed.
As nursing recognized the knowledge work necessary to improve
patient care and enhance the profession, so has medicine. Machin et
al. (2022) believed that physicians must be “thinking differently,
doing differently, and linking differently. This requires a raised
awareness of knowledge work skills, support for their use, and
promotion of linked working within communities of practice” (p. 73).
The healthcare industry, nursing profession, and patients all
benefit as nurses develop nursing intelligence and intellectual capital
by gaining insight into nursing science and its enactment in their
practice. NI applications of databases, knowledge management
systems, and repositories, where this knowledge can be analyzed
and reused, facilitate this process by enabling knowledge to be
disseminated and recycled.Getting to Wisdom
This text provides a framework that embraces knowledge so that
readers can develop the wisdom necessary to apply what they have
learned. Wisdom is the application of knowledge to an appropriate
situation. In the practice of nursing science, one expects actions to
be directed by wisdom. Wisdom uses knowledge and experience to
heighten common sense and insight to exercise sound judgment in
practical matters. It is developed through knowledge, experience,
insight, and reflection. Sometimes wisdom is thought of as the
highest form of common sense, the result of accumulated
knowledge, erudition (i.e., deep, thorough learning), or
enlightenment (i.e., education that results in understanding and the
dissemination of knowledge). It is the ability to apply valuable and
viable knowledge, experience, understanding, and insight while
being prudent and sensible. Knowledge and wisdom are not
synonymous: Knowledge abounds with others’ thoughts and
information, whereas wisdom is focused on one’s own mind and the
synthesis of experience, insight, understanding, and knowledge.
Wisdom has been called the foundation of the art of nursing.
Some nursing roles might be viewed as more focused on some
aspects than other aspects of the Foundation of Knowledge model.
For example, some people might argue that nurse educators are
primarily knowledge disseminators and that nurse researchers are
knowledge generators. Although the more frequent output of their
efforts can certainly be viewed in this way, it is important to realize
that nurses use all aspects of the Foundation of Knowledge model,
regardless of their area of practice. For nurse educators to be
effective, they must be in the habit of constantly building and
rebuilding their foundation of knowledge about nursing science. In
addition, as they develop and implement curricular innovations, they
must evaluate the effectiveness of those changes. In some cases,
they use formal research techniques to achieve this goal andtherefore generate knowledge about the best and most effective
teaching strategies. Similarly, nurse researchers must acquire and
process new knowledge as they design and conduct their research
studies. All nurses have the opportunity to be involved in the formal
dissemination of knowledge via their participation in professional
conferences, either as presenters or as attendees. In addition, some
nurses disseminate knowledge by formal publication of their ideas. In
the case of presenting at conferences or publishing, nurses may
receive feedback that stimulates rethinking about the knowledge
they have generated and disseminated, which in turn prompts them
to acquire and process data and information anew.
Regardless of their practice arena, all nurses must use informatics
and technology to inform and support that practice. The case
scenario introduced earlier discussed Tom’s use of various
monitoring devices that provide feedback on the physiological status
of the patient. It was also suggested that Tom might consult a clinical
database or nursing practice guidelines residing in the cloud (a
virtual information storage system) on a tablet or smartphone or on a
clinical agency network as he develops an appropriate plan of action
for his nursing interventions. Perhaps the clinical information system
in the agency supports the collection of data about patients in a
relational database, which would provide an opportunity for data
mining by nursing administrators or nurse researchers. Data mining
provides an opportunity to tease out important relationships to
determine best practices to support the delivery of effective care.
This text is designed to include the necessary content to prepare
nurses for practice in the ever-changing and technology-laden
healthcare environments. Informatics competence has been
recognized for many years as being necessary to enhance clinical
decision-making and improve patient care. NI research should be on
the structuring and processing of patient information and the ways
that these endeavors inform nursing decision-making in clinical
practice. The increased use of technology to enhance nursing
practice, nursing education, and nursing research will open new
avenues for acquiring, processing, generating, and disseminating
knowledge.In the future, nursing research will make significant contributions to
the development of nursing science. Technologies and translational
research will abound, and clinical practices will continue to be
evidence based, thereby improving patient outcomes and decreasing
safety concerns. Schools of nursing will embrace nursing science as
they strive to meet the needs of changing student populations and
the increasing complexity of healthcare environments.Summary
Nursing science influences all areas of nursing practice. This chapter
provided an overview of nursing science and considered how
nursing science relates to typical nursing practice roles, education,
informatics, and research. The Foundation of Knowledge model was
introduced as the organizing conceptual framework for this text. We
reviewed key concepts of knowledge and the characteristics of
knowledge workers, thus establishing nurses as knowledge workers.
Finally, the relationship of nursing science to NI was discussed. In
subsequent chapters, the reader will learn more about how NI
supports nurses in their many and varied roles. In an ideal world,
nurses would embrace nursing science as knowledge users,
knowledge managers, knowledge generators, knowledge engineers,
and knowledge workers.
THOUGHT-PROVOKING QUESTIONS
1. Imagine you are in a social situation and someone asks you, “What does a nurse
do?” Think about how you would capture and convey in your answer the richness
that is nursing science.
2. Choose a clinical scenario from your recent experience and analyze it using the
Foundation of Knowledge model. How did you acquire knowledge? How did you
process knowledge? How did you generate knowledge? How did you disseminate
knowledge? How did you use feedback, and what was the effect of the feedback on
the foundation of your knowledge?R E F E R E N C E S
APQC. (2022). What is knowledge management?
www.apqc.org/whatisknowledgemanagement
Bagayogo, F., Lapointe, L., Ramaprasad, J., & Vedel, I. (2014, January 6–9). Co-creation of
knowledge in healthcare: A study of social media usage [Session paper]. 47th Hawaii
International Conference on System Sciences, Waikoloa, Hawaii.
https://doi.org/10.1109/HICSS.2014.84
Drucker, P. F. (1996). Landmarks of tomorrow. Transaction. (Original work published 1959)
Euro Digital Systems. (2021). Knowledge workers vs. learning workers (pros and cons).
www.eurodigitalsystems.co.uk/blog/knowledge-workers-vs-learning-workers-pros-and￾cons
Evans, M., & Alleyne, J. (2009). The concept of knowledge in KM: A knowledge domain
process model applied to inter-professional care. Knowledge and Process Management,
16(4), 147–161. https://doi.org/10.1002/kpm.331
Farr, M., & Cressey, P. (2015). Understanding staff perspectives of quality in practice in
healthcare. BMC Health Services Research, 15(1), 1–11. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12913-
015-0788-1
Gent, A. (2007, October 17). Three types of knowledge workers. Incredibly Dull.
http://incrediblydull.blogspot.com/2007/10/three-types-of-knowledge-workers.html
Machin, A., Reeve, J., Lyness, E., & Reilly, J. (2022). Future doctors as knowledge workers.
British Journal of General Practice, 72(715), 73. https://doi.org/10.3399/bjgp22X718397
Mason, M. (2020). Knowledge management: The essence of the competitive edge.
www.moyak.com/papers/knowledge-management.html
MasterClass. (2022). What are knowledge workers? The role of knowledge workers.
www.masterclass.com/articles/knowledge-workers#6k3s0g5OZEiQzdkIVTphQd
McGowan, C. G., Reid, K. L. P., & Styger, L. E. J. (2018). The knowledge enhancement
process of knowledge workers. Journal of Organizational Psychology, 18(1), 33–41.
https://ro.uow.edu.au/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=2520&context=buspapers
Ministry of Education. (2022). Knowledge co-creation programme (KCCP).
https://nsc.gov.zm/_kccp/index.php
Salisbury, M. (2017, May 9). Introducing the new learning workers. Association for Talent
Development. www.td.org/insights/introducing-the-new-learning-workers
Sorrells-Jones, J., & Weaver, D. (1999). Knowledge workers and knowledge-intense
organizations, Part 1: A promising framework for nursing and healthcare. Journal of
Nursing Administration, 29(7/8), 12–18. https://doi.org/10.1097/00005110-199907000-
00008C H A P T E R 2
Introduction to Information,
Information Science, and
Information Systems
OBJECTIVES
1. Reflect on the progression from data to information to knowledge.
2. Describe the term information.
3. Assess how information is acquired.
4. Explore the characteristics of quality information.
5. Describe an information system.
6. Explore data acquisition, or input; processing, or retrieval; analysis; and synthesis of
data.
7. Assess output (e.g., reports, documents, summaries, alerts, and outcomes).
8. Describe information dissemination and feedback.
9. Define information science.
10. Assess how information is processed.
11. Explore how knowledge is generated in information science.
KEY TERMS
21st Century Cures Act (Cures Act)
acquisition
alert
analysis
artificial intelligence (AI)
Artificial Intelligence of Things (AIoT)
chief information officerchief technical officer
chief technology officer
cloud computing
cognitive science
communication science
computer science
computer-based information system
Consolidated Health Informatics (CHI)
data
dissemination
document
electronic health information (EHI)
electronic health record (EHR)
Federal Health Information Exchange (FHIE)
feedback
health information exchange (HIE)
Health Level Seven International (HL7)
Health New England
Indiana Health Information Exchange (IHIE)
information
information science
information system (IS)
information technology (IT)
input
interface
Internet of Things (IoT)
Internet2
knowledge
knowledge worker
library science
Massachusetts Health Data Consortium (MHDC)
National Health Information Infrastructure (NHII)
Nationwide Health Information Network (NHIN)
Next Generation Internet (NGI)
Office of the National Coordinator for Health Information Technology (ONC)
outcome
output
processing
Rapid Syndromic Validation Project (RSVP)report
social science
stakeholder
summary
synthesis
telecommunicationsIntroduction
This chapter explores information, information systems (ISs), and
information science as one of the building blocks of informatics
(Figure 2-1). The key word here, of course, is information.
Information and information processing are central to the work of
health care. Healthcare professionals are known as knowledge
workers because they deal with and process information on a daily
basis to make it meaningful and inform their practice.Figure 2-1 Building Blocks of Nursing Informatics
Healthcare information is complex and abounds with concerns
and issues, such as ownership, access, disclosure, exchange,
security, privacy, disposal, and dissemination. The widespread
implementation of electronic health records (EHRs) has promoted
collaboration among the public- and private-sector stakeholders on
a wide-ranging variety of healthcare information solutions. Some ofthe collaborative initiatives that we have seen over the years include
Health Level Seven International (HL7), Consolidated Health
Informatics (CHI), National Health Information Infrastructure
(NHII), Nationwide Health Information Network (NHIN), Next
Generation Internet (NGI), Internet2, and iHealth records in the
cloud. There are also health information exchange (HIE) systems,
such as NHS Connecting for Health, eHealth Initiative, Federal
Health Information Exchange (FHIE), Indiana Health Information
Exchange (IHIE), Massachusetts Health Data Consortium
(MHDC), Health New England, State of New Mexico’s Rapid
Syndromic Validation Project (RSVP), Southeast Michigan e￾Prescribing Initiative, and Tennessee Volunteer eHealth Initiative
(ASPE, n.d.; Goldstein et al., 2007; HL7 International, 2022; Western
Governors University, 2021). Many of these projects and initiatives
were sparked by the HITECH Act of 2011, which set the 2014
deadline for implementing EHRs and provided the impetus for HIE
initiatives. In addition, the Office of the National Coordinator for
Health Information Technology (ONC) is responsible for
implementing key provisions of the 21st Century Cures Act (Cures
Act) to promote interoperability and the access, exchange, and use
of electronic health information (EHI) and information blocking
(Department of Health and Human Services, 2020). It is quite
evident from the previous brief listing that there is a need to remedy
today’s healthcare information technology (IT) concerns,
challenges, and issues. One of the main issues deals with how to
manage healthcare information to make it meaningful. It is important
to understand how people obtain, manipulate, use, share, and
dispose of information. This chapter deals with the information piece
of this complex puzzle.Information
Suppose someone states the number 99.5. What does that
represent? It could be a radio station or a score on a test. Now
suppose someone says that Ms. Howsunny’s temperature is 99.5°F.
What does that convey? With that information, we now know that
99.5 is her temperature. The data (99.5) was processed into the
information that 99.5°F is a specific person’s temperature. Data are
raw facts. Information is processed data that has meaning.
Healthcare professionals constantly process data and information to
provide the best possible care for their patients.
Many types of data exist, such as alphabetic, numeric, audio,
image, and video data. Alphabetic, or alpha, data refer to letters;
numeric data refer to numbers; and alphanumeric data combine both
letters and numbers. These data include all text and the numeric
outputs of digital monitors. Some of the alphanumeric data
encountered by healthcare professionals are in the form of patients’
names, identification numbers, or medical record numbers. Audio
data refer to sounds, noises, or tones—for example, monitor alerts or
alarms, taped or recorded messages, and other sounds. Image data
include graphics and pictures, such as graphic monitor displays or
recorded electrocardiograms, radiographs, magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) outputs, and computed tomography (CT) scans.
Video data refer to animations, moving pictures, or moving graphics.
Using these data, one may review the ultrasound of a pregnant
patient; examine a patient’s echocardiogram; watch an animated
video for professional development; or learn how to operate a new
technology tool, such as a pump or monitoring system. The data we
gather, such as heart and lung sounds or X-rays, help us produce
information. For example, if a patient’s X-rays show a fracture, the
image is then interpreted into information about the fracture, such as
whether it is a spiral, compound, or hairline fracture. This informationis then processed into knowledge, and a treatment plan is
formulated, based on the healthcare professional’s wisdom.
The integrity and quality of the data, rather than the form, are what
matter. Integrity refers to whole, complete, correct, and consistent
data (Figure 2-2). Data integrity can be compromised through
human error; viruses, worms, or other computer bugs; hardware
failures or crashes; transmission errors; or hackers entering the
system. Figure 2-3 illustrates some of the ways that data can be
compromised. IT helps to decrease these errors by putting
safeguards into place, such as backing up files on a routine basis,
error detection for transmissions, and user interfaces that help
people enter the data correctly. High-quality data are relevant and
accurately represent their corresponding concepts. Data are dirty
when a database contains errors, such as duplicate, incomplete, or
outdated records. One of the authors (D.M.) found 50 cases of
tongue cancer in a database that she examined for data quality.
When the records were tracked down and analyzed and the dirty
data removed, only one case of tongue cancer remained. In this
situation, the data for the same person had been entered
erroneously 49 times. The major problem was with the patient’s
identification number and name: the number had been changed or
the name misspelled repeatedly. If researchers had taken the
number of cases in that defined population as 50, they would have
concluded that tongue cancer was an epidemic, which would have
resulted in flawed information that is not meaningful. As this example
demonstrates, it is imperative that data be clean if the goal is to have
quality information. The data that are processed into information
must be of high quality and integrity to create meaning to inform
assessments and decision-making.Figure 2-2 Data IntegrityFigure 2-3 Threats to Data Integrity
Description
To be valuable and meaningful, information must be of good
quality. Its value relates directly to how the information informs
decision-making. Characteristics of valuable, quality information
include accessibility, security, timeliness, accuracy, relevancy,
completeness, flexibility, reliability, objectivity, utility, transparency,
verifiability, and reproducibility.
Accessibility is a must; the right users must be able to obtain the
right information at the right time and in the right format to meet their
needs. Getting meaningful information to the right users at the right
time is as vital as generating the information in the first place. The
right users are those who are authorized to obtain the data and
information they are seeking. Security is a major challenge becauseunauthorized users must be blocked while at the same time
authorized users must have open and easy access. (See Chapter
12, Electronic Security.)
Timely information means that the information is available when it
is needed for the right purpose and at the right time. Knowing who
won the lottery last week does not help you to know whether
someone won it today. Accurate information means that there are no
errors in the data and information. Relevant information is a
subjective descriptor in that the information must be relevant, or
applicable, to the user’s needs. For example, if a healthcare provider
is trying to decide whether a patient needs insulin and they have only
the patient’s CT scan information, then the healthcare provider would
not be able to make that determination because the available
information is not relevant for that specific need. However, if the
healthcare provider needed information about the CT scan, then the
information would be relevant.
Complete information contains all the necessary essential data.
For example, if a healthcare provider needs to contact the only
relative listed for the patient and that relative’s contact information is
listed but the approval for that person to be a contact is missing, then
this information would be considered incomplete. Flexible
information means that the information can be used for a variety of
purposes. Information concerning the inventory of supplies on a
nursing unit, for example, can be used by nurses who need to know
whether an item is available for use for a patient. The nurse manager
accesses this same information to help decide which supplies need
to be ordered, to determine which items are used most frequently,
and to do an economic assessment of any waste.
Reliable information comes from clean data that are gathered from
authoritative and credible sources. Objective information is as close
to the truth as one can get; it is not subjective or biased but rather is
factual and impartial. For example, if someone states something,
then a determination must be made as to whether that person is
reliable and whether what they are stating is objective or tainted by
their own perspective.Utility refers to the ability to provide the right information at the
right time to the right person for the right purpose. Transparency
allows users to apply their intellect to accomplish their tasks while
the tools housing the information disappear into the background.
Verifiable information means that one can check to prove that the
information is correct. Reproducibility refers to the ability to produce
the same information again.
Information is acquired by either actively looking for it or having it
conveyed by the environment. All the senses (i.e., vision, hearing,
touch, smell, and taste) are used to gather input from the
surrounding world, and as technologies mature, more and more
input will be obtained through the senses. Currently, people receive
information from computers (output) through vision, hearing, or touch
(input), and the response (output) to the computer (input) is the
interface with technology. Gesture recognition is increasing, and
interfaces that incorporate such technology will change the way
people become informed. Daily, many people accessing the internet
are seeking or imparting information. Individuals are constantly
discovering or rediscovering, learning or relearning, or becoming
informed or reinformed and purging outdated information as new
information is acquired. The information acquired through these
processes is added to their personal knowledge base. Knowledge is
the awareness and understanding of a set of information and ways
that information can be made useful to support a specific task or
arrive at a decision. This knowledge building is an ongoing process
engaged in while a person is conscious and going about their normal
daily activities.Information Science
Information science has evolved over the past 50 or so years as a
field of scientific inquiry and professional practice. It can be thought
of as the science of information, studying the application and usage
of information and knowledge in organizations and the interface or
interaction between people, organizations, and ISs. This extensive,
interdisciplinary science integrates features from cognitive science,
communication science, computer science, library science, and
social science. Information science is primarily concerned with the
input, processing, output, and feedback of data and information
through technology integration with a focus on comprehending the
perspective of the stakeholders involved and then applying IT as
needed. It is systemically based and deals with the big picture, rather
than with the individual pieces, of technology.
Information science can also be related to determinism.
Specifically, it is a response to technological determinism, which is
the belief that technology develops by its own laws and realizes its
own potential, limited only by the material resources available, and
that it therefore must be regarded as an autonomous system that
controls and ultimately permeates all other subsystems of society. In
addition, “The [determinism] theory holds that the universe is utterly
rational because complete knowledge of any given situation assures
that unerring knowledge of its future is also possible” (Britannica,
n.d., para. 1).
This approach sets the tone for the study of information as it
applies to itself, the people, the technology, and the varied sciences
that are contextually related based on the needs of the setting or
organization. What is important is the interface between the
stakeholders and their systems and the ways they generate, use,
and locate information. According to Cornell University (n.d.),
information science explores “the interactions between people and
technology, how technology is shaping individual lives and socialgroups, as well as how the ways that people use technology can
shape new developments” (para. 1). Information science is an
interdisciplinary, people-oriented field that explores and enhances
the interchange of information to transform society through
communication science, computer science, cognitive science, library
science, and social science. Society is dominated by the need for
information, and knowledge and information science focus on
systems and individual users by fostering user-centered approaches
that enhance society’s information capabilities by effectively and
efficiently linking people, information, and technology. This
collaborative user-centered approach affects the configuration and
mix of organizations and influences the nature of work–namely, how
knowledge workers interact with and produce meaningful information
and knowledge.Information Processing
Information science enables the processing of information, which
links people and technology. Humans are organic ISs, constantly
acquiring, processing, and generating information or knowledge in
their professional and personal lives. In fact, this high degree of
knowledge characterizes humans as extremely intelligent organic
machines. The premise of this text revolves around this concept, and
the text is organized on the basis of the Foundation of Knowledge
model, whose concepts are knowledge acquisition, knowledge
processing, knowledge generation, and knowledge dissemination.
Information is data that are processed using knowledge. For
information to be valuable or meaningful, it must be accessible,
accurate, timely, complete, cost-effective, flexible, reliable, relevant,
simple, verifiable, and secure. We are in an era distinguished by the
explosive proliferation of information whereby we must assess
relevancy as we process information, based on our knowledge and
on each specific contextual situation. Knowledge is the awareness
and understanding of an information set and ways that information
can be made useful to support a specific task or arrive at a decision.
As an example, if an architect were going to design a building, part
of the knowledge necessary for developing a new building would be
understanding how the building will be used, what size of building
would be needed compared to the available building space, and how
many people would have or need access to this building. Therefore,
the work of choosing or rejecting facts based on their significance or
relevance to a particular task, such as designing a building, is also
based on a type of knowledge used in the process of converting data
into information. Information can then be considered data made
functional through the application of knowledge. Knowledge is
generative (having the ability to originate and produce, or generate)
in nature. Knowledge must also be viable. Knowledge viability refers
to applications that offer accessible, accurate, and timely informationobtained from a variety of resources and methods and presented in
a manner to provide the necessary elements to generate knowledge.
Information science and computational tools are extremely
important in enabling the processing of data, information, and
knowledge in health care. In the healthcare environment, the
hardware, software, networking, algorithms, and human organic ISs
work together to create meaningful information and generate
knowledge. The links between information processing and scientific
discovery are paramount. However, without the ability to generate
practical results that can be disseminated, the processing of data,
information, and knowledge is for naught. The ability of machines
(inorganic ISs) to support and facilitate the functioning of people
(human organic ISs) is what refines, enhances, and evolves nursing
practice by generating knowledge. This knowledge represents five
rights: the right information, accessible by the right people in the right
settings, applied the right way at the right time.
An important and ongoing process is the struggle to integrate new
knowledge with old knowledge to enhance wisdom. Wisdom is the
ability to act appropriately; it assumes actions directed by one’s own
wisdom. Wisdom uses knowledge and experience to heighten
common sense and insight to exercise sound judgment in practical
matters. It is developed through knowledge, experience, insight, and
reflection. Sometimes wisdom is thought of as the highest form of
common sense, which results from accumulated knowledge, or
erudition (i.e., deep, thorough learning) or enlightenment (i.e.,
education that results in understanding and the dissemination of
knowledge). It is the ability to apply valuable and viable knowledge,
experience, understanding, and insight while being prudent and
sensible. Knowledge and wisdom are not synonymous because
knowledge abounds with others’ thoughts and information, whereas
wisdom is focused on one’s own mind and the synthesis of one’s
own experience, insight, understanding, and knowledge.
If clinicians are inundated with data without the ability to process
them, the situation results in too much data and too little wisdom.
Consequently, it is crucial that clinicians have viable ISs at their
fingertips to facilitate the acquisition, sharing, and use of knowledgewhile maturing their wisdom, and it is this process that leads to
empowerment.Information Science and the Foundation of
Knowledge
Information science is multidisciplinary in that it encompasses
aspects of computer science, cognitive science, social science,
communication science, and library science to deal with obtaining,
gathering, organizing, manipulating, managing, storing, retrieving,
recapturing, disposing of, distributing, and broadcasting information.
Information science encompasses everything that pertains to
information and can be defined as the study of ISs. This science
originated as a subdiscipline of computer science as practitioners
sought to understand and rationalize the management of technology
within organizations. It has since matured into a major field of
management and is now an important area of research in
management studies. Moreover, information science has expanded
its scope to examine the human–computer interaction and the
interactions of people, ISs, and corporations. It is taught at all major
universities and business schools worldwide.
Modern-day organizations have become intensely aware of the
fact that information and knowledge are potent resources that must
be cultivated and honed to meet their needs. Thus, information
science, or the study of ISs—that is, the application and usage of
knowledge—focuses on why and how technology can be put to best
use to serve the information flow within an organization.
Information science affects information interfaces and influences
how people interact with information and subsequently develop and
use knowledge. The information a person acquires is added to their
knowledge base. Knowledge is the awareness and understanding of
an information set and the ways that information can be made useful
to support a specific task or arrive at a decision.
Healthcare organizations are affected by and rely on the evolution
of information science to enhance the recording and processing of
routine and intimate information while facilitating human-to-humanand human-to-system communication, delivery of healthcare
products, dissemination of information, and enhancement of the
organization’s business transactions. Unfortunately, the benefits and
enhancements of information science technology have also brought
to light new risks, such as glitches, loss of information, and hackers
who can steal identities and information. Solid leadership, guidance,
and vision are vital to the maintenance of cost-effective business
performance and safe, cutting-edge information technologies for the
organization. This field studies all facets of the building and use of
information. The emergence of information science and its effect on
information have also influenced how people acquire and use
knowledge.
Information science has already had a tremendous effect on
society and will undoubtedly expand its sphere of influence further as
it continues to evolve and innovate human activities at all levels.
What visionaries only dreamed of is now possible and part of reality,
but the future has yet to fully unfold in this important arena.Introduction to Information Systems
Consider the following scenario: You have just been hired by a large
healthcare facility. You enter the personnel office and are told that
you must learn a new language to work on the unit where you have
been assigned, a language that is particular to this unit only. If you
had been assigned to a different unit, you would have needed to
learn another language that is specific to that unit, and so on.
Because of the differences in various units’ languages,
interdepartmental sharing and information exchange (known as
interoperability) are severely hindered.
This scenario might seem far-fetched, but it is how workers once
operated in health care—in silos. There was a system for the
laboratory, one for finance, one for clinical departments, and so on.
As healthcare organizations have come to appreciate the importance
of communication, tracking, and research, however, they have
developed or purchased ISs that can be integrated to handle the
needs of the entire organization.
Information and IT have become major resources for all types of
organizations, and health care is no exception (Table 2-1). IT helps
to shape a healthcare organization in conjunction with personnel,
money, materials, and equipment. Many healthcare facilities have
hired chief information officers (CIOs) or chief technical officers
(CTOs), also known as chief technology officers. The CIO is
involved with the IT infrastructure, and sometimes this role is
expanded to include the position of chief knowledge officer. The CTO
is focused on organizationally based scientific and technical issues
and is responsible for technological research and development as
part of the organization’s products and services. The CTO and CIO
must be visionary leaders for the organization because so much of
the business of health care relies on solid infrastructures that
generate potent and timely information and knowledge. In some
organizations, the CTO and CIO positions are interchangeable, butTABLE 2-1
in others the CTO reports to the CIO. These positions will become
critical roles as companies continue to shift from being product to
knowledge oriented and as they begin emphasizing the production
process itself rather than the product. In health care, ISs must be
able to handle the volume of data and information necessary to
generate the needed information and knowledge for best practices
because the goal is to provide the highest-quality patient care.
Examples of Information Systems
Information
System
How It Is Used
Clinical information
system (CIS)
Comprehensive and integrative system that manages the
administrative, financial, and clinical aspects of a clinical
facility; a CIS should help to link financial and clinical
outcomes. An example is the EHR.
Decision support
system (DSS)
Organizes and analyzes information to help decision-makers
formulate decisions when they are unsure of their decisions’
possible outcomes. After gathering relevant and useful
information, the DSS develops what-if models to analyze the
options.
Executive information
system (EIS) or
executive support
system
Collects, organizes, analyzes, and summarizes vital information
to help executives with strategic decision-making. Provides a
quick view of all strategic business activities to help executives
analyze the milieu in which the organization operates to identify
patterns and long-term trends to plan appropriate strategies
and courses of action.
Geographic
information system
(GIS)
Collects, manipulates, analyzes, and generates information
related to geographic locations or the surface of the Earth;
provides output in the form of virtual models, maps, or lists.
Management
information system
(MIS)
Provides summaries of internal sources of information, such as
information from the transaction processing system, and
develops a series of routine reports for decision-making.
Knowledge work
system (KWS)
Promotes the creation of knowledge by providing an interface
that is user friendly and houses the necessary tools internallyand that includes access to external tools, such as databases.
It is designed to simplify the acquisition of information and
therefore to facilitate the integration of knowledge and technical
skills into the organization. Examples of a KWS would be an
external virtual reality (VR) system or internal financial
workspace.
Office system Facilitates communication and enhances the productivity of
users who need to process data and information.
Transaction
processing system
(TPS)
Processes and records routine business transactions, such as
a billing system to create and send invoices to customers or a
payroll system to generate employees’ pay stubs and wage
checks and calculate tax payments.
Hospital information
system (HIS)
Manages the administrative, financial, and clinical aspects of a
hospital enterprise. It should help to link financial and clinical
outcomes.
Information Systems
ISs can be manually based, but for the purposes of this text, the term
refers to computer-based information systems. These ISs are
combinations of computer hardware, software, telecommunications,
networks, users, and procedures. The hardware, or computer
equipment, performs the input, processing, and output activities,
based on the software that controls the operation of the computer.
Additional software tools, such as databases, organize the facts and
information collected and offer storage, retrieval, and modifications
to and deletion of data capabilities. Telecommunications provide a
mechanism for communicating. The networks connect designated
computers within hospitals across the country and around the world.
The largest computer network in the world is the internet. The
internet users (people) are responsible for designing, developing,
programming, operating, managing, and maintaining the system.
They collect, create, input, analyze, and distribute meaningful or
useful data and information. They also devise the procedures,
strategies, policies, methods, and rules for using the system. Along
the same lines, ISs have been defined as “a collection ofinterconnected elements that gather, process, store and distribute
data and information while providing a feedback structure to meet an
objective” (Stair & Reynolds, 2016, p. 4). Carnegie Melon University
(2022) described the field of ISs as being involved with the “effective
design, delivery, and use of information and communications
technologies to solve problems for companies, governments, and
society” (para. 5). ISs are designed for specific purposes within
organizations. They are only as functional as the decision-making
capabilities, problem-solving skills, and programming potency built
into them coupled with the quality of the data and information that
are inputted into them. The capability of the ISs to disseminate,
provide feedback, and adjust the data and information is based on
these dynamic processes and is what sets them apart. It is important
to ethically implement the ISs by appreciating and evaluating the
human effect of these technologies both on the users and on their
institutions. The ISs should be user-friendly entities that provide the
right information at the right time, in the right place, and to the right
person. ISs acquire data, or inputs; process data through the
retrieval, analysis, or synthesis of those data; disseminate, or
output, information in the form of reports, documents, summaries,
alerts, prompts, or outcomes; and provide for responses, or
feedback. Input, or data acquisition, is the activity of collecting and
acquiring raw data. Input devices include combinations of hardware,
software, and telecommunications, including keyboards, light pens,
touch screens, mice or other pointing devices, automatic scanners,
and machines that can read magnetic ink characters or lettering. To
watch a pay-per-view movie, for example, the viewer must first input
the chosen movie, verify the purchase, and pay with a method
approved by the vendor. The IS must acquire this information before
the viewer can receive the movie.
Processing, which is the retrieval, analysis, or synthesis of data,
refers to the alteration and transformation of the data into useful
information and outputs. The processing of data can range from
storing it for future use; to comparing the data, making calculations,
or applying formulas; to taking selective actions. Processing devices
consist of combinations of hardware, software, andtelecommunications and include processing chips, in which the
central processing unit (CPU) and main memory are housed. Some
of these chips are quite ingenious. In 2005, it was hoped that the
bunny chip could save the pharmaceutical industry money while
sparing “millions of furry creatures, with a chip that mimics a living
organism” (Schupak, 2005, para. 1). Other companies have
developed environments, or biological ISs, that reside on chips and
truly mimic the functioning of the human body. Researchers can use
these environments to test for both the harmful and the beneficial
effects of drugs, including those that are considered experimental
and that could be harmful if used in human and animal testing. Such
chips also allow researchers to monitor a drug’s toxicity in the liver
and other organs.
One patented HµREL microfluidic biochip comprises an
arrangement of separate but fluidically interconnected “organ” or
“tissue” compartments. Each compartment contains a culture of
living cells drawn from or engineered to mimic the primary functions
of the respective organ or tissue of a living animal. Microfluidic
channels permit a culture medium that serves as a blood surrogate
to recirculate, just as in a living system, driven by a microfluidic
pump. The geometry and fluidics of the device are fashioned to
simulate the values of certain related physiological parameters found
in the living creature. Drug candidates or other substrates of interest
are added to the culture medium and allowed to recirculate through
the device. The effects of drug compounds and their metabolites on
the cells within each respective organ compartment are then
detected by measuring or monitoring key physiological events. The
cell types used may be derived from either standard cell culture lines
or primary tissues. In 2019, HµREL and Cyprotex partnered to
collaborate and expand their research agendas. As new
technologies arise from collaboration and as partnerships continue to
evolve, more and more robust ISs that can handle a variety of
biological and clinical applications are being developed. Currently,
pharmaceutical companies and the healthcare community are
exploring assets that fall into the gray area between being classified
as a drug or a device, where their classification can have regulatoryand financial consequences (Castañeda, 2022; Jimenez, 2022).
Jimenez suggested that the intended use could be indicative of the
classification as a device or drug, but it is still questionable or
debatable. Think of the IS needed for the use and assessment of
drugs and devices being used to diagnose, mitigate, treat, and
monitor patients.
Returning to the example of the movie rental, the IS must verify
the data entered by the viewer and then process the request by
following the steps necessary to provide access to the movie that
was ordered. This processing must be instantaneous in today’s
world, where everyone wants everything now. After the data are
processed, they are stored. In this case, the rental must also be
processed so that the vendor receives payment for the movie,
whether electronically, via a credit card or checking account
withdrawal, or by generating a bill for payment.
Output, or dissemination, produces helpful information, which
can be in the form of reports, documents, summaries, alerts, or
outcomes. A report is designed to inform and is generally tailored to
the context of a given situation or user or user group. Reports may
include charts, figures, tables, graphics, pictures, hyperlinks,
references, or other documentation necessary to meet the needs of
the user. A document represents information that can be printed,
saved, or emailed or otherwise shared or displayed. A summary is a
condensed version of the original information that is designed to
highlight the major points. An alert comprises warnings, feedback, or
additional information necessary to assist the user in interacting with
the system. An outcome is the expected result of input and
processing. Output devices are combinations of hardware, software,
and telecommunications and include sound and speech synthesis
outputs, printers, and monitors.
Continuing with the example of the movie rental, the IS must be
able to provide the consumer with the movie ordered when the
consumer wants it and somehow notify the consumer that they have
indeed purchased the movie and are granted access. The IS must
also be able to generate payment, either electronically or by
generating a bill, while storing the transactional record for future use.Feedback, or a response, is a reaction to the inputting,
processing, and outputting. In ISs, feedback refers to information
from the system that is used to make modifications in the input,
processing actions, or outputs. In the example of the movie rental,
what if the consumer accidentally entered the same movie order
three times instead of only once? The IS would determine that more
than one movie order is out of range for the same movie order at the
same time, and it would provide feedback. Such feedback is used to
verify and correct the input. If undetected, the viewer’s error would
result in an erroneous bill and decreased customer satisfaction while
creating more work for the vendor, which would have to engage in
additional transactions with the customer to resolve this problem.
Section IV, Nursing Informatics Practice Applications: Care Delivery,
in this text provides detailed descriptions of CISs that operate on
these same principles to support healthcare delivery.Summary
ISs deal with the development, use, and management of an
organization’s IT infrastructure. An IS acquires data, or inputs;
processes data through the retrieval, analysis, or synthesis of those
data; disseminates, or outputs, the data in the form of reports,
documents, summaries, alerts, or outcomes; and provides for
responses, or feedback. Quality decision-making and problem￾solving skills are vital to the development of effective and valuable
ISs. Today’s organizations now recognize that their most precious
asset is their information, as represented by their employees,
experience, competence, and innovative approaches, all of which
are dependent on a robust information network that encompasses
the IT infrastructure.
In an ideal world, all ISs would be fluid in their ability to adapt to
any and all users’ needs. They would be internet oriented and global
so that resources are available to everyone. Think of cloud
computing. It is just the beginning point from which ISs will expand
and grow in their ability to provide meaningful information to their
users. As technologies advance, so will the skills and capabilities to
comprehend and realize what ISs can become. As wearable tracking
technologies and other health-related mobile applications expand,
more robust and timely health data will be generated, and these data
will need to be processed into meaningful information. “Practitioners
and medical researchers can look forward to technologies that
enable them to apply data analysis to develop new insights into
finding cures for difficult diseases. Healthcare CIOs and other IT
leaders can expect to be called upon to manage all the new data and
devices that will be transforming healthcare as we know it”
(Schindler, 2015, para. 2). Devices with sensors communicating with
each other are collectively known as the Internet of Things (IoT),
which expands the future possibilities for health care tremendously.
The IoT is made up of complex social, technical, procedural, andpolicy considerations that are constantly evolving for a variety of
users such as healthcare professionals (Airtel Business, 2022). The
IoT enables the connecting and exchanging of data with other
devices and systems from anywhere to anywhere. This IoT can
share and collect data and information with minimal human
intervention. Essentially, the sensor-collected data are transmitted to
another technology, which triggers an action or an alert that prompts
feedback for an action. Now think about the combination of artificial
intelligence (AI) and the IoT, called the Artificial Intelligence of
Things (AIoT), which represents the nurturing of the development of
the intellectual properties of the devices we use. This blending of AI
and the IoT infrastructure helps us attain more efficient and effective
operations, enhances human–technology interfacing and
interactions, and improves data and information management and
analytics (Yasar et al., 2023). It will be important to follow the
continued evolution of AIoT within and outside of the healthcare
arena. It is essential to continue to develop and refine functional,
robust, and visionary ISs that meet the current meaningful
information needs while evolving systems that are even better
prepared to handle the future information and knowledge needs of
the healthcare industry.
THOUGHT-PROVOKING QUESTIONS
1. How do you acquire information? Choose two hours out of your busy day to notice
all the information that you receive from your environment. Keep a diary indicating
where the information came from and how you knew it was information and not
data.
2. Reflect on an IS with which you are familiar, such as the automatic banking
machine. How does this IS function? What are the advantages of using this system
(i.e., why not use a bank teller instead)? What are the disadvantages? Are there
enhancements that you would add to this system?
3. In health care, think about a typical day of practice, and describe the setting. How
many times do nurses interact with ISs? What are the ISs that nurses interact with,
and how do they access them? Are the ISs at the bedside, handheld, or station
based? How do their location and ease of access affect nursing care?
4. Briefly describe an organization and discuss how our need for information and
knowledge affects the configuration and interaction of that organization with otherorganizations. Also, discuss how the need for information and knowledge
influences the nature of work or how knowledge workers interact with and produce
information and knowledge in this organization.
5. If you could meet only four of the rights discussed in this chapter, which one would
you omit and why? Also, provide your rationale for each right you chose to meet.
6. Describe how information science relates to nursing science.
7. Examine your personal and professional environments and assess the AI, IoT, and
AIoT devices you use in each setting.R E F E R E N C E S
Airtel Business. (2022). Explaining all communication models in IoT with examples.
www.airtel.in/blog/business/communication-models-in-iot-with-examples
ASPE. (n.d.). Nationwide Health Information Network (NHIN) workforce study.
https://aspe.hhs.gov/nationwide-health-information-network-nhin-workforce-study
Britannica. (n.d.). Determinism. In Britannica.com: Philosophical issues.
www.britannica.com/topic/determinism
Carnegie Melon University. (2022). What is “information systems”? And is it right for me?
www.cmu.edu/information-systems/what-is-information-systems-right-for-me.html
Castañeda, R. (2022). Pharma developments in 2022: What you need to know.
www.pharmaceutical-technology.com/features/pharma-developments-in-2022-what-you￾need-to-know/?cf-view
Cornell University. (n.d.). Cornell Bowers CIS information science. https://infosci.cornell.edu
Department of Health and Human Services. (2020). 21st Century Cures Act: Interoperability,
information blocking, and the ONC Health IT Certification Program.
www.healthit.gov/sites/default/files/cures/2020-
03/ONC_Cures_Act_Final_Rule_03092020.pdf
Yasar, K., Gillis, A. S., & Christensen, G. (2023, July 28). What is Artificial Intelligence of
Things (AIOT)? TechTarget. www.techtarget.com/iotagenda/definition/Artificial￾Intelligence-of-Things-AIoT
Goldstein, D., Groen, P., Ponkshe, S., & Wine, M. (2007). Medical informatics 20/20. Jones
and Bartlett.
HL7 International. (2022). Electronic health records.
www.hl7.org/Special/committees/ehr/overview.cfm
Jimenez, D. (2022, December 21). When is a drug a device? www.pharmaceutical￾technology.com/features/drug-device-fda-regulation/
Schindler, E. (2015, December 30). Healthcare IT: Hot trends for 2016, part 1.
InformationWeek. www.informationweek.com/healthcare/leadership/healthcare-it-hot￾trends-for-2016-part-1/d/d-id/1323722
Schupak, A. (2005, August 14). Technology: The bunny chip. Forbes.
www.forbes.com/forbes/2005/0815/053.html
Stair, R., & Reynolds, G. (2016). Principles of information systems (12th ed.). Cengage
Learning.
Western Governors University. (2021). What is the Health Information Exchange (HIE)?
www.wgu.edu/blog/health-information-exchange2104.html#closeC H A P T E R 3
Computer Science and the
Foundation of Knowledge
Model
OBJECTIVES
1. Describe the essential components of computer systems, including hardware and
software.
2. Recognize the rapid evolution of computer systems and the benefit of keeping up to
date with current trends and developments.
3. Analyze how computer systems function as tools for managing information and
generating knowledge.
4. Define the concept of human–technology interfaces.
5. Assess how computers can support collaboration, networking, and information
exchange.
KEY TERMS
acquisition
active-matrix organic light-emitting diode (AMOLED)
application
arithmetic logic unit
bandwidth
basic input/output system (BIOS)
binary system
bit
broadband
byte
cache memorycentral processing unit (CPU)
Chromebook
cloud computing
cloud storage
communication software
compact disk read-only memory (CD-ROM)
compact disk-recordable (CD-R)
compact disk-rewritable (CD-RW)
compatible
computer
computer science
conferencing software
creativity software
database
desktop
desktop publishing
digital video disk-recordable (DVD-R)
digital video disk-rewritable (DVD-RW)
distributed network
double data rate synchronous dynamic random-access memory (DDR SDRAM)
dynamic random-access memory (DRAM)
electronically erasable programmable read-only memory (EEPROM)
email
encryption
exabyte (EB)
execute
extensible
far-field communication
firmware
flash memory
gigabyte (GB)
gigahertz
graphical user interface (GUI)
graphics card
haptics
hard disk
hard drive
hardware
head-mounted display (HMD)information
Information Age
infrastructure as a service (IaaS)
in-plane switching liquid-crystal display (IPS LCD)
instant message (IM)
keyboard
knowledge
laptop
local area network (LAN)
main memory
megabyte (MB)
memory
metaverse
microprocessor
millions of instructions per second (MIPS)
mobile
mobile computing
mobile device
mobile health (mHealth)
modem
monitor
motherboard
mouse
MPEG-1 Audio Layer-3 (MP3)
near field communication (NFC)
network
office suite
open source
operating system (OS)
peripheral component interconnection (PCI)
personal computer (PC)
petabyte (PB)
platform as a service (PaaS)
plug-and-play
portable
power supply
presentation
processing
processorproductivity software
professional development
programmable read-only memory (PROM)
quantum bit (qubit)
quantum computing
QWERTY
radio-frequency identification (RFID)
random-access memory (RAM)
read-only memory (ROM)
security
Small Computer System Interface (SCSI)
software
software as a service (SaaS)
sound card
spreadsheet
synchronous dynamic random-access memory (SDRAM)
technology
terabyte (TB)
throughput
touch pad
touch screen
universal serial bus (USB)
USB flash drive
user-friendly
user interface
video adapter card
virtual memory
virtual private network (VPN)
wearable technology
Wi-Fi
Wi-Fi hotspot
wide area network (WAN)
wireless
wireless mobile computing
wisdom
word processing
World Wide Web (WWW)
yottabyte (YB)
zettabyte (ZB)Introduction
In this chapter, the discipline of computer science, which is one of
the building blocks of nursing informatics, is introduced through a
focus on computers and the hardware and software that comprise
these evolving systems (Figure 3-1). Computer science offers
extremely valuable tools that, when used skillfully, can facilitate the
acquisition and manipulation of data and information by nurses
who then can synthesize the data into an evolving knowledge and
wisdom base. This process can facilitate professional
development and the ability to apply evidence-based practice
decisions within nursing care, and if the results are disseminated and
shared, they can also advance the professional knowledge base.Figure 3-1 Building Blocks of Nursing Informatics
This chapter begins with a look at common computer hardware,
followed by a brief overview of operating, productivity, creativity, and
communication software. It concludes with a glimpse at how
computer systems help to shape knowledge and collaboration and
an introduction to human–technology interface dynamics.The Computer as a Tool for Managing
Information and Generating Knowledge
Throughout history, various milestones have signaled discoveries,
inventions, and philosophical shifts that spurred a surge in
knowledge and understanding within the human race. The advent of
the computer is one such milestone, which has sparked an
intellectual metamorphosis whose boundaries have yet to be fully
understood. Computer technology has ushered in what has been
called the Information Age, an age when data, information, and
knowledge are both accessible and manipulable by more people
than ever before. How can a mere machine lead to such a
revolutionary state of knowledge potential? To begin to answer this
question, we need to examine the basic structure and components of
computer systems.
Essentially, a computer is an electronic information-processing
machine that serves as a tool with which to manipulate data and
information. The easiest way to begin to understand computers is to
realize that they are input–output systems. These unique machines
accept data input via a variety of devices, process data through
logical and arithmetic rendering, store the data in memory
components, and output data and information to the user.
“Computing has changed the world more than any other invention
of the past hundred years, and has come to pervade nearly all
human endeavors. Yet, we are just at the beginning of the computing
revolution; today’s computing offers just a glimpse of the potential
impact of computers” (Evans, 2019, p. 3). Computer manufacturers
and researchers, such as Intel, have identified the need to design
computers to mask this growing complexity and sophistication by
enhancing ease of use or user-friendly aspects. This is being
achieved by honing hardware and software capabilities until they
work together seamlessly to ensure user-friendly, intuitive tools for
users of all levels of expertise. An example is in the haptictechnologies, evolving hardware and software that will increase the
experiential aspects of computing. Box 3-1 provides information
about haptic technology.
BOX 3-1 HAPTIC TECHNOLOGY
Dee McGonigle
The science of haptics deals with artificial touch technology. Haptics is touted as the
evolving technology needed to advance virtual reality (VR) and augmented reality (AR)
beyond just seeing and hearing within a virtual world in VR or the floating interfaces of
AR to actually feel what you are touching or what comes in contact with you if you have
a body suit. On its website, Immersion states that “real, immersive, and more
appealing: haptics adds value to the experience” (www.immersion.com), thus
enhancing digital experiences. No matter what reality we are experiencing, our
emotions and experiences are heightened, or come alive, through our sense of touch,
and it is haptic technology that allows the user to reproduce that sensation. The user
can feel the technology, or experience, through a series of actions, including force and
vibration or carefully controlled haptic virtual objects, and as the technology improves,
so will the virtual feeling that improves the immersive experience. Effective learning
environments will provide an excellent integration of visual and audible perceptions with
tactile sensations.
Haptic technology is being built into partial- and full-body suits. According to VR
Electronics, its wearable “TESLASUIT training solution provides outputs from haptic
feedback and climate control to users and receives inputs from motion capture and
biometrics. With our software and partner ecosystem, this technology is a complete
solution for improving human performance” (https://teslasuit.io). This suit can be used
by rehabilitation professionals to facilitate the user’s learning or relearning physical
actions and training their reflexes.
Haptic gloves as well continue to evolve.
VR Life reviewed the top haptic gloves for VR in 2022 (Bithrey, 2022). VR Life thinks
the best gloves are the SensoryX VR Free Gloves, which can work with all VR HMDs.
The SensoryX website (https://sensoryx.tech) states that they are the tracking solution
for the metaverse and the user interaction of the future.
LEAPMotion, a company that designs motion control devices, wants to “build a more
human reality.” The Ultraleap Gemini is the fifth-generation hand-tracking platform,
which has improved tracking for both hands, especially when they are close together,
interacting, or actually overlapping (https://developer.leapmotion.com/about-gemini).
The Make Use Of website describes the Oculus Quest as being capable of using the
headset’s external cameras to track your finger motion and hand movement to use as
input (Stegner, 2022).
Reflect on the ramifications of the computer and digital enhancements for health care
and education, especially as they relate to the haptic experience and wearables.The goal for vendors that provide computer systems and software
is to decrease the learning curve for users while enhancing their
capacity to manipulate the system to meet their computing needs.
Therefore, the complexity of the operation is concealed by its ease of
use.
Computers are universal machines because they are general￾purpose, symbol-manipulating devices that can perform any task
represented in specific programs. For instance, they can be used to
draw an image, calculate statistics, write an essay, or record nursing
care data. In a nutshell, computers can be used for data and
information storage, retrieval, analysis, generation, and
transformation.
Most computers are based on scientist John von Neumann’s
model of a processor–memory–input–output architecture. This basic
configuration and the components are briefly reviewed (see Table 3-
1 and Figure 3-2).Keyboard © Undrey/Shutterstock; mouse © Pressmaster/Shutterstock; microphone ©
VectorShow/Shutterstock; touch pad © donfiore/Shutterstock; pen drawing a diagram ©
Syda Productions/Shutterstock; USB drive © DecemberDah/Shutterstock; CPU © Péter
Gudella/Dreamstime.com; RAM © NorGal/Shutterstock; hard drive © mike
mols/Shutterstock; monitor © Leone_V/Shutterstock; printer © Billion Photos/Shutterstock;
speakers © Krailurk Warasup/Shutterstock; TV © JTal/Shutterstock; flash drive ©
Ksander/Shutterstock
Figure 3-2 Computer Components
DescriptionTABLE 3-1 Components
Component Description
Hardware Actual physical body of the computer and its components.
Central
processing unit
(CPU)
CPU is an older term for the processor and microprocessor.
Sometimes conceptualized as the brain, or command center,
directing the actions of all computer components; executes,
calculates, and processes the binary computer code (which
consists of various configurations of 0s and 1s), which are functions
that are instigated by the operating system (OS) and other
applications on the computer. Manages both incoming and
outgoing data that are processed across components. The
processor contains specific mechanical units, including registers,
arithmetic logic units; a floating point unit; control circuitry; and
cache memory. Cache memory is extremely quick memory that
holds whatever data and code are being used at any one time. The
speed and power of a processor are measured in gigahertz (1
GHz). Multicore microprocessors, or chips that combine two or
more processors, have become a standard in both personal and
professional computers. For more information, refer to UL
Benchmarks (2023).
Motherboard Known as the central nervous system of the computer, it facilitates
communication among all the computer components since the
components are connected to it in some way (either directly via
local sockets, attached directly to it, or connected via cables).
These components include universal serial bus (USB), Ethernet
network, and integrated graphics controllers.
Power supply A critical component because it provides the essential electrical
energy needed to allow a computer to operate.
Hard disk, or
hard drive
The rigid hard disks acting as permanent data storage holding
gigabytes (GB) or terabytes (TB) of data, information, documents,
and programs saved on the computer, even when the computer is
turned off. These disk drives are not infallible, however, so backing
up important data is imperative.
Random-access
memory (RAM)
RAM is considered to be volatile memory because it is a temporary
storage system that allows the processor to access program codes
and data while working on a task. The contents of RAM are lost
once the system is rebooted or shut off intentionally or because ofComponent Description
a loss of power. Computers can gain more RAM via graphics cards
and other expansion cards.
A certain portion of the RAM, called the main memory, serves the
hard disk and facilitates interactions between the hard disk and the
CPU. Main memory is provided by dynamic random-access
memory (DRAM) and synchronous dynamic random-access
memory (SDRAM). Newer chips, double data rate synchronous
dynamic random-access memory (DDR SDRAM), allow for
greater bandwidth and twice the transfers per the unit of time of the
computer’s internal clock.
Read-only
memory (ROM)
ROM stores saved data and is critical in the working of the
computer’s OS and other activities. ROM is stored primarily on the
motherboard, but it may also be available through the graphics
card, other expansion cards, and peripherals. In recent years,
rewritable ROM chips, which may include other forms of ROM,
such as programmable read-only memory (PROM), erasable
ROM, electronically erasable programmable read-only memory
(EEPROM), and flash memory (a variation of EEPROM), have
become available.
Basic
input/output
system (BIOS)
BIOS is a specific type of ROM used by the computer when it first
boots up to establish basic communication among the processor,
motherboard, and other components. It controls the computer from
the time the machine is switched on until the primary OS takes
over. The firmware initializes the hardware and boots (loads and
executes) the primary OS.
Virtual memory A special type of memory that is stored on the hard disk to provide
temporary data storage so that data can be swapped in and out of
the RAM as needed.
Peripheral
component
interconnection
(PCI) bus
This component is important for connecting additional plug-in
components to the computer. It uses a series of slots on the
motherboard to allow peripheral component interconnection
(PCI) card plug-ins.
Small computer
system interface
(SCSI)
The SCSI component provides the means to attach additional
devices, such as scanners and extra hard drives.
DVD/CD drives The compact disk read-only memory (CD-ROM) drive reads and
records data to portable CDs. The light reflected on the disk is
directed by a system of lenses to a photodetector, which convertsComponent Description
the light pulses into an electrical signal; this signal is then decoded
by the drive electronics to the motherboard. There are compact
disk-recordable (CD-R), compact disk-rewritable (CD-RW),
digital video disk-recordable (DVD-R), and digital video disk￾rewritable (DVD-RW) drives.
Flash or USB
flash drive
This portable memory device uses electronically erasable,
programmable ROM to provide fast, permanent memory. The USB
flash drive is typically a removable and rewritable device that
includes flash memory and an integrated USB interface.
Modem Can be situated either externally or internally; enables internet
connectivity via a cable connection through network adapters
situated within the computer apparatus.
Connection ports These ports allow data to move to and from the computer via
peripheral or storage devices and are made to fit different types of
plug-in devices, including monitor cable, keyboard, mouse, network
cable, microphone/speaker/auxiliary input, USB, and printer ports
(SCSI or parallel).
Cards Graphics card: Most computers have a graphics accelerator card
slotted in the microprocessor to process image data and output
those data to the monitor. If a user intends to create or view three￾dimensional images or is an active game user, an enhanced
graphics card generally must be installed.
Video adapter cards: Provide video memory, a video processor,
and a digital-to-analog converter that works with the processor to
output high-quality video images to the monitor.
Sound card: Converts digital data into an analog signal, which is
then outputted to the computer’s speakers or headphones. The
reverse is also accomplished by inputting a signal from a
microphone or other audio-recording equipment, which then
converts the analog signal to a digital signal.
Binary System and Storage Bit
A bit is the smallest possible chunk of data memory used in
computer processing and is depicted as either a 1 or a 0. Bits make
up the binary system of the computer.Byte
A byte is a chunk of memory that consists of 8 bits and is the best
way to indicate computer memory or storage capacity. In modern
computers, bytes are described in units of megabytes (MB),
gigabytes (GB) (1 GB equals 1,000 MB), or terabytes (TB) (1 TB
equals 1 trillion bytes, or 1,000 GB). Box 3-2 discusses the various
storage capacities.
BOX 3-2 STORAGE CAPACITIES
Dee McGonigle and Kathleen Mastrian
Storage and memory capacities are evolving. In the past few decades, great leaps in
data storage have been made. All storage capacity begins with the bit. The files on a
computer are stored as binary files. The software that is used translates these binary
files into words, numbers, pictures, images, or video. Using this binary code in the
binary numbering system, measurement is counted by factors of 2, such as 1, 2, 4, 8,
16, 32, 64, and 128. These multiples of the binary system in computer usage are also
prefixed based on the metric system. Therefore, a kilobyte (KB) is actually 2 to the 10th
power (or 2
10
), or 1,024 bytes, but it is typically considered to be 1,000 bytes. That is
why you will see 1,024 or multiples of that number, instead of an even 1,000,
mentioned at times in relation to kilobytes.
As capabilities soared, so did the ability to save and store what was used and
created, and so the megabyte (MB) emerged as a common unit of measure (1 MB is
1,048,576 bytes but roughly equivalent to 1 million bytes). The next leap in computer
capacity is a gigabyte (GB) (1 GB is 1,073,741,824 bytes but is generally rounded to 1
billion bytes). Some computing experts are very concerned that valuable bytes are lost
when these measurements are rounded, whereas hard-drive manufacturers use the
decimal system so that capacity is expressed as an even 1 billion bytes per gigabyte.
Computer capacity has moved into and beyond the range of terabytes, with
capacities moving into the range of petabytes (PB), exabytes (EB), zettabytes (ZB),
and yottabytes (YB). These terms for storage capacity are defined as follows:
1 TB = 1,000 GB
1 PB = 1,000,000 GB
1 EB = 1,000 PB
1 ZB = 1,000 EB
1 YB = 1,000 ZB
To put all of this in perspective, Lyman and Varian (2003) described the data powers
of 10 as follows:
2 KB: A typewritten page
2 MB: A high-resolution photographTABLE 3-2
10 MB: A minute of high-fidelity sound or a digital chest X-ray
50 MB: A digital mammogram
1 GB: A symphony in high-fidelity sound or a movie at TV quality
1 TB: All the X-ray films in a large, technologically advanced hospital
2 PB: The contents of all U.S. academic research libraries
5 EB: All words ever spoken by human beings
And we have not even addressed zettabytes (ZB) and yottabytes (YB), so stay
tuned.
Software
Software comprises the application programs developed to facilitate
various user functions, such as writing, artwork, organizing meetings,
surfing the internet, and communicating with others. For the
purposes of this overview, the various types of software have been
divided into four categories: (1) OS software, (2) productivity
software, (3) creativity software, and (4) communication software.
User friendliness is a critical condition for effective software
adoption. How user friendly the software is to users is based on their
perception of how clear the package is to understand and to use.
The rapid evolution of hardware mentioned previously has been
equally matched by the phenomenal development in software over
the past three or four decades (see Table 3-2 for a brief review of
software).
Software
Software Description
Commercial Several large commercial software companies, such as Apple,
Microsoft, IBM, and Adobe, dominate the market and have done so
since the advent of the personal computer (PC). Licensed software
has evolved over time; hence, most products have a long version
history. Many software packages, such as office suites, are
expensive to purchase; in turn, there is a digital divide as far as
access and affordability go across societal spheres, especially when
viewed from a global perspective.Software Description
Open source The open source initiative began in the late 1990s and has become
a powerful movement that is changing the software production and
consumer market. In addition to commercially available software, a
growing number of open source software packages are being
developed in all four of the categories addressed in this chapter. The
open source movement was begun by developers who wished to
offer their creations to others for the good of the community and
encouraged them to do the same. Users who modify or contribute to
the evolution of open source software are obligated to share their
new code, but essentially the software is free to all. Apache
OpenOffice, Google Docs, and NeoOffice are examples of open
source productivity software (Figure 3-3).
Figure 3-3 Open Source Software
Description
Operating
system (OS)
The OS is the most important software on any computer. It is the
very first program to load upon start-up and is fundamental for theSoftware Description
operation of all other software and the computer hardware since it
provides a reliable, consistent interface for the software applications
to work with the computer’s hardware. Examples of commonly used
OSs include the Microsoft Windows family, Linux, and Mac OS. An
OS must be both powerful and flexible to adapt to the myriad types of
software available, which are made by a variety of development
companies. New versions of the major OSs are equipped to deal with
multiple users and handle multitasking with ease. For example, a
user can work on a word processing document while listening for an
email-received signal, have an internet browser window open to look
for references on the internet as needed, listen to music in the
background, and download a file—all at the same time.
OS tasks can be described in terms of six basic processes:
Memory management
Device management
Processor management
Storage management
Application interface
User interface (usually a graphical user interface [GUI])
A GUI (pronounced “gooey”) is used by OSs to display a combination
of graphics and text, such as icons, drop-down menus, and buttons;
it allows one to use input and output devices as well as icons that
represent files, programs, actions, and processes. OSs should be
convenient to use, easy to learn, reliable, safe, secure, and fast.
They should also be easy to design, implement, and maintain while
being flexible, compatible, portable, reliable, error-free, extensible,
and efficient.
Productivity Productivity software, such as an office suite, is the type of
software most commonly used in the workplace and on personal
computers. It typically bundles together word processing,
spreadsheet, database, presentation, web development, and email
programs. The intent of office suites is to provide all the basic
programs that office or knowledge workers need to do their work.
The bundled programs within the suite are organized to be
compatible with one another and designed to look similar to one
another for ease of use and provide a powerful array of tools for data
manipulation, information gathering, and knowledge generation.
Some office suites add other programs, such as database creation
software, mathematical editors, and drawing and desktop publishing
programs. Table 3-3 summarizes the application of programsTABLE 3-3
Software Description
included in some of the popular office suites: Microsoft Office,
Apache OpenOffice, and WordPerfect Suite.
Creativity Creativity software includes programs that allow users to draw,
paint, render, record music and sound, and incorporate digital video
and other multimedia in professional aesthetic ways to share and
convey information and knowledge (Table 3-4).
Communication Networking and communication software enable users to dialogue,
share, and network with other users via email or instant message
(IM), by accessing the World Wide Web (WWW), or by engaging in
virtual meetings using conferencing software (Table 3-5).
Productivity: Office Suite Software Features and
Examples
Program Application Examples
Word
processing
Composition, editing, formatting,
and producing text documents
Microsoft Word, OpenOffice
Writer, KOffice KWord, Corel
WordPerfect or Corel Write,
Apple Pages, and Apache
OpenOffice
Spreadsheets Grid-based documents in ledger
format; organize numbers and
text and calculate statistical
formulae
Microsoft Excel, OpenOffice
Calc, KOffice KSpread, Corel
Quattro Pro, Apple Numbers,
and Apache OpenOffice
Presentations Slideshow software, usually
used for business or classroom
presentations, using text,
images, graphs, and media
Microsoft PowerPoint,
OpenOffice Impress, KOffice
KPresenter, Corel Show, Apple
Keynote, and Apache
OpenOffice
Databases Database creation for text and
numbers
Microsoft Access (in elite
packages), OpenOffice Base,
KOffice Kexi, Corel Calculate,
Corel ParadoxTABLE 3-4
Email Integrated email program to
send and receive electronic mail
Microsoft Outlook, Corel
WordPerfect Mail, Mozilla
Thunderbird
Drawing Graphics and diagram drawing OpenOffice Draw, Corel
Presentation Graphics, KOffice
Kivio, Karbon, Krita
Math formulas Insert math equations in word
processing and presentation
work
OpenOffice Math, KOffice
KFormula
Desktop
publishing
Page layouts and publication￾ready documents
Microsoft Publisher (in elite
packages), Apple Pages
Creative Software Features and Examples
Program and Application Software Examples
Raster graphics programs
Draw, paint, render, manipulate, and edit
images, fonts, and photographs to create
pixel-based (dot points) digital art and
graphics.
Adobe Photoshop and Fireworks; Ulead
PhotoImpact; CorelDRAW, Painter, and
PaintShop Pro; GIMP (open source);
KOffice; Krita (open source)
Vector graphics programs
Mathematically rendered geometric
modeling is applied through shapes,
curves, lines, and points and manipulated
for shape, color, and size. Ideal for printing
and three-dimensional (3D) modeling.
Adobe Flash, FreeHand, and Illustrator;
CorelDRAW and Designer; OpenOffice
Draw (open source); Microsoft Visio;
Xara Xtreme; KOffice Karbon14 (open
source)
Desktop publishing programs
Page layout and publishing preparation for
printed and web documents, such as
magazines, journals, books, newsletters,
and brochures.
Adobe InDesign, Corel PageMaker,
Microsoft Publisher, Scribus (open
source), QuarkXPress, Apple Pages
(note that many of the graphics programs
can also be used for desktop publishing)TABLE 3-5
Web design programs
Create, edit, and update webpages using
specific codes, such as XML, CSS, HTML,
and Java.
Adobe Dreamweaver, Word Press,
Microsoft FrontPage, Nvu (open source),
W3C’s Amaya (open source)
Multimedia programs
Combine text, audio, images, animation,
and video into interactive content for
electronic presentation.
Adobe Flash, Microsoft Movie Maker,
Apple QuickTime and FinalCut Studio,
Corel VideoStudio, Ulead VideoStudio,
Real Studio, CamStudio (open source),
Audacity (open source)
Communication Software Features and
Examples
Program and Application Software Examples
Email client
Allows user to read, edit, forward, and send
email messages to other users via an internet
connection. The software can be resident on
the computer or accessed via the World Wide
Web.
Resident programs
Microsoft Outlook and Outlook
Express, Eudora, Pegasus, Mozilla
Thunderbird, Lotus Notes
Web-based programs
Gmail, Yahoo Mail, Hotmail
Internet browsers
Enables user to access, browse, download,
upload, and interact with text, audio, video,
and other web-based documents.
Mozilla Firefox, Microsoft Internet
Explorer and Edge, Google Chrome,
Apple Safari, Opera, microbrowsers
(for mobile access)
Instant messaging (IM)TABLE 3-6
Real-time text messaging between users; can
attach images, videos, and other documents
via personal computer, cell phone, and
handheld devices.
MSN Instant Messenger, Microsoft
Live Messenger, Yahoo Messenger,
Apple iChat
Conferencing
Enables user to communicate in a virtual
meeting room setting to share work,
discussions, or planning using an intranet or
internet environment; can exhibit files, video,
and screenshots of content.
Adobe Acrobat Connect, Microsoft Live
Meeting or Meeting Space, Microsoft
Teams, GoToMeeting, Meeting Bridge,
Free Conference, RainDance, WebEx,
Zoom
Acquisition of Data and Information: Input Components
Input devices include keyboard; mouse; joystick (typically used for
playing computer games); game controller or pad; web camera
(webcam); stylus (often used with tablets or personal digital
assistants); image scanner for copying a digital image of a document
or picture; touch pad; or other plug-and-play input devices, such as
a digital camera, digital video recorder (camcorder), MPEG-1 Audio
Layer-3 (MP3) player, electronic musical instrument, and
physiological monitor. These devices are the media used to input
text or visual, audio, or multimedia data into the computer system for
viewing, listening, manipulating, creating, or editing. The primary
input devices on a computer are the keyboard, mouse, touch pad,
and touch screen. See Table 3-6 for a brief overview of the typical
input devices.
Typical Input Devices
Input
Component
Description
Keyboard A computer keyboard is very similar to the typewriter keyboards of
earlier days and usually serves as the primary input device that
enables the user to type words, numbers, and commands into thecomputer’s programs. Typically, standard computer keyboards are
organized to facilitate Latin-based languages using a QWERTY
layout (so named because these letters appear on the first six keys
in the first row of letters). Certain keys are used as command keys,
particularly the control (CTRL), alternate (Alt), delete (Del), and shift
keys, all of which can be used to activate useful commands. The
escape (ESC) key allows the user to instantly exit a process or
program.
Some keyboards have a wire and a plug-in, whereas others are
wireless, or cordless. Touch screen, or virtual, keyboards are
incorporated into the touch screens of phones, gaming machines,
and tablets, and they are also available through ease-of-access
tools on laptops.
Mouse The mouse is the second most commonly used input device. It is
manipulated by the user’s hand to point, click, and move objects
around on the computer screen. A mouse can come in a number of
configurations, including a standard mechanical trackball serial
mouse, bus mouse, PS/2 mouse, USB-connected mouse, optical
lens mouse, cordless mouse, and optomechanical mouse. It has
evolved and increased in complexity and capability over time. Most
gaming mice have become sophisticated with customizable
features, such as programmable macro commands and on-the-fly
resolution switching.
Touch pad A device that senses the pressure of the user’s finger along with the
movement of the finger on the touch pad to control input
positioning. It is an alternative to using a mouse.
Touch screen The touch screen is a display used as an input device for
interacting with or relating to the display’s materials or content. The
user can touch or press on the designated display area to respond
to, execute, or request information or output.
Processing of Data and Information:
Throughput/Processing Components
All the hardware discussed earlier in this chapter is involved in the
throughput, or processing, of input data and the preparation of
output data and information. Specific software is used, depending on
the application and data involved. One key hardware component, the
computer monitor, is a unique example of a visible throughput
component; it is the part of the computer that users focus on themost when they are working on a computer. Input data can be
visualized and accessed by manipulating the mouse and keyboard
input devices, but the monitor is what the user focuses on. The
monitor is critical for the efficient rendering or image synthesis so
that the data, information, and images can be visualized during this
part of the cycle because it facilitates user access and control of the
data and information.
Monitor
The monitor is the visual display that serves as the landscape for all
interactions between the user and the machine. Some computer
monitors also have a touch screen, which can serve as an input
device when the user touches specific areas of the screen. Monitors
vary in their refresh rate and dot pitch, and both are important for
user comfort. The faster the refresh rate, the cleaner and clearer the
image on the screen because the monitor refreshes the screen
contents more frequently. Similarly, the larger the dot pitch factor, the
smaller the dots that make up the screen image, which provides a
more detailed display on the monitor and facilitates clarity and ease
of viewing.
If equipped with a touch screen, a monitor can also serve as an
input device when activated by a stylus or finger pressure. Some
users might also consider the monitor to be an output device
because access to input and stored documents is often performed
via the screen (e.g., reading a document that is stored on the
computer or viewable from the internet). As we advance to more
engaged computing, larger screens and ultrawide monitors are
evolving to provide immersive experiences.
Smartphone displays can be a form of active-matrix organic
light-emitting diode (AMOLED) or in-plane switching liquid￾crystal display (IPS LCD). In the AMOLED type of display, the
individual pixels are lit separately (active matrix); the next-generation
super AMOLED type of display includes touch sensors.
Dissemination: Output ComponentsOutput devices carry data in a usable form through exit devices in or
attached to a computer. Common forms of output include printed
documents; audio or video files; physiological summaries; scan
results; and saved files on portable disk drives, a flash drive, or an
external hard drive. Output devices literally put data and information
at the user’s fingertips, which can then be used to develop
knowledge and even wisdom. The most commonly used output
devices include printers, speakers, and portable disk drives.
Printer
Printers are external components that can be attached to a computer
enabling users to print a hard copy of documents that are housed on
the computer.
Printers are typically all-in-one machines, meaning they can print,
scan, fax, and copy. There are printers that can be accessed via the
internet using Wi-Fi. There are also three-dimensional (3D) printers
that can create a 3D solid object produced layer by layer from a 3D
software digital file.
Speakers
All computers have some sort of speaker setup, usually small
speakers embedded in the monitor or in the case, or if it is a laptop,
close to the keyboard. Often, external speakers are added to a
computer system to provide enhanced sound and a more enjoyable
listening experience.What Is the Relationship of Computer
Science to Knowledge?
Scholars and researchers understand the effects that computer
systems, architecture, applications, and processes have on the
potential for knowledge acquisition and development. Users who
have access to contemporary computers equipped with full internet
access have extensive resources at their fingertips such as entire
library collections. Users are also able to contribute to the
development of knowledge through the use of productivity, creativity,
and communication software and are able to disseminate knowledge
on a grand scale with other users. This deluge of information
available via computers must be mastered and organized by the
user if knowledge is to emerge. Discernment and the ability to
critique and filter this information must also be present to facilitate
the further development of wisdom.
The development of an understanding of computer science
principles as they apply to technology used in nursing can facilitate
optimal usage of the technology for knowledge development and
dissemination in the profession. The maxim that knowledge is power
and that the skillful use of computers lies at the heart of this power is
a presumption. Once nurses become comfortable with the various
technologies, they can shape, refine, and apply them in new and
different ways, just as they have always adapted equipment and
technologies. Nurses must harness the power of data and
information through the use of computer technologies to build
knowledge and gain wisdom.How Does the Computer Support
Collaboration and Information Exchange?
Computers can be linked to other computers through networking
software and hardware to promote communication, information
exchange, work sharing, and collaboration. Networks can be
local or organizationally based, with computers joined together
into a local area network (LAN);
organized on a wider area scope such as a city or distinct
geographic area, such as a cable TV network, using a
metropolitan area network (MAN) typically comprising several
LANs that are interconnected over a dedicated backbone
connection; and
encompassing computers at an even greater distance, such as a
country, continent, or even the internet itself, using a wide area
network (WAN).
Network interface cards are used to connect a computer and its
modem to a network. A virtual private network (VPN) provides
secure and private connectivity between networks and remote
computers or devices using encryption, which transforms
information or data into a code to prevent unauthorized access.
Networks within health care can manifest in several configurations,
including client-focused networks, such as in telenursing, e-health,
and client support networks; work-related networks, including virtual
work and virtual social networks; and learning and research
networks, as in communities of practice. These trends are still
evolving in most nursing work environments (and most nurses’
personal lives), but they are growing dramatically. We are
experiencing one of the greatest upsurges in shared information and
our ability to access, exchange, and utilize this information to
enhance knowledge.Virtual social networks are another form of professional network
that have expanded phenomenally since the advent of the internet
and other computer software and hardware. Nursing-related virtual
social networks provide a cyberspace for nurses to make contacts,
share information and ideas, and build a sense of community.
Social communication software is used to provide a dynamic
virtual environment, and often virtual social networks provide
communicative capabilities through posting tools, such as blogs,
forums, and wikis; email for sharing ideas on a smaller scale;
collaborative areas for interaction and creating and building digital
artifacts or planning projects; navigation tools for moving through the
virtual network landscape; and profiles to provide a space for each
member to disclose personal information with others. Nurses
engaged in shift work often find that virtual social networks can
provide a sense of connection with other professionals that is
available around the clock. Because time is often a factor in any
social interchange, virtual communication offers an alternative for
practicing nurses. With active participation, the interchanges and
shared information and ideas of the network can culminate in
valuable social and cultural capital, which is available to all members
of that network. Often, nursing virtual social networks are created for
the purpose of exchanging ideas on practice issues and best
practices; becoming more knowledgeable about new trends,
research, and innovations in health care; or participating in
advocacy, activist, and educational initiatives.
Through the use of portable disk devices, such as flash drives, as
well as web-based and cloud spaces, people can share information,
documents, and communications by exchanging files. The World
Wide Web has evolved to become a viable and user-friendly way for
people to collaborate and exchange information; projects; and other
knowledge-based files, such as websites, email, social networking
applications, and webinar logs.Mobile Computing
Mobile computing is a technology that allows human–computer
interaction wherever you are by transporting the capability of
transmitting data, voice, and video with you, whether you are moving
or standing still. A mobile OS is different from a computer’s OS in
one important way, being designed for mobile use for wireless
transmissions. Mobile OSs were created specifically for mobile
devices, such as a smartphone, tablet, or other embedded mobile
OS. Two of the most popular OSs are Android OS (Google) and
iPhone OS, or iOS (Apple). Wireless mobile computing refers to
mobile computing without the need for wires or cables to connect to
a network. The wireless system affords a fixed or portable end point
with access to a distributed network. A distributed network consists
of shared programming and data spread across more than one
computer. A mobile computing system provides all the resources of
that distributed network to devices that are portable, or that can go
anywhere. However, because mobile systems are transported to
various locations, they can experience issues within the locality that
affect reception. Therefore, mobile and wireless systems actually
achieve two different things. Wi-Fi is a wireless technology that
allows electronic devices (e.g., smartphones, laptops, and tablets) to
exchange data over the internet using radio waves by connecting to
a Wi-Fi network in the vicinity or locale of the device. A Wi-Fi
hotspot is a wireless access point that is usually provided in a public
location, such as cafés, libraries, hotels, airports, and even grocery
stores. Even though these technologies continue to improve, it is
important to note that our mobile devices are only as secure as the
network that we access and over which we transmit data.
Near field communication (NFC) and far-field communication
refer to regions of the electromagnetic field around an object. NFC is
a wireless and contactless communication technology that makes a
device even smarter because it streamlines informationtransmissions and is the ultimate in connectivity. It allows the user to
wave the smartphone over an NFC-compatible device to send
information without having to touch the devices together or complete
multiple steps to set up the connection. NFC-compatible devices
contain an NFC tag that is passive and operates without a power
supply of its own; it is designed to store information and transfer a
wide variety of data types to other NFC-enabled devices. The
architecture of the NFC tags evolved from radio-frequency
identification (RFID). RFID uses radio waves to identify objects or
people with encoded microchips. NFC tags are passive devices, and
NFC chip technology operates as one part of a wireless link that,
when activated by another chip, transfers data between the two
devices. There are different types of NFC tags, including labels and
wristbands with varying storage capacities and transfer speeds.
Mobile computing applications will continue to evolve, and
healthcare organizations will continue to meet the security
challenge while they manage their mobile computing devices and
wireless networks as enterprise solutions to meet their strategic
plans.Bandwidth, Broadband, and Mobile
Broadband Versus Wireless Broadband
Bandwidth and Broadband
Bandwidth is the measurement in bits, bytes, kilobytes, megabytes,
and gigabytes of the data that can be transferred from or to your
computer. Broadband, or a wide band or range of frequencies, is
the minimum speed at which your connection will transfer
information. Tundlam (2015) developed a simple analogy using
roads and traffic to explain the difference between bandwidth and
broadband. Bandwidth would be related to the “speed limit of the
highway. Assuming each car is a fixed size, the number of cars going
through a highway is nothing but the average speed of the cars on
the highway. Cars per second would be the unit.” Tundlam likened
broadband to the “highway itself. A fast lane that allows cars to go at
a speed higher than on most other roads. Antonym is narrowband,
analogous to a city road, much less speed and capacity.”
Mobile Broadband Versus Wireless Broadband
The difference between mobile and wireless broadband depends on
the limitations of accessing the internet and the method of access.
Both wireless and mobile broadband are fast internet access
technologies, but only mobile broadband permits end users to
access the internet from different locations without restrictions. Some
mobile broadband technologies are included in wireless broadband
access methods because of the inaccessibility of wired connectivity.Cloud Computing
Cloud computing has web browser–based login-accessible data,
software, and hardware that can be accessed and used. Using the
cloud, systems can be linked together and costs reduced (Figure 3-
4). According to Griffith (2020), cloud computing refers to storing
and accessing data and programs over the internet, instead of on a
computer’s hard drive. “[T]he ‘cloud’ is just a metaphor for the
internet” (para. 3). According to Vennam (2020), the definition of
cloud computing is as follows:
Figure 3-4 Cloud Computing
Description[It] is on-demand access, via the internet, to computing resources—applications,
servers (physical servers and virtual servers), data storage, development tools,
networking capabilities, and more—hosted at a remote data center managed by a
cloud services provider (or CSP). (para. 1)
The CSP is a pay as you go service, where the user is billed
based on the resources they use. Robust technological capabilities
such as artificial intelligence (AI) and blockchain technology are
utilized to enhance security.
As we explore web-based apps and computing over the internet,
we are cloud computing. Griffith (2020) described common examples
of cloud computing that you might be using right now: Google Drive,
Microsoft Office Online, Microsoft OneDrive, Apple iCloud, Amazon
Cloud Drive, Box, Dropbox, and SugarSync. And then there’s cloud
hardware. The primary example of a device that is completely cloud
centric is the Chromebook, which is a laptop that has just enough
local storage and power to run the Chrome OS, which essentially
turns the Google Chrome web browser into an operating system.
The Chromebook moves cloud computing to the next level because
applications and games accessed on the computer are executing on
the cloud. Therefore, the Chromebook is an example of where
personal computing might evolve—devices that have a web browser
reaching out to online applications and services with a small number
of local applications and minimal storage capabilities. In the cloud
computing model, users must rely heavily on their internet providers
for connectivity, speed, and bandwidth. The speed relates to how
fast users can upload and download, and the bandwidth relates to
how much data can be uploaded and downloaded. The speed and
bandwidth issues could hinder mass appeal of the Chromebook.
Cloud storage is the housing of data that is provided by networked
online servers, which are typically located outside of the institutions
whose data are being stored.
There are also services other than those already discussed that
are based in the cloud and that are mainly business related:
software as a service (SaaS), platform as a service (PaaS), and
infrastructure as a service (IaaS) (Figure 3-5). SaaS, such as
Salesforce.com, refers to cloud-based applications with the followingbenefits: quick start in using innovative or specific business apps that
are scalable to a company’s needs, any connected computer can
access the apps and data, and data are not lost if a hard drive
crashes because the data are stored in the cloud (Griffith, 2020;
Vennam, 2020). PaaS provides everything needed to support the
cloud application’s building and delivery, which enables users to
rapidly develop and launch custom web applications to the cloud
(Griffith, 2020; Vennam, 2020). IaaS, such as Amazon, Microsoft,
Google, and Rackspace, provide a rentable backbone to companies,
enabling the scalable, on-demand infrastructure they need to support
their dynamic workloads. Users pay for only what they use, and they
do not have to invest in hardware, such as networks, storage, and
data center space (Griffith, 2020; Vennam, 2020). Users can access
and receive services from Netflix and Pinterest because they are
customers of Amazon’s cloud services. According to Precedence
Research (2023), “The global cloud computing market size was
valued at USD 446.51 billion in 2022 and is expected to hit USD
1,614.10 billion by 2030” (para. 1).Figure 3-5 Software as a service (SaaS), platform as a service (PaaS), and infrastructure
as a service (IaaS)
Description
Cloud computing is internet computing, and it has the same pitfalls
and benefits as using the internet. Some people are not sold on the
claims that it is totally reliable, safe, and secure. Others believe it is a
more environmentally friendly option because it uses fewer
resources and less energy compared to other internet services, and
yet many people can share efficiently managed, centralized cloud￾based systems (Woodford, 2022). One of the driving forces behind
the initiation of cloud computing was the need for affordable,
scalable resources. As with anything on the internet, these resources
can be shared or privately held. Cloud computing will continue to
grow as long as there is a demand for it and it can meet the
scalability requirements while maintaining secure, reliable spaces.H
Splunk (2022) stated that one of the top five security, incident, and
event management (SIEM) priority trends to watch will continue to be
cloud and app security. According to Doyle (2020), “Device-as-a￾Service (DaaS) means medical teams can benefit from the more
flexible provision of IT [information technology] equipment such as
desktops, laptops and other mobile devices” (para. 1). Reflect on
DaaS as one of the solutions in Case Study 3-1. What are the
advantages of incorporating DaaS as one of the solutions in this
health system?
CASE STUDY 3-1
ospital system: Mid-Cheshire Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust
540 beds and community health services
4,500 staff across three hospital sites in northwest England
Problem: Aging infrastructure, including desktop devices that were over 10 years old,
which was having a negative effect on thousands of its staff members’ productivity and
stressing its internal information technology help desk.
Solution from CDW: Formulating a compelling business case and implementing the
following:
Microsoft Office 365 to improve user experience; security, including email
encryption; and support collaboration.
Microsoft SharePoint platform for user collaboration.
Windows 10 and new password reset tool to decrease help desk calls.
Unable to replace all devices at once, CDW developed a business case to replace
those devices over 10 years old; a DaaS solution delivered by CDW established a
new 5-year refresh cycle.
Outcome: Infrastructure renewal is benefiting from CDW’s CloudPlan service while
CDW prepares for migration to Microsoft Azure* in the near future. CDW is also rolling
out Cisco networking technology to enable free Wi-Fi for patients.
*Microsoft described Azure as an “ever-expanding set of cloud services”
(https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/overview/what-is-azure). In the healthcare sector,
McKesson, one of the oldest and largest healthcare companies, serving more than
50% of U.S. hospitals, chose Azure (https://cloud.netapp.com/blog/azure-cvo-blg￾azure-case-studies-with-cloud-volumes-ontap). McKesson needed help to meet theinfrastructure needs of their clients (https://cloud.netapp.com/hubfs/success-stories/CS￾McKesson.pdf, para. 1).
CDW. (n.d.). Case study: CDW helps Mid-Cheshire NHS Trust improve patient care by
replacing ageing IT infrastructure. www.uk.cdw.com/about/case-studies/mid-cheshire￾nhs-trust
Realizing the benefits of using cloud computing is critical in health
care as we seek to blend big data analytics with evidence-based
practice to improve patient care. In an ideal world, nurses must be
able to interact with computer technologies effectively to enhance
patient care. They would be able to understand computer science
and know how to harness its capabilities to benefit the profession
and ultimately their patients.Looking to the Future
The use of the cloud will only continue to expand. The market for
wearable technology, which comprises small handheld and
portable computer systems and high-quality voice-activated
inventions, will further facilitate the use of computers in nursing
practice and professional development. The field of computer
science will continue to contribute to the evolving art and science of
nursing informatics. New trends promise to bring wide-ranging and (it
is hoped) positive changes to the practice of nursing. Computers and
other technologies have the potential to support a more client￾oriented healthcare system in which clients truly become active
participants in their own healthcare planning and decisions. Mobile
health technology, telenursing, sophisticated electronic health
records, and next-generation technology are predicted to contribute
to high-quality nursing care and consultation within healthcare
settings, including patients’ homes and communities.
Computers are becoming more powerful and compact, which are
factors that will contribute to the development of several
technological initiatives that are currently evolving, such as quantum
computing. Some of these initiatives are described here. These
predicted innovations are only some of the many computer and
technological applications being developed. As nurses gain
proficiency in capitalizing on the creative, time-saving, and
interactive capabilities emerging from information technology
research, the field of nursing informatics will grow in similar
proportions.
Quantum Computing
Quantum bits (qubits) are three-dimensional arrays of atoms in
quantum states. A quantum computer is a proposed machine that is
not based on the binary system but instead performs calculations
based on the behavior of subatomic particles, or qubits. It isestimated that with quantum computing, we will be able to execute
millions of instructions per second (MIPS) due to the qubits
existing in more than one state at a time, or having the ability to
simultaneously execute and process. According to Kennedy (2016),
“the era of quantum computers is one step closer” (para. 1) due to
the creation of qubits by David Weiss’s (a professor of physics at
Penn State University) research team.
Voice-Activated Communicators
Voice-activated communicators are already on the market, with new
iterations being developed by a variety of companies, including
Vocera Communications. Vocera (2019) developed the Vocera
B3000n Communication Badge. This badge is a wearable, one-to￾many, two-way, voice-controlled communication device. This device
uses intuitive, simple commands to facilitate responses and
communication permitting nurses to use wireless, hands-free
devices to communicate with one another and to record data. Such
technology is becoming a user-friendly and cost-effective way to
increase clinical productivity.
Game and Simulation Technology
Game and simulation technology is offering immersive, realistic,
innovative ways to teach content in general, including healthcare
informatics concepts and skills. The same technology that powers
video games is being used to create dynamic educational interfaces
to help students learn about pathophysiology, care guidelines, and a
host of other topics. Such applications are also valuable for client
education and health promotion materials. The “serious games”
industry is growing now that video game producers are looking
beyond mere entertainment to address public and private policy;
management; and leadership issues and topics, including those
related to health care.
Virtual Reality and the MetaverseVR is influencing and will continue to influence healthcare education
and professional development. VR is a three-dimensional, computer￾generated “world” in which a person (with the right equipment) can
move about and interact as if they were actually in a physical
location. The person’s senses are immersed in this VR world using
special gadgetry, such as head-mounted displays (HMDs), data
gloves, joysticks, and other hand tools. Oculus Quest has become
Meta Quest (www.meta.com/quest). The metaverse is an immersive
world where our interactions are facilitated by the realities (virtual,
augmented, and mixed), and we can move seamlessly from reality
through VRs while we engage in our professional and personal lives.
Headsets continue to evolve, and more are entering the market with
greater capabilities and lighter weights and designs that will increase
the amount of time people can wear them comfortably as the
metaverse expands its reach into our personal and professional
lives.
Mobile Devices
Mobile devices will be increasingly used by nurses, both at the point
of care and in planning, documenting, interacting with the
interprofessional healthcare team, and researching. Nurses will also
be using such powerful wearable technologies as nano-based
diagnostic sensors in their personal lives and will be generating their
own data streams and receiving data from the wearable and mobile
devices their patients use.
Mobile health (mHealth) is the use of mobile technologies,
including mobile phones (and, increasingly, internet-enabled,
wireless-connected smartphones), tablet computers and
subnotebook microcomputers, remote diagnostic and monitoring
devices, and global positioning system (GPS)/geographic
information system (GIS) mapping equipment. As society becomes
more mobile, people’s medical, public health, and self-care health
access and needs can be met with a set of apps, devices, and
connections supported by their mobile devices.
Truly, data are at our fingertips.Summary
The field of computer science is one of the fastest-growing
disciplines. Astonishing innovations in computer hardware, software,
and architecture have occurred over the past few decades, and there
are no indications that this trend will come to a halt any time soon.
Computers have increased in speed, accuracy, and efficiency yet
now cost less and have reduced physical size compared to their
forebears. These trends are predicted to continue. Current computer
hardware and software serve as vital and valuable tools for both
nurses and patients to engage in on-screen and online activities that
provide rich access to data and information. Productivity, creativity,
and communication software tools also enable nurses to work with
computers to further foster knowledge acquisition and development.
Wide access to vast stores of information and knowledge shared by
others facilitates the emergence of wisdom in users, which can then
be applied to nursing in meaningful and creative ways. It is
imperative that nurses exploit the potential of the metaverse and
become discerning yet skillful users of computer technology to apply
the principles of nursing informatics to their practice to improve
patient care and to contribute to the profession’s ever-growing body
of knowledge.
THOUGHT-PROVOKING QUESTIONS
1. How can knowledge of computer hardware and software help nurses to participate
in information technology adoption decisions in the practice area?
2. How can new computer software help nurses engage in professional development,
collaboration, and knowledge dissemination activities at their own pace and
leisure?Working Wisdom
Since the beginning of the profession, nurses have applied their
ingenuity, resourcefulness, and professional awareness of what
works to adapt technology and objects to support nursing care,
usually with the intention of promoting efficiency but also in support
of client comfort and healing. This resourcefulness could also be
applied effectively to the adaptation of information technology within
the care environment, to ensure that the technology truly does serve
patients, nurses, and the rest of the interprofessional team.
Consider this question: How can you develop competency in using
the various computer hardware and software not only to promote
efficient, high-quality nursing care and to develop yourself
professionally but also to further the development of the profession’s
body of knowledge?Application Scenario
Dan P. has just been accepted into the nursing informatics graduate
program. In the past, he has used his 8-year-old laptop to surf the
World Wide Web, exchange email with friends, and play computer
games. Now, however, Dan realizes that the computer is a vital tool
for his academic success, and he has saved up enough money to
purchase a new laptop computer and the necessary accessories he
needs to be successful. He knows that his program will entail VR
and that the university has launched their public metaverse space.
What questions should he ask of his nursing advisor before he
decides on the laptop he should purchase? Dan reached out to his
nursing advisor, Dr. Smythely, and she sent Dan a list of general
university and program-specific technical requirements needed for
his success (see Box 3-3).
BOX 3-3 UNIVERSITY AND PROGRAM-SPECIFIC
TECHNICAL REQUIREMENTS UNIVERSITY GENERAL
TECHNICAL REQUIREMENTS THESE
REQUIREMENTS ARE DESIGNED TO ENSURE YOUR
SUCCESS. PLEASE MAKE SURE THAT YOU ARE
ABLE TO MEET THEM, OR CONSULT WITH YOUR
STUDENT ADVISOR OR STUDENT SUPPORT
LIAISON.
As a student, you should be proficient using
email,
internet, and
productivity software.
GENERAL SUGGESTED REQUIREMENTS*
Laptop is required but a newer tablet (3 years old or less) and newer smartphone (3
years old or less) might be able to be used based on specific courserequirements/needs.
SUGGESTED SETUP*
Internet access is required and broadband is highly recommended.
Windows Vista/7 or Mac OS X with virtualization software (such as Parallels with
Windows OS)
2 GB of RAM minimum
40 GB hard drive
Speakers connected to the computer
Headphone connected to the computer
All-in-one inkjet or laser printer
Scanner or scanning application for mobile devices
Portable media (thumb drive)
SOFTWARE REQUIREMENTS
Required web browser: Google Chrome in its most current version
Microsoft Office
Adobe
Reader version 10.1 or higher
Flash Player version 11.7 or higher
Apple QuickTime version 7.7 or higher
Windows Media Player version 11 or higher
Antivirus software: Most current version of McAfee is suggested, but you can also
use the most current version of Norton. This software must be installed, running,
and kept current.
ADDITIONAL TECHNOLOGY REQUIREMENTS SPECIFIC
PROGRAMS OR COURSES MIGHT REQUIRE ADDITIONAL
TECHNOLOGIES THAT ARE NOT ADDRESSED IN THESE
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
*These are the general requirements for the university, but you must consult the
software/hardware requirements within your specific program of study with a faculty
member, student advisor, or student support liaison. Please note that these
recommendations and requirements may change as technology evolves, and changes
could also vary from course to course throughout your program of study.NURSING INFORMATICS GRADUATE NURSING PROGRAM
SPECIFIC TECHNICAL REQUIREMENTS IN ADDITION TO
THE GENERAL REQUIREMENTS*
Laptop
MAC Minimum Requirements
Operating system: Mojave at a minimum; Big Sur would be maximum
Processor: Intel i5 at least 2.0 GHZ
Memory: 8 GB RAM or more
Storage: 9 GB available space
Graphics card: Dedicated GPU with minimum AMD Radeon Pro 560 4GB
2016 or newer hardware
Microphone and webcam access
Windows PC Minimum Requirements
Operating system: Windows 10 or newer
Processor: Intel i5
Memory: 8 GB RAM or more
Storage: 9 GB available space
Graphics card: Nvidia GeForce GTX 970
2016 or newer hardware
Microphone and webcam access
Bandwidth Requirements Minimum bandwidth:
50 Kbps download per learner in the classroom, plus 16 Kbps per open mic learner
(1 kbps = 0.001 Mbps)
200 Kbps upload (for your video feed) plus 900 Kbps to share your screen
Browser
Updated Chrome or Edge browser
Head-Mounted Display (VR Headset)
Meta Quest Pro or Oculus Quest 2 or newer models if available
Pico 4 or Pico Neo 3
VIVE Flow or VIVE Focus 3
Apple iPhone 8 or Higher/iPad Minimum System Requirements
Operating system: iOS 13.0
Processor: A11 chip or higher
Memory: 2 GB RAMStorage: 5 GB available space
ANDROID SMARTPHONE OR TABLET MINIMUM SYSTEM
REQUIREMENTS
Operating system: Android 7.1.1
Processor: Qualcomm Snapdragon 835
Memory: 4 GB RAM
Storage: 5 GB available space
In addition to these specific technical requirements, you must meet the general
requirements.
After completing this chapter, how would you answer the following
questions?
1. Dan is set on purchasing a new laptop. Where is his money best
spent and why? Would it be better to get the most memory, the
fastest processor, the most storage, or the latest operating
system?
2. Dan is excited about VR but does not have a clue about which
HMD would be best let alone how much they cost. Since he
does not know anything about the headsets, what should he do
to make an informed decision?
3. Would you tell Dan to evaluate his internet speed and
connectivity? How would you explain the importance of the
terms broadband and bandwidth?
What else would you discuss with Dan before he chooses his
laptop and HMD if he still wants to learn more about computers? You
recommend that he review the following information: Brant (2023)
and Burek (2023).R E F E R E N C E S
Bithrey, R. (2022, January 21). Best VR gloves 2022: Our top picks for virtual reality. VR
Life. www.gfinityesports.com/vr/best-vr-gloves
Brant, T. (2023). The best desktop computers for 2023. PC Magazine.
www.pcmag.com/picks/the-best-desktop-computers
Burek, J. (2023). The best computer mice for 2023. PC Magazine.
www.pcmag.com/picks/the-best-computer-mice
Doyle, H. (2020, January 13). How DaaS can drive increased productivity in healthcare.
CDW Blog. https://news.uk.cdw.com/how-daas-can-drive-increased-productivity-in￾healthcare
Evans, D. (2019, June 24). Introduction to computing: Explorations in language, logic, and
machines. http://computingbook.org/FullText.pdf
Griffith, E. (2020, June 29). What is cloud computing? PC Magazine.
www.pcmag.com/news/what-is-cloud-computing
Kennedy, B. K. (2016, June 27). New, better way to build circuits for the world’s first useful
quantum computers. Phys.org. http://phys.org/news/2016-06-circuits-world￾quantum.html#jCp
Lyman, P., & Varian, H. R. (2003). How much information? 2003. Berkeley.edu.
https://groups.ischool.berkeley.edu/archive/how-much-info-2003/printable_report.pdf
Precedence Research. (2023). Cloud Computing Market Size to Surpass USD 1,614.10 BN
by 2030. www.precedenceresearch.com
SplunkTop 5 SIEM trends to watch in 2022.www.splunk.com/en_us/form/top-5-siem￾trends.html
Stegner, B. (2022, February 12). How to use hand tracking on your Oculus Quest. Make
Use Of. www.makeuseof.com/how-to-use-hand-tracking-oculus-quest
Tundlam, D. (2015, August 24). What is the difference between broadband and bandwidth?
Quora. www.quora.com/What-is-the-difference-between-broadband-and-bandwidth
UL Benchmarks. (2023). Best processors February 2023.
https://aws.futuremark.com/compare/best-cpus
Vennam, S. (2020, August 18). What is cloud computing? IBM.
web.archive.org/web/20221218040027/https://www.ibm.com/cloud/learn/cloud￾computing
Vocera. (2019). Data sheet: The B3000n Communication Badge.
www.vocera.com/sites/default/files/2019-07/44_DS_B3000n_070119.pdf
Woodford, C. (2022, November 28). Cloud computing. Explain That Stuff.
www.explainthatstuff.com/cloud-computing-introduction.htmlC H A P T E R 4
Introduction to Cognitive
Science and Cognitive
Informatics
OBJECTIVES
1. Describe cognitive science.
2. Assess how the human mind processes and generates information and knowledge.
3. Explore cognitive informatics.
4. Examine artificial intelligence and its relationship to cognitive science and computer
science.
KEY TERMS
artificial intelligence (AI)
augmented intelligence
brain
cognitive informatics (CI)
cognitive science
computer science
connectionism
decision-making
epistemology
human mental workload (MWL)
intelligence
intuition
knowledge
logicmachine learning (ML)
memory
mind
natural language processing (NLP)
neuroscience
perception
problem-solving
psychology
reasoning
wisdomIntroduction
Cognitive science is the fourth of the four basic building blocks used
to understand informatics (Figure 4-1). The Building Blocks of
Nursing Informatics section began by examining nursing science,
information science, and computer science and by considering how
each science relates to and helps the reader understand informatics.
This chapter explores the critical aspects of cognitive science and
how it supports cognitive informatics (CI) and artificial intelligence
(AI).Figure 4-1 Building Blocks of Nursing Informatics
Throughout the centuries, cognitive science has intrigued
philosophers and educators alike. Beginning in Greece, the ancient
philosophers sought to comprehend how the mind works and the
nature of knowledge. This age-old quest to unravel the processes
inherent in the working brain has been undertaken by some of the
greatest minds in history. However, it was only about 50 years agothat computer operations and actions were linked to cognitive
science, meaning theories of the mind, intellect, or brain. This
association led to the expansion of cognitive science to examine the
complete array of cognitive processes, from lower-level perceptions
to higher-level critical thinking, logical analysis, and reasoning.
The focus of this chapter is the impact of cognitive science on
nursing informatics (NI). This section provides the reader with an
introduction and overview of cognitive science; the nature of
knowledge, wisdom, and AI as they apply to the Foundation of
Knowledge model; and NI. The applications to NI include problem￾solving, decision support systems, usability issues, user-centered
interfaces and systems, and the development and use of
terminologies.Cognitive Science
The interdisciplinary field of cognitive science studies the mind,
intelligence, and behavior from an information-processing
perspective. H. Christopher Longuet-Higgins originated the term
cognitive science in his 1973 commentary on the Lighthill report,
which pertained to the state of AI research at that time. The
Cognitive Science Society and the Cognitive Science Journal date
back to 1980. The interdisciplinary base of cognitive science arises
from psychology, philosophy, neuroscience, computer science,
linguistics, biology, and physics. Its focus covers memory, attention,
perception, reasoning, language, mental ability, and computational
models of cognitive processes. The science explores the nature of
the mind, knowledge representation, language, problem-solving,
decision-making, and the social factors influencing the design and
use of technology. Simply put, cognitive science is the study of the
mind and how information is processed in the mind. As described in
the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Thagard, 2023):
The central hypothesis of cognitive science is that thinking can best be understood
in terms of representational structures in the mind and computational procedures
that operate on those structures. While there is much disagreement about the
nature of the representations and computations that constitute thinking, the central
hypothesis is general enough to encompass the current range of thinking in
cognitive science, including connectionist theories which model thinking using
artificial neural networks. (para. 109)
Connectionism is a component of cognitive science that uses
computer modeling through artificial neural networks to explain
human intellectual abilities. Neural networks can be thought of as
interconnected simple processing devices or simplified models of the
brain and nervous system that consist of a considerable number of
elements or units (i.e., analogs of neurons) linked together in a
pattern of connections (i.e., analogs of synapses). A neural network
that models the entire nervous system would have three types of
units: (1) input units (i.e., analogs of sensory neurons), which receiveinformation to be processed; (2) hidden units (i.e., analogs to all the
other neurons, not sensory or motor), which work in between input
and output units; and (3) output units (i.e., analogs of motor
neurons), where the outcomes, or results of the processing, are
found.
Connectionism (Figure 4-2) is rooted in how computation occurs
in the brain and nervous system, or biological neural networks. On
their own, single neurons have minimal computational capacity.
When interconnected with other neurons, however, they have
immense computational power. The connectionism system learns by
modifying the connections linking the neurons. Artificial neural
networks are unique computer programs designed to simulate their
biological analogs, the neurons of the brain.Figure 4-2 Connectionism
The mind is frequently compared to a computer, and experts in
computer science strive to understand how the mind processes data
and information. In contrast, experts in cognitive science model
human thinking using artificial networks provided by computers, an
endeavor sometimes referred to as AI. How does the mind process
all of the inputs received? Which items and in which ways are things
stored or placed into memory, accessed, augmented, changed,
reconfigured, and restored? Cognitive science provides the
scaffolding for the analysis and modeling of complicated,
multifaceted human performance and has a tremendous effect on
the issues affecting informatics.
The end user is the focus of this activity because the concern is
with enhancing performance in the workplace; in nursing, the end
user could be the actual clinician in the clinical setting, and cognitive
science can enhance the integration and implementation of the
technologies being designed to facilitate this knowledge worker, with
the ultimate goal of improving patient care delivery. Technologies
change rapidly, and this evolution must be harnessed for the clinician
at the bedside. To do this at all levels of nursing practice, one must
understand the nature of knowledge, the information and knowledge
needed, and the means by which the nurse processes this
information and knowledge in the situational context.Sources of Knowledge
Just as philosophers have questioned the nature of knowledge, so
too have they strived to determine how knowledge arises because
the origins of knowledge can help us understand its nature. How do
people come to know what they know about themselves, others, and
their world? There are many viewpoints on this issue, both scientific
and nonscientific.
Three sources of knowledge have been identified: (1) instinct, (2)
reason, and (3) intuition. Instinct is when one reacts without reason,
such as when a car is heading toward a pedestrian and they jump
out of the way without thinking. Instinct is found in both humans and
animals, whereas reason and intuition are found only in humans.
Reason “[c]ollects facts, generalizes, reasons out from cause to
effect, from effect to cause, from premises to conclusions, from
propositions to proofs” (Sivananda, 2017, para. 4). Intuition is a way
of acquiring knowledge that cannot be obtained by inference,
deduction, observation, reason, analysis, or experience. Intuition
was described by Aristotle as “[a] leap of understanding, a grasping
of a larger concept unreachable by other intellectual means, yet
fundamentally an intellectual process” (Shallcross & Sisk, n.d.).
Some believe that knowledge is acquired through perception and
logic. Perception is the process of acquiring knowledge about the
environment or situation by obtaining, interpreting, selecting, and
organizing sensory information from seeing, hearing, touching,
tasting, and smelling. Logic is a discipline that relies on reasoned
action or drawing inferences or conclusions based on premises or
what you know from finding new data and information by analyzing
and synthesizing if other known data and information are true.
Acquiring knowledge through logic requires reasoned action to make
valid inferences.
The sources of knowledge provide a variety of inputs, throughputs,
and outputs through which knowledge is processed. No matter howyou believe knowledge is acquired, it is important to be able to
explain or describe those beliefs, communicate those thoughts,
enhance shared understanding, and discover the nature of
knowledge.Nature of Knowledge
Epistemology is the study of the nature and origin of knowledge—
that is, what it means to know. Everyone has a conception of what it
means to know based on their own perceptions, education, and
experiences; knowledge is a part of life that continues to grow with
the person. Thus, a definition of knowledge is somewhat difficult to
agree on because it reflects the viewpoints, beliefs, and
understandings of the person or group defining it. Some people
believe that knowledge is part of a sequential learning process that
resembles a pyramid, with data on the bottom, rising to information,
then knowledge, and finally wisdom. Others believe that knowledge
emerges from interactions and experience with the environment, and
still others think that it is religiously or culturally bound. Knowledge
acquisition is thought to be an internal process derived through
thinking and cognition or an external process from senses,
observations, studies, and interactions. Descartes’s important
premise “called ‘the way of ideas’ represents the attempt in
epistemology to provide a foundation for our knowledge of the
external world (as well as our knowledge of the past and of other
minds) in the mental experiences of the individual” (Martinich &
Stroll, 2023, para. 4).
For the purpose of this text, knowledge is defined as the
awareness and understanding of a set of information and ways that
information can be made useful to support a specific task or arrive at
a decision. It abounds with others’ thoughts and information or
consists of information that is synthesized so that relationships are
identified and formalized.How Knowledge and Wisdom Are Used in
Decision-Making
The reason for collecting and building data, information, and
knowledge is to be able to make informed, judicious, prudent, and
intelligent decisions. When you consider the nature of knowledge
and its applications, you must also examine the concept of wisdom.
Wisdom has been defined in numerous ways:
Knowledge applied in a practical way or translated into actions
The use of knowledge and experience to heighten common
sense and insight to exercise sound judgment in practical
matters
The highest form of common sense resulting from accumulated
knowledge or erudition (i.e., deep, thorough learning) or
enlightenment (i.e., education that results in understanding and
the dissemination of knowledge)
The ability to apply valuable and viable knowledge, experience,
understanding, and insight while being prudent and sensible
Focused on our own minds
The synthesis of our experience, insight, understanding, and
knowledge
The appropriate use of knowledge to solve human problems
In essence, wisdom entails knowing when and how to apply
knowledge. The decision-making process revolves around
knowledge and wisdom. It is through efforts to understand the nature
of knowledge and its evolution to wisdom that one can conceive of,
build, and implement informatics tools that enhance and mimic the
mind’s processes to facilitate decision-making and job performance.Cognitive Informatics
Wang (2003) described cognitive informatics (CI) as an emerging
transdisciplinary field of study that bridges the gap in understanding
regarding how information is processed in the mind and in the
computer. Computing and informatics theories can be applied to help
elucidate the information processing of the brain, and cognitive and
neurological sciences can likewise be applied to build better and
more efficient computer processing systems. Wang suggested that
the common issue among the human knowledge sciences is the
drive to develop an understanding of natural intelligence and human
problem-solving.
Patel et al. (2014) defined CI as “the multidisciplinary study of
cognition, information and computational sciences that investigates
all facets of human computing including design and computer￾mediated intelligent action, thus is strongly grounded in methods and
theories from cognitive science” (para. 1). CI helps to bridge this gap
by systematically exploring the mechanisms of the brain and mind
and specifically how information is acquired, represented,
remembered, retrieved, generated, and communicated. This
dawning of understanding can then be applied and modeled in AI
situations, which will then result in more efficient computing
applications.
Wang (2003) explained further:
Cognitive informatics attempts to solve problems in two connected areas in a
bidirectional and multidisciplinary approach. In one direction, CI uses informatics
and computing techniques to investigate cognitive science problems, such as
memory, learning, and reasoning; in the other direction, CI uses cognitive theories
to investigate the problems in informatics, computing, and software engineering.
(p. 120)
Principles of cognitive informatics and an understanding of how
humans interact with computers can be used to build information
technology (IT) systems that better meet the needs of users (Figure
4-3). If a system is too complex or taxing for users, they are likely toresist its use. The National Center for Cognitive Informatics and
Decision Making in Healthcare (NCCD) is funded by the Office of the
National Coordinator for Health IT (ONC) under the Strategic Health
IT Advanced Research Projects (SHARP) program. The NCCD was
established to respond to the cognitive challenges in health IT and to
“bring together a collaborative, interdisciplinary team of researchers
across the nation with the highest level of expertise in patient
centered cognitive support research” (SHARP, 2010, p. 6). Similarly,
Longo (2015) emphasized human mental workload (MWL) as a
key component in effective system design (Figure 4-4). He stated
the following:
Figure 4-3 Cognitive Informatics Leads to Usable Systems
DescriptionFigure 4-4 Human Mental Workload
At a low level of MWL, people may often experience annoyance and frustration
when processing information. On the other hand, a high level can also be both
problematic and even dangerous, as it leads to confusion, decreases performance
in information processing and increases the chances of errors and mistakes. (p.
758)Cognitive Informatics and Nursing Practice
According to Mastrian (2008), the recognition of the potential
application of principles of cognitive science to NI is relatively new.
The traditional and widely accepted definition of NI advanced by
Graves and Corcoran (1989) is that NI is a combination of nursing
science, computer science, and information science used to describe
the processes nurses employ to manage data, information, and
knowledge in nursing practice. Turley (1996) proposed the addition
of cognitive science to this mix because nurse scientists are seen to
strive to capture and explain the influence of the human brain on
data, information, and knowledge processing and to elucidate how
these factors in turn affect nursing decision-making. The need to
include cognitive sciences is imperative as researchers attempt to
model and support nursing decision-making in complex computer
programs.
In 2003, Wang proposed the term cognitive informatics to signify
the branch of information and computer sciences that investigates
and explains information processing in the human brain. The science
of CI grew out of interest in AI, based on computer scientists
developing computer programs that mimic the information
processing and knowledge generation functions of the human brain.
CI bridges the gap between artificial and natural intelligence and
enhances the understanding of how information is acquired,
processed, stored, and retrieved so that these functions can be
modeled in computer software.
What does CI have to do with nursing? At its very core, nursing
practice requires problem-solving and decision-making. Nurses help
people manage their responses to illnesses and identify ways that
patients can maintain or restore their health. During the nursing
process, nurses must first recognize that there is a problem to be
solved and then they must identify the nature of the problem, pull
information from knowledge stores that is relevant to the problem,decide on a plan of action, implement the plan, and evaluate the
effectiveness of the interventions. When nurses have practiced the
science of nursing for some time, they tend to do these processes
automatically; they instinctively know what needs to be done to
intervene in the problem. What happens, however, if nurses face a
situation or problem for which they have no experience on which to
draw? The ever-increasing acuity and complexity of patient
situations, coupled with the explosion of information in health care,
has fueled the development of decision support software embedded
in the electronic health record. This software models the human and
natural decision-making processes of professionals in an artificial
program. Such systems can help decision-makers to consider the
consequences of different courses of action before implementing
one of them. They also provide stores of information that users may
not be aware of that they can use to choose the best course of
action and ultimately make a better decision in unfamiliar
circumstances.
Decision support programs continue to evolve as research in the
fields of cognitive science, AI, and CI is continuously generated and
then applied to the development of these systems. Nurses must
embrace—not resist—these advances as support and enhancement
of the practice of nursing science. Patel and Kannampallil (2015)
pointed out the following:
CI plays a key role—both in terms of understanding, describing and predicting the
nature of clinical work activities of its participants (e.g., clinicians, patients, and lay
public) and in terms of developing engineering and computing solutions that can
improve clinical practice (e.g., a new decision-support system), patient
engagement (e.g., a tool to remind patients of their medication schedule), and
public health interventions (e.g., a mobile application to track the spread of an
epidemic). (p. 4)What Is AI?
The field of AI deals with the conception, development, and
implementation of informatics tools based on intelligent technologies.
This field attempts to mimic the complex processes of human
thought and intelligence, using machines.
The challenge of AI use in healthcare rests in capturing,
mimicking, and creating the complex processes of the mind in
informatics tools, including software, hardware, and other machine
technologies, with the goal that the tool be able to initiate and
generate its own mechanical thought processing. The brain’s
processing is highly intricate and complicated. AI uses cognitive
science and computer science to replicate and generate human
intelligence. A self-driving car is an example of an AI system that
collects, processes, and uses data to make decisions. In health care,
AI systems gather and process data and make predictions of health
risk and suggestions for care based on the available evidence.
Examples of AI use in health care include diagnostic technologies
and clinical decision support. As Luber (2011) explained, AI tools
cannot be preprogramed to anticipate and respond to specific
situations because of the variability and complexity of situations.
“Instead, an intelligent agent must be equipped with the ability to
make decisions based on the information it has, and re-evaluate its
past solutions to improve future decisions” (p. 3). This field has
evolved and has produced artificially intelligent tools to enhance
nurses’ personal and professional lives. According to Columbia
University (n.d.), “[N]ow more than ever, there is unparalleled
promise for what AI in health care can achieve in saving and
improving lives” (para. 1). However, AI is not likely to completely
replace the human functions in health care because of the
complexities associated with and the emotional aspects of health
care. The American Medical Association has suggested the use of
the term augmented intelligence to emphasize the assistive role ofAI in enhancing human intelligence (www.ama￾assn.org/amaone/augmented-intelligence-ai).
Those involved in developing AI do not fully understand what
needs to be solved, and facets get overlooked. The complexity of
healthcare challenges results in AI agents that do not perform well in
the healthcare arena. The natural language processing (NLP)
systems are still not where they need to be, especially at the
provider–patient point of care, requiring the need for translators and
multilingual nurses and doctors so that miscommunication or lack of
communication does not disrupt care, especially in forming the
patient–nurse and patient–doctor relationship, diagnosing, treating,
and educating the patient (Columbia University, n.d.). It has been
suggested that doctors, nurses, and other healthcare workers will not
be replaced due to the need for touching patients while integrating
the best technologies to improve patient outcomes (Baxter, 2019).
Machine learning (ML) is becoming an important part of AI usage in
health care. ML is a subset of AI in that machines mine vast amounts
of data from various sources to identify patterns and make
predictions about the data or decisions without human intervention.
The data analysis outputs of ML are predictive, proactive, and
preventive; they can augment and evolve the work of nurses and
doctors but not replace them. Some people thought that radiologists
would be replaced by AI. Instead, healthcare professionals are able
to make intelligent and informed decisions through algorithmic
support that meticulously and precisely processes massive amounts
of data efficiently at an incredible speed and identifies patterns that
were previously undetected (Columbia University, n.d.; Oracle, n.d.).
The healthcare team can receive updates and analytics that are
synthesized into reports, which not only decreases their workloads
but also allows them to proactively care for their patients. For
example, the reports can highlight primary levels of prevention
issues they need to address with specific patients under their care.
This is a good illustration of augmented intelligence.
AI in the FutureAs electronic health records become more ubiquitous and we have
access to physiological data streamed in real time, we will have the
potential to process vast amounts of data using AI tools, and we will
begin to see data analytics that will enable machine processing that
far exceeds the capabilities of the human mind. AI is already
transforming how healthcare professionals practice and the patient
experience. Deloitte (n.d.) stated that “[w]hile each AI technology can
contribute significant value alone, the larger potential lies in the
synergies generated by using them together across the entire patient
journey, from diagnoses, to treatment, to ongoing health
maintenance” (para. 8). As AI continues to evolve, we will realize
greater patient engagement, improved patient outcomes and quality
of care, and the personalization of the levels of prevention.Summary
Cognitive science is the interdisciplinary field that studies the mind,
intelligence, and behavior from an information-processing
perspective. CI is a field of study that bridges the gap in
understanding regarding how information is processed in the mind
and in the computer. Computing and informatics theories can be
applied to help elucidate the information processing of the brain, and
cognitive and neurological sciences can likewise be applied to build
better and more efficient computer-processing systems.
AI is the field that deals with the conception, development, and
implementation of informatics tools based on intelligent technologies.
This field captures the complex processes of human thought and
intelligence. AI uses cognitive science and computer science to
replicate and generate human intelligence. More robust AI systems
leveraging ML and deep learning techniques are likely to have a
tremendous effect on health care in the future.
Clinicians must harness the sources of knowledge, the nature of
knowledge, and the rapidly changing technologies to enhance their
bedside care. Therefore, we must understand the nature of
knowledge and knowledge processing, the information and
knowledge needed, and the means by which nurses and machines
process this information and knowledge in their own situational
context. The reason for collecting and building data, information, and
knowledge is to be able to build wisdom—that is, the ability to apply
valuable and viable knowledge, experience, understanding, and
insight while being prudent and sensible. Wisdom is focused on our
own minds, the synthesis of our experience, insight, understanding,
and knowledge. Nurses must use their wisdom and make informed,
judicious, prudent, and intelligent decisions while providing care to
patients, families, and communities. Cognitive science, CI, and AI
will continue to evolve to help build knowledge and wisdom.THOUGHT-PROVOKING QUESTIONS
1. How would you describe CI? Reflect on a plan of care that you have developed for
a patient. How could CI be used to create tools to help with or support this
important work?
2. Think of a clinical setting with which you are familiar and envision how AI tools
might be applied in this setting. Are there any current tools in use? Which current or
emerging tools would enhance practice in this setting and why?
3. Use your creative mind to think of a tool of the future based on CI that would
support your practice.R E F E R E N C E S
Baxter, M. (2019, September 11). Forget AI in healthcare, augmented intelligence and
distributed ledger technology will transform healthcare. Information Age.
www.information-age.com/augmented-intelligence-distributed-ledger-technology￾healthcare-123485246
Columbia University. (n.d.). The future of artificial intelligence in health care.
https://ai.engineering.columbia.edu/ai-applications/ai-in-health-care
Deloitte. (n.d.). The future of artificial intelligence in health care.
www2.deloitte.com/us/en/pages/life-sciences-and-health-care/articles/future-of-artificial￾intelligence-in-health-care.html
Graves, J., & Corcoran, S. (1989). The study of nursing informatics. Image: Journal of
Nursing Scholarship, 21(4), 227–230. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1547-
5069.1989.tb00148.x
Longo, L. (2015). A defeasible reasoning framework for human mental workload
representation and assessment. Behaviour & Information Technology, 34(8), 758–786.
https://doi.org/10.1080/0144929X.2015.1015166
Longuet-Higgins, H. C. (1973). Comments on the Lighthill report and the Sutherland reply.
Chilton Computing. www.chilton￾computing.org.uk/inf/literature/reports/lighthill_report/p004.htm
Luber, S. (2011). Cognitive science artificial intelligence: Simulating the human mind to
achieve goals. 3rd International Conference on Computer Research and Development,
Shanghai, China (pp. 207–210). http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ICCRD.2011.5764005
Martinich, A. P., & Stroll, A. (2023). Epistemology. In Encyclopedia Britannica.
www.britannica.com/topic/epistemology
Mastrian, K. (2008, February). Invited editorial: Cognitive informatics and nursing practice.
Online Journal of Nursing Informatics, 12(1). http://ojni.org/12_1/kathy.html
Patel, V., & Kannampallil, T. (2015). Cognitive informatics in biomedicine and healthcare.
Journal of Biomedical Informatics, 53, 3–14. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbi.2014.12.007
Patel, V., Kaufman, D., & Cohen, T. (2014). Cognitive informatics in health and biomedicine:
Case studies on critical care, complexity and errors. Springer.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4471-5490-7
Shallcross, D. J., & Sisk, D. A. (n.d.). What is intuition? Hyponoetics Glossary.
www.hyponoesis.org/Glossary/Intuition/Intuition
Sivananda, S. (2017). The four sources of knowledge. The Divine Life Society.
www.dlshq.org/messages/knowledge.htm
Strategic Health IT Advanced Research Projects. (2010). Area 2: Patient-centered cognitive
support. http://informatics.mayo.edu/sharp/images/8/82/SHARP-C_overviews.ppt.pdf
Thagard, P. (2023, January 21). Cognitive science. In Stanford encyclopedia of philosophy.
http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/cognitive-science
Turley, J. (1996). Toward a model for nursing informatics. Image: Journal of Nursing
Scholarship, 28(4), 309–313. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1547-5069.1996.tb00379.xWang, Y. (2003). Cognitive informatics: A new transdisciplinary research field. Brain and
Mind, 4(2), 115–127. https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1025419826662C H A P T E R 5
Ethical Applications of
Informatics
OBJECTIVES
1. Recognize ethical dilemmas in nursing informatics.
2. Examine ethical implications of nursing informatics.
3. Evaluate professional responsibilities for the ethical use of healthcare informatics
technology.
4. Explore the ethical model for ethical decision-making.
5. Analyze practical ways of applying the ethical model for ethical decision-making to
manage ethical dilemmas in nursing informatics.
KEY TERMS
alternative
antiprinciplism
application (app)
augmented reality (AR)
autonomy
beneficence
bioethics
bioinformatics
care ethics
casuist approach
confidentiality
consequence
courage
decision-making
decision supportduty
ethical decision-making
ethical dilemma
ethical, social, and legal implications
ethicist
ethics
eudaemonistic
fidelity
Glass
good
harm
human enhancement technology (HET)
justice
liberty
microblog
microblogging
micropost
moral
moral dilemma
moral right
negligence
Nicomachean ethics
nonmaleficence
principlism
privacy
pseudo AI
radio-frequency identification (RFID)
rights
security
self-control
smartphone
social media
standard
truth
über-connected world
uncertainty
values
veracity
virtuevirtue ethics
wisdomIntroduction
Those who followed or researched the actual events of Apollo 13 or
were entertained by the movie (Howard, 1995) watched the
astronauts strive against all odds to bring their crippled spaceship
back to Earth. The speed of their travel was incomprehensible to
most viewers, and the task of bringing the spaceship back to Earth
seemed nearly impossible. They were experiencing a crisis never
imagined by the experts at NASA, and they made up their survival
plan moment by moment. What brought them back to Earth safely?
Surely, credit must be given to the technology and the spaceship’s
ability to withstand the trauma it experienced. Most amazing,
however, were the traditional nontechnological tools, skills, and
supplies that were used in new and different ways to stabilize the
spacecraft’s environment and keep the astronauts safe while
traveling toward their uncertain future.
This sense of constancy in the midst of change serves to stabilize
experience in many life events and contributes to the survival of
crisis and change. This rhythmic process is also vital to the
healthcare system’s stability and survival in the presence of the
rapidly changing events of the Knowledge Age. No one can dispute
the fact that the Knowledge Age is changing health care in ways that
will not be fully recognized and understood for years. The change is
paradigmatic, and every expert who addresses this change reminds
healthcare professionals of the need to go with the flow of rapid
change or be left behind.
As with any paradigm shift, a new way of viewing the world brings
with it some of the enduring values of the previous worldview. As
health care continues its journey into digital communications,
telehealth, and wearable technologies, it brings some familiar tools
and skills recognized in the form of values, such as privacy,
confidentiality, autonomy, and nonmaleficence. Although these
basic values remain unchanged, the standards for living out thesevalues will take on new meaning as health professionals confront
new and different moral dilemmas brought on by the adoption of
technological tools for information management, knowledge
development, and evidence-based changes in patient care. Ethical
decision-making frameworks will remain constant, but the context
for examining these moral issues, or ethical dilemmas, will become
increasingly complex.
This chapter highlights some familiar ethical concepts to consider
on the challenging journey into the increasingly complex future of
healthcare informatics. Ethics and bioethics are briefly defined, and
the evolution of ethical approaches from the Hippocratic ethic era, to
principlism, to the current antiprinciplism movement of ethical
decision-making is examined. New and challenging ethical dilemmas
are surfacing in the venture into the unfolding era of healthcare
informatics (Figure 5-1). Also presented in this chapter are findings
from some of the more recent literature related to these issues.
Readers are challenged to think constantly and carefully about ethics
as they become involved in healthcare informatics and to stay
abreast of new developments in ethical approaches.Figure 5-1 Ethics in Health CareEthics
Ethics is a process of systematically examining varying viewpoints
related to moral questions of right and wrong. Ethicists have defined
the term in a variety of ways, with each definition reflecting a basic
theoretical philosophic perspective.
Beauchamp and Childress (1994) referred to ethics as a generic
term for various ways of understanding and examining the moral life.
Ethical approaches to this examination may be normative,
presenting standards of right, or good action; descriptive, reporting
what people believe and how they act; or explorative, analyzing the
concepts and methods of ethics.
Husted and Husted (1995) emphasized a practice-based ethics,
stating that “ethics examines the ways men and women can exercise
their power in order to bring about human benefit—the ways in which
one can act in order to bring about the conditions of happiness” (p.
3).
Velasquez et al. (2010) posed the question, “What is ethics?” They
answered it with the following two-part response: “First, ethics refers
to well-based standards of right and wrong that prescribe what
humans ought to do, usually in terms of rights, obligations, benefits
to society, fairness, or specific virtues” (para. 10). “Secondly, ethics
refers to the study and development of one’s ethical standards”
(para. 11).
Regardless of the theoretical definition, a common characteristic
regarding ethics is its dialectical, goal-oriented approach to
answering questions, which allows for the potential for multiple
acceptable answers.Bioethics
Bioethics is defined as the study and formulation of healthcare
ethics. Bioethics takes on relevant ethical problems experienced by
healthcare providers in the provision of care to individuals and
groups. Husted and Husted (1995) stated that the fundamental
background of bioethics that forms its essential nature is as follows:
1. The nature and needs of humans as living, thinking beings
2. The purpose and function of the healthcare system in a human
society
3. An increased cultural awareness of human beings’ essential
moral status (p. 7)
Bioethics emerged in the 1970s as health care began to change its
focus from a mechanistic approach of treating disease to a more
holistic approach of treating people with illnesses. As technology
advanced, recognition and acknowledgment of the rights and the
needs of individuals and groups receiving this high-tech care also
increased.
In today’s technologically savvy healthcare environment, in some
clinical practices, patients are being prescribed applications (apps)
for their smartphones instead of medications. Patients’
smartphones are being used to interact with them in new ways and
to monitor and assess their health in some cases. With apps and
add-ons, for example, a provider can see the patient’s ECG
immediately, or the patient can monitor their ECG and send it to the
provider as necessary. Another example would be a sensor attached
to the patient’s mobile device that could monitor blood glucose
levels. We are just beginning to realize the vast potential of these
mobile devices—and the threats they can pose. For example,
Google’s Glass, which is an augmented reality (AR) headset that
provides an interactive experience within a real-world environment,
has been updated for the workplace (Brown, 2019). On the onehand, this wearable device can take photos and videos without
anyone knowing that this is occurring; in the healthcare environment,
such a technological advancement can violate patients’ privacy and
confidentiality. On the other hand, wearable technologies provide a
data-rich environment for diagnosing, addressing, and monitoring
health issues. As we analyze huge patient datasets, concerns arise
about privacy, confidentiality, and data sharing.
The use of robotics in healthcare is causing disruption. Segers
(2022) felt the predominant concern was that the “implementation of
care robots will turn deception into a routine component of elderly
care, at least to the extent that these robots will function as
simulacra for something that they are not (i.e. human caregivers)”
(para. 1). Even though they might create a paradigm shift in the
current healthcare system and provider–patient relationships, there
could be a reawakening, reexamination, and reassessment of
veracity (Segers, 2022). The virtue of veracity is one of the values
that is employed to lobby against a “substitution of human caregivers
(while a combination of care robots and human caregivers is much
more accepted)” (Segers, 2022, para. 1). Add these evolving
developments to healthcare providers’ engagement in social media
use with their patients, and it becomes clear that personal and
ethical dilemmas abound for nurses in the new über-connected
world through social media tools, such as wikis, blogs, and other
social networks, which are connecting employees, patients,
healthcare providers, and other people globally.Ethical Issues and Social Media
As connectivity has improved, owing to emerging technologies, a
rapid explosion in the phenomenon known as social media has
occurred. Social media is defined as “a group of Internet-based
applications that build on the ideological and technological
foundations of Web 2.0 and that allow the creation and exchange of
user-generated content” (Spector & Kappel, 2012). Just as the
electronic health record serves as a real-time event in recording
patient–provider contact, so too does the use of social media
represent an instantaneous form of communication. Healthcare
providers—particularly nurses—can enhance the patient care
delivery system, promote professional collegiality, and provide timely
communication and education regarding health-related matters by
using this forum (National Council of State Boards of Nursing, 2011;
National Student Nurses’ Association, n.d., p. 4). In all cases,
however, nurses must exercise judicious use of social media to
protect patients’ rights. Nurses must understand their obligation to
their chosen profession, particularly as it relates to personal behavior
and the perceptions of their image as portrayed through social
media. Above all, nurses must be mindful that once communication
is written and posted on the internet, there is no way to retract what
was written; it is a permanent record that can be tracked, even if the
post is deleted (Englund et al., 2012, p. 242). In recent years, more
patients are using social media to discuss not only their stories but
also their healthcare providers and healthcare settings. Foot et al.
(2021) felt that people were inclined to trust those who posted
comparable experiences and points of view like their own. One
parent felt that her “large social media following influenced her
daughter’s doctor’s willingness to try interventions identified through
social media” (Foot et al., 2021, p. 9). Zakkar et al. (2022)
researched the issue from the perspectives of healthcare providers
and administrators to investigate if they could use the stories toassess healthcare experiences. Their study found that the
healthcare system’s culture might need to change to foster the use
of social media to improve the quality of healthcare. In addition, the
changes might be required to “enable the development of a safe
patient-provider communication environment that facilitates the
exchange of constructive feedback between the two parties without
the fear of legal consequences, breaches of patient privacy, or
violation of professional codes of conduct” (Zakkar et al., 2022, para.
1). The healthcare providers and administrators must formulate a
plan on how they will continue to acknowledge, access, evaluate,
and act on the social media posts of their consumers—their patients.
Social media platforms include such electronic communication
outlets as Facebook, WhatsApp, X (formerly Twitter; microblogging
site), TikTok, LinkedIn, Instagram, Snapchat, WeChat, Douyin, and
YouTube. Other widely used means of instantaneous
communications include wikis, blogs, tweeting, Skype, Instagram,
and the “hangout” feature on Google+. Use of social networking has
increased dramatically among all age groups. There are 4.61 billion
social media users out of a global population of 7.91 billion (Kemp,
2022). Chaffey (2023) reported that “59% of the world’s population
uses social media. The average daily usage is 2 hours and 29
minutes” (para. 4.). Kemp listed the favorite social media platforms
for people aged 16 to 64 in the following order with the percentage of
users choosing their favorite top seven social media in parentheses:
WhatsApp (15.7%); Instagram (14.8%); Facebook (14.5%); WeChat
(11.4%); Douyin (5.1%); TikTok (4.3%); and X (Twitter) (3.3%).
WhatsApp has over 100 billion messages shared every day (Dean,
2023c). Instagram has over 500 million daily active users worldwide
(Dean, 2023b). Facebook has 1.9 billion daily users who access its
platform (Dean, 2023a).
X (Twitter) is a social media microblog platform that allows users
to microblog microposts, or frequent, short posts. X’s (Twitter’s)
influence on health care continues to grow, according to Pershad et
al. (2018). Symplur (n.d.) reported 2,000,000,000+ tweets related to
health care, covering 17,265 topics. X (Twitter, n.d.) is driving the
consumer and provider connection in health care. In addition,healthcare consumers can connect to share their treatment
experiences. Healthcare providers were typically connected to
information as well as other members of their discipline or other
members of the healthcare team through their attendance at
conferences (Twitter, n.d.). The COVID-19 pandemic changed that
since conferences moved from face-to-face to virtual venues with “an
evergreen conversation, where more than 60 percent of the
conference dialogue was happening outside conference windows
with hashtags like #ASCO22 and #ANA22. HCPs [healthcare
practitioners] used the conference hashtag to connect with their
peers and share information” (Twitter, n.d., para. 5). This change in
connection among professionals opened the door for conference
exhibitors to develop digital targeted marketing efforts for year-round
strategies instead of only materials for face-to-face encounters
typically used for conferences (Twitter, n.d.).
Given the magnitude of people using social media, it is almost a
given that our patients are using one or more of the social media
platforms. Therefore, we must capitalize on its use and leverage the
opportunities that exist within these forums. The need to maintain
confidentiality presents a major obstacle to the healthcare industry’s
widespread adoption of such technology as well as the ethical
implications when using social networking venues. Healthcare
professionals as well as patients must consider how social media
affects the delivery and support of healthcare. We must comprehend
how engaging in these social media platforms affects patient
outcomes in relation to attitudes, behavior, and information needs for
the patient; their significant others; caregivers; and healthcare
providers. There is a need for correlational research that explores
these factors as well as others over an extended period of time to
inform us about the consequence of engaging in or limiting the use
of these platforms throughout our healthcare connections.
The prevalent use of smartphones by providers and patients is
another perplexing facet because smartphones have the capability to
take still pictures as well as live recordings with or without audio and
they come with the patients and providers into healthcare settings,including treatment rooms, patient rooms, and other provider–patient
relationship areas.
As a consequence of more stringent confidentiality laws and
widespread availability and use of social and mobile media,
numerous ethical and legal dilemmas have been posed to nurses.
What still are not well defined are the expectations of healthcare
providers regarding this technology. In some cases, nurses
employed in the emergency department setting have been subjected
to video and audio recordings by patients and families when they
perform procedures and provide care during such visits. Nurses
would be wise to inquire—before an incident occurs—about the
hospital policy regarding audio/video recording by patients and
families as well as the state laws governing two-party consent.
Sigman (2019) reminded us that the federal wiretapping law (18 U.S.
Code § 2511) “requires that only one party consent to recording a
conversation. States also have laws governing recording. In most
cases, state laws that are more restrictive than federal law would
supersede the federal statute” (para. 4).
Sometimes the enthusiasm for patient care and learning can lead
to ethics violations. Over the years many violations have been cited.
In one case, an inadvertent violation of privacy laws occurred when a
nurse in a small town blogged about a child in her care whom she
referred to as her “little handicapper.” The post also noted the child’s
age and the fact that the child used a wheelchair. A complaint about
this breach of confidentiality was reported to the Board of Nursing. A
warning was issued to the nurse blogging this information, although
a more stringent disciplinary action could have been taken (Spector
& Kappel, 2012, p. 2). In another case cited by Spector and Kappel,
a student nurse cared for a 3-year-old leukemia patient whom she
wanted to remember after finishing her pediatric clinical experience.
She took the child’s picture, and in the background of the photo, the
patient’s room number was clearly displayed. The child’s picture was
posted on the student nurse’s Facebook page along with her
statement of how much she cared about this child and how proud
she was to be a student nurse. Someone forwarded the picture to
the nurse supervisor of the children’s hospital. Not only was thestudent expelled from the program but also the clinical site offer
made by the children’s hospital to the nursing school was rescinded.
In addition, the hospital faced citations for violations of the Health
Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA), owing to the
student nurse’s transgression (p. 3). Sometimes nurses use social
network sites, blogs, and microblogs about the patients they care for
believing that if they omit the patient’s name, they are not violating
the patient’s privacy and confidentiality. “A nurse who posts about
caring for an 85-year-old female in her city could cause the patient to
be identified by content in the post. This action does not protect the
patient” (Henderson & Dahnke, 2015, p. 63).
Adler (2023) summarized recent incidents involving nurses where
they took “photographs and videos of patients in compromising
positions, recording abuse of patients in nursing homes, and taking
embarrassing or degrading photographs and sharing them with
friends via social media networks” (para. 12). As reflected in these
violations, nurses must always think and think again before posting.
It is important to review the do’s and don’ts such as those of Brown
(2022), who provided guidelines for nurses using social media for
nurse.org.Ethical Dilemmas and Morals
An ethical dilemma arises when moral issues raise questions that
cannot be answered with a simple, clearly defined rule, fact, or
authoritative view. Morals refer to social conventions about right and
wrong human conduct that are so widely shared that they form a
stable (although usually incomplete) communal consensus
(Beauchamp & Childress, 1994). Moral dilemmas arise with
uncertainty, as is the case when a person is confronted with
evidence that indicates an action is morally right and other evidence
that indicates the same action is morally wrong. Uncertainty is
stressful and, in the face of inconclusive evidence on both sides of
the dilemma, causes the person to question what they should do.
Sometimes the individual concludes that based on their moral
beliefs, they cannot act. Uncertainty also arises from unanticipated
effects or unforeseeable behavioral responses to actions or the lack
of action. Adding uncertainty to the situational factors and personal
beliefs that must be considered creates a need for an ethical
decision-making model to help one choose the best action.Ethical Decision-Making
Ethical decision-making refers to the process of making informed
choices about ethical dilemmas based on a set of standards
differentiating right from wrong. This type of decision-making
reflects an understanding of the principles and standards of ethical
decision-making, as well as the philosophic approaches to ethical
decision-making, and it requires a systematic framework for
addressing the complex and often controversial moral questions.
In this high-speed era of digital communication, the rights and
needs of individuals and groups is of the utmost concern to all
healthcare professionals. The changing meaning of communication,
for example, will bring with it new concerns among healthcare
professionals about protecting patients’ rights of confidentiality,
privacy, and autonomy. Systematic and flexible ethical decision￾making abilities are essential for all healthcare professionals.
Notably, the concept of nonmaleficence (“do no harm”) will be
broadened to include those individuals and groups that one may
never see in person but with whom one will enter into a professional
relationship of trust and care. As early as 2000, Mack discussed the
popularity of individuals seeking information online, instead of
directly from their healthcare providers, and the effects this behavior
has on patient–provider relationships. This has increased over the
years, and currently many people look to the internet first before
seeking information and care from healthcare professionals. Mack is
emphatic in his reminder that “organizations and individuals that
provide health information on the Internet have obligations to be
trustworthy, provide high-quality content, protect users’ privacy, and
adhere to standards of best practices for online commerce and
online professional services in healthcare” (p. 41).
Makus (2001) suggested that both autonomy and justice are
enhanced with universal access to information but that tensions may
be created in patient–provider relationships as a result of this accessto outside information. This has only increased, and currently
healthcare workers realize that they are not the sole providers and
gatekeepers of health-related information. As patients share and
seek healthcare information on social media and from other online
websites, it is the responsibility of healthcare providers to embrace
information empowerment, discuss what their patients share from
social media, and suggest websites and apps to patients that contain
reliable, accurate, timely, and relevant information.
It is clear that patients’ increasing use of the internet for healthcare
information may prompt entirely new types of ethical issues, such as
who is responsible if a patient is harmed as a result of following
online health advice. Derse and Miller (2008) discussed this issue
extensively and concluded that a clear line separates information
and practice. Practice occurs when there is direct or personal
communication between the provider and the patient, the advice is
tailored to the patient’s specific health issue, and there is a
reasonable expectation that the patient will act in reliance on the
information.
A summit sponsored by the Internet Healthcare Coalition in 2000
developed the eHealth Code of Ethics (eHealth Ethics Initiative,
2000), which includes eight standards for the ethical development of
health-related internet sites: (1) candor, (2) honesty, (3) quality, (4)
informed consent, (5) privacy, (6) professionalism, (7) responsible
partnering, and (8) accountability. For more information about each
of these standards, access the full discussion of the eHealth Code of
Ethics (www.ihealthcoalition.org/wp-content/themes/IHC￾theme/code0524.pdf).
It is important to realize that the standards for ethical development
of health-related internet sites are voluntary; there is no overseer
perusing these sites and issuing safety alerts for users. Although
some sites carry a specific symbol indicating that they have been
reviewed and are trustworthy (e.g., HONcode and TRUSTe), the
healthcare provider cannot control the amount of patient
engagement, which information patients access, or how they
perceive and act related to the health information they find online.
The research briefs previously presented described one study ofconsumer perceptions of health information on the web, another
study that explored ethics and consumer engagement in nursing,
and a study profiling cancer patients based on their motives for
seeking informational and emotional support online.Theoretical Approaches to Healthcare Ethics
Theoretical approaches to healthcare ethics have evolved in
response to societal changes. In a 30-year retrospective article for
the Journal of the American Medical Association, Pellegrino (1993)
traced the evolution of healthcare ethics from the Hippocratic ethic,
to principlism, to the current antiprinciplism movement.
The Hippocratic tradition emerged from relatively homogeneous
societies in which beliefs were similar and most societal members
shared common values. The emphasis was on duty, virtue, and
gentlemanly conduct.
Principlism arose as societies became more heterogeneous and
members began experiencing a diversity of incompatible beliefs and
values; it emerged as a foundation for ethical decision-making.
Principles were expansive enough to be shared by all rational
individuals, regardless of their backgrounds and individual beliefs.
This approach continued into the 1900s and was popularized by two
bioethicists, Beauchamp and Childress (1977; 1994), in the last
quarter of the 20th century. Principles are considered broad
guidelines that provide guidance or direction but that leave
substantial room for case-specific judgment. From principles, one
can develop more detailed rules and policies.
RESEARCH BRIEFS
CONSUMER PERCEPTIONS OF HEALTH INFORMATION ON
THE WEB
Using an online survey of 1,227 randomly selected respondents, Bodkin and Miaoulis
(2007) sought to describe the characteristics of information seekers on eHealth
websites, the types of information they seek, and their perceptions of the quality and
ethics of the websites. Of the respondents, 74% had sought health information on the
web, with women accounting for 55.8% of the health information seekers. A total of
50% of the seekers were between 35 and 54 years of age. Nearly two thirds of the
users began their searches using a general search engine rather than a health-specificsite, unless they were seeking information related to symptoms or diseases. The top
reasons for seeking information were related to diseases or symptoms of medical
conditions, medication information, health news, health insurance, locating a doctor,
and Medicare or Medicaid information. The level of education of information seekers
was related to the ratings of website quality in that more educated seekers found health
information websites more understandable but were more likely to perceive bias in the
website information. The researchers also found that the ethical codes for eHealth
websites seem to be increasing consumers’ trust in the safety and quality of information
found on the web but that most consumers are not comfortable purchasing health
products or services online.
ETHICS AND CONSUMER ENGAGEMENT IN NURSING
Hassmiller and Bilazarian (2018) explored consumer engagement and its relationship
to safety, quality, and ethics to identify promising practices and leadership strategies.
The literature review was supplemented with interviews from 25 key nursing
informants. They described examples illustrating business, ethical, and quality cases
and noted that we must pay attention to all three types of cases for the synergy needed
for optimal clinical effectiveness and consumer engagement. Interviewees highlighted
the ethics cases and the idea that nurse leaders have an ethical responsibility to lead in
the area of consumer engagement by committing to the values of compassion, patient
advocacy, and consumer engagement and translating those values to the patient. It
was important to note that technology can add to or detract from opportunities for
engagement with consumers based on the use of the tools and the amount of
disruption. This study identified strategies and organizational changes necessary to
enhance partnering with healthcare consumers while supporting the quality and safety,
business, and ethics cases needed for consumer engagement.
MOTIVES FOR SEEKING INFORMATIONAL AND EMOTIONAL
SUPPORT ONLINE
Duimel et al. (2022) sought to identify theoretically founded profiles of cancer patients
varying in their motives for seeking informational and/or emotional support online based
on the stress and coping theory and the uses and gratifications theory. The researchers
also wanted to compare the profiles in terms of these patients’ psychological and
background attributes and their perception of healthcare services. Duimel et al.
conducted a hierarchical cluster analysis using questionnaire data from patients who
visited a large Dutch health website (N = 181). This uncovered three unique profiles: (1)
overall seekers (n = 83, 46.0%); (2) occasional information seekers (n = 83, 46.0%);
and (3) contact exchangers (n = 15, 8.0%). Patients across these profiles varied in their
eHealth literacy, with the contact exchangers being more eHealth literate than the
overall seekers and occasional information seekers. It is important to comprehend why
patients seek informational and/or emotional support online to provide them with
accurate and reliable support that addresses their needs, preferences, and personal
situational context. The results can be used to create awareness among healthcare
providers to help them tailor recommendations for and development of online resourcesthat fit the patients’ needs. This study was the first to explore individual variations
across groups of cancer patients that seek support online.
Beauchamp and Childress (1994) proposed four guiding
principles: (1) respect for autonomy, (2) nonmaleficence, (3)
beneficence, and (4) justice.
Autonomy refers to an individual’s freedom from controlling
interferences by others and from personal limitations that
prevent meaningful choices, such as inadequate understanding.
Two conditions are essential for autonomy: liberty, meaning
independence from controlling influences, and an individual’s
capacity for intentional action.
Nonmaleficence asserts an obligation not to inflict harm
intentionally and forms the framework for the standard of due
care to be met by any professional. Obligations of
nonmaleficence are those of not inflicting harm and not imposing
risks of harm.
Negligence, which is a departure from the standard of due care
toward others, includes intentionally imposing risks that are
unreasonable and unintentionally but carelessly imposing risks.
Beneficence refers to actions performed that contribute to the
welfare of others. Two principles underlie beneficence: positive
beneficence requires the provision of benefits, and utility
requires that benefits and drawbacks be balanced. One must
avoid negative beneficence, which occurs when constraints are
placed on activities that, even though they might not be unjust,
could in some situations cause detriment or harm to others.
Justice refers to fair, equitable, and appropriate treatment in
light of what is due or owed to a person. Distributive justice
refers to fair, equitable, and appropriate distribution in society as
determined by justified norms that structure the terms of social
cooperation.
Beauchamp and Childress (1994) also suggested three types of
rules for guiding actions: substantive, authority, and procedural.(Rules are more restrictive in scope than principles and more
specific in content.) Substantive rules are rules of truth telling,
confidentiality, privacy, and fidelity and those pertaining to the
allocation and rationing of health care, omitting treatment, physician￾assisted suicide, and informed consent. Authority rules indicate who
may and should perform actions. Procedural rules establish the
procedures to be followed.
The principlism advocated by Beauchamp and Childress has since
given way to the antiprinciplism movement, which emerged in the
21st century with the expansive technological changes and
tremendous rise in ethical dilemmas accompanying these changes.
Opponents of principlism include those who claim that its principles
do not represent a theoretical approach and those who claim that its
principles are too far removed from the concrete particularities of
everyday human existence because they are too conceptual,
intangible, or abstract or they disregard a person’s psychological
factors; personality; life history; sexual orientation; or religious,
ethnic, and cultural background. Next, different approaches to
making ethical decisions are briefly explored to provide the reader
with an understanding of the varied methods professionals may use
to arrive at an ethical decision.
The casuist approach to ethical decision-making grew out of the
call for more concrete methods of examining ethical dilemmas.
Casuistry is a case-based ethical reasoning method that analyzes
the facts of a case in a sound, logical, ordered, and structured
manner. The facts are compared to decisions arising out of
consensus in previous paradigmatic, or model, cases. One casuist
proponent, Jonsen (1991), preferred particular and concrete
paradigms and analogies over the universal and abstract theories of
principlism.
The Husted bioethical decision-making model centers on the
healthcare professional’s implicit agreement with the patient or client
(Husted & Husted, 1995). It is based on six contemporary bioethical
standards: (1) autonomy, (2) freedom, (3) veracity, (4) privacy, (5)
beneficence, and (6) fidelity.The virtue ethics approach emphasizes the virtuous character of
individuals who make the choices. A virtue is any characteristic or
disposition desired in others or oneself. It is derived from the Greek
word aretai, meaning “excellence,” and refers to what one expects of
oneself and others. Virtue ethicists emphasize the ideal situation and
attempt to identify and define ideals. Virtue ethics dates back to
Plato and Socrates. When asked “whether virtue can be taught or
whether virtue can be acquired in some other way, Socrates answers
that if virtue is knowledge, then it can be taught. Thus, Socrates
assumes that whatever can be known can be taught” (Scott, 2002,
para. 9). According to this view, the cause of any moral weakness is
not a matter of character flaws but rather a matter of ignorance. In
other words, a person acts immorally because the individual does
not know what is really good for themselves. A person can, for
example, be overpowered by immediate pleasures and forget to
consider the long-term consequences. Plato emphasized that to lead
a moral life and not succumb to immediate pleasures and
gratification, one must have a moral vision. He identified four
cardinal virtues: (1) wisdom, (2) courage, (3) self-control, and (4)
justice.
Aristotle’s (2009) Nicomachean ethics also contribute to virtue
ethics. According to Aristotle, virtues are connected to will and
motive because the intention is what determines whether one is or is
not acting virtuously. Ethical considerations, according to his
eudaemonistic principles, address the question, “What is it to be an
excellent person?” For Aristotle, being an excellent person ultimately
means acting in a temperate manner according to a rational mean
between extreme possibilities.
Virtue ethics has experienced a recent resurgence in popularity
(Energetic Synthesis, 2016). Two of the most influential moral and
medical authors, Pellegrino and Thomasma (1993), have maintained
that virtue theory should be related to other theories within a
comprehensive philosophy of the health professions. They argued
that moral events are composed of four elements (i.e., the agent, the
act, the circumstances, and the consequences) and that a variety oftheories must be interrelated to account for different facets of moral
judgment.
Care ethics is responsiveness to the needs of others, which
dictates providing care, preventing harm, and maintaining
relationships. This viewpoint has been in existence for some time.
Engster (2004) stated that “Carol Gilligan’s In a Different Voice
(1982) established care ethics as a major new perspective in
contemporary moral and political discourse” (p. 113). The
relationship between care and virtue is complex, however. Benjamin
and Curtis (1992) based their framework on care ethics; they
propose that “critical reflection and inquiry in ethics involves the
complex interplay of a variety of human faculties, ranging from
empathy and moral imagination on the one hand to analytic precision
and careful reasoning on the other” (p. 12). Care ethicists are less
stringently guided by rules than by a focus on the needs of others
and the individual’s responsibility to meet those needs. As opposed
to the aforementioned theories that are centered on the individual’s
rights, an ethic of care emphasizes the personal part of an
interdependent relationship that affects how decisions are made. In
this theory, the specific situation and context in which the person is
embedded become a part of the decision-making process.
The consensus-based approach to bioethics was proposed by
Martin (1999), who claimed that American bioethics harbors a variety
of ethical methods that emphasize different ethical factors, including
principles, circumstances, character, interpersonal needs, and
personal meaning. Each method reflects an important aspect of
ethical experience, adds to the others, and enriches the ethical
imagination. Thus, working with these methods provides the
challenge and the opportunity necessary for the perceptive and
shrewd bioethicist to transform them into something new and
valuable through the process of building ethical consensus. Diverse
ethical insights can be integrated to support a particular bioethical
decision, and that decision can be understood as a new, ethical
whole.Applying Ethics to Informatics
With the Knowledge Age has come global closeness, meaning the
ability to reach around the globe instantaneously through technology.
Language barriers are being broken through technologically based
translators, which can enhance interaction and exchange of data and
information. Informatics practitioners are bridging continents, and
international panels, committees, and organizations have
established standards and rules for the implementation of
informatics. This international perspective must be considered when
informatics dilemmas are examined from an ethical standpoint; it
promises to influence the development of ethical approaches that
begin to accept that healthcare practitioners are working within
international networks and must recognize, respect, and regard the
diverse political, social, and human factors within informatics ethics.
The various ethical approaches can be used to help healthcare
professionals make ethical decisions in all areas of practice. The
focus of this text is on informatics. Informatics theory and practice
have continued to grow at a rapid rate and infiltrate every area of
professional life. New applications and ways of performing skills are
being developed daily. Therefore, education in informatics ethics is
extremely important.
Typically, situations are analyzed using past experience and in
collaboration with others. Each situation warrants its own
deliberation and unique approach because each individual patient
seeking or receiving care has their own preferences, quality of life,
and healthcare needs in a situational milieu framed by financial,
provider, setting, institutional, and social context issues. Clinicians
must consider all these factors when making ethical decisions.
The use of expert systems, decision support tools, evidence￾based practice, and artificial intelligence in the care of patients
creates challenges in terms of who should use these tools, how they
are implemented, and how they are tempered with clinical judgment.Reflect on the ethical issues presented in the following Ethical Issues
to Ponder.
All clinical situations are not the same, and even though the result
of interacting with these systems and tools is enhanced information
and knowledge, the clinician must weigh this information in light of
each patient’s unique clinical circumstances, including that
individual’s beliefs and wishes. Patients are demanding access to
quality care and the information necessary to control their lives.
Clinicians need to analyze and synthesize the parameters of each
distinctive situation using a specific decision-making framework that
helps them make the best decisions. Getting it right the first time has
a tremendous impact on expected patient outcomes. The focus
should remain on patient outcomes while the informatics tools
available are ethically incorporated.
Facing ethical dilemmas on a daily basis and struggling with
unique client situations may cause many clinicians to question their
own actions and the actions of their colleagues and patients. One
must realize that colleagues and patients may reach very different
decisions, but that does not mean anyone is wrong. Instead, all
parties reach their ethical decision based on their own review of the
situational facts and understanding of ethics. As one deals with
diversity among patients, colleagues, and administrators, one must
constantly strive to use ethical imagination to reach ethically
competent decisions.
Balancing the needs of society, their employer, and their patients
could cause the clinician to face ethical challenges on an everyday
basis. Society expects judicious use of finite healthcare resources.
Employers have their own policies, standards, and practices that
sometimes can inhibit the practice of the clinician. Each patient is
unique and has life experiences that affect their healthcare
perspective, choices, motivation, and adherence. Combine all these
factors with the challenges posed by informatics, and it is clear that
the evolving healthcare arena calls for an informatics-competent,
politically active, consumer-oriented, business-savvy, ethical clinician
to rule this ever-changing landscape known as health care.ETHICAL ISSUES TO PONDER FAKING ARTIFICIAL
INTELLIGENCE (AI), OR PSEUDO AI?
Schmelzer (2020) discussed the technical and data-driven complexities of AI that
challenge technology companies to deliver on their AI promises. Companies that
cannot navigate the complexities of AI employ human impostors who fake AI by
pretending to be the machines assigned to do the work of the humans. Pseudo AI is
when humans complete the tasks assigned to AI, thus undermining the entire premise
of AI. AI can realize accomplishments that only humans were thought capable of not so
many years ago. AI is an evolving field, and new AI technologies are emerging daily.
What are the ethical considerations for faking AI?
HUMAN ENHANCEMENT TECHNOLOGY
Human enhancement technology (HET) refers to biomedical and other technology
that augments a person using human–machine integration, such as the use of artificial
limbs or other prosthetics. Such technology can make a healthy person healthier or
stronger or a smart person even smarter using pharmaceutical enhancements and
human genetic engineering. As with all technologies, ethical questions arise.
RoboticsBiz (2019) asked about the impact of HET on how we will define future human
beings. It further discussed the idea of equality and whether enhancements provide
advantages. Another equality issue relates to the ability of the wealthy to obtain
expensive enhancements. Will we be able to distinguish between healing and
enhancement? What ethical dilemmas can you foresee?
ARE WE READY TO REPLACE DOCTORS WITH MACHINES
USING AI?
Kumar (2018) discussed the strides made in analytics and machine learning
capabilities in health care in relation to the potential replacement of physicians.
According to Kumar, there are three issues delaying such a move: obstacles, ethical
issues, and limitations. The obstacles include slow adoption of technologies in health
care and machine learning issues related to time series and natural language
processing, which are weaknesses of machine learning algorithms.
The ethical issues surround healthcare analytics, bias, patient privacy, and assessing
human feelings or pain. Kumar raised an excellent question. If AI creates a model
found to contain errors, who is responsible, the physician caring for the patient or the
scientists who developed the model? Limitations center on the nonhuman factors.
Robots and computers are machines and are not perceived as human. They cannot
replace a human care provider’s capacity to afford comfort, support, and compassion.
IMPLICATIONS OF IMPLANTED RADIO-FREQUENCY
IDENTIFICATION AND NEAR FIELD COMMUNICATION
THERE HAS BEEN AN INCREASE IN THE IMPLANTATION OFRADIO-FREQUENCY IDENTIFICATION (RFID) AND NEAR
FIELD COMMUNICATION (NFC) TAGS. THEY CAN BE
LOCATED IN DEVICES SUCH AS PACEMAKERS.
ACCORDING TO OFFENBAKER (2017), “RECENTLY,
MEDTRONIC INTRODUCED A PACEMAKER THAT CAN BE
MONITORED REMOTELY THROUGH A SMARTPHONE
APPLICATION THROUGH IOS AND/OR ANDROID
SMARTPHONES” (PARA. 4). THESE TAGS CAN ALSO BE
IMPLANTED WITHIN PATIENTS WHO HAVE BEEN
DIAGNOSED WITH ALZHEIMER’S AND WHO ARE A FLIGHT
RISK TO TRACK THEIR LOCATION. WEISS (2018) STATED
THAT “MICROCHIP IMPLANTS ARE GOING FROM TECH￾GEEK NOVELTY TO GENUINE HEALTH TOOL—AND YOU
MIGHT BE RUNNING OUT OF GOOD REASONS TO SAY NO”
(PARA. 1). ACCORDING TO OFFENBAKER, ONE OF THE
MOST COMMON REASONS PEOPLE DO NOT WANT TO
ACCEPT THESE TAGS IS TO GUARD THEIR PRIVACY.
PEOPLE ARE ALSO CONCERNED THAT THESE TAGS WILL
BE IMPLANTED WITHOUT THEIR KNOWLEDGE, AND IT IS
NOT REASSURING TO SOME THAT THEY WOULD REQUIRE
INFORMED CONSENT. WHAT ARE THE ETHICAL
IMPLICATIONS ARISING FROM THE USE OF IMPLANTABLE
TAGS?
The goal of any ethical system should be that a rational, justifiable
decision be reached. Ethics is always there to help the practitioner
decide what is right. Indeed, the measure of an adequate ethical
system, theory, or approach is in part its ability to be useful in novel
contexts. A comprehensive, robust theory of ethics should be up to
the task of addressing a broad variety of new applications and
challenges at the intersection of informatics and health care.
To be useful, the information concerning an ethical dilemma must
be viewed in the context of the dilemma. Bioinformatics could
gather, manipulate, classify, analyze, synthesize, retrieve, and
maintain databases related to ethical cases; the effective reasoningapplied to various ethical dilemmas; and the resulting ethical
decisions. This input would certainly be potent, but the resolution of
dilemmas cannot be achieved simply by examining relevant cases
from a database. Instead, clinicians must assess each situational
context and the patient’s specific situation and needs and make their
ethical decisions based on the information they have at hand.
Ethics is exciting, and competent clinicians need to know about
ethical dilemmas and solutions in their professions. Ethicists have
often been thought of as experts in the arbitrary, ambiguous, and
ungrounded judgments of other people. They know that they make
the best decisions they can based on the situation and stakeholders
at hand. Just as clinicians try to make the best healthcare decisions
with and for their patients, ethically driven practitioners must do the
same. Each healthcare provider must critically think through the
situation to arrive at the best decision.
To make ethical decisions about informatics technologies and
patients’ intimate healthcare data and information, the healthcare
provider must be competent in informatics. To the extent that
information technology is reshaping healthcare practices or promises
to improve patient care, healthcare professionals must be trained
and competent in the use of these tools. This competency needs to
be evaluated through instruments developed by professional groups
or societies; such assessment will help with consistency and quality.
For the healthcare professional to be an effective patient advocate,
they must understand how information technology affects the patient
and the subsequent delivery of care. Information science and its
effects on health care are both interesting and important. It follows
that information technology and its ethical, social, and legal
implications should be incorporated into all levels of professional
education.
The need for confidentiality was perhaps first articulated by
Hippocrates. Thus, if anything is different in today’s environment, it is
simply the ways in which confidentiality can be violated. Perhaps the
use of computers for clinical decision support and data mining in
research will raise new ethical issues. Ethical dilemmas associated
with the integration of informatics must be examined to provide anethical framework that considers all stakeholders. Patients’ rights
must be protected in the face of a healthcare provider’s duty to their
employer and society at large when initiating care and assigning
finite healthcare resources. An ethical framework is necessary to
help guide healthcare providers in reference to the ethical treatment
of electronic data and information during all stages of collection,
storage, manipulation, and dissemination. These new approaches
and means come with their own ethical dilemmas. Often, they are
dilemmas not yet faced owing to the cutting-edge nature of these
technologies.
Just as processes and models are used to diagnose and treat
patients in practice, so too a model in the analysis and synthesis of
ethical dilemmas or cases can be applied. An ethical model for
ethical decision-making (Box 5-1) facilitates the ability to analyze the
dilemma and synthesize the information into a plan of action
(McGonigle, 2000). The model presented here is based on the
letters in the word ethical. Each letter guides and prompts the
healthcare provider to think critically (i.e., think and rethink) through
the situation presented. The model is a tool because in the final
analysis, it allows the nurse to objectively ascertain the essence of
the dilemma and develop a plan of action.
BOX 5-1 ETHICAL MODEL FOR ETHICAL DECISION￾MAKING
Examine the ethical dilemma (conflicting values exist).
Thoroughly comprehend the possible alternatives available.
Hypothesize ethical arguments.
Investigate, compare, and evaluate the arguments for each alternative.
Choose the alternative you would recommend.
Act on your chosen alternative.
Look at the ethical dilemma and examine the outcomes while reflecting on the
ethical decision.
APPLYING THE ETHICAL MODEL
Examine the ethical dilemma:Use your problem-solving, decision-making, and critical thinking skills.
What is the dilemma you are analyzing? Collect as much information about the
dilemma as you can, making sure to gather the relevant facts that clearly identify
the dilemma. You should be able to describe in detail the dilemma you are
analyzing.
Ascertain exactly what must be decided.
Who should be involved in the decision-making process for this specific case?
Who are the interested players or stakeholders?
Reflect on the viewpoints of these key players and their value systems.
What do you think each of these stakeholders would like you to decide as a plan of
action for this dilemma?
How can you generate the greatest good?
Thoroughly comprehend the possible alternatives available:
Use your problem-solving, decision-making, and critical thinking skills.
Create a list of the possible alternatives. Be creative when developing your
alternatives. Be open minded; there is more than one way to reach a goal. Compel
yourself to discern at least three alternatives.
Clarify the alternatives available and predict the associated consequences—good
and bad—of each potential alternative or intervention.
For each alternative, ask the following questions:
Do any of the principles or rules, such as legal, professional, or organizational,
automatically nullify this alternative?
If this alternative is chosen, what do you predict as the best-case and the worst￾case scenarios?
Do the best-case outcomes outweigh the worst-case outcomes?
Could you live with the worst-case scenario?
Will anyone be harmed? If so, how will they be harmed?
Does the benefit obtained from this alternative overcome the risk of potential
harm that it could cause to anyone?
Hypothesize ethical arguments:
Use your problem-solving, decision-making, and critical thinking skills.
Determine which of the five approaches apply to this dilemma.
Identify the moral principles that can be brought into play to support a conclusion as
to what ought to be done ethically in this case or in similar cases.
Ascertain whether the approaches generate converging or diverging conclusions
about what ought to be done.
Investigate, compare, and evaluate the arguments for each alternative:
Use your problem-solving, decision-making, and critical thinking skills.
Appraise the relevant facts and assumptions prudently.
Is there ambiguous information that must be evaluated?
Are there any unjustifiable factual or illogical assumptions or debatable
conceptual issues that must be explored?Rate the ethical reasoning and arguments for each alternative in terms of their
relative significance.
4 = extreme significance
3 = major significance
2 = significant
1 = minor significance
Compare and contrast the alternatives available with the values of the key players
involved.
Reflect on these alternatives:
Does each alternative consider all the key players?
Does each alternative consider and reflect an interest in the concerns and welfare
of all the key players?
Which alternative will produce the greatest good or the least amount of harm for
the greatest number of people?
Refer to your professional codes of ethical conduct. Do they support your
reasoning?
Choose the alternative you would recommend:
Use your problem-solving, decision-making, and critial thinking skills.
Decide which alternative available is the best.
Remember the Golden Rule: Does your decision treat others as you would want
to be treated?
Does your decision consider and reflect an interest in the concerns and welfare of
all the key players?
Does your decision maximize the benefit and minimize the risk for everyone
involved?
Become your own critic. Challenge your decision as you think others might. Use the
ethical arguments you predict they would use and defend your decision.
Would you be secure enough in your ethical decision-making process to see it
aired on national television or sent out globally over the internet?
Are you secure enough with this ethical decision that you could have allowed your
loved ones to observe your decision-making process, your decision, and its
outcomes?
Act on your chosen alternative:
Use your problem-solving, decision-making, and critical thinking skills.
Formulate an implementation plan delineating the execution of the decision.
This plan should be designed to maximize the benefits and minimize the risks.
This plan must consider all the resources necessary for implementation, including
personnel and money.
Implement the plan.
Look at the ethical dilemma and examine the outcomes while reflecting on your
ethical decision:
Use your problem-solving, decision-making, and critical thinking skills.Monitor the implementation plan and its outcomes. It is extremely important to
reflect on specific case decisions and evaluate their outcomes to develop your
ethical decision-making ability.
If new information becomes available, the plan must be reevaluated.
Monitor and revise the plan as necessary.
The ethical model for ethical decision-making was developed by Dr. Dee McGonigle
and is the property of Educational Advancement Associates (EAA). The permission for
its use in this text has been granted by Mr. Craig R. Goshow, Vice President, EAA.Case Analysis Demonstration
The following case study is intended to help readers think through
how to apply the ethical model. Review the model and then read
through the case. Try to apply the model to this case or follow along
as the model is implemented. Readers are challenged to determine
their decision in this case and then compare and contrast their
response with the decision the authors reached.
Allison is a charge nurse on a busy medical–surgical unit. She is expecting the
clinical instructor from the local university at 2:00 p.m. to review and discuss
potential patient assignments for the nursing students scheduled for the following
day. Just as the university professor arrives, one of the patients on the unit
develops a crisis requiring Allison’s attention. To expedite the student nurse
assignments for the following day, Allison gives her electronic medical record
access password to the instructor.
Examine the Ethical Dilemma
Allison made a commitment to meet with the university instructor to
develop student assignments at 2:00 p.m. The patient emergency
that developed prevented Allison from living up to that commitment.
Allison had an obligation to provide patient care during the
emergency and a competing obligation to the professor. She solved
the dilemma of competing obligations by providing her electronic
medical record access password to the university professor.
By sharing her password, Allison most likely violated hospital
policy related to the security of healthcare information. She may
also have violated the American Nurses Association code of ethics,
which states that nurses must judiciously protect information of a
confidential nature. Because the university professor was also a
nurse and had a legitimate interest in the protected healthcare
information, there might not be a code of ethics violation.
Thoroughly Comprehend the Possible Alternatives
AvailableThe possible alternatives available include the following: (1) Allison
could have asked the professor to wait until the patient crisis was
resolved, (2) Allison could have delegated another staff member to
assist the university professor, or (3) Allison could have logged on to
the system for the professor.
Hypothesize Ethical Arguments
The utilitarian approach applies to this situation. An ethical action is
one that provides the greatest good for the greatest number; the
underlying principles in this perspective are beneficence and
nonmaleficence. The rights to be considered are as follows: right of
the individual to choose for themselves (autonomy), right to truth
(veracity), right of privacy (the ethical right to privacy avoids conflict
and, like all rights, promotes harmony), right not to be injured, and
right to what has been promised (fidelity).
Does the action respect the moral rights of everyone? The
principles to consider are autonomy, veracity, and fidelity.
As for the fairness or justice, how fair is an action? Does it treat
everyone in the same way, or does it show favoritism and
discrimination? The principles to consider are justice and distributive
justice.
Thinking about the common good assumes one’s own good is
inextricably linked to the good of the community; community
members are bound by pursuit of common values and goals and
ensuring that the social policies, social systems, institutions, and
environments on which one depends are beneficial to all. Examples
of such outcomes are affordable health care, effective public safety,
a just legal system, and an unpolluted environment. The principle of
distributive justice is considered.
Virtue assumes that one should strive toward certain ideals that
provide for the full development of humanity. Virtues are attitudes or
character traits that enable one to be virtuous and to act in ways that
develop the highest potential. Examples include honesty, courage,
compassion, generosity, fidelity, integrity, fairness, self-control, and
prudence. Like habits, virtues become characteristics of the person.The virtuous person is the ethical person. Ask yourself, what kind of
person should I be? What will promote the development of character
within myself and my community? The principles considered are
fidelity, veracity, beneficence, nonmaleficence, justice, and
distributive justice.
In this case, there is a clear violation of an institutional policy
designed to protect the privacy and confidentiality of medical
records. However, the professor had a legitimate interest in the
information and a legitimate right to the information. Allison trusted
that the professor would not use the system password to obtain
information outside the scope of the legitimate interest. However,
Allison cannot be sure that the professor would not access
inappropriate information. Further, Allison is responsible for how her
access to the electronic system is used. Balancing the rights of
everyone—the professor’s right to the information, the patients’
rights to expect that their information is safeguarded, and the right of
the patient in crisis to expect the best possible care—is important
and is the crux of the dilemma. Does the patient care obligation
outweigh the obligation to the professor? Yes, probably. Allison did
the right thing by caring for the patient in crisis. By giving out her
system access password, Allison also compromised the rights of the
other patients on the unit to expect that their confidentiality and
privacy would be safeguarded.
Virtue ethics suggests that individuals use power to bring about
human benefit. One must consider the needs of others and the
responsibility to meet those needs. Allison must simultaneously
provide care, prevent harm, and maintain professional relationships.
Allison may want to effect a long-term change in hospital policy for
the common good. It is reasonable to assume that this event was not
an isolated incident and that the problem may recur in the future.
Can the institutional policy be amended to provide professors with
access to the medical records system? As suggested in the HIPAA
administrative guidelines, the professor could receive the same staff
training regarding appropriate and inappropriate use of access and
sign the agreement to safeguard the records. If the institution hasTABLE 5-1
tracking software, the professor’s access could be monitored to
watch for inappropriate use.
Identify the moral principles that can be brought into play to
support a conclusion as to what ought to be done ethically in this
case or in similar cases. The International Council of Nurses (2020)
code of ethics states, “The nurse holds in confidence personal
information and uses judgment in sharing this information” (p. 2).
The code also states, “The nurse uses judgment in relation to
individual competence when accepting and delegating
responsibilities” (p. 5). Both of these statements apply to the current
situation.
Ascertain whether the approaches generate converging or
diverging conclusions about what ought to be done. From the
analysis, it is clear that the best immediate solution is to delegate
assisting the professor with assignments to another nurse on the
unit.
Investigate, Compare, and Evaluate the Arguments for
Each Alternative
Review and think through the items listed in Table 5-1.
Detailed Analysis of Alternative ActionsDescription
Choose the Alternative You Would Recommend
The best immediate solution is to delegate another staff member to
assist the professor. The best long-term solution is to change the
hospital policy to include access for professors, as described
previously.
Act on Your Chosen Alternative
Allison should delegate another staff member to assist the professor
in making assignments.
Look at the Ethical Dilemma and Examine the Outcomes
While Reflecting on the Ethical Decision
As already indicated in the alternative analyses, delegation may not
be an ideal solution because the staff nurse who is assigned toassist the professor may not possess the same extensive
information about all the patients as the charge nurse. It is, however,
the best immediate solution to the dilemma and is certainly safer
than compromising the integrity of the hospital’s computer system.
As noted previously, Allison may want to pursue a long-term solution
to a potentially recurring problem by helping the professor gain
legitimate access to the computer system with the professor’s own
password. The system administrator would then have the ability to
track who used the system and which types of information were
accessed during use.
This case analysis demonstration provides the authors’
perspective on this case and the ethical decision made. If your
decision did not match this perspective, what was the basis for the
difference of opinion? If you worked through the model, you might
have reached a different decision based on your individual
background and perspective. This does not make the decision right
or wrong. A decision should reflect the best decision one can make
given review, reflection, and critical thinking about this specific
situation.
Six additional cases are provided in the online learner’s manual for
review. Apply the model to each case study, and discuss these cases
with colleagues or classmates.New Frontiers in Ethical Issues
The expanding use of new information technologies in health care
will bring about new and challenging ethical issues. Consider that
patients and healthcare providers no longer have to be in the same
place for a quality interaction. How, then, does one deal with
licensing issues if the electronic consultation takes place across a
state line? Derse and Miller (2008) described a second opinion
medical consultation on the internet where the information was
provided to the referring physician and not to the patient, thus
avoiding the licensing issue. In essence, provider-to-provider
consultation does not constitute practicing in a state in which you are
not licensed. As new technologies for healthcare delivery are
developed, new ethical challenges may arise. It is important for all
healthcare providers to be aware of the code of ethics for their
specific practices and to understand the laws governing their
practice and private health information.
Consider also the ethical issues created by genomic databases or
by the sharing of information in a health information exchange to
promote population health. Alpert (2008) asked, “Is it wise to put
genomic sequence data into electronic medical records that are
poorly protected, that cannot adhere well to Fair Information Practice
Principles for privacy, and that can potentially be seen by tens of
thousands of people/entities, when it is clear that we do not
understand the functionality of the genome and likely will not for
several years?” (p. 382). That was the ethical consideration about
the genome then, but what about now? What should we be
concerned about?
Further, how does one really obtain informed consent for such
data collection when how the data will ultimately be used is not
known but clearly that application will be important to health research
uses that go beyond the immediate medical care of the patient?
Angst (2009) asked whether the public good outweighs individualinterests in such a case because the information contained in these
databases is important to developing new understandings and
creating new knowledge by matching data in aggregated pools:
“Thus, science adds meaning and context to data, but to what extent
do we agree to make the data available such that this discovery
process can take place, and are the impacts of discovery great
enough to justify the risks?” (p. 172). Further, if a voluntary system
for which patients can opt out of such data collection is adopted,
then are healthcare disparities related to incomplete electronic health
records created?
In an ideal world, healthcare professionals must not be affected by
conflicting loyalties; nothing should interfere with judicious, ethical
decision-making. As the technologically charged waters of health
care are navigated, one must hone a solid foundation of ethical
decision-making, practice it, and reevaluate it consistently.Summary
As science and technology advance and policymakers and
healthcare providers continue to shape healthcare practices,
including information management, it is paramount that ethical
decisions be made. Healthcare professionals are typically honest,
trustworthy, and ethical, and they understand that they are duty
bound to focus on the needs and rights of their patients. At the same
time, their day-to-day work is conducted in a world of changing
healthcare landscapes populated by new technologies; diverse
patients; varied healthcare settings; and changing policies set by
their employers, insurance companies, and providers. The
technologies themselves are not the problem, but their misuse can
cause harm to our patients. If we use them to the patient’s
advantage while protecting the patient, they can be beneficial tools in
accessing our technologically savvy patients to garner the data and
information necessary to address their healthcare needs, including
patient education, while impacting public health and enhancing our
relationship with our patients. Healthcare professionals need to
juggle all these balls simultaneously, and so the ethical
considerations must be at the forefront, a task that often results in far
too many gray areas or ethical decision-making dilemmas with no
clear correct course of action. Patients rely on the ethical
competence of their healthcare providers, believing that their
situation is unique and will be respected and evaluated based on
their own needs, abilities, and limitations. The healthcare
professional cannot allow conflicting loyalties to interfere with
judicious, ethical decision-making. Just as in the opening example of
the Apollo mission, it is uncertain where this technologically
heightened information era will lead, but if a solid foundation of
ethical decision-making is relied upon, duties and rights will be
judiciously and ethically fulfilled.THOUGHT-PROVOKING QUESTIONS
1. Identify moral dilemmas in healthcare informatics that would best be approached
with the use of an ethical decision-making framework, such as the use of
smartphones to interact with patients as well as to monitor and assess patient
health.
2. Discuss the evolving healthcare ethics traditions within their social and historical
contexts.
3. Differentiate among the theoretical approaches to healthcare ethics as they relate
to the theorists’ perspectives of individuals and their relationships.
4. Select one of the healthcare ethics theories and support its use in examining
ethical issues in healthcare informatics.
5. Select one of the healthcare ethics theories and argue against its use in examining
ethical issues in healthcare informatics.R E F E R E N C E S
Alder, S. (2023, February 1). What happens if a nurse violates HIPAA? HIPAA Journal.
www.hipaajournal.com/what-happens-nurse-violates-hipaa
Alpert, S. (2008). Privacy issues in clinical genomic medicine, or Marcus Welby, M.D.,
meets the $1000 genome. Cambridge Quarterly of Healthcare Ethics, 17(4), 373–384.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/S0963180108080511
Angst, C. (2009). Protect my privacy or support the common-good? Ethical questions about
electronic health information exchanges. Journal of Business Ethics, 90(suppl), 169–
178. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10551-010-0385-5
Aristotle. (2009). The human good. In W. D. Ross (Trans.), Nichomachean ethics. Oxford
University Press.
Beauchamp, T. L., & Childress, J. F. (1977). Principles of biomedical ethics. Oxford
University Press.
Beauchamp, T. L., & Childress, J. F. (1994). Principles of biomedical ethics (4th ed.). Oxford
University Press.
Benjamin, M., & Curtis, J. (1992). Ethics in nursing (3rd ed.). Oxford University Press.
Bodkin, C., & Miaoulis, G. (2007). eHealth information quality and ethics issues: An
exploratory study of consumer perceptions. International Journal of Pharmaceutical and
Healthcare Marketing, 1(1), 27–42. http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/17506120710740261
Brown, C. G. (2022, December 14). Nursing social media do’s and don’ts. Nurse.org.
https://nurse.org/articles/nurses-social-media
Brown, D. (2019, May 21). Google takes another stab at Google Glass, updates the AR
headsets for business customers. USA Today.
www.usatoday.com/story/tech/talkingtech/2019/05/21/google-announced-updated￾google-glass/3751043002
Chaffey, D. (2023). Global social media statistics research summary 2023. Smart Insights.
www.smartinsights.com/social-media-marketing/social-media-strategy/new-global-social￾media-research
Dean, B. (2023a). Facebook demographic statistics: How many people use Facebook in
2023? Backlinko. https://backlinko.com/facebook-users
Dean, B. (2023b). Instagram demographic statistics: How many people use Instagram in
2023? Backlinko. https://backlinko.com/instagram-users#instagram-stats-top-picks
Dean, B. (2023c). WhatsApp 2023 user statistics: How many people use WhatsApp?
Backlinko. https://backlinko.com/whatsapp-users
Derse, A., & Miller, T. (2008). Net effect: Professional and ethical challenges of medicine
online. Cambridge Quarterly of Healthcare Ethics, 17(4), 453–464.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/S0963180108080572
Duimel, S., Linn, A., Smets, E., Smit, E., & van Weert, J. (2022). Profiling cancer patients
based on their motives for seeking informational and emotional support online. Health
Communication, 1–15. https://doi.org/10.1080/10410236.2022.2144287
eHealth Ethics Initiative. (2000). eHealth code of ethics. www.ihealthcoalition.org/wp￾content/themes/IHC-theme/code0524.pdfEnergetic Synthesis. (2016). Virtue based ethics. Ascension Glossary.
https://ascensionglossary.com/index.php/Virtue_Based_Ethics
Englund, H., Chappy, S., Jambunathan, J., & Gohdes, E. (2012, November/December).
Ethical reasoning and online social media. Nurse Educator, 37(6), 242–247.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/NNE.0b013e31826f2c04
Engster, D. (2004). Care ethics and natural law theory: Toward an institutional political
theory of caring. The Journal of Politics, 66(1), 113–135. https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1468-
2508.2004.00144.x
Foot, E., Leonhard, A., Majeski, J., Zahn, L., Li, H., & Brown, A. (2021). “The stakes could
not be higher”: A mixed methods study of parental social media use in pediatric
oncology. Pediatric Blood & Cancer, 68, e:29176, 1–10.
https://doi.org/10.1002/pbc.29176
Hassmiller, S., & Bilazarian, A. (2018). The business, ethics, and quality cases for consumer
engagement in nursing. The Journal of Nursing Administration, 48(4), 184–190.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/NNA.0000000000000597
Henderson, M., & Dahnke, M. (2015). The ethical use of social media in nursing practice.
MEDSURG Nursing, 24(1), 62–64.
Howard, R. (Director). (1995). Apollo 13 [Motion picture]. United States: MCA Universal
Studios.
Husted, G. L., & Husted, J. H. (1995). Ethical decision-making in nursing (2nd ed.). Mosby.
International Council of Nurses. (2020). International Council of Nurses launches
consultation to revise Code of Ethics for Nurses. www.icn.ch/news/international-council￾nurses-launches-consultation-revise-code-ethics-nurses
Jonsen, A. R. (1991). Casuistry as methodology in clinical ethics. Theoretical Medicine, 12,
295–307. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/BF00489890
Kemp, S. (2022, January 26). Digital 2022: Global overview report. Global Digital Insights.
https://datareportal.com/reports/digital-2022-global-overview-report
Kumar, V. (2018, October 13). AI in healthcare—Ethical considerations. Data Science
Central. www.datasciencecentral.com/profiles/blogs/ai-in-healthcare-ethical￾considerations
Mack, J. (2000). Patient empowerment, not economics, is driving e-health: Privacy and
ethics issues need attention too! Frontiers of Health Services Management, 17(1), 39–
43; discussion 49–51. ABI/INFORM Global (Document ID: 59722384).
Makus, R. (2001). Ethics and internet healthcare: An ontological reflection. Cambridge
Quarterly of Healthcare Ethics, 10(2), 127–136.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/s0963180101002031
Martin, P. A. (1999). Bioethics and the whole: Pluralism, consensus, and the transmutation
of bioethical methods into gold. Journal of Law, Medicine & Ethics, 27(4), 316–327.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1748-720x.1999.tb01466.x
McGonigle, D. (2000). The ethical model for ethical decision making. Inside Case
Management, 7(8), 1–5.
National Council of State Boards of Nursing. (2011). Social media guidelines for nurses.
www.ncsbn.org/video/social-media-guidelines-for-nurses
National Student Nurses’ Association. (n.d.). Recommendations for: Social media usage
and maintaining privacy, confidentiality and professionalism. www.ncsbn.org/public-files/NSNA_Social_Media_Recommendations.pdf
Offenbaker, D. (2017, June 13). RFID implantation and implementation: A look into the
future. allnurses. https://allnurses.com/rfid-implantation-implementation-a-look-t650006/
Pellegrino, E. D. (1993). The metamorphosis of medical ethics: A 30-year retrospective.
Journal of the American Medical Association, 269(9), 1158–1162.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1001/jama.1993.03500090094039
Pellegrino, E., & Thomasma, D. (1993). The virtues in medical practice. Oxford University
Press.
Pershad, Y., Hangge, P., Albadawi, H., & Oklu, R. (2018). Social medicine: Twitter in
healthcare. Journal of Clinical Medicine, 7(6), E121.
http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/jcm7060121
RoboticsBiz. (2019, May 26). Editorial: 8 ethical issues in the use of robots in healthcare.
https://roboticsbiz.com/8-ethical-issues-in-the-use-of-robots-in-healthcare
Schmelzer, R. (2020, April 4). Artificial or human intelligence? Companies faking AI. Forbes.
www.forbes.com/sites/cognitiveworld/2020/04/04/artificial-or-human-intelligence￾companies-faking-ai/#20ee7171664f
Scott, A. (2002). Plato’s Meno. Angelfire. www.angelfire.com/md2/timewarp/plato.html
Segers, S. (2022). Robotics technology for the elderly and the value of veracity: Disruptive
technology or reinvigorating entrenched principles? National Library of Medicine,
Science and Engineering Ethics, 28(6), 1–14. doi:10.1007/s11948-022-00420-2
Sigman, L. (2019, April 30). State, federal laws govern whether doctor visits can be
recorded. American Academy of Pediatrics.
https://publications.aap.org/aapnews/news/13600/State-federal-laws-govern-whether￾doctor-visits?autologincheck=redirected
Spector, N., & Kappel, D. M. (2012). Guidelines for using electronic and social media: The
regulatory perspective. Online Journal of Issues in Nursing, 17(3), 1.
https://ojin.nursingworld.org/MainMenuCategories/ANAMarketplace/ANAPeriodicals/OJI
N/TableofContents/Vol-17-2012/No3-Sept-2012/Guidelines-for-Electronic-and-Social￾Media.html
Symplur. (n.d.). Healthcare hashtag project. www.symplur.com/healthcare-hashtags
Twitter. (n.d.). How Twitter drives connection in healthcare, on the consumer and provider
sides. https://business.twitter.com/en/blog/how-twitter-drives-connection-in￾healthcare.html
Velasquez, M., Andre, C., Shanks, T., & Myer, M. (2010, January 1). What is ethics? Santa
Clara University. www.scu.edu/ethics/ethics-resources/ethical-decision-making/what-is￾ethics
Weiss, H. (2018, September 21). Why you’re probably getting a microchip implant someday.
The Atlantic. www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2018/09/how-i-learned-to-stop￾worrying-and-love-the-microchip/570946
Zakkar, M., Janes, C., & Meyer, S. (2022). Benefits and harms of patient stories on social
media from the perspective of healthcare providers and administrators in Ontario. The
International Journal of Health Planning & Management, 37(2), 1075–1088.
https://doi.org/10.1002/hpm.3391© nadla/E+/Getty ImagesChapter 6
Chapter 7
Chapter 8
SECTION II
Perspectives on Nursing Informatics
History and Evolution of Nursing Informatics
Nursing Informatics as a Specialty
Legislative Aspects of Nursing Informatics: HIPAA,
HITECH, and Beyond
Nursing informatics (NI) is the synthesis of nursing science,
information science, computer science, and cognitive science for the
purpose of managing and enhancing healthcare data, information,
knowledge, and wisdom to improve patient care and the nursing
profession. In Section I, Building Blocks of Nursing Informatics, the
reader learned about the four sciences of NI, also referred to as the
four building blocks, and the ethical application of these sciences to
manage patient information. Nursing knowledge workers must be
able to understand the evolving specialty of NI to harness and use
the tools available for managing the vast amount of healthcare data
and information. It is essential that NI capabilities be appreciated,
promoted, expanded, and advanced to facilitate the work of the
nurse, improve patient care, and enhance the nursing profession.
This section presents an overview of NI, informatics education and
competencies, informatics as a specialty practice, and legislation
that governs informatics and healthcare technology. Chapter 6,
History and Evolution of Nursing Informatics, begins this exploration
by providing the historical development and evolution of NI, which
transitions into Chapter 7, Nursing Informatics as a Specialty, in
which the reader learns about NI roles, competencies, and skills.
Chapter 8, Legislative Aspects of Nursing Informatics: HIPAA,
HITECH, and Beyond, considers the evolving NI needs of nurses
and nurse informaticists, based on the current regulations affecting
the healthcare arena.In Chapter 6, History and Evolution of Nursing Informatics,
interrelationships among major NI concepts are discussed. As data
are transformed into information and information into knowledge,
increasing complexity and interrelationships ensue. The boundaries
between concepts can become blurred, and feedback loops from
one concept level to another evolve. Structured languages and
human–computer interaction concepts, which are critical elements
for NI, are noted in this chapter. Taxonomies and other current
structured languages for nursing are listed. Human–computer
interaction concepts are briefly defined and discussed because they
are critical to the success of informatics solutions. Importantly, the
construct of decision-making is added to the traditional nursing
metaparadigms: nurse, person, health, and environment. Decision￾making is not only at the crux of nursing practice in all settings and
roles but is also a fundamental concern of NI. The work of nursing is
centered on the concepts of NI: data, information, knowledge, and
wisdom. Information technology (IT) per se is not the focus. Instead,
the focus is on the information that the technology conveys.
Moreover, NI is no longer the domain of experts in the IT field. More
interesting, one does not need technology to perform informatics.
The centerpiece of informatics is the manipulation of data,
information, and knowledge, especially related to decision-making in
any aspect of nursing or in any setting. In a way, all nurses are
already informatics nurses. Note that the core concepts and
competencies of informatics are particularly well suited to a model of
interprofessional education. Ideally, when educational programs are
emulating clinical settings, informatics knowledge should be
integrated with the processes of interprofessional teams and
decision-making. Because simulation laboratories are becoming
increasingly common fixtures in the delivery of health-related
professional education, they provide a perfect opportunity to
incorporate the electronic health record (EHR) applications. The
learning laboratory for nursing education will then more closely
approximate the IT-enabled clinical settings that are emerging in the
real world. A presumption is often made that future graduates will be
more computer literate than nurses currently in practice. Althoughthis may be true, computer literacy, or the comfort level someone
has with using computer programs and applications, does not equate
to an understanding of the facilitative and transformative role of IT. It
is essential that the future curricula of basic nursing programs
embed the concepts of the role of IT in supporting clinical care
delivery. The need for standardizing nursing terminology is also
discussed in this chapter as a way to improve the clinical support
functions of the EHR. The healthcare industry employs the largest
number of knowledge workers—a fact that has resulted in the
realization that healthcare administrators must begin to change the
way they look at their employees. Nurses and physicians are bright,
highly skilled, and dedicated to giving the best patient care.
Administrators who tap into this wealth of knowledge find that patient
care becomes safer and more efficient.
Chapter 7, Nursing Informatics as a Specialty, discusses NI as a
relatively new nursing specialty that combines the building block
sciences covered earlier in the text. Combining these sciences
results in nurses being able to care for their patients effectively and
safely because the information that they need is readily available.
Nurses have been actively involved in NI since computers were
introduced into health care. With the advent of EHRs, it became
apparent that nursing needed to develop its own language for this
evolving field. NI was instrumental in assisting in nursing language
development. NI is governed by standards established by the
American Nurses Association and is a very diverse field, which
results in many nurse informaticist specialists becoming focused on
one segment of NI. Although NI is a recognized specialty area of
practice, in the future all nurses will be expected to have some
knowledge of the field, as discussed in Chapter 6, History and
Evolution of Nursing Informatics. NI competencies have been
developed to ensure that all entry-level nurses are ready to enter a
field that is becoming more technologically advanced. The
competencies may also be used to determine the educational needs
of currently practicing nurses as well as NI specialists. NI specialists
no longer must enter the field solely through on-the-job exposure butcan now obtain an advanced degree in NI at many well-established
universities throughout the United States. NI has grown
tremendously as a specialty since its inception and is predicted to
continue growing.
Chapter 8, Legislative Aspects of Nursing Informatics: HIPAA,
HITECH, and Beyond, provides insights into the Health Insurance
Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) rules and an overview of
the rules associated with technology implementation as defined by
the Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health
(HITECH) Act. Equally important in informatics practice is a thorough
understanding of current legislation and regulations that shape 21st￾century practice. The information provided in this text reflects current
rules that were in effect at the time of publication. The reader should
follow the development of rules and the evolution of informatics
legislation at the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
website (www.hhs.gov) to obtain the most current information related
to health information management.
There is an emerging global focus on IT to support clinical care
and on the potential benefits for clinicians and patients. In the future,
nurses will likely have sufficient computing power at their disposal to
aggregate and transform additional multidimensional data and
information sources (e.g., historical, multisensory, experiential, and
genetic) into a clinical information system to engage with individuals,
families, and groups in ways not yet imagined. Every nurse’s
practice will make contributions to new nursing knowledge in these
dynamically interactive clinical information system environments.
With the right tools to support the management of data, complex
information processing, and ready access to knowledge, the core
concepts and competencies associated with informatics will be
embedded in the practice of every nurse, whether administrator,
researcher, educator, or practitioner. IT is not a panacea, but it
provides the profession with unprecedented capacity to generate
and disseminate new knowledge more rapidly.The material in this text is placed within the context of the
Foundation of Knowledge model (Figure II-1) to meet the needs of
healthcare delivery systems, organizations, patients, and nurses.
Through involvement in NI and learning about this evolving specialty,
one will be able to use the current theories, architecture, and tools
while beginning to challenge what is known. This questioning and
search for what could be will provide the basis for the future
landscape of nursing. By using the Foundation of Knowledge model
as an organizing framework for this text, the authors have attempted
to capture this process.
Designed by Alicia Mastrian
Figure II-1 Foundation of Knowledge Model
DescriptionIn this section, readers learn about NI. Those readers who are
beginning their education will consciously focus on input and
knowledge acquisition to glean as much information and knowledge
as possible. As these readers become more comfortable in their
clinical setting and with nursing science, they will begin to perform
some of the other knowledge functions. Experienced nurses, also
known as seasoned nurses, question what is known and search for
ways to enhance their knowledge and the knowledge of others. What
is not available must be created. Through these leaders,
researchers, or clinicians, new knowledge is generated and
disseminated, and nursing science is advanced. Sometimes,
however, to keep up with the explosion of information in nursing and
health care, one must continue to rely on the knowledge generated
and disseminated by others. In this sense, nurses are committed to
lifelong learning and the use of knowledge in the practice of nursing
science. How nurses interact within their environment and apply
what is learned denotes where they are in the ongoing process
captured in the Foundation of Knowledge model; they can be
acquiring knowledge, processing knowledge, generating knowledge,
and/or disseminating knowledge.
Readers of this section are challenged to ask how they can (1)
apply knowledge gained from the practice setting to benefit patients
and enhance their practice; (2) help colleagues and patients
understand and use current technology; and (3) use wisdom to help
create the theories, tools, and knowledge of the future.C H A P T E R 6
History and Evolution of
Nursing Informatics
OBJECTIVES
1. Trace the evolution of nursing informatics from concept to specialty practice.
2. Relate nursing informatics metastructures, concepts, and tools to the knowledge
work of nursing.
3. Explore the quest for consistent terminology in nursing, and describe terminology
approaches that accurately capture and codify the contributions of nursing to health
care.
4. Explore informatics education initiatives.
5. Explore how nurses can create and derive clinical knowledge from information
systems.
KEY TERMS
accessibility
data
data gatherer
enumerative approach
expert system
information
information user
International Classification of Nursing Practice (ICNP)
knowledge
knowledge builder
knowledge user
knowledge worker
ontological approachreusability
standardized nursing terminology
terminology
ubiquity
wisdomIntroduction
The information and knowledge that inform 21st-century healthcare
delivery have been growing at an unprecedented pace in recent
years. Clinical research has propelled the understanding of the
efficacy of various clinical practices, treatment regimens, and
interventions. Extended and expanded access to clinical research
findings and decision support tools has been significantly influenced
by the advent of computerization and the internet. Indeed, the
conduct of research itself has been accelerated by virtue of
ubiquitous computing. Working in environments of increasingly
complex clinical care and contending with the management of large
volumes of data and information, all nurses need to avail themselves
of the technological tools that can support quality practice that is
optimally safe, informed, and knowledge based. Although the
increased deployment of information technology (IT) within
healthcare settings presumes that nurses and other health
professionals are proficient in the use of computing devices, the
processes and potential outcomes associated with informatics are
yet to be fully realized or understood. Nurses need to participate in
the creation of those possibilities.
Health service organizations, societies, and governments
throughout the industrialized world are committed to ensuring that
healthcare delivery is safe, knowledge based, cost-effective,
seamless, and timely. Beyond these deliverables, there are
expectations of improved efficiency and quality and of the active
engagement of consumers in their care. Given the evolving
emphasis on such issues as chronic disease management and aging
at home, informatics tools need to include the use of technologies to
empower citizens to manage their own health and wellness more
effectively.
This chapter explores the history and evolution of nursing
informatics (NI) and informatics education and defines andaddresses the goal of informatics as it relates to nursing practice.
The ways in which NI supports the creation of a culture of
knowledge-based nursing practice that is enabled and advanced
using information and communication technologies are described.
The chapter also addresses some of the challenges associated with
the attainment of this knowledge-based culture as well as the
opportunities for nurses to create and derive knowledge from
emerging health IT. Finally, the chapter provides a contemplative
view of the future for nurses and informatics.The Evolution of a Specialty
Nurses have historically gathered and recorded data, albeit in a
paper record. For example, nurses gather atomic-level data (e.g.,
blood pressure, pulse, blood glucose, and pallor), aggregate data to
derive information (e.g., impending shock), and apply knowledge
(e.g., implement the evidence-based practice [EBP] protocol for
impending shock). Over the years, these data have been recorded
into individuals’ hard copy health records, thereby chronicling
findings, actions, and outcomes; these data and information were
then forever lost, unless they were manually extracted for research
purposes. As computers were introduced into health care and data
and information were recorded electronically, a nursing specialty was
born.
Florence Nightingale has been credited as one of the first
statisticians to collect and use data to change the way she cared for
her patients. While serving in the Crimean War, she began to gather
data regarding the conditions in which patients were living and the
diseases they contracted and from which they died. These data were
later used to improve patient conditions at both city and military
hospitals (O’Connor & Robertson, 2003). There is no doubt that
nursing experiences build knowledge and skill in nursing practice but
that paper-based documentation has hindered the ability to share
knowledge and aggregate experiences to build new knowledge.
NI pioneers recognized early on that computers had the potential
to fundamentally change health care, and they became actively
involved in shaping how computers were used in health care. For
more specific information on NI pioneers and to view video
recordings of the contributions of each pioneer in the NI history
project, please visit this website:
https://amia.org/community/working-groups/nursing￾informatics/nursing-informatics-innovators.According to Ozbolt and Saba (2008), one very early pioneer,
Harriet Werley, a nurse researcher at Walter Reed Army Research
Institute, consulted with IBM in the late 1950s to explore computer
use in health care. Ms. Werley recognized the need for a minimum
set of data to be collected from every patient so that comparisons
could be made, which set the stage for the development of
informatics. As computers became more commonplace in the 1970s
and 1980s, more nurses became involved with developing
approaches to using computers in health care. It is important to note
that this was also the time when nurse leaders were writing about
the need for and developing terminologies to represent patient data
and nursing contributions to health care, beginning to conduct
informatics research, and advocating for informatics education in
nursing curricula (Ozbolt & Saba, 2008).
In 1989, Graves and Corcoran offered what is widely viewed as
the seminal definition of NI. They defined NI as “a combination of
computer science, information science, and nursing science
designed to assist in the management and processing of nursing
data, information, and knowledge to support the practice of nursing
and the delivery of nursing care” (p. 227). In this same article,
acknowledging the 1986 work of Blum, Graves and Corcoran
provided the definitions and descriptions of the concepts of data (i.e.,
discrete entities described objectively without interpretation),
information (i.e., data that are interpreted, organized, or structured),
and knowledge (i.e., information that is synthesized so that
relationships are identified and formalized) as they apply to the
science and practice of NI. They also described what is meant by
management and processing:
The management component of informatics is the functional ability to collect,
aggregate, organize, move, and re-present information in an economical, efficient
way that is useful to the users of the system. . . . In practice, processing is
considered as a transformation of data or information from one form to another
form, usually at a more complex state of organization or meaning. There is a
progression of transformation of data into information and of information into
knowledge. (p. 227)We will return to a discussion of these concepts later in the chapter.
For now, we continue our exploration of the evolution of informatics
as a specialty.
In the 1990s, an NI workgroup was established within the newly
founded American Medical Informatics Association, the American
Nurses Association (ANA) recognized NI as a specialty and
published two documents related to informatics practice, and the first
informatics certification was established (Ozbolt & Saba, 2008). As
NI pioneers and emerging leaders continued to champion the use of
computers in health care, the need for computer-friendly
terminologies to represent the work of nursing was increasingly
apparent. Several terminology schemes were developed during this
time, and there were also international efforts at developing a
standardized nursing terminology to capture and codify the
contributions of nursing to health care. At the same time, healthcare
organizations were beginning to implement electronic information
systems. There was much work being done around computerization
in health care, but there was little coordination of these efforts and
approaches. Ozbolt and Saba (2008) explained that the cost of using
known nomenclatures and the difficulty in choosing among them
resulted in many healthcare organizations deciding to use their own
or vendor-provided, nonstandard terms. Use of nonstandard terms
creates issues with data retrieval and analysis. We will discuss this
issue in more detail later in the chapter.
President George W. Bush’s call for electronic health records
(EHRs) in 2004 further stimulated the development of NI, informatics
competency identification, and informatics education reform and
spawned several national and international informatics
organizations. Knowledge creation in nursing is dependent on
knowledge representation in the information management tools that
are central to NI, thus we see the clear connection between nursing
science and NI. That is, knowledge creation in nursing is dependent
on knowledge representation in the information management tools
that are central to NI. As the NI pioneers recognized these important
connections and synergies, both nursing as a science and NI as a
specialty evolved. Indeed, the evolution is not complete.As the NI specialty was evolving, informatics pioneers and other
nurse leaders collaborated on several ANA publications. As
mentioned previously, NI was identified by the ANA as a specialty in
1992. In 1994, the first formal document identifying the scope of
practice was published, followed by a separate standards of practice
document in 1995. In 2001, a combined scope and standards
document was published by the ANA, followed by a more robust
scope and standards publication in 2008. In 2015, the ANA released
the second edition of Nursing Informatics: Scope and Standards of
Practice, and in 2022, the third edition was released.What Is Nursing Informatics?
The definition of NI has undergone several revisions to arrive at its
current form. The 1994 ANA definition of NI indicated that it was the
integration of nursing science, computer science, and information
science and that it supports practice, education, research, and
knowledge development (Murphy, 2010). The 2001 version
mentioned the support of decision-making by patients and providers
across all roles and settings and identified information structures,
processes, and IT as central to informatics (Murphy, 2010). An
important change in the 2008 definition of NI is the addition of
wisdom to the key concepts of the management of data, information,
and knowledge (Murphy, 2010).
The ANA’s Nursing Informatics: Scope and Standards of Practice
(2015) offered the following definition of NI:
Nursing informatics (NI) is the specialty that integrates nursing science with
multiple information and analytical sciences to identify, define, manage, and
communicate data, information, knowledge, and wisdom in nursing practice. NI
supports nurses, consumers, patients, the interprofessional healthcare team, and
all other stakeholders in their decision-making in all roles and settings to achieve
desired outcomes. This support is accomplished through the use of information
structures, information processes, and information technology. (pp. 1–2)
In the 2015 version, we note that the sciences are no longer
limited to nursing science, information science, and computer
science. Cognitive science is also a very important part of NI. Other
sciences that may contribute to NI include library science and
information management, mathematics, archival science, and the
science of terminologies and taxonomies (ANA, 2015).
Let us reflect more carefully on NI by deconstructing each of the
statements contained in the ANA’s (2015) definition (statements from
the definition are italicized):
Nursing informatics (NI) is the specialty that integrates nursing
science with multiple information and analytical sciences toidentify, define, manage, and communicate data, information,
knowledge, and wisdom in nursing practice. As we established
previously, there are concepts drawn from several sciences that
are integrated to support and contribute to NI. The contributions
of these sciences become apparent in the actions of NI: identify,
define, manage, and communicate. The last part of this
statement contains the critical central concepts of NI: the data,
information, knowledge, and wisdom that are integral to our
practice. We will explore these central concepts in more detail in
the next section.
NI supports nurses, consumers, patients, the interprofessional
healthcare team, and all other stakeholders in their decision￾making in all roles and settings to achieve desired outcomes.
This statement refers to the IT tools that support our practice and
help us to collaborate and communicate with other healthcare
professionals and that support the evolving trends and tools
related to patient engagement in managing their own health. All
these tools contribute to better health outcomes. Examples of
such tools are EHRs, barcode medication administration
systems, clinical decision support and other expert systems,
patient monitoring devices, and telehealth tools. These and other
NI tools are discussed in subsequent chapters.
This support is accomplished through the use of information
structures, information processes, and information technology.
This section of the definition clearly identifies the need for IT to
provide structure to the data we collect from our patients and to
allow for processing of data and information to create knowledge
and support wisdom in nursing practice. Think about the fact that
with the advent of clinical information systems (CISs),
specifically electronic documentation and clinical decision
support (CDS) applications, every nurse has the capacity to
contribute to the advancement of nursing knowledge on many
levels. Imagine the use of IT solutions to capture not only
discrete, quantifiable data but also the nurse’s experiential and
intuitive personal knowledge not typically documented in paperrecords. Add to that mix the family history, culture, environmental
and social factors, past experiences, and perspectives from
patients and families, and it becomes clear that the possibilities
for generating new understandings within populations and
across the life span and care continuum are endless. Many of
these technologies are covered in subsequent chapters.
In 2022, the ANA released the third edition of Nursing Informatics:
Scope and Standards of Practice. The third edition is described as
“the culmination of a 2-year intensive professional review and
revision initiative, complicated by the significant interruptions of the
Covid-19 pandemic in 2020 and 2021” (ANA, 2022, p. 1). The ANA
offers this current definition of NI:
Nursing informatics is the specialty that transforms data into needed information
and leverages technologies to improve health and health care equity, safety,
quality, and outcomes. (ANA, 2022, p. 3)
We shall examine the essence of NI in detail in subsequent
chapters.The DIKW Paradigm
The conceptual framework underpinning the science and practice of
NI centers on the core concepts of data, information, knowledge, and
wisdom, also known as the DIKW paradigm. As an aside, it is
important to note that this paradigm is not exclusive to nursing and
that it is in fact used by others who work with data and information.
When we assess a patient to determine their nursing needs, we
gather and then analyze and interpret data to form a conclusion. This
is the essence of nursing science. Information is composed of data
that were processed using knowledge. Knowledge is the awareness
and understanding of a set of information and the ways that
information can be made useful to support a specific task or arrive at
a decision. When we apply previous knowledge to data, we convert
those data into information and information into new knowledge—
that is, an understanding of which interventions are appropriate in
practice. Thus, information is data made functional through the
application of knowledge. Wisdom is the appropriate application of
knowledge to a specific situation. In the practice of nursing science,
one expects actions to ultimately be directed by wisdom. Wisdom
uses knowledge and experience to heighten common sense and
insight to exercise sound judgment in practical matters.
Matney et al. (2011) and Topaz (2013) provided these expanded
definitions and examples of the DIKW paradigm:
Data: Data are the smallest components of the DIKW
framework. They are commonly presented as discrete facts, the
product of observation with little interpretation (Matney et al.,
2011). These are the discrete factors describing the patient or
their environment. Examples include the patient’s medical
diagnosis (e.g., International Classification of Diseases [ICD-10]
diagnosis #150.20: Unspecified systolic [congestive] heart
failure) or living status (e.g., living alone, living with family, orliving in a retirement community). A single piece of data, known
as datum, often has little meaning in isolation.
Information: Information might be thought of as “data +
meaning” (Matney et al., 2011). Information is often constructed
by combining data points into a meaningful picture given a
certain context. Information is a continuum of progressively
developing and clustered data; it answers questions such as
who, what, where, and when. For example, a combination of a
patient’s “ICD-10 diagnosis #150.20: Unspecified systolic
(congestive) heart failure” and living status “living alone” has a
certain meaning in the context of an older adult.
Knowledge: Knowledge is information that has been
synthesized so that relations and interactions are defined and
formalized; it is built of meaningful information constructed of
discrete data points (Matney et al., 2011). Knowledge is often
affected by assumptions and central theories of a scientific
discipline and is derived by discovering patterns of relationships
among clusters of information. Knowledge answers questions of
why or how. For healthcare professionals, the combination of
information clusters, such as the “ICD-10 diagnosis #150.20:
Unspecified systolic (congestive) heart failure” plus living status
“living alone,” with additional information that an older man (78
years old) was just discharged from the hospital to home with a
complicated new medication regimen (e.g., blood thinners) might
indicate that this person is at a high risk for drug-related adverse
effects (e.g., bleeding).
Wisdom: Wisdom is an appropriate use of knowledge to
manage and solve human problems (ANA, 2008; Matney et al.,
2011). Wisdom implies a form of ethics, or knowing why certain
things or procedures should or should not be implemented in
healthcare practice. In nursing, wisdom guides the nurse in
recognizing the situation at hand, based on the patient’s values
and the nurse’s experience and healthcare knowledge.
Combining all these components, the nurse decides on a
nursing intervention or action. Benner (2000) presents wisdomas a clinical judgment that integrates intuition, emotions, and the
senses. Using the previous examples, wisdom would be
displayed when the home care nurse considers prioritizing the
elderly heart failure patient who is using blood thinners for an
immediate intervention, such as an initial nursing visit within the
first hours of discharge from the hospital to ensure appropriate
use of medications (para. 2).
Reflect on the examples previously given by Topaz, and create your
own example of an application of the DIKW scenario.
The DIKW paradigm is frequently depicted as a pyramid, which
suggests a hierarchy, with data on the bottom, then information, then
knowledge, and finally wisdom. With the use of IT solutions to
harvest and mine data to extract meaning, this depiction does not
really reflect reality. Rowley (2007) suggested that alternate
representations might better capture the complexity of these
concepts. “Is there a sharp divide between data, information and
knowledge, or do they lie on a continuum with different levels of
meaning, structure, and actionability occurring at different levels?”
(p. 175). Ronquillo et al. (2016) reported that the critiques of the
hierarchical DIKW model centered around the suggested linearity
and unidirectionality of movement from data to information to
knowledge to wisdom. We offer Figure 6-1, which depicts the
iterative, or repetitive, nature of our ability (both human and
machine) to process data and information to build knowledge and
sometimes reach wisdom. There is constant critical thinking (and
processing) between information and knowledge. Knowledge can be
eventually used to gain wisdom. We believe that most of the critical
thinking, analysis, and synthesis occurs between data, information,
and knowledge, with some extending to wisdom. The processing of
data does not always end with wisdom because of the high degree
of human agency in wisdom, but it will end in knowledge that
provides a basis for action. As we enhance our knowledge and gain
wisdom, the way we process, analyze, synthesize, and disseminate
data, information, and knowledge evolves. The result is sound
clinical judgment.Figure 6-1 Moving From Data and Information to Knowledge and Wisdom
Description
Rowley (2007) was among the first to map data, information,
knowledge, and wisdom to types of IT systems, which suggests that
data reside in transaction processing systems; information, in
information processing systems; knowledge, in decision support
systems (DSSs); and wisdom, in expert systems. As IT tools become
more sophisticated, we may gain more insight into how knowledge
and wisdom are evolved from data and information. Because of the
speed of processing and multiple iterations performed by these
sophisticated tools, the lines between data, information, knowledge,
and wisdom will be increasingly blurred. What really matters, though,
is that the outcomes of this processing will provide important
actionable insights to drive nursing practice.Snyder-Halpern and colleagues (2001) identified four tasks
associated with human information processing: (1) data gathering,
(2) information use, (3) creative application of knowledge to clinical
practice, and (4) generation of new knowledge. These four tasks are
associated with the four roles that nurses take on as knowledge
workers: data gatherer, information user, knowledge user, and
knowledge builder, respectively.
Nurses are data gatherers by nature. They collect and record
objective clinical data daily. These items include such things as
patients’ medical history, vital signs, and assessment data. As data
gatherers, nurses transition to information users when they begin to
interpret the data that they have collected and recorded. As
information users, nurses then structure the clinical data into
information that can be used to guide patient-care decisions
(Snyder-Halpern et al., 2001). An example of this progression is
when nurses notice that a patient’s blood pressure is elevated.
Information users transition to knowledge users when they notice
trends in a patient’s clinical data and determine whether the clinical
data fall within or outside of the normal data range. Nurses transition
from knowledge users to knowledge builders when they examine
clinical data and trends across groups of patients. These trends are
interpreted and compared to current scientific data to determine
whether these data would improve the nursing knowledge domain.
An example of the transition of a nurse as knowledge user to a nurse
as knowledge builder is an observation of medication compliance
rates over a specified time period for patients diagnosed with chronic
high blood pressure, with the nurse then comparing these rates to
evidence-based literature to determine whether this information
improves the nursing knowledge base (Snyder-Halpern et al., 2001).
Snyder-Halpern and colleagues (2001) found that as nurses
assumed each of these roles, they required different types of
decision support processes to support their knowledge needs. The
data gatherer requires a system that captures and stores data
accurately and reliably and allows the data to be readily accessed.
Most current healthcare DSSs support the nurse in this role. The
information user role requires a system that can transform clinicaldata into a format that allows for easy recognition of patterns and
trends. These systems recognize the trend and display it for the
nurse, who in turn uses this information to adjust the plan of care for
the patient. The information user role is generally well supported by
current DSSs. The knowledge user role is the least supported, and
many systems are currently looking at ways to support nurses in this
role. One advantage of these DSSs is their ability to bring knowledge
to nurses so that they do not have to retrieve the information
themselves, which allows them to adjust a patient’s plan of care in a
more efficient and timely manner. The knowledge builder role is
typically seen in conjunction with the nurse–researcher and quality
management roles. These roles typically look at aggregated data
that have been captured over time and from numerous patients.
Then these data are compared to clinical variables and interventions.
This analysis then results in the development of new domain
knowledge (Snyder-Halpern et al., 2001).
Most of the available DSS tools for nursing practice, although
promising, are simplistic and in early development. Typically, a DSS
includes tools such as (1) computerized alerts and reminders (e.g.,
medication due, patient has an allergy, or potassium level abnormal),
(2) clinical guidelines (e.g., best practices for prevention of skin
breakdown), (3) online information retrieval (e.g., CINAHL or drug
information), (4) clinical order sets and protocols, and (5) online
access to organizational policies and procedures. In the future, these
tools may be expanded to include applications with embedded case￾based reasoning.
In the context of nursing practice that is supported by CISs, nurses
will eventually have access to evidence and knowledge derived from
large aggregates of clinical data, including nursing interventions and
resultant outcomes. Experiential evidence provides practice
guidelines and directives to ensure concurrence with optimal clinical
decisions and actions. To illustrate, consider this example: A nurse
assesses a patient who has experienced a stroke for signs of skin
breakdown, photographs and documents early skin integrity
changes, and submits the photos and documentation to the CIS. The
nurse receives an option to review the best practices for care of thepatient and to submit a request for a consult to a wound
management specialist. The ongoing clinical findings, treatment, and
response are logged and aggregated with similar cases, thereby
contributing to the knowledge base related to nursing and care of the
integumentary system.
The informational elements of CISs can also be designed to
include specifics about individuals’ multicultural practices and beliefs.
Consider the situation in which a client voices concerns about her
prescribed dietary treatment and expresses a preference for a
female care provider. With a query to the CIS for the client’s history
and sociocultural background, the nurse obtains explanations for
these requests that derive from the patient’s religious and cultural
background and makes a notation to highlight and carry this
information forward in the electronic record for any future
admissions. Future systems may also be designed to provide access
to standards of ethical practice and online access to experts in the
field of moral reasoning to guide clinical interactions and decision￾making.
Through each instance of interacting with the CIS, nurses add to
this repository of knowledge by chronicling their daily clinical
challenges and queries. The delivery of personalized, knowledge￾based care is enhanced by the continued expansion and
aggregation of knowledge about clients and populations, which
includes their personal, cultural, physical, and clinical presentations
and experiences coupled with the guidance received from others.
Graves and Corcoran (1989) have suggested that nursing
knowledge is “simultaneously the laws and relationships that exist
between the elements that describe the phenomena of concern in
nursing (factual knowledge) and the laws or rules that the nurse uses
to combine the facts to make clinical nursing decisions” (p. 230). In
their view, not only does knowledge support decision-making, but it
also leads to new discoveries. Thus, one might think about the future
creation of nursing knowledge as being the discovery of new laws
and relationships that can continue to advance nursing practice.
New technologies have made the capture of multifaceted data and
information possible using such technologies as digital imaging (e.g.,photography to support wound management). Now included as part
of the clinical record, such images add a new dimension to the
assessment, monitoring, and treatment of illness and the
maintenance of wellness. Beyond the use of computer keyboards,
input devices are being integrated with CISs and used to gather data
and information for the following clinical and administrative purposes:
Biometrics (e.g., facial recognition and security)
Voice and video recordings (e.g., client interviews and
observations, diagnostic procedures, and ultrasounds)
Voice-to-text files (e.g., voice recognition for documentation)
Medical devices (e.g., infusion pumps, ventilators, and
hemodynamic monitors)
Barcode and radio-frequency identification (RFID) technologies
(e.g., medication administration)
Telehomecare monitoring (e.g., for use in diabetes and other
chronic disease management)
These are but a few of the emerging capabilities that allow for
numerous data inputs to be transposed, combined, analyzed, and
displayed to provide information and views of clinical situations
currently not possible with hard copy documentation. Through the
application of information and communication technologies to
support the capture and processing (i.e., interpreting, organizing,
and structuring) of all relevant clinical data, relationships can be
identified and formalized into new knowledge. This transformational
process is at the core of generating new nursing knowledge at a rate
never experienced before; in the context of current research
paradigms, the same relationships would likely take years to
uncover.
As CISs advance, nurses will eventually become generators of
new knowledge by virtue of designs that embed machine learning
and case-based reasoning methods within their core functionality.
This functionality will become possible only with national and
international adoption of a standardized nursing language, which isdescribed in the following section. Imagine the power of having
access to systems that aggregate the same data elements and
information garnered from multiple clinical situations and provide a
probability estimate of the likely outcome for individuals of a certain
age, with a specific diagnosis and comorbid conditions, medication
profile, symptoms, and interventions. How much more rapidly would
an understanding of the efficacy of clinical interventions be
elucidated? Historically, some knowledge might have taken years of
research to discover—for example, that sometimes long-standing
practices are more harmful than beneficial. A case in point is the
long-standing practice of instilling endotracheal tubes with normal
saline before suctioning (O’Neal et al., 2001). Based on the evidence
gathered through several studies, the potentially deleterious effects
of this practice have become widely recognized. Conceivably, a
meta-analysis approach to clinical studies would be expedited by
convergence of large clinical data repositories across care settings,
thereby making available to practitioners the collective contributions
of health professionals and longitudinal outcomes for individuals,
families, and populations.
Nurses need to be engaged in the design of CIS tools that support
access to and the generation of nursing knowledge. As we have
emphasized, the adoption of clinical data standards is of particular
importance to the future design of CIS tools. We are also beginning
to see the development and use of expert systems, which implement
knowledge automatically without human intervention. For example,
an insulin pump that senses the patient’s blood glucose level and
administers insulin based on those data is a form of an expert
system. Expert systems differ from decision support tools in that the
decision support tools require the human to act on the information
provided, whereas expert systems intervene automatically, based on
an algorithm that directs the intervention. Consider that as CISs are
widely implemented, standards for nursing documentation and
reporting are adopted, and healthcare IT solutions continue to
evolve, the synthesis of findings from a variety of methods and
worldviews becomes much more feasible.Central to the development of robust expert systems is the
agreement on and use of standard data formats and terminologies
that accurately codify and capture the essence of nursing processes
and outcomes in these electronic systems. Consider that physician
contributions to the health of a patient have been specifically codified
(and billed) for some time (i.e., ICD-10). What if we were able to
code and thus capture nursing contributions in a similar way? This
information would help to highlight the specific nursing contributions
to patient outcomes.Capturing and Codifying the Work of Nursing
There are major efforts underway—internationally through the
International Council of Nurses’ International Classification of
Nursing Practice (ICNP) and in many other initiatives among and
within countries—in which nurses are attempting to standardize the
language of nursing practice (Hannah et al., 2009). These efforts are
particularly important in the face of the development of EHRs and
health information exchanges (HIEs), which have been stimulated by
the HITECH Act of 2009. The capacity to encourage and enforce
consistent nomenclatures that reflect the practice of nurses is now
possible. Standardized language gives both the nursing profession
and the healthcare delivery systems the capability to capture, codify,
retrieve, and analyze the impact of nursing care on client outcomes.
For example, with the use and documentation of standardized client
assessments, including risk measures, interventions based on best
practices, and consistently measured outcomes within different care
settings and across the continuum of care, there will be an ability to
demonstrate more clearly the contributions and impact of nursing
care through the analysis of EHR outputs. In addition, clinical
outcomes can be further understood in the context of care
environments, particularly implications related to the availability of
human and material resources to support care delivery. The
standardization of clinical inputs and outputs into EHRs will
eventually provide a rich knowledge base from which practice and
research can be enhanced and administrative and policy decisions
can be better informed (Nagle et al., 2010). According to Androwich
(2010), it is important to understand that there is a dual role for
accessing and using information (content) in health care. In the first
instance, when the nurse is caring for an individual patient,
evidence-based information (content) and patient data need to be
available at the point of care to inform the present patient encounter.
In the second instance, patient data that are entered by the nurse inthe process of documentation need to be entered in such a manner
that they are able to be aggregated to inform future patient
encounters.
Rutherford (2008) provided this insight:
A standardized nursing language should be defined so that nursing care can be
communicated accurately among nurses and other health care providers. Once
standardized, a term can be measured and coded. Measurement of the nursing
care through a standardized vocabulary by way of an ED [electronic
documentation] will lead to the development of large databases. From these
databases, evidence-based standards can be developed to validate the
contribution of nurses to patient outcomes. (para. 5)
Thede and Schwiran (2011) identified the benefits of using
standardized terminology as (1) better communication among nurses
and other healthcare providers, (2) increased visibility of nursing
interventions, (3) improved patient care, (4) enhanced data collection
to evaluate nursing care outcomes, (5) greater adherence to
standards of care, and (6) facilitation of assessment of nursing
competency (para. 2).
Think about this. Some EHRs measure height in feet and inches
and others in centimeters. Weight may be measured in pounds or
kilograms. If we wanted to compare patient data from multiple EHRs
in several healthcare institutions to develop a model to predict the
onset of type 2 diabetes, these disparate measures would not
translate well. Some EHRs force data collection into coded database
fields, and thus these data are more easily analyzed for trends than
those same data recorded as free text. Clinicians who are used to
recording data (charting) as text may resist the use of the coded data
fields that are typically presented as drop-down menus in the EHR.
As Skrocki (2013) pointed out, “Data interoperability is hindered
when clinicians utilize free text documentation. Although text data
can be searched with a specific word or word phrases, it does not
allow for optimal data sharing. When an organization transfers data
to another organization, standardized codified data allows for better
data interpretation” (p. 77).
Although significant progress has been made in this
standardization work, it is still evolving. Box 6-1 discusses theevolution of standardized terminologies in nursing; it was contributed
by Nicholas Hardiker (2011), a leader in the development of
standardized languages that support clinical applications of
information and communication technology.
BOX 6-1 THE EVOLUTION OF STANDARDIZED
TERMINOLOGIES TO SUPPORT
NURSING PRACTICE
Nicholas Hardiker
Agreement on the consistent use of a term, such as impaired physical mobility allows
that term to be used for a number of purposes: to provide continuity of care from care
provider to care provider, to ensure care quality by facilitating comparisons between
care providers, or to identify trends through data aggregation. Since the early 1970s,
there has been a concerted effort to promote consistency in nursing terminology. This
work continues today, driven by the following increasing demands placed on health￾related information and knowledge:
Accessibility: Accessibility means that the information and knowledge needed to
deliver care or manage a health service should be easy to access.
Ubiquity: Ubiquity means that with changing models of healthcare delivery,
information and knowledge should be available anywhere.
Longevity: Information should be usable beyond the immediate clinical encounter.
Reusability: Reusability means that information should be useful for a range of
purposes.
Without consistent terminology, nursing runs the risk of becoming invisible; nursing
will remain difficult to quantify, the unique contribution and impact of nursing will go
unrecognized, and the nursing component of EHR systems will remain rudimentary at
best. Not least, without consistent terminology, the nursing knowledge base will suffer
in terms of development and access, thereby delaying the integration of evidence￾based health care into nursing practice.
External pressures merely compound this problem. For example, in the United
States, the HITECH Act, signed in January 2009, provided a financial incentive for the
use of EHRs; similar steps were taken in other regions. The HITECH Act mandated that
EHRs be used in a meaningful way, but without consistent terminology, achieving this
goal will be problematic. Finally, the current and future landscape of information and
communication technologies (e.g., connection anywhere, borderless communication,
web-based applications, collaborative working, disintermediation and reintermediation,
consumerization, ubiquitous advanced digital content [van Eecke et al., 2007]) and their
inevitable infiltration into health care will only serve to reinforce the need for consistent
nursing terminology while providing an additional sense of urgency.This box explains what is meant by a standardized nursing terminology and lists
several examples. It describes in detail the different approaches taken in the
development of two terminologies. It presents, in the form of an international technical
standard, a means of ensuring consistency among the plethora of contemporary
standardized nursing terminologies, with a view toward harmonization and possible
convergence. Finally, it provides a rationale for the shared development of models of
terminology use—models that embody both clinical and pragmatic knowledge to ensure
that contemporary nursing record systems reflect the best available evidence and fit
comfortably with routine practice.
STANDARDIZED NURSING TERMINOLOGIES
A term at its simplest level is a word or phrase used to describe something concrete
(e.g., leg) or abstract (e.g., plan). A nursing terminology is a body of the terms used in
nursing. Many nursing terminologies exist, both formal and informal. Nursing
terminologies allow nurses to consistently capture, represent, access, and
communicate nursing data, information, and knowledge. A standardized nursing
terminology is a nursing terminology that is in some way approved by an appropriate
authority (de jure standardization) or by general consent (de facto standardization).
In North America, one such authority was the ANA, which operated a process of de
jure standardization through its Committee for Nursing Practice Information
Infrastructure (CNPII), which now no longer exists. The CNPII recognized two data
element sets: the Nursing Minimum Data Set (NMDS) and the Nursing Management
Minimum Data Set (NMMDS). In the United States, work on a standardized data
element set for nursing began in the 1980s with the NMDS (Werley & Lang, 1988),
which provided an additional catalyst for the development of many nursing
terminologies that could provide values (e.g., chronic pain) for particular data elements
in the NMDS (e.g., nursing diagnosis). The data element sets provided a framework for
the uniform collection and management of nursing data and encouraged the use of a
standardized nursing terminology to represent those data as a way to enhance
consistency.
APPROACHES TO NURSING TERMINOLOGY
From relatively humble beginnings, nursing terminologies have evolved significantly
over the past several decades in line with best practices in terminology work. The
enumerative approach consists of words or phrases in a list or a simple hierarchy
format. In the nursing diagnosis terminology system of the North American Nursing
Diagnosis Association (NANDA), a nursing diagnosis has an associated name and a
textual definition (NANDA International, 2008). Each nursing diagnosis may have a set
of defining characteristics and related risk factors. These additional features do not
constitute part of the core terminology but instead are intended to be used as an aid to
diagnosis. What an enumerative approach to standardizing terminology may lack in
terms of hierarchical sophistication, it makes up for in terms of simplicity and potential
ease of implementation and use.
In contrast, the ontological approach is compositional in nature and provides a
partial representation of the entities within a domain and the relationships between
them. The evolution of this approach to terminology standardization has been facilitatedby advances in knowledge representation (e.g., the refinement of the description logic
that underpins many contemporary ontologies) and in their accompanying technologies
(e.g., automated reasoners that can check consistency and identify equivalence) as
well as the subsumption (i.e., subclass–superclass) relationships within those
ontologies.
ICNP version 2 is an example of an ontology. ICNP is described as a unified nursing
language system. It seeks to provide a resource that can be used to develop local
terminologies and facilitate cross-mapping between terminologies to compare and
combine data from different sources; the existence of a number of overlapping but
inconsistent standardized nursing terminologies is problematic in terms of data
comparison and aggregation. The core of ICNP is represented in the Web Ontology
Language (OWL), a recommendation of the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) and a
de facto standard language for representing ontologies (McGuiness & van Harmelen,
2004). Because it is underpinned by description logic, OWL permits the use of
automated reasoners that can check consistency, identify equivalence, and support
classification within the ICNP ontology.
The results of contemporary terminology work are encouraging. Nevertheless, further
work is needed to harmonize standardized nursing terminologies and scale up and
mainstream the development and implementation of models of terminology use.
REFERENCES
McGuiness, D. L., & van Harmelen, F. (Eds.). (2004). OWL Web Ontology Language
overview. World Wide Web Consortium. http://www.w3.org/TR/owl-features
NANDA International. (2008). Nursing diagnoses: Definitions and classification 2009–
2011 edition. Wiley-Blackwell.
van Eecke, P., da Fonseca Pinto, P., & Egyedi, T., for the European Commission.
(2007). EU study on the specific policy needs for ICT standardisation [Final report].
http://ec.europa.eu/idabc/en/document/7040/254.html
Werley, H. H., & Lang, N. M. (Eds.). (1988). Identification of the Nursing Minimum Data
Set. Springer.
At least two decades of work have been directed toward
articulating standardized data elements that reflect nursing practice.
The nursing profession has been steadily moving toward consensus
on the adoption of data standards. In fact, several “consensus
conferences” have been hosted in recent years by the University of
Minnesota, with the goal to develop “a national action plan and
harmonize existing and new efforts of multiple individuals and
organizations to expedite integration of standardized nursing data
within EHRs and ensure their availability in clinical data repositories
for secondary use” (Westra et al., 2015, para. 3). See Chapter 14,The Electronic Health Record and Clinical Informatics, for more
information about using standardized terminologies in the EHR.
The National Library of Medicine has been designated by the
Department of Health and Human Services as the central
coordinating body for clinical terminology standards. Its web page
(www.nlm.nih.gov/healthit/index.html) provides several training and
implementation resources as well as current information on updates
to important terminologies.
The Office of the National Coordinator for Health Information
Technology (ONC) has also been working diligently to develop
national standards for EHR interoperability. The result of the work is
the United States Core Data for Interoperability (USCDI) Version 3
released in July 2022. “The USCDI is a standardized set of health
data classes and constituent data elements for nationwide,
interoperable health information exchange” (ONC, 2022, para. 1).
Access the USCDI here: www.healthit.gov/isa/sites/isa/files/2022-
07/USCDI-Version-3-July-2022-Final.pdf.
The ANA (2018) updated its position statement and advocated for
“the use of the ANA recognized terminologies supporting nursing
practice within the Electronic Health Record (EHR) and other health
information technology solutions” (para. 2). A landscape analysis of
standard nursing terminologies, conducted by the ONC (2017),
reported that the ANA recognizes 12 standard nursing terminologies
—2 minimum data sets, 2 reference terminologies, and 8 interface
terminologies. These terminologies are provided in Box 6-2.
BOX 6-2 ANA-RECOGNIZED STANDARD NURSING
TERMINOLOGIES
MINIMUM DATA SETS
USA Nursing Minimum Data Set (USA NMDS):
https://drive.google.com/file/d/1qWKs6OXUAGtlZ9MaYt6WnI1aS3rBZ5lW/view
The NMDS national work supported the initiative to formulate or construct an
international NMDS (i-NMDS):
https://drive.google.com/file/d/1Am5yDn56RCEkFJfsvXLcPtw9C-_RLkpa/viewNursing Management Minimum Data Set (NMMDS):
https://drive.google.com/file/d/1L2gnoALBebnirOWhyriEJUOuKWSffkfw/view
REFERENCE TERMINOLOGIES
Logical Observation Identifiers Names and Codes (LOINC): https://loinc.org
Systematized Nomenclature of Medicine Clinical Terms (SNOMED CT):
www.snomed.org
INTERFACE TERMINOLOGIES
Clinical Care Classification (CCC) System: https://careclassification.org
International Classification for Nursing Practice (ICNP):
www.who.int/standards/classifications/other-classifications/international￾classification-for-nursing-practice
North American Nursing Diagnosis Association International (NANDA-I):
www.nanda.org
Nursing Interventions Classification (NIC): www.nursing.uiowa.edu/cncce/nursing￾interventions-classification-overview
Nursing Outcomes Classification (NOC): www.nursing.uiowa.edu/cncce/nursing￾outcomes-classification-overview
Omaha System: www.omahasystem.org
Perioperative Nursing Data Set (PNDS): https://abccodes.com
Consider that as clinical information systems are widely
implemented, standards for nursing documentation and reporting are
adopted, and healthcare IT solutions continue to evolve, the
synthesis of findings from a variety of methods and worldviews
becomes much more feasible. As we move toward a standard
terminology to capture the work of nursing, we will also have the
ability to mine electronic record data to tease out best practices and
promote care improvements. It is important to note that we do not yet
have an agreed-upon standardized terminology for nursing
documentation in the EHR, as demonstrated by the list of eight ANA￾recognized interface terminologies in Box 6-2. This fact is hampering
seamless data exchanges among competing healthcare systems
and opportunities for data mining and research. One interesting and
highly developed terminology system for documenting nursing care
in an EHR is the CCC (https://careclassification.org). An overview
and examples of the use of this system are presented in Box 6-3.BOX 6-3 CLINICAL CARE CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM
FRAMEWORK
The CCC was developed by Virginia Saba and colleagues to provide a standardized
approach to clinical care documentation in an EHR. The CCC consists of 4 health care
patterns (i.e., physiological, psychological, functional, and health behavioral); 21 care
component classes (e.g., activity, behavior, medication, nutrition, and elimination); 176
nursing diagnoses, 804 nursing interventions/actions, and 528 nursing outcomes; 3
outcome qualifiers (i.e., improved, stabilized, and deteriorated); and 4 action type
qualifiers (i.e., monitor, perform, teach, or manage)
(https://careclassification.org/framework).
CODING STRUCTURE
The concept codes promote information exchange and interoperability. Each code
consists of five alphanumeric characters:
1st: Alpha character represents = care component = A
2nd: Two or three digits represent = nursing concepts = A02.1
A nursing concept represents either a nursing diagnosis or a nursing intervention.
5th: Last digit represents either
1 of 3 outcome qualifiers (last digit), or
1 of 4 intervention action types (last digit)
(https://careclassification.org/framework).
Examples:
Diagnosis code A.01.4.1
Intervention code A.01.3.1
Summary of steps used to build code:
1. Assessment: A—Activity
2. Diagnosis: 01.4 (subdiagnosis)—Fatigue
3. Outcome identification: 1—Improve
4. Planning: 03.1 (subintervention)—Ambulation therapy
5. Implementation (action type): 1—Assess
6. Evaluation (outcome): 1—Improved
The Online Code Builder tool allows you to practice with the system to appreciate its
comprehensiveness. Please visit the following website to experience code building for
yourself: https://careclassification.org/online-code-builder-1.
IT is not a panacea for all the challenges found in health care, but
it will provide the nursing profession with an unprecedented capacityto generate and disseminate new knowledge at a rapid speed, thus
supporting the knowledge work of nursing. To practice effectively in
this ever-changing environment, all healthcare professionals,
regardless of specialty, will need a basic level of informatics
education. Here we will focus on NI education.Nursing Informatics Education
If we are to fully embrace the knowledge work of nursing, we must
also embrace technologies that support knowledge and practice. The
future of nursing science and NI is closely associated with nursing
education and nursing research. Skiba (2007) suggested that
technologically savvy and well-informed faculty who can
demonstrate the appropriate use of technologies to enhance the
delivery of nursing care are needed. Along those lines, Whitman￾Price et al. (2012) conducted research among senior nursing
students to determine perceptions of personal phone use to access
healthcare information during clinical experiences. Their study
indicated that ready access to electronic resources enhanced clinical
decision-making and confidence in patient care. As early as 2007,
Girard discussed cutting-edge operating room technologies, such as
nanosurgery using nanorobots, smart fabrics that aid in patient
assessment during surgery, biopharmacy techniques for the safe
and effective delivery of anesthesia, and virtual reality training. She
made an extremely provocative point about nursing education:
“Educators will need to expand their knowledge and teach for the
future and not the past. They must take heed that the old tried-and￾true nursing education methods and curriculum that has lasted 100
years will have to change, and that change will be mandated for all
areas of nursing” (p. 353). Bassendowski (2007) specifically
addressed the potential for the generation of knowledge in
educational endeavors as faculty apply new technologies to teaching
and the focus shifts away from individual to group instruction, which
promotes sharing and processing of knowledge. We are also likely to
see more interprofessional education initiatives because
professionals must be prepared to work together and support one
another to ensure robust patient outcomes.
Several key national groups continue to promote the inclusion of
informatics content in nursing education programs. These initiativesinclude the Vision Series by the National League for Nursing (NLN)
(2015), the Quality and Safety Education for Nurses (QSEN; n.d.-b)
learning modules, and the Technology Informatics Guiding Education
Reform (TIGER) initiative (Healthcare Information and Management
Systems Society, n.d.). These organizations focus on the need to
integrate informatics competencies into nursing curricula to prepare
future nurses for the tasks of managing data, information, and
knowledge; alleviating errors and promoting safety; supporting
clinical judgment and decision-making; and improving the quality of
patient care. Nurse educators are challenged to prepare informatics￾competent nurses who can practice safely in technology-laden
settings.
The TIGER (2007) initiative identified steps toward a 10-year
vision and stated a key purpose: “to create a vision for the future of
nursing that bridges the quality chasm with information technology,
enabling nurses to use informatics in practice and education to
provide safer, higher-quality patient care” (p. 4). The pillars of the
TIGER vision include the following:
Management & Leadership: Revolutionary leadership that
drives, empowers, and executes the transformation of health
care.
Education: Collaborative learning communities that maximize the
possibilities of technology toward knowledge development and
dissemination, driving rapid deployment and implementation of
best practices.
Communication & Collaboration: Standardized, person-centered,
technology-enabled processes to facilitate teamwork and
relationships across the continuum of care.
Informatics Design: Evidence-based, interoperable intelligence
systems that support education and practice to foster quality
care and safety.
Information Technology: Smart, people-centered, affordable
technologies that are universal, useable, useful, and standards
based.Policy: Consistent, incentives-based initiatives (organizational
and governmental) that support advocacy and coalition-building,
achieving and resourcing an ethical culture of safety.
Culture: A respectful, open system that leverages technology
and informatics across multiple disciplines in an environment
where all stakeholders trust each other to work together toward
the goal of high quality and safety. (p. 4)
The American Association of Colleges of Nursing (AACN) has
embraced a competency-based model of nursing education. The
Essentials: Core Competencies for Professional Nursing Education
released in 2021 consists of 10 essential domains with each having
2 levels of subcompetencies reflecting entry-level and advanced￾level education (AACN, 2021a). Domain 8 is titled Informatics and
Healthcare Technologies and includes five competencies with
subcompetencies specific to entry-level and advanced-level nursing
education. The five competencies follow:
Describe the various information and communication technology
tools used in the care of patients, communities, and populations.
Use information and communication technology to gather data,
create information, and generate knowledge.
Use information and communication technologies and
informatics processes to deliver safe nursing care to diverse
populations in a variety of settings.
Use information and communication technology to support
documentation of care and communication among providers,
patients, and all system levels.
Use information and communication technologies in accordance
with ethical, legal, professional, and regulatory standards, and
workplace policies in the delivery of care. (AACN, 2021b, para.
3)
You can view the specifics of the competencies and
subcompetencies for this domain atwww.aacnnursing.org/Essentials/Domains/Informatics-and￾Healthcare-Technologies.TABLE 6-1
Quality and Safety Education for Nurses
As nursing science evolves, it is critical that patient care improve.
Unfortunately, sometimes patient care is unsafe and less than
adequate. Therefore, quality and safety have become paramount.
The QSEN Institute project seeks to prepare future nurses who will
have the knowledge, skills, and attitudes (KSAs) necessary to
continually improve the quality and safety of the healthcare systems
within which they work.
Prelicensure informatics KSAs are shown in Table 6-1 (QSEN
Institute, n.d.-c). Graduate-level informatics KSAs are shown in
Table 6-2 (QSEN Institute, n.d.-a).
Prelicensure Informatics KSAs
Knowledge Skills Attitudes
Explain why information and
technology skills are essential
for safe patient care
Seek education about
how information is
managed in care
settings before
providing care
Apply technology and
information
management tools to
support safe
processes of care
Appreciate the necessity for
all health professionals to
seek lifelong, continuous
learning of information
technology skills
Identify essential information
that must be available in a
common database to support
patient care
Contrast benefits and
limitations of different
communication technologies
Navigate the electronic
health record
Document and plan
patient care in an
electronic health
record
Employ
communication
Value technologies that
support clinical decision￾making, error prevention,
and care coordination
Protect the confidentiality of
protected health information
in electronic health recordsTABLE 6-2
Knowledge Skills Attitudes
and their impact on safety and
quality
technologies to
coordinate care for
patients
Describe examples of how
technology and information
management are related to
the quality and safety of
patient care
Recognize the time, effort,
and skill required for
computers, databases, and
other technologies to become
reliable and effective tools for
patient care
Respond appropriately
to clinical decision￾making supports and
alerts
Use information
management tools to
monitor outcomes of
care processes
Use high-quality
electronic sources of
healthcare information
Value nurses’ involvement
in design, selection,
implementation, and
evaluation of information
technologies to support
patient care
Informatics definition: Use information and technology to communicate, manage
knowledge, mitigate error, and support decision-making.
Reproduced from Cronenwett, L., Sherwood, G., Barnsteiner, J., Disch, J., Johnson, J.,
Mitchell, P., Sullivan, D. T., & Warren, J. (2007). Quality and safety education for nurses.
Nursing Outlook, 55(3), 122–131. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.outlook.2007.02.006. Copyright
2007, with permission from Elsevier.
Graduate-Level Informatics KSAs
Knowledge Skills Attitudes
Contrast benefits and
limitations of common
information technology
strategies used in the
delivery of patient care
Evaluate the strengths and
weaknesses of information
systems used in patient care
Participate in the
selection, design,
implementation, and
evaluation of information
systems
Communicate the integral
role of information
technology in nurses’ work
Model behaviors that
support implementation
Value the use of
information and
communication
technologies in patient
careKnowledge Skills Attitudes
and appropriate use of
electronic health records
Assist team members to
adopt information
technology by piloting and
evaluating proposed
technologies
Formulate essential
information that must be
available in a common
database to support patient
care in the practice specialty
Evaluate benefits and
limitations of different
communication technologies
and their impact on safety
and quality
Promote access to patient
care information for all
professionals who provide
care to patients
Serve as a resource for
how to document nursing
care at basic and
advanced levels
Develop safeguards for
protected health
information
Champion communication
technologies that support
clinical decision-making,
error prevention, care
coordination, and
protection of patient
privacy
Appreciate the need for
consensus and
collaboration in
developing systems to
manage information for
patient care
Value the confidentiality
and security of all patient
records
Describe and critique
taxonomic and terminology
systems used in national
efforts to enhance
interoperability of information
systems and knowledge
management systems
Access and evaluate high￾quality electronic sources
of healthcare information
Participate in the design of
clinical decision-making
supports and alerts
Search, retrieve, and
manage data to make
decisions using
information and
knowledge management
systems
Anticipate unintended
consequences of new
Value the importance of
standardized
terminologies in
conducting searches for
patient information
Appreciate the
contribution of
technological alert
systems
Appreciate the time,
effort, and skill required
for computers, databases,
and other technologies to
become reliable andI
Knowledge Skills Attitudes
technology effective tools for patient
care
Informatics definition: Use information and technology to communicate, manage
knowledge, mitigate error, and support decision-making.
Reproduced from Cronenwett, L., Sherwood, G., Pohl, J., Barnsteiner, J., Moore, D.,
Sullivan, D., Ward, D., & Warren, J. (2009). Quality and safety education for advanced
nursing practice. Nursing Outlook, 57(6), 338–348.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.outlook.2009.07.009. Copyright 2009, with permission from
Elsevier.
CASE STUDY: CASTING TO THE FUTURE
n the year 2030, enabled by technology, nursing practice has created a professional
culture of reflection, critical inquiry, and interprofessional collaboration. Nurses use
technology at the point of care in all clinical settings (e.g., primary, acute,
community, and long-term care) to inform their clinical decisions and effect the best
possible outcomes for their clients. Information is gathered and retrieved via human–
technology biometric interfaces, including voice, visual, sensory, gustatory, and auditory
interfaces, which continuously monitor physiological parameters for potentially harmful
imbalances. Longitudinal records are maintained for all citizens, from their initial
prenatal assessment to death; all lifelong records are aggregated into the knowledge
bases of expert systems. These systems provide the basis of the artificial intelligence
being embedded in emerging technologies. Smart technologies and invisible computing
are ubiquitous in all sectors where care is delivered. Clients and families are
empowered to review and contribute actively to their record of health and wellness.
Invasive diagnostic techniques are obsolete, nanotechnology therapeutics are the
norm, and robotics supplement or replace much of the traditional work of all health
professions. Nurses provide expertise to citizens to help them effectively manage their
health and wellness life plans and navigate access to appropriate information and
services.
The basic education of all health professions will evolve over the next decade to
incorporate core informatics competencies. In general, clinical care environments will
be connected, and information will be integrated across disciplines to the benefit of
care providers and citizens alike. The future of health care will be highly dependent on
the use of CISs and CDSs to achieve the global aspiration of safe and quality care for
all citizens.
The ideal is a nursing practice that has wholly integrated informatics and nursing
education and that is driven using information and knowledge from a myriad of sources,
creating practitioners whose way of being is grounded in informatics. Nursing research
is dynamic and an enterprise in which all nurses are engaged by virtue of their use oftechnologies to gather and analyze findings that inform specific clinical situations. In
every practice setting, the contributions of nurses to the health and well-being of
citizens will be highly respected and will parallel, if not exceed, the preeminence
granted physicians.The Future
The future landscape is yet to be fully understood as technology
continues to evolve with a rapidity that is rich with promise and
potential peril. The previous case study helps us to imagine what
future practice might entail. Nurse informaticists and nurse
executives are anticipating that computing power will be capable of
aggregating and transforming additional multidimensional data and
information sources (e.g., historical, multisensory, experiential, and
genetic sources) into CIS. With the availability of such rich
repositories, further opportunities will open to enhance the education
of health professionals, advance the design and application of CDSs,
deliver care that is informed by the most current evidence, and
engage with individuals and families in ways yet unimagined.Summary
In this chapter, we have defined NI, reviewed the historical evolution
of informatics, and explored the DIKW paradigm central to
informatics. We also explored the need for and the development of
standardized nursing terminologies to capture and codify the work of
nursing and how NI supports the knowledge work of nursing. An
overview of initiatives to integrate informatics education in both
undergraduate and graduate nursing programs was also provided.
This chapter advanced the view that every nurse’s practice will make
contributions to new nursing knowledge to support clinical judgment
in dynamically interactive CIS environments. The core concepts
associated with informatics will become embedded in the practice of
every nurse, whether administrator, researcher, educator, or
practitioner. Informatics will be prominent in the knowledge work of
nurses, yet it will be a subtlety because of its eventual transparent
integration with clinical care processes. Today and tomorrow, clinical
care and clinical judgment will be substantially supported by the
capacity and promise of technology.
Most importantly, readers need to contemplate a future that is not
limited by the world of practice as it is known today. IT is not a
panacea for all the challenges found in health care, but it will provide
the nursing profession with an unprecedented capacity to rapidly
generate and disseminate new knowledge. Realizing these
possibilities necessitates that all nurses understand and leverage the
informatician within and contribute to the future.
THOUGHT-PROVOKING QUESTIONS
1. How is the concept of wisdom in NI like or unlike professional nursing judgment?
Can any aspect of nursing wisdom be automated?
2. How can a single agreed-upon model of terminology use (with linkages to a single
terminology) help to integrate knowledge into routine clinical practice?3. Can you create examples of how expert systems (not decision support systems but
true expert systems initiating actions without human intervention) can be used to
support nursing practice?
4. How would you incorporate the data-to-wisdom continuum into a job description for
nurses?
5. What are the possibilities for accelerating the generation and uptake of new nursing
knowledge?R E F E R E N C E S
American Association of Colleges of Nursing. (2021a). The essentials: Core competencies
for professional nursing education.
www.aacnnursing.org/Portals/42/AcademicNursing/pdf/Essentials-2021.pdf
American Association of Colleges of Nursing. (2021b). The essentials: Domain 8:
Informatics and healthcare technologies.
www.aacnnursing.org/Essentials/Domains/Informatics-and-Healthcare-Technologies
American Nurses Association. (2008). Nursing informatics: Scope and standards of
practice. Nursesbooks.org.
American Nurses Association. (2015). Nursing informatics: Scope and standards of practice
(2nd ed.). Nursesbooks.org.
American Nurses Association. (2018). Inclusion of recognized terminologies supporting
nursing practice within electronic health records and other health information technology
solutions. www.nursingworld.org/practice-policy/nursing-excellence/official-position￾statements/id/Inclusion-of-Recognized-Terminologies-Supporting-Nursing-Practice￾within-Electronic-Health-Records
American Nurses Association. (2022). Nursing informatics: Scope and standards of practice
(3rd ed.). Nursesbooks.org.
Androwich, I. (2010, June 4). We the people: How nursing informatics can contribute to
healthcare reform through patient-centric HIT [Conference session]. Delaware Valley
Nursing Informatics Annual Meeting, Malvern, Pennsylvania.
Bassendowski, S. (2007). NursingQuest: Supporting an analysis of nursing issues. Journal
of Nursing Education, 46(2), 92–95. http://dx.doi.org/10.3928/01484834-20070201-11
Benner, P. (2000). The wisdom of our practice. American Journal of Nursing, 100(10), 99–
101, 103, 105. https://doi.org/10.2307/3522335
Blum, B. (1986). Clinical information systems. Springer-Verlag.
Girard, N. (2007). Science fiction comes to the OR. AORN Journal, 86(3), 351–353.
https://aornjournal.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1016/j.aorn.2007.08.003
Graves, J., & Corcoran, S. (1989). The study of nursing informatics. Image: Journal of
Nursing Scholarship, 21(4), 227–230. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1547-
5069.1989.tb00148.x
Hannah, K. J., White, P., Nagle, L. M., & Pringle, D. M. (2009). Standardizing nursing
information in Canada for inclusion in electronic health records: C-HOBIC. Journal of the
American Medical Informatics Association, 16(4), 524–530.
https://doi.org/10.1197/jamia.M2974
Hardiker, N. (2011). Developing standardized terminologies to support nursing practice. In
D. McGonigle & K. Mastrian (Eds.), Nursing informatics and the foundation of knowledge
(2nd ed., pp. 111–120). Jones & Bartlett Learning.
Healthcare Information and Management Systems Society. (n.d.). TIGER initiative for
technology and health informatics education. www.himss.org/tiger-initiative-technology￾and-health-informatics-educationMatney, S., Brewster, P., Sward, K., Cloyes, K., & Staggers, N. (2011). Philosophical
approaches to the data-information-knowledge-wisdom framework. Advances in Nursing
Science, 34(1), 6–18. https://doi.org/10.1097/ANS.0b013e3182071813
Murphy, J. (2010). Nursing informatics: The intersection of nursing, computer, and
information sciences. Nursing Economic$, 28(3), 204–207.
Nagle, L. M., White, P., & Pringle, D. (2010). Realizing the benefits of standardized
measures of clinical outcomes. Electronic Healthcare, 9(2), e3–e9.
National League for Nursing. (2015). A vision for the changing faculty role: Preparing
students for the technological world of health care. www.nln.org/docs/default￾source/uploadedfiles/about/nln-vision-series-position-statements/nlnvision-8.pdf?
sfvrsn=1219df0d_0
O’Connor, J. J., & Robertson, E. F. (2003). Florence Nightingale. MacTutor.
http://mathshistory.st-andrews.ac.uk/Biographies/Nightingale.html
Office of the National Coordinator for Health Information Technology. (2017). Standard
nursing terminologies: A landscape analysis.
https://www.healthit.gov/sites/default/files/snt_final_05302017.pdf
Office of the National Coordinator for Health Information Technology. (2022). United States
Core Data for Interoperability (USCDI), Version 3.
www.healthit.gov/isa/sites/isa/files/2022-07/USCDI-Version-3-July-2022-Final.pdf
O’Neal, P. V., Grap, M. J., Thompson, C., & Dudley, W. (2001). Level of dyspnoea
experienced in mechanically ventilated adults with and without saline instillation prior to
endotracheal suctioning. Intensive Critical Care Nursing, 17(6), 356–363.
https://doi.org/10.1054/iccn.2001.1604
Ozbolt, J., & Saba, V. (2008). A brief history of nursing informatics in the United States of
America. Nursing Outlook, 56(5), 199–205. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.outlook.2008.06.008
Quality and Safety Education for Nurses Institute. (n.d.-a). Graduate QSEN competencies.
www.qsen.org/competencies/graduate-ksas
Quality and Safety Education for Nurses Institute. (n.d.-b). QSEN learning modules.
www.aacnnursing.org/our-initiatives/education-practice/teaching-resources/qsen￾learning-modules
Quality and Safety Education for Nurses Institute. (n.d.-c). QSEN competencies.
www.qsen.org/competencies/pre-licensure-ksas
Ronquillo, C., Currie, L. M., & Rodney, P. (2016). The evolution of data-information￾knowledge-wisdom in nursing informatics. Advances in Nursing Science, 39(1), E1–E18.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/ANS.0000000000000107
Rowley, J. (2007). The wisdom hierarchy: Representations of the DIKW hierarchy. Journal
of Information Science, 33(2), 163. https://doi.org/10.1177/0165551506070706
Rutherford, M. (2008). Standardized nursing language: What does it mean for nursing
practice? Online Journal of Issues in Nursing, 13(1), 1–12.
https://ojin.nursingworld.org/MainMenuCategories/ThePracticeofProfessionalNursing/He
alth-IT/StandardizedNursingLanguage.html
Skiba, D. (2007). Faculty 2.0: Flipping the novice to expert continuum. Nursing Education
Perspectives, 28(6), 342–344. ProQuest Nursing & Allied Health Source Database
[Document ID: 1401240241].Skrocki, M. (2013). Standardization needs for effective interoperability. Transactions of the
International Conference on Health Information Technology Advancement, 2(1), 76–83.
https://scholarworks.wmich.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?
article=1039&context=ichita_transactions
Snyder-Halpern, R., Corcoran-Perry, S., & Narayan, S. (2001). Developing clinical practice
environments supporting the knowledge work of nurses. Computers in Nursing, 19(1),
17–26.
Technology Informatics Guiding Education Reform. (2007). Evidence and informatics
transforming nursing: 3-Year action steps toward a 10-year vision.
www.tigersummit.com/uploads/TIGERInitiative_Report2007_Color.pdf
Thede, L., & Schwiran, P. (2011). Informatics: The standardized nursing terminologies: A
national survey of nurses’ experiences and attitudes—Survey I. Online Journal of Issues
in Nursing, 16(2).
http://ojin.nursingworld.org/MainMenuCategories/ThePracticeofProfessionalNursing/Hea
lth-IT/Standardized-Nursing-Terminologies.html
Topaz, M. (2013). Invited editorial: The hitchhiker’s guide to nursing informatics theory:
Using the data-knowledge-information-wisdom framework to guide informatics research.
Online Journal of Nursing Informatics, 17(3).
https://cmapspublic2.ihmc.us/rid=1TM7H9MW0-1BC81HG￾46V/The_Hitchhiker_s_Guide_to_nursing_inform.pdf
Westra, B., Latimer, G., Matney, S., Park, J., Sensmeier, J., Simpson, R., Swanson, M. J.,
Warren, J. J., & Delaney, C. (2015). A national action plan for sharable and comparable
nursing data to support practice and translational research for transforming health care.
Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association, 22(3), 600–607.
https://doi.org/10.1093/jamia/ocu011
Whitman-Price, R., Kennedy, L., & Godwin, C. (2012). Use of personal phones by senior
nursing students to access health care information during clinical education: Staff
nurses’ and students’ perceptions. Journal of Nursing Education, 51(11), 642–646.
http://dx.doi.org/10.3928/01484834-20120914-04C H A P T E R 7
Nursing Informatics as a
Specialty
OBJECTIVES
1. Describe the nursing informatics specialty.
2. Explore the scope and standards of nursing informatics practice.
3. Assess the evolving roles and competencies of nursing informatics practice.
4. Appreciate the future of nursing informatics in our rich, technology-laden healthcare
environments.
KEY TERMS
advocate/policy developer
certificate
certification
clinical analyst/systems specialist
consultant
data
decision support/outcomes manager
educator
entrepreneur
informatics innovator
informatics nurse specialist (INS)
information
interprofessional team
knowledge
knowledge worker
medical informaticsnursing informatics (NI)
nursing informatics competencies
product developer
project manager
researcher
TIGER initiativeIntroduction
In Chapter 6, History and Evolution of Nursing Informatics, you
learned about the initiation of nursing informatics, how it is evolving,
and the ways that all nurses use informatics in their practice. In this
chapter, we will focus on nursing informatics (NI) as a specialty. NI
is an established yet ever-evolving specialty. Those choosing NI as a
career find it full of numerous and varied opportunities. Previously,
most nurse informaticists entered the field by having an
understanding of and enthusiasm for working with computers. Now,
however, nurses have many educational opportunities available to
become formally trained in the field of NI to become an informatics
nurse specialist (INS). We will explore the scope and standards of
NI; NI roles, education, and specialization; rewards of working in the
field; and organizations and professional journals supporting the INS.Nursing Contributions to Healthcare
Informatics
Nursing has been involved in the purchase, design, and
implementation of information systems (ISs) since the 1970s (Saba
& McCormick, 2006). One of the first health IS vendors studied how
nurses managed patient care and realized that nursing activity was
the core of patient activity and needed to be the foundation of the
health, or clinical, IS. Nursing informaticists have been instrumental
in developing, critiquing, and promoting standard nursing
terminologies to be used in the health IS. Nursing is heavily involved
in the design of educational materials for practicing nurses, student
nurses, other healthcare workers, and patients. Computers have
revolutionized the way individuals access information and
educational and social networking processes.Scope and Standards
NI is important to nursing and health care because it focuses on
representing nursing data, information, and knowledge. As
identified in the 2008 edition of Nursing Informatics: Scope and
Standards of Practice, NI meets the following needs for health
informatics (American Nurses Association [ANA], 2008; Brennan,
1994):
Provides a nursing perspective
Showcases nursing values and beliefs
Provides a foundation for nurses in NI
Produces unique knowledge
Distinguishes groups of practitioners
Emphasizes the interest for nursing
Provides needed nursing language and word context
In 2008, the ANA published a scope and standards of NI practice.
This publication included the INS standards of practice and the INS
standards of professional performance and addressed the who,
what, when, where, how, why, and functional roles of INS practice.
Three overarching standards of practice were identified (ANA, 2008):
1. Incorporate theories, principles, and concepts from appropriate
sciences into informatics practice.
2. Integrate ergonomics and human–computer interaction (HCI)
principles into informatics solution design, development,
selection, implementation, and evaluation.
3. Systematically determine the social, legal, and ethical impact of
an informatics solution within nursing and health care. (p. 33)
In 2022, the third edition of the ANA’s Nursing Informatics: Scope
and Standards of Practice was released. The standards of practiceand professional performance for an INS are listed in Box 7-1.
BOX 7-1 INFORMATICS NURSE SPECIALIST
STANDARDS OF PRACTICE AND PERFORMANCE
STANDARDS OF PROFESSIONAL PRACTICE FOR
NURSING INFORMATICS
Standard 1: Assessment
Standard 2: Diagnosis, Problems, and Issues Identification
Standard 3: Outcomes Identification
Standard 4: Planning
Standard 5: Implementation
Standard 5A: Coordination of Activities
Standard 5B: Health Teaching and Health Promotion
Standard 6: Evaluation
STANDARDS OF PROFESSIONAL PERFORMANCE FOR
NURSING INFORMATICS
Standard 7: Ethics
Standard 8: Culturally Congruent Practice
Standard 9: Communication
Standard 10: Collaboration
Standard 11: Leadership
Standard 12: Education
Standard 13: Evidence Based Practice and Research
Standard 14: Quality of Practice
Standard 15: Professional Practice Evaluation
Standard 16: Resource Utilization
Standard 17: Environmental Health
Data from: American Nurses Association. (2022). Nursing informatics: Scope and
standards of practice (2nd ed.). Nursesbooks.org.
The ANA (2018) also described the major functional areas of
nursing informatics as follows:
Administration, leadership, and managementAnalysis
Compliance and integrity management
Consultation
Coordination, facilitation, and integration
Development
Education and professional development
Policy development and advocacy
Research and evaluation (para. 6)
As INSs assume their roles, it is evident that typical roles cover
more than one functional area and that their “informatics solutions
are more closely integrated with the delivery of care” (ANA, 2015, p.
36). The ANA also denoted telehealth as an integrated functional
area that is a dynamic health information technology. As nursing,
information, computer, and cognitive sciences continue to evolve, so
will NI functions. For example, Kim (2020) pointed out the growing
need for INSs to be fully aware of cybersecurity threats and prepared
to act in cases of intentional tampering with patient information
systems. According to the ANA (2018), “informatics nurses of all
levels practice at the intersection of technology and clinical practice”
(para. 7). With the rapid advancements we have already seen in the
previous decade, we know that the INSs of the future will be
assuming roles and working in areas that we have not yet imagined.Nursing Informatics Roles
NI has become a viable and essential nursing specialty with the
introduction of computers, technology, and the electronic health
record (EHR) to health care. Many nurses entered the NI field
because of their natural curiosity and dedication to being lifelong
learners. Others who entered this field might have done so by
accident. Perhaps they were comfortable working with computers,
and their coworkers used them as a resource for computer-related
questions. The introduction of the EHR has forced all clinicians to
learn to use this new technology and incorporate it into their already
busy days. According to Baumann et al. (2018), who conducted a
systematic review and meta-analysis, nursing documentation time
increased from 9% before EHR to 23% after EHR implementation.
Assisting nurses to incorporate this new technology into their daily
workflow is one of many challenges that the INS may tackle. Even
though INSs appear to work behind the scenes, they affect the
health and clinical outcomes of patients.
The INS may take on numerous roles (Figure 7-1). For example,
one position that INSs fill quite well is the role of project manager as
a result of their ability to simultaneously manage multiple complex
situations. Because of the breadth of the NI field, however, many
INSs find that they need to further specialize. The following list
includes some typical INS positions, though it is far from
comprehensive because this field changes rapidly, as does
technology (ANA, 2015, 2022; Thede, 2003).Figure 7-1 Nursing Informatics Roles
Description
Project manager: In the project manager role, the INS is
responsible for the planning and implementation of informatics
projects. The INS uses the skills of communication, change
management, process analysis, risk assessment, scope
definition, and team building. This role acts as the liaison among
clinicians, management, IS personnel, stakeholders, vendors,
and all other interested parties.
Consultant: The INS who takes on the consultant role provides
expert advice, opinions, and recommendations based on their
area of expertise. Flexibility, good communication skills,
excellent interpersonal skills, and extensive clinical and
informatics knowledge are highly desirable skill sets that the NI
consultant needs.
Educator: The success or failure of an informatics solution can
be directly related to the education and training that are provided
for end users. The INS who chooses the educator role develops
and implements educational materials and sessions and
provides education about the system to new or current
employees during a system implementation or an upgrade.Researcher: The researcher role entails conducting research
(especially data mining) to create new informatics and clinical
knowledge. Research may range from basic informatics
research to developing clinical decision support tools for nurses.
Product developer: An INS in the product developer role
participates in the design, production, and marketing of new
informatics solutions. An understanding of business and nursing
is essential in this role.
Decision support/outcomes manager: Nurses assuming the
role of decision support/outcomes manager use tools to maintain
data integrity and reliability. Contributing to the development of a
nursing knowledge base is an integral component of this role.
Advocate/policy developer: INSs are key to advocating for the
patients and healthcare systems and developing the
infrastructure of health policy. Policy development on local,
national, and international levels is an integral part of the
advocate/policy developer role.
Clinical analyst/systems specialist: INSs may work at varying
levels and serve as a link between nursing and information
services in healthcare organizations.
Entrepreneur: The nurses involved in the entrepreneur role
combine their passion, skills, and knowledge to develop
marketable business ideas by analyzing nursing information
needs and developing and marketing solutions.
The Nursing Informatics Working Group of the American Medical
Informatics Association (AMIA; n.d.) identified the following core
responsibilities for nurse informaticists to embrace:
Concept representation and standards to support evidence￾based practice, research, and education
Data and communication standards to build an interoperable
national data infrastructureResearch methodologies to disseminate new knowledge into
practice
Information presentation and retrieval approaches to support
safe patient centered care
Information and communication technologies to address inter￾professional workflow needs across all care venues
Vision and management for the development, design, and
implementation of communication and information technology
Definition of healthcare policy to advance the public’s health
(para. 3)
These expanded responsibilities make clear that nurse
informaticists will be instrumental in knowledge building and
dissemination, promoting interoperability, supporting safe patient￾centered care, ensuring interprofessional workflow and
communications, and participating in key health policy decisions.Specialty Education and Certification
Many of the original nurses who entered into NI did so without any
formal education in this field. In many cases, these nurses served as
the unit resource for computer or programming questions. Often,
they acquired their skills through on-the-job training or by attending
classes. Although this pathway to the NI field is still available today,
more formal ways of acquiring these skills exist. The informatics
nurse has a Bachelor of Science degree in nursing and additional
knowledge and expertise in the informatics field (ANA, 2022). The
INS holds an advanced degree or a post-master’s certificate and is
prepared to assume roles requiring this advanced knowledge. INSs
may attend informatics conferences and obtain contact hours or
continuing education units.
Box 7-2 lists some of the pioneering colleges and universities that
offer advanced degrees or certificates in NI. This is not a
comprehensive list because new programs are continually being
developed. You should research local colleges and universities to
see which ones have informatics programs.
BOX 7-2 FORMAL NURSING INFORMATICS
EDUCATIONAL PROGRAMS
GRADUATE DEGREE PROGRAMS
Chamberlain University: www.chamberlain.edu/admissions/graduate/Master-of￾Science-in-Nursing/informatics-track
Duke University: https://nursing.duke.edu/academic-programs/msn-master-science￾nursing/health-informatics
Excelsior University: www.excelsior.edu/program/master-of-science-in-nursing￾informatics
Loyola University Chicago:
www.luc.edu/parkinson/academics/departments/healthinformaticsdatascience/mshe
althinformaticsNew York University: https://nursing.nyu.edu/academic-programs/masters￾ms/informatics
University of Alabama at Birmingham:
www.uab.edu/nursing/home/academics/masters/msn-nursing-health-system￾leadership
University of Colorado at Denver:
www.denvercollegeofnursing.edu/programs/master-of-science-in-nursing.html
University of Iowa: https://informatics.uiowa.edu/study-opportunities/graduate￾program
University of Kansas: www.kumc.edu/health-informatics/master-in-health￾informatics.html
University of Maryland: www.nursing.umaryland.edu/academics/grad/nursing￾informatics
University of Pittsburgh: www.nursing.pitt.edu/degree-programs/master-science￾nursing-msn/nursing-informatics-online
University of Utah: https://nursing.utah.edu/programs/graduate/ms/nursing￾informatics.php
University of Washington: https://nursing.uw.edu/programs/degree/ms-cipct
Vanderbilt University: https://nursing.vanderbilt.edu/msn/ni/index.php
CERTIFICATE PROGRAMS
Chamberlain University: www.chamberlain.edu/academics/nursing-school/graduate￾certificate-programs
Loyola University Chicago:
www.luc.edu/media/lucedu/gpem/pdfs/programsheetscurrent/HSPH￾HealthInformatics.pdf
Northeastern University: www.khoury.northeastern.edu/program/health-informatics￾grad-certificate
Penn State University: www.worldcampus.psu.edu/degrees-and-certificates/nursing￾informatics-certificate/overview
University of Iowa: https://informatics.uiowa.edu/study-opportunities/graduate￾program/health-informatics/certificate-requirements
It is important to distinguish between earning a certificate in
nursing informatics and earning certification. As provided in Box 7-2,
there are several certificate (educational) programs in nursing and/or
health informatics. A certificate program “is an educational or
training program that is used to teach learning objectives and assess
whether those objectives were achieved by the student” (Institute for
Credentialing Excellence, n.d., para. 2). In contrast, certification is a
program “designed to test the knowledge, skills, and abilitiesrequired to perform a particular job, and, upon successfully passing
a certification exam, to represent a declaration of a particular
individual’s professional competence” (para. 2).
Nurses who choose to specialize in informatics have several
certification options available to them. The only certification specific
to nursing informatics is offered through the American Nurses
Credentialing Center, and the successful candidate is identified by
the RN-BC credential. The applicant must be a licensed registered
nurse with at least 2 years of recent experience and have a
baccalaureate degree in nursing or a related field. The applicant
must have completed 30 contact hours of continuing education in
informatics within the past 3 years. The applicant must meet one of
the following criteria for practice hours: (1) 2,000 hours practicing as
an informatics nurse in the past 3 years, (2) 1,000 hours practicing
as an informatics nurse and 12 semester hours of graduate
academic credit toward an NI degree, or (3) completion of an NI
degree that included at least 200 supervised practicum hours. For
further information on this certification examination, visit
www.nursingworld.org/our-certifications/informatics-nurse. This
website includes the aforementioned criteria and provides further
information about test eligibility, fees, examination content and
locations, study materials, and practice tests.
The Healthcare Information and Management Systems Society
(HIMSS) sponsors two certification examinations—Certified
Associate in Healthcare Information and Management Systems
(CAHIMS) and Certified Professional in Healthcare Information and
Management Systems (CPHIMS). Candidates who successfully
pass the CPHIMS examination are designated as certified
professionals in healthcare information and management systems.
The HIMSS examinations are open to any candidate who is involved
in healthcare informatics. For CPHIMS certification, candidates must
hold a position in one of the following fields:
administration/management, clinical IS, eHealth, IS, or management
engineering. Candidates may include any of the following roles: chief
executive officers, chief information officers, chief operating officers,
senior executives, senior managers, IS technical staff, physicians,nurses, consultants, attorneys, financial advisers, technology
vendors, academicians, management engineers, and students. For
more information on the HIMSS certification processes, please visit
www.himss.org/resources/certification.
Mack (n.d.) provided an overview of additional certifications that
are available or in development in healthcare informatics: Registered
Health Information Administrator (RHIA) certification, offered by the
American Health Information Management Association (AHIMA)
(www.ahima.org/certification-careers/certifications/rhia), and AMIA
Health Informatics Certification (AHIC), through AMIA
(https://amia.org/ahic).Nursing Informatics Competencies
An ongoing challenge that has been identified in the literature and
that will likely continue to plague health care is the vast differences in
computer literacy and information management skills that healthcare
workers possess (Gassert, 2008; McNeil et al., 2006; Topkaya &
Kaya, 2015).
As early as 2001, Staggers et al. advocated that nursing students
and practicing nurses should be educated on core NI competencies.
Although information technology (IT) and informatics concepts
certainly need to be incorporated into nursing school curricula,
progress in this area has been slow. In the 1980s, a nursing group of
the International Medical Informatics Association convened to
develop the first level of nursing competencies. While developing
these competencies, the nursing group found that nurses fell into
one of the following three categories: (1) user, (2) developer, or (3)
expert. These categories have since been expanded.
Staggers and colleagues (2001) decided that the NI competencies
that were developed in the 1980s were inadequate and needed to be
updated. These authors reviewed 35 NI competency articles and 14
job descriptions, which resulted in 1,159 items that were sorted into
three broad categories: (1) computer skills, (2) informatics
knowledge, and (3) informatics skills. These items were then placed
in a database, where redundant items were removed. When this
process was completed, 313 items remained.
When these items were then further subdivided, Staggers and
colleagues (2001), along with the AMIA work group, realized that
these competencies were not universal to all nurses; thus, before
they could determine whether the competency was an NI
competency, the nursing skill levels needed to be defined. The group
determined that practicing nurses could be classified into four
categories: (1) beginning nurse, (2) experienced nurse, (3) INS, and
(4) informatics innovator. Each of these skill levels needed to beTABLE 7-1
defined before Staggers and colleagues could determine which level
was the most appropriate for that skill set.
Staggers et al. (2002) conducted the seminal work in this area, a
Delphi study to validate the placement of the competencies into the
correct skill level. Of the 305 original competencies identified, 281
achieved an 80% approval rating for both importance as a
competency and placement in the correct practice level. The authors
stressed that this is a comprehensive list; thus, for a nurse to enter a
particular skill level, they need not have mastered every item listed
for that skill level. For a list of competencies identified by nursing skill
level, see Table 7-1.
Nursing Informatics Competencies by Skill Level
Based on research conducted by Hunter et al. (2013), the online TIGER-based self￾assessment instrument, Assessment of Nursing Informatics Competencies (TANIC), was
developed. This instrument assesses the Level 1: Beginning Nurse and Level 2:
Experienced Nurse competencies.
Level 1: Beginning Nurse
Start the computer and log on securely to access select applications/software
Access and send email
Collect and enter patient data into the information system
Level 2: Experienced Nurse
Identify the risks and limitations of surfing the internet to locate evidence-based
practice information
Gather data to draw and synthesize conclusions
Explain how to sustain the integrity of information resources
Based on the research conducted by McGonigle et al. (2015), the online self￾assessment instrument, Nursing Informatics Competency Assessment—Level 3/Level 4(NICA L3/L4), was developed. This instrument assesses the Level 3: Informatics Nurse
Specialist and Level 4: Informatics Innovator competencies.
Level 3: Informatics Nurse Specialist
Fluent in nursing informatics and nursing terminologies
Apply aspects of human technology interface to screen, device, and software design
Teach nurses how to locate, access, retrieve, and evaluate information
Level 4: Informatics Innovator
Analyze systems
Transform software programs to support data analysis and aggregation
Lead research efforts to determine and address application needs
Hunter, K. M., McGonigle, D., & Hebda, T. (2012, June 23–27). Operationalizing TIGER NI
competencies for online assessment of perceived competency. 11th International Congress
on Nursing Informatics, Montreal, Canada, 181.
In 2004, a group of nurses came together after attending a
national informatics conference to ensure that nursing was equally
recognized in the national informatics movement. This so-called
Technology Informatics Guiding Education Reform (TIGER) team
determined that using informatics was a core competency for all
healthcare workers. They also determined that many nurses lacked
IT skills, which limited their ability to access evidence-based
information that could otherwise be incorporated into their daily
practice. This group developed a plan to include informatics courses
in all levels of nursing education (HIMSS, n.d.-b). Many of the items
identified by the TIGER team as lacking in both nursing students and
practicing nurses are ones that Staggers et al. (2002) determined to
be NI competencies. To learn more about the TIGER initiative, visit
www.himss.org/professionaldevelopment/tiger-initiative.
Through the work of Hunter et al. (2012, 2013, 2015) and
McGonigle et al. (2013, 2015), the competencies for nursinginformatics practice levels 1 through 4 have been further refined with
two self-assessment tools that have been developed. Hunter and
colleagues focused on the level 1 and level 2 competencies and
developed the self-assessment of competencies TANIC tool, TIGER￾Based Assessment of Nursing Informatics Competencies. McGonigle
and colleagues focused on the competencies related to the
advanced levels 3 and 4 and developed the self-assessment of
competencies NICA L3/L4 tool, Nursing Informatics Competency
Assessment Level 3/Level 4. “Together, these two instruments allow
for comprehensive assessment of informatics competencies and
hold international recognition” (ANA, 2022, p. 63).
It is critical for nurses and INSs to demonstrate competence.
Because there were many definitions of the term competency, the
authors of these tools had to first define the term. Hunter et al.
(2013) concluded the following:
Competency, then, is a concept applicable to multiple situations. At its most basic,
competency denotes having the knowledge, skills, and ability to perform or do a
specific task, act, or job. Depending on the context, competency can refer to
adequate or expert performance. For this research, competency was used to mean
adequate knowledge, skills, and ability. Nursing-informatics competency was
defined as adequate knowledge, skills, and ability to perform specific informatics
tasks. (p. 71)
The teams began instrument development by synthesizing both
seminal and current literature to construct instrument items; they
reviewed, formatted, and initiated instrument testing with a Delphi
study and then piloted the resulting instrument with experts.
Cronbach’s alpha values were calculated. The TANIC Cronbach was
0.944 for clinical information management, 0.948 for computer skills,
and 0.980 for information literacy. The NICA L3/L4 reliability
estimates were as follows: computer skills, 0.909; informatics
knowledge, 0.982; and informatics skills, 0.992. The Cronbach’s
reliability estimates for each tool showed strong internal consistency
reliability.
The TANIC self-assessment instrument included questions about
demographics and the self-assessment, consisting of 85 items that
cover basic computer literacy, clinical information management, andinformation literacy. The NICA L3/L4 self-assessment instrument
included questions about demographics and the 178-item self￾assessment, consisting of computer skills, informatics knowledge,
and informatics skills.
These tools and those that will follow are extremely important
because they help each of us identify our own level of comfort with
technology and our self-confidence in our ability to perform these
skills and tasks. Nurse educators in all practice settings and school￾based programs must help their nurses or nursing students
recognize deficits in their current knowledge and skills. The nurse
educators can facilitate the professional development of their nurses
or nursing students through the identification of courses or skill￾based labs that will help them turn their deficits into strengths.Value and Rewards of Nursing Informatics
Practice
NI is a nursing specialty that does not focus on direct patient care
but instead focuses on enhancing patient care and safety and
improving the workflow and work processes of nurses and other
healthcare workers. The INS is instrumental in designing the EHRs
that healthcare workers use on a daily basis. This nurse is also
responsible for designing tools that allow healthcare workers to
access patient information more efficiently than they have been able
to do in the past. The ANA (2022) pointed out that informatics nurses
(INs) and INSs possess a “unique contextual understanding of the
healthcare ecosystem” (p. 6). The INS brings value to an
organization because of specialized practice expertise and a unique
understanding of organizations, health policy, and research.
Change is a factor that an INS deals with daily. The dynamic
nature of this position is probably its most difficult aspect because
people deal with change differently. Understanding change theory
and processes and appreciating how change affects people assist
the INS in developing strategies to encourage healthcare workers to
accept changes and become proficient in informatics solutions that
have been implemented. Seeing the change adopted with a minimal
amount of discord is very rewarding to the INS.
INSs also participate in informatics organizations that allow them
to network and share experiences with one another. Such
interactions allow them to bring new solutions back to their
respective organizations and improve informatics trouble spots.
Attending professional conferences allows INSs to stay abreast of
changes in the industry. Continuing education may help INSs to
improve a process or workflow within the hospital or to change the
way a system upgrade is implemented.Nursing Informatics Organizations and
Journals
One of the first informatics organizations founded was HIMSS.
Launched in 1961, HIMSS celebrated its 62nd year in 2023 and now
has offices throughout the United States and Europe. HIMSS
currently represents more than 120,000 individuals and 650
corporations; supports both local and national chapters; and has
many associated work groups, one of which is an NI work group.
HIMSS is well known for its development of industry-wide policies
and its educational and professional development initiatives, all of
which are directed toward the goal of ensuring safe patient care.
Membership in HIMSS offers many advantages for nurses, such as
access to numerous weekly and monthly publications and a
scholarly journal, the Online Journal of Nursing Informatics. HIMSS
offers several educational programs, including virtual expos, which
allow participants to experience the expo without having to travel.
These educational opportunities allow participants to network with
colleagues and peers, which is a valuable asset in this field. HIMSS
also periodically conducts NI workforce surveys. It is interesting to
review the most current survey results and compare them to your
setting and role.
The AMIA was founded in 1990 when three health informatics
associations merged. It currently has more than 3,000 members who
reside in 42 countries. Its focus is on the development and
application of biomedical and healthcare informatics. Members
include physicians, nurses, dentists, pharmacists, health IT
professionals, and biomedical engineers. AMIA offers many benefits
to its members, such as weekly and monthly publications and a
scholarly journal, JAMIA: Journal of the American Medical
Informatics Association. Members may join a working group that is
specific to their specialty, including an NI working group. AMIA offers
multiple opportunities for educational and networking pursuits.The American Nursing Informatics Association (ANIA) was
established in 1992 to provide an opportunity for Southern California
informatics nurses to meet. It has since grown into a national
organization whose members include healthcare professionals who
work with clinical ISs, educational applications, data
collection/research applications, and administrative/decision support
systems (DSSs) as well as those who have an interest in the field of
NI. In 2009, ANIA merged with the Capital Area Roundtable on
Informatics in Nursing. Membership benefits include the following:
Access to a network of more than 3,200 informatics
professionals in 50 states and 30 countries
Active email list
Quarterly newsletter indexed in CINAHL and Thomson
Job bank with employee-paid postings
Reduced rate at the ANIA Annual Conference
Reduced rate for CIN: Computers, Informatics, Nursing
ANIA Online Library of on-demand and webinar education
activities
Membership in the Alliance for Nursing Informatics
Web-based meetings
In-person meetings and conferences held nationally and
worldwide
The Alliance for Nursing Informatics (ANI) is a coalition of NI
groups that represents more than 3,000 nurses and 20 distinct NI
groups in the United States. Its membership represents local,
national, and international NI members and groups. These individual
groups have developed organizational structures and established
programs and publications. ANI functions as the link between NI
organizations and the general nursing and healthcare communities
and serves as the united voice of NI.
Box 7-3 lists some of the organizations that have been
instrumental in establishing the informatics community along withtheir publications, but many other informatics groups exist.
BOX 7-3 NURSING INFORMATICS WEBSITES AND
CORRESPONDING JOURNALS
Alliance for Nursing Informatics
Website: www.allianceni.org
American Health Information Management Association
Website: www.ahima.org
Journal: Journal of AHIMA and Perspectives in Health Information Management
(online)
American Medical Informatics Association
Website: www.amia.org
Journal: JAMIA: Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association
NI website: www.amia.org/programs/working-groups/nursing-informatics
American Nursing Informatics Association
Website: www.ania.org (includes Capital Area Roundtable on Informatics in
Nursing)
Journal: Journal of Informatics Nursing
Health Information and Management Systems Society
Website: www.himss.org
Journal: Online Journal of Nursing Informatics: www.himss.org/resources-online￾journal-nursing-informatics (Dee McGonigle and Renee Eggers cofounded this
journal in 1996, making it the first online scholarly nursing journal.)
International Medical Informatics Association
Website: https://imia-medinfo.org/wp
NI website: https://imia-medinfo.org/wp/sig-ni-nursing-informatics
Journals
International Journal of Medical Informatics:
www.journals.elsevier.com/international-journal-of-medical-informatics
Applied Clinical Informatics: https://shop.thieme.com/ACI-Applied-Clinical￾Informatics/1869-0327
Informatics for Health and Social Care: www.tandfonline.com/toc/imif20/current
Methods of Information in Medicine: https://shop.thieme.com/Methods-of￾Information-in-Medicine/0026-1270The Future of Nursing Informatics
NI is still in its infancy, as is the technology that the INS uses on a
daily basis. NI will continue to influence the development of
interoperable EHRs to accurately capture and share patient data and
capture the care that nurses give to patients. These are formidable
challenges because much of the care provided by nurses is
intangible in nature and we are still struggling with EHRs that can
seamlessly share health information. In the future, the EHR will
provide data to the INS that can be analyzed and then used to
improve nursing workflow and determine whether current practices
are the most efficient and beneficial to the patient. The HIMSS 2017
Nursing Informatics Workforce Survey reported that the most
frequent job responsibilities of the INS are systems implementation,
systems optimization/utilization, systems development, clinical
analytics, quality initiatives and reporting, informatics education,
liaison/communicator, and regulatory initiatives. The HIMSS 2020
Nursing Informatics Workforce Survey reported that the job
responsibilities had remained consistent with those identified in the
2017 survey; however, project management and change
control/management surfaced as new responsibilities. Nursing and
health care are on a roller-coaster ride that will undoubtedly prove
very interesting. New technology is being introduced at a breakneck
speed, and nursing and health care must be ready to ride this roller
coaster. Programs need to be developed to keep nurses and
healthcare workers abreast of the technological changes as they
occur, and educating new and current nurses presents a significant
challenge to the INS. Therefore, the INS’s future looks very
promising and rewarding, and demand for INSs is only expected to
grow.
As the future becomes yesterday, people are waking up to the fact
that we need the entire healthcare team prepared with informatics
competencies. All healthcare providers should receive education oninformatics because they need basic informatics skills, such as the
ability to use search engines to find information about a specific
topic. Consequently, all healthcare providers must attend classes to
improve their computer skills and knowledge, and those entering the
nursing field need a general knowledge of computer capabilities.
Many new trends—such as Web 2.0, increased attention to
evidence-based practice, and a better understanding of genomics—
will affect care delivery in the 21st century, and NI nurses must be
prepared to lead these efforts to improve care and help nurses have
a voice in the informatics skills they need and the advances and
tools they use, including the EHR (Bakken et al., 2008; Lavin et al.,
2015).
INSs are also in a unique position to lead interprofessional team
collaboration efforts. An interprofessional team is a collection of
professionals (e.g., physicians, nurses, pharmacists, physical
therapists, and nutritionists) who work together to deliver patient care
and improve outcomes. Although the EHR is the primary
documentation tool for professionals, sometimes it is difficult to
surface important care information and viewpoints of other
professionals because finding the documentation of other
professionals may not be intuitive. INSs educated in a collaborative
practice philosophy understand how to reach across professional
boundaries and surface and support the unique contributions of
professionals to patient care. As Christopherson et al. (2015) pointed
out, “Integrated competency is essential for eliminating information
silos, duplication and redundancy. Effective utilization of and
implementation of technology is dependent on clinical tools that are
intentionally designed to support and enhance the scopes of practice
of the interprofessional team members” (p. 12). The INS is uniquely
positioned to ensure that the IT tools are used effectively. Similarly,
Holden et al. (2018) advocated for the involvement of informatics
professionals in interprofessional team collaboration efforts. They
identified seven best practices for informaticians to support
interprofessional collaboration:
1. Adopt the characteristics of effective teams.2. Practice leadership and followership.
3. Clearly communicate with the aid of tools.
4. Design team meetings for effectiveness and efficiency.
5. Articulate your skills with respect to health informatics.
6. Develop skills and knowledge in interprofessional teamwork and
domains.
7. Ensure health informatics education supports interprofessional
collaboration. (p. 143)
Change plays a significant part in health care today, and those
interested in NI must embrace change. They must also be good at
enticing others to embrace change if they want to truly transform
healthcare practices and ensure excellent outcomes. Nevertheless,
NI candidates must realize that change is often accompanied by
resistance. For their part, INSs must be ready to leave the bedside
because nurses entering into this field will no longer be giving hands￾on care. NI is a very challenging but rewarding field. In an ideal
world, all healthcare agencies would employ at least one INS, and all
nurses would embrace the knowledge worker title.
We would be remiss if we did not acknowledge NI and health
technology initiatives worldwide. We tend to be ethnocentric in our
belief that the United States is the only leader in informatics when in
fact there are strong informatics initiatives in many other countries.
Cummins et al. (2016) identified nursing informatics societies in eight
other countries: Australia, Canada, England, Ireland, Korea, New
Zealand, Singapore, and Taiwan. In 2020, the 15th International
Congress on Nursing Informatics was held in Brisbane, Australia.
Previous international conferences were held in Mexico (2018),
Switzerland (2016), Taiwan (2013), Canada (2012), Finland (2009),
and Korea (2006). The HIMSS (n.d.-a) indicates that there are 58
chapters in the United States, Canada, and India.
In 2014, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC;
n.d.) launched a Global Health Security Agenda (GHSA) with the
goal of quickly identifying and containing public health threats. We
will learn more about CDC initiatives in Chapter 17, UsingInformatics to Promote Community and Population Health. It is clear
that the reach of informatics and health technology is worldwide and
ever expanding.Summary
According to the ANA (2022), “NI is the specialty that transforms data
into needed information and leverages technologies to improve
health and health care equity, safety, quality, and outcomes” (p. 6).
Here is our expanded definition of NI: the synthesis of nursing
science, information science, computer science, and cognitive
science for the purpose of managing, disseminating, and enhancing
healthcare data, information, knowledge, and wisdom to improve
collaboration and decision-making; provide high-quality patient care;
and advance the profession of nursing. Informatics practices support
nurses as they seek to care for their patients effectively and safely
by making the information that they need more readily available.
Nurses have been actively involved in this field since computers
were introduced to health care. With the advent of the EHR, it
became apparent that nursing needed to develop its own
terminology related to the new technology and its applications; NI
has been instrumental in this process.
Today, the healthcare industry employs the largest number of
knowledge workers in the world. Nurses, as knowledge workers in
technology-laden healthcare facilities, must continually improve their
informatics competencies. The INS is instrumental in leading the
advancement of informatics concepts and tools in all settings and
across all specialties. NI is a specialty governed by standards that
have been established by the ANA. Because NI is a very diverse
field, many INSs eventually specialize in one segment of the field.
Although NI is an established specialty, all nurses utilize the core NI
principles. Nursing informatics competencies have been
developed to encompass all levels of practice and ensure that entry￾level nurses are ready to enter the more technologically advanced
field of nursing as well as establishing advanced competencies for
the INS’s specialty practice. These competencies may be used to
determine the educational needs of current staff members.The growth of the NI field has resulted in the formation of
numerous NI organizations or nursing subgroups of the medical
informatics organizations. Nurses no longer have to enter the field
by chance but instead can obtain an advanced degree in NI at many
well-established universities. In addition, INSs may continue their
learning by attending the numerous conferences offered.
NI has grown tremendously as a specialty since its inception and
is expected to continue to grow. The NI specialty not only engages
nurses and patients but also engages data to improve patient
outcomes, enhance patient care, and advance the science of
nursing. It will be interesting to see where NI and INSs take health
care in the future.
THOUGHT-PROVOKING QUESTIONS
1. A hospital is seeking to update its EHRs. It has been suggested that an INS be
hired. This position does not involve direct patient care, and the administration is
struggling with how to justify the position. How can this position be justified?
2. It is important that all nurses be informatics competent at all levels. In particular, at
which levels should the INS be able to exhibit competency? Provide several
examples of the knowledge and skills that an INS might demonstrate.
3. How does nursing move from measuring the tasks completed to measuring the final
outcome of the patient? How can the INS help us reach this goal?R E F E R E N C E S
American Medical Informatics Association. (n.d.). Nursing informatics.
www.amia.org/programs/working-groups/nursing-informatics
American Nurses Association. (2008). Nursing informatics: Scope and standard of practice.
Nursesbooks.org.
American Nurses Association. (2015). Nursing informatics: Scope and standard of practice
(2nd ed.). Nursesbooks.org.
American Nurses Association. (2018). Nursing informatics: The intersection of technology
and clinical practice. www.wolterskluwer.com/en/expert-insights/nursing-informatics-the￾intersection-of-technology-and-clinical-practice
American Nurses Association. (2022). Nursing informatics: Scope and standard of practice
(3rd ed.). Nursesbooks.org.
Bakken, S., Stone, P., & Larson, E. (2008). A nursing informatics research agenda for 2008–
18: Contextual influences and key components. Nursing Outlook, 56(5), 206–214.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.outlook.2008.06.007
Baumann, L. A., Baker, J., & Elshaug, A. G. (2018). The impact of electronic health record
systems on clinical documentation times: A systematic review. Health Policy, 122(8),
827–836. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.healthpol.2018.05.014
Brennan, P. F. (1994). On the relevance of discipline to informatics. Journal of the American
Medical Informatics Association, 1(2), 200–201.
https://doi.org/10.1136/jamia.1994.95236150
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (n.d.). Global health protection and security.
www.cdc.gov/globalhealth/healthprotection/about.html
Christopherson, T. A., Troseth, M. R., & Clingerman, E. M. (2015). Informatics-enabled
interprofessional education and collaborative practice: A framework-driven approach.
Journal of Interprofessional Education & Practice, 1(1), 10–15.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xjep.2015.03.002
Cummins, M. R., Gundlapalli, A. V., Murray, P., Park, H.-A., & Lehmann, C. U. (2016).
Nursing informatics certification worldwide: History, pathway, roles, and motivation.
Yearbook of Medical Informatics, 25(1), 264–271. https://dx.doi.org/10.15265/IY-2016-
039
Gassert, C. (2008). Technology and informatics competencies. Nursing Clinics of North
America, 43(4), 507–521. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cnur.2008.06.005
Health Information and Management Systems Society. (n.d.-a). Member participation.
www.himss.org/membership-participation-chapters
Health Information and Management Systems Society. (n.d.-b). Technology Informatics
Guiding Education Reform (TIGER): An initiative for technology and health informatics
education. www.himss.org/professionaldevelopment/tiger-initiative
Health Information and Management Systems Society. (2017). HIMSS 2017 nursing
informatics workforce survey. www.himss.org/sites/hde/files/d7/2017-nursing￾informatics-workforce-full-report.pdfHealth Information and Management Systems Society. (2020). 2020 nursing informatics
workforce survey.
www.himss.org/sites/hde/files/media/file/2020/05/15/himss_nursinginformaticssurvey202
0_v4.pdf
Holden, R. J., Binkheder, S., Patel, J., & Viernes, S. (2018). Best practices for health
informatician involvement in interprofessional health care teams. Applied Clinical
Informatics, 9(1), 141–148. https://doi.org/10.1055/s-0038-1626724
Hunter, K. M., McGonigle, D., & Hebda, T. (2012, June 23–27). Operationalizing TIGER NI
competencies for online assessment of perceived competency. 11th International
Congress on Nursing Informatics, Montreal, Canada.
Hunter, K., McGonigle, D., & Hebda, T. (2013). TIGER-based measurement of nursing
informatics competencies: The development and implementation of an online tool for
self-assessment. Journal of Nursing Education and Practice, 3(12), 70–80.
https://dx.doi.org/10.5430/jnep.v3n12p70
Hunter, K., McGonigle, D., Hebda, T., Sipes, C., Hill, T., & Lamblin, J. (2015). TIGER-based
assessment of nursing informatics competencies (TANIC). In A. Rocha, S. Correia, S.
Costanza, & L. Reis (Eds.), New contributions in information systems and technologies
(Vol. 1, pp. 171–177). Springer.
Institute for Credentialing Excellence. (n.d.). About us.
www.credentialingexcellence.org/About
Kim, L. (2020). Cybercrime, ransomware, and the role of the informatics nurse. Nursing,
50(3), 63–65. http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/01.NURSE.0000654064.67531.c5
Lavin, M., Harper, E., & Barr, N. (2015). Health information technology, patient safety, and
professional nursing care documentation in acute care settings. Online Journal of Issues
in Nursing, 20(2), 6. doi:10.3912/OJIN.Vol20No02PPT04
Mack, J. (n.d.). Do you need to be certified in health informatics? University of San Diego.
https://onlinedegrees.sandiego.edu/do-you-need-health-informatics-certification
McGonigle, D., Hunter, K., Hebda, T., & Hill, T. (2013). Assessment of level 3 and level 4
nursing informatics (NI) competencies tool development.
https://sigma.nursingrepository.org/bitstream/handle/10755/623941/ToolAssessment.pdf
?sequence=1&isAllowed=y
McGonigle, D., Hunter, K., Hebda, T., Sipes, C., Hill, T., & Lamblin, J. (2015). Nursing
informatics competencies assessment level 3 and level 4 (NICA L3/L4). In A. Rocha, S.
Correia, S. Costanza, & L. Reis (Eds.), New contributions in information systems and
technologies (Vol. 1, pp. 209–214). Springer.
McNeil, B. J., Elfrink, V., Beyea, S. C., Pierce, S., & Bickford, C. J. (2006). Computer literacy
study: Report of qualitative findings. Journal of Professional Nursing, 22(1), 52–59.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.profnurs.2005.12.006
Saba, V. K., & McCormick, K. A. (Eds.). (2006). Essentials of nursing informatics (4th ed.).
McGraw-Hill.
Staggers, N., Gassert, C., & Curran, C. (2001). Informatics competencies for nurses at four
levels of practice. Journal of Nursing Education, 40(7), 303–316.
https://doi.org/10.3928/0148-4834-20011001-05
Staggers, N., Gassert, C., & Curran, C. (2002). A Delphi study to determine informatics
competencies for nurses at four levels of practice. Nursing Research, 51(6), 383–390.https://doi.org/10.1097/00006199-200211000-00006
Thede, L. Q. (2003). Informatics and nursing: Opportunities and challenges (2nd ed.).
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
Topkaya, S., & Kaya, N. (2015). Nurses’ computer literacy and attitudes towards the use of
computers in health care. Journal of Nursing Interventions, 21(S2), 141–149.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/ijn.12350C H A P T E R 8
Legislative Aspects of
Nursing Informatics: HIPAA,
HITECH, and Beyond
OBJECTIVES
1. Explore the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) of 1996.
2. Describe the purposes of the Health Information Technology for Economic and
Clinical Health (HITECH) Act of 2009.
3. Appreciate how the HITECH Act enhanced the security and privacy protections of
HIPAA and how these protections continue to evolve as health information
technology develops.
4. Survey the provisions of the 21st Century Cures Act and its impact on health.
KEY TERMS
access
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ)
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act (ARRA)
certified EHR technology
civil monetary penalty (CMP)
compliance
confidentiality
consequence
covered entity
electronic health record (EHR)
enterprise integration
health disparity
health information technologyHealth Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health (HITECH) Act
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA)
healthcare-associated infection (HAI)
meaningful use
nursing informatics (NI)
Office for Civil Rights (OCR)
Office of the National Coordinator for Health Information Technology (ONC)
patient-centered care
policy
privacy
protected health information (PHI)
qualified electronic health record
right
security
standard
treatment/payment/operations (TPO)Introduction
Two key pieces of legislation were instrumental in shaping the
health information technology and nursing informatics (NI)
landscape: the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability
Act (HIPAA) of 1996 and the Health Information Technology for
Economic and Clinical Health (HITECH) Act of 2009. Other
legislation, policies, and regulations continue to further the vision
initiated by these seminal laws. This chapter presents an overview of
the HITECH Act, including the Medicare and Medicaid health
information technology (health IT) provisions of the law. Nurses need
to be familiar with the goals and purposes of this law and how it
enhances the security and privacy protections of HIPAA and
appreciate how it otherwise affects nursing practice in the ever￾evolving electronic health records age. Key concepts related to
legislating health IT are explored in this chapter as well as newer
legislation regulating medical devices and apps that support patient
centeredness and the movement toward payment based on quality.
Figure 8-1 provides a snapshot of the legislation affecting the
informatics landscape.
Figure 8-1 Health Informatics RegulationsHIPAA Came First
HIPAA was signed into law by President Bill Clinton in 1996.
Hellerstein (1999) summarized the intent of the act as follows: to
curtail healthcare fraud and abuse, enforce standards for health
information, guarantee the security and privacy of health information,
and ensure health insurance portability for employed persons.
Consequences were put into place for institutions and individuals
who violate the requirements of this act. For this text, we concentrate
on the health information security and privacy aspects of HIPAA,
which are outlined as follows:
The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA) Rules
contain privacy, security, and breach notification requirements that apply to
individually identifiable health information created, received, maintained, or
transmitted by health care providers who engage in certain electronic transactions,
health transactions, health plans, health care clearinghouses, and their business
associates. The Office for Civil Rights (OCR) is the Departmental component
responsible for implementing and enforcing the privacy regulation. (U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services [HHS], 2022, para. 6–7)
The need and means to guarantee the security and privacy of
health information were the focus of numerous debates.
Comprehensive standards for the implementation of this portion of
the act eventually were finalized, but the process to adopt final
standards took years. In August 1998, HHS released a set of
proposed rules addressing health information management.
Proposed rules specific to health information privacy and security
were released in November 1999. The purpose of the proposed
rules was to balance patients’ rights to privacy and providers’ needs
for access to information (Hellerstein, 2000).
Hellerstein (2000) summarized the proposed privacy rules as
follows:
Define protected health information (PHI) as “information
relating to one’s physical or mental health, the provision of one’s
health care, or the payment for that health care, that has beenmaintained or transmitted electronically and that can be
reasonably identified with the individual it applies to” (p. 2).
Figure 8-2 depicts the types of information protected under
HIPAA.
Figure 8-2 What Is Protected Health Information?
Propose that authorization by patients for release of information
is not necessary when the release of information is directly
related to treatment and payment for treatment. Specific patient
authorization is not required for research, medical or policeemergencies, legal proceedings, and collection of data for public
health concerns. All other releases of health information require
a form for each release that specifies which information pertinent
to the issue at hand is to be released. All releases of information
must be formally documented and accessible to the patient on
request.
Establish patient ownership of the healthcare record and allow
for patient-initiated corrections and amendments.
Mandate administrative requirements for the protection of
healthcare information. All healthcare organizations are required
to have a privacy official and an office to receive privacy violation
complaints. A specific training program for employees that
includes a certification of completion and a signed statement by
all employees that they will uphold privacy procedures must be
developed and implemented. Every 3 years, all employees must
re-sign the agreement to uphold privacy. Sanctions for violations
of policy must be clearly defined and applied.
Mandate that all outside entities that conduct business with
healthcare organizations (e.g., attorneys, consultants, and
auditors) must meet the same standards as those of the
organization for information protection and security.
Allow PHI to be released without authorization for research
studies. Patients may not access their information in blinded
research studies because their access may affect the reliability
of the study outcomes.
Propose that PHI may be de-identified before release in such a
manner that the identity of the patient is protected. The
healthcare organization may code the de-identification so that
the information can be re-identified once it has been returned.
Applies only to health information maintained or transmitted by
electronic means.
As concerns mounted and deadlines loomed, the healthcare arena
prepared to comply with the requirements of the law. Theadministrative simplification portion of this law was intended to
decrease the financial and administrative burdens by standardizing
the electronic transmission of certain administrative and financial
transactions. This section also addressed the security and privacy of
healthcare data and information for the covered entities of healthcare
providers that transmit any health information in electronic form in
connection with a covered transaction, health plans, and healthcare
clearinghouses (Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services [CMS],
n.d.-a).
The privacy requirements, which went into effect on April 14, 2003,
limited the release of PHI without the patient’s knowledge and
consent. Covered entities must comply with the requirements.
Notably, they must dedicate a privacy officer, adopt and implement
privacy procedures, educate their personnel, and secure their
electronic patient records. Most individuals are familiar with the need
to notify patients of their privacy rights because of their having had to
sign forms before interacting with their own healthcare providers.
The Privacy Rule provided certain rights to patients: the right to
request restrictions to access of the health record, the right to
request an alternative method of communication with a provider, the
right to receive a paper copy of the notice of privacy practices, the
right to file a complaint if the patient believes their privacy rights were
violated, the right to inspect and copy one’s health record, the right
to request an amendment to the health record, and the right to see
an account of disclosures of one’s health record. These rights placed
the burden of maintaining privacy and accuracy on the healthcare
system rather than on the patient.
On October 16, 2003, the standards for electronic transactions
and code sets became effective. At that time, the standards did not
require electronic transmission but rather mandated that if
transactions were conducted electronically, they must comply with
the required federal standards for electronically filed healthcare
claims. “The Secretary has made the Centers for Medicare &
Medicaid Services (CMS) responsible for enforcing the electronic
transactions and code sets provisions of the law” (Indian Health
Service, 2003, para. 3).The security requirements went into effect on April 21, 2005, and
required the covered entities to put safeguards into place that protect
the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of PHI when stored and
transmitted electronically.
The safeguards that were addressed were administrative,
physical, and technical. The administrative safeguards refer to the
documented formal policies and procedures that are used to manage
and execute the security measures. They govern the protection of
healthcare data and information and the conduct of the personnel.
The physical safeguards refer to the policies and procedures that
must be in place to limit physical access to electronic information
systems. Technical safeguards are the policies and procedures used
to control access to healthcare data and information. Safeguards
need to be in place to control access, whether the data and
information are at rest; residing on a machine or storage medium;
being processed; or in transmission, such as being backed up to
storage or disseminated across a network.Overview of the HITECH Act
The federal HITECH Act, enacted February 17, 2009, is part of the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act (ARRA). The ARRA,
also known as the Stimulus law, was enacted to stimulate various
sectors of the U.S. economy during the most severe recession this
country had experienced since the Great Depression of the late
1920s and early 1930s. The health IT industry was one area where
lawmakers saw an opportunity to stimulate the economy and
improve the delivery of health care at the same time. This explains
why the title of the HITECH Act contains the phrase “for Economic
and Clinical Health.”
The ARRA is a lengthy piece of legislation that is organized into
two divisions, A and B. Each division contains several titles. Title XIII
of Division A of the ARRA is the HITECH Act. It addresses the
development, adoption, and implementation of health IT policies and
standards and provides enhanced privacy and security protections
for patient information—an area of the law that is of paramount
concern in NI. Title IV of Division B of the ARRA is considered part of
the HITECH Act. It addressed Medicare and Medicaid health IT and
provided significant financial incentives to healthcare professionals
and hospitals that adopted and engaged in the “meaningful use” of
electronic health record (EHR) technology.
At the time the HITECH Act was enacted, it was estimated that
fewer than 8% of U.S. hospitals used a basic EHR system in at least
one of their clinical units and that fewer than 2% of U.S. hospitals
had an EHR system in all of their clinical settings (Ashish et al.,
2009). Not surprisingly, the cost of an EHR system was a major
barrier to widespread adoption of this technology in most healthcare
facilities. The HITECH Act sought to change that situation by
providing each person in the United States with an EHR. In addition,
a nationwide health IT infrastructure would be developed so that
access to a person’s EHR would be readily available to everyhealthcare provider who treats the patient, no matter where the
patient may be located at the time treatment is rendered. According
to the Office of the National Coordinator for Health Information
Technology (ONC), 96% of hospitals and 78% of physician’s offices
have EHR technology certified by HHS (ONC, n.d.-c).
Definitions
The HITECH Act included some important definitions that anyone
involved in NI should know:
Certified EHR technology: The term certified EHR technology
means that an EHR meets specific governmental standards for
the type of record involved, whether it be an ambulatory EHR
used by office-based healthcare practitioners or an inpatient
EHR used by hospitals. The specific standards that are to be
met for any such EHRs are set forth in federal regulations.
Enterprise integration: The term enterprise integration means
the electronic linkage of healthcare providers, health plans, the
government, and other interested parties to enable the electronic
exchange and use of health information among all the
components in the healthcare infrastructure.
Healthcare provider: The term healthcare provider includes
hospitals, skilled nursing facilities, nursing homes, long-term
care facilities, home health agencies, hemodialysis centers,
clinics, community mental health centers, ambulatory surgery
centers, group practices, pharmacies and pharmacists,
laboratories, physicians, and therapists.
Health information technology: The term health information
technology means “hardware, software, integrated technologies
or related licenses, intellectual property, upgrades, or packaged
solutions sold as services that are designed for or support the
use by healthcare entities or patients for the electronic creation,
maintenance, access, or exchange of health information.”Qualified electronic health record: The term qualified
electronic health record means “an electronic record of health￾related information on an individual.” A “qualified” EHR contains
a patient’s demographic and clinical health information, including
the medical history and a list of health problems, and is capable
of providing support for clinical decisions and entry of physician
orders. It must also have the capacity “to capture and query
information relevant to health care quality” and “exchange
electronic health information with, and integrate such information
from other sources.” (ONC, 2009, pp. 8–9)
Purposes
The HITECH Act established the ONC within HHS. The ONC,
headed by the national coordinator, was charged with overseeing the
development of a nationwide health IT infrastructure that supported
the use and exchange of information to achieve the following goals:
1. Improve healthcare quality by enhancing coordination of
services between and among the various healthcare providers a
patient may have, fostering more appropriate healthcare
decisions at the time and place of delivery of services, and
preventing medical errors and advancing the delivery of patient￾centered care
2. Reduce the cost of health care by addressing inefficiencies,
such as duplication of services within the healthcare delivery
system, and reducing the number of medical errors
3. Improve people’s health by promoting prevention, early
detection, and management of chronic diseases
4. Protect public health by fostering early detection and rapid
response to infectious diseases, bioterrorism, and other
situations that could have a widespread impact on the health
status of many individuals
5. Facilitate clinical research
6. Reduce health disparities7. Better secure patient health information
The responsibilities of the ONC have evolved over time, although
the core responsibilities of supporting the adoption of health IT and
promoting health information exchange remain unchanged. The
ONC’s current strategic goals follow:
Advance person-centered and self-managed health
Transform health care delivery and community health
Foster research, scientific knowledge, and innovation
Enhance the nation’s health IT infrastructure (ONC, n.d.-a)
Improving healthcare quality has been an ongoing challenge in the
United States. According to the Agency for Healthcare Research
and Quality (AHRQ), quality health care is “described in terms of six
priorities: patient safety, person-centered care, care coordination,
effective treatment, healthy living, and care affordability” (AHRQ,
2022, para 1). AHRQ, an agency within HHS, has been releasing a
National Healthcare Quality and Disparities Report every year since
2003. Access the 2022 report at
www.ahrq.gov/research/findings/nhqrdr/nhqdr22/index.html.
The prevalence of healthcare-associated infections (HAIs)
serves as an excellent example of how the use of EHR technology
and a nationwide health IT infrastructure played a significant role in
addressing healthcare quality issues. The National Healthcare
Quality and Disparities Report suggested that “[w]ound infection
following surgery is a common HAI. Hospitals can reduce the risk of
surgical site infection by making sure patients get the right antibiotics
at the right time on the day of their surgery. Surgery patients who get
antibiotics within the hour before their operation are less likely to get
wound infections than those who do not” (AHRQ, 2009, p. 110).
Crader and Varacallo (2020) verified that this is an ongoing and
accepted practice. The evolving U.S. health IT infrastructure has
enabled us to track this issue for all surgical patients and thus
develop evidence-based care plans to ensure that all patients within
the infrastructure receive the same quality of care. This is just one ofmany examples in which the end result of EHR adoption is better
patient outcomes.
EHR technology makes it easier for all providers involved in a
patient’s care to readily access that patient’s complete and current
healthcare record, thereby allowing providers to make well-informed,
efficient, and effective decisions about a patient’s care at the time
those decisions need to be made. Being able to do this is of
tremendous benefit to the patient and promotes a higher level of
patient-centered care. It also allows effective coordination of care
between and among all providers involved in the patient’s care,
including doctors, nurses, therapists, nutritionists, hospitals, nursing
homes, rehabilitation facilities, home health agencies, laboratories,
and other diagnostic centers, thereby assuring the continuum of
patient care.
Such an integrated system has clear benefits for patients and
providers alike. For example, imagine how much easier it would be
for a patient with a rare form of cancer to obtain a second
oncologist’s opinion before beginning a course of treatment. The
patient’s complete record, including the results of numerous
diagnostic tests conducted at multiple sites, such as blood tests,
biopsies, radiographs, and scans, would be readily available to the
second oncologist. Imagine how much easier it would be for a
patient with end-stage renal disease, who is receiving outpatient
hemodialysis several times a week, to receive appropriate treatment
if they were suddenly hospitalized or would like to take a vacation
out of state. Imagine how much easier it would be for nurses to
complete a medication reconciliation for a newly admitted patient.
The possibilities are endless, and the savings realized from
enhancing quality, avoiding duplication of services, and streamlining
delivery of patient care are obvious.
Reducing healthcare errors is another ongoing challenge in the
United States. Healthcare providers strive to meet the standard of
care and avoid harm to patients. Patients have a right to receive
appropriate care, but that does not always happen. The seminal
report, To Err Is Human: Building a Safer Health System, issued by
the Institute of Medicine’s Committee on the Quality of Health Carein America, undertook a comprehensive literature review and
summarized the results of more than 40 studies about healthcare
errors (Institute of Medicine, 2000). That report concluded that
approximately 44,000 to 98,000 people in the United States die each
year as a result of healthcare errors. Many thousands more who do
not die are seriously injured from such errors. In addition to the
human pain and suffering associated with healthcare errors, the
monetary costs of these errors are substantial. Although progress in
reducing healthcare errors has been made since the release of To
Err Is Human, substantial work remains to be done. It is anticipated
that a nationwide health IT infrastructure will contribute to a reduction
in healthcare errors by providing mechanisms to assist with the
prevention of errors and to provide timely warnings of the possibility
of a repetitive error that may affect many patients.
Containing and reducing healthcare costs in the United States,
where more than $4.3 trillion is spent on health care each year with a
projected increase by 2028 of $6.2 trillion, is another daunting
challenge (CMS, n.d.-c). Using EHR technology and a nationwide
health IT infrastructure to improve quality and reduce errors within
the healthcare delivery system is one way to address this challenge.
Promoting prevention, early detection, and management of chronic
diseases was another purpose of the HITECH Act. The delivery of
health care in the United States traditionally has been based on a
disease model rather than on a wellness model. Having an EHR for
everyone helps with the necessary transition as providers and their
patients become more aware of the variables that positively or
negatively affect health. The ability to collect and analyze data to
identify appropriate choices to promote wellness and either prevent
illness and injury or detect and manage chronic diseases sooner is
well supported by the EHR.
Chronic diseases are of major concern to this country not only
because of the impact they have on individuals but also because of
the tremendous cost associated with providing treatment for patients
with these conditions. Adult-onset diabetes, for example, has
reached epidemic proportions. A national health IT infrastructure
helps providers better identify those patients who are at risk fordeveloping this disease and provide treatment strategies to avoid it.
Providers of those patients who develop type 2 diabetes can predict
and diagnose the condition much sooner and manage it more
effectively because of the vast resources provided by the national
health IT infrastructure.
Improving public health was another purpose of the HITECH Act.
The recent pandemic challenge is illustrative of how a national health
IT infrastructure can protect public health by fostering early detection
and rapid response to infectious diseases, bioterrorism, and other
situations that could have a widespread effect on the health status of
many individuals and groups.
The effect that a national health IT infrastructure has and will
continue to have on clinical research is self-evident. As the
infrastructure evolves, the amount of data that is readily available for
clinical research will increase exponentially. The ability of
researchers to conduct studies and provide clinicians with the most
current evidence-based practice is of tremendous benefit to patients
everywhere.
Reducing health disparities was another purpose of the HITECH
Act. Disparities are differences in access to and quality of care in
subpopulations. Detailed information about healthcare disparities
can be found at the website for the Office of Health Equity at
www.cdc.gov/minorityhealth. The AHRQ routinely examines the
issue of disparities in health care and reports its findings to the
public. Access the report at
www.ahrq.gov/research/findings/nhqrdr/index.html.
All patients, regardless of race, ethnicity, or socioeconomic status,
should receive care that is effective, safe, equitable, and timely.
When the national health IT infrastructure contemplated by the
HITECH Act is fully implemented, such disparities are bound to
decrease. The ability to monitor for disparities and promote the
delivery of appropriate care to all patients will be enhanced.
Clinicians will be prompted to base their treatments on appropriate
factors and avoid biased care.
Perhaps the most important task that faced the national
coordinator during the development and implementation of anationwide health IT infrastructure was ensuring the security of the
PHI within that system. The ability to secure and protect confidential
patient information has always been of paramount importance to
clinicians, who view this consideration as an ethical and legal
obligation of practice. Patients value their privacy, and they have a
right to expect that their confidential health information will be
properly safeguarded. Nurses have been complying with the
regulatory requirements of HIPAA for years, and the HITECH Act
enhanced the security and privacy protections each patient has a
right to expect under HIPAA. The specific changes are discussed in
greater detail later in this chapter.How a National Health IT Infrastructure Was
Developed
Developing a national health IT infrastructure is an enormous and
extremely complex undertaking that requires extensive financial,
technological, and human resources. The HITECH Act established
the ONC, as noted earlier, and HHS appointed a national coordinator
who is responsible for the development of the infrastructure. The
HITECH Act also established two committees within the ONC: the
Health IT Policy Committee and the Health IT Standards Committee.
The Policy Committee was responsible for making
recommendations to the coordinator about how to implement the
requirements of the HITECH Act, such as the technologies to use in
the infrastructure. The Standards Committee was responsible for
recommending standards by which health information was to be
electronically exchanged. These two committees have since been
replaced by the Health Information Technology Advisory Committee
(HITAC), established by the 21st Century Cures Act (discussed
later). HITAC is charged with recommending “policies, standards,
implementation specifications, and certification criteria, relating to the
implementation of a health information technology infrastructure,
nationally and locally, that advances the electronic access,
exchange, and use of health information” (ONC, n.d.-b, para. 1).
The national coordinator is charged with providing overall
leadership and strategic direction for the ONC, and these duties will
continue to evolve as the health IT infrastructure evolves. The
Federal Register has indicated that the national coordinator of the
ONC
1. ensures the interoperability of health information, as central and
foundational to the core mission of HHS to enhance and protect
the health and well-being of all Americans;2. ensures that health information technology initiatives are
coordinated across HHS programs;
3. ensures that health information technology policy and programs
of HHS are coordinated with those of relevant executive branch
agencies (including Federal commissions and advisory
committees) with a goal of avoiding duplication of effort and of
helping to ensure that each agency undertakes activities
primarily within the areas of its greatest expertise and technical
capability;
4. reviews Federal health information technology investments to
ensure Federal health information programs are meeting the
objectives of the strategic plan required under Executive Order
13335, to create a national interoperable health information
technology infrastructure;
5. provides comments and advice regarding specific Federal
health information technology programs; and
6. develops, maintains, and reports on measurable outcome goals
for health information technology to assess progress within HHS
and other executive branch agencies (HHS, 2018)
The HITECH Act also provided significant monetary incentives for
providers who engaged in meaningful use of health IT. Meaningful
use was defined as “electronically capturing health information in a
coded format, using that information to track key clinical conditions,
communicating that information to help coordinate care, and initiating
the reporting of clinical quality measures and public health
information” (CMS, 2010, para. 6). Monetary incentives were
available to clinicians and facilities that implemented EHR systems
that met the specific standards. The term meaningful use has since
been replaced by provisions outlined in the Medicare Access and
CHIP Reauthorization Act (MACRA) of 2015.How the HITECH Act Changed HIPAA
HIPAA Privacy and Security Rules
Nurses have been complying with HIPAA for years. HIPAA was
enacted by the federal government for several purposes, including
better portability of health insurance as a worker moved from one job
to another; deterrence of fraud, abuse, and waste within the
healthcare delivery system; and simplification of the administrative
functions associated with the delivery of health care, such as
reimbursement claims sent to Medicare and Medicaid. Simplification
of administrative functions entailed the adoption of electronic
transactions that included sensitive healthcare information. To
protect the privacy and security of health information, two sets of
federal regulations were implemented: The Privacy Rule became
effective in 2003, and the Security Rule became effective in 2005.
Many practitioners who refer to HIPAA are not referring to the
comprehensive federal statute enacted in 1996 but rather to the
Privacy Rule and the Security Rule, the federal regulations that were
adopted years after HIPAA became law.
Under the Privacy Rule, patients have a right to expect privacy
protections that limit the use and disclosure of their health
information. Under the Security Rule, providers are obligated to
safeguard their patients’ health information from improper use or
disclosure and to maintain the integrity of the information and ensure
its availability. Both rules apply to PHI, defined as any physical or
mental health information created, received, or stored by a covered
entity that can be used to identify an individual patient, regardless of
the form of the health information (i.e., it can be electronic,
handwritten, or verbal) (Legal Information Institute, 2013). Covered
entities include hospitals and other healthcare providers that transmit
any health information electronically as well as health insurance
companies and healthcare clearinghouses (Legal Information
Institute, 2013).Clinicians have become very knowledgeable about the
requirements of the Privacy and Security Rules. They are familiar
with their obligations to protect patient information and the rights
afforded to their patients under these regulations:
Patients are entitled to a notice of privacy practices from their
healthcare provider.
Inpatients are entitled to opt out of the facility’s directory, thereby
protecting disclosure of information that they are even a patient
in the facility.
Under certain circumstances, patients must authorize disclosure
of their PHI before it can be released by the provider.
Patients can request and obtain access to their own healthcare
records and may request that corrections and additions be made
to their records. Providers must consider a patient’s request to
amend a healthcare record, but they are not required to make
such an amendment if the request is unwarranted.
Unauthorized access or use or any loss of healthcare
information must be disclosed to any patient affected by the
breach.
Patients may request an accounting of anyone who accessed
their healthcare information, and the provider is required to
provide that information in a timely manner.
Patients have a right to complain if they perceive that the privacy
or security of their healthcare information has been
compromised in some way. Such complaints can be made
directly to the provider or to the Office for Civil Rights (OCR).
The OCR, which is part of HHS, is responsible for enforcing
HIPAA. It provides significant information and guidance to clinicians
who must comply with the Privacy and Security Rules. It has been
tracking complaints and investigating violations since 2003.
Guidance and information about the complaint process and the
violations that the OCR has handled are available on its website at
www.hhs.gov/hipaa/filing-a-complaint/index.html. As an example,snooping of healthcare records of friends and neighbors is a
common HIPAA violation. Even if the information is not disclosed to
anyone else, it is still a violation to access records of persons whom
one is not assigned to care for. Disciplinary actions may include
termination (HIPAA Journal, 2023a).
Many businesses are moving to enact a “bring your own device”
(BYOD) policy for employees. This policy, which helps to streamline
the lives of employees by maintaining personal and business
information on one device, can also result in cost savings for the
organization overall. BYOD is an issue, however, when dealing with
PHI. Healthcare organizations typically do not encourage the use of
personal devices for professional matters, and in many instances,
they have policies in place forbidding employees from using personal
devices in the workplace. According to Pennic (2013), approximately
50% of healthcare organizations reported that personal mobile
devices can be used to access the internet within their facilities but
these devices were not given access to the organization’s network.
For a long time, only devices that were issued by the organization,
secured, and routinely audited were able to access the secure
network; however, workers were not happy carrying more than one
device. Kleyman (2018) pointed out that “[i]f we want to keep an
effective and productive healthcare workforce, we need to find a
balance between connection and control” (para. 7). He suggested
several strategies to support workflow and provide appropriate
security:
1. Detail and document your users, their mobile interactions, and
their use-case
2. Design a mobility and BYOD workflow that works and is secure
3. Leverage EMM/MDM [enterprise mobility management/mobile
device management] and mobility control technologies to
improve user experience while still locking things down
4. Enable network-level visibility, DLP [data loss prevention], and
data scanning (para. 22–25)As more healthcare workers used personal devices in the
workplace, policies began to change to ensure HIPAA compliance.
Wani et al. (2020) suggested several technologies to address BYOD
security risks. These include a mobile device management platform
to provide central management of devices, including
registration/deregistration, encryption, log off, device tracking and
data wiping; containerization to separate personal and organization
data; virtual desktop infrastructure that eliminates organizational data
storage on personal devices; identity and access management; and
secure clinical communication platforms. See this website for a list of
ways to handle personal devices and maintain the security of PHI:
www.healthit.gov/topic/privacy-security-and-hipaa/how-can-you￾protect-and-secure-health-information-when-using-mobile-device.
Compliance with the Privacy and Security Rules is mandatory for
all covered entities, and the HITECH Act extends compliance with
these requirements directly to other entities that are business
associates of a covered entity. Requirements include designation of
privacy and information security officials to protect health information
and appropriate handling of any complaints. Sanctions must be
imposed if a violation of HIPAA occurs. The Privacy and Security
Rules also mandated that certain physical and technical safeguards
be implemented for PHI and that entities conduct periodic training of
all staff to ensure compliance with these safeguards. Most entities
adhere to industry standards and provide their personnel with yearly
training. In addition, entities are to conduct regular audits to ensure
compliance, and any breaches in the privacy or security of PHI must
be remedied immediately. It is important to avoid a security incident
because such incidents trigger certain notification requirements and
may be associated with monetary penalties.
The HITECH Act Enhanced HIPAA Protections
The HITECH Act has had a significant effect on HIPAA’s Privacy and
Security Rules in the following ways:HHS is to provide annual guidance about how to secure health
information.
Notification requirements in the event of a breach in the security
of health information were enhanced.
HIPAA requirements now also apply directly to any business
associates of a covered entity.
The rules that pertain to providing an accounting to patients who
want to know who accessed their health information were
changed.
Enforcement of HIPAA was strengthened.
These measures were implemented to provide further assurance
that health information would be protected as the country
transitioned to a nationwide health IT infrastructure. Privacy and data
regulations are also being established around the world. See a map
of the world depicting the laws of various countries at this website:
https://iapp.org/resources/article/dla-piper-data-protection-laws-of￾the-world. It is quite evident that privacy and security are global
concerns.
Several standards-setting organizations are also involved in the
privacy and security aspects of the health IT infrastructure
development (Box 8-1).
BOX 8-1 STANDARDS-SETTING ORGANIZATIONS THE
FOLLOWING ORGANIZATIONS ARE RECOGNIZED BY
THE SECRETARY OF HEALTH OF HHS AS
STANDARDS-SETTING ORGANIZATIONS AND
GROUPS THAT SUPPORT THE ADMINISTRATIVE
SIMPLIFICATION ASPECTS OF HIPAA. EACH
ORGANIZATION IS FOLLOWED BY A LINK TO ITS
WEB PAGE. THIS INFORMATION IS USED WITH
PERMISSION FROM WWW.CMS.GOV/REGULATIONS￾AND-GUIDANCE/ADMINISTRATIVE-SIMPLIFICATION/HIPAA￾ACA/STANDARDSSETTINGANDRELATEDORGANIZATI
ONS.
ADVISORY GROUPS
National Committee on Vital and Health Statistics (NCVHS)
https://ncvhs.hhs.gov
Workgroup for Electronic Data Interchange (WEDI)
www.wedi.org
DESIGNATED AUTHORING ENTITY FOR OPERATING RULES
Committee on Operating Rules for Information Exchange (CAQH CORE)
www.caqh.org/CORE
DESIGNATED STANDARD MAINTENANCE ORGANIZATIONS
(DSMOS)
Dental Content Committee of the American Dental Association (ADA DeCC)
www.ada.org/en/science-research/dental-standards/dental-content-committee￾decc
Accredited Standards Committee (ASC X12)
www.x12.org
Health Level Seven (HL7)
www.hl7.org
National Council for Prescription Drug Programs (NCPDP)
www.ncpdp.org/home
National Uniform Billing Committee (NUBC)
www.nubc.org
National Uniform Claim Committee (NUCC)
www.nucc.org
NON–DESIGNATED STANDARD MAINTENANCE
ORGANIZATIONS
American National Standards Institute (ANSI)
www.ansi.org
Electronic Healthcare Network Accreditation Commission (EHNAC)
www.ehnac.org
Health Industry Business Communications Council (HIBCC)www.hibcc.org
Electronic Payments Association (Nacha)
www.nacha.org
National Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC)
https://content.naic.org
National Information Standards Organization (NISO)
www.niso.org
Avoiding security incidents has become a paramount concern for
healthcare organizations and providers. Providers must protect their
information and prevent unauthorized persons from accessing,
using, disclosing, changing, or destroying a patient’s health
information or otherwise interfering with the operations of a health
information system, such as an EHR. PHI can be secured through
encryption, shredding and other forms of complete destruction, or
electronic media sanitation. For an overview of two methods for de￾identifying PHI, visit www.hhs.gov/hipaa/for￾professionals/privacy/special-topics/de-identification/index.html.
Figure 8-3 depicts some common causes of PHI vulnerabilities.
Figure 8-3 Vulnerability of Private Health InformationDescription
The distinction between secured and unsecured PHI is important
because providers that experience a breach in the privacy or security
of their PHI must adhere to certain notification requirements
depending on the type of PHI affected by the breach. The HITECH
Act enhanced the breach notification requirements of HIPAA. If the
PHI is unsecured, the provider must take certain steps to notify those
individuals who have been affected. Providers can avoid these
onerous breach notification requirements if the PHI is secured in
accordance with the specifications of HHS.
A breach is considered discovered as soon as an employee other
than the individual who committed the breach knows or should have
known of the breach, such as unauthorized access or even an
unsuccessful attempt to access information. For example, if a nurse
knows that a colleague has accessed or attempted to access the
record of a patient for whom the colleague is not providing care, the
nurse’s employer is deemed to have discovered the breach as soon
as the nurse learned of it. The discovery of a breach triggers the
beginning of the time frame during which the provider must fulfill the
notification requirements. A provider must fulfill these requirements
within a reasonable period; under no circumstances may a provider
take more than 60 days from discovery of the breach. It is easy to
understand why providers require their employees to report
knowledge of such breaches immediately to the privacy or
information security officer. A provider’s failure to adhere to the
breach notification requirements could result in OCR sanctions,
including monetary penalties.
Whenever a breach involves unsecured PHI, covered entities are
responsible for alerting each affected individual by mail or email,
based on the individual’s preference. If there is insufficient contact
information for 10 or more patients, the provider is required to place
conspicuous postings on the home page of its website or in major
print or broadcast media (without identifying patients). A toll-free
number must be provided so that affected individuals can call forinformation about the breach. For breaches involving unsecured PHI
of more than 500 individuals, a prominent media outlet must also be
notified. Notice of a breach must be given to HHS within 60 calendar
days of the discovery (HHS, 2015). It is easy to see why providers
would want to avoid these requirements by making sure that their
PHI is secured. Having to post such notices undermines the trust
that exists between healthcare providers and the patients and
communities they serve.
The HITECH Act has improved the privacy and security of PHI by
applying the requirements of HIPAA directly to the business
associates of covered entities. In the past, it was up to the covered
entity to enter into contracts with its business associates to ensure
compliance with HIPAA. Now business associates are responsible
for their own compliance. An example of such a business associate
is a health IT company hired by a hospital to implement or upgrade
an EHR system. The technology company has access to the
hospital’s EHR system and must comply with the HIPAA Privacy and
Security Rules, just as covered entities must comply with these
rules, which includes being subject to enforcement by the OCR for
any violations.
Existing accounting rules are enhanced under the HITECH Act,
giving patients the right to access their EHR and receive an
accounting of all disclosures. Before the HITECH Act, HIPAA
regulations provided an exception to the accounting requirements.
Providers and other covered entities were not required to include in
the accounting any disclosures that were made to facilitate
treatment/payment/operations (TPO)—treatment of patients, the
payment for services, or the operations of the entity—a provision
commonly known as the TPO exception. This exception ended in
January 2011 for providers that recently implemented new EHR
systems. For those providers with EHR systems that were
implemented before the HITECH Act, the TPO exception ended in
January 2014. It is easy to understand why this exception has
ended. As all providers implement comprehensive EHR systems, it
will be very easy to generate an electronic record with an accounting
of anyone who accessed a patient’s record.Finally, the HITECH Act strengthened the enforcement of HIPAA.
HHS can conduct audits, which will be even easier to accomplish
once a nationwide health IT infrastructure is in place. In addition,
stiffer civil monetary penalties (CMPs) for violations of HIPAA
became effective as soon as the HITECH Act became law in
February 2009. They were revised in 2019 to reduce the maximum
penalty for Tiers 1 through 3. CMPs are divided into four tiers. A Tier
1 CMP, in which the covered entity had no reason to know of a
violation, is $100 per incident, up to a cap of $25,000 per year. A Tier
2 CMP, in which the covered entity had reasonable cause to know of
a violation, is $1,000 per incident, up to a cap of $100,000 per year.
A Tier 3 CMP, in which the covered entity engaged in willful neglect
that resulted in a breach, is $10,000 per incident, up to a cap of
$250,000 per year. In addition, the HITECH Act gives authority to
impose an additional Tier 4 CMP of $50,000 to $1.5 million if the
covered entity does not properly correct a violation. Criminal
penalties also can be imposed when warranted. It is imperative that
providers avoid these penalties (HHS, 2019). The HIPAA Journal
(2023b) notes that the OCR has discretion when applying penalties
and that the actual dollar amounts change yearly with inflation.
Before enactment of the HITECH Act, the federal government
alone enforced HIPAA. Now state attorneys general can play a
significant role in the enforcement and prosecution of HIPAA
violations. Once the HITECH Act became law, state attorneys
general were authorized to pursue civil claims for HIPAA violations
and collect up to $25,000 plus attorneys’ fees. As of 2012,
individuals who are damaged by such violations became eligible to
share in any monetary awards obtained by these state officials. For
very specific and current HIPAA information, see
www.hhs.gov/hipaa/index.html.
Interestingly, during the COVID-19 pandemic, the Secretary of
Health and Human Services issued a limited waiver of HIPAA
sanctions and penalties in response to the declaration of a national
emergency. Read here the bulletin detailing HIPAA requirements and
limited sanctions during a national emergency:www.hhs.gov/sites/default/files/hipaa-and-covid-19-limited-hipaa￾waiver-bulletin-508.pdf.Implications for Nursing Practice
Being Involved and Staying Informed
The development and implementation of a nationwide EHR system
holds great promise for nursing practice and NI. The profession of
nursing will benefit from the many enhancements such an
infrastructure has to offer, including the ability to improve the delivery
and quality of nursing care, making more efficient and timely nursing
care decisions for patients, avoiding errors that may harm patients,
and promoting health and wellness for the patients whom nurses
serve. On a broader scale, nurse researchers will have the ability to
more readily access data that can be used to continue to foster
evidence-based practice. For those who devote their professional
careers to NI or plan to do so, the opportunities abound. Much work
remains to be done as this country transitions to a nationwide health
IT infrastructure.
All nurses need to be engaged in this process, whether they treat
patients, are managers within healthcare organizations, teach,
develop computer programs, or help create institutional or
governmental policies. Nurses, as the end users of developing
technologies, cannot afford to be left behind in these exciting times.
Their voices must be heard, whether within the facility in which they
work as changes to the EHR system are contemplated or in the
public policy arena. How often are nurses the last to know that a new
EHR system has been adopted by their hospital? How many times
have nurses been trained to use a system that would have benefited
from their input before it was implemented or even purchased?
Often, nurses are not invited to the table when entities make
decisions about informatics. They should not be afraid to ask to be
included, whether to be heard within the workplace or within the
governmental agencies that are overseeing the changes that are
taking place.Even nurses who do not get involved in this process need to stay
current with the rapid changes that are taking place. Information
about federal initiatives is available from the ONC and the OCR.
Both offices are housed within HHS and are excellent resources for
additional information about the HITECH Act and HIPAA.
Regulations to implement the HITECH Act and enhance the HIPAA
protections required by it are being proposed and adopted at a rapid
pace.
Protecting Yourself
Nurses who strive to protect the privacy and security of patient
information are protecting themselves from ethical lapses and
violations of law. The American Nurses Association’s (ANA’s) Code
of Ethics for Nurses with Interpretive Statements mandates that
nurses protect a patient’s rights to privacy and confidentiality.
Associated with the right to privacy, the nurse has a duty to
maintain the confidentiality of all patient information. Nurses who
engage with social media need to be especially cognizant of the
potential for breaching the confidentiality of patient information. Box
8-2 provides more information related to nurses’ use of social media.
Refer also to the ethical use of social media discussed in Chapter 5,
Ethical Applications of Informatics. The patient’s well-being could be
jeopardized and the fundamental trust between patient and nurse
destroyed by unnecessary access to data or the inappropriate
disclosure of identifiable patient information. The rights, well-being,
and safety of the individual patient should be the primary factors in
arriving at any professional judgment concerning the disposition of
confidential information received from or about the patient, whether
oral, written, or electronic. The standard of nursing practice and the
nurse’s responsibility to provide quality care require that relevant
data be shared with only those members of the healthcare team who
have a need to know that information. Only information pertinent to a
patient’s treatment and welfare should be disclosed and only to
those directly involved with the patient’s care. When using electroniccommunications, special effort should be made to maintain data
security (ANA, 2015).
BOX 8-2 USE OF SOCIAL NETWORKS BY NURSES
New opportunities to share information via social networks have grabbed the headlines.
Since their inception in 2004, the growth in popularity of social networking platforms,
such as Facebook (www.facebook.com) and X (formerly Twitter) (www.twitter.com), has
been phenomenal. What makes these sites so attractive? Web-based applications,
such as Facebook, allow users to connect and share information in ways that were not
previously possible. Users develop online profiles that contain information they choose
to share with others. Using simple online utilities, users can easily connect and share
their profiles and communicate with friends over the internet. Virtual groups of users
with similar profiles may be created, connecting users with others who have similar
interests. X (Twitter), a microblogging platform, allows users to create interpersonal
networks for socializing, support, and information sharing. The power of such tools as X
(Twitter) lies in their being lightweight, their limiting of updates to 280 or fewer
characters, and their convenience—users can update their status from any device that
has an internet connection or text messaging capabilities.
The popularity of social and mobile networking applications is one indication of how
new web-based technologies are changing communication preferences. The web is no
longer a destination place but instead has become a vehicle of communication where
individuals use application software (app), which is installed or downloaded, to connect
with others. Individuals act as their own portal and can connect from anywhere with
their various communities. This makes it difficult to separate communities and social
networks. Where once it was relatively easy to separate work relationships from friends
and family, networked communities tend to overlap, which blurs the boundaries
between them. The phenomenon of overlapping networks means that the unintended
audience is almost always greater than the intended one. A status update that may be
construed as harmless and funny to one’s friends could be taken in an entirely different
way by family or colleagues. This is not to say networked communities are harmful or
bad. Indeed, the benefits of such communities far exceed their negatives. However, the
immediacy and permanence of the updates shared mean that the user must think
about the impact beyond the intended audience in ways never before required
(Johnson & Swain, 2011).
Nurses and other healthcare workers who use social media must be aware that the
overlapping of networks may unintentionally create privacy and confidentiality
breaches. Even when patients are not identified by name, general sharing of
information or venting about a difficult day may constitute a privacy breach. The
National Council of State Boards of Nursing (2011) has collaborated with the ANA in a
white paper to develop specific guidelines for the use of social media by nurses. Read
the white paper discussing common misconceptions about social media, consequences
for breaching confidentiality using social media, guidelines for appropriate use of social
media, and case scenarios with discussion.REFERENCES
Johnson, G., & Swain, J. (2011). Professional development and collaboration tools. In
D. McGonigle & K. Mastrian (Eds.), Nursing informatics and the foundation of
knowledge (2nd ed., pp. 185–195). Jones & Bartlett Learning.
National Council of State Boards of Nursing. (2011, August). White paper: A nurse’s
guide to the use of social media. www.ncsbn.org/public￾files/NCSBN_SocialMedia.pdf
The similarities between these ethical obligations and the legal
requirements of HIPAA and other federal and state privacy and
confidentiality laws are readily apparent to nurses. By complying with
their ethical code, nurses were complying with the Privacy and
Security Rules before they were required to do so. Since the
adoption of the HIPAA Privacy and Security Rules and the
strengthening of the rules by the HITECH Act, it is more important
than ever for nurses to understand their obligations in this area and
to avoid the pitfalls of violations.
In addition to the sanctions imposed by the OCR, violations can
lead to disciplinary actions, as well as litigation, by employers and
professional licensing boards. Such actions can have a serious
negative effect on the nurse’s reputation and financial well-being. If a
nurse is terminated for invading a patient’s privacy or breaching the
confidentiality of a patient’s information, some state laws require
reporting the information to prospective employers of the nurse;
other laws require reporting the information to the state board of
nursing. State boards of nursing have the authority to publicly
discipline a nurse who has engaged in professional misconduct by
invading a patient’s privacy, which includes inappropriately
accessing a patient’s EHR and breaching confidentiality of patient
information, such as allowing or tolerating unauthorized access to a
patient’s EHR. These types of situations can also cause patients to
file complaints with the OCR and lawsuits against the offenders.
Nurses must be ever mindful of their obligation to report a breach in
the privacy or security of PHI to their employers, even if it entails
reporting a colleague.
Finally, some view the EHR as a convenient method for employers
to monitor the performance of their nurses. Clearly, an EHR systemprovides a wealth of information that can be, and often is required to
be, monitored. Audits are required to make sure that no breaches in
the system’s security occur. Audits are not necessarily required to
determine, for example, which nurses are failing to complete the
hospital’s documentation requirements in a timely fashion, which
nurses are improperly altering (attempting to correct) the record, or
which nurses are dispensing more pain medication than the average.
Nurses have been challenged by employers who allege failure to
document, improper or false documentation, and suspected
diversion of narcotics. These types of situations are unsettling and
may be on the rise as more providers adopt sophisticated EHR
systems. Thus, it behooves every nurse who works with such a
system to obtain proper training and to know the policies and
procedures that pertain to its use.
Social media can and should be used in an appropriate manner by
professionals to educate and promote health behaviors in the clients
they serve, communicate with clients if they choose this method of
communication, and network with other professionals by sharing
information (de-identified) and knowledge. As Gagnon and Sabus
(2015) suggested, “the reach of social media for health and wellness
presents exciting opportunities for the health care professional with a
well-executed social media presence. Social media give health care
providers a far-reaching platform on which to contribute high-quality
online content and amplify positive and accurate health care
information and messages. It also provides a forum for correcting
misinformation and addressing misconceptions” (p. 410). They
advocated for healthcare professionals to practice digital
professionalism and for social media use to be one of the
professional competencies for health professional education. Bazan
(2015) suggested that social media can be used to consult with other
healthcare providers, such as in a professional Facebook group,
using direct private messaging between the two providers, but
cautioned that posting to the main social site cannot contain any hint
of PHI. He also shared information about a progressive medical
practice that communicates with patients via private messaging on
Facebook. Pershad et al. (2018) suggested that X (Twitter) is a greatcollaborative and communication tool for patients, physicians, and
researchers. They caution, however, that dangerous misinformation
can also be shared by nonexperts on this platform. Remember that
everything you do electronically leaves a digital footprint. Proceed
with caution and be certain that your digital interactions comply
completely with professional ethics, laws, and organizational
policies.Recent Laws and Regulations
In 2015, MACRA (HHS, 2016) was released by CMS. Although this
legislation primarily affects provider payments based on quality care,
all members of the healthcare team will have a hand in helping to
ensure quality care. This new legislation replaced the former CMS
meaningful use guidelines and rewards clinicians for value over
volume. A key component of this legislation was the replacement of
Social Security numbers on Medicare cards by April 2019 (CMS,
n.d.-b). Updates to this legislation and implementation rules and
guidelines can be found at the CMS website at
www.cms.gov/Medicare/Quality-Initiatives-Patient-Assessment￾Instruments/Value-Based-Programs/MACRA-MIPS-and￾APMs/MACRA-MIPS-and-APMs.
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA), a division of HHS,
is responsible for regulating medical devices to ensure public safety.
In 2015, in response to the proliferation of mobile medical
applications, the FDA released a guidance document for
manufacturers, developers, and FDA staff, which was revised in
2019 and again in 2022. Currently, the most common types of these
mobile or smartphone-based apps are not regulated by the FDA
because they are not defined as medical devices. An app is defined
as a medical device and may be subject to regulation by the FDA if
“the intended use of a mobile app is for the diagnosis of a disease or
other conditions, or the cure, mitigation, treatment, or prevention of
disease, or if it is intended to affect the structure or function of the
body of man” (FDA, 2022, p. 8). The guidance document also
provides a list of examples of apps that are not currently viewed as
medical devices, such as apps that help users organize personal
medical data, track fitness, or self-manage a disease. If, however,
the mobile app is an accessory to a regulated medical device, then it
is also considered a medical device and is subject to FDA oversight.
For those who are interested in developing mobile health apps in thefuture, the FDA provides an interactive website to help determine
whether the device would need to be regulated (www.ftc.gov/tips￾advice/business-center/guidance/mobile-health-apps-interactive￾tool). We must be aware that as these mobile apps become more
sophisticated in the future, they may indeed be subject to more
stringent oversight by the FDA to ensure consumer safety.
The 21st Century Cures Act signed into law in 2016 contains
several provisions that are specific to informatics. In general, the
Cures Act was designed to provide funding streams and promote
research into preventing and curing serious illnesses, ensure
medication and medical device development, support community
mental health efforts, and improve interoperability and health
information exchange by providing seamless access to improved
EHRs. Interestingly, there is a provision barring the FDA from
regulating mobile health apps that support wellness as long as the
app does not diagnose or treat disease. The act also clarifies HIPAA
privacy rules when a patient is incapacitated and unable to make
decisions (Lengyel-Gomez, 2017). The most interesting part of the
Cures Act is the focus on interoperability by requiring a standardized
application programming interface (API), creating a Trusted
Exchange Network, and forbidding the blocking of health information
exchanges. These items are detailed in the Cures Act Final Rule,
which puts patients at the center so that IT will do the following:
Enable patients to make choices that work for them by
increasing transparency into the cost and outcomes of care
Allow patients to shop for and understand their options in getting
medical care
Provide patients with convenient, easy access and visualizations
of health information through smartphone apps
Support an “app economy” that provides innovation and choice
to patients, physicians, hospitals, payers, and employers (ONC,
n.d.-d, para. 5)Stay tuned for HIPAA Privacy Rule changes likely to be
announced in mid-2023. According to Clark (2023), the stated
reasons for the 2023 Privacy Rule changes include
Strengthening patient rights to access their own PHI,
Managing information sharing for care coordination and case
management,
Family and caregiver involvement for individuals experiencing
emergencies and health crises,
Providing guidance for disclosures of PHI to facilitate patient
care during an emergency situation, and
Reducing administrative burden (para. 6)
The Kaiser Family Foundation periodically publishes the U.S.
Global Health Legislation Tracker, which provides a list of legislation
being considered by Congress. Access the tracker at
www.kff.org/coronavirus-covid-19/fact-sheet/u-s-global-health￾legislation-tracker.Summary
The HITECH Act and the HIPAA Privacy Rule and Security Rule are
intended to enhance the rights of individuals. These laws provide
patients with greater access and control over their PHI. They can
control its uses, dissemination, and disclosures. Covered entities
must establish not only a required level of security for PHI but also
sanctions for employees who violate the organization’s privacy
policies and administrative processes for responding to patient
requests regarding their information. Therefore, they must be able to
track the PHI, note access from the perspective of which information
was accessed and by whom, and identify any disclosures. Finally,
readers should recognize that there is global awareness of the need
for privacy protections for personal information or PHI.
Over the next few years, international efforts will accelerate to
enhance international data exchange. We will come to appreciate
the importance of data and terminology standards that support
seamless exchange. We may also see additional legislation
designed to safeguard PHI while at the same time enhancing and
enabling the use of healthcare data to promote health.
THOUGHT-PROVOKING QUESTIONS
1. One of the biggest problems with healthcare information security has always been
inappropriate use by authorized users. How do HIPAA and the HITECH Act help to
curb this problem?
2. How do you envision privacy rules, HIPAA, and the HITECH Act evolving in the
next decade?
3. If you were the privacy officer in your organization, how would you address the
following?
a. Tracking each point of access of the patient’s database, including who entered
the data
b. Encouraging employees to report privacy and security breaches
c. The healthcare professionals are using smartphones, iPads, and other mobile
devices. How do you address privacy when data can literally walk out of yoursetting?
d. You observe one of the healthcare professionals using their smartphone to take
pictures of a patient. They see you and, in front of the patient, say, “I am not
capturing their face!” How do you respond to this situation?R E F E R E N C E S
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. (2009). National healthcare quality report.
https://archive.ahrq.gov/research/findings/nhqrdr/nhqr09/nhqr09.pdf
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. (2022). 2022 national healthcare quality and
disparities report. www.ahrq.gov/research/findings/nhqrdr/nhqdr22/index.html
American Nurses Association. (2015). Code of ethics for nurses with interpretive
statements. www.nursingworld.org/coe-view-only
Ashish, K. J., DesRoches, C. M., Campbell, E. G., Donelan, K., Rao, S. R., Ferris, T. G.,
Shields, A., Rosenbaum, S., & Blumenthal, D. (2009). Use of electronic health records in
U.S. hospitals. New England Journal of Medicine, 360(16), 1628–1638.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1056/NEJMsa0900592
Bazan, J. (2015). HIPAA in the age of social media. Optometry Times, 7(2), 16–18.
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. (n.d.-a). HIPAA and administrative
simplification: Administrative simplification overview. www.cms.gov/Regulations-and￾Guidance/Administrative-Simplification/HIPAA-ACA/index
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. (n.d.-b). MACRA.
www.cms.gov/Medicare/Quality-Initiatives-Patient-Assessment-Instruments/Value￾Based-Programs/MACRA-MIPS-and-APMs/MACRA-MIPS-and-APMs.html
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. (n.d.-c). NHE fact sheet.
www.cms.gov/research-statistics-data-and-systems/statistics-trends-and￾reports/nationalhealthexpenddata/nhe-fact-sheet
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. (2010, July 16). CMS finalizes definition of
meaningful use of certified electronic health records (EHR) technology.
www.cms.gov/newsroom/fact-sheets/cms-finalizes-definition-meaningful-use-certified￾electronic-health-records-ehr-technology
Clark, D. (2023). Proposed modifications to the HIPAA Privacy Rule 2023: What to know
and how to prepare. HIPAAtrek. https://hipaatrek.com/hipaa-privacy-rule-2023-what-to￾know-and-how-to-prepare
Crader, M. F., & Varacallo, M. (2020). Preoperative antibiotic prophylaxis. StatPearls.
www.statpearls.com/kb/viewarticle/27671
Gagnon, K., & Sabus, C. (2015). Professionalism in a digital age: Opportunities and
considerations for using social media in health care. Physical Therapy, 95(3), 406–414.
http://doi.org/10.2522/ptj.20130227
Hellerstein, D. (1999). HIPAA’s impact on healthcare. Health Management Technology,
20(3), 10–12, 14–15. https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10351268
Hellerstein, D. (2000). HIPAA and health information privacy rules: Almost there. Health
Management Technology, 21(4), 26, 28, 30–31. PMID:11066924
HIPAA Journal. (2023a, January 2). The ten most common HIPAA violations you should
avoid. www.hipaajournal.com/common-hipaa-violations
HIPAA Journal. (2023b, January 1). What are the penalties for HIPAA violations?
www.hipaajournal.com/what-are-the-penalties-for-hipaa-violations-7096Indian Health Service. (2003). Guidance on compliance with HIPAA transactions and code
sets.
www.ihs.gov/sites/hipaa/themes/responsive2017/display_objects/documents/guidance￾final.pdf
Institute of Medicine. (2000). To err is human: Building a safer health system. National
Academies Press.
Kleyman, B. (2018, January 29). 4 Key ways to overcome healthcare BYOD security
challenges. HealthITSecurity. https://healthitsecurity.com/news/4-key-ways-to￾overcome-healthcare-byod-security-challenges
Legal Information Institute. (2013). 45 CFR § 160.103 - Definitions.
www.law.cornell.edu/cfr/text/45/160.103
Lengyel-Gomez, B. (2017, February 20). 21st Century Cures Act—A summary. Healthcare
Information Management and Systems Society. www.himss.org/resources/21st-century￾cures-act-summary
Office of the National Coordinator for Health Information Technology. (n.d.-a). About ONC:
What we do. www.healthit.gov/topic/about-onc
Office of the National Coordinator for Health Information Technology. (n.d.-b). Health
Information Technology Advisory Committee (HITAC).
www.healthit.gov/hitac/committees/health-information-technology-advisory-committee￾hitac
Office of the National Coordinator for Health Information Technology. (n.d.-c). National
trends in hospital and physician adoption of electronic health records.
www.healthit.gov/data/quickstats/national-trends-hospital-and-physician-adoption￾electronic-health-records
Office of the National Coordinator for Health Information Technology. (n.d.-d). The ONC
Cures Act final rule. www.healthit.gov/cures/sites/default/files/cures/2020-
03/TheONCCuresActFinalRule.pdf
Office of the National Coordinator for Health Information Technology. (2009). Index for
excerpts from the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (ARRA).
www.healthit.gov/sites/default/files/hitech_act_excerpt_from_arra_with_index.pdf
Pennic, J. (2013, June 11). 3 Do’s and don’ts of effective HIPAA compliance for BYOD &
mHealth. HIT Consultant. https://www.hhs.gov/foia/privacy/index.html
Pershad, Y., Hangge, P., Albadawi, H., & Oklu, R. (2018). Social medicine: Twitter in
healthcare. Journal of Clinical Medicine, 7(6), 121–130.
https://doi.org/10.3390/jcm7060121
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (2015). Submitting notice of a breach to
the secretary. www.hhs.gov/guidance/document/breach-reporting-submitting-notice￾breach-secretary
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (2016). Administration takes first step to
implement legislation modernizing how Medicare pays physicians for quality.
https://wayback.archive￾it.org/3926/20170127191630/https://www.hhs.gov/about/news/2016/04/27/administration
-takes-first-step-implement-legislation-modernizing-how-medicare-pays-physicians.html
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (2018). Statement of organization,
functions, and delegations of authority; Office of the National Coordinator for HealthInformation Technology. www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-2018-05-02/pdf/2018-
09361.pdf
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (2019). 45 CFR part 160: Notification of
enforcement discretion regarding HIPAA civil money penalties.
www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-2019-04-30/pdf/2019-08530.pdf
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (2022, August 31). The Privacy Act.
www.hhs.gov/foia/privacy/index.html
U.S. Food and Drug Administration. (2022, September 28). Policy for device software
functions and mobile medical applications. www.fda.gov/media/80958/download
Wani, T. A., Mendoza, A., & Gray, K. (2020). Hospital bring-your-own-device security
challenges and solutions: Systematic review of gray literature. JMIR mHealth and
uHealth, 8(6), e18175. https://doi.org/10.2196/18175© nadla/E+/Getty ImagesChapter 9
Chapter 10
Chapter 11
Chapter 12
Chapter 13
SECTION III
Nursing Informatics Administrative
Applications: Precare and Care Support
Systems Development Life Cycle: Nursing Informatics
and Organizational Decision-Making
Administrative Information Systems
The Human–Technology Interface
Electronic Security
Achieving Excellence by Managing Workflow and
Initiating Quality Projects
Nursing informatics (NI) and information technology (IT) have
invaded nursing, and some nurses are happy with the capabilities
afforded by this specialty. Others, however, remain convinced that
the changes wrought by IT are nothing more than a nuisance. In the
past, nursing administrators have found the implementation of
technology tools to be an expensive venture with minimal rewards.
This disappointment is likely related to their lack of knowledge about
NI, which caused nursing administrators to listen to vendors or other
colleagues; in essence, it was decision-making based on limited and
biased information. There were at least two reasons for the
experience of limited rewards. First, nurses were rarely included in
the testing and implementation of products designed for nurses and
nursing tasks and workflows. Second, the new products they
purchased had to interface with old, legacy systems that were not at
all compatible or that seemed compatible until the glitches arose.
These glitches caused frustration for clinicians and administrators
alike. They purchased tools that should have made the nurses
happy, but instead all they did was grumble.The good news is that approaches have changed as a result of the
difficult lessons learned from the early forays into technology tools.
Nursing personnel are involved at both the agency and the vendor
levels in the decision-making process and development of new
systems and products charged with enhancing the practice of
nursing. Older legacy systems are being replaced with newer
systems that have more capacity to interface with other systems.
Nurses and administrators have become more astute in the realm of
NI, but there is still a long way to go. Chapter 9, Systems
Development Life Cycle: Nursing Informatics and Organizational
Decision-Making, introduces the systems development life cycle,
which is used to make important and appropriate organizational
decisions for technology adoption.
Administrators need information systems that facilitate their
administrative role, and they particularly need systems that provide
financial, risk management, quality assurance, human resources,
payroll, patient registration, acuity, communication, and scheduling
functions. The administrator must be open to learning about all the
tools available. One of the most important tasks that an administrator
can oversee and engage in is data mining, or the extraction of data
and information from big data, which are sizable data sets that have
been collected and warehoused. Data mining helps to identify
patterns in aggregate data; gain insights; and, ultimately, discover
and generate knowledge applicable to nursing science. To take
advantage of these benefits, nursing administrators must become
astute informaticists—knowledge workers who harness the
information and knowledge at their fingertips to facilitate the practice
of their clinicians, improve patient care, and advance the science of
nursing.
Clinical information systems (CISs) have traditionally been
designed for use by one unit or department within an institution.
However, because clinicians working in other areas of the
organization need access to this information, these data and
information are generally used by more than one area. Newinitiatives continue to arise with the integration and enhancement of
the electronic health record, which places institutions in the position
of striving to manage their CISs through the electronic health record.
Currently, there are many CISs, including nursing, laboratory,
pharmacy, monitoring, and order entry plus additional ancillary
systems, to meet the individual institution’s needs. Chapter 10,
Administrative Information Systems, provides an overview of
administrative information systems and helps the reader to
understand the powerful data aggregation and data mining tools
afforded by these systems.
Chapter 11, The Human–Technology Interface, discusses the
need to significantly improve quality and safety outcomes in the
United States. Through the use of IT, the designs for human–
technology interfaces can be radically improved so that the
technology better fits both human and task requirements. A number
of useful tools are currently available for the analysis, design, and
evaluation phases of development life cycles and should be used
routinely by informatics professionals to ensure that technology
better fits both task and user requirements. In this chapter, the
authors stress that the focus on interface improvement using these
tools has dramatically improved patient safety in a specific area of
health care: anesthesiology. With increased attention from
informatics professionals and engineers, the same kinds of
improvements are being made in other areas. The human–
technology interface is a crucial area if the theories, architectures,
and tools provided by the building block sciences are to be
implemented.
Each organization must determine who can access and use its
information systems and provide robust tools for securing
information in a networked environment. Chapter 12, Electronic
Security, addresses the important safeguards for protecting
information. As new technologies designed to improve
interprofessional collaboration and enhance patient care are
adopted, barriers to implementation and resistance by practitionersto change are frequently encountered. Chapter 13, Achieving
Excellence by Managing Workflow and Initiating Quality Projects,
provides insights into clinical workflow analysis and advice on
improving efficiency and effectiveness while reviewing what we have
learned as we tried to achieve meaningful use of caring
technologies. The Patient Room ‘Next’ (PRN) initiative is reviewed.
Any new technology implementation will affect work processes and
disrupt workflow. Attention must be paid to this effect, and strategies
must be implemented to minimize negative effects. Quality
improvement projects are focused on improving work processes and
patient safety after technologies have been implemented. Quality
improvement projects employ many of the same strategies and
metrics used in workflow analyses.
Pause to reflect on the Foundation of Knowledge model (Figure
III-1) and its relationship to both personal and organizational
knowledge management. Consider that organizational decision￾making must be driven by appropriate information and knowledge
developed in the organization and applied with wisdom. Equally
important to adopting technology within an organization is the
consideration of the knowledge base and knowledge capabilities of
the individuals within that organization. Administrators must use the
system development life cycle wisely and must carefully consider
organizational workflow as they adopt NI technology for meaningful
use.Figure III-1 Foundation of Knowledge Model
Description
The reader of this section is challenged to ask the following
questions: (1) How can I apply the knowledge gained from my
practice setting to benefit my patients and enhance my practice? (2)
How can I help my colleagues and patients understand and use the
current technology that is available? and (3) How can I use my
wisdom to create the theories, tools, and knowledge of the future?C H A P T E R 9
Systems Development Life
Cycle: Nursing Informatics
and Organizational Decision￾Making
OBJECTIVES
1. Describe the systems development life cycle (SDLC).
2. Explore selected approaches to the SDLC.
3. Assess interoperability and its importance in addressing and meeting the challenges
of implementing the HITECH Act in health care.
4. Reflect on the past to move forward into the future to determine how new systems
will be developed, integrated, and made interoperable in health care.
KEY TERMS
agile
chief information officer
computer-aided software engineering (CASE)
dynamic system development method (DSDM)
end user
free/libre open source software (FLOSS)
free/open source software (F/OSS or FOSS)
health management information system
hospital information system (HIS)
information technology (IT)
integrationinteroperability
iteration
milestone
MoSCoW
object-oriented systems development (OOSD)
open source software (OSS)
prototype
rapid application development (RAD)
rapid prototyping
repository
Scrum
Scrum master
Scrum team
systems development life cycle (SDLC)
TELOS strategy
total cost of ownership (TCO)
waterfall modelIntroduction
The following case scenario describes the development of rural
clinics with an integrated data collection and processing system
demonstrating the need to have all stakeholders involved from the
beginning to the end of a systems development life cycle (SDLC).
Creating the right team to manage system development is key.
Various methodologies have been developed to guide this process.
This chapter reviews the following approaches to the SDLC:
waterfall; rapid prototyping, or rapid development (RAD); object￾oriented system development (OOSD); dynamic system
development method (DSDM); and agile. When reading about each
approach, think about the case scenario and how important it is to
understand the specific situational needs and the various
methodologies for bringing a system to life. As in the case scenario
described later, it is generally necessary or beneficial to use a hybrid
approach that blends two or more models for a robust development
process.
As the case demonstrates, the process of developing systems, or
the SDLC, is an ongoing development with a life cycle. The first step
in developing a system is to understand the problems, or business
needs. This step is followed by understanding the solution, or how to
address those needs; developing a plan; implementing the plan;
evaluating the implementation; and, finally, performing plan
maintenance, plan review, and system destruction. If a system needs
major upgrading outside the scope of the maintenance phase or
needs to be replaced because of technological advances or the
business needs change, a new project is launched, the old system is
destroyed, and the life cycle begins anew.
The SDLC is a way to deliver efficient and effective information
systems (ISs) that fit with the strategic business plan of the
organization, which stems from its mission. In the world of health
care, the development of the IS includes a needs assessment of theW
entire organization, which should include outreach linkages (as seen
in the case scenario) and partnerships and merged or shared
functions. The organization’s participating physicians and other
ancillary professionals and their offices are included in a thorough
needs assessment. When developing a strategic plan, the design
must consider the existence of the organization within the larger
healthcare delivery system and assess the various factors outside of
the organization itself, including technological, legislative, and
environmental issues, that affect the organization. The plan must
identify the needs of the organization as a whole and propose
solutions to meet those needs or a way to address the issues.
The SDLC can occur within an organization or be outsourced or
be a blend of the two approaches. With outsourcing, the team hires
an outside organization to carry out all or some of the development.
Developing systems that truly meet business needs is not an easy
task and is quite complex. Therefore, it is common to run over
budget and miss milestones. When reading this chapter, reflect on
the case scenario and, in general, the challenges teams face when
developing systems.
CASE SCENARIO
ellness Alliance was formed from the merger of two large healthcare facilities
to better serve the community. Its mission is to establish and manage
community health programming that addresses the health needs of the rural,
underserved populations in the area. Wellness Alliance would like to establish pilot
clinical sites in five rural areas to promote access and provide health care to these
underserved consumers. Each clinical site will have a full-time program manager and
three part-time employees (i.e., a secretary, a nurse, and a doctor). Each program
manager will report to the wellness program coordinator, a newly created position
within Wellness Alliance.
Because you are a community health nurse with extensive experience, you have
been appointed as the wellness program coordinator. Your directive is to establish
these clinical sites within 3 months and report back in 6 months with the following
information: (1) community health programs offered, (2) level of community involvement
in outreach health programs and clinical site–based programming, (3) consumer visits
made to the clinical site, and (4) personnel performance.
You are excited and challenged, but soon reality sets in. You know that you have five
sites with five program managers. You need some way to gather vital information fromeach of them in a similar manner so that the data are meaningful and useful to you as
you develop your reports and evaluate the strengths and weaknesses of the pilot
project. You know that you need a system that will handle all of the pilot project’s
information needs.
Your first stop is the chief information officer of the health system, a nurse
informaticist. You know her from the health management information system mini￾seminar that she led. After explaining your needs, you share with her the constraint that
this system must be in place in 3 months, which is when the sites will be up and
running, before you make your report. When she begins to ask questions, you realize
that you do not know the answers. All you know is that you must be able to report on
which community health programs were offered, track the level of community
involvement in outreach health programs and clinical site–based programming, monitor
consumer visits made to the clinical site, and monitor the performance of site
personnel. You know that you want accessible, real-time tracking, but as far as
programming and clinical site–related activities are concerned, you do not have a
precise description of either the process or the procedures that will be involved in
implementing the pilot or the means by which the clinical sites will gather and enter
data.
The chief information officer requires that you and each program manager remain
involved in the development process. They assign an information technology (IT)
analyst to work with you and your team in the development of a system that will meet
your current needs. After the first meeting, your head is spinning. The IT analyst has
challenged your team not only to work out the process for your immediate needs but
also to envision what your future needs will be. At the next meeting, you tell the analyst
that your team does not feel comfortable trying to map everything out at this point.
The analyst states that there are several ways to go about building the system and
software by using the SDLC. Noticing the blank look on everyone’s faces, they explain
that the SDLC is a series of actions used to develop an IS. The SDLC is similar to the
nursing process in which the nurse must assess, diagnose, plan, implement, evaluate,
and revise. If the plan developed in this way does not meet the patient’s need or a new
problem arises, the nurse either revises and updates the plan or starts anew. Likewise,
you will plan, analyze, design, implement, operate, support, and secure the proposed
community health system. The SDLC is an iterative process—a conceptual model that
is used in project management to describe the phases involved in developing an IS. It
moves from assessing feasibility to project initiation, to design analysis, to system
specification, to programming, to testing, to implementation, to maintenance, and to
destruction—literally from beginning to end.
As the IT analyst describes this process, once again they see puzzled looks. They
quickly state that even the destruction of the system is planned—that is, how it will be
retired, broken down, and replaced with a new system. Even during upgrades,
destruction tactics can be invoked to secure the data and even decide whether servers
are to be disposed of or repurposed. The security people will tell you that this is their
phase where they make sure that any sensitive information is properly handled and
decide whether the data are to be securely and safely archived or destroyed.
After reviewing all the possible methods and helping you to conduct your feasibility
and business study, the analyst chooses the DSDM. This SDLC model was selected
because it works well when the time span is short and the requirements are fluctuating
and mainly unknown at the outset. The IT analyst explains that this model works wellon tight schedules and is a highly iterative and incremental approach that stresses
continual user input and involvement. As part of this highly iterative process, the team
will revisit and loop through the same development activities numerous times; this
repetitive examination provides ever-increasing levels of detail, thereby improving
accuracy. The analyst explains that you will use a mock-up of the hospital information
system (HIS) and design for what is known; you will then create your own mini-system
that will interface with the HIS. Because time is short, the analysis, design, and
development phases will occur simultaneously while you are formulating and revising
your specific requirements through the iterative process so that they can be integrated
into the system.
The functional model iteration phase will be completed in 2 weeks, based on the
information that you have given the analyst. At that time, the team will review the
prototype. The IT analyst tells you to expect at least two or more iterations of the
prototype based on your input. You should end with software that provides some key
capabilities. Design and testing will occur in the design and build iteration phase and
continue until the system is ready for implementation, which is the final phase. This
DSDM should work well because any previous phase can be revisited and reworked
through its iterative process.
One month into the SDLC process, the IT analyst tells the team that they will be
leaving their position at Wellness Alliance. They introduce their replacement. The
replacement is new to Wellness Alliance and is eager to work with the team. The
original IT analyst will be there for one more week to help the new analyst with the
transition. When the original analyst explains to the new analyst that you are working
through DSDM, they look a bit panicky and state that they have never used this
approach. They have used the waterfall, prototyping, iterative enhancement, spiral, and
object-oriented methodologies but never the DSDM. From what they have heard,
DSDM is new and often runs amok because of the lack of understanding as to how to
implement it appropriately. After one week on the project, the new IT analyst believes
that this approach was not the best choice. As the leader of this SDLC, they are
growing concerned about having a product ready when the clinical sites open. They
might combine another method to create a hybrid approach with which they would be
more comfortable; they are thinking aloud and have everyone very nervous.
The IT analyst reviews the equipment that has arrived for the sites and is excited to
learn that the computers were ordered from Apple. They will be powerful and versatile
enough for your needs.
Two months after the opening of the clinical sites, you, as the wellness program
coordinator, are still tweaking the system with the help of the IT analyst. It is hard to
believe how quickly the team was able to get a robust system in place. As you think
back on the process, it seems so long ago that you reviewed the HIS for deficiencies
and screenshots. You reexamined your requirements and watched them come to life
through five prototype iterations and constant security updates. You trained your
personnel on its use, tested its performance, and made final adjustments before
implementation. Your own stand-alone system that met your needs was installed and
fully operational on the Friday before you opened the clinic doors on Monday, one day
ahead of schedule.
At the end of week one, the IT analyst sends out a meeting invitation to discuss the
project and lessons learned. In the invitation, they state that the purpose of the meeting
is to review the process, what went well and what did not, and any issues that aroseand how they were addressed so that this process can be improved going forward.
They stress that this is a meeting to review the process and a time to reflect, not a time
to cast blame but instead to look for areas of growth; it can be a time to recognize and
praise those who went above and beyond.
The lessons-learned meeting was highly collaborative and energizing since everyone
came to the meeting prepared to share their reflections and perspectives openly.
Communication was one of the areas where issues arose during development. They
discussed how this could have been handled better at the time and offered suggestions
for improving communications in subsequent developments. Many of the people in
attendance were recognized for their work ethic and positive attitudes throughout the
entire project. It was a very positive meeting that did address issues and ideas for
improving the process going forward.
You are continuing to evaluate and modify the system, but that is how the SDLC
works. It is never finished but rather is constantly evolving.Waterfall Model
The waterfall model is one of the oldest methods and literally
depicts a waterfall effect; that is, the output from each previous
phase flows into or becomes the initial input for the next phase. This
model is a sequential development process in that there is one pass
through each component activity from conception, or feasibility,
through implementation in a linear order. The deliverables for each
phase result from the inputs and any additional information that is
gathered. There is minimal or no iterative development where one
takes advantage of what was learned during the development of
earlier deliverables. Many projects are broken down into six phases
(Figure 9-1), especially small to medium-size projects.
Figure 9-1 Waterfall Phases
Feasibility
As the term implies, the feasibility study is used to determine
whether the project should be initiated and supported. This studyshould generate a project plan and an estimated budget for the
SDLC phases. Often, the TELOS strategy (i.e., technological and
systems, economic, legal, operational, and schedule feasibility) is
followed. Technological and systems feasibility addresses the issues
of technological capabilities, including the expertise and
infrastructure needed to complete the project. Economic feasibility is
determined by performing a cost-benefit analysis, which weighs the
benefits versus the costs to determine whether the project is fiscally
possible and worth undertaking. Formal assessments should include
a return on investment. Legal feasibility assesses the legal
ramifications of the project, including current contractual obligations,
legislation, regulatory bodies, and liabilities that could affect the
project. Operational feasibility determines how effective the project
will be in meeting the needs and expectations of the organization
and actually achieving the goals of the project or addressing and
solving the business problem. Schedule feasibility assesses the
viability of the time frame, making sure it is a reasonable estimation
of the time and resources necessary for the project to be developed
in time to attain the benefits and meet constraints. The TELOS
strategy helps to provide a clear picture of the feasibility of the
project.
Analysis
During the analysis phase, the requirements for the system are
teased out from a detailed study of the business needs of the
organization. As part of this analysis, workflows and business
practices are examined. It may be necessary to consider options for
changing the business process.
Design
The design phase focuses on high- and low-level design and
interface and data design. At the high-level phase, team members
establish which programs are needed and ascertain how they will
interact. At the low-level phase, team members explore how theindividual programs will actually work. The interface design
determines what the look and feel will be, or what the interfaces will
look like. During data design, the team critically thinks about and
verifies which data are required or essential.
The analysis and design phases are vital in the development
cycle, and great care is taken during these phases to ensure that the
software’s overall configuration is defined properly. Mock-ups or
prototypes of screenshots, reports, and processes may be generated
to clarify the requirements and get the team or stakeholders on the
same page, limiting the occurrence of glitches that might result in
costly software development revisions later in the project.
Implement
During this phase, the designs are brought to life through
programming code. The right programming language, such as C++,
Pascal, and Java, is chosen based on the application requirements.
Test
The testing is generally broken down into five layers: (1) the
individual programming modules, (2) integration, (3) volume, (4) the
system as a whole, and (5) beta testing. Typically, the programs are
developed in a modular fashion, and the individual modules are then
subjected to detailed testing. The modules are subsequently
synthesized, and the interfaces between the modules are tested.
The system is evaluated regarding its platform and the expected
volume of data. It is then tested as a complete system by the team.
Finally, to determine whether the system performs appropriately for
the user, it is beta tested. During beta testing, users put the new
system through its paces to make sure that it does what they need it
to do to perform their jobs.
MaintainOnce the system has been finalized from the testing phase, it must
be maintained. This could include user support through actual
software changes necessitated through use or time.
This model is sequential, with five common stages that must be
completed before the next sequential stage begins (Adobe
Communications Team, 2022; Isaias & Issa, 2015). This could be
considered a disadvantage to system development since no projects
are static and changes typically occur during the SDLC. As
requirements change, there is no way to address them formally
using the waterfall model after project requirements are developed.
The waterfall model should be used for simple projects when the
requirements are well known and stable from the outset.Rapid Prototyping, or Rapid Application
Development
As technology advances and faster development is expected, rapid
prototyping, also known as rapid application development
(RAD), provides a fast way to add functionality through prototyping
and user testing. It is easier for users to examine an actual prototype
than documentation. A rapid requirements-gathering phase relies on
workshops and focus groups to build a prototype application using
real data. This prototype is then beta tested with users, and their
feedback is used to perfect or add functionality and capabilities to
the system (Figure 9-2).
Figure 9-2 Rapid Prototyping, or Rapid Application Development (RAD)
According to Alexandrou (2023), “RAD proposes that products can
be developed faster and of higher quality” (para. 1). The RAD
approach uses informal communication, repurposes components,
and typically follows a fast-paced schedule. Object-oriented
programming, using languages such as C++ and Java, promotes
software repurposing and reuse.The major advantage of RAD is the speed with which the system
can be deployed; a working, usable system can be built within 3
months. The use of prototyping allows the developers to skip steps
in the SDLC process in favor of getting a mock-up in front of the
user. At times, the system may be deemed acceptable if it meets a
predefined minimum set of requirements rather than all of the
identified requirements. This rapid deployment also limits the
project’s exposure to change elements. Unfortunately, the fast pace
can be its biggest disadvantage in some cases. Once one is locked
into a tight development schedule, the process may be too fast for
adequate testing to be put in place and completed. The most
dangerous lack of testing is in the realm of security.
The RAD approach is chosen because it builds systems quickly
through user-driven prototyping and adherence to quick, strict
delivery milestones. This approach continues to be refined and
honed, and other contemporary manifestations of RAD continue to
emerge in the agile software development realm.Object-Oriented Systems Development
The object-oriented systems development (OOSD) model blends
SDLC logic with object-oriented modeling and programming power to
apply object-oriented concepts to all the stages of the SDLC
(GeeksforGeeks, 2022; Stair & Reynolds, 2016). It is a method of
contemplating and reflecting on problems using models organized
around real-world concepts or objects. Object-oriented modeling
represents real-world objects by modeling the real-world entities or
things (e.g., clinic, patient, account, or nursing or healthcare
professional) into abstract computer software objects. Once the
system is object oriented, all the interactions or exchanges take
place between or among the objects. The objects are derived from
classes, and each object comprises data and the actions that can be
enacted on that data. Class hierarchy allows objects to inherit
attributes from parent classes, which fosters object reuse and results
in less coding. The object-oriented programming languages, such as
C++ and Java, promote software repurposing and reuse. Therefore,
the class hierarchy must be clearly and appropriately designed to
reap the benefits of this SDLC approach, which uses object-oriented
programming to support the interactions of objects.
For example, in the case scenario, a system could be developed
for Wellness Alliance to manage the community health programming
for the clinic system being set up for outreach. There could be a
class of programs, and well-baby care could be an object in the class
of programs; programs is a relationship between Wellness Alliance
and well-baby care. The program class has attributes, such as clinic
site, location address, or attendees or patients. The relationship itself
may be considered an object having attributes, such as pediatric
programs. The class hierarchy from which all the system objects are
created with resultant object interactions must be clearly defined.
The OOSD model is a highly iterative approach. The process
begins by investigating where object-oriented solutions can addressbusiness problems or needs; determining user requirements;
designing the system; programming or modifying object modeling
(i.e., class hierarchy and objects); and implementing, testing,
modifying, and reimplementing the system and ends with the new
system being reviewed regularly at established intervals and
modifications being made as needed throughout its life.Dynamic System Development Method
The dynamic system development method (DSDM) is a very
iterative and incremental approach with a high level of user input and
involvement. The iterative process requires repetitive examination
that enhances detail and improves accuracy. The DSDM has three
phases: (1) preproject, (2) project life cycle (i.e., feasibility and
business studies, functional model iteration, design and build
iteration, and implementation), and (3) postproject.
In the preproject phase, buy-in is established and funding is
secured. This helps to identify the stakeholders (i.e., administration
and end users) and gain support for the project. In the second
phase, the project’s life cycle begins. This phase includes five steps:
(1) feasibility, (2) business studies, (3) functional model iteration, (4)
design and build iteration, and (5) implementation (Figure 9-3).
Copyright 2014 Agile Business Consortium Limited. Reproduced by kind permission.Figure 9-3 Dynamic System Development Method (DSDM)
Description
In steps 1 and 2, the feasibility and business studies are
completed. The team ascertains whether this project meets the
required business needs while identifying the potential risks during
the feasibility study. In step 1, the deliverables are a feasibility report,
project plan, and risk log. Once the project is deemed feasible, step
2, the business study, is begun. The business study extends the
feasibility report by examining the processes and the stakeholders’
needs. It is important to align the stakeholders with the project and
secure their buy-in because it is necessary to have user input and
involvement throughout the entire DSDM process. Therefore,
bringing them in at the beginning of the project is imperative.
Using the MoSCoW approach, the team works with the
stakeholders to develop a prioritized requirements list and a
development plan. MoSCoW stands for “must have, should have,
could have, and would have.” The “must have” requirements are
necessary to meet the business needs and are critical to the success
of the project. The “should have” requirements are those that would
be great to have if possible, but the success of the project does not
depend on their being addressed. The “could have” requirements are
those that would be nice to have met, and the “would have”
requirements can be put off until later; these requirements may be
undertaken during future developmental iterations. Timeboxing is
generally used to develop the project plan. In timeboxing, the project
is divided into sections, each having its own fixed budget and
milestones for deliverables. The MoSCoW approach is then used to
prioritize the requirements within each section; the requirements are
the only variables because the schedule and budget are set. If a
project is running out of time or money, the team can easily omit the
requirements that have been identified as the lowest priority to meet
their schedule and budget obligations. This does not mean that the
final deliverable, the actual system, would be flawed or incomplete.Instead, because the team has already determined the “must have”
or “should have” items, it still meets the business needs. According
to Haughey (2021), the 80/20 rule, or Pareto principle, can be
applied to nearly everything. The Pareto principle states that 80% of
the project comes from 20% of the system requirements; therefore,
the 20% of requirements must be the crucial requirements, or those
with the highest priority. One must also consider the pancake
principle: The first pancake is not as good as the rest, and one
should know that the first development will not be perfect. This is
why it is extremely important to clearly identify the “must have” and
“should have” requirements.
In the third step of the project life cycle phase, known as functional
model iteration, the deliverables are a functional model and
prototype ready for user testing. This could take several iterations to
develop the desired functionality and incorporate the users’ input. At
this stage, the team should examine the quality of the product and
revise the list requirements and risk log. The requirements are
adjusted, the ones that have been realized are deleted, and the
remaining requirements are prioritized. The risk log is revised based
on the risk analysis completed during and after prototype
development.
The design and build iteration step focuses on integrating
functional components and identifying the nonfunctional
requirements that need to be in the tested system. Testing is crucial;
the team will develop a system that the end users can safely use on
a daily basis. The team will garner user feedback and generate user
documentation. These efforts provide this step’s deliverable, a tested
system with documentation for the next and final phase of the
development process.
In the final step of the project life cycle phase, known as
implementation, deliverables are the system (ready to use),
documentation, and trained users. The requirements list should be
satisfied along with the users’ needs. Training users and
implementing the approved system are the first part of this phase,
and the final part consists of a full review. It is important to review the
effect of the system on the business processes and determinewhether it addresses the requirements established at the beginning
of the project. This final review determines whether the project is
completed or if further development is necessary. If further
development is needed, the preceding phases are revisited. If the
project is complete and satisfies the users, then it moves into
maintenance and ongoing development.
The final phase is labeled postproject. In this phase, the team
verifies that the system is functioning properly. Once verified, the
maintenance schedule begins. Because the DSDM is iterative, this
postproject phase is seen as ongoing development, and any of the
deliverables can be refined. This is what makes the DSDM such an
iterative development process.
DSDM is one of an increasing number of agile methodologies
being introduced, such as Scrum and Extreme Programming. Refer
to the following information on the agile method. These new
approaches address the organizational, managerial, and
interpersonal communication issues that often bog down SDLC
projects. Empowerment of teams and user involvement enhance the
iterative and programming strengths provided in these SDLC
models.Agile
The agile method is different from other approaches to software
development since the focus is on “the people doing the work and
how they work together. Solutions evolve through collaboration
between self-organizing cross-functional teams utilizing the
appropriate practices for their context” (Agile Alliance, n.d., para. 7).
The agile software development approach merges iterative and
incremental process models whereby the product is broken into
small incremental builds on which the teams work in short bursts,
such as 2- to 4-week intervals, to accomplish their tasks. Failure is
considered positive if you fail fast and fail often to get to your goal.
This method lends itself well to smaller projects and rapidly delivers
functional software to the customer; this quick turnaround enhances
customer satisfaction.
Scrum is an agile strategy that emphasizes collaboration, team
autonomy, or self-management and flexibility to adapt to emerging
business realities. This strategy organizes software developers into a
team called a Scrum team to reach a common goal of creating
market-ready products and services using iterative development
cycles. As a framework, it can manage complex knowledge work.
Scrum defines roles, procedures, and tools to guarantee the delivery
of an effective and efficient product. The three foundational concepts
of Scrum are adaptation, transparency, and inspection. The Scrum
master is the agile servant–leader project manager who facilitates
the work performed by the Scrum team; this leader is responsible for
removing barriers and obstacles so that tasks may be completed for
the team to achieve its goals. The Scrum master must support the
Scrum team and facilitate its ability to self-manage and self-organize.
Since this is a highly collaborative process, the Scrum master must
also establish and ensure a positive environment that is open to
discussion and sharing of ideas. In addition, the Scrum master must
assess and monitor Scrum team interactions with those outside ofthe team to determine which exchanges with the Scrum team are
beneficial and which are not in order to maximize the value
generated by the Scrum team (i.e., shielding the Scrum team from
distractions and work interruptions). The Scrum master guides,
protects, coaches, facilitates, and develops the Scrum team to reach
its goals of producing high-quality products and service deliverables.Computer-Aided Software Engineering Tools
When reviewing the SDLC, the computer-aided software
engineering (CASE) tools that will be used must be described.
CASE is the methodical application of a set of tools that promote
adherence to the SDLC process by automating several required
tasks, which provides standardization and thoroughness to the total
systems to develop quality software systems that are free of defects
(Stair & Reynolds, 2016; Waghmare, 2023; Wikibooks.org, 2018).
These tools help to reduce cost and development time while
enriching the quality of the product. CASE tools contain a repository
with information about the system: models, data definitions, and
references that link models together. Repositories are valuable in
their ability to make sure the models follow diagramming rules and
are consistent and complete.
The various types of tools can be referred to as upper-CASE or
lower-CASE tools. The upper-CASE tools support the analysis and
design phases, whereas the lower-CASE tools support
implementation. The tools can also be general or specific in nature,
with the specific tools being designed for a particular methodology.
Two examples of CASE tools are Visible Analyst and Rational
Rose (IBM, 2021). According to Andoh-Baidoo et al. (2009), Visible
Analyst “supports structured and object-oriented design (UML)” (p.
372). Rational Rose supports solely object-oriented design (UML),
allowing for “side-by-side comparison between the Rose diagrams
and the equivalent diagrams in the new Rational UML modeling
products” (IBM, 2021, para. 3). Both tools can “build and reverse
database schemas for SQL and Oracle” and “support code
generation for pre-.NET versions of Visual Basic” (p. 372). Visible
Analyst can also support shell code generation for pre-.NET versions
of C and COBOL, whereas Rational Rose can support complete
code for C++ and Java. In addition, Andoh-Baidoo et al. (2009) found
that Rational Rose “[p]rovides good integration with Java, andincorporates common packages into class diagrams and
decompositions through classes” (p. 372).
CASE tools have many advantages, including decreasing
development time and producing more flexible systems. On the
downside, they can be difficult to customize and use with existing
systems.Open Source Software, Free/Libre Open
Source Software, and Free/Open Source
Software
Another area that must be discussed with the SDLC is open source
software (OSS), free/libre open source software (FLOSS), and
free/open source software (F/OSS or FOSS). There are two
political camps in the free software community: the free software
movement and open source. According to Stallman (2021),
The free software movement is a campaign for computer users’ freedom; we say
that a nonfree program is an injustice to its users. The open source camp declines
to see the issue as a matter of justice to the users, and bases its arguments on
practical benefits only. (para. 1)
Free software refers to freedom and not cost and, as a nonpolitical
statement, is noted as free/libre, creating the FLOSS abbreviation.
Stallworth stated that “[o]thers use the term ‘FOSS,’ which stands for
‘Free and Open Source Software.’ This is meant to mean the same
thing as ‘FLOSS,’ but it is less clear, since it fails to explain that ‘free’
refers to freedom” (para. 4).
An examination of job descriptions or advertisements for
candidates shows that many IS and IT professionals need a
thorough understanding of the SDLC and OSS development tools
(e.g., PHP, MySQL, and HTML). With OSS, any programmer can
implement, modify, apply, reconstruct, and restructure the rich
libraries of source codes available from proven, well-tested products.
As Karopka et al. (2014) noted,
Free/Libre Open Source Software (FLOSS) has been successfully adopted across
a wide range of different areas and has opened new ways of value creation. Today
there are hundreds of examples of successful FLOSS projects and products. . . .
Especially in times of financial crisis and austerity the adoption of FLOSS
principles opens interesting alternatives and options to tremendously lower total
cost of ownership (TCO) and open the way for a continuous user-driven
improvement process. (para. 6)To transform health care, it is necessary for clinicians to use ISs
that can share patient data (Goulde & Brown, 2006; HealthIT.gov,
2022; NORC, 2014). Because this all sounds terrific, many people
wonder why it has been slowly evolving, not realizing that the
challenges are many. How does one establish the networks
necessary to share data between and among all healthcare facilities
easily and securely? Early attempts at OSS ventures in the
healthcare realm failed because of a lack of support for sustained
effort, technological lags, lack of authority and credibility, and other
such issues. Health care in the United States has been applying
FLOSS-HC (health care). OSS is developed to work with everything
and facilitates the sharing of data and information, making it
essential to interoperability. With OSS, numerous people and entities
are working to solve the same or similar problems, affording
healthcare organizations access to innovative solutions to their major
challenges such as scalability and security.
Health care is realizing the benefits of FLOSS, including vendor
independence.Interoperability
Interoperability, which is the ability to share information across
organizations, remains paramount under the HITECH Act. The ability
to share patient data is extremely important, both within an
organization and across organizational boundaries (Figure 9-4).
Figure 9-4 InteroperabilityAccording to the Health Information and Management Systems
Society (HIMSS; n.d.), there are standards, implementation
specifications, and standards-development organizations. These
various types of organizations are working to support the
development of systems that can seamlessly exchange and use
health data. Few healthcare systems take advantage of the full
potential of the current state of the art in computer science and
health informatics (HIMSS, n.d.). The consequences of this situation
include a drain on financial resources from the economy, the inability
to truly mitigate the occurrence of medical errors, and a lack of
national preparedness to respond to natural and man-made
epidemics and disasters. HIMSS created the Integration and
Interoperability Steering Committee to guide the industry on
allocating resources to develop and implement the standards and
technology needed to achieve interoperability.
As we enter into the SDLC, we must be aware of how this type of
development will affect both our own healthcare organization and the
healthcare delivery system as a whole. In an ideal world, we would
all work together to create systems that are integrated within our own
organization while having the interoperability to cross organizational
boundaries and unite the healthcare delivery system to realize the
common goal of improving the quality of care provided to
consumers.Summary
At times during the SDLC, new information affects the outputs from
earlier phases; the development effort may be reexamined or halted
until these modifications can be reconciled with the current design
and scope of the project. At other times, teams are overwhelmed
with new ideas from the iterative SDLC process that result in new
capabilities or features that exceed the initial scope of the project.
Astute team leaders will preserve these ideas so that they can be
considered at a later time. The team should develop a list of
recommendations to improve the current software when the project
is complete. This iterative and dynamic exchange makes the SDLC
robust.
As technology and research continue to advance, new SDLC
models are being pioneered and revised to enhance development
techniques. The interpretation and implementation of any model
selected reflect the knowledge and skill of the team applying the
model. The success of the project is often directly related to the
quality of the organizational decision-making throughout the project
—that is, how well the plan was followed and documented. United
efforts to create systems that are integrated and interoperable will
define the future of health care.
THOUGHT-PROVOKING QUESTIONS
1. Reflect on the SDLC in relation to the quality of the organizational decision-making
throughout the project. What are some of the major stumbling blocks faced by
healthcare organizations?
2. Why is it important for all nurses and healthcare professionals to understand the
basics of how ISs are selected and implemented?
3. Describe the major differences between the agile method and other SDLC
approaches. Reflect on why you would select the agile method over the waterfall
model, and provide a detailed rationale for your choice.R E F E R E N C E S
Adobe Communications Team. (2022). Waterfall methodology: A complete guide.
https://business.adobe.com/blog/basics/waterfall
Agile Alliance. (n.d.). Agile 101. www.agilealliance.org/agile101
Alexandrou, M. (2023, May 4). Rapid application development (RAD) methodology. Infolific.
www.infolific.com/technology/methodologies/rapid-application-development
Andoh-Baidoo, F., Kunene, K., & Walker, R. (2009). An evaluation of CASE tools as
pedagogical aids in software development courses. Southwest Decision Sciences
Institute. www.swdsi.org/swdsi2009/Papers/9K10.pdf
GeeksforGeeks. (2022, July 8). Types of models in object oriented modeling and design.
www.geeksforgeeks.org/types-of-models-in-object-oriented-modeling-and-design
Goulde, M., & Brown, E. (2006, March). Open source software: A primer for health care
leaders. www.chcf.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/12/PDF-OpenSourcePrimer.pdf
Haughey, D. (2021, October 18). Pareto analysis step by step. ProjectSmart.
www.projectsmart.co.uk/pareto-analysis-step-by-step.php
Health Information and Management Systems Society. (n.d.). Interoperability in healthcare.
www.himss.org/resources/interoperability-healthcare
HealthIT.gov. (2022, July 25). The ONC healthIT playbook: Section 3: Health information
exchange. www.healthit.gov/playbook/health-information-exchange
IBM. (2021, March 2). Rational Rose model. www.ibm.com/docs/en/rational-soft-arch/9.7.0?
topic=migration-rational-rose-model
Isaias, P., & Issa, T. (2015). High level models and methodologies for information systems.
Springer.
Karopka, T., Schmuhl, H., & Demski, H. (2014). Free/libre open source software in health
care: A review. Healthcare Informatics Research, 20(1), 11–22.
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3950260
NORC. (2014). Data sharing to enable clinical transformation at the community level: IT
takes a village. Office of the National Coordinator for Health Information Technology.
www.healthit.gov/sites/default/files/briefs/beacondatasharingbrief062014.pdf
Stair, R., & Reynolds, G. (2016). Principles of information systems (12th ed.). Cengage
Learning.
Stallman, R. (2021). FLOSS and FOSS. GNU Operating System.
www.gnu.org/philosophy/floss-and-foss.en.html
Waghmare, P. (2023, May 17). Software engineering—CASE tools: Learn about types,
components & more! Testbook. https://testbook.com/software-engineering/software￾case-tools
Wikibooks.org. (2018, September 27). Introduction to software engineering/tools/modelling
and case tools.
https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Introduction_to_Software_Engineering/Tools/Modelling_and
_Case_ToolsC H A P T E R 1 0
Administrative Information
Systems
OBJECTIVES
1. Explore agency-based health information systems (ISs).
2. Evaluate how administrators use core business systems in their practice.
3. Assess the function and information output from selected ISs used in healthcare
organizations.
KEY TERMS
acuity system
admission, discharge, and transfer (ADT) system
American National Standards Institute (ANSI)
attribute
care plan
case management information system
clinical documentation improvement (CDI)
clinical documentation system
clinical information system (CIS)
collaboration
column
communication system
computerized physician (or provider) order entry (CPOE) system
core business system
database
database management system
data dictionarydata file
data mart
data mining
data warehouse
decision support
drill down
electronic health record (EHR)
entity
entity relationship diagram
field
financial system
information system (IS)
information technology (IT)
International Organization for Standardization (ISO)
interoperability
key field
knowledge exchange
laboratory information system
managed care information system
order entry system
patient care information system
patient care support system
patient centered
pharmacy information system
picture archiving and communication system (PACS)
primary key
query
radiology information system (RIS)
record
relational database management system (RDMS)
repository
row
scheduling system
stakeholder
standardized plan of care
Structured Query Language (SQL)
table
tiering
triagetuple
unified communications (UC)Introduction
To compete in the ever-changing healthcare arena, organizations
require quick and immediate access to a variety of types of
information, data, and bodies of knowledge for daily clinical,
operational, financial, and human resource activities. Information is
continually shared between units and departments within healthcare
organizations and is also required or requested from other
healthcare organizations, regulatory and government agencies,
educational and philanthropic institutions, and consumers.
Organizations need interoperable systems that are accessible for
data storage and retrieval.
But healthcare organizations are distinct from other organizations
that use ISs. Fichman et al. (2011) identified six important elements
of health care that may explain the lag in the development and
implementation of ISs:
The stakes are life and death.
Healthcare information is highly personal.
Health care is highly influenced by regulation and competition.
Health care is professionally driven and hierarchical.
Health care is multidisciplinary.
Healthcare information system implementation is complex, with
important implications for learning and adaptation. (pp. 420–423)
Healthcare organizations integrate a variety of clinical and
administrative types of information systems (ISs). These systems
collect, process, and distribute patient-centered data to aid in
managing and providing care. Together, they create a
comprehensive record of the patient’s medical history and support
organizational processes. Each of these systems is unique in the
way it functions and provides information to clinicians and
administrators. An understanding of how each of these types ofsystems works within healthcare organizations is fundamental in the
study of informatics. This chapter will focus on the administrative
organizational systems.Principles of Interoperability
It is important to realize that ISs of one type or another have been
used in healthcare facilities for quite a while. Unfortunately, some of
these early systems (sometimes referred to as legacy systems)
created data silos; that is, the data and information central to that
system remained in that system and could not easily be shared with
other systems. A key component to coordinated, patient-centered
care is the interoperability of healthcare ISs. Interoperability is
defined as the ability of various systems and organizations to work
together to exchange information. “Interoperability is made possible
by the implementation of standards” (IEEE Standards University,
2016, para. 51). To provide continuity of care, data and information
about our patients must be accessible and usable so that we are
making informed decisions about their care. We also must monitor
our patients, and often this requires gathering multiple biometric data
from medical devices such as ventilators, blood pressure monitors,
weight scales, and glucose monitors. By using IEEE standards,
these devices can be interoperable. “A patient can access data from
multiple devices at the same time and the provider can monitor all of
the data to get a complete view of the patient’s health” (IEEE
Standards Association, 2023, para. 14). Metadata can be used to
describe information about data and digital objects, using terms
called tags. “Metadata tagging is the process of systematically
assigning those tags to the digital assets in an archive or collection,
typically using a rules-based system to ensure consistency”
(MerlinOne, n.d.).
In 2015, the Office of the National Coordinator for Health
Information Technology (ONC) released an interoperability road map
to promote ease of access and use of electronic healthcare data.
The final goal of the national road map emphasis on interoperability
is driven by the need to “achieve nationwide interoperability to
enable a learning health system, with the person at the center of asystem that can continuously improve care, public health, and
science through real-time data access” (ONC, 2015, p. vii). Since
that time, the ONC sunsetted the road map ahead of schedule, but it
did help “lay the groundwork and set the direction for policy
development on information blocking, reducing provider burden, and
nationwide, electronic health information exchange—to name a few”
(Posnack, 2021b, para. 3). The Health Interoperability Outcomes
2030 will continue to drive this initiative. As an example, “because of
interoperability, faxes are no longer used in clinical care before/by
2030. As another example, because of interoperability, before/by
2030 everyone that is part of a care team will have accurate, up-to￾date clinical information prior to providing care” (Posnack, 2021a,
para. 7). For more information on the synthesized statements that
reflect the public’s overall sentiments regarding 2030 outcomes,
refer to the website at www.healthit.gov/topic/interoperability/health￾interoperability-outcomes-2030. Glickman and Orlova (2022)
recapped the standards development work that has been done over
the past 16 years. This work has “led the International Organization
of Standardization (ISO) Technical Committee 215, Health
Informatics (ISO/TC 215) to the practical realization that a ‘bundle’ of
individual standards is required to create interoperable health
information technology (health IT) standards that will ensure both
adoption and sustainability” (para. 2).
As we develop more sophisticated electronic systems, we are
realizing the huge potential benefits of exchanging secure and
precise healthcare data. However, in the current landscape, several
things need to happen to realize this goal. Chief among them is a
worldwide commitment to interoperability. The Healthcare
Information and Management Systems Society (HIMSS; n.d.)
identified four types of health information technology (IT)
interoperability—foundational, structural, semantic, and
organizational—each with increasing complexity. Foundational
interoperability defines the requirements necessary between
systems to communicate data, and structural interoperability defines
syntax and format to facilitate data exchange. Semantic
interoperability is more complex and refers to consistency of clinicalterminology and shared meanings. Finally, organizational
interoperability refers to shared trust and consistency of policies and
social and legal meanings to facilitate seamless workflows between
organizations.
Suppose you have a joint replacement patient who is being
discharged from the acute care facility to a rehabilitation center. You
create a discharge summary for the patient in a PDF format and
send it via a secure electronic exchange to the new facility. The staff
at the rehabilitation center is able to read and understand the report,
and a staff assistant can scan a copy of the discharge summary into
the electronic record of the rehabilitation facility. This is an example
of functional interoperability. If each facility uses Health Level 7
standards for data exchange and collects certain minimum data,
then it might be possible for some data fields from one facility to
populate automatically into an appropriate data field in the other
facility. This is an example of structural interoperability. To achieve
true sematic interoperability, systems must use the same
standardized terminologies, or disparate terminologies must be
mapped so that the two systems are able to “talk” to each other to
exchange data seamlessly and to populate the data into the
appropriate fields in the new system. True sematic interoperability
enables machine-to-machine data exchange. The adoption and use
will continue to need input from users to hone and evolve the
standards so that they continue to meet each user’s needs. We must
strive to truly create the health interoperability ecosystem that
“comprises individuals, systems and processes that want to share,
exchange and access all forms of health information, including
discrete, narrative and multimedia. Individuals, patients, providers,
hospitals/health systems, researchers, payers, suppliers and
systems are potential stakeholders within this ecosystem” (HIMSS,
n.d., para. 29). It is imperative that every stakeholder be included in
the “creation, exchange and use of health information and/or data.
An efficient interoperability ecosystem provides an information
infrastructure that uses technical standards, policies and protocols to
enable seamless and secure capture, discovery, exchange and
utilization of health information” (HIMSS, n.d., para. 29).Types of Healthcare Organization
Information Systems
Case Management Information Systems
Case management information systems identify resources,
patterns, and variances in care to prevent costly complications
related to chronic conditions and to enhance the overall outcomes
for patients with chronic illness. These systems scan past episodes
of treatment and search for trends among the records. Once a trend
is identified, case management systems provide decision support
that promotes preventive care. Care plans are a common tool found
in case management systems. A care plan is an evidence-based set
of care guidelines that outline the course of treatment and the
recommended interventions that should be implemented to achieve
optimal results. By using a standardized plan of care, these ISs
present clinicians with treatment protocols to maximize patient
outcomes and support best practices. IT in health care is positioned
to support the development of interdisciplinary care plans. In the
health informatics pathway, Standard 5 deals with documentation, for
which AHIMA (2020) stated the importance of actively participating in
the “development of query policies that support documentation
integrity, and meet regulatory, legal, and ethical standards for coding
and reporting” (para. 22). We are all responsible for accurate
documentation and being aware of the varied uses of healthcare
information. As we interact with the interdisciplinary healthcare team
verbally and in writing when we document information about our
patients, it is imperative that we adhere to the legal and regulatory
standards that promote truthful and ethical reporting methods,
resulting in correct and trustworthy data and information.
Case management information systems are especially beneficial
for patient populations with a high cost of care and complex health
needs, such as the elderly or patients with chronic diseaseconditions. Avoiding complications requires identifying the right
resources for care and implementing preventive treatments across
all medical visits. The more information that can be shared among all
types of providers, the more that care planning and decision-making
can be coordinated, consistent, and safe. Ultimately, this coordinated
care decreases the costs of care for patients with chronic illnesses
and supports a better quality of life. Such systems increase the value
of individual care while controlling the costs and risks associated
with long-term health care. Initially, case managers were employed
by hospitals, and they primarily focused on utilization review and
discharge planning. Now case managers are practicing in other
arenas, including home health agencies and insurance companies
(Davis, 2022). Case management systems are increasingly being
integrated with electronic health records (EHRs). Information
collected by these systems is processed in a way that helps to
reduce risks, ensure quality, and decrease costs.
In an effort to promote patient-centered care for the management
of chronic diseases, Fico et al. (2016) reported on the development
of an information and communication technology platform to support
personalized healthcare pathways to manage diabetes. The system
they developed and tested allowed for automatic data collection via
personal monitoring devices worn by the patient. Using standardized
treatment plans and system analysis of patient data, “the system
delivers automated feedback consisting of alerts, reminders, and
motivational messages in real time and periodically (over three and
seven days’ period)” (Fico et al., 2016, p. 30). Phamily (n.d.)
integrates its chronic care management service into your EHR and
provides a “unique texting-based approach to patient engagement”
(para. 1). MCG Health offers assessments for people experiencing
chronic conditions and high-intensity and low-intensity guidelines for
disease management along with patient engagement tools (Miller,
2023). These examples show the types of case management tools
being developed for chronic disease management within and outside
of the healthcare system.
Communication systems promote interaction among healthcare
providers and between providers and patients and are designed tobe Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA)
compliant. Such systems have historically been kept separate from
other types of health ISs and from one another. Healthcare
professionals overwhelmingly recognize the value of these systems,
however, so they are now more commonly integrated into the design
of other types of systems as a newly developing standard within the
industry. There is no one size fits all for communication systems.
According to Mock (2021), “the log-out mechanisms in provider-to￾provider systems make them impractical for emergency alerts, while
the capabilities of provider-to-patient systems (or vice versa) do not
support mass notification” (para. 15). Examples of communication
systems include call light systems, wireless telephones, pagers,
email, and instant messaging, which have traditionally been forms of
communication targeted at clinicians. Other communication systems
target patients and their families. Some patients are now able to
access their electronic chart from home via an internet connection.
They can update their own medical record to inform their physician
of changes to their health or personal practices that affect their
physical condition. Inpatients in hospital settings also receive
communication directly to their room. Patients and their families may,
for example, review individualized messages with scheduled tests
and procedures for the day and confirm menu choices for their
meals. These types of systems may also communicate educational
messages, such as smoking cessation advice.
With the introduction of more of these technologies into practice,
the value of having communication tools integrated with other types
of systems is being widely recognized. Integrating communication
systems with clinical applications provides a real-time approach that
facilitates interactions among the entire healthcare team and patients
and their families to enhance care. These systems improve the flow
of communication within an organization and promote an exchange
of information to better care for patients. The next generation of
communication systems will be integrated with other types of
healthcare systems and guaranteed to work together smoothly. The
following Research Briefs from 2010, 2014, and 2020 discuss the
economic and quality healthcare effect of communicationinefficiencies in U.S. hospitals. As hospitals and physician practices
strive to become more patient centered, communication
technologies will be an integral part of this goal. Many of us have
experienced the anxiety of waiting for news about a loved one during
a surgical procedure. Newer communication techniques, such as
surgical tracking boards that communicate about the process, help to
ease these anxieties. Gordon and colleagues (2015) reported high
patient and family satisfaction with a HIPAA-compliant surgical
instant messaging system to communicate real-time surgical
progress with patient-designated recipients. Post–COVID-19
pandemic conditions continue to affect communication styles and
challenge healthcare professionals to demand unified
communications (UC) in health care. Carter (2022) stated that the
UC “market will grow at a rate of 18.3% in the healthcare space up to
the year of 2026, enabling the sector to provide a better quality of
patient care” (para. 2).
What are some other ways that new communication technologies
could be harnessed into a UC interface and leveraged to increase
patient and family satisfaction with health care in your practice?
RESEARCH BRIEFS
2010
Researchers attempted to quantify the costs of poor communication, termed
communication inefficiencies, in hospitals. This qualitative study was conducted in
seven acute care hospitals of varying sizes via structured interviews with key
informants at each facility. The interview questions focused on four broad categories:
(1) communication bottlenecks, (2) negative outcomes as a result of those bottlenecks,
(3) subjective perceptions of the potential effectiveness of communication
improvements on the negative outcomes, and (4) ideas for specific communication
improvements. The researchers independently coded the interview data and then
compared results to extract themes.
All the interviewees indicated that communication was an issue. Inefficiencies
revolved around time spent tracking people down to communicate with them, with
various estimates provided: 3 hours per nursing shift wasted tracking people down,
20% of productive time wasted on communication bottlenecks, and a reported average
of five to six telephone calls to locate a physician. Several respondents pointed to
costly medical errors that were the direct result of communication issues.Communication lapses also resulted in inefficient use of clinician resources and
increased length of stay for patients.
The researchers developed a conceptual model of communication quality with four
primary dimensions: (1) efficiency of resource use, (2) effectiveness of resource use,
(3) quality of work life, and (4) service quality. They concluded that the total cost of
communication inefficiencies in U.S. hospitals is more than $12 billion annually and
estimated that a 500-bed hospital could lose as much as $4 million annually because of
such problems. They urge the adoption of information technologies to redesign
workflow processes and promote better communication. It would be interesting to see
this study repeated today to ascertain whether these inefficiencies still exist despite the
introduction of newer technologies.
The full article appears in: Agarwal, R., Sands, D., Schneider, J., & Smaltz, D. (2010).
Quantifying the economic impact of communication inefficiencies in U.S. hospitals.
Journal of Healthcare Management, 55(4), 265–281.
2014
The Ponemon Institute (2014) surveyed more than 400 U.S. healthcare providers about
the conventional communication process during three clinical workflows: coordinating
emergency response, admitting patients, and transferring patients. There was
overwhelming agreement among the participants that significant time was wasted
during each workflow basically because of ineffective communications having an
“estimated annual economic impact of about $1.75 million per U.S. hospital and more
than $11 billion industry-wide” (Ponemon Institute, 2014, para. 4).
2020
Dinsdale et al. (2020) analyzed data from 3,293 referral letters and 2,468 response
letters from 68 general practices and 17 hospitals in addition to 6,800 patients’ files
over a 2-year period.
The authors identified several “areas for improvement at different points in the patient
journey in the context of increasing complexity in medicine due to chronic disease and
multi-morbidity” (Dinsdale et al., 2020, p. 67). It was interesting to note that there were
communication gaps caused by the length of time it took to deliver letters from the
hospital to general practitioners. The authors stressed that “it is possible to adopt
appropriate evidence-based strategies to improve the quality and timeliness of referral
and response letters. Future research should be aimed at developing robust strategies
to addressing communication gaps reported in this study” (Dinsdale et al., 2020, p. 67).
Dinsdale, E., Hannigan, A., O’Connor, R., O’Doherty, J., Glynn, L., Casey, M., Hayes,
P., Kelly, D., Cullen, W., & O’Regan, A. (2020). Communication between primary and
secondary care: Deficits and danger. Family Practice, 37(1), 63–68.
https://doi.org/10.1093/fampra/cmz037Core Business Systems
Core business systems enhance administrative tasks within
healthcare organizations. Unlike clinical information systems
(CISs), whose aim is to provide support for direct patient care, these
systems support the administrative management of health care
within an organization. Core business systems provide the
framework for reimbursement, support of best practices, quality
control, and resource allocation. There are four common core
business systems: (1) admission, discharge, and transfer (ADT)
systems; (2) financial systems; (3) acuity systems; and (4)
scheduling systems.
Admission, discharge, and transfer (ADT) systems provide the
backbone structure for the other types of clinical and business
systems and, when automated, provide opportunities for health
information exchange leading to care coordination (Michigan Health
Information Network, 2019). These systems were among the first to
be automated in health care. Admitting, billing, and bed management
departments most commonly use ADT systems within the hospital
setting. These systems hold key information on which all other
systems rely. For example, ADT systems maintain the patient’s
name; medical record number; visit or account number; and
demographic information, such as age, gender, home address, and
contact information. Such systems are considered the central source
for collecting this type of patient information and communicating it to
other types of healthcare ISs. Initially, these systems were primarily
in-house management systems, but with the national health IT
expansion, ADT systems may communicate important information
about patient transitions (i.e., admissions, discharges, and/or
emergency room visits) to the primary care physician, insurance
company, community case manager, or skilled nursing and
rehabilitation facilities. The ADT alert system was designed to
improve communication across care providers, improve chronic carepatient management, and reduce unnecessary hospital utilization
(Michigan Health Information Network, n.d.; ONC, 2013). The ADT
notifications help to determine overutilization and provide the
information necessary for healthcare providers to intervene by
identifying those patients who repeatedly access the healthcare
system. Once identified, the provider can assist these super user,
high utilizer, or super-high utilizer patients by affording both clinical
and nonclinical options or interventions. The goal is to decrease the
amount of overutilization by avoiding or preventing visits to the
emergency room as well as readmissions to the hospital (Gilbert et
al., 2018; Maruster et al., 2021; Tsai et al., 2018).
HealthShare Exchange (n.d.) in Philadelphia collects ADT data
from 39 hospitals and makes it possible to track patients receiving
services from multiple providers, thus promoting coordinated care
and care efficiencies. Even in long-term care, “[c]loud-based ADT
message systems can now be synched with handheld devices,
giving caregivers access to a resident’s medical data on the go.
There has also been considerable improvement in data entry
accuracy as well as improved data organization” (Wong, 2022, para.
5).
Financial systems manage the expenses and revenue for
providing health care. The finance, auditing, and accounting
departments within an organization most commonly use financial
systems. These systems determine the direction for maintenance
and growth for a given facility. They often interface to share
information with materials management, staffing, and billing systems
to balance the financial effect of these resources within an
organization. Financial systems report fiscal outcomes, which can
then be tracked and related to the organizational goals of an
institution. These systems are key components in the decision￾making process as healthcare institutions prepare their fiscal
budgets. They often play a pivotal role in determining the strategic
direction for an organization.
Acuity systems monitor the range of patient types within a
healthcare organization using specific indicators. They track these
indicators based on the current patient population within a facility. Bymonitoring the patient’s acuity, these systems provide feedback
about how intensive the care requirement is for an individual patient
or for a group of patients. Identifying and classifying a patient’s
acuity can promote better organizational management of the
expenses and resources necessary to provide quality care.
Information about a patient’s acuity also provides important insights
into staffing for safe care delivery. Acuity systems help predict the
ability and capacity of an organization to care for its current
population. They also forecast future trends to allow an organization
to successfully strategize on how to meet upcoming market
demands. Trepanier et al. (2017) reported on the implementation of
a value-based nurse staffing model using a data-driven,
interoperable acuity-based staffing (ABS) system. “Sophisticated
ABS technology offers many new and exciting options that are
significantly more accurate and less burdensome than the traditional
staffing process. Such systems not only improve value to patients by
supporting the achievement of consistently better outcomes across
the healthcare system, but they also provide reliable data to inform a
variety of day-to-day and long-term planning and management
tasks” (p. 188). Handzel (2021) described the nurse and non-nurse
support staffing changes that were done in response to the COVID￾19 pandemic. To increase responsiveness, several changes were
made, such as creating a 1:4 ratio of nurses to patients and
increasing the use of non-nurse support personnel. Also,
“[a]lternative med/surg suites were prepared in the radiology care
unit, CCL [cardiac catheterization lab], and two GI [gastrointestinal]
procedural centers” (Handzel, 2021, para. 9).
Scheduling systems coordinate staff, services, equipment, and
allocation of patient beds. They are frequently integrated with the
other types of core business systems. By closely monitoring staff
and physical resources, these systems provide data to the financial
systems. For example, resource-scheduling systems may provide
information about operating room use or availability of intensive care
unit beds and regular nursing unit beds. These systems also provide
great assistance to financial systems when they are used to track
medical equipment within a facility. Procedures and care are plannedwhen the tools and resources are available. Scheduling systems
help to track resources within a facility while managing the frequency
and distribution of those resources.
Increasingly, hospital systems are moving to enterprise resource
planning (ERP) software that integrates many of the core business
functions into one package, thus providing seamless access to data
that can be used for planning, mandatory reporting, and overall
strategic management purposes. “Implementing an ERP system can
provide significant benefits for healthcare providers, not only in the
promotion of proficient performance and functionality, but also in
positioning organizations to respond to a quickly evolving industry”
(DeLeon, n.d., para. 12).Order Entry Systems
Order entry systems are one of the most important systems in use
today. They automate the way that orders have traditionally been
initiated for patients; that is, clinicians place orders using these
systems instead of creating traditional handwritten transcriptions
onto paper. Order entry systems provide major safeguards by
ensuring that physician orders are legible and complete, thereby
providing a level of patient safety that was historically missing with
paper-based orders. Computerized physician (or provider) order
entry (CPOE) systems provide decision support and automated
alert functionality that was unavailable with paper-based orders.
In the seminal report by the Institute of Medicine (2000), To Err Is
Human: Building a Safer Health System, it was estimated that
medical errors cost the United States approximately $37.6 billion
each year; nearly $17 billion of those costs are associated with
preventable errors. Consequently, the federal Agency for Healthcare
Research and Quality Patient Safety Network (2019) continued to
recommend eliminating reliance on handwriting for ordering
medications and advocated instead for CPOE paired with clinical
decision support. Because of the global concern for patient safety as
a result of incorrect and misinterpreted orders, healthcare
organizations are incorporating order entry systems into their
operations as a standard tool for practice. Such systems allow for
clear and legible orders, thereby promoting patient safety and
streamlining care.Patient Care Support Systems
Most specialty disciplines within health care have an associated
patient care information system. These patient-centered systems
focus on collecting data and disseminating information related to
direct care. Several of these systems have become mainstream
types of systems used in health care. The four systems most
commonly encountered in health care are (1) clinical documentation
systems, (2) pharmacy information systems, (3) laboratory
information systems, and (4) radiology information systems.
Clinical documentation systems, also known as clinical
information systems (CISs), are the most commonly used type of
patient care support system within healthcare organizations. CISs
are designed to collect patient data in real time. They enhance care
by putting data at the clinician’s fingertips and enabling decision￾making where it needs to occur, which is at the bedside. For that
reason, these systems often are easily accessible at the point of
care for caregivers interacting with the patient. CISs are patient
centered, meaning they contain the observations, interventions, and
outcomes noted by the care team. Team members enter information,
such as the plan of care, hemodynamic data, laboratory results,
clinical notes, allergies, and medications. All members of the
treatment team use CISs; for example, pharmacists, allied health
workers, nurses, physicians, support staff, and many others access
patients’ clinical records using these systems. Accuracy and
thoroughness of clinical documentation are increasingly emphasized
because the quality of documentation is now tied to reimbursement.
Because of this, larger health systems began employing clinical
documentation improvement (CDI) specialists, who review
electronic records for gaps and inaccuracies in charting (Miliard,
2017). These specialists generally have both clinical and coding
backgrounds so that they can review the medical records ordocumentation for missing data and information in relation to the
disease process, diagnostics, and coding (AAPC, 2023).
Frequently, these clinical documentation systems are also referred
to as the electronic patient record, or electronic health record
(EHR).
Pharmacy information systems also have become mainstream
patient care support systems. They typically allow pharmacists to
order, manage, and dispense medications for a facility. They also
commonly incorporate information regarding allergies and height and
weight to ensure effective medication management. Pharmacy
information systems streamline the order entry, dispensing,
verification, and authorization process for medication administration.
They often interface with clinical documentation and order entry
systems so that clinicians can order and document the
administration of medications and prescriptions to patients while
having the benefits of decision-support alerting and interaction
checking. Technologies emerging in pharmacy information systems
include automated dispensing cabinets, CPOE, smart pumps, bar￾coded medication administration (BCMA) systems, bar-coded unit
dose packaging systems, and temperature monitoring systems.
Halvorsen (2018) was correct in suggesting that the use of robotics
was a trend worth watching. MarketWatch (2023) stated that the
“global robotic prescription dispensing systems market is anticipated
to rise at a considerable rate during the forecast period, between
2022 and 2030” (para. 1).
Laboratory information systems were perhaps some of the first
CISs ever used in health care. Because of their long history of use
within medicine, laboratory systems have been models for the
design and implementation of other types of patient care support
systems. Laboratory information systems report on blood, body fluid,
and tissue samples along with biological specimens collected at the
bedside and received in a central laboratory. They provide clinicians
with reference ranges for tests indicating high, low, or normal values
to make care decisions. Often, the laboratory system provides result
information in the EHR and directs clinicians toward the next course
of action within a treatment regimen. As older legacy systems arephased out, new laboratory information systems are designed to be
fully interoperable with other health ISs, thus reducing turnaround
times for specimen collection, transport, and analysis and providing
opportunities for data analysis beyond basic results reporting (Muin,
2017). Interoperability of the laboratory information system is critical
in the “move to interoperable healthcare systems because of the
tremendous amount of data it manages and the value of that data in
making patient care decisions” (Futrell, 2021, para. 1). The final type
of patient care support system commonly found within health care is
the radiology information system (RIS) used in radiology
departments. These systems schedule, provide results, and store
information related to diagnostic radiology procedures. One feature
found in most radiology systems is a picture archiving and
communication system (PACS). The PACS may be a stand-alone
system, which is kept separate from the main radiology system, or it
can be integrated with the RIS and CIS. These systems collect,
store, and distribute medical images, such as computed tomography
scans, magnetic resonance images, and X-rays. PACS replaces
traditional hard copy films with digital media that are easy to store,
retrieve, and present to clinicians. The benefit of RIS and PACS is
their ability to assist in diagnosing and storing vital patient care
support data. Imaging studies can be available in minutes as
opposed to 2 to 6 hours for images in a film-based system. The
digital workstations provide enhanced imaging capabilities and on￾screen measurement tools to improve diagnostic accuracy. Finally,
the archive system stores images in a database that is readily
accessible so that images can be easily retrieved and compared to
subsequent testing or shared instantly with consultants. Advances in
RIS/PACS systems include the use of machine learning techniques
to analyze data and create decision-support mechanisms. Brink et
al. (2017) suggested that “[t]he use of machine learning promises
better decision support for medical imaging, improved quantitative
imaging, improved computer-assisted diagnoses, improved
computer-assisted radiology for structured report generation,
precision in diagnosis, and real-time correlation with other medical
data” (p. 3649). However, Rockall (2019) provided a caution aboutthe use of artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning in
radiology: “The key is to ensure that AI is used to address important
unmet clinical needs, whether in relation to triage and diagnostic
tools, improved workflow or sustainability of healthcare. Applications
of AI must primarily serve patient needs, not just what’s interesting or
feasible” (p. 1). AI will greatly enhance and augment the field of
radiology but not replace radiologists as once thought.
The mobility of patients both geographically and within a single
healthcare delivery system challenges ISs because data must be
captured wherever and whenever the patient receives care. In the
past, managed care information systems were implemented to
address these issues. Consequently, data can be obtained at any
and all of the areas where a patient interacts with the healthcare
system. Patient-tracking mechanisms continue to be honed, but the
financial impact of health care also has changed these systems to
some extent. The ISs currently in use enable nurses and physicians
to make clinical decisions while being mindful of their financial
ramifications. In the future, vast improvements in ISs and systems
that support health information exchange are likely to continue to
emerge.
One such trend is the incentive to develop accountable care
organizations (ACOs), which are encouraged by the Patient
Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2010. According to the Centers
for Medicare and Medicaid Services (2020), “Accountable Care
Organizations (ACOs) are groups of doctors, hospitals, and other
health care providers, who come together voluntarily to give
coordinated high quality care to their Medicare patients. The goal of
coordinated care is to ensure that patients, especially the chronically
ill, get the right care at the right time, while avoiding unnecessary
duplication of services and preventing medical errors” (para. 1–2).
Members of an ACO share data and information to better coordinate
care and share in any healthcare cost savings generated when the
coordination of care reduces unnecessary and duplicated costs.Aggregating Patient and Organizational Data
Many healthcare organizations now aggregate data in a data
warehouse for the purpose of mining the data to discover new
relationships and build organizational knowledge. Proper access to
the data and big data analyses are critical to improving patient
outcomes and healthcare processes. Data storage strategies can not
only impact how data is made available to users and applications but
also the success of any data analysis.
In addition to the access and storage challenges, “the information
collected and generated by hospitals is managed and stored
following the set standards” (Kholodenko, 2022, para. 56): HIPAA,
electronic protected health information (EPHI), and Health
Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health (HITECH)
Act. When disparate ISs within an organization are unable to
interface with any other ISs (either within or outside of the
organization), the result is poor communication, billing errors, and
issues with continuity of care. By developing a single comprehensive
database, healthcare systems are able to facilitate interprofessional
communications yet maintain compliance with privacy regulations.
Figure 10-1 depicts moving from siloed to integrated data.
Data from: SmartData Collective. (2015, October 5). Two critical obstacles facing retailers
for data driven marketing. www.smartdatacollective.com/two-critical-obstacles-facing￾retailers-data-driven-marketingFigure 10-1 Moving From Data Silos to Integrated Data
Description
Based on the size of the organization, data triage and tiering
might be necessary. These decision-making processes related to
data storage are based on predictions regarding how quickly data
might need to be accessed. For example, consider the case of
Intermountain, a chain of 22 hospitals in Salt Lake City. With 4.7
petabytes of data under its management, cloud storage becomes
cost prohibitive. The network estimates the size of the hospital
chain’s data will grow by 25% to 30% each year until it reaches 15
petabytes 5 years from now (DeGaspari, 2013, para. 1).
With such massive data needs, it was imperative that
Intermountain find ways to cut costs and streamline efficiency. One
way was through data tiering, which is the creation of data storage
tiers that can be accessed when necessary at the appropriate
speeds. Tiering can be done manually through triaging but is
typically accomplished through auto-tiering, which automatically
stores data according to availability needs. Therefore, auto-tiering
determines the media storage necessary to meet the data needs and
can be a cost saver by storing data on lower-cost media when
appropriate.
The most basic element of a database system is the data. Data
refer to raw facts that can comprise unorganized text, graphics,
sound, or video. Information is data that have been processed,
meaning the data have been organized in a way that people find
meaningful and useful. Even useful information can be lost if one is
mired in unorganized information. Computers can come to the
rescue by helping to create order out of chaos. Computer science
and information science are designed to help cut down the amount
of information to a more manageable size and organize it so that
users can cope with it more efficiently through the use of databases
and database program technology. Learning about basic databases
and database management programs is paramount so that userscan apply data and information management principles in health
care.
A database is a structured or organized collection of data that is
typically the main component of an IS. Databases and database
management software allow the user to input, sort, arrange,
structure, organize, and store data and turn those data into useful
information. An individual can set up a personal database to
organize recipes, music, names and addresses, notes, bills, and
other data. In health care, databases and ISs make key information
available to healthcare providers and ancillary personnel to promote
the provision of quality patient care. Box 10-1 provides a detailed
description of a database.
BOX 10-1 OVERVIEW OF DATABASE CONSTRUCTION
Databases consist of fields, or columns, and records, or rows. Within each record,
one of the fields is identified as the primary key, or key field. This primary key
contains a code, name, number, or other information that acts as a unique identifier for
that record. In the healthcare system, for example, a patient is assigned a patient
number, or ID, that is unique for that patient. As you compile related records, you create
data files, or tables. A data file is a collection of related records. Therefore, databases
consist of one or more related data files or tables.
An entity represents a table, and each field within the table becomes an attribute of
that entity. The database developer must critically think about the attributes for each
entity. For example, the entity disease might have the attributes of chronic disease,
acute disease, or communicable disease. The name of the entity, disease, implies that
the entity is about diseases. The fields, or attributes, are chronic, acute, or
communicable.
The entity relationship diagram specifies the relationship among the entities in the
database. Sometimes the implied relationships are readily apparent based on the
entities’ definitions; however, all relationships should be specified as to how they relate
to one another. Typically, three relationships are possible: (1) one to one, (2) one to
many, and (3) many to many. A one-to-one relationship exists between the entities of
the table about a patient and the table about the patient’s birth. A one-to-many
relationship could exist when one entity is repeatedly used by another entity. Such a
one-to-many relationship could then be a table query for age that could be used
numerous times for one patient entity. The many-to-many relationship reflects entities
that are used repeatedly by other entities. This is easily explained by the entities of
patient and nurse. The patient could have several nurses caring for them, and the
nurse could have many patients assigned to them (see Figure 10-2).Figure 10-2 Example of an Entity Relationship Diagram
Description
The relational model is a database model that describes data in which all data
elements are placed in relation in two-dimensional tables; the relations, or tables, are
analogous to files. A relational database management system (RDMS) is a system
that manages data using this kind of relational model. A relational database could link a
patient’s table to a treatment table (e.g., by a common field, such as the patient ID
number). To keep track of the tables that constitute a database, the database
management system uses software called a data dictionary. The data dictionary
contains a listing of the tables and their details, including field names, validation
settings, and data types. The data type refers to the type of information, such as a
name, a date, or a time.
The database management system is an important program because, before it was
available, many health systems and businesses had dozens of database files withincompatible formats. Because patient data come from a variety of sources, these
separated, isolated data files required duplicate entry of the same information, thereby
increasing the risk of data entry error. The design of the relational databases eliminates
data duplication. Some examples of popular database management system software
include Microsoft’s Access and Visual FoxPro, Oracle’s Oracle Database 21c, and
IBM’s Db2.
On a large scale, a data warehouse is an extremely large
database, or repository, that stores all of an organization’s or
institution’s data and makes these data available for data mining.
The data warehouse can combine an institution’s many databases to
provide management personnel with flexible access to the data. On
a smaller scale, a data mart represents a large database in which
the data used by one of the units or a division of a healthcare system
are stored and maintained. For example, a university hospital system
might store clinical information from its many affiliate hospitals in a
data warehouse, and each separate hospital might have a data mart
housing its data.
There are many ways to access and retrieve information in
databases. Searching information in databases can be done through
the use of a query, as is used in Microsoft’s Access database. A
query asks questions of the database to retrieve specific data and
information. Box 10-2 provides a detailed description of the
Structured Query Language (SQL).
BOX 10-2 STRUCTURED QUERY LANGUAGE (SQL)
SQL was originally called SEQUEL, or Structured English Query Language. SQL, still
pronounced “sequel,” now stands for Structured Query Language; it is a database
querying language, rather than a programming language, and a standard language for
accessing and manipulating databases. SQL is “used with relational databases; it
allows users to define the structure and organization of stored data, verify and maintain
data integrity, control access to the data, and define relationships among the stored
data items” (Blink, 2016, para. 8). SQL simplifies the process of retrieving information
from a database in a functional or usable form while facilitating the reorganization of
data within the databases.
The RDMS is the foundation for SQL. Data in an RDMS are stored in tables. A table
is a collection of related data that consists of columns, which are also referred to as
fields, and rows, which are also referred to as records, or tuples (Peterson, 2023).
Databases can have many tables, and each table is identified by a name. Theconsistent formatting and organization of data in an RDMS allows a user to easily
enter, view, and manipulate data (see the following Database Example: School of
Nursing Faculty).
SQL statements handle most of the actions users need to perform on a database.
SQL is an International Organization for Standardization (ISO) and American
National Standards Institute (ANSI) standard (Indiana University, 2021). To remain
compliant with the ISO and ANSI standards, SQL must handle or support the most
typical major commands such as SELECT, UPDATE, DELETE, INSERT, and WHERE
(Prateek, 2023). The SELECT command allows extraction of data from a database,
UPDATE updates the data, DELETE deletes the data, and INSERT inserts new data.
WHERE is used to specify selection criteria, thereby restricting the results of the SQL
query. Thus, SQL allows the creation of databases and their manipulation by storing,
retrieving, updating, and deleting data. Coursera (2023) described SQL as a powerful
method of storing and being able to interact with data. SQL supports high-quality data
analysis due to its flexibility and power.
Description
The database example provided here reflects the faculty listing for a school of
nursing. The table that contains the data is identified by the name “Faculty.” The faculty
members are categorized by the following fields (columns): Last Name, First Name,
Department Affiliation, Office Phone Number, Office Location, and UserID. Each faculty
member’s information is a record (tuple, or row).
Using the SQL command SELECT, all the records in the “Faculty” table can be
selected:
SELECT * FROM Faculty
This command would SELECT all (*) of the records FROM the table known as
FACULTY. The asterisk (*) is used to select all the columns.
Data mining software sorts through data to discover patterns and
ascertain relationships. This software discovers previously
unidentified relationships among the data in a database byconducting an exploratory analysis looking for hidden patterns in
data. Using such software, the user searches for previously
undiscovered patterns by analyzing the data stored in a data
warehouse. Drill down is a term that means the user can view data
warehouse information by drilling down to lower levels of the
database to focus on information that is pertinent to their needs at
the moment.
As users move through databases within the healthcare system,
they can access anything from enterprise-wide data warehouses to
data marts. For example, an infection control nurse might notice a
pattern of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus infections in
the local data mart (a single hospital within a larger system). The
nurse might want to find out whether the outbreak is local (data mart)
or more widespread in the system (data warehouse). The nurse
might also query the database to determine whether certain patient
attributes (e.g., age or medical diagnosis) are associated with the
incidence of infection.
These kinds of data mining capabilities are also quite useful for
healthcare practitioners who wish to conduct clinical research
studies. For example, one might query a database to tease out
attributes (i.e., patient characteristics) associated with asthma￾related hospitalizations.
In 2013, Mishra et al. were the first to report on a new set of
challenges and opportunities for managing data and data mining and
establishing data analysis algorithms in the cloud. At the time, this
development was game changing for organizations. The world as we
knew it was changing. Clouds are leading us to develop
revolutionary data mining technologies because the organization can
take advantage of the sophisticated software and processing
methodology available from the cloud provider without having to
invest in them individually. Hein (2019) discussed the benefits and
risks of cloud computing in health care. Benefits include data storage
capacity, scalability (i.e., matching service demands), ease of
collaboration, and access to AI and machine learning processing.
Risks include training needed for proper implementation, securityvulnerabilities, HIPAA compliance, and availability and control of the
data.
Blockchain technology is showing great promise in solving some
of the issues associated with traditional databases and cloud
computing. Blockchain is widely described as a distributed ledger
technology. “A blockchain is, in the simplest of terms, a time￾stamped series of immutable record of data that is managed by a
cluster of computers not owned by any single entity. Each of these
blocks of data (i.e., block) is secured and bound to each other using
cryptographic principles (i.e., chain)” (Chadha, 2020, para. 7). Every
transaction is recorded in the blockchain and trackable, and
authorized users will have immediate access to records updated in
real time. However, each new change is recorded in a new block so
that authorized users can retrace the steps in the information trail to
understand changes as they occurred. These private chains are also
referred to as permissioned chains, and they offer a high level of
security. Potential uses of blockchain technology in health care
include managing patient records with a hash ID unique identifier to
allow more accurate matching of records from different providers,
seamless sharing of records and health data as the patient permits,
incentivizing healthy behaviors, managing the pharmacy supply
chain, curtailing insurance fraud, and conducting research and
clinical trials using secure and trusted data (Chadha, 2020). Block
chain is currently being used in health care for “everything from
securing patient data to managing the pharmaceutical supply chain”
(Daley, 2023, para. 1).Department Collaboration and Exchange of
Knowledge and Information
The implementation of systems within health care is the
responsibility of many people and departments. All systems require a
partnership of collaboration and knowledge sharing to implement
and maintain successful standards of care. Collaboration is the
sharing of ideas and experiences for the purposes of mutual
understanding and learning. Knowledge exchange is the product of
collaboration when sharing an understanding of information
promotes learning from past experiences to make better future
decisions.
Depending on the type of project, collaboration may occur at
several levels within an organization. At an administrative level,
collaboration among key stakeholders is critical to the success of
any project. Stakeholders have the most responsibility for completing
the project. They have the greatest influence on the overall design of
the system because, ultimately, they are the people who are most
impacted by a system implementation. Together with the
organizational executive team, stakeholders collaborate on the
overall budget and time frame for a system implementation.
Collaboration may also occur among the various departments
affected by the system. These groups frequently include
representatives from IT, clinical specialty areas, support services,
and software vendors. Once a team is assembled, it defines the
objectives and goals of the system. The team members work
strategically to align their goals with the goals of the organization
where the system is to be used. The focus for these groups is on
planning, resource management, transitioning, and ongoing support
of the system. Their collaboration determines the way in which the
project is managed—the deliverables for the project, the individuals
held accountable for the project, the time frame for the project, andthe opportunities for process improvement using the system—and
the means by which resources are allocated to support the system.
From collaboration comes the exchange of information and ideas
through knowledge sharing. Specialists exchange knowledge within
their respective areas of expertise to ensure that the system works
for an entire organization. From one another, they learn the
requirements that make the system successful. This exchange of
ideas is what makes healthcare ISs so valuable. A multidisciplinary
approach ensures that systems work in the complex environment of
healthcare organizations, which have diverse and complex patient
populations.Summary
The integration of technology within healthcare organizations offers
limitless possibilities. As new types of systems emerge, clinicians will
become smarter and more adept at incorporating these tools into
their daily practice. Success will be achieved when health care
incorporates technology systems in a way that they are not viewed
as separate tools to support healthcare practices but rather as
necessary instruments to provide healthcare. Patients, too, will
become savvier at using healthcare ISs as a means of
communicating and managing their personal and preventive care. In
the future, these two mindsets will become expectations for health
care and not simply a high-tech benefit, as they are often viewed
today.
Ultimately, it is not the type of systems adopted that is important
but rather the method in which they are put into practice. In an ideal
world, robust and transparent information technologies will support
clinical and administrative functions and promote safe, high-quality,
and cost-effective care.
THOUGHT-PROVOKING QUESTIONS
1. Which type of technology exists today that could be converted into new types of ISs
to be used in health care?
2. How could collaboration and knowledge sharing at a single organization be used to
help individuals preparing for IT at a different facility?
3. Explore the administrative ISs and their applications in your healthcare
organization.
a. What are the main systems used?
b. How are data shared among systems?
c. What examples of functional, structural, and semantic interoperability can you
identify?
4. Reflect on the communication tools available in a clinical setting. How do UC
systems affect and address the inefficiencies in communication that currently exist?
What else needs to be done to eliminate communication inefficiency and gaps?5. Assess all the reasons, in detail, as to why CDI is necessary. How does it address
missing, incomplete, and inaccurate records, including coding errors? Could AI be
employed to complete this task? Explain, in detail, why or why not.
6. Why are ADT systems critical to the improvement of communication across care
providers? How can ADT improve chronic care patient management and reduce
unnecessary hospital utilization?R E F E R E N C E S
AAPC. (2023). What is clinical documentation improvement?
www.aapc.com/resources/what-is-clinical-documentation
Agarwal, R., Sands, D., Schneider, J., & Smaltz, D. (2010). Quantifying the economic
impact of communication inefficiencies in U.S. hospitals. Journal of Healthcare
Management, 55(4), 265–281.
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality Patient Safety Network. (2019). Patient safety
primer: Medication errors and adverse drug events.
https://psnet.ahrq.gov/primer/medication-errors-and-adverse-drug-events
AHIMA. (2020). Ethical standards for clinical documentation integrity (CDI) professionals
(2020). www.ahima.org/media/r2gmhlop/ethical-standards-for-clinical-documentation￾integrity-cdi-professionals-2020.pdf?oid=301868
Blink. (2016, April 28). Data warehouse terms. University of California at San Diego.
https://blink.ucsd.edu/technology/help-desk/queries/warehouse/terms.html
Brink, J., Arenson, R., Grist, T., Lewin, J., & Enzmann, D. (2017). Bits and bytes: The future
of radiology lies in informatics and information technology. European Radiology, 27(9),
3647–3651. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00330-016-4688-5
Carter, R. (2022, January 17). The state of unified communications in healthcare 2022. UC
Today. www.uctoday.com/unified-communications/the-state-of-unified-communications￾in-healthcare-2022
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. (2020). Accountable care organizations
(ACOs). www.medicare.gov/manage-your-health/coordinating-your-care/accountable￾care-organizations
Chadha, B. (2020, April 24). The true importance of blockchain education. Blockgeeks.
https://blockgeeks.com/guides/blockchain-education
Coursera. (2023, June 16). SQL vs. MySQL: Differences, similarities, uses, and benefits.
www.coursera.org/articles/sql-vs-mysql
Daley, S. (2023, February 16). Blockchain in healthcare: 17 Examples to know 2023. Built
In. https://builtin.com/blockchain/blockchain-healthcare-applications-companies
Davis, E. (2022, March 10). Duties and types of case managers. Verywell Health.
www.verywellhealth.com/what-does-a-case-manager-do-1738560
DeGaspari, J. (2013, September 11). Data storage strategies: Not all in the cloud.
Healthcare Innovation. www.hcinnovationgroup.com/interoperability￾hie/infrastructure/article/13021976/data-storage-strategies-not-all-in-the-cloud
DeLeon, H. (n.d.). Enterprise resource planning in the healthcare industry. Hospital Jobs
Online. www.hospitaljobsonline.com/career-center/healthcare-careers/enterprise￾resource-planning-in-the-healthcare-industry.html
Dinsdale, E., Hannigan, A., O’Connor, R., O’Doherty, J., Glynn, L., Casey, M., Hayes, P.,
Kelly, D., Cullen, W., & O’Regan, A. (2020). Communication between primary and
secondary care: Deficits and danger. Family Practice, 37(1), 63–68.
https://doi.org/10.1093/fampra/cmz037Fichman, R. G., Kohli, R., & Krishnan, R. (2011). Editorial overview—The role of information
systems in healthcare: Current research and future trends. Information Systems
Research, 22(3), 419–428. https://doi.org/10.1287/isre.1110.0382
Fico, G., Fioravanti, A., Arredondo, M. T., Gorman, J., Diazzi, C., Arcuri, G., Conti, C., &
Pirini, G. (2016). Integration of personalized healthcare pathways in an ICT platform for
diabetes managements: A small-scale exploratory study. IEEE Journal of Biomedical
and Health Informatics, 20(1), 29–38. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/JBHI.2014.2367863
Futrell, K. (2021, February 22). COVID-19 highlights need for laboratory data sharing and
interoperability. Medical Laboratory Observer. www.mlo-online.com/information￾technology/lis/article/21210723/covid19-highlights-need-for-laboratory-data-sharing-and￾interoperability
Gilbert, J., Helfand, M., & Relevo, R. (2018). High utilizers of healthcare.
https://effectivehealthcare.ahrq.gov/system/files/docs/topic-brief-high-utilizers.pdf
Glickman, M., & Orlova, A. (2022). Building interoperability standards and ensuring patient
safety. AHIMA. https://bok.ahima.org/doc?oid=107799-.Y-AF7y_MK3A
Gordon, C. R., Rezzadeh, K. S., Li, A., Vardanian, A., Zelken, J., Shores, J. T., Sacks, J. M.,
Segovia, A. L., & Jarrahy, R. (2015). Digital mobile technology facilitates HIPAA-sensitive
perioperative messaging, improves physician-patient communication, and streamlines
patient care. Patient Safety in Surgery, 9(1), 1–7. http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/s13037-015-
0070-9
Halvorsen, D. (2018). Technology expansion. State of Pharmacy Automation, 15(8), 4.
www.pppmag.com/article/2260
Handzel, S. (2021, May 10). How one hospital changed nurse staffing models in response
to COVID-19. Wolters Kluwer. www.wolterskluwer.com/en/expert-insights/how-one￾hospital-changed-nurse-staffing-models-in-response-to-covid
Healthcare Information and Management Systems Society. (n.d.). Interoperability in
healthcare. www.himss.org/resources/interoperability-healthcare
HealthShare Exchange. (n.d.). Hospitals & health systems.
www.healthshareexchange.org/hospitals-health-systems
Hein, D. (2019, January 22). 8 Benefits and risks of cloud computing in healthcare.
Solutions Review. https://solutionsreview.com/cloud-platforms/8-benefits-and-risks-of￾cloud-computing-in-healthcare
IEEE Standards Association. (2023, January 11). How can standards help monitor our
health and wellness? https://standards.ieee.org/beyond-standards/how-can-standards￾help-monitor-our-health-and-wellness
IEEE Standards University. (2016, September 23). Standards glossary.
www.standardsuniversity.org/article/standards-glossary
Indiana University. (2021, September 20). SQL example statements for retrieving data from
a table. http://kb.iu.edu/data/ahux.html
Institute of Medicine. (2000). To err is human: Building a safer health system. National
Academies Press.
Kholodenko, O. (2022, November 16). Data storage in healthcare. CodeIT.
https://codeit.us/blog/data-storage-in-healthcare
MarketWatch. (2023, June 5). Robotic prescription dispensing systems market research
2023–2030 [Press release]. www.marketwatch.com/press-release/robotic-prescription-dispensing-systems-market-research-2023-2030-2023-06-05
Maruster, L., van der Zee, D-J., & Buskens, E. (2021). Identifying frequent health care users
and care consumption patterns: Process mining of emergency medical services data.
Journal of Medical Internet Research, 23(10), e27499. doi:10.2196/27499
MerlinOne. (n.d.). What is metadata tagging? https://merlinone.com/what-is-metadata￾tagging.
Michigan Health Information Network. (n.d.). Admission, discharge, transfer notifications
(ADT) use case. https://mihin.org/admission-discharge-transfer-notifications-use-case
Michigan Health Information Network. (2019, May 9). Admission, discharge, transfer
notifications: Implementation guide. https://mihin.org/wp￾content/uploads/2019/05/Microsoft-Word-MiHIN-UCIG-ADT-Notifications-v46-05-09-
19.pdf
Miliard, M. (2017, September 27). How to improve clinical documentation. Healthcare IT
News. www.healthcareitnews.com/news/how-improve-clinical-documentation
Miller, R. (2023). MCG chronic care guidelines. MCG Health. www.mcg.com/care￾guidelines/chronic-care
Mishra, N., Sharma, S., & Pandey, A. (2013). High performance cloud data mining algorithm
and data mining in clouds. IOSR Journal of Computer Engineering, 8(4), 54–61.
https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/2d03/59258ed04703fd03d8e878527442d61939b6.pdf
Mock, T. (2021, March 31). What are common communication systems in healthcare? Rave
Mobile Safety. www.ravemobilesafety.com/blog/common-communication-systems￾healthcare
Muin, M. (2017, April 23). What are the uses and benefits of a laboratory information
system? MedProjects. http://medprojects.com/2017/what-are-the-uses-and-benefits-of￾a-laboratory-information-system
Office of the National Coordinator for Health Information Technology. (2013, May).
Improving hospital transitions and care coordination using automated admission,
discharge and transfer alerts: A learning guide. www.healthit.gov/sites/default/files/onc￾beacon-lg1-adt-alerts-for-toc-and-care-coord.pdf
Office of the National Coordinator for Health Information Technology. (2015). Connecting
health and care for the nation: A shared nationwide interoperability roadmap.
www.healthit.gov/sites/default/files/hie-interoperability/nationwide-interoperability￾roadmap-final-version-1.0.pdf
Peterson, R. (2023, July 20). Difference between DBMS and RDBMS. Guru99.
www.guru99.com/difference-dbms-vs-rdbms.html
Phamily. (n.d.). The #1 text-based chronic care management software.
https://join.phamily.com/ccm-solution
Ponemon Istitute. (2014, June). The Imprivata report on the economic impact of inefficient
communications in healthcare.
www.ponemon.org/local/upload/file/2014%20Imprivata%20Report%20FINAL%203(1).pd
f
Posnack, S. (2021a, May 13). Health interoperability outcomes 2030. Heath IT Buzz.
www.healthit.gov/buzz-blog/interoperability/health-interoperability-outcomes-2030
Posnack, S. (2021b, May 4). A road well traveled – Sunsetting the interoperability roadmap.
Health IT Buzz. www.healthit.gov/buzz-blog/health-it/a-road-well-traveled-sunsetting-the-interoperability-roadmap
Prateek, T. L. (2023, June 19). SQL basics – One stop solution for beginners. Edureka!
www.edureka.co/blog/sql-basics
Rockall, A. (2019). From hype to hope to hard work: Developing responsible AI for
radiology. Clinical Radiology, 75(1), 1–2. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.crad.2019.09.123
SmartData Collective. (2015, October 5). Two critical obstacles facing retailers for data
driven marketing. www.smartdatacollective.com/two-critical-obstacles-facing-retailers￾data-driven-marketing
Trepanier, S., Lee, D. W., & Kerfoot, K. M. (2017). Interoperable acuity-based staffing
solutions: Lessons learned from a multi-hospital system. Nursing Economics, 35(4),
184–188, 204.
Tsai, M., Xirasagar, S., Carroll, S., Bryan, C., Gallagher, P., Davis, K., & Jauch, E. (2018).
Reducing high-users’ visits to the emergency department by a primary care intervention
for the uninsured: A retrospective study. INQUIRY: The Journal of Health Care
Organization, Provision, and Financing, 55, 004695801876397.
Wong, C. (2022, June 7). The importance of an ADT message system. Experience.care.
https://experience.care/blog/importance-of-an-adt-message-systemC H A P T E R 11
The Human–Technology
Interface
OBJECTIVES
1. Describe the human–technology interface.
2. Explore human–technology interface problems.
3. Analyze the human–technology interface problems you have identified in your
personal and professional lives.
4. Reflect on the future of the human–technology interface.
KEY TERMS
application programming interface (API)
cognitive task analysis
cognitive walkthrough
cognitive work analysis (CWA)
earcon
ecological interface design (EID)
ergonomics
field study
gulf of evaluation
gulf of execution
heuristic evaluation
human–computer interaction
human factor
human–technology interaction
human–technology interface
mappingnatural language processing (NLP)
near field communication (NFC)
Near Field Communication Interface and Protocol (NFCIP-1)
near field communication-enabled medication administration (NFCMA)
situational awareness
task analysis
usability
user experience (UX)
user interface (UI)
wearable technology
workaroundIntroduction
One of the authors of this chapter stayed in a new hotel on the
outskirts of London. When she entered her room, she encountered
three wall-mounted light switches in a row with no indication of which
lights they operated. In fact, the mapping of switches to lights was so
peculiar that she was more often than not surprised by the light that
came on when she pressed a particular switch. One might conclude
that the author had a serious problem, but she prefers to attribute
her difficulty to poor design. When these kinds of technology design
issues surface in health care, they are more than just an annoyance.
Poorly designed technology can lead to errors, lower productivity, or
even removing the system (Alexander & Staggers, 2009; Benjamins,
2021; Hannah, 2023). Unfortunately, as more and more kinds of
increasingly complex health information technology applications are
integrated, the problem becomes even worse (Johnson, 2006; Lau et
al., 2019). However, nurses are very creative, and if it is at all
possible, they will design workarounds that allow them to
circumvent troublesome technology. However, workarounds are only
a temporary solution.
In his classic book, The Psychology of Everyday Things, Norman
(1988) argued that life would be a lot simpler if people who built the
things that others encounter (such as light switches) paid more
attention to how they would be used. At least one everyday thing
meets Norman’s criteria for good design: the scythe. Even people
who have never encountered one will pick up a scythe in the manner
needed to use it because the design makes only one way feasible.
The scythe’s design fits perfectly with its intended use and a human
user. Would it not be great if all technology were so well fit to human
use? In fact, this is not such a far-fetched idea. Scientists and
engineers are making excellent strides in understanding human–
technology interface problems and proposing solutions to them.As you read through this chapter, reflect on the everyday items
you use. What makes them easy or difficult to use? Is it evident that
the developer thought about how they would be used to facilitate
their design and function? Next, turn your attention to the
technologies you use. Is it evident that the developer thought about
how the technology would be used to facilitate its design and
function? Think about your smartphone. How easy is it to hold your
smartphone? Is it intuitive and easy to access and use? What
improvements would you make? Does the electronic health record
(EHR) system you use support your workflow and patient needs? Do
you use workarounds to avoid items that you feel should not be there
or are not needed at the time of entry? Do you think that the
developer understood you, as the user, or did not realize how the
technology tool would be used? By the end of this chapter, you
should be able to critically examine the human–technology interfaces
currently available in health care and describe models, strategies,
and exemplars for improving interfaces during the analysis, design,
and evaluation phases of the development life cycle.The Human–Technology Interface
What is the human–technology interface? Broadly speaking, any
time a human uses technology, some type of hardware or software
enables and supports the interaction. It is this hardware and software
that define the interface and how the user will interact with it, the
user interface (UI). The user experience (UX) is the user’s
experience from interacting with an object, product, or service. It has
been connected to the term usability and refers to the design of
products and services with the user in mind in order to meet the
user’s needs. There are bad designs and good designs. We have all
encountered things that we felt should have been designed better.
The array of light switches described previously was actually an
interface (although not a great one) between the lighting technology
in the room and the human user.
In today’s healthcare settings, one encounters a wide variety of
human–technology interfaces. Those who work in hospitals may use
bar-coded identification cards to log in their arrival time to a human
resources management system. Using the same cards, they might
log in to their patients’ EHRs, access their patients’ drugs from a
drug administration system, and even administer the drugs using
bar-coding technology. Other examples of human–technology
interfaces one might encounter include a defibrillator, a patient￾controlled analgesia (PCA) pump, any number of physiological
monitoring systems, electronic thermometers, and telephones and
pagers. Rice and Tahir (2014) examined research that stressed the
essence of human–technology interfacing, the human factor. They
stated that
recent studies have found that rapid implementation of new medical technology—
electronic health records, patient monitoring devices, surgical robots and other
tools—can lead to adverse patient events when it is not thoughtfully integrated into
workflow. The right processes require understanding the devices and the users.
Testing in controlled environments often does not adequately consider the “human
factor,” or how people interact with technology in high-pressure, real-life situations.
(p. 12)The human interfaces for each of these technologies are different
and can even differ among different brands or versions of the same
device. For example, to enter data into an EHR, one might use a
keyboard, a light pen, a touch screen, or their voice. Healthcare
technologies may present information via computer screen, printer,
or smartphone. Patient data might be displayed in the form of text,
images (e.g., the results of a brain scan), or sound (an
echocardiogram); in addition, the information may be presented
differently, based on roles and preferences. Dumon’s (2017)
statement is still timely: “Technology does not determine human
action; human action shapes technology. As we push forward into
this age of the marriage of data and technology, we must apply the
basic principle that technology needs to serve humanity, first and
last” (para. 9).
Some human–technology interfaces mimic face-to-face human
encounters. For example, faculty members are increasingly using
videoconferencing technology to communicate with their students.
Similarly, telehealth allows nurses to use telecommunication and
videoconferencing software to communicate more effectively and
frequently with patients at home by using the technology to monitor
patients’ vital signs, supervise their wound care, or demonstrate a
procedure. To provide comprehensive, quality healthcare
interventions, we must fully leverage these tools, take all human
factors into account, and make sure they are included in the
healthcare provider’s clinical workflow. Telehealth technology has
fostered other virtual interfaces, such as system-wide intensive care
units in which intensivists and specially trained nurses monitor
critically ill patients in intensive care units, some of whom may be in
rural locations. Sometimes telehealth interfaces allow patients to
interact with a virtual clinician (a computer program such as an
artificial intelligence [AI] agent or robot) that asks questions, provides
social support, and tailors education to identify patient needs based
on the answers to screening questions. These human–technology
interfaces have been remarkably successful; sometimes patients
even prefer them to live clinicians.Human–technology interfaces may present information using text,
numbers, images, icons, or sound. Auditory, visual, or tactile alarms
may alert users to important information. Users may interact with (or
control) the technology via keyboards, digital pens, voice activation,
or touch.
A small but growing number of clinical and educational interfaces
rely heavily on tactile input. For example, many students learn to
access an intravenous site using virtual technology. Other, more
sophisticated virtual reality applications help physicians learn to do
endoscopies or practice complex surgical procedures in a safe
environment. Still others allow drug researchers to design new
medications by combining virtual molecules (here, the tactile
response is quite different for molecules that can be joined from
those that cannot). In each of these training environments,
accurately depicting tactile sensations is critical. For example, feeling
the kind and amount of pressure required to penetrate the desired
tissues, but not others, is essential to a realistic and effective
learning experience.
The growing use of large databases for research has led to the
design of novel human–technology interfaces that help researchers
visualize and understand patterns in the data that generate new
knowledge or lead to new questions. Many of these interfaces now
incorporate multidimensional visualizations in addition to scatter
plots, histograms, or cluster representations (Matange et al., n.d.;
Vincent et al., 2010). Some designers, such as Quinn (the founder of
the Design Rhythmics Sonification Research Laboratory at the
University of New Hampshire) and Meeker (2001), began using
variations in sound to help researchers hear the patterns in large
data sets. In Quinn and Meeker’s climate symphony, a variety of
musical instruments, tones, pitches, and phrases are mapped onto
variables, such as the amounts and relative concentrations of
minerals, to help researchers detect patterns in ice core data
covering more than 110,000 years. Climate patterns take centuries
to emerge and can be difficult to detect. The music allows the entire
110,000 years to be condensed into just a few minutes, making
detection of patterns and changes much easier. The ability to quicklymodel, analyze, assess, synthesize, and discover patterns in large
data sets is critical to the future of health care. As the previous
examples demonstrated, there are evolving effective ways to model
complex healthcare data, visualizing impactful data, and uncovering
patterns (Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, 2019; Kaul,
2020). Healthcare data visualization is flourishing with the increased
awareness of the power afforded from the graphical representation
of healthcare data. “Data visualization in the healthcare industry is
the representation of complex medical stats in a digestible graphical
format. It allows users to easily obtain qualitative insights, changes,
patterns, and trends while drawing valuable conclusions . . . even
without developed math skills (Khristich, 2023, para. 5).
© Thomas Andreas/Shutterstock, Inc.
The human–technology interface is ubiquitous in health care and
takes many forms. A look at the quality of these interfaces follows.
Be warned, though. It is not always a pretty picture.© Innocenti/Cultura/Getty Images© Carlos Amarillo/Shutterstock, Inc.The Human–Technology Interface Problem
In The Human Factor, Vicente (2004) cited the many safety
problems in health care identified by the Institute of Medicine’s
(2000) seminal report, To Err Is Human: Building a Safer Health
System, and noted how the technology (defined broadly) used often
does not fit well with human characteristics. As a case in point,
Vicente described his own studies of nurses’ PCA pump errors.
Nurses made the errors in large part because of the complexity of
the user interface, which required as many as 27 steps to program
the device. Vicente and his colleagues developed a PCA in which
programming required no more than 12 steps. Nurses who used it in
laboratory experiments made fewer errors, programmed drug
delivery faster, and reported lower cognitive workloads compared to
using the commercial device. Further evidence that human–
technology interfaces do not work as well as they might is evident in
the following events.
Doyle (2005) reported that when a bar-coding medication system
interfered with nurses’ workflow, they devised workarounds, such as
removing the armband from the patient and attaching it to the bed
because the bar-code reader failed to interpret barcodes when the
bracelet curved tightly around a small arm. Koppel et al. (2005)
reported that a widely used computerized physician order entry
(CPOE) system meant to decrease medication errors actually
facilitated 22 types of errors because the information needed to
order medications was fragmented across as many as 20 screens,
available medication dosages differed from those the physicians
expected, and allergy alerts were triggered only after an order was
written.
Han et al. (2005) reported increased mortality among children
admitted to Children’s Hospital in Pittsburgh after CPOE
implementation. Three reasons were cited for this unexpected
outcome. First, CPOE changed the workflow in the emergency room.Before CPOE, orders were written for critical time-sensitive
treatment based on radio communication with the incoming transport
team before the child arrived. After CPOE implementation, orders
could not be written until the patient arrived and was registered in the
system (a policy that was later changed). Second, entering an order
required as many as 10 clicks and took as long as 2 minutes;
moreover, computer screens sometimes froze or response time was
slow. Third, when the team changed its workflow to accommodate
CPOE, face-to-face contact among team members diminished.
Despite the problems with study methods identified by some of the
informatics community, there certainly were serious human–
technology interface problems.
In 2005, a Washington Post article reported that Cedars-Sinai
Medical Center in Los Angeles had shut down a $34 million system
after 3 months because of the medical staff’s rebellion. Reasons for
the rebellion included the additional time it took to complete the
structured information forms, failure of the system to recognize
misspellings (as nurses had previously done), and intrusive and
interruptive automated alerts (Connolly, 2005). Even though
physicians actually responded appropriately to the alerts, modifying
or canceling 35% of the orders that triggered them, designers had
not found the right balance of helpful-to-interruptive alerts. The
system simply did not fit the clinicians’ workflow.
Such unintended consequences (Ash et al., 2004) or
unpredictable outcomes (Aarts et al., 2004) of healthcare information
systems may be attributed in part to a flawed implementation
process, but there were clearly also human–technology
interaction issues. That is, the technology was not well matched to
the users and the context of care. In the pediatrics case, a system
developed for medical–surgical units was implemented in a critical
care unit.
Human–technology interface problems are the major cause of as
many as 87% of all patient monitoring incidents (Walsh & Beatty,
2002). It is not always that the technology itself is faulty. In fact, the
technology may perform flawlessly, but the interface design may lead
the human user to make errors (Vicente, 2004).Rice and Tahir (2014) reported on two errors that remind us we
still have a long way to go to ensure patient safety. In 2011, a pop-up
box on a digital blood glucose reader was misread, and the patient
was given too much insulin, which sent her into a diabetic coma. In
2013, a patient did not receive his psychiatric medicine for almost 3
weeks because the pharmacy’s computer system was set to
automatically discontinue orders for certain drugs and there was no
alert built in to notify the team providing care to this patient that the
drug was suspended. The real issue is that the healthcare
personnel–technology interfaces continue to cause these adverse
events and near misses. It is important to remember that it is not
only a technology or human interface issue. Many of these problems
occur when new technology is introduced or existing technology is
modified. In addition, we must examine how the technology tools are
tested, the human users are prepared for their use, and the tools are
integrated into the care delivery process (Rice & Tahir, 2014).
The Institute for Safe Medication Practices (2020) reflected on the
seminal Institute of Medicine’s report, To Err Is Human, and
developed its top 10 most persistent medication and safety
errors/issues. This list includes selecting the wrong medication after
entering the first few letters of the drug name, errors due to look￾alike labeling of manufacturers’ products, misheard drug orders or
recommendations during verbal/telephone communication, unsafe
ability to override with automated dispensing cabinets (ADCs),
unsafe practices associated with IV push medications, and wrong
routes. It is important to note that errors and issues have continued
more than two decades after the To Err Is Human report was issued.
These errors are important to review since they reflect the work that
has been done while making us aware of how much work is left to do
when we add technologies to patient care. Please refer to Box 11-1:
Interface Applications. We must be cognizant that new issues can
arise from combining human factors and technology into patient care
(American Society for Health Care and Risk Management, n.d.; The
Joint Commission, 2023; Nuber, 2022; Sittig et al., 2018; USF
Health, 2023).BOX 11-1 INTERFACE APPLICATIONS
REFLECT ON THESE INTERFACE APPLICATIONS
Xerox (2023) listed 35 innovations that rocked or changed our world. We selected a
few for you to critically think about in relation to how they affect health care.
NATURAL LANGUAGE USER INTERFACES
Natural language processing (NLP) is a discipline of computer science concerning
the relationship between computers and human language that requires machine
learning skills from the disciplines of AI and computational linguistics. Our virtual
assistants, such as Siri, Cortana, and Alexa, can respond to our questions or verbalized
needs. As natural language interfaces evolve, they will help us speed up complex
processes requiring extensive typing. This will enhance health care by allowing us to do
the following:
Map unstructured text data elements to structured fields in an EHR to improve
clinical data reliability and integrity
Identify key elements, concepts, or phrases in lengthy blocks of a clinical note
Reverse the process by converting data from machine-readable formats to natural
language for reporting functions
Conduct unique or distinct free text queries requiring multiple data sources to be
synthesized to meet the query
THE CAPACITIVE TOUCH SCREEN, OR TOUCH DISPLAY
As opposed to the resistive touch screen, relying on the mechanical pressure made by
your finger or a stylus, the capacitive touch screen, or touch display, uses the fact that
our bodies are naturally conductive. The use of the electrical charges held in our
fingertips makes tapping; swiping; scrolling; and resizing, such as zooming, easier. In
the clinical setting, these displays can be used by gloved fingers.
GESTURE RECOGNITION
Gesture recognition requires the interpretation of human gestures via mathematical
algorithms. Gestures can originate from any bodily motion, but typically they come from
the face or hands. Emotion recognition is evolving.
Healthcare professionals use computer vision-based gesture recognition and
wearable sensor-based gesture recognition. Surgeons can access patient data mid￾surgery using a gesture, and doctors and nurses can similarly control robots. As
pointed out by Xerox (n.d.), “When computers read gestures, the world is your
interface” (para. 37).NEAR FIELD COMMUNICATION INTERFACE AND
PROTOCOL
For people to be able to interact with devices and computers, the devices and
computers must have smart ways to interact with each other. The standard that defines
these communication modes is the Near Field Communication Interface and
Protocol (NFCIP-1), which provides the communication network for these devices to
be interconnected. This communication network uses near field communication
(NFC) secure credentialing to network the products and consumer equipment in
machine-to-machine or machine-to-object interaction. This provides the security that
makes mobile payments practical.
Landman et al. (2014) developed an innovative use for a “near field
communication-enabled medication administration (NFCMA) system taking
advantage of a mobile device equipped with a reader for near field communication
(NFC), a wireless communication protocol that allows secure exchange of small
amounts of data by proximity or touch” (para. 9). Debnath et al. (2020) reported that
their short transmission range makes NFC-based transactions very secure. In 2021,
Aldughayfiq and Sampalli (2021) conducted a usability study and determined that an
NFC-based mobile application could improve patient safety. The results demonstrate
that their subjects thought the NFC application will decrease errors in the dispensing of
medications. Landman et al.’s (2014) innovation positively affects medication
administration, and NFC continues to be researched.
APPLICATION PROGRAMMING INTERFACE
The application programming interface (API) is an interface or communication
protocol between a server and a client. It is a computing interface to a software
component or a system that defines how other components or systems can use it. The
interface can be entirely customized; specific to a component of the system; or
designed based on an industry standard to assure interoperability, which is key.
Xerox (n.d.) stated that “[s]oftware is certainly eating the world. But the web wouldn’t
be what it is without the proliferation of API bridges between all that software” (para.
39).
Healthcare applications involve building interoperability between EHRs, internal
apps, and other data exchange tools, which necessitates the need for APIs to govern
the flow of information among these disparate, distinct systems.Improving the Human–Technology Interface
Much can be learned from the related fields of cognitive engineering,
human factors, and ergonomics (Figure 11-1 and Figure 11-2)
about how to make interfaces more compatible with their human
users and the context of care. Each of these areas of study is
multidisciplinary and integrates knowledge from multiple disciplines
(e.g., computer science, engineering, cognitive engineering,
psychology, and sociology).Figure 11-1 Human Factors and Ergonomics
Figure 11-2 Human Factors and Ergonomics, Continued
Description
These areas are also concerned with health issues arising from
computer and other technology use. Longo and Reese (2014)
reminded us that
[n]early 20 years ago, the American Optometric Association termed computer
vision syndrome (CVS) as the complex of eye and vision problems related to near
work experienced while using a computer. CVS symptoms reflect the current broad
diagnosis of asthenopia (ICD-9, 368.13) [2017 ICD-10-CM H53.149] also referredto as eyestrain. Symptoms include: fatigue, blurred distal or proximal vision,
headache, dry or irritated eyes, neck and/or backaches, blurred near vision and
diplopia (double vision). (p. 8)
Longo and Reese (2014) described how to prevent computer
vision syndrome. One of the best ways to help your eyes is to
remember to look 20 feet away from your screen every 20 minutes
for a minimum of 20 seconds. With increased smartphone use, we
are seeing neck issues caused by the tilt of the head (with the chin
on the chest) while looking down at the smartphone or other
handheld device. You should hold your phone up so that you are
keeping your neck and eyes aligned properly with the device’s
screen for more comfortable viewing and interactions. We must all
be aware of our posture and how our work areas are set up when
using our computers, smartphones, tablets, and any other devices
that consume a great deal of our time during our work or personal
hours. See Box 11-2 for how to use a virtual reality headset.
BOX 11-2 VIRTUAL REALITY (VR) HEADSET USAGE
A VR headset, or head-mounted display, is a wearable device that you place over your
eyes like goggles and use it to fully engage in the VR environment. Here is a list of
human–technology interface tips from the authors:
1. Always read the manufacturer’s instructions and safety warnings before using any
headset.
2. Place your headset on and adjust it, based on the manufacturer’s guidance, so that
it feels comfortable; once you enter VR, make sure everything looks crisp and clear.
3. Learn how to hold and use the controllers if applicable. They typically have a wrist
strap, and it is suggested to use the strap to prevent the controllers from falling to
the floor and being damaged.
4. Clear your space so that you do not have any hazards while you move around in
VR such as when you reach and extend your arms or walk around. Some people
stay seated when they do not have a large enough area for safe movement.
5. Begin slowly by building the amount of time you spend in VR. Access a program for
5 minutes and evaluate how you feel. If you do not feel any discomfort, keep the
headset on for 15 to 30 minutes engaging in VR activities. If you feel discomfort,
remove the headset, discontinue use, and rest. Try again later.
6. It is suggested to take a 10 to 15 minute break for every 30 minutes of VR time or
30 minutes for every hour of VR.7. As your eyes and brain get accustomed to the headset and VR, you can increase
your time in VR. It is not recommended to exceed 1 hour of continuous use, so
remember to take breaks. You might even take up to 1-hour breaks after being in
VR for 1 hour.
8. Be mindful of your eyes and make sure that you look off into the distance after you
remove the headset, just as you would if you are using a monitor and should
change your eyes’ focus often. Change the visual distance you focus on for your
eyes.
In addition, Meta Quest (2023) recommended the following:
1. You must be 13+ years old.
2. Only use indoors (keep headset away from direct sunlight).
3. Take care of your headset by keeping it away from liquids or heat.
4. Read and abide by their [Meta] current code of conduct.
5. To protect youth, adults should monitor how their 13+ teens are using the Meta VR
systems.
Meta Quest. (n.d.). Welcome to the Meta Quest safety center. www.oculus.com/safety￾center
Effken (2006) proposed an ecological approach to interface design
to help us realize a more meaningful EHR. The ecological interface
design (EID) is an approach to interface design that was introduced
explicitly for multifaceted, complex sociotechnical, real-time, and
dynamic systems; it has been applied in many fields, including health
care. This approach supports knowledge workers in health care as
they manage and adapt to change, innovation, and novelty. This
approach was borrowed from a small field of psychology—ecological
psychology—which helps the user identify deviations from normal
physical or physiological processes. It is evident that users and
clinicians need the technology and interfaces necessary to quickly
comprehend the multiple discrete data that are contained in distinct
parts of the EHR.
Over the years, three axioms have evolved for developing
effective human–computer interactions: (1) Users must be an
early and continuous focus during interface design; (2) the design
process should be iterative, allowing for evaluation and correction of
identified problems; and (3) formal evaluation should take place
using rigorous experimental or qualitative methods (Staggers, 2003).It is important to note that the following axioms still apply today and
that, even after all these years, are often not followed.
Axiom 1: Users Must Be an Early and Continuous Focus
During Interface Design
Rubin (1994) used the term user-centered design to describe the
process of designing products (e.g., human–technology interfaces)
so that users can carry out the tasks needed to achieve their goals
with “minimal effort and maximal efficiency” (p. 10). Thus, in user￾centered design, the end user is emphasized. This is still a focus of
human–technology interface design today.
Vicente (2004) argued that technology should fit human
requirements at five levels of analysis (i.e., physical, psychological,
team, organizational, and political). Physical characteristics of the
technology (e.g., size, shape, or location) should conform to the
user’s size, grasp, and available space. Information should be
presented in ways that are consistent with known human
psychological capabilities (e.g., the number of items that can be
remembered is seven plus or minus two). In addition, systems
should conform to the communication, workflow, and authority
structures of work teams; to organizational factors, such as culture
and staffing levels; and even to political factors, such as budget
constraints, laws, or regulations.
A number of analysis tools and techniques have been developed
to help designers better understand the task and user environment
for which they are designing. Discussed next are task analysis,
cognitive task analysis, and cognitive work analysis.
Task analysis examines how a task must be accomplished.
Generally, analysts describe the task in terms of inputs needed for
the task, outputs (i.e., what is achieved by the task), and any
constraints on actors’ choices on carrying out the task. Analysts then
lay out in flowcharts the sequence of temporally ordered actions that
must be carried out to complete the task (Vicente, 1999). A worker’s
tasks must be analyzed. Task analysis is very useful in defining what
users must do and which functions might be distributed between theuser and technology (U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services, 2013). Cognitive task analysis usually starts by
identifying, through interviews or questionnaires, the particular task
and its typicality and frequency. Then analysts may review the
written materials that describe the job or are used for training and
determine, through structured interviews or by observing experts
perform the task, which knowledge is involved and how that
knowledge might be represented. Cognitive task analysis can be
used to develop training programs. Zupanc et al. (2015) reported on
the use of cognitive task analysis techniques to develop a framework
from which a colonoscopy training program could be designed. “Task
analysis methods (observation, a think-aloud protocol and cued￾recall) and subsequent expert review were employed to identify the
competency components exhibited by practicing endoscopists with
the aim of providing a basis for future instructional design” (p. 10).
The resulting colonoscopy competency framework consisted of
“twenty-seven competency components grouped into six categories:
clinical knowledge; colonoscope handling; situation awareness;
heuristics and strategies; clinical reasoning; and intra and inter￾personal” (p. 10).
Cognitive work analysis (CWA) was developed specifically for
the analysis of complex, high-technology work domains, such as
nuclear power plants, intensive care units, and emergency
departments, where workers need considerable flexibility in
responding to external demands (Burns & Hajdukiewicz, 2004;
Vicente, 1999). A complete CWA includes five types of analysis: (1)
work domain, (2) control tasks, (3) strategies, (4) social–
organizational, and (5) worker competencies. The work domain
analysis describes the functions of the system and identifies the
information that users need to accomplish their task goals. The
control task analysis investigates the control structures through
which the user interacts with or controls the system. It also identifies
which variables and relations among variables discovered in the
work domain analysis are relevant for particular situations so that
context-sensitive interfaces can present the right information (e.g.,
prompts or alerts) at the right time. The strategies analysis looks athow work is actually done by users to facilitate the design of
appropriate human–computer dialogues. The social–organizational
analysis identifies the responsibilities of various users (e.g., doctors,
nurses, clerks, or therapists) so that the system can support
collaboration, communication, and a viable organizational structure.
Finally, the worker competencies analysis identifies design
constraints related to the users themselves (Effken, 2002).
Specialized tools are available for the first three types of CWA
(Vicente, 1999). Analysts typically borrow tools (e.g., ethnography)
from the social sciences for the two remaining types. Hajdukiewicz et
al. (2001) used CWA to model an operating room environment.
Effken (2002) and Effken et al. (2001) used CWA to analyze the
information needs for an oxygenation management display for an
intensive care unit. Other examples of the application of CWA in
health care are described by Burns and Hajdukiewicz (2004) in their
book, Ecological Interface Design. Ashoori et al. (2014) used team
CWA to reveal the interactions of the healthcare team in the context
of work models in a birthing unit. They felt that team CWA enhances
CWA in complex environments, such as health care, that require
effective teamwork because it reveals additional constraints relevant
to the workings of the team. The information gleaned about the
teamwork could be used for systems design applications.
Axiom 2: The Design Process Should Be Iterative,
Allowing for Evaluation and Correction of Identified
Problems
Today, both principles and techniques for developing human–
technology interfaces that people can use with minimal stress and
maximal efficiency are available. An excellent place to start is with
Norman’s (1988, pp. 188–189) principles:
1. Use both knowledge in the world and knowledge in the head. In
other words, pay attention not only to the environment or to the
user but to both, and to how they relate. By using both, the
problem actually may be simplified.2. Simplify the structure of tasks. For example, reduce the number
of steps or even computer screens needed to accomplish the
goal.
3. Make things visible. Bridge the gulf of execution and the gulf
of evaluation. Users need to be able to see how to use the
technology to accomplish a goal (e.g., which buttons does one
press and in which order to program this PCA?); if they do, then
designers have bridged the gulf of execution. They also need to
be able to see the effects of their actions on the technology
(e.g., if a nurse practitioner prescribes a drug to treat a certain
condition, the actual patient response may not be perfectly
clear). This bridges the gulf of evaluation.
4. Get the mappings right. Here, the term mapping is used to
describe how environmental facts (e.g., the order of light
switches or variables in a physiologic monitoring display) are
accurately depicted by the information presentation.
5. Exploit the power of constraints, both natural and artificial.
Because of where the eyes are located in the head, humans
have to turn their heads to see what is happening behind them;
however, that is not true of all animals. As the location of one’s
eyes constrains what one can see, so also do physical
elements, social factors, and even organizational policy
constrain the way tasks are accomplished. By taking these
constraints into account when designing technology, it can be
made easier for human use.
6. Design for error. Mistakes happen. Technology should eliminate
predictable errors and be sufficiently flexible to allow humans to
identify and recover from unpredictable errors.
7. When all else fails, standardize. To get a feel for this principle,
think how difficult it is to change from a Macintosh to a Windows
environment or from the iPhone operating system to Android.
Kirlik and Muruyama (2004) described a real-world human–
technology interface that follows Norman’s principles. In their classic
analogy, the authors observed how a busy expert short-order cookstrategically managed to grill many hamburgers at the same time
and each to the customer’s desired level of doneness. The cook put
the burgers that were to be well done on the back and far right
portion of the grill, those to be medium well done in the center of the
grill, and those to be rare at the front of the grill but farther to the left.
The cook moved all the burgers to the left as grilling proceeded and
turned them over during their travel across the grill. Everything the
cook needed to know was available in this simple interface. As a
human–technology interface, the grill layout was elegant. The
interface used knowledge housed in both the environment and the
expert cook’s head; also, things were clearly visible, both the
position of the burgers and the way they were moved. The process
was clearly and effectively standardized, with built-in constraints.
What might it take to create such an intuitive human–technology
interface in health care?
Several useful books have been written about effective interface
design (e.g., Burns & Hajdukiewicz, 2004; Cooper, 1995; Mandel,
1997; McKay, 2013; Wigdor & Wixon, 2011). Just as in other
industries, health care is learning that big data can provide big
insights if they can be visualized, accessed, and meaningful (Intel,
n.d.). Often, designers use graphical objects to show how variables
relate. The first to do so were likely Cole and Stewart (1993), who
used changes in the lengths of the sides and area of a four-sided
object to show the relationship of respiratory rate to tidal volume.
Other researchers have demonstrated that histograms and polygon
displays are better than numeric displays for detecting changes in
patients’ physiological variables (Gurushanthaiah et al., 1995). When
Horn et al. (2001) presented physiological data via a single circular
object with 12 sectors (where each sector represented a different
variable), nurses reported that it was easy to recognize abnormal
conditions but difficult to comprehend the patient’s overall status.
This kind of graphical object approach has been most widely used in
anesthesiology, where a number of researchers have shown
improved clinician situational awareness or problem-detection time
by mapping physiological variables onto display objects that have
meaningful shapes, such as using a bellows-like object to representventilation (Agutter et al., 2003; Blike et al., 2000; Michels et al.,
1997; Zhang et al., 2002).
Effken (2006) compared a prototype display that represented
physiological data in a structured pictorial format with two bar graph
displays. Both the first bar graph display and the prototype presented
data in the order that experts were observed to use them. The
second bar graph display presented the data in the way that nurses
collected them. In an experiment in which resident physicians and
novice nurses used simulated drugs to treat observed oxygenation
management problems using each display, residents’ performance
was improved with the displays ordered as experts used them, but
nurses’ performance was not improved. Instead, nurses performed
better when the variables were ordered as they were used to
collecting them, which demonstrated the importance of
understanding user roles and the tasks they need to accomplish.
Data also must be represented in ways other than visually. Gaver
(2010) proposed that because ordinary sounds map onto familiar
events, they could be used as icons to facilitate easier technology
navigation and use and provide continuous background information
about how a system is functioning. In health care, auditory displays
have been used to provide clinicians with information about patients’
vital signs (e.g., in pulse oximetry), such as by altering volume or
tone when a significant change occurs (Sanderson, 2006).
Admittedly, auditory displays are probably more useful for quieter
areas of the hospital, such as the operating room. Perhaps that is
why researchers have most frequently applied the approach in
anesthesiology. For example, Loeb and Fitch (2002) reported that
anesthesiologists detected critical events more quickly when auditory
information about heart rate, blood pressure, and respiratory
parameters was added to a visual display. An earcon is a brief or
short distinctive sound representing a specific event or conveying
some other bit of information such as the sound from your phone
when you receive an email or a text that alerts you to check for the
information just received. These are common in computer systems
and applications, such as the computer beep signifying there is an
error or a distinct sound indicating that a patient has allergies orsomething else that needs your attention. Auditory tones also have
been combined as earcons to represent relationships among data
elements, such as the relationship of systolic to diastolic blood
pressure (Watson & Gill, 2004).
Axiom 3: Formal Evaluation Should Take Place Using
Rigorous Experimental or Qualitative Methods
Perhaps one of the highest accolades that any interface can achieve
is to say that it is transparent. An interface becomes transparent
when it is so easy to use that users think only about the task at hand
instead of the interface. For example, a transparent clinical interface
would enable clinicians to focus on patient decisions rather than on
how to access or combine patient data from multiple sources. In
Figure 11-3, instead of the nurse interacting with the computer, the
nurse and the patient interact through the technology interface. The
more transparent the interface, the easier the interaction should be.Modified from: Staggers, N., & Parks, P. L. (1993). Description and initial applications of the
Staggers & Parks nurse–computer interaction framework. Computers in Nursing, 11, 282–
290. Reprinted by permission of AMIA.
Figure 11-3 Nurse–Patient Interaction Framework in Which the
Technology Supports the Interaction
Description
Usability is a term that denotes the ease with which people can
use an interface to achieve a particular goal. Usability of a new
human–technology interface needs to be evaluated early and often
throughout its development. Typical usability indicators include ease
of use, ease of learning, satisfaction with using, efficiency of use,
error tolerance, and fit of the system to the task (Staggers, 2003).
Some of the more commonly used approaches to usability
evaluation are discussed next.
Surveys of Potential or Actual Users
Chernecky et al. (2006) assessed cancer patients’ preferences for
website design. Participants were asked their preferences for a
number of design characteristics, such as display color, menu
buttons, text, photo size, icon metaphor, and layout, by selecting on
a computer screen their preferences for each item from two or three
options.
Focus Groups
Typically used at the very start of the design process, focus groups
can help the designer better understand users’ responses to
potential interface designs and to content that might be included in
the interface.
Cognitive Walkthrough
In a cognitive walkthrough, evaluators assess a paper mock-up,
working prototype, or completed interface by observing the steps
users are likely to take to use the interface to accomplish typicaltasks. This analysis helps designers determine how understandable
and easy to learn the interface is likely to be for these users and their
typical tasks (Wharton et al., 1994).
Heuristic Evaluation
A heuristic evaluation has become the most popular of what are
called discount usability evaluation methods. The objective of a
heuristic evaluation is to detect problems early in the design process,
when they can be most easily and economically corrected. The
methods are called discount because they typically are easy to do,
involve fewer than 10 experts (often experts in relevant fields, such
as human–computer technology or cognitive engineering), and are
much less expensive than other methods. They are called heuristic
because evaluators assess the degree to which the design complies
with recognized usability rules of thumb or principles (the heuristics),
such as those proposed by Nielsen (1994) and available on his
website (www.useit.com/papers/heuristic/heuristic_list.html).
For example, McDaniel and colleagues (2002) conducted a
usability test of an interactive computer-based program to encourage
smoking cessation by low-income women. As part of the initial
evaluation, healthcare professionals familiar with the intended users
reviewed the design and layout of the program. The usability test
revealed several problems with the decision rules used to tailor
content to users, which were corrected before implementation.
Formal Usability Test
Formal usability tests typically use either experimental or
observational studies of actual users using the interface to
accomplish real-world tasks. A number of researchers use these
methods. For example, Staggers et al. (2007) conducted a usability
study of a prototype electronic medication administration record.
Participants were asked to add, modify, or discontinue medications
using the system. The time they needed to complete the task and
their accuracy in the task and satisfaction with the prototype were
assessed (the last criterion through a questionnaire). Althoughsatisfaction was high, the evaluation also revealed design flaws that
could be corrected before implementation.
Field Study
In a field study, end users evaluate a prototype in the actual work
setting just before its general release. For example, Thompson et al.
(2007) evaluated the use of touch-screen computer kiosks
containing child health–promoting information in several low-income
urban community settings through an online questionnaire that could
be completed after the kiosk was used. Most users found the kiosk
easy to use and the information it provided easy to understand.
Researchers also gained a better understanding of the
characteristics of the likely users (e.g., 26% had never used the
internet, and 48% had less than a high school education) and the
information most often accessed (i.e., television and media use and
smoke exposure).
Dykes and her colleagues (2006) used a field test to investigate
the feasibility of using digital pen and paper technology to record
vital signs as a way to bridge an organization from paper to an EHR.
In general, satisfaction with the tool increased with use, and the
devices conformed well to nurses’ workflow. However, 8% of the vital
sign entries were recorded inaccurately because of inaccurate
handwriting recognition, entries outside the recording box, or
inaccurate data entry (i.e., the data entered were not valid values).
The number of modifications needed in the tool and the time that
would be required to make those changes ruled out using the digital
pen and paper as a bridging technology.
Ideally, every healthcare setting would have a usability laboratory
of its own to test new software and technology in its own setting
before actual implementation. However, having such a laboratory
can be expensive, especially for small organizations. Kushniruk and
Borycki (2006) developed a low-cost, rapid usability engineering
method for creating a portable usability laboratory, consisting of
video cameras and other technology, which can be taken out of the
laboratory into hospitals and other locations to test the technology
on-site using as close to a real-world environment as possible. Anon-site usability laboratory is a cost-effective and efficient solution,
which makes it possible to test all technologies before their
implementation.A Framework for Evaluation
Ammenwerth et al. (2006) proposed a fit between individuals, tasks,
and technology (FITT) model that suggests that each of these
factors be considered in designing and evaluating human–
technology interfaces. It is not enough to consider only the user and
technology characteristics; the tasks that the technology supports
must be considered as well. The FITT model builds on DeLone and
McLean’s (1992) information success model, Davis’s (1993)
technology acceptance model, and Goodhue and Thompson’s
(1995) task technology fit model. A notable strength of the FITT
model is that it encourages the evaluator to examine the fit between
the various pairs of components: user and technology, task and
technology, and user and task.
Johnson and Turley (2006) compared how doctors and nurses
describe patient information and found that doctors emphasized
diagnosis, treatment, and management, whereas the nurses
emphasized functional issues. Although both physicians and nurses
share some patient information, how they thought about patients
differed. For that reason, an EHR needs to present information (even
the same information) to the two groups in different ways.
Hyun et al. (2009) used a combination of two models (i.e.,
technology acceptance model and task–technology fit model) to
design and evaluate an electronic documentation system for nurses.
To facilitate the design, they employed multiple methods, including
brainstorming of experts, to identify design requirements. To
evaluate how well the prototype design fit both task and user, nurses
were asked to carry out specific tasks using the prototype in a
laboratory setting and then complete a questionnaire on ease of use,
usefulness, and fit of the technology with their documentation tasks.
Because the researchers engaged nurses at each step of the design
process, the result was a more useful and usable system.It is easy to see how the foundational work of all these early
pioneers have helped to shape our views of human–technology
interfacing. They laid the groundwork for us to leverage technology
while considering the human–technology interface for our own health
and safety and also for our patients and their significant others.Future of the Human–Technology Interface
Increased attention to improving the human–technology interface
through human factors approaches has already led to significant
improvements in one area of health care: anesthesiology. Anesthesia
machines that once had hoses that would fit into any delivery port
now have hoses that can be plugged in to only the proper port.
Anesthesiologists have also been actively working with engineers to
improve the computer interface through which they monitor their
patients’ status and are among the leaders in investigating the use of
audio techniques as an alternative way to help anesthesiologists
maintain their situational awareness. As a result of these efforts,
anesthesia-related deaths dropped from 2 in 20,000 to 1 in 200,000
in less than 10 years (Vicente, 2004). It is hoped that continued
emphasis on human factors (Vicente, 2004) and user-centered
design (Rubin, 1994) by informatics professionals and human–
computer interactions experts will have equally successful effects on
other parts of the healthcare system. The increased amount of
informatics research in this area is encouraging, but there is a long
way to go.
A systematic review of clinical technology design evaluation
studies (Alexander & Staggers, 2009) found 50 nursing studies. Of
those studies, nearly half (24) evaluated effectiveness, fewer (16)
evaluated satisfaction, and still fewer (10) evaluated efficiency. The
evaluations were not systematic; that is, there was no attempt to
evaluate the same system in different environments or with different
users. Most evaluations were done in a laboratory rather than in the
setting where the system would be used. The authors argued for a
broader range of studies that use an expanded set of outcome
measures. For example, instead of looking at user satisfaction,
evaluators should dig deeper into the design factors that led to the
satisfaction or dissatisfaction. In addition, performance measures,such as diagnostic accuracy, errors, and correct treatment, should
be used.
Barth (2013) reported on a social study of the human cloud formed
in part by data collected from wearable technologies; they focused
on assessing attitudes and exploring how cloud computing is
enabling this new generation of smart devices. Today, smartphones,
glasses, clothing, watches, cameras, and monitors for health or
patient tracking, to name but a few devices, are available for this
purpose.
Wearable technology, or the field of mobile smart devices that
are worn on our bodies, is the current rapidly evolving human–
technology interface. Booth (2019) stated that “[r]oughly 60 million
Americans use wearable devices” (para. 1), which include gloves,
body gear, and headsets. Booth reported that for the most part,
wearables consist of shrinking smartphone technology—for example,
taking the smartphone’s display and adding it to a watch. However,
the next new frontier is creating wearable devices that not “only read
signals from the human body but also intersect and interject signals
into the human body” (para. 5). Marr (2020) stated that this industry
began with fitness trackers and has “now exploded into a whole
industry of wearable technology designed to improve human
performance and help us live healthier, safer, more efficient lives. In
the future, we may even see humans merge with technology to
create ‘augmented humans’ or ‘transhumans’” (para. 4). With these
developments, it will be critical for the human–technology interfaces
to accommodate the needs of varied users with numerous personal
and healthcare needs and lifestyles.
The technologies that are entering our lives on a daily basis can
enhance or challenge our ability to complete both our activities of
daily living and our professional tasks. As our home monitoring and
patient technologies increase, the user’s (i.e., patient’s or nurse’s)
ability to use the technology is paramount. No matter who is using
the technology, the human–technology interface addresses the
user’s ability and the technology’s functionality to complete the task’s
demands (see Figure 11-4).Figure 11-4 Human–Technology Interface and Task Completion
Description
As our technologies continue to evolve, we are creating more
design issues. The proliferation of smart devices and wearable
technology brings new concerns related to human–technology
interfaces. According to Ferreira et al. (2021), wearable technologies
are adding another wrinkle into the design process—namely, human
behavior. How will someone use this technology? How will
individuals behave with it on their person? How will they wear it?
How and when will they enable and use it? Will others be able to
detect the technologies (i.e., will someone be able to wear Google
Glass and take pictures or videos of other people’s actions withouttheir knowing), and will users be able to seamlessly move among all
the capabilities of their wearable technologies? We have a long way
to go in addressing these issues.
Futurside (2022) reported that the future of “human-computer
interfaces is increasingly complex and dynamic, as organizations
continue to look for ways to increase efficiency” (para. 14). We are
learning how to interact with the new technology, and it is the “wild
west when it comes to voice, VR and wearables, but these
technologies aren’t going anywhere. In fact, they are laying the
foundation for a future where humans and computers are tied more
closely together than ever before” (Bieller, 2022, para. 32). Bechtel
(n.d.) believed “[t]he ‘Age of With’—human work augmented and
enhanced with AI—is upon us. How will rapidly evolving artificial
intelligence technology shape the future of how we live and work?”
(para. 1). We will continue to experience major advances and
influences that are impacting our machine interactions, human–
technology interfacing, especially when you consider how fast AI text
and image generators exploded into our awareness and affected our
personal and professional lives. “AI is neither hero nor villain. Rather,
it represents our species’ latest in a long series of hacks: This time,
offloading discernment and decision-making” (Bechtel, n.d., para.
24). As new technologies disrupt, it is up to us to learn, leverage,
harness, and control their effect and the human–technology
interface.Summary
There are at least three messages the reader should take away from
the discussion in this chapter. First, if there is to be significant
improvement in quality and safety outcomes in the United States
through the use of information technology, the designs for human–
technology interfaces must be radically improved so that the
technology better fits human and task requirements. However, that
improvement will be possible only if clinicians identify and report
problems rather than simply creating workarounds. This means that
each clinician has a responsibility to participate in the design process
and to report designs that do not work.
Second, a number of useful tools are currently available for the
analysis, design, and evaluation phases of development life cycles.
They should be used routinely by informatics professionals to ensure
that technology better fits both task and user requirements.
Third, focusing on interface improvement using these tools has
had a huge effect on patient safety in the area of anesthesiology and
medication administration. With increased attention from informatics
professionals and engineers, the same kind of improvement should
be possible in other areas, regardless of the technologies actually
employed there. In an ideal world, one can envision that every
human–technology interface would be designed to enhance users’
workflow, as easy to use as banking ATMs, and fully tested before its
implementation in a setting that mirrors that in which it would be
used.
THOUGHT-PROVOKING QUESTIONS
1. You are a member of a team that has been asked to evaluate a prototype
smartphone-based application for calculating drug dosages. Based on what you
know about usability testing, which kind of tests might you do and why?
2. Is there a human–technology interface that you have encountered that you think
needs improvement? If you were to design a replacement, which analysistechniques would you choose? Why?
3. Which type of functionality and interoperability would you want from your
smartphone, watch, clothing, glasses, headset, camera, and monitor? Provide a
detailed response.
4. If you reflect on Marr’s (2020) statement, “In the future, we may even see humans
merge with technology to create ‘augmented humans’ or ‘transhumans’” (para. 4),
do we need to redefine human–technology interfacing? Please provide a detailed
rationale for your answer. If you respond no, why wouldn’t the interfacing need to
be redefined? If you respond yes, how would the interfacing need to be changed?
5. Reflect on AI. How would you describe AI to someone who has not experienced it?
How has AI caused disruption? Explain in detail how we should learn, leverage,
harness, and control AI’s effect and the human–technology interface.R E F E R E N C E S
Aarts, J., Doorewaard, H., & Berg, M. (2004). Understanding implementation: The case of a
computerized physician order entry system in a large Dutch university medical center.
Journal of the American Medical Association, 11(3), 207–216.
https://doi.org/10.1197/jamia.M1372
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. (2019). Flu’s annual impact visualized.
www.ahrq.gov/data/visualizations/flu-impact-visualized.html
Agutter, J., Drews, F., Syroid, N., Westneskow, D., Albert, R., Strayer, D., Bermudez, J., &
Weinger, M. (2003). Evaluation of graphic cardiovascular display in a high-fidelity
simulator. Anesthesia & Analgesia, 97(5), 1403–1413.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1213/01.ANE.0000085298.03143.CD
Aldughayfiq, B., & Sampalli, S. (2021). A framework to lower the risk of medication
prescribing and dispensing errors: A usability study of an NFC-based mobile application.
International Journal of Medical Informatics, 153, 104509.
doi:10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2021.104509
Alexander, G., & Staggers, N. (2009). A systematic review of the designs of clinical
technology findings and recommendations for future research. Advances in Nursing
Science, 32(3), 252–279. http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/ANS.0b013e3181b0d737
American Society for Health Care and Risk Management. (n.d.). ASHRM patient safety tip
sheet: Technology and patient safety.
www.ashrm.org/system/files/media/file/2021/02/Technology-and-Patient-Safety.pdf
Ammenwerth, E., Iller, C., & Mahler, C. (2006). IT-adoption and the interaction of task,
technology and individuals: A fit framework and a case study. BMC Medical Informatics
and Decision Making, 6, 3. http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/1472-6947-6-3
Ash, J. S., Berg, M., & Coiera, E. (2004). Some unintended consequences of information
technology in health care: The nature of patient care information system-related errors.
Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association, 11(2), 104–112.
https://doi.org/10.1197/jamia.M1471
Ashoori, M., Burns, C., d’Entremont, B., & Momtahan, K. (2014). Using team cognitive work
analysis to reveal healthcare team interactions in a birthing unit. Ergonomics, 57(7),
973–986. https://doi.org/10.1080/00140139.2014.909949
Barth, J. (2013). The human cloud: Wearable technology from novelty to productivity.
Research Online. https://research.gold.ac.uk/id/eprint/15056
Bechtel, M. (n.d.). The future of AI: Seeing the forest for the trees, and the forests beyond.
Deloitte. www2.deloitte.com/us/en/pages/consulting/articles/the-future-of-ai.html
Benjamins, S. (2021, May 5). Examples of bad design in the real world. Site Builder Report.
www.sitebuilderreport.com/blog/examples-of-bad-design-in-the-real-world
Bieller, E. (2022, May 9). What’s the future of human-computer interaction (HCI)?
CareerFoundry. https://careerfoundry.com/en/blog/ui-design/the-future-of-human￾computer-interaction-whats-next
Blike, G. T., Surgenor, S. D., Whallen, K., & Jensen, J. (2000). Specific elements of a new
hemodynamics display improves the performance of anesthesiologists. Journal ofClinical Monitoring & Computing, 16, 485–491.
https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1011426226436
Booth, B. (2019, September 24). This new wearable tech is closing the gap between
humans and cyborgs. CNBC. www.cnbc.com/2019/09/24/new-wearable-tech-is-closing￾the-gap-between-humans-and-cyborgs.html
Burns, C. M., & Hajdukiewicz, J. R. (2004). Ecological interface design. CRC Press.
Chernecky, C., Macklin, D., & Waller, J. (2006). Internet design preferences of patients with
cancer. Oncology Nursing Forum, 33(4), 787–792. http://dx.doi.org/10.1188/06.ONF.787-
792
Cole, W. G., & Stewart, J. G. (1993). Metaphor graphics to support integrated decision
making with respiratory data. International Journal of Clinical Monitoring and Computing,
10, 91–100. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01142279
Connolly, C. (2005, March 21). Cedars-Sinai doctors cling to pen and paper. Washington
Post, A01.
Cooper, A. (1995). About face: Essentials of window interface design. Hungry Minds.
Davis, F. D. (1993). User acceptance of information technology: System characteristics,
user perceptions and behavioral impacts. International Journal of Man-Machine Studies,
38(3), 475–487. http://dx.doi.org/10.1006/imms.1993.1022
Debnath, B., Ghosh, A., & Deb, S. (2020). Designing a Rapid Optical Response Trigger
(RORT) for self-navigating and path explorer robot. Procedia Computer Science, 167(3),
1543–1552. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procs.2020.03.365
DeLone, W. H., & McLean, E. (1992). Information systems success: The quest for the
dependent variable. Information Systems Research, 3(1), 60–95.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1287/isre.3.1.60
Doyle, M. (2005). Impact of the bar code medication administration (BCMA) system on
medication administration errors [Unpublished doctoral dissertation]. University of
Arizona.
Dumon, O. (2017, March 29). Benefits of the human technology interface. Huffpost.
www.huffpost.com/entry/benefits-of-the-human-technology￾interface_b_58d3d81de4b062043ad4b06c
Dykes, P. C., Benoit, A., Chang, F., Gallagher, J., Li, Q., Spurr, C., McGrath, E. J., Kilroy, S.
M., & Prater, M. (2006). The feasibility of digital pen and paper technology for vital sign
data capture in acute care settings. In AMIA Annual Symposium Proceedings (pp. 229–
233). American Medical Informatics Association.
Effken, J. A. (2002). Different lenses, improved outcomes: A new approach to the analysis
and design of healthcare information systems. International Journal of Medical
Informatics, 65(1), 59–74. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1386-5056(02)00003-5
Effken, J. A. (2006). Improving clinical decision making through ecological interfaces.
Ecological Psychology, 18(4), 283–318. https://doi.org/10.1207/s15326969eco1804_4
Effken, J., Loeb, R., Johnson, K., Johnson, S., & Reyna, V. (2001). Using cognitive work
analysis to design clinical displays. In V. L. Patel, R. Rogers, & R. Haux (Eds.),
Proceedings of MedInfo 2001 (pp. 127–131). IOS Press. http://dx.doi.org/10.3233/978-1-
60750-928-8-127
Ferreira, J., Fernandes, C., Rammal, H., & Veiga, P. (2021). Wearable technology and
consumer interaction: A systematic review and research agenda. Computers in HumanBehavior, 118. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2021.106710
Futurside. (2022, April 18). Future of human-machine interface (HMI) in the world we are
building. https://futurside.com/future-of-human-machine-interface-hmi-in-the-world-we￾are-building
Gaver, W. W. (2010). What in the world do we hear? An ecological approach to auditory
event perception. Ecological Psychology, 5(1), 1–29.
https://doi.org/10.1207/s15326969eco0501_1
Goodhue, D. L., & Thompson, R. L. (1995). Task–technology fit and individual performance.
MIS Quarterly, 19(2), 213–236. http://dx.doi.org/10.2307/249689
Gurushanthaiah, K. I., Weinger, M. B., & Englund, C. E. (1995). Visual display format affects
the ability of anesthesiologists to detect acute physiologic changes: A laboratory study
employing a clinical display simulator. Anesthesiology, 83(6), 1184–1193.
Hajdukiewicz, J. R., Vicente, K. J., Doyle, D. J., Milgram, P., & Burns, C. M. (2001).
Modeling a medical environment: An ontology for integrated medical informatics design.
International Journal of Medical Informatics, 62(1), 79–99.
https://doi.org/10.1016/S1386-5056(01)00128-9
Han, Y. Y., Carcillo, J. A., Venkataraman, S. T., Clark, R. S. B., Watson, R. S., Nguyen, T. C.,
Bayir, H., & Orr, R. (2005). Unexpected increased mortality after implementation of a
commercially sold computerized physician order entry system. Pediatrics, 116(6), 1506–
1512. http://dx.doi.org/10.1542/peds.2005-1287
Hannah, J. (2023, May 9). 10 Classic UX design fails that teach us how not to do UX.
CareerFoundry. https://careerfoundry.com/en/blog/ux-design/10-classic-ux-design-fails
Horn, W., Popow, C., & Unterasinger, L. (2001). Support for fast comprehension of ICU
data: Visualization using metaphor graphics. Methods in Informatics Medicine, 40(5),
421–424. http://dx.doi.org/10.1055/s-0038-1634202
Hyun, S., Johnson, S. B., Stetson, P. D., & Bakken, S. (2009). Development and evaluation
of nursing user interface screens using multiple methods. Journal of Biomedical
Informatics, 42(6), 1004–1012. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbi.2009.05.005
Institute of Medicine. (2000). To err is human: Building a safer health system. National
Academies Press.
Institute for Safe Medication Practices. (2020, January 16). ISMP publishes top 10 list of
medication errors and hazards covered in newsletter. www.ismp.org/news/ismp￾publishes-top-10-list-medication-errors-and-hazards-covered-newsletter
Intel. (n.d.). Turn big data into big value.
www.intel.com/content/dam/develop/external/us/en/documents/turn-big-data-into-big￾value-550757.pdf
Johnson, C. M., & Turley, J. P. (2006). The significance of cognitive modeling in building
healthcare interfaces. International Journal of Medical Informatics, 75(2), 163–172.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2005.06.003
Johnson, C. W. (2006). Why did that happen? Exploring the proliferation of barely usable
software in healthcare systems. Quality & Safety in Healthcare, 15(suppl 1), 176–181.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/qshc.2005.016105
The Joint Commission. (2023). 2023 hospital national patient safety goals.
www.jointcommission.org/-/media/tjc/documents/standards/national-patient-safety￾goals/2023/2023-hap-npsg-goals-102122_simple.pdfKaul, A. (2020, July 6). Modeling healthcare data with graph databases. Towards Data
Science. https://towardsdatascience.com/modeling-healthcare-data-with-graph￾databases-3e3695bcae3c
Kirlik, A., & Muruyama, S. (2004). Human–technology interaction and music perception and
performance: Toward the robust design of sociotechnical systems. Proceedings of the
IEEE, 92(4), 616–631. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/JPROC.2004.825881
Koppel, R., Metlay, J. P., Cohen, A., Abaluck, B., Localio, A. R., Kimmel, S. E., & Stron, B.
(2005). Role of computerized physician order entry systems in facilitating medication
errors. Journal of the American Medical Association, 293(10), 1197–1203.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1001/jama.293.10.1197
Kushniruk, A. W., & Borycki, E. M. (2006). Low-cost rapid usability engineering: Designing
and customizing usable healthcare information systems. Healthcare Quarterly, 9(40),
98–100, 102.
Landman, A., Neri, P., Robertson, A., McEvoy, D., Dinsmore, M., Sweet, M., Bane, A.,
Takhar, S., & Miles, S. (2014). Efficiency and usability of a near field communication￾enabled tablet for medication administration. JMIR mHealth and uHealth, 2(2), e26.
doi:10.2196/mhealth.3215
Lau, F., Bartle-Clar, J., & Bliss, G. (2019). Improving usability, safety and patient outcomes
with health information technology: From research to practice. IOS Press.
Loeb, R. G., & Fitch, W. T. (2002). A laboratory evaluation of an auditory display designed to
enhance intraoperative monitoring. Anesthesia & Analgesia, 94(2), 362–368.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1213/00000539-200202000-00025
Longo, B., & Reese, C. (2014). Human–technology interface: Computers and vision health.
Nevada RNformation, 23(1), 8, 19.
https://d3ms3kxrsap50t.cloudfront.net/uploads/publication/pdf/968/NV2_14.pdf
Mandel, T. (1997). The elements of user interface design. Wiley.
Marr, B. (2020, April 20). These 25 technology trends will define the next decade. Forbes.
www.forbes.com/sites/bernardmarr/2020/04/20/these-25-technology-trends-will-define￾the-next-decade/#21106dd829e3
Matange, S., Beamon, J., & Huffman, C. (n.d.). Multidimensional data visualization tools.
SAS Institute.
https://support.sas.com/resources/papers/proceedings/proceedings/sugi23/Infovis/p145.
pdf
McDaniel, A., Hutchinson, S., Casper, G. R., Ford, R. T., Stratton, R., & Rembush, M.
(2002). Usability testing and outcomes of an interactive computer program to promote
smoking cessation in low income women. In Proceedings AMIA 2002 (pp. 509–513).
American Medical Informatics Association.
McKay, E. (2013). UI is communication: How to design intuitive, user-centered interfaces by
focusing on effective communication. Elsevier.
Michels, P., Gravenstein, D., & Westenskow, D. R. (1997). An integrated graphic data
display improves detection and identification of critical events during anesthesia. Journal
of Clinical Monitoring & Computing, 13, 249–259.
https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1007395901610
Nielsen, J. (1994). Heuristic evaluation. In J. Nielsen & R. L. Mack (Eds.), Usability
inspection methods (pp. 25–62). Wiley.Norman, D. A. (1988). The psychology of everyday things. Basic Books.
Nuber, E. (2022, March 18). ECRI’s top 10 patient safety risks for 2022. ECRI Blog.
https://blog.ecri.org/ecris-top-10-patient-safety-risks-for-2022
Quinn, M., & Meeker, L. (2001). Research set to music: The climate symphony and other
sonifications of ice core, radar, DNA, seismic and solar wind data. Georgia Tech.
repository.gatech.edu/entities/publication/471547b3-bdd8-4d48-9fa7-a011d3b9114a
Rice, S., & Tahir, D. (2014). The human factor. Modern Healthcare, 44(33), 12–15.
Rubin, J. (1994). Handbook of usability testing: How to plan, design, and conduct effective
tests. Wiley.
Sanderson, P. (2006). The multimodal world of medical monitoring displays. Applied
Ergonomics, 37(4), 501–512. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apergo.2006.04.022
Sittig, D., Wright, A., Coiera, E., Magrabi, F., Ratwani, R., Bates, D., & Singh, H. (2018).
Current challenges in health information technology-related patient safety. Health
Informatics Journal, 26(1), 181–189. https://doi.org/10.1177/1460458218814893
Staggers, N., & Parks, P. L. (1993). Description and initial applications of the Staggers &
Parks nurse–computer interaction framework. Computers in Nursing, 11, 282–290.
Staggers, N. (2003). Human factors: Imperative concepts for information systems in critical
care. AACN Clinical Issues, 14(3), 310–319.
https://aacnjournals.org/aacnacconline/article-abstract/14/3/310/14053/Human￾FactorsImperative-Concepts-for-Information?redirectedFrom=fulltext
Staggers, N., Kobus, D., & Brown, C. (2007). Nurses’ evaluations of a novel design for an
electronic medication administration record. CIN: Computers, Informatics, Nursing,
25(2), 67–75. http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/01.NCN.0000263981.38801.be
Khristich, S. (2023, January 12). Healthcare data visualization: Examples, benefits and
challenges. Tateeda. https://tateeda.com/blog/healthcare-data-visualization-examples￾benefits-challenges
Thompson, D. A., Lozano, P., & Christakis, D. A. (2007). Parent use of touchscreen
computer kiosks for child health promotion in community settings. Pediatrics, 119(3),
427–434. https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2006-2669
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (2013). Task analysis. Usability.gov.
www.usability.gov/how-to-and-tools/methods/task-analysis.html
USF Health. (2023, February 28). The impact of information technology on patient safety.
www.usfhealthonline.com/resources/health-informatics/impact-of-information￾technology-on-patient-safety
Vincent, D., Hastings-Tolsma, M., & Effken, J. (2010). Data visualization and large nursing
datasets. Online Journal of Nursing Informatics, 14(2). http://ojni.org/14_2/Vincent.pdf
Vicente, K. J. (1999). Cognitive work analysis: Toward safe, productive, and healthy
computer-based work. Lawrence Erlbaum.
Vicente, K. J. (2004). The human factor. Routledge.
Walsh, T., & Beatty, P. C. W. (2002). Human factors error and patient monitoring.
Physiological Measurement, 23(3), R111–R132.
Watson, G., & Gill, T. (2004). Earcon for intermittent information in monitoring environments.
In Proceedings of the 2004 Conference of the Computer–Human Interaction Special
Interest Group of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society of Australia,
Wollonggong, New South Wales, November 22–24, 1994.Wharton, C., Rieman, J., Lewis, C., & Polson, P. (1994). The cognitive walkthrough: A
practitioner’s guide. In J. Nielsen & R. L. Mack (Eds.), Usability inspection methods (pp.
105–139). Wiley.
Wigdor, D., & Wixon, D. (2011). Brave NUI world: Designing natural user interfaces for
touch and gesture. Elsevier.
Xerox. (2023). 35 interfaces that changed our world. www.xerox.com/en-ie/insights/user￾interface-examples
Zhang, Y., Drews, F. A., Westenskow, D. R., Foresti, S., Agutter, J., Bermudez, J. C., Blike,
G., & Loeb, R. (2002). Effects of integrated graphical displays on situation awareness in
anaesthesiology. Cognition, Technology & Work, 4, 82–90.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s101110200007
Zupanc, C., Burgess-Limerick, R., Hill, A., Riek, S., Wallis, G., Plooy, A., Horswill, M. S.,
Watson, M. O., & Hewett, D. (2015). A competency framework for colonoscopy training
derived from cognitive task analysis techniques and expert review. BMC Medical
Education, 15, 1–11. http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/s12909-015-0494-zC H A P T E R 1 2
Electronic Security
OBJECTIVES
1. Assess processes for securing electronic information in a computer network.
2. Identify various methods of user authentication and relate authentication to the
security of a network.
3. Consider methods for anticipating and preventing typical threats to network security.
KEY TERMS
antivirus software
authentication
baiting
biometrics
blockchain
brute force attack
cloud computing
confidentiality
data loss prevention (DLP)
distributed ledger technology (DLT)
electronic protected health information (EPHI)
firewall
flash drive
hacker
integrity
intrusion detection device
intrusion detection system
jump drive
malicious code
malicious insidermalware
mask
negligent insider
network
network accessibility
network availability
network security
password
phishing
proxy server
radio-frequency identification (RFID)
ransomware
scareware
secure information
security breach
shoulder surfing
social engineering
spear phishing
spyware
thumb drive
Trojan horse
use case
virtual desktop interface (VDI)
virus
worm
zero day attackIntroduction
In addition to complying with the guidelines of the Health Insurance
Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) and the Health Information
Technology for Economic and Clinical Health (HITECH) Act
regarding the privacy of patient information, healthcare systems
need to be vigilant in the way they secure information and manage
network security. Many have discussed and will continue to discuss
the vulnerability of electronic health records to data breaches (Alder,
2021; McKeon, 2023; Mowry & Oakes, 2011). Mowry and Oakes
(2011) suggested that as many as 77 people could view a patient’s
record during a hospital stay. One of the largest healthcare data
breaches, over 3.5 million records, resulted from the hacking of a
firewall vendor (Alder, 2021). Another third-party data breach was
reported by McKeon (2023); this attack affected the information
technology (IT) infrastructure and resulted in the loss of patient data
since IT could not access or retrieve patient information. It is critical
for IT policies and procedures to ensure appropriate access by
clinicians and protect private information from inappropriate access.
However, authentication procedures can be cumbersome and time￾consuming, thus reducing clinicians’ performance efficiency.
Physicians spend on average 7 minutes per patient encounter,
with nearly 2 minutes of that time being devoted to managing logins
and application navigation. Likewise, an average major healthcare
provider must deal with more than 150 applications—most requiring
different user names and passwords—which makes it difficult for
caregivers to navigate and receive contextual information.
Healthcare organizations must strike the right balance between
simplifying access to core clinical data sets and maximizing the time
providers can interact with patients without jeopardizing data integrity
and security (Mowry & Oakes, 2011). AHIMA (n.d.) stated that “[d]ata
quality and integrity requires consideration of privacy and security
issues, including the protection of data against risks such as loss orunauthorized access, destruction, use, modification, or disclosures of
data by parties not authorized to do so” (para. 7). This chapter
explores the use of information and the processes for securing
information in a health system computer network.Securing Network Information
Typically, a healthcare organization has computers linked together to
facilitate communication and operations within and outside the
facility. These linked computers are commonly referred to as a
network. The linking of computers together and to the outside world
creates the possibility of a breach of network security and exposes
the information to unauthorized use. With the advent of smart
devices, managing all these risks has become a nightmare for some
institutions’ security processes. In the past, stationary devices and
computers resided within healthcare facilities. Today, smart devices
travel in and out of healthcare organizations with patients, family
members, and other visitors as well as employees—both staff and
healthcare providers alike. Since wireless medical devices are
becoming more advanced while being increasingly integrated into
health care to enhance access and provide quality care, there are
substantial security risks associated with their use. Medical devices
such as insulin pumps and pacemakers must share data and
information over the internet across networks and devices requiring
that they are and remain cyber secure (Sullivan, 2012; U.S. Food
and Drug Administration, 2022).
The three main areas of secure network information are
confidentiality, availability, and integrity. An organization must follow
a well-defined policy to ensure that private health information
remains appropriately confidential. The confidentiality policy should
clearly define which data are confidential and how those data should
be handled. Employees also need to understand the procedures for
releasing confidential information outside the organization or to
others within the organization and know which procedures to follow if
confidential information is accidentally or intentionally released
without authorization. In addition, the organization’s confidentiality
policy should contain consideration for elements as basic as the
placement of monitors so that information cannot be read bypassersby. Shoulder surfing, which is watching over someone’s
back as that person is working, is still a major way that confidentiality
is compromised.
Availability refers to network information being accessible when
needed. This area of the policy tends to be much more technical in
nature. An accessibility policy covers issues associated with
protecting the key hardware elements of the computer network and
the procedures to follow in case of a major electrical or internet
outage. Food and drinks spilled onto keyboards of computer units,
dropping or jarring hardware, and electrical surges or static charges
are examples of ways that the hardware elements of a computer
network may be damaged. In the case of an electrical outage or a
weather-related disaster, the network administrator must have clear
plans for data backup, storage, and retrieval. There must also be
clear procedures and alternative methods of ensuring that care
delivery remains largely uninterrupted.
Another way organizations protect the availability of their networks
is to institute an acceptable use policy. Elements covered in such a
policy could include which types of activities are acceptable on the
corporate network. For example, are employees permitted to
download music at work? Restricting downloads is a very common
way for organizations to prevent viruses and other malicious code
from entering their networks. The policy should also clearly define
which activities are not acceptable and identify the consequences for
violations.
The last area of information security is integrity. Employees must
have confidence that the information they are reading is true. To
accomplish this, organizations need clear policies to clarify how data
are actually inputted, determine who has the authorization to change
such data, and track how and when data are changed. All three of
these areas use authorization and authentication to enforce the
corporate policies. Access to networks can easily be grouped into
areas of authorization (e.g., users can be grouped by job title). For
example, anyone with the job title of “floor supervisor” might be
authorized to change the hours worked by an employee, whereas anemployee with the title of “patient care assistant” could not make
such changes.Authentication of Users
Organizations also use authentication of employees in their security
policies. The most common ways to authenticate a user rely on
something the user knows, has, or is (Figure 12-1).
A. © Photos.com. C. © Gary James Calder/Shutterstock, Inc.
Figure 12-1 Ways to Authenticate Users: A. An ID Badge. B.
Examples of Weak and Strong Passwords. C. A Finger on a
Biometric Scanner.Something a user knows is a password. Most organizations today
enforce a strong password policy because free software available on
the internet can break a password from the dictionary very quickly.
Strong password policies include using combinations of letters;
numbers; and special characters, such as plus signs (+) and
ampersands (&). Some organizations are suggesting the use of
passphrases to increase the strength of a password. See Box 12-1
for an overview of best practices for creating strong passwords.
Policies typically include the enforcement of changing passwords
every 30 or 60 days. Passwords should never be written down in an
obvious place, such as a sticky note attached to the monitor or under
the keyboard.
BOX 12-1 BEST PRACTICES FOR CREATING AND
MANAGING PASSWORDS
DO
Review the specific system guidelines for users; most of them will have information
on password parameters and allowable characters.
Use characters and symbols instead of letters, such as special characters (e.g., !, $,
%, &, *).
Create exclusive passwords for each account.
Use longer passwords because they are harder to crack. Consider more than eight
characters, and if the system allows, expand your password to 12 or 14 characters.
Choose a password that is based on a phrase. Use portions or abbreviations of the
words in the phrase, or use substitutions (e.g., $ for S, 4 for for) to create the
password. For example, the phrase is “‘Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds’ was
released in 1967,” and the password is LUit$wdia67.
Use at least four-word passphrases that seem obscure such as “kittens laugh bark
catamaran.” This is easier to recall and less able to be hacked.
After you create it, assess your password’s strength if the site provides a password
analyzer that will indicate its strength or weakness.
Think carefully about the password, and create something that you will remember
but that uses these different strategies to increase its strength.
Change your password frequently, and do so immediately if you believe your
system or email has been hacked. Some sites or organizations require you to
change your password every 60 to 120 days. They also restrict how many recent
passwords would not be able to be reused.Enable two-factor authentication, also referred to as multifactor authentication. Even
if someone hacks your password, they would not be able to access your account if
you also require a code to be sent to your phone. The hacker would then need your
phone and your password.
Use a password generator to obtain a randomized, more secure password.
Consider using a password manager program to help you create strong passwords
and store them securely.
Check your username and password to see if your credentials were included in any
recent data breaches using a security tool such as Have I Been Pwned?
(https://haveibeenpwned.com).
DO NOT
Share your password with anyone.
Post your passwords in plain sight.
Never use personal information such as your pet’s name, phone number, address,
bank account, or birthday. Avoid the birthdays of your significant others too.
Use dictionary words.
Use a string of numbers.
Make simple changes to your old passwords, such as your current password being
golf.players3 and your new password being golf.players4. It is best to create an
entirely new password.
Use keyboard strings or patterns that can be replicated such as fr5tghy6 or olp098.
Use the same password for multiple sites.
Terwillegar, T. (2023, July 17). 10 essential password security best practices. Liquid
Web. www.liquidweb.com/blog/password-security-best-practices
The second area of authentication is something the user has, such
as an identification (ID) card. ID cards can be magnetic, similar to a
credit card, or have a radio-frequency identification (RFID) chip
embedded into the card.
The last area of authentication is biometrics. Devices that
recognize thumbprints or retina or facial patterns are available.
Depending on the level of security needed, organizations commonly
use a combination of these types of authentication.Blockchain
A blockchain is a digital database containing a record of
transactions, maintained across several computers linked in a
network, that can be simultaneously used and shared within a large,
decentralized publicly accessible network. Transactions are logged
publicly in chronological order. The database displays an ever￾increasing list of ordered blocks; each block is time-stamped and
connected to the block that came before it, thereby establishing a
blockchain. Marr (2020) stated that a blockchain is a “super-secure
method of storing, authenticating, and protecting data [that] could
revolutionize many aspects of business—particularly when it comes
to facilitating trusted transactions” (para. 7). It is important to note
that each block cannot be altered, deleted, or otherwise modified
since it is a permanent record that a given transaction has occurred.
Blockchain technology lends itself well to the management of health
records and proving identity, based on its security features. To
provide multiple layers of security, healthcare organizations could
restrict the connection points or network nodes in their
communication network to only the HIPAA-covered entities, encrypt
some data, and leave other data off blockchain (Alder, n.d.; Miliard,
2017). Visibility and accountability are strengths, but it is important to
note that not all blockchains must be publicly available.
BLOCKCHAIN APPLICATIONS IN HEALTH CARE
HEALTHCARE RESEARCH COULD BE FACILITATED
BY BLOCKCHAIN TECHNOLOGY SINCE THE
TECHNOLOGY COULD GENERATE A LAYER OF DE￾IDENTIFIED DATA THAT RESEARCHERS COULD
ACCESS. BLOCKCHAIN TECHNOLOGY COULD
ENACT PATIENT-CENTERED CARE BY POSITIONING
THE PATIENT AT THE CENTER OF THE HEALTHCAREDELIVERY SYSTEM WHILE IMPROVING PRIVACY,
SECURITY, AND INTEROPERABILITY.
Healthcare settings have numerous ways to enter the patient’s date of birth, and the
date cannot be standardized after it has been entered. Blockchain can be used in this
case by linking patients to their data instead of to their identity. Blockchain can also
conduct identity management of the healthcare provider.Use Case for Blockchain Technology
A use case describes a distinct situation in which a specific product
or service could possibly be used. The following use case focuses
on blockchain technology.
Blockchain Use Case: Insurance Claim Processing
The goal of this use case was to automate health insurance claim
processing by demonstrating the application of blockchain to the
insurance industry and specifically in health care. Blockchain
technology maintains the patient’s privacy while allowing data to be
shared between entities in a synchronized and secured process. The
benefits of using blockchain include improved efficiency, better trust
and control, faster claims processing, smart contract capabilities,
and fraud prevention. Using blockchain in health care “can reduce
the costs and inefficiencies associated with processing and paying
healthcare claims, thereby combating fraudulent activities.
Blockchain can reduce the time needed to process claims by storing
data and automating the validation process” (Gyan Solutions, 2023,
para. 16).
Preauthorization payment claim transactions must be verifiable
and smart contract–enabled distributed ledger technology (DLT)
leveraged. DLT is a technological infrastructure with protocols to
simultaneously access, validate, record, share, coordinate, and
synchronize transactions in electronic ledgers across a network that
spans numerous entities or locations. DLT has already succeeded in
the financial technology industry.
Blockchain use cases, such as the one described, reveal the
following benefits of blockchain technology:
Decentralized management
Indisputable audit trailData trusted, transparent, and easily tracked
Robustness and availability
Privacy and securityThreats to Security
The largest benefit of a computer network is the ability to share
information. However, organizations need to protect that information
and ensure that only authorized individuals have access to the
network and the data appropriate to their role. Threats to data
security in healthcare organizations are becoming increasingly
prevalent. A nationwide survey by the Computing Technology
Industry Association (CompTIA) found that human error was
responsible for more than half of security breaches. Human error
was categorized as failure to follow policies and procedures, with
more than half of the organizations believing that their employees
ignore their cybersecurity guidelines, are generally careless, lack
experience with websites and applications, and are unaware of new
threats (Greenberg, 2015; O’Driscoll, 2023). The literature continues
to abound with information concerning the snowballing volume of
electronic patient data that is vulnerable and the frequency and types
of compliance complaints and data breaches such as hacking, loss,
improper handling, and theft (Alder, 2021; American Hospital
Association, 2023b; Culbertson, 2021; DeGaspari, 2010; Health
Information and Management Systems Society [HIMSS], 2019).
In the Fifth Annual Benchmark Study on Privacy and Security of
Healthcare Data, the Ponemon Institute (2015) reported that “[m]ore
than 90 percent of healthcare organizations represented in this study
had a data breach, and 40 percent had more than five data breaches
over the past two years” (para. 3). Interestingly, the most common
type of data breach was related to a criminal attack on the
healthcare organization (up 125% over the past 5 years). Key terms
related to criminal attacks are brute force attack (i.e., software used
to guess network passwords) and zero day attack (i.e., searching
for and exploiting software vulnerabilities). Of the intentional data
breaches (as opposed to unintentional), “45 percent of healthcare
organizations say the root cause of the data breach was a criminalattack and 12 percent say it was due to a malicious insider”
(Ponemon Institute, 2015, para. 4). That leaves nearly 43% of data
breaches in the unintentional category. Alder (2015) reported on the
HIMSS 2015 Healthcare Cybersecurity Survey, which determined
the negligent insider to be the most common source of a security
breach. Examples of unintentional, or negligent, breaches include
lost or stolen devices and walking away from a workstation without
logging off, both of which could be cause for discipline or even
dismissal from a job. An interesting example of an unintentional data
breach was reported on the Office for Civil Rights website. A
company leased photocopier equipment and returned it without
erasing the healthcare data stored on the copier’s hard drive, which
resulted in a settlement of over $1.2 million (U.S. Department of
Health and Human Services [HHS], 2017). The findings of the 2019
HIMSS Cybersecurity Survey suggested that “healthcare
cybersecurity practices are moving in the right direction with some
degree of uniformity. The findings also suggest there is room for
improvement” (p. 20). Alder (2020) stated that “2019 was a
particularly bad year for healthcare data breaches with 510 data
breaches reported by HIPAA-covered entities and their business
associates. That equates to a rate of 42.5 data breaches per month”
(para. 2). There was a major increase in hacking and IT incident
breaches: “[M]ore than 59% of data breaches reported to the HHS’
Office for Civil Rights were the result of hacking, malware,
ransomware, phishing attacks, and other IT security breaches”
(Alder, 2020, para. 4). According to Alder (2021), “Across the 686
2021 healthcare data breaches, 44,993,618 healthcare records have
been exposed or stolen, which makes 2021 the second-worst year in
terms of breached healthcare records” (para. 3). The worst year thus
far has been 2020 (Kath, 2021). We are improving but must maintain
and increase our efforts. Recurring security training for employees
can help reduce the risks associated with phishing attacks, and
healthcare organizations must be proactive in anticipating the
potential for and preventing security breaches.
The first line of defense is strictly physical. A locked office door, an
operating system that locks down after 5 minutes of inactivity, andregular security training programs are extremely effective in this
regard. Proper workspace security discipline is a critical aspect of
maintaining security. Employees need to be properly trained to be
aware of computer monitor visibility, shoulder surfing, and policy
regarding the removal of computer hardware. A major issue facing
organizations is removable storage devices (Figure 12-2). Jump
drives, flash drives, and thumb drives (which use USB port
access) are potential security risks. These devices can be slipped
into a pocket and therefore easily removed from the organization.
One way to address this physical security risk is to limit the
authorization to write files to a device. Organizations are also turning
off the USB ports on company desktops.
© Alex Kotlov/Shutterstock, Inc.
Figure 12-2 A Removable Storage DeviceThe most common security threats a corporate network faces are
hackers, malicious codes (i.e., spyware, adware, ransomware,
viruses, worms, and Trojan horses), and malicious insiders.
Acceptable use policies help to address these problems. For
example, employees may be restricted from downloading files from
the internet. Downloaded files, including email attachments, are the
most common way viruses and other malicious codes enter a
computer network. Typically, network security policies prohibit
employees from using personal USB drives, thereby preventing the
transfer of malicious codes from a personal computer to the network.
Let’s look more closely at some of these common network security
threats. Typically, we think of hackers as outsiders who attempt to
break into a network by exploiting software and network
vulnerabilities, and indeed these black hat (i.e., malicious) hackers
(also called crackers) do exist. However, more organizations are
looking to employ ethical hackers (i.e., white hat hackers), who are
the hackers skilled at looking for and closing network security
vulnerabilities (Caldwell, 2011; Milijkovac, 2022).
Spyware and adware are normally controlled in a corporate
network by limiting the functions of the browsers used to surf the
internet. For example, browser privacy options can control how
cookies are used. A cookie is a very small file written to the hard
drive of a computer whose user is surfing the internet. This file
contains information about the user. For example, many shopping
sites write cookies to the user’s hard drive containing the user’s
name and preferences. When that user returns to the site, the site
will greet them by name and list products in which they are possibly
interested. Weather websites send cookies to users’ hard drives with
their ZIP code so that when a user returns to that site, the local
weather forecast is immediately displayed. On the negative side,
cookies can follow the user’s travels on the internet. Marketing
companies use spying cookies to track popular websites that could
provide a return on advertising expenditures. Spying cookies related
to marketing typically do not track keystrokes in an attempt to steal
user IDs and passwords; instead, they simply track which websites
are popular, and these data are then used to develop advertising andmarketing strategies. Nurse informaticists exploring new healthcare
technologies on the internet may find that ads for these technologies
begin to pop up the next few times they are on the internet. Spyware
that does steal user IDs and passwords contains malicious code that
is normally hidden in a seemingly innocent file download. This threat
to security explains why healthcare organizations typically do not
allow employees to download files. The rule of thumb to protect the
network and one’s own computer system is to download files only
from a reputable site that provides complete contact information. Be
aware that sometimes malicious code is hidden in an email link or in
a file sent by a trusted contact whose email has been hacked. If you
are not expecting a file from an email contact or if you receive an
email with only a link in it, resist the urge to download or click.
A relatively new threat to healthcare organizations is ransomware,
which is malicious code that blocks the organization from using its
computer systems until a ransom is paid to the hacker. Business
Wire (2021) suggested that healthcare delivery systems must pay
attention to the Ponemon Institute’s research concerning
ransomware and transform their current cybersecurity practices. The
American Hospital Association (2023a) reported that the FBI “seized
control of servers and websites used by the Hive ransomware
network to target hospitals and other critical infrastructure, and
infiltrated the network in July to provide decryption keys to victims
and prevent $130 million in ransom payments” (para. 1). Consider
the following cases of ransomware intrusion from 2016 and 2020.
Waddell (2016) described a hospital in Los Angeles that operated
without access to its electronic health records for several weeks
when hackers took over its computer systems and then demanded
$3.6 million in bitcoin cryptocurrency ransom to return access of the
computer system to the hospital. Cryptocurrencies provide
anonymity to the hackers. The hackers were able to encrypt the
patient records, which meant even though they might not have
gained access to the files, the real goal was not to access the
content of these records but instead to hold them hostage so that the
hospital could not access them. This ransom was made possible due
to ransomware, which is viruses and malware unleashed to takeover a server or computer by encrypting the files so that hackers can
demand money to return control to the rightful owners. With the
expanding use of networked devices and servers, hackers are
leveraging ransomware attacks because businesses must have
access to their data. Such attacks continue to affect healthcare
organizations and have even interfered with clinical trials. Perlroth
(2020) reported on October 3, 2020, that in the past 2 weeks, a
company that “sells software used in hundreds of clinical trials,
including the crash effort to develop tests, treatments and a vaccine
for the coronavirus, was hit by a ransomware attack that has slowed
some of those trials” (para. 1). These attacks can be devastating and
far-reaching; this company’s software is being used in
pharmaceutical trials conducted throughout Europe, Asia, and North
America.
In addition to strict policies related to network security,
organizations may also use software or hardware tools, such as
firewalls (covered in the next section) and intrusion detection
devices, to protect from hackers. Protect yourself at home by
ensuring that you have an updated version of antivirus software, be
wary of unusual emails, and develop strong passwords and change
them frequently. If your email is hacked, report it to the proper
authorities as soon as possible, warn your contacts that you have
been hacked, change your password, and check to see that your
antivirus software is up to date.
Another huge threat to corporate security is social engineering,
which is the manipulation of a relationship based on one’s position
(or pretend position) in an organization. For example, someone
attempting to access a network might pretend to be an employee
from the corporate IT office who simply asks for an employee’s user
ID and password. The outsider can then gain access to the
corporate network. Once this access has been obtained, all
corporate information is at risk. A second example of social
engineering is a hacker impersonating a federal government agent.
After talking an employee into revealing network information, the
hacker has an open door to enter the corporate network. A related
type of social engineering is phishing, which is an attempt to stealinformation by manipulating the recipient of an email or phone call to
provide passwords or other private information. Box 12-2 contains
an example of a phishing email and tips for identifying phishing
scams.
BOX 12-2 IDENTIFYING PHISHING SCAMS
Description
EXAMPLE OF A PHISHING SCAM EMAIL
Check suspicious emails for grammar and spelling errors, generic greetings (e.g., User,
Dear, or Dearest), or requests for immediate action or personal information (e.g.,
passwords or bank account numbers). Some phishing emails may appear to come from
your bank or another trusted organization. Think carefully about why a seemingly
legitimate organization might be asking for information it should already have or why it
might need to know what it is asking for. Be aware of your organization’s procedures for
reporting phishing scams, and do so immediately.
Data from: Pennsylvania State University, Office of Information Security. (n.d.). What is
phishing? http://phishing.psu.edu/what-is-phishing
Additional types of social engineering schemes include spear
phishing, which is a more specifically targeted scheme whereby the
attacker takes advantage of contact information provided in an
organization’s directory and tailors the scam email to a specific
person; baiting, which is when a malware-infected USB flash driveis left in a public area, thus tricking the finder into loading it to identify
its owner; and scareware, which is when the scam email reports that
the user has been hacked and tricks them into giving the hacker
remote access to the computer to “fix” it (Rosencrance, n.d.).
Another example of an important security threat to a corporate
network is the malicious insider. This person can be a disgruntled
or recently fired employee whose rights of access to the corporate
network have not yet been removed. In the case of a recently fired
employee, their network access should be suspended immediately
upon notice of termination. To avoid the potentially hazardous issues
created by malicious insiders, healthcare organizations need a policy
and specific procedures to monitor employee activity to ensure that
employees carry out only those duties that are part of their normal
job. Separation of privileges is a common security tool, which means
that no single employee should be able to complete a task that could
cause a critical event without the knowledge of another employee.
For example, the employee who processes and prints the checks
should not be the same employee who signs those checks. Similarly,
the employee who alters pay rates and hours worked should be
required to submit a weekly report to a supervisor before the
changes take effect.
Software that can track and monitor employee activity is also
available. This software can log which files an employee accesses
and whether changes were made to the files or the files were copied.
Depending on the number of employees, organizations may also
employ a full-time electronic auditor who does nothing but monitor
activity logs and hire full-time employees to provide network security.
The amount of money allocated varied greatly, but “over one-quarter
of respondents (26%) operate within a system that spends money on
cybersecurity activities/resources, even though there is no specific
cybersecurity ‘carve out’ within the IT budget” (HIMSS, 2019, p. 9).
Additional strategies for securing networks that were suggested in
this HIMSS survey were mock cyber defense exercises, sharing
information between and among healthcare organizations,
monitoring vendor intelligence feeds, and subscribing to securityalerts and tips from the United States Computer Emergency
Readiness Team (www.cisa.gov).Security Tools
A wide range of tools is available to an organization to protect the
organizational network and information. Software Testing Help
(2023) provides cybersecurity testing tools for mobile devices to the
web, including antivirus technology, firewalls, and data encryption
being used in health care. These tools can be either a software
solution, such as antivirus software, or a hardware tool, such as a
proxy server. Such tools are effective only if they are used along
with employee awareness training.
For example, email scanning is a commonly used software tool. All
incoming email messages are scanned to ensure that they do not
contain a virus or some other malicious code. This software can find
only viruses that are currently known, so it is important that the virus
software be set to search for and download updates automatically.
Organizations can further protect themselves by training employees
to never open an email attachment unless they are expecting the
attachment and know the sender. Even IT managers have fallen
victim to email viruses that sent infected emails to everyone in their
address book. Employees should be taught to protect their
organization from new viruses that may not yet be included in their
scanning software by never opening an email attachment unless the
sender is known and the attachment is expected. Email scanning
and antivirus software should never be turned off, and updates
should be installed at least weekly or, ideally, daily. Software is also
available to scan instant messages and automatically delete spam
email.
Many antivirus and adware software packages are available for
fees ranging from free to more than $25 per month (for personal use)
to several thousands of dollars per month (to secure an
organization’s network). The main factors to consider when
purchasing antivirus software are its effectiveness (i.e., the number
of viruses it has missed), the ease of installation and use, theeffectiveness of the updates, and the help and user support
available. Numerous websites compare and contrast the most recent
antivirus software packages. Be aware, however, that some of these
sites also sell antivirus software, so they may present biased
information.
Firewalls are another tool used by organizations to protect their
corporate networks when they are connected to the internet. A
firewall can be hardware or software or a combination of both and is
used to examine all incoming messages or traffic to the network. The
firewall can be set up to allow only messages from known senders
into the corporate network and look at outgoing information from the
corporate network. If the message contains some type of corporate
secret, the firewall may prevent the message from leaving. In
essence, firewalls serve as electronic security guards at the gate of
the corporate network.
Proxy servers also protect the organizational network by
preventing users from directly accessing the internet. Instead, users
must first request passage from the proxy server. The server looks at
the request and makes sure that the request is from a legitimate user
and that the destination of the request is permissible. For example,
organizations can block requests to view a website with the word sex
in the title or the actual uniform resource locator of a known
pornography site. The proxy server can also lend the requesting user
a mask to use while they are surfing the web, which allows the
corporation to protect the identity of its employees. The proxy server
keeps track of which employees are using which masks and directs
the traffic appropriately.
With hacking becoming more common, healthcare organizations
must have some type of protection to avoid this invasion. An
intrusion detection system (both hardware and software) allows an
organization to monitor who is using the network and which files that
user has accessed. Detection systems can be set up to monitor a
single computer or an entire network. Corporations must diligently
monitor unauthorized access of their networks. Anytime someone
uses a secured network, a digital footprint of all the user’s travels is
left, which can be easily tracked by electronic auditing software.Everyone in nursing informatics and IT has a tremendous amount
of work to do and must be forever vigilant to maintain the highest
level of cybersecurity. Healthcare organizations have taken many
positive steps since the 2015 HIMSS survey, which is reflected in the
2019 survey. In 2019, 44% of the respondents agreed and 15%
strongly agreed that “[c]ybersecurity professionals feel empowered
to drive change in healthcare organizations” (HIMSS, 2019, p. 8).
The 2021 HIMSS Cybersecurity Survey reflected that “most
respondents (59%) reported an increase in cybersecurity budgets for
2022. It is likely that this increase in budgets will lead to more
positive growth within healthcare cybersecurity programs” (HIMSS,
2022, p. 15).Off-Site Use of Portable Devices
Off-site use of portable devices, such as laptops, tablets, home
computing systems, smartphones, smart devices, and portable data
storage devices, can help to streamline the delivery of health care.
For example, home health nurses may need to access electronic
protected health information (EPHI) via a wireless laptop
connection during a home visit, or a physician might use a
smartphone to get specific patient information related to a
prescription refill in response to a patient request. These mobile
devices are invaluable to healthcare efficiency and responsiveness
to patient need in such cases. At the very least, however, agencies
should require data encryption when EPHI is being transmitted over
unsecured networks or transported on a mobile device as a way of
protecting sensitive information. Hotspots provided by businesses,
such as coffee shops or restaurants and airports, are not secured
networks. Virtual private networks (VPNs) must be used to ensure
that all data transmitted on unsecured networks are encrypted. The
user must log in to the VPN to reach the organization’s network.
Only data essential for the job should be maintained on a mobile
device; other nonclinical information, such as Social Security
numbers, should never be carried outside the secure network. Some
institutions make use of thin clients, which are basic interface portals
that do not keep secure information stored on them. Essentially,
users must log in to the network to get the data they need. Use of
thin clients may be problematic in patient-care situations where the
user cannot access the network easily. For example, some rural
areas of the United States do not have wireless or cellular data
coverage. In these instances, private health information may need to
be stored in a clinician’s laptop or tablet. This is comparable to home
health nurses carrying paper charts in their cars to make home visits
and entails the same responsibilities that accompany such use of
private information outside the institution’s walls.What happens if one of these devices is lost or stolen? The
agency is ultimately responsible for the integrity of the data
contained on these devices and is required by HIPAA regulations
(HHS, 2006) to have policies in place covering such items as
appropriate remote use, removal of devices from their usual physical
location, and protection of these devices from loss or theft. Simple
rules, such as covering laptops left in a car and locking car doors
during the transport of mobile devices containing EPHI, can help to
deter theft. If a device is lost or stolen, the agency must have clear
procedures in place to help ensure that sensitive data are not
released or used inappropriately. Software packages that provide for
physical tracking of the static and mobile computer inventory,
including laptops, smartphones, and tablets, are being used more
widely and can assist in the recovery of lost or stolen devices. In
addition, some software that allows for remote data deletion (data
wipe) in the event of theft or loss of a mobile device can be
invaluable to the agency in preventing the release of EPHI.
If a member of an agency is caught accessing EPHI
inappropriately or stealing a mobile device, the sanctions should be
swift and public. Sanctions may range from a warning or suspension
with retraining to termination or prosecution, depending on the
severity of the security breach. The sanctions must send a clear
message to everyone that protecting EPHI is serious business. The
following strategies for managing remote access are imperative:
Remote access must be restricted to company-owned and
company-configured computers and devices.
Strong VPN policies must be in place and enforced, including
the creation of a safe space or sandbox that isolates or
quarantines the session from other software running on the
remote device.
User privileges associated with remote access must be
stringently applied and enforced based on company policy.
Effective educational programming must be instituted and
mandated for all personnel to ensure safe computing practicesassociated with remote locations and remote access. Updates
and retraining must be provided at specified intervals to maintain
safe remote access practices.
To protect patients and their data, nurses must consider the effect
of wireless mobile devices (see Box 12-3). Data can be stolen by an
employee very easily through the use of email or file transfers.
BOX 12-3 POKÉMON TARGETS HOSPITAL
Informatics nurse specialists must be aware of the uses of portable devices. In 2016,
this came to light when one hospital in the Pittsburgh area was a site of a popular game
and the administration was upset because it created a privacy issue for people using
their hospital as a search site. This hospital contacted the game developer to be
removed from its game.
Hospitals must always be concerned about privacy and safety issues within their
control but also be on the alert for those outside their control, such as the Pokémon Go
game. Marcie Cipriani, with Pittsburgh’s Action News 4, reported that Pokémon Go
used West Penn Hospital, which is part of the Allegheny Health Network in Pittsburgh,
as a real-world location in the game. The game utilizes enhanced reality, which allows
players to combine images from the real world with those of the game. The Allegheny
Health Network officials stated that the exciting, interactive game created concerns
when it brought players inside their hospital. They say hunting Pokémon at the hospital
created a patient privacy issue and a safety concern. Administrators warned those who
were playing to stay out of their hospitals, and they contacted the game’s developer,
who agreed to remove their hospitals from the app. They asked their employees to be
on the lookout for anyone playing the app while they were walking around the hospital
and to contact security if they saw Pokémon Go players.
Data from: Cipriani, M. (2016, July 29). Pokemon ‘Gone:’ Players banned from
Allegheny Health Network facilities. Pittsburgh’s Action News 4.
www.wtae.com/article/pokemon-gone-players-banned-from-allegheny-health-network￾facilities-1/7481333
Malware, or malicious code, that infiltrates a network can collect
easily accessible data. One of the evolving issues is lost or stolen
devices that can provide a gateway into a healthcare organization’s
network and records. When the device is owned by the employee,
other issues arise as to how the device is used and secured.The increase in cloud computing has also challenged healthcare
professionals’ personal and professional security and privacy. Cloud
computing refers to storing and accessing data and computer
programs on the internet rather than on the local hard drive of a
computer. Common examples of cloud computing for personal use
include Google Drive, Apple iCloud, and Amazon. Cloud computing
allows for easy syncing of separate devices to promote sharing and
collaboration (Griffith, 2022). According to Jansen and Grance
(2011), cloud computing “promises to have far-reaching effects on
the systems and networks of federal agencies and other
organizations. Many of the features that make cloud computing
attractive, however, can also be at odds with traditional security
models and controls” (p. vi). Healthcare organizations moved to the
cloud because cloud computing tends to be cheaper and faster,
offers more flexibility for work location, provides nearly immediate
disaster recovery, supports collaboration, provides security, and
offers frequent software updates (Salesforce UK, 2020). However,
there are important security concerns related to cloud computing in
health care. To maintain security in a cloud environment, several
safeguards must be in place, such as encoding files with encryption
at both the local and the cloud levels, adding multiple access
controls such as multifaceted authentication methods, and providing
data loss prevention (DLP) protocols and tools. The threats
continue. According to Accenture (n.d.), “digitalization and the Cloud
Continuum have redefined not only enterprise boundaries and
capabilities but also the attack surface, adding vulnerabilities that are
beyond the reach of traditional responses” (para. 2). Therefore, data
must be guarded as more and more functions are moved to the
cloud. One way to do this is through the DLP strategy. This approach
is critical for making sure that end users do not send sensitive or
critical information outside the institution’s network. The virtual
desktop interface (VDI) allows the user to have a computer for
which the operating system, applications, and data are located and
accessed on a central server instead of on the local desktop. Many
VDIs are cloud based, meaning a complete desktop and app
virtualization service runs in the cloud. Desktops can have securityissues, but with the VDI, the IT team can generate and delete virtual
desktops instantly. On the flip side, the cloud must then be secured.
It is clear that healthcare organizations need to be extra vigilant
about their data security when using cloud computing. However, as
we emphasized several times in this chapter, employee training on
security measures may be the most important defense. Many
security strategies are focusing on employees or threats from within
since careless or negligent employees are still considered a major
risk to the healthcare organization (Ekran, 2023; Guccione, 2015;
Schwartz, 2022).Summary
Technology changes so quickly that even the most diligent user will
likely encounter a situation that could constitute a threat to their
network. Organizations must provide their users with the proper
training to help them avoid known threats and, more importantly, be
able to discern a possible new threat. Consider that 10 years ago
wireless networks were the exception to the rule, whereas today
access to wireless networks is almost taken for granted. How will
computer networks be accessed 10 years from now? The most
important concept to remember from this chapter is that the only
completely safe network is one that is turned off. Network
accessibility and network availability are necessary evils that
pose security risks. The information must be available to be
accessed, yet it must remain secured from hackers, unauthorized
users, and any other potential security breaches. As the cloud
expands, so do the concerns over security and privacy. The major
threat remains from insiders or employees being negligent or
malicious. In an ideal world, everyone would understand the
potential threats to network security and diligently monitor and
implement tools to prevent unauthorized access of their networks,
data, and information.
THOUGHT-PROVOKING QUESTIONS
1. Sue is a chronic obstructive pulmonary disorder clinic nurse enrolled in a master’s
education program. She is interested in writing a paper on the factors that are
associated with poor compliance with medical regimens and associated repeat
hospitalization of chronic obstructive pulmonary disorder patients. She downloads
patient information from the clinic database to a thumb drive that she later
accesses on her home computer. Sue understands rules about privacy of
information and believes that because she is a nurse and needs this information for
a graduate school assignment, she is entitled to the information. Is Sue correct in
her thinking? Describe why she is or is not correct.2. The nursing education department of a large hospital system has been centralized;
as a consequence, the nurse educators are no longer assigned to one hospital but
must now travel among all the hospitals. They use their smartphones to interact
and share data and information. What are the first steps you would take to secure
these transactions? Describe why each step is necessary.
3. Research cloud computing in relation to health care. What are the major security
and privacy challenges? Please choose three and describe them in detail.
4. Blockchain is touted as a security measure. Describe in detail how blockchain
technology functions and why it would help maintain security.
5. How can organizations decrease negligence among their employees? State two
detailed ways to prevent breaches caused by careless employees.R E F E R E N C E S
Accenture. (n.d.). Cybersecurity as competitive advantage in a world of uncertainty.
www.accenture.com/us-en/services/security-index
AHIMA. (n.d.). AHIMA policy statement: Data quality and integrity.
www.ahima.org/advocacy/policy-statements/data-quality-and-integrity
Alder, S. (n.d.). HIPAA encryption requirements. HIPAA Journal.
www.hipaajournal.com/hipaa-encryption-requirements
Alder, S. (2015, July 9). HIMSS releases 2015 healthcare cybersecurity report. HIPPA
Journal. www.hipaajournal.com/himss-releases-2015-healthcare-cybersecurity-report￾8014
Alder, S. (2020, February 21). January 2020 healthcare data breach report. HIPAA Journal.
www.hipaajournal.com/january-2020-healthcare-data-breach-report
Alder, S. (2021, December 30). Largest healthcare data breaches of 2021. HIPAA Journal.
www.hipaajournal.com/largest-healthcare-data-breaches-of-2021
American Hospital Association. (2023a, January 26). FBI disrupts ransomware network
targeting hospitals and others. www.aha.org/news/news/2023-01-26-fbi-disrupts￾ransomware-network-targeting-hospitals-and-others
American Hospital Association. (2023b, February 21). OCR: HIPAA breaches down,
compliance complaints up in 2021. www.aha.org/news/headline/2023-02-21-ocr-hipaa￾breaches-down-compliance-complaints-2021
Business Wire. (2021, September 22). New Ponemon Institute research shows ransomware
attacks on healthcare delivery organizations can lead to increased mortality rate.
www.businesswire.com/news/home/20210922005436/en/New-Ponemon-Institute￾Research-Shows-Ransomware-Attacks-on-Healthcare-Delivery-Organizations-Can￾Lead-to-Increased-Mortality-Rate
Caldwell, T. (2011). Ethical hackers: Putting on the white hat. Network Security, 2011(7),
10–13. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1353-4858(11)70075-7
Cipriani, M. (2016, July 29). Pokemon ‘Gone:’ Players banned from Allegheny Health
Network facilities. Pittsburgh’s Action News 4. www.wtae.com/article/pokemon-gone￾players-banned-from-allegheny-health-network-facilities-1/7481333
Culbertson, N. (2021, August 6). The skyrocketing volume of healthcare data makes privacy
imperative. Forbes. www.forbes.com/sites/forbestechcouncil/2021/08/06/the￾skyrocketing-volume-of-healthcare-data-makes-privacy-imperative/?sh=6ab051626555
DeGaspari, J. (2010). Staying ahead of the curve on data security. Healthcare Informatics,
27(10), 32–34, 36.
Ekran. (2023, March 22). 7 examples of real-life data breaches caused by insider threats.
www.ekransystem.com/en/blog/real-life-examples-insider-threat-caused-breaches
Kath, H. (2021, June 1). The top 10 healthcare data breaches of 2020. FORTRA.
www.goanywhere.com/blog/the-top-10-healthcare-data-breaches-of-2020
Greenberg, A. (2015, April 1). Human error cited as leading contributor to breaches, study
shows. SC Media. www.scmagazine.com/home/security-news/human-error-cited-as￾leading-contributor-to-breaches-study-showsGriffith, E. (2022, February 15). What is cloud computing? PC Magazine.
www.pcmag.com/article2/0,2817,2372163,00.asp
Guccione, D. (2015, July 20). Is the cloud safe for healthcare? Healthcare Innovation.
www.hcinnovationgroup.com/cybersecurity/privacy-security/article/13025478/is-the￾cloud-safe-for-healthcare
Gyan Solutions. (2023, February 6). How blockchain will disrupt the healthcare and life
sciences sector. gyanconsulting.medium.com/how-blockchain-will-disrupt-the￾healthcare-life-sciences-sector-40cbfd9174a4
Health Information and Management Systems Society. (2019). 2019 HIMSS cybersecurity
survey.
www.himss.org/sites/hde/files/d7/u132196/2019_HIMSS_Cybersecurity_Survey_Final_R
eport.pdf
Health Information and Management Systems Society. (2022). 2022 HIMSS healthcare
cybersecurity survey report. www.himss.org/resources/himss-healthcare-cybersecurity￾survey
Jansen, W., & Grance, T. (2011, December). National Institute of Standards and Technology
(NIST): Guidelines on security and privacy in public cloud computing.
https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/Legacy/SP/nistspecialpublication800-144.pdf
Marr, B. (2020, April 20). These 25 technology trends will define the next decade. Forbes.
www.forbes.com/sites/bernardmarr/2020/04/20/these-25-technology-trends-will-define￾the-next-decade/#21106dd829e3
McKeon, J. (2023, February 16). Third-party data breach corrupts medical records at NH
hospital. HealthITSecurity. https://healthitsecurity.com/news/third-party-data-breach￾corrupts-medical-records-at-nh-hospital
Miliard, M. (2017, April 13). How does blockchain actually work for healthcare? Healthcare
IT News. www.healthcareitnews.com/news/how-does-blockchain-actually-work￾healthcare
Milijkovac, I. (2022, July 27). What is hacking? Types of hackers and examples. Security
Gladiators. https://securitygladiators.com/threat/hacking
Mowry, M., & Oakes, R. (2011, June 23). Not too tight, not too loose. Healthcare Innovation.
www.hcinnovationgroup.com/home/article/13012462/not-too-tight-not-too-loose
O’Driscoll, A. (2023, March 22). The role of human error in cybersecurity: What the stats tell
us. Comparitech. www.comparitech.com/blog/information-security/human-error￾cybersecurity-stats
Pennsylvania State University, Office of Information Security. (n.d.). What is phishing?
http://phishing.psu.edu/what-is-phishing
Perlroth, N. (2020, October 3). Clinical trials hit by ransomware attack on health tech firm.
New York Times. www.nytimes.com/2020/10/03/technology/clinical-trials-ransomware￾attack-drugmakers.html
Ponemon Institute. (2015, May 27). Fifth annual benchmark study on privacy & security of
healthcare data. www.ponemon.org/research/ponemon-library/security/fifth-annual￾benchmark-study-on-privacy-security-of-healthcare-data.html
Rosencrance, L. (n.d.). Definition: Social engineering. TechTarget.
http://searchsecurity.techtarget.com/definition/social-engineeringSalesforce UK. (2020, October 1). What are the advantages of cloud computing? 10
reasons to move to the cloud. Salesforce. www.salesforce.com/uk/blog/2015/11/why￾move-to-the-cloud-10-benefits-of-cloud-computing.html
Schwartz, S. (2022, January 25). Careless employees behind the majority of insider threat
incidents: Report. CIO Dive. www.ciodive.com/news/insider-threat-malicious-negligent￾employee/617715
Software Testing Help. (2023, July 5). Top 11 most powerful cybersecurity software tools in
2023. www.softwaretestinghelp.com/cybersecurity-software-tools
Sullivan, T. (2012, May 23). DHS lists top 5 mobile medical device security risks. Healthcare
IT News. www.healthcareitnews.com/news/dhs-lists-top-5-mobile-device-security-risks
Terwillegar, T. (2023, July 17). 10 essential password security best practices. Liquid Web.
www.liquidweb.com/blog/password-security-best-practices
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (2006, December 28). HIPAA security
guidance.
www.hhs.gov/sites/default/files/ocr/privacy/hipaa/administrative/securityrule/remoteuse.p
df
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (2017, June 7). HHS settles with health
plan in photocopier breach case. www.hhs.gov/hipaa/for-professionals/compliance￾enforcement/examples/health-plan-photocopier-breach-case/index.html
U.S. Food and Drug Administration. (2022). Medical device cybersecurity: What you need to
know. www.fda.gov/consumers/consumer-updates/medical-device-cybersecurity-what￾you-need-know
Waddell, K. (2016, February 17). A hospital paralyzed by hackers. The Atlantic.
www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2016/02/hackers-are-holding-a-hospita1s￾patient-data-ransom/463008C H A P T E R 1 3
Achieving Excellence by
Managing Workflow and
Initiating Quality Projects
OBJECTIVES
1. Provide an overview of the purpose of conducting workflow analysis and design.
2. Deliver specific instructions on workflow analysis and redesign techniques.
3. Cite measures of efficiency and effectiveness that can be applied to redesign
efforts.
4. Explore quality improvement processes.
KEY TERMS
Alternative Payment Model (APM)
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act (ARRA)
barcode medication administration
clinical transformation
computerized provider order entry (CPOE)
electronic health record (EHR)
event
health information exchange (HIE)
health information technology
information system
interaction
Lean
meaningful use
medical home modelMedicare Access and CHIP Reauthorization Act of 2015 (MACRA)
Merit-based Incentive Payment System (MIPS)
metrics
Patient Room ‘Next’ (PRN)
process analysis
process map
process owner
Qualified Clinical Data Registry
quality
quality improvement (QI)
Quality Payment Program
Six Sigma
task
work process
workflow
workflow analysisIntroduction
The healthcare environment has grown more complex over the years
and continues to evolve every day. Unfortunately, the complexities
that help clinicians deliver better care and improve patient outcomes
also take a toll on the clinicians themselves. This toll is exemplified
through hours spent learning new technology, loss in productivity as
users adjust and adapt to new technology, and unintended workflow
consequences from the use of technology.
Despite the perceived negative downstream effects to end users
and patients as a result of technology, this very same technology can
improve efficiency and yield a leaner healthcare environment. The
intent of this chapter is to outline the driving forces that create the
need to manage or redesign workflow as well as elucidate what the
nurse must know about how to conduct workflow redesign, measure
the effect of workflow changes, and promote the best use of
technology.Purpose of Workflow Analysis
According to The Patient Safety League (2023), “2.2 million patients
are harmed by medical errors every day in this country and 440,000
of them DIE from PREVENTABLE medical errors daily.”
Not only is there an effect on patients and their families from these
errors but also there is a significant financial effect on healthcare
organizations. Clearly, we must minimize these errors, and one of
the most important tools for this purpose is the use of electronic
health records and information systems to improve communication
and provide point-of-care decision support and automation.
Technology can provide a mechanism to improve care delivery
and create a safer patient environment provided it is implemented
appropriately and considers the effect on the surrounding workflow.
In an important early article, Campbell et al. (2009) suggested that
technology implemented without consideration of user workflow can
create greater patient safety concerns than no technology at all.
Consideration of computerized provider order entry (CPOE), for
example, helps us to focus more specifically on workflow effects.
Sometimes these negative workflow implications are referred to as
the unintended consequences of CPOE implementation and were
likely due to poorly implemented technology. Ash et al. (2009)
reported on nine unintended consequences of CPOE. Interestingly, a
later study by Abraham et al. (2018) also reported on workflow
process issues with CPOE, and they identified four core categories:
order entry issues, user issues, system limitations, and care
transition issues.
The Healthcare Information Management Systems Society Toolkit
addressed workflow redesign and considered why it is so critical to
successful technology implementations. Replacing or upgrading a
system that was already automated requires substantially less
workflow redesign than implementing an information technology (IT)
system that addresses a process that was not previously automated.The toolkit was instrumental in identifying and describing several
workflow improvement theories. These theories and others are still
used today: total quality management (TQM), business process
reengineering (BPR), plan-do-check-act (PDCA), Six Sigma, Lean
and Lean Six Sigma, business process management (BPM), and five
whys analysis (Laoyan, 2023). Consistently and rigorously using
these theories helps support process improvements in an
organization by providing well-defined processes and improved
workflows. Reflect on the addition of machine learning and artificial
intelligence (AI) (Health Catalyst, 2021; Hopkins, 2019). For more
information about each of these processes, review the information
provided in the cited references, or search for each one individually.
Nursing informaticists are invaluable for successful system
implementation by defining clinical workflow, enhancing efficiencies,
improving quality, and acting as change agents to promote adoption
(Schoenbaum & Carroll, 2021). Thompson et al. (2016) stated that
“[b]y partnering clinicians with informaticists we strove to leverage
the power of the electronic medical record (EMR) to reduce heart
failure readmissions and improve patient transitions back to the
community” (p. 380). They concluded that “[p]artnering with clinical
informatics enabled the multidisciplinary team to leverage the power
of the EMR in supporting and tracking new clinical workflows that
impact patient outcomes” (p. 380). This multidisciplinary team
believed that its success could reshape how healthcare providers
facilitate patient discharge and the transition home. Leveraging the
multidisciplinary team and the EMR could provide a model for
patient-centered and cost-effective care that could extend beyond its
patients with heart failure.
Technology is recognized to have a potentially positive effect on
patient outcomes. Nevertheless, even with the promise of improving
how care is delivered, adoption of technology was slow. The cost of
technology solutions, such as CPOE, barcode medication
administration, and electronic health records (EHRs), was one of
the main reasons for initial resistance. The cost of technology,
coupled with the lengthy timelines required to develop and
implement such technology, initially put this endeavor out of reachfor many healthcare organizations. In addition, upgrades to the
technology are often necessary either during the implementation or
shortly after a launch, leaving little time to focus efforts on the
optimization of the technology within the current workflow.
Furthermore, the existence of technology does not in itself guarantee
that it will be used in a manner that promotes better outcomes for
patients.
Given the sluggish adoption of technology, in 2009 the U.S.
government took an unprecedented step when it formally recognized
the importance of health information technology for patient care
outcomes. As a result of the provisions of the American Recovery
and Reinvestment Act (ARRA), healthcare organizations were able
to qualify for financial incentives based on the level of meaningful
use achieved. Meaningful use referred to the rules and regulations
established by the ARRA. The three stages of meaningful use were
part of an EHR incentive program, renamed in 2018 to Promoting
Interoperability Programs (Centers for Medicare and Medicaid
Services [CMS], 2022). During stage 1, the focus was on data
capturing and sharing. Stage 2 focused on advanced clinical
processes, and stage 3 sought to improve outcomes. Stage 1 was
initiated from 2011 to 2012, stage 2 began in 2014, and stage 3 was
established in 2017 (CMS, 2021). However, with the new goal of
paying for value and better care, the Medicare Access and CHIP
Reauthorization Act of 2015 (MACRA) reformed Medicare
payments by making changes that created the Quality Payment
Program to replace the hodgepodge system of Medicare reporting
programs (CMS, 2016b; see Figure 13-1). The MACRA Quality
Payment Program has two paths—Merit-based Incentive Payment
System (MIPS) or Alternative Payment Model (APM)—which will
be in effect through 2021 and beyond (CMS, 2016b). The MACRA
requirements for the Measure Development Plan follow:Figure 13-1 MACRA
Multipayer applicability
Coordination and sharing across measure developers
Clinical practice guidelines
Evidence base for nonendorsed measures
Gap analysis
Quality domains and priorities
Applicability of measures across healthcare settings
Clinical practice improvement activities
Considerations for electronic specifications and Qualified
Clinical Data Registries (QCDRs) (CMS, 2016a, p. 16)
For an organization seeking to meet these measures, the data to
support these measures must be gathered and reported on
electronically, which necessitates the use of technology in all patient
care areas. The successful implementation of the Measurement
Development Plan “depends on a successful partnership with
patients, frontline clinicians, and professional organizations and
collaboration with other diverse stakeholders to develop measures
that are meaningful to patients and clinicians and can be used
across payers and health care settings” (CMS, 2016a, p. 64). Many
of the quality reporting measures rely on nursing and medical
documentation. Most healthcare personnel already use EHRs, but
MACRA measures pushed healthcare organizations to reexaminethe use of clinical technologies within their organizations and
approach implementation in a new way.
Not only is there a potential for patient safety and quality issues to
arise from technology implementation that does not address
workflow, but a financial impact on the organization is possible as
well. We must make sure that technology is not a barrier to quality
healthcare and patient safety (American Society for Health Care Risk
Management [ASHRM], 2021). All organizations, regardless of their
industry, must operate efficiently to maintain profits and continue to
provide services to their customers. For hospitals, which normally
have significantly smaller profit margins than other organizations, the
need to maintain efficient and effective care is essential for survival.
Given that hospital profit margins are diminishing, never has there
been a more crucial time than now to examine the costs of errors
and poorly designed workflows and the financial burden they present
to an organization. Moreover, what are the costs to an organization
that fails to address the appropriate integration of technology? This
is an area for which few supporting data exist to substantiate the
claim that technology without workflow considerations can, in fact,
affect the bottom line.
Many healthcare organizations have or are still experiencing the
effects of poorly implemented clinical technology solutions. These
effects may be manifested in the form of redundant documentation,
non–value-added steps, and additional time spent at the computer
rather than in direct care delivery. Consider these post￾implementation examples of workflow issues. Gugerty et al. (2007)
studied the challenges and opportunities in nursing documentation
and determined that it was possible to decrease by 25% per shift the
time a nurse spends documenting. Technology ought not to be
implemented for the sake of automation unless it promises to deliver
gains in patient outcomes and proper workflow. In fact, the cost to
organizations for duplicate/redundant documentation by nursing can
range from $6,500 to $13,000 per nurse per year (Clancy et al.,
2006). Stokowski (2013) found other issues, such as systems that
are slow and freeze; lose data; and “don’t dump data from monitors
and screening devices into the EHR in real time,” which slows thedocumentation process and increases the amount of time the nurse
must spend on the computer and not in direct patient care (p. 9).
Cision PR Newswire (2018) reported on a Black Book Market
Research survey that 96% of nurse survey respondents are largely
satisfied with EHR documentation and 83% appreciated the quick
responses by IT departments to reported issues. On a positive note,
“[e]ighty-five percent of nurses now see competency with at least
one EHR as a highly-sought employment skill for an RN, and sixty￾five percent believe nurses with multiple fluencies are deemed a
highly superior job candidate currently by health systems” (para. 9).
However, there are still some challenges negatively affecting
workflow because computers or handheld devices are not in every
room.
Examining the workflow surrounding the use of technology
enables better use of the technology and more efficient work. It also
promotes safer patient care delivery. The need to focus on workflow
and technology is attracting increasing recognition, although a dearth
of literature remains that addresses the importance of this area. As
more organizations work to achieve a level of technology adoption
that will enable them to meet MACRA measures and receive
financial payments, more attention will be paid to the area of
workflow design, resulting in a greater body of research and
evidence (Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality [AHRQ],
n.d.; Yuan et al., 2013).Workflow and Technology
Workflow is a term used to describe the action or execution of a
series of tasks in a prescribed sequence. Another definition of
workflow is a progression of steps (i.e., tasks, events, or
interactions) that constitute a work process, involve two or more
persons, and create or add value to the organization’s activities. In a
sequential workflow, each step depends on the occurrence of the
previous step; in a parallel workflow, two or more steps can occur
concurrently. Sometimes the term workflow is used interchangeably
with process or process flows, particularly in the context of
implementations. Observation and documentation of workflow to
better understand what is happening in the current environment and
how it can be altered is referred to as workflow analysis. A typical
output of workflow analysis is a visual depiction of the process,
called a process map. The process map ranges from simplistic to
fairly complex and provides an excellent tool for identifying specific
steps. It can also provide a vehicle for communication and a tool
upon which to build educational materials as well as policies and
procedures.
One school of thought suggests that technology should be
designed to meet the needs of clinical workflow (Yuan et al., 2013).
This model implies that system analysts have a high degree of
control over screen layout and data capture. It also implies that
technology is malleable enough to allow for the flexibility to adapt to
a variety of workflow scenarios. Lessons learned from more than
three decades of clinical technology implementations suggest that
clinical technologies still have a long way to go on the road to
maturity to allow this to be possible. The second and probably most
prevalent thought process is that workflow should be adapted to the
use of technology. Today, this is by far the most commonly used
model given the progress of clinical technology. Bucur et al. (2016)
developed clinical models to support clinical decision-making thatwere inserted into the workflow models. This system integrates a
workflow suite and functionality for the storage, management, and
execution of clinical workflows and the storage of traces of
execution. The knowledge models are integrated and run from the
workflow to support decisions at the right point in the clinical process
(Bucur et al., 2016, p. 152). The ability to track and assess decision￾making throughout a clinical course of care for a patient will enhance
nursing knowledge and improve patient care. Flohr et al. (2018)
described a design process for a mobile application that would
combine outputs from multiple pieces of intensive care unit
equipment to aid clinicians in assessing, processing, and clinical
decision-making. Their approach included 54 hours of clinical
observations as well as stakeholder interviews. In this way, workflow
informed the technology design rather than the technology driving
the consequent workflow.
A concept that has gained popularity in recent years relative to
workflow redesign is clinical transformation. Clinical transformation
is the complete alteration of the clinical environment; therefore, this
term should be used cautiously to describe redesign efforts. Earl et
al. (1995) defined transformation as “a radical change approach that
produces a more responsive organization that is more capable of
performing in unstable and changing environments that
organizations continue to be faced with” (p. 31). Many workflow
redesign efforts are focused on relatively small changes and not on
the widespread change that accompanies transformational activities.
Moreover, clinical transformation would imply that the manner in
which work is carried out and the outcomes achieved are completely
different from the prior state, which is not always true when the
change simply involves implementing technology. Technology can be
used to launch or in conjunction with a clinical transformation
initiative, although the implementation of technology alone is not
perceived as transformational.
Before undertaking transformative initiatives, the following
guidelines should be understood:Leadership must take the lead and create a case for
transformation.
Establish a vision for the end point.
Allow those persons with specific expertise to provide the
details.
Think about the most optimal experience for both the patient and
the clinician.
Do not replicate the current state.
Focus on those initiatives that offer the greatest value to the
organization.
Recognize that small gains have no real impact on
transformation.
Holston (2022) reported on Patient Room ‘Next’ (PRN), which is
an approach to provide high-quality health care to patients wherever
they are located. The patient could be in the community, their home,
or even an ambulance. The PRN strategy looks to the future of
technology and patient care in five key categories: “machine vision,
machine audio, content interaction with patients, sensors and
telehealth” (para. 3). There is a need to improve patient care and
clinical workflows through the five goals of the PRN: (1) the easy
button, (2) real-time data knowledge, (3) automated documentation,
(4) touchless technology, and (5) flexible spaces (Holston, 2022).
The easy button refers to access to patient data and information for
the clinicians when they need it. Real-time data knowledge provides
the best data and information possible at the time of care so that the
clinicians can make informed diagnoses and decisions. Automated
documentation allows the clinicians to spend less time in the EHR
and more time with their patients. Touchless technology uses
equipment such as cameras and sensors to monitor the patient
without disturbance. Flexible spaces allow healthcare institutions to
repurpose areas not currently used to provide patient care into
patient care spaces; when these patient care areas are no longer
needed, they can be returned to their former state. PRN is an agile,integrated framework for healthcare environments that improves the
quality of care and enhances the patient experience, no matter
where health care is provided, by doing the following:
Augmenting important real-time patient information into care
processes
Improving caregivers’ efficiency by reducing or removing
complicated interactions with technology
Reducing patient-invasive touch without reducing care and
personal interactions that increase satisfaction
Engaging the patient and family in a way that reduces mental
stress and improves satisfaction with care
Allowing care to flex into alternate areas as needs arise and
change (This Week Health, 2022, para. 2)
Therefore, PRN is making the processes, workflows, and
technologies seamless.
Optimization
Most of what has been and will be discussed in this chapter is
related to workflow analysis in conjunction with technology
implementations. Nevertheless, not all workflow analysis and
redesign occur before the implementation of technology. Some
analysis and redesign efforts may occur weeks, months, or even
years following the implementation. When workflow analysis occurs
after implementation, it is often referred to as optimization.
Optimization is the process of moving conditions past their current
state and into more efficient and effective methods of performing
tasks. Merriam-Webster (n.d.) defined optimization to be the act,
process, or methodology of making something (as a design, system,
or decision) as fully perfect, functional, or effective as possible.
Some organizations will routinely engage in optimization efforts
following an implementation, whereas other organizations mayundertake this activity in response to clinicians’ concerns or a
marked change in operational performance.
Furthermore, workflow analysis can be conducted either as a
stand-alone effort or as part of an operational improvement event.
When the process is addressed alone, the effort is termed process
improvement. Nursing informatics professionals should always be
included in these activities to represent the needs of clinicians and to
serve as a liaison for technological solutions to process problems. In
addition, informaticists will likely become increasingly operationally
focused and will need to transform their role accordingly to address
workflow in an overall capacity as well as respective to technology.
As mentioned earlier, hospitals tend to operate with smaller profit
margins than other industries, and these profits will likely continue to
diminish, forcing organizations to work smarter, not harder, and to
use technology to accomplish this goal.
If optimization efforts are undertaken, the need to revisit workflow
design should not be considered a flaw in the implementation
approach. Even a well-designed future-state workflow during a
technology implementation must be reexamined after
implementation to ensure that what was projected about the future
state remains valid and to incorporate any additional workflow
elements into the process redesign.
Exploring the topic of workflow analysis regarding clinical
technology implementation will yield considerably fewer literature
results than searching for other topical areas of implementation.
More research is needed in the area of the financial implications of
workflow inefficiencies and their impact on patient care. Time studies
require an investment of resources and may be subject to patient
privacy issues as well as the challenges of capturing time
measurements on processes that are not exactly replicable. Another
confounding factor affecting the quality and quantity of workflow
research is the lack of standardized terminology for this area. A
comprehensive literature search was conducted and published
through the AHRQ in 2008 as an evidence-based handbook for
nurses; this literature search yielded findings indicating that a lack of
standardized terminology in the area of workflow and publications onthis topic have made it a difficult subject to support through research
findings. Stitt (2021) outlined some of the difficulties associated with
different operations and different terminologies found in IT operations
and security operations. He described the two teams as typically
opposing rather than cooperating for the good of the organization
and stressed the need for them to speak a common language.
“While things like terminology, user interface preferences and
workflows will need to be addressed, getting alignment about the
sources of data is an important first step, allowing decisions to be
made based on a common set of information” (p. 11).
What all organizations ultimately strive for is efficient and effective
delivery of patient care. The terms efficient and effective are widely
known in quality areas, or Six Sigma and Lean departments, but are
not necessarily known or used in informatics. Effective delivery of
care or workflow suggests that the process or end product is in the
most desirable state. An efficient delivery of care or workflow would
mean that little waste—that is, unnecessary motion, transportation,
overprocessing, or defects—was incurred. Some health systems,
such as Virginia Mason University Village Medical Center, have
experienced significant quality and cost gains from the widespread
implementation of Lean throughout their organizations.Workflow Analysis and Informatics Practice
The American Nurses Association (ANA), in Nursing Informatics:
Scope and Standards of Practice (2015, 2022), defined functional
areas of practice for the informatics nurse specialist (INS). The
functional area of analysis identified the specific functional qualities
related to workflow analysis. Particularly, the ANA indicated that the
INS should develop techniques necessary to assess and improve
human–computer interaction. Workflow analysis is a central part of
every INS function. The INS needs to understand workflow and
appreciate how lack of efficient workflow negatively affects patient
care.
A critical aspect of the informatics role is workflow design. Nursing
informatics is uniquely positioned to engage in the analysis and
redesign of processes and tasks surrounding the use of technology.
The ANA (2015) cited workflow redesign as one of the fundamental
skill sets that make up the discipline of this specialty. The ANA
(2022) stated that the INS raises workflow and clinical practice
awareness. Moreover, workflow analysis should be part of every
technology implementation, and the role of the informaticist within
this team is to direct others in the execution of this task or to perform
the task directly.
Unfortunately, many nurses still find themselves in an informatics
capacity without sufficient preparation for a process analysis role.
One area of practice that is particularly susceptible to inadequate
preparation is the ability to facilitate process analysis. Workflow
analysis requires careful attention to detail and the ability to
moderate group discussions, organize concepts, and generate
solutions. These skills can be acquired through a formal academic
informatics program or through courses that teach the concepts of
Six Sigma or Lean by example. Regardless of where these skills are
acquired, it is important to understand that they are now and will
continue to be a vital aspect of the informatics role.Some organizations have felt strongly enough about the need for
workflow analysis that departments have been created to address
this very need. Whether the department carries the name of clinical
excellence, organizational effectiveness, or Lean Six Sigma, it is
critical to recognize the value this group can offer technology
implementations and clinicians.
As we examine how workflow analysis is conducted, note that
although the nursing informaticist is an essential member of the team
that participates in or enables workflow analysis, a team dedicated to
this effort is necessary for its success.
Building the Redesign Team
The workflow redesign team is an interdisciplinary team consisting of
process owners. Process owners are those persons who directly
engage in the workflow to be analyzed and redesigned. These
individuals can speak about the intricacy of the process, including
process variations from the norm. When constructing the team, it is
important to include individuals who are able to contribute
information about the exact current state of the workflow and offer
suggestions for improvement of its future state. Members of the
workflow redesign team should also have the authority to make
decisions about how the process should be redesigned. Sometimes
this authority is issued by managers, or it could come from
participation of the managers directly. Such a careful blend of
decision-makers and process owners can be difficult to assemble but
is critical for forming the team and enabling it to succeed. Often,
individuals at the managerial level will want to participate exclusively
in the redesign process. Although having management participate
provides the advantage of having decision-makers and
management-level buy-in, these individuals may also make
erroneous assumptions about how the process should be versus
how the process is truly occurring. Conversely, including only
process owners who do not possess the authority to make decisions
can slow down the work of the team while decisions are made
outside the group sessions.Team focus needs to be addressed at the outset of the team’s
assembly. Early on, the team should decide which workflow will be
examined to avoid confusion or spending time unnecessarily on
workflow that does not ultimately matter to the outcome. In the early
stages of workflow redesign, the team should define the beginning
and end and a few high-level steps of the process. Avoid focusing on
process steps in great detail in the beginning because the
conversation can get sidetracked or team members may get bogged
down by focusing on details and not moving along at a good pace.
Six Sigma expert George Eckes uses the phrase “Stay as high as
you can as long as you can,” which is a great catchphrase to
remember to keep the team focused and at a high level. The pace at
which any implementation team progresses ultimately affects the
overall timeline of a project; therefore, focus and speed are skills that
the informatics expert should develop and use throughout every
initiative but particularly when addressing workflow redesign.
The workflow redesign team will develop a detailed process map
after agreement is reached on the current state of the beginning and
end points of the process and after a high-level map depicting the
major process steps is finalized. Because workflow crosses many
care providers, it may be useful to construct the process map using a
swim-lane technique (Figure 13-2). A swim-lane technique uses
categories, such as functional workgroups, and roles to visually
depict groups of work and who performs the work. The resulting map
shows how workflow and data transition to clinicians and can
demonstrate areas of potential process and information breakdowns.Developed by Dee McGonigle.
Figure 13-2 Swim-Lane Workflow: Process for Medication
Reconciliation When a Patient Is Admitted to the Hospital
Description
It may take several sessions of analysis to complete a process
map as details are uncovered and workarounds discussed. There is
a tendency for individuals who participate in process redesign
sessions to describe workflow as they believe it to be occurring
rather than how it really is. The informatics expert and/or the process
team facilitator should determine what is really happening, however,
and capture that information accurately. Regardless of whether a
swim-lane or simplistic process map design is used, the goal is tocapture enough details to accurately portray the process as it is
happening today.
Besides process mapping, other techniques may be used to help
the team understand the workflow as it exists in its current state.
Future-state workflow planning will only be as good as the reliability
of the current state; thus, it is crucial to undertake whatever other
actions are needed to better understand what is happening in the
current state. Observation, interviews, and process or waste walks
are also helpful in understanding the current state. Waste walks are
a method of observing work as it is performed to note any waste or
inefficient practices. It is important to make sure that all findings are
shared with the nurses who were observed.
Value Added Versus Non–Value Added
Beyond analysis of tasks, current-state mapping provides the
opportunity for the process redesign team to distinguish between
value-added and non–value-added activities. A value-added step is
one that ultimately brings the process closer to completion or
changes the product or service for the better. An example of a value￾added step would be placing a name tag on a specimen sample. The
name tag is necessary for the laboratory personnel to identify the
specimen, and therefore its placement is an essential, or value￾added, step in the process. Some steps in a process do not
necessarily add value but are needed for regulatory or compliance
reasons; therefore, they must be included in the future process. In
contrast, a non–value-added step does not alter the outcome of a
process or product. Activities such as handling, moving, and holding
are not considered value-added steps and should be evaluated
during workflow analysis. Manipulating papers, moving through
computer screens, and walking or transporting items are considered
non–value-added activities.
The five whys represent one technique for driving the team toward
identifying value-added versus non–value-added steps. The process
redesign facilitator will query the group about why a specific task is
done or is done in a particular way through a series of questionsasking why. The goal is to uncover tasks that came about due to
workarounds or for other unsubstantiated reasons. Tasks that are
considered non–value added and that are not necessary for the
purpose of compliance or regulatory reasons should be eliminated
from the future-state process. The team’s purpose in redesigning
workflow is to eliminate steps in a process that do not add value to
the end state or that create waste by their very nature.
Waste
A key underpinning of the Lean philosophy is the removal of waste
activities from workflow. Waste is classified as unnecessary activities
or an excess of products used to perform tasks. The seven
categories listed here are the most widely recognized forms of
waste:
Overproduction: pace is faster than necessary to support the
process
Waiting
Transport
Inappropriate processing: overprocessing
Unnecessary inventory: excess stock
Unnecessary motion: bending, lifting, moving, and so on
Defects: reproduction
Variation
The nature of the work situation for the nurse is one of frequent
interruptions, which cause the workflow to be disrupted and increase
the chance of error (Wang & Jin, 2021; Yuan et al., 2013). Variation
in workflow is considered the enemy of all good processes and
therefore should be eliminated when possible. Variation occurs when
workers perform the same function in different ways. This situation
usually arises because of flaws in the way a process was originally
designed, lack of knowledge about the process, or inability toexecute a process as originally designed due to disruption or
disturbances in the workflow. Examining the process as it exists
today will help with identifying variation. Some variation cannot be
eliminated because processes that involve highly customized
products or services are generally not conducive to standardization
and the elimination of variation inherent to the process.
Some people argue that delivery of care is subject to variation
owing to its very nature and to the individual needs of patients. There
is little doubt that each patient’s care should be tailored to meet their
specific needs. Nevertheless, delivery of care involves some
common processes that can be standardized and improved upon
without jeopardizing care.
Transitioning to the Future State
Following redesign efforts, regardless of whether they occurred
during or after an implementation or as a stand-alone process
improvement event, steps must be taken to ensure that change
takes hold and that the new workflow continues after the support
team has disbanded. Management support and involvement during
the transition phase is essential because management will be
necessary to enforce new workflow procedures and further define
and refine roles and responsibilities. Documentation of the future￾state workflow should have occurred during the redesign effort but is
not completely finished until after the redesign is complete and the
workflow has become operational. Policies and procedures are
addressed and rewritten to encompass the changes to workflows
and role assignments. Help desk, system analyst, nursing education,
and other support personnel need to be educated about the workflow
specifics as part of the post-improvement effort. It is considered
good practice to involve the operational staff in the future process
discussions and planning in order to incorporate specifics of these
areas and to ensure staff buy-in.
Workflow changes beginning to fail and workarounds developing
signal that something is flawed about the way in which the new
process was constructed and that it needs to be evaluated further.The workflow redesign team is then brought together to review and,
if necessary, redesign the process.
The future state is constructed with the best possible knowledge of
how the process will ideally work. To move from the current state to
the future state, gap analysis is necessary. Gap analysis zeroes in
on the major areas most affected by the change—namely,
technology. What often happens in redesign efforts is an exact or
near-exact replication of the current state using automation. The gap
analysis discussion should generate ideas from the group about how
best to utilize the technology to transform practice. A prudent step is
to consider having legal and risk representatives at the table when
initiating future-state discussions to identify the parameters within
which the group should work; nevertheless, the group should not
assume that the existing parameters are its only boundaries.
Future-state process maps become the basis of educational
materials for end users, communication tools for the project team,
and the foundation of new policies and procedures. Simplified
process maps provide an excellent schematic for communicating
change to others.Informatics as a Change Agent
Technology implementations represent a significant change for
clinicians, as does the workflow redesign that accompanies adoption
of technology. Often, the degree of change and its impact are
underappreciated and unaccounted for by leadership and staff alike.
A typical response to change is anger, frustration, and a refusal to
accept the proposed change. All these responses should be
expected and need to be accounted for; thus, a plan to address the
emotional side of change is developed early on. Every workflow
redesign effort should begin with a change management plan
(Figure 13-3). Engagement of the end user is a critical aspect of
change management and therefore technology adoption. Without
end user involvement, change is resisted and efforts are subject to
failure. Users may be engaged and brought into the prospective
change through question-and-answer forums, technology
demonstrations, and frequent communications regarding change and
as department-specific representatives in working meetings.© Digital Storm/Shutterstock Figure 13-3 Change Management
Many change theories have been developed. No matter which
change theory is adopted by the informatics specialist, however,
communication, planning, and support are key factors in any change
management strategy. Informaticists should become knowledgeable
about at least one change theory and use this knowledge as the
basis for change management planning as part of every effort. John
Kotter (1996), one of the most widely recognized change theorists,
suggested that the following conditions must be addressed to deal
with change in an organization:
Education and communication
Participation and involvement
Facilitation and support
Negotiation and agreement
Manipulation and cooptation
Explicit and implicit coercionIn the Healthcare Information and Management Systems Society
(HIMSS) (2022) Nursing Informatics Workforce Survey, the crucial
role that nurse informaticists play in enhancing healthcare, driving
innovation and technology to achieve the full health promise of every
human, was validated. Nurse informaticists “use project and change
management expertise and optimize electronic medical health
records, quality initiatives and reporting” (HIMSS, 2022, para. 1).
Nursing informaticists are the most significant resource in a project
team that influences adoption and change management since they
bring to such teams their ability to interact with various clinicians,
knowledge of clinical practice, and the ability to empathize with the
clinicians as they experience the impact of workflow change. These
innate skills differentiate the nursing informaticist from other
members of the implementation team and are highly desirable in the
informatics community.
Nevertheless, no matter which change management techniques
are employed by the informatics specialist and the project team, the
adoption of technology and workflow may be slow to evolve. Change
is often a slow process that requires continual positive reinforcement
and involvement of supporting resources. Failure to achieve strong
adoption results early on is not necessarily a failure of the methods
utilized but rather may be due to other factors not entirely within the
control of the informaticist.
Perhaps a complete alteration in behavior is not possible, but
modifications to behaviors needed to support a desired outcome can
be realized. This situation is analogous to the individual who stops
smoking; the desire for the cigarette remains, but the behavior has
been modified to no longer sustain smoking. To manage change in
an organization, nurses must modify behavior to produce the
intended outcome.
Change takes hold when strong leadership support exists. This
support manifests itself as a visible presence to staff, clear and
concise communications, an unwavering position, and an open-door
policy to field concerns about change. Too often, leadership verbally
endorses change and then fails to follow through with these actionsor withdraws support when the going gets tough. Inevitably, if
leadership wavers, so, too, will staff.TABLE 13-1
Measuring the Results
Metrics provide an understanding about the performance of a
process or function. Typically, within clinical technology projects,
metrics about the performance of the technology or that capture the
level of participation or adoption are identified and collected. Equally
important is the need for process performance metrics. Process
metrics are collected at the initial stage of project or problem
identification. Current-state metrics are then benchmarked against
internal indicators. When there are no internal indicators to
benchmark against, a suitable course of action is to benchmark
against an external source, such as a similar business practice
within a different industry. Consider examining the hotel room
changeover strategy or the customer service approach of Disney or
Ritz-Carlton hotels, for example, to determine suitable metrics for a
particular project or focus area.
The right workflow complement will provide the organization with
the data it needs to understand operational and clinical performance.
This area is highlighted through the need for healthcare
organizations to capture MACRA measures. Good metrics should tell
the story of accomplishment. The presence of technology alone does
not guarantee an organization’s ability to capture and report on these
measures without also addressing the surrounding workflow. Metrics
should focus on the variables of time, quality, and costs. Table 13-1
provides examples of relevant metrics.
Examples of Metrics
Turnaround times Cycle times Throughput
Changeover time Setup time System availability
Patient satisfaction Employee satisfactionMACRA highlights the need for healthcare organizations to collect
information that represents the impact of technology on patient
outcomes. Furthermore, data are necessary to demonstrate how a
process is performing in its current state. In spite of the MACRA
mandates, the need to collect data to demonstrate improvement in
workflow—though it remains strong—is all too often absent in
implementation or redesign efforts. A team cannot demonstrate
improvements to an existing process without collecting information
about how the process is performing today. Current-state measures
also help the process team validate that the correct area for
improvement was identified. Once a process improvement effort is
over and the new solution has been implemented, post-improvement
measures should be gathered to demonstrate progress.
In some organizations, the informatics professional reports to the
director of operations, the chief information officer, or the chief
operations officer. In this relationship, the need to demonstrate
operational measures is even stronger. Some of the operational
measures captured are turnaround times, throughput, and
equipment or technology availability.Quality Improvement Initiatives
Thus far, we have focused on workflow considerations in relation to
the adoption, implementation, and optimization of new technology.
We turn now to another critical role for the nurse informaticist,
quality improvement (QI). QI consists of a systematic process
using data and continuous actions that leads to measurable
improvement in healthcare services and the health status of targeted
patient groups. QI projects use many of the same techniques that we
discussed for workflow—namely, process mapping, team buy-in, and
attention to change theories. They are also dependent on metrics to
accurately assess the nature of the issue to be addressed and to
measure the success of the project. Health Catalyst (2022)
suggested the following broad categories for potential hospital QI
projects: “clinical variation, preventable medical errors, hospital
acquired infections, delays in patient discharge, and dwindling cash
flow” (para. 1). As with any project, it is critical to choose wisely;
select the topic to address, a great team, a process that is likely to
succeed, and the most reliable metrics. In addition to relational skills,
such as collaboration and communication, Jones et al. (2019)
identified these key characteristics that QI change agents need:
“[e]nthusiasm, optimism, curiosity, and perseverance” (para. 5).
Systematic change requires attention to the processes and metrics
necessary to successfully enact the change. QI is dependent on four
key principles for success: the need to understand current systems
and processes, to focus on patient needs and expectations, to focus
on teamwork, and to be data driven. The Somerset NHS Foundation
Trust (n.d.) outlined the following seven key steps in a QI project:
1. Select the QI team members based on their knowledge of the
issue to be solved and their ability to contribute meaningfully to
the team.
2. Select the project by considering performance gaps, the
problem, the relationship to the organization’s strategic plan,staff input and/or resistance, and feasibility and timing.
3. Develop the aim statement using a SMART (specific,
measurable, achievable, relevant, and time-bound) approach.
The aim statement should be specific enough so that the what,
why, who, when, and how of the project are readily apparent.
4. Develop measures to determine whether project goals were met
while keeping in mind that a change in one area may create
issues for another area. A QI project must consider these critical
organizational balancing issues.
5. Identify change ideas.
6. Test changes.
7. Develop a process for sustainability and spread.
You should always celebrate success. This is a necessary
component and time well spent, but it does not always occur.
Reflecting on and appreciating the work that went into the project
and celebrating its success are critical to recognizing this effort and
the desired outcomes.Future Directions
Workflow analysis is not an optional part of clinical implementations
but rather is a necessity for safe patient care supported by
technology. The ultimate goal of workflow analysis is to create a
future-state solution that maximizes the use of technology and
eliminates non–value-added activities. Although many tools are
available to accomplish workflow redesign, the best method is the
one that complements the organization and supports the work of
clinicians. Redesigning how people do work will provide evidence to
create change; thus, the nursing informaticist will need to apply
change management principles for the new way of doing things to
take hold. These statements are also true of QI projects.
Workflow analysis and QI have been described in this chapter
within the context of the most widely accepted tools that are
fundamentally linked to the concepts of Lean Six Sigma. Other
methods of workflow analysis and QI exist and may also be used to
assess clinical workflow. An example of an alternative workflow
analysis tool is the use of radio-frequency badges to detect
movement within a defined clinical area. Clinician and patient
movements may be tracked using these devices, and corresponding
actions may be documented, which together paint a picture of the
workflow for a specific area (Vankipuram et al., 2011).
Another example of a workflow analysis tool involves the use of
modeling software. An application such as ProModel provides
images of the clinical work area where clinician workflows can be
plotted out and reconfigured to best suit the needs of a specific area.
Simulation applications enable decision-makers to visualize realistic
scenarios and draw conclusions about how to leverage resources,
implement technology, and improve performance. Other vendors that
offer simulation applications include Maya and Autodesk.
Healthcare organizations need to consider how other industries
have analyzed and addressed workflow to streamline businesspractices and improve quality outputs to glean best practices that
might be incorporated into the healthcare industry’s own clinical and
business approaches. First, however, each healthcare organization
must step outside itself and recognize that not all aspects of patient
care are unique; consequently, many aspects of care can be
subjected to standardization. Many models of workflow redesign
from manufacturing and the service sector can be extrapolated to
health care. The healthcare industry is facing difficult economic times
and can benefit from performance improvement strategies used in
other industries.
Although workflow analysis principles have been described in this
chapter within the context of acute and ambulatory care, the need to
perform process analysis on a macro level will expand as more
organizations move forward with health information exchanges
(HIEs) and medical home models. An HIE requires the nursing
informaticist to visualize how patients move through the entire
continuum of care and not just a specific patient care area.
Technology initiatives will become increasingly complex in the
future. In turn, nursing informaticists will need greater preparation in
the area of process analysis and improvement techniques to meet
the growing challenges that technology brings and the operational
performance demands of fiscally impaired healthcare organizations.Summary
Workflows integrating technology provide the healthcare professional
with the data necessary to make informed decisions. This quality
data must be collected and captured to meet MACRA measures.
Nurses are the healthcare team members who spend the most time
with patients. Therefore, the nurses must be involved in “meaningful
data collection and reporting. Documentation by nurses can tell
what’s going on with the patient beyond physical exams, test results,
and procedures” (Daley, 2011, para. 5).
Workflow redesign is a critical aspect of technology
implementation. When done well, it yields technology that is more
likely to achieve the intended patient outcomes and safety benefits.
Nursing informatics professionals are taking on a greater role
regarding workflow design, and this aspect of practice will grow in
light of MACRA-driven measures. QI initiatives that affect hospital
performance will also drive informatics professionals to influence
how technology is used in the context of workflow and QI to improve
the bottom line for their organizations. In an ideal world, nurse
informaticists who are experts at workflow analysis and QI would be
core members of every organization.
THOUGHT-PROVOKING QUESTIONS
1. What do you perceive as the current obstacles to redesigning workflow within your
clinical setting?
2. Thinking about your last implementation, were you able to challenge the policies
and practices that constitute today’s workflow, or were you able to create a
workflow solution that eliminated non–value-added steps?
3. Is the workflow surrounding technology usage providing the healthcare
organization with the data it needs to make decisions and eventually meet MACRA
criteria?
4. Describe your understanding of the PRN in detail. How is the PRN disrupting
healthcare delivery?5. How does the current educational preparation need to change to address the skills
necessary to perform workflow analysis and QI?
6. Identify a process that would benefit from a QI project. Whom would you place on
the team, and what steps would you initiate?R E F E R E N C E S
Abraham, J., Kannampallil, T. G., Jarman, A., Sharma, S., Rash, C., Schiff, G., & Galanter,
W. (2018). Reasons for computerised provider order entry (CPOE)-based inpatient
medication ordering errors: An observational study of voided orders. BMJ Quality &
Safety, 27(4), 299–307. http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/bmjqs-2017-006606
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. (n.d.). Workflow assessment for health IT
toolkit. https://digital.ahrq.gov/health-it-tools-and-resources/evaluation￾resources/workflow-assessment-health-it-toolkit
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. (2008). Patient safety and quality: An
evidence-based handbook for nurses. https://archive.ahrq.gov/professionals/clinicians￾providers/resources/nursing/resources/nurseshdbk/nurseshdbk.pdf
American Nurses Association. (2015). Nursing informatics: Scope and standards of practice
(2nd ed.). Nursesbooks.org
American Nurses Association. (2022). Nursing informatics: Scope and standards of practice
(3rd ed.). Nursesbooks.org
American Society for Health Care Risk Management. (2021). ASHRM patient safety tip
sheet: Technology and patient safety.
www.ashrm.org/system/files/media/file/2021/02/Technology-and-Patient-Safety.pdf
Ash, J. S., Sittig, D. F., Dykstra, R., Campbell, E., & Guappone, K. (2009). The unintended
consequences of computerized provider order entry: Findings from a mixed methods
exploration. International Journal of Medical Informatics, 78(Suppl 1), S69–S76.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2008.07.015
Bucur, A., van Leeuwen, J., Christodoulou, N., Sigdel, K., Argyri, K., Koumakis, L., Graf, N.,
& Stamatakos, G. (2016). Workflow-driven clinical decision support for personalized
oncology. BMC Medical Informatics & Decision Making, 16(Suppl 2), 151–162.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/s12911-016-0314-3
Campbell, E., Guappone, K., Sittig, D., Dykstra, R., & Ash, J. (2009). Computerized provider
order entry adoption: Implications for clinical workflow. Journal of General Internal
Medicine, 24(1), 21–26. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11606-008-0857-9
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. (2016a). CMS quality measure development
plan: Supporting the transition to the Merit-based Incentive Payment System (MIPS) and
Alternative Payment Models (APMs). www.cms.gov/Medicare/Quality-Initiatives-Patient￾Assessment-Instruments/Value-Based-Programs/MACRA-MIPS-and-APMs/Final￾MDP.pdf
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. (2016b). Quality Payment Program: APMs
overview. https://qpp.cms.gov/apms/overview
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. (2021). 2018 program requirements Medicare.
www.cms.gov/medicare/regulations-guidance/promoting-interoperability￾programs/requirements-previous-years/2018-program-requirements-medicare
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. (2022). Requirements for previous years.
www.cms.gov/Regulations-and￾Guidance/Legislation/EHRIncentivePrograms/RequirementsforPreviousYears.htmlCision PR Newswire. (2018, May 10). Nursing EHR satisfaction takes a major swing to the
positive, Black Book user survey. www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/nursing-ehr￾satisfaction-takes-a-major-swing-to-the-positive-black-book-user-survey-300646654.html
Clancy, T., Delaney, C., Morrison, B., & Gunn, J. (2006). The benefits of standardized
nursing languages in complex adaptive systems such as hospitals. Journal of Nursing
Administration, 36(9), 426–434. http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/00005110-200609000-00009
Daley, K. (2011). Making HIT meaningful for nursing and patients. American Nurse, 43(4), 3.
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21954800
Earl, M., Sampler, J., & Short, J. (1995). Strategies for business process reengineering:
Evidence from field studies. Journal of Management Information Systems, 12(1), 31–56.
https://doi.org/10.1080/07421222.1995.11518069
Flohr, L., Beaudry, S., Johnson, K. T., West, N., Burns, C. M., Ansermino, J. M., Dumont, G.
A., Wensley, D., Skippen, P., & Gorges, M. (2018). Clinician-driven design of VitalPAD—
An intelligent monitoring and communication device to improve patient safety in the
intensive care unit. IEEE Journal of Translational Engineering in Health and Medicine, 6,
1–14. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/JTEHM.2018.2812162
Gugerty, B., Maranda, M. J., Beachley, M., Navarro, V. B., Newbold, S., Hawk, W., Karp, J.,
Koszalka, M., Morrison, S., Poe, S. S., & Wilhelm, D. (2007). Challenges and
opportunities in documentation of the nursing care of patients. Maryland Nursing
Workforce Commission.
http://mbon.maryland.gov/Documents/documentation_challenges.pdf
Healthcare Information and Management Systems Society. (2022). HIMSS Nursing
Informatics Workforce Survey. www.himss.org/resources/himss-nursing-informatics￾workforce-survey
Health Catalyst. (2021, January 21). Healthcare process improvement: Six strategies for
organizationwide transformation. www.healthcatalyst.com/insights/healthcare-process￾improvement-6-strategies
Health Catalyst. (2022, July 5). The top four examples of quality improvement in healthcare.
www.healthcatalyst.com/insights/top-examples-quality-improvement-healthcare
Holston, F. (2022, August 2). What is Patient Room ‘Next’ and how can healthcare
organizations achieve it? HealthTech.
https://healthtechmagazine.net/article/2022/08/what-patient-room-next-and-how-can￾healthcare-organizations-achieve-it
Hopkins, B. (2019, August 23). 3 ways to improve healthcare workflow. Medical Group
Management Association. www.mgma.com/articles/3-ways-to-improve-healthcare￾workflow
Jones, B., Vaux, E., & Olsson-Brown, A. (2019). How to get started in quality improvement.
British Medical Journal, 364, k5408. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.k5437
Kotter, J. P. (1996). Leading change. Harvard Business School Press.
Laoyan, S. (2023). 7 types of process improvement methodologies. Asana.
Merriam-Webster. (n.d.). Optimization. In Merriam-Webster.com dictionary. Retrieved July
17, 2023, from www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/optimization
Schoenbaum, A., & Carroll, W. (2021). Nursing informatics key role in defining clinical
workflow, increasing efficiency and improving quality. Healthcare Information andManagement Systems Society. www.himss.org/resources/nursing-informatics-key-role￾defining-clinical-workflow-increasing-efficiency-and
Somerset NHS Foundation Trust. (n.d.). 7 steps to quality improvement.
https://web.archive.org/web/20230206123730/https://www.somersetft.nhs.uk/improveme
nt/improvement/7-steps-to-qi
Stitt, T. (2021). Office walls and roadblocks: How workflows and terminology get in the way
of visibility. Network Security, 2019(11), 9–13. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1353-
4858(19)30131-X
Stokowski, L. (2013, September 12). Electronic nursing documentation: Charting new
territory. Medscape. www.medscape.com/viewarticle/810573_1
The Patient Safety League. (2023). You’re not immune to medical errors. 4patientsafety.org
This Week Health. (2022, September 8). Future of care: Patient Room ‘Next’ with Sirius
Healthcare. https://thisweekhealth.com/futureofcare-prn-sirius-healthcare
Thompson, C., Kell, C., Shetty, R., & Banerjee, D. (2016). Clinical workflow redesign
leveraging informatics improves patient outcomes. Heart & Lung, 45(4), 380–381.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.hrtlng.2016.05.025
Vankipuram, M., Kaholab, K., Cohenac, T., & Patel, V. L. (2011). Toward automated
workflow analysis and visualization in clinical environments. Journal of Biomedical
Informatics, 44(3), 432–440. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbi.2010.05.015
Wang, W., & Jin, L. (2021). Current status and influencing factors of nursing interruption
events. American Journal of Managed Care, 27(6). www.ajmc.com/view/current-status￾and-influencing-factors-of-nursing-interruption-events
Yuan, M., Finley, G., Long, J., Mills, C., & Johnson, R. (2013). Evaluation of user interface
and workflow design of a bedside nursing clinical decision support system. Interactive
Journal of Medical Research, 2(1), e4. https://doi.org/10.2196/ijmr.2402© nadla/E+/Getty ImagesChapter 14
Chapter 15
Chapter 16
Chapter 17
Chapter 18
SECTION IV
Nursing Informatics Practice Applications:
Care Delivery
The Electronic Health Record and Clinical Informatics
Informatics Tools to Promote Patient Safety, Quality
Outcomes, and Interdisciplinary Collaboration
Patient Engagement and Connected Health
Using Informatics to Promote Community and
Population Health
Telenursing and Remote Access Telehealth
Nursing information systems must support nurses as they fulfill their
roles in delivering quality patient care. Such systems must be
responsive to nurses’ needs, allowing them to manage their data and
information as necessary and providing access to essential
references, literature sources, and other networked departments.
Nurses have always practiced in a field where they have needed to
use their ingenuity, resourcefulness, creativity, initiative, and skills. To
improve patient care and advance the science of nursing, clinicians
as knowledge workers must apply these same abilities and skills to
become astute users of available information systems.
In this section, the reader learns about clinical practice tools,
electronic health records, and clinical information systems;
informatics tools to enhance patient safety, provide consumer
information, and meet education needs; population and community
health tools; and telehealth and telenursing.
Information systems, electronic documentation, and electronic
health records are changing the way nurses and physicians practice.Nursing informatics systems are also changing how patients enter
and receive data and information. Some institutions, for example, are
permitting patients to access their own records electronically via the
internet or a dedicated patient portal. Confidentiality and privacy
issues loom with these new electronic systems. Health Insurance
Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) regulations (covered in
Section II, Perspectives on Nursing Informatics) and professional
ethics principles (covered in Section I, Building Blocks of Nursing
Informatics) must remain at the forefront when clinicians interact
electronically with intimate patient data and information.
The material in this book is placed within the context of the
Foundation of Knowledge model (Figure IV-1) to meet the needs of
healthcare delivery systems, organizations, patients, and nurses.
Readers should continue to assess their personal knowledge
progression. The Foundation of Knowledge model challenges us to
reflect on how our knowledge foundation is ever changing and to
appreciate that acquiring new information is a key resource for
knowledge building. This section addresses the information systems
with which clinicians interact in their healthcare environments as
affected by legislation; professional codes of ethics; consumerism;
and reconceptualization of practice paradigms, such as in
telenursing. All the various nursing roles—practice, administration,
education, research, and informatics—involve the science of nursing.Designed by Alicia Mastrian.
Figure IV-1 Foundation of Knowledge Model
DescriptionC H A P T E R 1 4
The Electronic Health Record
and Clinical Informatics
OBJECTIVES
1. Describe the common components of an electronic health record.
2. Assess the benefits of implementing an electronic health record.
3. Explore the ownership of an electronic health record.
4. Evaluate the flexibility of the electronic health record in meeting the needs of
clinicians and patients.
5. Examine the impact on patient outcomes when social determinants of health are
included in the electronic health record.
KEY TERMS
administrative process
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act (ARRA)
connectivity
decision support
electronic communication
electronic health record (EHR)
health information
Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health (HITECH) Act
interoperability
meaningful use
order entry management
patient support
population health management
reporting
results managementsocial determinants of health (SDOH)Introduction
The significance of electronic health records (EHRs) to nursing
cannot be overestimated. Although EHRs on the surface suggest a
simple automation of clinical documentation, in fact their implications
are broad, ranging from the ways in which care is delivered, to the
types of interactions nurses have with patients in conjunction with
the use of technology, to the research surrounding EHRs that will
inform nursing practice for tomorrow. Although EHR standards are
evolving and barriers to adoption remain, the collective work has a
positive momentum that will benefit clinicians and patients alike.
A basic knowledge of EHRs and nursing informatics is now
considered by many to be an entry-level nursing competency.
Various nursing work groups have delineated nursing informatics
competencies from entry level to nursing informatics specialists, and
other groups have identified competencies specific to the EHR. The
American Health Information Management Association (AHIMA)
collaborated with the Health Professions Network and the
Employment and Training Administration to create a graphic
depiction of competencies necessary for EHR interaction. The
Health Information Management Competency model is divided into
six levels: personal effectiveness competencies, academic
competencies, workplace competencies, industry-wide technical
competencies, industry-sector technical competencies, and a
management competencies level shared with occupation-specific
requirements. The Health Information Management Competency
model can be viewed at
www.careeronestop.org/competencymodel/competency￾models/electronic-health-records.aspx. Hovering over each block in
the model provides a definition of each of the competencies covered
by the model. For example, the industry-sector technical
competencies section includes health information literacy and skills,
health informatics skills using the EHR, privacy and confidentiality ofhealth information, and health information/data technical security.
The drive to adopt EHRs was underscored with the passage of the
Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical
Health (HITECH) Act of 2009. It is essential that EHR competency
be developed if nurses are to participate fully in the changing world
of healthcare information technology.
This chapter has four goals. First, it describes the common
components of an EHR. Second, it reviews the benefits of using an
EHR. Third, it provides an overview of successful ownership of an
EHR, including nursing’s role in promoting the safe adoption of
EHRs in day-to-day practice. Fourth, it discusses the flexibility of an
EHR in meeting the needs of both clinicians and patients and
emphasizes the need for fully interoperable EHRs and clinical
information systems (CISs).Setting the Stage
The U.S. healthcare system faces the enormous challenge of
improving quality of care while simultaneously controlling costs.
EHRs were proposed as one solution to achieve this goal (Institute
of Medicine [IOM], 2001). In January 2004, President George W.
Bush raised the profile of EHRs in his State of the Union Address by
outlining a plan to ensure that most Americans have an EHR by
2014. He stated that “by computerizing health records, we can avoid
dangerous medical mistakes, reduce costs and improve care” (Bush,
2004). This proclamation generated an increased demand for
understanding EHRs and promoting their adoption, but relatively few
healthcare organizations were motivated at that time to pursue
adoption of EHRs. Congress passed the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act (ARRA) of 2009. This legislation included the
HITECH Act, which specifically sought to incentivize health
organizations and providers to become meaningful users of EHRs.
These incentives came in the form of increased reimbursement rates
from the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS);
ultimately, the HITECH Act resulted in payment of a penalty by any
healthcare organization that had not adopted an EHR by January
2015. The Healthcare Information and Management Systems
Society (HIMSS) has been tracking EHR adoption since 2005
through its Stage 7 validation and in 2013 reported that most U.S.
healthcare organizations (77%) were in Stage 3, reflecting
implementation of only the basic EHR components of laboratory,
radiology, and pharmacy ancillaries; a clinical data repository,
including a controlled medical vocabulary; and simple nursing
documentation and clinical decision support (HIMSS, n.d.-a, 2014,
2017). Higher stages of the EHR adoption model include more
sophisticated use of clinical decision support systems and
medication administration tools, with HIMSS Stage 7—the highest
level—consisting of EHRs that have data sharing and warehousingcapabilities and are completely interfaced with emergency and
outpatient facilities (Burkey, 2015; HIMSS, n.d.-c, 2017). Real
progress is being made on the adoption of more robust EHRs.
HIMSS (n.d.-c) reports that 1,313 hospitals in the United States have
achieved Stage 6, with full physician documentation, a robust clinical
decision support system, and electronic access to medical images.
Burkey (2015) reported that, to date, over 200 hospitals have
achieved Stage 7 and are totally paperless and that more
organizations reach this goal every day. Overall, 96% of U.S.
hospitals and 78% of physicians’ offices have adopted an EHR
(Office of the National Coordinator for Health Information
Technology, n.d.).Components of Electronic Health Records
Overview
Before enactment of the ARRA, several variants of EHRs existed,
each with its own terminology and each developed with a different
audience in mind. The sources of these records included, for
example, the federal government (HIMSS, n.d.-a, 2017; IOM, 2003)
and the National Institutes of Health (2006). The ARRA included an
explicit requirement for providers and hospitals to use a certified
EHR that meets a set of standard functional definitions to be eligible
for an increased reimbursement incentive. Standards, standardized
functions, and standard terminology requirements are important
considerations so that information can be easily shared among
providers. Initially, the U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services (HHS) granted two organizations the authority to accredit
EHRs: the Drummond Group and the Certification Commission for
Healthcare Information Technology. These bodies are authorized to
test and certify EHR vendors against the standards and test
procedures developed by the National Institute of Standards and
Technology (NIST) and endorsed by the Office of the National
Coordinator for Health Information Technology (ONC) for EHRs. The
number of certification bodies recognized by the ONC changes over
time; for current information, see www.healthit.gov/topic/certification￾ehrs/about-onc-health-it-certification-program.
The initial NIST test procedure included 45 certification criteria,
ranging from the basic ability to record patient demographics,
document vital signs, and maintain an up-to-date problem list to
more complex functions, such as electronic exchange of clinical
information and patient summary records (NIST, 2010a). Box 14-1
lists the 45 certification criteria outlined by NIST in 2010. These
criteria have been updated several times since 2010, with the 2015
version developed after going out for public comment (ONC, 2023).
In 2020, the changes that are now reflected in the revised criteriaresulted from the implementation of the 21st Century Cures Act
(Federal Register, 2020a, 2020b). Each iteration of certification
criteria and testing procedures seeks to make the EHR more robust,
interoperable, and functional to meet the needs of patients and
users.
BOX 14-1 EHR CERTIFICATION CRITERIA
Criteria # Certification Criteria
§170.302 (a) Drug–drug, drug–allergy interaction checks
§170.302 (b) Drug formulary checks
§170.302 (c) Maintain up-to-date problem list
§170.302 (d) Maintain active medication list
§170.302 (e) Maintain active medication allergy list
§170.302 (f)(1) Vital signs
§170.302 (f)(2) Calculate body mass index
§170.302 (f)(3) Plot and display growth charts
§170.302 (g) Smoking status
§170.302 (h) Incorporate laboratory test results
§170.302 (i) Generate patient lists
§170.302 (j) Medication reconciliation
§170.302 (k) Submission to immunization registries
§170.302 (l) Public health surveillance
§170.302 (m) Patient-specific education resourcesCriteria # Certification Criteria
§170.302 (n) Automated measure calculation
§170.302 (o) Access control
§170.302 (p) Emergency access
§170.302 (q) Automatic log-off
§170.302 (r) Audit log
§170.302 (s) Integrity
§170.302 (t) Authentication
§170.302 (u) General encryption
§170.302 (v) Encryption when exchanging electronic health information
§170.302 (w) Accounting of disclosures (optional)
§170.304 (a) Computerized provider order entry
§170.304 (b) Electronic prescribing
§170.304 (c) Record demographics
§170.304 (d) Patient reminders
§170.304 (e) Clinical decision support
§170.304 (f) Electronic copy of health information
§170.304 (g) Timely access
§170.304 (h) Clinical summaries
§170.304 (i) Exchange clinical information and patient summary record
§170.304 (j) Calculate and submit clinical quality measures
§170.306 (a) Computerized provider order entryCriteria # Certification Criteria
§170.306 (b) Record demographics
§170.306 (c) Clinical decision support
§170.306 (d)
(1)
Electronic copy of health information
§170.306 (d)
(2)
Electronic copy of health information Note: For discharge
summary
§170.306 (e) Electronic copy of discharge instructions
§170.306 (f) Exchange clinical information and patient summary record
§170.306 (g) Reportable lab results
§170.306 (h) Advance directives
§170.306 (i) Calculate and submit clinical quality measures
It is important to see the criteria first established by the ONC in 2010. In 2015, the
new requirements expanded from 45 to 60 criteria organized into eight certification
criteria categories (ONC, 2015). The categories follow:
1. Clinical Processes
2. Care Coordination
3. Clinical Quality Measurement
4. Privacy and Security
5. Patient Engagement
6. Public Health
7. Health IT Design and Performance
8. Electronic Exchange
According to the Federal Register (2020a), the 21st Century Cures Act changed the
2015 criteria. This final rule by the ONC updated the 2015 criteria by removing several
certification criteria. This final rule implements certain provisions of the 21st Century
Cures Act, including the following: Conditions and Maintenance of Certification
requirements for [health IT] developers under the ONC Health IT Certification Program,
the voluntary certification of health IT for use by pediatric health care providers, and
reasonable and necessary activities that do not constitute information blocking.
(Federal Register, 2020b, para. 1) It also updated some of the “certification criteria toreflect standard and implementation specification updates. In consideration of public
comments, the final rule adds only two new technical certification criteria and two new
attestation-structured privacy and security certification criteria” (Federal Register,
2020a, para. 8).
Reproduced from: National Institute of Standards and Technology. (2010b). Meaningful
use test method: Approved test procedures version 1.0. www.nist.gov/news￾events/news/2010/08/nist-publishes-approved-testing-procedures-electronic-health￾records
Despite the points articulated in the ARRA, the IOM definition of an
EHR also remains a valid reference point. This definition is useful
because it has distilled all the possible features of an EHR into eight
essential components with an emphasis on functions that promote
patient safety—a universal denominator that everyone in health care
can accept. The eight components are (1) health information and
data, (2) results management, (3) order entry management, (4)
decision support, (5) electronic communication and connectivity, (6)
patient support, (7) administrative processes, and (8) reporting and
population health management (IOM, 2003). These initial core
components, as well as more recent modifications, described by the
Health Resources and Services Administration (Green, 2023) and
the components of a comprehensive EHR identified by the ONC
(Charles et al., 2015) are described in more detail here. With the
exception of EHR infrastructure functions, such as security and
privacy management, controlled medical vocabularies, and
interoperability standards, the 45 initial NIST standards easily map
onto the IOM categories.
Health Information and Data
Health information and data comprise the patient data required to
make sound clinical decisions, including demographics, medical and
nursing diagnoses, medication lists, allergies, and test results (IOM,
2003). This component of the EHR also includes care management
data regarding details of patient visits and interactions with patients,
medication reconciliation, consents, and directives (Green, 2023). A
comprehensive EHR will also contain nursing assessments and
problem lists (Charles et al., 2015). According to the ONC (2019a),the EHR is a digital, or electronic, record that can provide
comprehensive health information about patients. The EHR systems
are designed to disseminate patient information to healthcare
providers, laboratories, imaging centers, pharmacies, clinics, and
other organizations involved in the patient’s care.
Results Management
Results management is the ability to manage results of all types
electronically, including both current and historical laboratory and
radiology procedure reports (IOM, 2003).
Order Entry Management
Order entry management is the ability of a clinician to enter
medication and other care orders, including laboratory, microbiology,
pathology, radiology, nursing, and supply orders; ancillary services;
and consultations, directly into a computer (IOM, 2003). A
comprehensive EHR will also contain nursing orders (Charles et al.,
2015).
Decision Support
Decision support entails the use of computer reminders and alerts
to improve the diagnosis and care of a patient, including screening
for correct drug selection and dosing; screening for medication
interactions with other medications; preventive health reminders in
such areas as vaccinations, health risk screening, and detection; and
clinical guidelines for patient disease treatment (IOM, 2003). The
National Academy of Medicine (2017) reflected that the core
potential of health information technology is its promise to
revolutionize the data, information, knowledge, and wisdom (DIKW)
process and alleviate the challenges related to clinical decision
support. It believed that health information technology must be able
to “ameliorate the burden that exponentially expanding clinical
knowledge as well as care and choice complexity place on the finitetime and attention of clinicians, patients, and every other member of
the care team” (p. 1). Incorporating decision support into the EHR is
crucial for the delivery of the right data, information, and knowledge
to healthcare providers to offer the best support for advocated or
recommended clinical decisions. Therefore, the EHR must
consistently provide the best available data, information, and
knowledge in the context of the patient’s needs that can be applied
to the patient’s healthcare goals. Healthcare providers must be able
to access the right data and information at the right time and in the
proper format to facilitate their decision and care processes to
optimize patient care and outcomes.
Electronic Communication and Connectivity
Electronic communication and connectivity include the online
communication among healthcare team members and their care
partners and with their patients, which includes email; web
messaging; and an integrated health record within and across
settings, institutions, and telemedicine (IOM, 2003). This component
has been expanded to include the interfaces and interoperability
required to exchange health information with other providers,
laboratories, pharmacies (i.e., e-prescribing), patients, and
government disease registries (Green, 2023). The ONC (2019a)
believes that the EHR interfacing has the potential to reduce the
fragmentation of care by enhancing care coordination.
Patient Support
Patient support encompasses patient education and self-monitoring
tools, including interactive computer-based patient education, home
telemonitoring, and telehealth systems (IOM, 2003).
Administrative Processes
Administrative processes are activities carried out by the
electronic scheduling, billing, and claims management systems,including electronic scheduling for inpatient and outpatient visits and
procedures, electronic insurance eligibility validation, claim
authorization and prior approval, identification of possible research
study participants, and drug recall support (IOM, 2003).
Reporting and Population Health Management
Reporting and population health management are the data
collection tools that support public and private reporting
requirements, including data represented in a standardized
terminology and machine-readable format (IOM, 2003).
NIST has not provided an exhaustive list of all possible features
and functions of an EHR. Consequently, vendors’ EHR systems
combine different components in their offerings, and often a single
set of EHR components may not meet the needs of all clinicians and
patient populations. For example, a pediatric setting may demand
functions for immunization management, growth tracking, and more
robust order entry features that include weight-based dosing
(Spooner & Council on Clinical Information Technology, 2007). These
types of features may not be provided by all EHR systems, and it is
important to consider EHR certification to be a minimum standard.
See Figure 14-1 for a graphic depiction of leveraging the EHR.Courtesy of Dr. Dee McGonigle.
Figure 14-1 Leveraging the EHR
Description
Another group that focuses on EHR standards and functionality is
Health Level Seven International (HL7). Founded in 1987, “Health
Level Seven International (HL7) is a not-for-profit, ANSI-accredited
standards developing organization dedicated to providing a
comprehensive framework and related standards for the exchange,
integration, sharing, and retrieval of electronic health information that
supports clinical practice and the management, delivery and
evaluation of health services” (HL7 International, n.d., para. 1). This
group concentrates on developing the behind-the-scenes
programming standards (Level Seven is the application level of theOpen Systems Interconnection model) for interfaces to ensure
interoperability and connectivity among systems.Advantages of Electronic Health Records
Measuring the benefits of EHRs can be challenging. Possible
methods for estimating EHR benefits include using data supplied by
vendors that have been retrieved from their customers’ systems,
synthesizing and applying studies of overall EHR value, creating
logical engineering models of EHR value, summarizing focused
studies of elements of EHR value, and conducting and applying
information from site visits (ONC, 2017a; Thompson et al., 2007).
Early in their development, the four most-cited benefits of EHRs
were (1) increased delivery of guidelines-based care, (2) enhanced
capacity to perform surveillance and monitoring for disease
conditions, (3) reduction in medication errors, and (4) decreased use
of care (Chaudhry et al., 2006; ONC, 2017a). These findings were
echoed by two similar literature reviews. The first review, by Dorr et
al. (2007), focused on the use of informatics systems for managing
patients with chronic illness. They found that the processes of care
that were most positively affected were guidelines adherence, visit
frequency (i.e., a decrease in emergency department visits), provider
documentation, patient treatment adherence, and screening and
testing.
The second review, by Shekelle et al. (2006), was a cost-benefit
analysis of health information technology, completed by the Agency
for Healthcare Research and Quality, that studied the value of an
EHR in ambulatory care and pediatric settings, including its overall
economic value. Shekelle et al.’s study highlighted the common
findings already described but also noted that most of the data
available for review came from six leading healthcare organizations
in the United States, which underscored the challenge of
generalizing these results to the broader healthcare industry. The
challenge to generalize results persists in the hospital arena, with
fewer than 1% of U.S. hospitals, or eight leading organizations,
providing most of the experience with comprehensive EHRs (HIMSS,n.d.-a, n.d.-c, 2017). Finally, the literature reviews cited here
indicated that there are a limited number of hypothesis-testing
studies of EHRs and even fewer that have reported cost data.
The descriptive studies do have value, however, and should not be
hastily dismissed. Although not as rigorous in their design compared
to experimental studies, they do describe the advantages of EHRs
well and often include useful implementation recommendations
learned from practical experience. As identified in these types of
reviews, EHR advantages include simple benefits, such as no longer
having to interpret poor handwriting and handwritten orders; reduced
turnaround time for laboratory results in an emergency department;
and decreased time to administration of the first dose of antibiotics in
an inpatient nursing unit (Husk & Waxman, 2004; ONC, 2017a). In
the ambulatory care setting, improved management of cardiac￾related risk factors in patients with diabetes and effective patient
notification of medication recalls have been demonstrated to be
benefits of the EHR (Jain et al., 2005; Reed & Bernard, 2005). Two
other unique advantages that have great potential are the ability to
use the EHR and decision support functions to identify patients who
qualify for research studies or prescription drug benefits offered by
pharmaceutical companies at safety net clinics and hospitals (Embi
et al., 2005; Poprock, 2005). Safety net refers to U.S. medical
hospitals and clinics that have a mission, legal duty, or obligation to
afford health care to individuals irrespective of their ability to pay or
health insurance status, thus making all these facilities provide
access and care to all the U.S. populations.
The HIMSS Davies Award may be the best resource for combined
quantitative and qualitative results of successful EHR
implementation. The Davies Award recognizes healthcare
organizations that have achieved both excellence in implementation
and value from health information technology (HIMSS, n.d.-b;
Monegain, 2010). Winners demonstrate a significant avoidance of
medication errors, a decrease in medical records expenses, a
decrease in adverse drug reactions, and a reduction of duplicate
laboratory orders (HIMSS, 2020). There have been qualitative andquantitative evidence of high rates of end user adoption and
satisfaction with use of the EHR.
A 2011 study of the effects of EHR adoption on nurse perceptions
of quality of care, communication, and patient safety documented
that nurses report better care outcomes and fewer concerns with
care coordination and patient safety in hospitals with a basic EHR
(Kutney-Lee & Kelly, 2011). In this study, nurses perceived that in
hospitals with a functioning EHR, there was better communication
among staff, especially during patient transfers, and fewer
medication errors. Bayliss et al. (2015) demonstrated that an
integrated care system utilizing an EHR resulted in fewer hospital
readmissions and emergency room visits for over 12,000 seniors
with multiple health challenges.
Without an EHR system, any of these benefits would be very
difficult and costly to accomplish. Thus, despite limited standards
and published studies, there is enough evidence to embrace
widespread implementation of the EHR (Halamka, 2006; ONC,
2017a) and certainly enough evidence to warrant further study of the
use and benefits of EHRs. Box 14-2 describes some of the specific
CIS functions of an EHR.
BOX 14-2 THE EHR AS A CLINICAL INFORMATION
SYSTEM
Denise Tyler
A CIS is a technology-based system applied at the point of care and designed to
support care by providing instant access to information for clinicians. Early CISs,
implemented before the advent of EHRs, were limited in scope and provided such
information as interpretation of laboratory results or a medication formulary and drug
interaction information. With the implementation of EHRs, the goal of many
organizations is to expand the scope of the early CISs to become comprehensive
systems that provide clinical decision support; an electronic patient record; and, in
some instances, professional development and training tools. Benefits of such a
comprehensive system include easy access to patient data at the point of care;
structured and legible information that can be searched easily and lends itself to data
mining and analysis; and improved patient safety, especially the prevention of adverse
drug reactions and the identification of health risk factors, such as falls.TRACKING CLINICAL OUTCOMES
The ability to measure outcomes can be enhanced or impeded by the way an
information system is designed and used. Although many practitioners can paint a very
good picture of the patient by using a narrative (free text), employing this mode of
expression in a clinical system without the use of a coded entry makes it difficult to
analyze the care given or the patient’s response. Free-text reporting also leads to
inconsistencies of reporting from clinician to clinician and patient information that is
fragmented or disorganized. Such inconsistencies can limit the usefulness of patient
data to other clinicians and interfere with the ability to create reports from the data for
quality assurance and measurement purposes. Moreover, not all clinicians are equally
skilled at the free-text form of communication, which yields inconsistent quality of
documentation. Integrating standardized nursing terminologies into computerized
nursing documentation systems enhances the ability to use the data for reporting and
further research.
According to the IOM (2012), “Payers, healthcare delivery organizations and medical
product companies should contribute data to research and analytic consortia to support
expanded use of care data to generate new insights” (para. 2). Goldsmith (2019) stated
that “many health organizations are already taking advantage of technologies such as
AI [artificial intelligence] and advanced analytics to gain insights that help them improve
clinical treatment processes and outcomes” (para. 1). Clinical analytics are being used
to promote medical care outcomes research. The use of a CIS in conjunction with
standardized codes for patient clinical issues helps to support the rigorous analysis of
clinical data. Outcomes data produced as part of these analyses may include length of
stay, mortality, readmissions, and complications. Future goals include the ability to
compare data and outcomes across various institutions as a means of developing
clinical or best practices guidelines. With the implementation of a comprehensive CIS,
similar analyses of nursing outcomes could also be performed and shared. Likewise,
such a system could aid nurse administrators in cross-unit comparisons and staffing
decisions, especially when coupled with acuity systems data. In addition, clinical
analytics can support required data reporting functions, especially those required by
accreditation bodies.
SUPPORTING EVIDENCE-BASED PRACTICE
Evidence-based practice (EBP) can be thought of as the integration of clinical expertise
and best practices based on systematic research to enhance decision-making and
improve patient care. References supporting EBP, such as clinical guidelines, are
available for review at the click of a mouse or the execution of a few keystrokes. The
CIS’s prompting capabilities can also reinforce the practice of looking for evidence to
support nursing interventions rather than relying on how things have been done
historically. This approach enhances processing and understanding of the information
and allows the nurse to apply the information to other areas, which increases the
knowledge obtained about why certain conditions or responses result in prompts for
additional questions or actions.
To incorporate EBP into the practice of clinical nursing, the information needs to be
embedded into the computerized documentation system so that it is part of the
workflow. The most typical way of embedding this timely information is through clinicalpractice guidelines. The resulting interventions and clinical outcomes need to be
measurable and reportable for further research. The supporting documentation for the
EBP must be easily retrievable and meaningful. Links, reminders, and prompts can be
used as vehicles for transmission of this information. The format needs to allow for
rapid scanning, with the ability to expand the amount of information when more detail is
required or desired. Balancing a consistency in formatting with creativity can be difficult
but is worth the effort to stimulate an atmosphere for learning.
EBP is supported by translational research, which is an exciting movement that has
enormous potential for the sharing and use of EBP. The use of translational research to
support EBP may help to close the gap between what is known (i.e., research) and
what is done (i.e., practice).
THE CIS AS A STAFF DEVELOPMENT TOOL
Joy Hilty, a registered nurse from Kaweah Delta, devised a creative way to provide staff
development and education without taking staff away from the bedside to a classroom
setting. She created pop-up boxes on the opening charting screens for all staff who
chart on the computer. These pop-ups vary in color and content and include a short
piece of clinical information along with a question. Staff can earn vacations from these
pop-ups for as long as 14 days by emailing the correct answer to the question. This
medium has provided information, stimulation, and a definite benefit: the vacation. The
pop-up box education format has also encouraged staff members to share their
answers, thereby creating interaction, knowledge dissemination, and reinforcement of
the education provided.
Embedding EBP into nursing documentation can also increase the compliance with
Joint Commission core measures, such as providing information on influenza and
pneumococcal vaccinations to at-risk patients. In the author’s experience at Kaweah
Delta, educating staff via classes, flyers, and storyboards was not successful in
improving compliance with the documentation of immunization status or offering
education on these vaccinations to at-risk patients. Embedding the prompts,
information, and related questions into the nursing documentation with a link to the
protocol and educational material, however, improved the compliance to 96% for
pneumococcal vaccinations and to 95% for influenza vaccinations (Hettinger, 2007).
Downing et al. (2019) studied the implementation of a sepsis alert for inpatients using
patient-level randomization and leveraging EHR functionality for real-time alerts along
with a patient-centered design in a standardized clinical workflow. They found that even
though it is realistic to develop sepsis alerts using the EHR, further research is
necessary to comprehend how to design these sepsis alerts to actually change
healthcare providers’ behavior.
As more information is stored electronically, nurse informaticists must translate the
technology so that the input and retrieval of information are developed in a manner that
is easy for clinicians to learn and use. A highly usable product should decrease errors
and improve information entry and retrieval. Nurse informaticists must be able to work
with staff and expert users to design systems that meet the needs of the staff who will
actually use the systems. Even after the system has been installed, work continues to
develop and improve it because as staff members use it, they will be able to suggest
changes to improve it. This ongoing revision should result in a system that is mature
and meets the needs of the users.In an ideal world, all clinical documentation would be shared through a national
database, in a standard language, to enable evaluation of nursing care, increase the
body of evidence, and improve patient outcomes. With minimal effort, the information
would be translated into new research that could be analyzed and linked to new
evidence that would be intuitively applied to the CIS. Alerts would be meaningful and
specific to patient and provider. The steps required of the clinician to find current,
reliable information would be almost transparent, and the information would be
presented in a personalized manner, based on user preferences stored in the CIS.
REFERENCES
Downing, N., Rolnick, J., Poole, S., Hall, E., Wessels, A., Heidenreich, P., & Shieh, L.
(2019). Electronic health record-based clinical decision support alert for severe
sepsis: A randomised evaluation. BMJ Quality and Safety, 28(9), 762–768.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/bmjqs-2018-008765
Goldsmith, C. (2019). Three ways analytics are improving clinical outcomes.
https://cloudblogs.microsoft.com/industry-blog/health/2019/03/13/three-ways￾analytics-are-improving-clinical-outcomes/
Hettinger, M. (2007, March). Core measure reporting: Performance improvement.
Visalia, CA: Kaweah Delta Health Care District.
Institute of Medicine (IOM). (2012). Best care at lower cost.
https://www.nap.edu/catalog/13444/best-care-at-lower-cost-the-path-to-continuously￾learning
A more recent description of the benefits of an EHR by the ONC
(2022) emphasized that EHRs hold the promise of transforming
health care. Specifically, EHRs will lead to the following benefits:
Better health care by improving all aspects of patient care,
including safety, effectiveness, patient-centeredness,
communication, education, timeliness, efficiency, and equity
Better health by encouraging healthier lifestyles in the entire
population, including increased physical activity, better nutrition,
avoidance of behavioral risks, and wider use of preventative
care
Improved efficiencies and lower healthcare costs by promoting
preventative medicine and improved coordination of healthcare
services, as well as by reducing waste and redundant tests
Better clinical decision making by integrating patient information
from multiple sources (para. 3)The ONC (2019a) amended the benefits of an EHR that it had
listed in 2014. The ONC reminded us in the update that the EHR
provides information whenever and wherever it is needed to improve
patient care, increase patient engagement, enhance care
coordination, and advance diagnostics and patient outcomes with
practice efficiencies and cost savings.
The EHR can be an important source of information on patient
vulnerability risks related to social determinants of health (SDOH).
SDOH are the economic and social conditions, in relation to their
diffusion and distribution, among the population that actually
influence individual and group differences and disparities in health
status and health outcomes; “they are the conditions of the
environment in which people are born, live, learn, work, play,
worship, and age that affect a wide range of health, functioning, and
quality-of-life outcomes and risks” (Healthy People 2030, n.d., para.
1). SDOH have an effect on our life expectancy, morbidity, and
mortality. Paruk (2019) shared that the research has demonstrated
that “these factors contribute significantly to health and well-being.
For example, average life expectancy is reduced by 15 to 20 years
for people living in low-income communities, due to increased risk for
stroke, chronic disease and other health concerns” (para. 2). Healthy
People 2030 (n.d.) stated that there are five key domains for SDOH:
“(1) Economic Stability, (2) Education Access and Quality, (3) Health
Care Access and Quality, (4) Neighborhood and Built Environment,
and (5) Social and Community Context” (para. 1). The eHealth
Initiative (2019) provided examples of SDOH that included safe
housing and food markets, access to healthcare services,
opportunities for recreation, public safety and exposure to crime, and
access to emerging technologies.
To gain access to SDOH data, users must be able to extract data
found in unstructured text and diagnosis codes as well as what is
collected in the EHR. According to Paruk (2019), Allscripts has
“discovered more than 2 million SDoH-related diagnoses in our
[Allscripts’s] data lake of more than 40 million de-identified patient
records. Top diagnoses include disruption of family by separation or
divorce, disappearance or death of a family member andunemployment” (para. 7). Rohatgi (2022) advocates for the use of
specific screening tools to capture SDOH data rather than teasing
the information out of data lakes as described above. “While medical
care accounts for approximately 20 percent of healthcare, physical
environment, socioeconomic factors, and health-related behaviors,
all elements of SDOH account for about 80 percent of outcomes”
(para. 1). These insights into patients’ circumstances can help
nurses advocate for them and transform the healthcare delivery
system by tailoring services to meet their needs. If nurses can
improve the health of individual patients within the population, they
will be able to improve the population’s health.
Nurses can gather, analyze, and synthesize data and information
from each of the SDOH domains. It is imperative that they determine
the priorities they must focus on to improve health status. The CMS
(2023) developed an Accountable Health Communities model to
identify and attend to the SDOH needs that affect healthcare
utilization and costs; the model “addresses a critical gap between
clinical care and community services in the current health care
delivery system” (para. 1). This model is based on emerging proof
that tackling health-related social needs through improved clinical–
community relationships can improve health outcomes and decrease
costs. According to the CMS (2023), “unmet health-related social
needs, such as food insecurity and inadequate or unstable housing,
may increase the risk of developing chronic conditions, reduce an
individual’s ability to manage these conditions, increase health care
costs, and lead to avoidable health care utilization” (para. 2). The
Accountable Health Communities model is an example of data
analytics being used to guide our actions on the data and information
that exist at our fingertips. Working collectively with individuals,
communities, organizations, the healthcare delivery system, and
government agencies, data-driven solutions could be planned,
implemented, monitored, and evaluated. If nurses and healthcare
professionals can truly act on the data and information to advance
health equity, this could restructure social and physical environments
to promote better health for everyone.Standardized Terminology and the EHR
As we inch closer to interoperable EHRs, which provide for seamless
health information exchange among providers and healthcare
institutions, the need for standardizing terminologies becomes ever
clearer. Consider also the trend toward value-based care
reimbursements, for which healthcare data are mined “to
demonstrate nursing’s contributions to improving the cost, quality,
and efficiency of care, key elements of the value equation” (Ponte et
al., 2016, p. 127). EHR data must be formatted in a machine￾readable manner to support interoperable exchange of information
and data mining. An important distinction that needs to be made here
is the difference between interface terminologies (i.e., North
American Nursing Diagnosis Association [NANDA], Nursing
Interventions Classification [NIC], and Nursing Outcomes
Classification [NOC]) and reference terminologies (i.e., Systematized
Nomenclature of Medicine Clinical Terms [SNOMED CT] and Logical
Observation Identifiers Names and Codes [LOINC]). It is important to
understand the function of the nursing terminologies that interface
between nurses’ everyday language, used to describe patients and
document patient care, and the structured elements of the specific
information systems that nurses use. “The mapping of interface
terminologies to reference terminologies allows a standard, shared
vocabulary to communicate data across settings” (ONC, 2017b, p.
8).
Since the nursing standards support the EHR and nursing
practice, the ONC (2017b) assessed the “current state of
development and usage within the 12 Standard Nursing
Terminologies (SNT) recognized by the American Nurses
Association” (p. 4). The ONC conducted a “landscape assessment to
better understand the current state and challenges associated with
using terminologies and classifications to support nursing practice
within health information technology (health IT) solutions” (p. 4).They noted that some health systems found the language in some of
the terminologies awkward and difficult to implement, especially
when they are moving “to implement an interdisciplinary care plan
and other types of clinical documentation” (p. 23).
The various interface terminologies and their subsets are coded in
the EHR and typically presented to the user in drop-down menus.
Users may also be able to use a search function in the EHR to
identify the most appropriate term that represents the patient’s
condition. The electronic presentation of these terminologies
supports clinician workflow and promotes data retrieval and
exchange in future use.
HHS has designated the National Library of Medicine as the
central coordinating body for clinical terminologies. (See Box 14-3
for descriptions of administrative and reference terminologies used in
an EHR.) (See Chapter 6, History and Evolution of Nursing
Informatics, for a list of approved nursing terminologies.) In 2018, the
American Nurses Association reaffirmed its support for the use of
standardized terminologies:
BOX 14-3 STANDARD EHR ADMINISTRATIVE AND
REFERENCE TERMINOLOGIES
ADMINISTRATIVE (BILLING) TERMINOLOGIES
ICD-10 (International Classification of Diseases, Version 10): Medical diagnosis
code set
CPT (Current Procedural Terminology): Used to code procedures for billing
CLINICAL TERMINOLOGIES
SNOMED CT (Systematized Nomenclature of Medicine Clinical Terms):
Comprehensive clinical terminology (mapping to this terminology is ongoing,
including nursing-orders mapping)
LOINC (Logical Observation Identifier Names and Codes): Universal codes for
laboratory and clinical observations
RxNorm: Terminology system for drug names, which provides links to drug
vocabularies and interaction softwareUnified Medical Language System (UMLS) and the Metathesaurus: Support
terminology integration efforts and online searches (not a terminology system)
See the National Library of Medicine’s website for more comprehensive information:
www.nlm.nih.gov/research/umls/Snomed/nursing_terminology_resources.html.
The purpose of this position statement is to reaffirm the American Nurses
Association’s (ANA) support for the use of recognized terminologies supporting
nursing practice as valuable representations of nursing practice and to promote the
integration of those terminologies into information technology solutions.
Standardized terminologies have become a significant vehicle for facilitating
interoperability between different concepts, nomenclatures, and information
systems. (para. 1)
Because no single model of standardized terminology for health
care or nursing can represent all the contributions to the health of a
patient, work is ongoing to map terminologies to one another. For
example, Kim et al. (2014) studied the degree of similarity between
the International Classification for Nursing Practice (ICNP) and the
SNOMED CT. Although they identified some areas of overlap, they
cautioned that there is still more work to be done to truly represent
nursing concepts in the EHR. Ponte et al. (2016) issued a call to
action to chief nursing officers (CNOs): “CNOs must begin partnering
with and influencing EHR developers and vendors to ensure the
EHRs implemented in their organizations capture nursing content
using a standardized taxonomy that is evidence based and mapped
to SNOMED-CT and LOINC” (p. 127). Ongoing efforts to map
nursing problem lists to SNOMED CT are evident in the work of
Matney et al. (2012) and on the National Library of Medicine website
(www.nlm.nih.gov/research/umls/Snomed/nursing_terminology_reso
urces.html). It is probably safe to say that the number of types and
the variability of EHRs are likely to contract and converge as the
demand for robust systems to support interoperability expands.
Nurse informatics specialists and CNOs participating in the selection
and implementation of EHRs must ask a critical question: To what
extent are nursing care contributions visible, retrievable, and
accurately represented in this EHR?Ownership of Electronic Health Records
The selection and implementation of an EHR has the potential to
affect every member of a healthcare organization. The process of
becoming a successful owner of an EHR requires multiple steps and
integrating the EHR into the organization’s day-to-day operations
and long-term vision as well as into clinicians’ day-to-day practice. All
members of the healthcare organization—from the executive level to
the clinician at the point of care—must feel a sense of ownership to
make the implementation successful for themselves, their
colleagues, and their patients. Successful ownership of an EHR may
be defined in part by the level of clinician adoption of the tool, and
this section reviews key steps and strategies for the selection,
implementation, evaluation, and optimization of an EHR in pursuit of
that goal.
The first step of ownership is typically a vendor selection process
for a certified, commercially available EHR. Although clinicians, as
the primary end users, should drive the project, the assessment
should also include the needs and readiness of the executive
leadership, information technology, and project management teams.
In addition, this pre-acquisition phase should concentrate on
understanding the current state of the health information technology
industry to identify appropriate questions and the next steps in the
selection process (American Organization of Nurse Executives,
2009). These first steps begin to identify organizational risks related
to successful implementation and pave the way for initiating a
change management process to educate the organization about the
future state of delivering health care with an EHR system.
The second step of the selection process is to choose a system
based on the organization’s current and predicted needs. It is
common during this phase to see a demonstration of several
vendors’ EHR products. Based on the completed needs assessment,
the organization should establish key evaluation criteria to comparethe different vendors and products. These criteria should include
both subjective and objective items that cover such topics as
common clinical workflows, decision support, reporting, usability,
technical build, and maintenance of the system. Providing the vendor
with these guidelines will ensure that the process meets the
organization’s needs; however, it is also essential to let the vendor
demonstrate a proposed future state from its own perspective. This
activity is critical to ensuring that the vendor’s and the organization’s
visions are well aligned (Konschak & Shiple, n.d.). It also helps spark
dialogue about the possible future state of clinical work at the
organization and the change required in obtaining it. Such
demonstrations not only enable the organization to compare and
contrast the features and functions of different systems but also are
a good way to engage the organization’s members in being a part of
this strategic decision.
Implementation planning should occur concurrently with the
selection process, particularly the assessment of the scope of the
work, initial sequencing of the EHR components to be implemented,
and resources required. However, this step begins in earnest once a
vendor and a product have been selected. In addition to further
refining the implementation plan, this is the time to identify key
metrics by which to measure the EHR’s success. An organization
may realize numerous benefits from implementing an EHR. It should
choose metrics that match its overall strategy and goals in the
coming years and may include expected improvements in financial,
quality, and clinical outcomes. Commonly used metrics focus on
reductions in the number of duplicate laboratory tests through
duplicate orders alerting, reductions in the number of adverse drug
events through the use of barcode medication administration,
meaningful use objectives and measures, and the EHR advantages
mentioned earlier in this chapter. To ensure that the desired benefits
are realized, it is important to avoid choosing so many that they
become meaningless or unobtainable and to carefully and practically
define those that are selected, measure before and after the
implementation, and assign accountability to a member of the
organization to ensure that the work is completed.End user adoption of the EHR is also essential to realizing its
benefits. Clinicians must be engaged to use the EHR successfully in
their practice and daily workflows so that data may be captured to
drive the decision support that underlies so many of the advantages
and metrics described. To promote adoption, a change management
plan must be developed in conjunction with the EHR implementation
plan. The most effective change management plans offer end users
several exposures to the system and relevant workflows in advance
of its use and continue through the go-live and post-live time periods.
Successful pre-live strategies include involving end users as subject
matter experts to validate the EHR workflow design and content
build, hosting end user usability testing sessions, shadowing end
users in their current daily work in parallel with the new system, and
conducting formal training activities. The goal of these pre-live
activities is not only to ensure that the EHR implementation will meet
end users’ needs but also to assess the effect of the new EHR on
current workflow and processes. The larger the effect, the more
change management is required above and beyond system training.
For example, simulation laboratory experiences may be offered to
more thoroughly rehearse a significant workflow change; executive
leaders may need to convey their support and expectations of
clinicians about a new way of working; and, generally, more
anticipatory guidance is required to communicate to those affected
by the changes.
Training may be delivered in a variety of media. Often, a
combination of approaches works best, including classroom time;
electronic learning; independent exercises; and peer-to-peer, at-the￾elbow support. Training must be workflow based and reflect real
clinical processes. It must be planned and budgeted for through the
post-live period to ensure that competency with the system is
assessed at the go-live point and any necessary retraining or
reinforcements are made in the 30 to 60 days post-live. This process
not only promotes reliability and safe use of the system as it was
designed but also can have a positive effect on end users’ morale;
users will feel that they are being supported beyond the initial go-liveperiod and have an opportunity to move from basic skills to
advanced proficiency with the system.
Finally, the implementation plan should account for the long-term
optimization of the EHR. This step is commonly overlooked and
often results in benefits falling short of expectations because the
resources are not available to realize them permanently. It also often
means the difference between end users of EHRs merely surviving
the change versus becoming savvy about how to adopt the EHR as
another powerful clinical tool, much as clinicians have embraced
such technologies as the stethoscope (ONC, 2017a). Optimization
activities of the EHR should be considered a routine part of the
organization’s operations and resourced accordingly and should
emphasize the continued involvement of clinician users to identify
ways that the EHR can enable the organization to achieve its overall
mission. Many organizations start implementations of EHRs with the
goal of transforming their care delivery and operations. An endeavor
that differs from simply automating a previously manual or
fragmented process, transformation often includes steps to improve
the process to realize better patient care outcomes or added
efficiency. Although some transformation is experienced with the
initial use of the system, most of this work is done after
implementation and relies on widespread clinician adoption of the
EHR. As such, it makes optimization a critical component to
successful ownership of an EHR.Flexibility and Expandability
Health care is as unique as the patients themselves. It is delivered in
a variety of settings, for a variety of reasons, over the course of a
patient’s lifetime. In addition, patients rarely receive all their care
from one healthcare organization; indeed, choice is a cornerstone of
the U.S. healthcare system. An EHR must be flexible and
expandable to meet the needs of patients and caregivers in all these
settings, despite the challenges.
At a very basic level, there is as yet no EHR system available that
can provide all functions for all specialties to such a degree that all
clinicians would successfully adopt it. Consider oncology as an
example. Most systems do not yet provide the advanced ordering
features required for the complex treatment planning undertaken in
this field. An oncologist could use a general system, but they would
not find as many benefits without additional features for
chemotherapy ordering, lifetime cumulative dose tracking, or the
ability to adjust a treatment day schedule and recalculate a schedule
for the remaining days of the plan. Some EHRs do a good job of
supporting the work of nursing staff and physicians but are not as
supportive of the work of clinicians, such as dieticians, physical and
occupational therapists, and other healthcare personnel. These
systems will continue to evolve and support interprofessional
collaboration as more healthcare professionals are exposed to the
power of these systems to support their work and become better
able to articulate their specific needs.
Conditions are improving every day at both vendor and healthcare
organizations alike. Some improvements were recently fueled by
ARRA incentives (see Box 14-4).
BOX 14-4 CLOUDY EHRSA paradigm shift from healthcare facility–owned, machine-based computing to off-site,
vendor-owned cloud computing with web browser–based, log-on–accessible data,
software, and hardware could link systems together and reduce costs. Hospitals with
shrinking budgets and extreme IT needs are exploring the successes in this area
achieved in other industries, such as Amazon’s S3. As providers strive to implement
potent EHRs, they are looking for cloud-based models that offer the necessary
functionality without having to assume the burden associated with all the hardware,
software, application, and storage issues. However, in the face of the HITECH Act and
its associated penalties, how can nurses and healthcare professionals overcome the
challenges to realize the benefits of this approach? Cloud computing has both
advantages and disadvantages, and while healthcare providers explore this new
paradigm, they must relinquish control as they continue to strive to maintain security.
The vendors that are responsible for developing and maintaining this new environment
are also facing challenges originating from both legislatures and healthcare providers.
As the vendors and healthcare providers work together to improve the implementation
and adoption of the cloud-based EHR, the sky is the limit!
ARRA has also set the expectation that despite the large number
of settings in which a patient may receive care, a minimum set of
data from those records must flow, or “interoperate,” among each
setting and the unique EHR systems used in those settings. Today,
interoperability exists through what is called a Continuity of Care
Document (CCD). This data set includes information about a
patient’s health care, such as patient demographics, medications,
allergies, and problems. The document is formatted according to
HL7 standards and is both machine and human readable.
Despite this positive step forward, financial and patient privacy
hurdles remain to be overcome to achieve an expansive EHR. Most
health care is delivered by small community practices and hospitals,
many of which do not have the financial or technical resources to
implement robust, interoperable EHRs. HHS recently loosened
regulations so that physicians may now be able to receive healthcare
information technology software, hardware, and implementation
services from hospitals to alleviate the financial burden placed on
individual providers and foster more widespread adoption of the
EHR. Interoperable EHRs facilitate data sharing to help “coordinate
care, reduce costs, manage population health, improve patient
experience and outcomes, and address health equity challenges”
(Juhn & Galvez, 2022, p. 426).Accountable Care Organizations and the
EHR
EHRs with data-sharing capabilities are central to the support of
Accountable Care Organizations (ACOs), a payment incentive
program established by the CMS (2022). As discussed elsewhere,
this program of shared medical and financial responsibility is
designed to provide quality, coordinated care while limiting costs.
Some of the core information technology requirements for an ACO
are EHRs, HIEs, care management systems, and analytics and
reporting systems (Welter, 2015; Figure 14-2). A robust EHR can
support many of these functions:Data from: ECG Consultants. (2015). The use of technology in healthcare reform: IT
considerations for accountable care. www.ecgmc.com/thought-leadership/articles/the-use￾of-technology-in-healthcare-reform-it-considerations-for-accountable-care.
Figure 14-2 How EHRs Support Accountable Care
Description
EHR solutions that are interoperable across organizations can significantly reduce
the cost and complication of IT infrastructure by creating full EHR visibility between
providers. This shared visibility reduces or eliminates the need to participate inHIEs or invest in solutions to integrate data across different EHR platforms. Many
EHRs also can serve as a program’s care management system, eliminating the
need for a separate system to document care management efforts and help care
teams engage with patients. (Welter, 2015, para. 5)The Future
Despite the challenges, the future of EHRs is an exciting one for
patients and clinicians alike. Benefits may be realized by
implementing stand-alone EHRs, as described here, but the more
significant transformation will come as interoperability is realized
between systems.
The U.S. population depends on health IT to “securely, efficiently,
and effectively share electronic health information with patient
consent to achieve better care, smarter spending and healthier
people” (ONC, 2019b, para. 1). The barriers that must be eliminated
are the lack of confidence and trust in the healthcare delivery
system, lack of standardized health information, payment and
reimbursement issues, and the fact that privacy laws are not
standard and can lead to misinterpretation (ONC, 2019b, para. 2).
Patients and healthcare providers must continue to fight to overcome
the barriers to interoperability because it has the potential to truly
transform our healthcare delivery system “from a static one to a
learning health system that improves individual, community and
population health” (ONC, 2019b, para. 1).
The future also holds tremendous potential for EHR features and
functions that will include not only more sophisticated decision
support and clinical reporting capacity but also improved support for
patients and all healthcare professionals; improved biomedical
device integration, ease of use, and intuitiveness; and access
through more hardware platforms (see the Applications: Enhancing
the EHR box).
Implementation of robust and interoperable EHRs is becoming
more commonplace. As more organizations adopt EHRs, broader
dissemination of implementation best practices will be facilitated,
with the hope of further shortening the time required to take
advantage of advanced EHR features.APPLICATIONS: ENHANCING THE EHR
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE (AI)
Siwicki (2019) reported on Vanderbilt’s AI-powered EHR voice assistant. This “VEVA
tool has helped improve caregiver productivity and efficiency” (para. 1). Healthcare
providers can interact with the EHR using their voice through natural speech
recognition. Using AI is valued because it saves time by decreasing the number of
clicks per query.
PATIENT ENGAGEMENT
The ONC (2023) stated that we should realize the opportunity to engage patients in
their health and care by using and expanding EHR patient portals. The patient portals
have the ability to streamline and simplify clinical workflows while improving patient
engagement by meeting patients’ needs. You could provide the ability to schedule an
appointment or reorder prescription refills, thereby drawing your patients to the EHR
portal.
BLOCKCHAIN
Carfagno (2018) reminded us of the fragmented medical records in health care across
multiple providers and how healthcare professionals could miss important patient
information. Blockchain technology is a secure technology that could cure this
transactional inefficiency and bring all these pieces of information concerning a patient
together so that all the records are in sync all the time. Blockchain is being
implemented in the Mayo Clinic EHR. Because blockchain technologies enhance
EHRs, they can streamline processes, such as associating or connecting patients with
their EHR information to activate insurance reimbursement payments related to a
specific disease process without having to reverify the diagnosis or file a claim. This
process could also expedite the filling of a prescription because all the information
would be available, including whether this drug is the best drug, the insurance benefit
related to what the company will cover, and even so far as to make sure that the
pharmacy is able to provide the patient with the specific drug that was ordered. As an
example of one transactional inefficiency that could be addressed through blockchain
technology, think of insurance, a resource-intensive area. With blockchain technology,
the physician’s office staff would not need to know every insurance plan’s benefits or
make numerous calls to find out, and the patient would not have to play the waiting
game to see whether the drug is approved and available.
REFERENCES
Carfagno, J. (2018). Future of medicine: Mayo Clinic to incorporate blockchain in
electronic health records. DocWire News. https://www.docwirenews.com/docwire￾pick/future-of-medicine-picks/mayo-clinic-to-incorporate-blockchain-in-electronic￾health-records/Office of the National Coordinator for Health Information Technology (ONC). (2020).
Patient engagement playbook. https://www.healthit.gov/playbook/patient￾engagement/
Siwicki, B. (2019). Vanderbilt’s AI-powered EHR voice assistant saves time for
caregivers. Healthcare IT News. https://www.healthcareitnews.com/news/vanderbilts￾ai-powered-ehr-voice-assistant-saves-time-caregivers
In the future, we can expect to see more enhanced EHRs housed
in the cloud, usable patient portals as we move toward more patient￾centered health care, the integration of wearables and data into the
EHR, the expansion of telemedicine applications for rural patients
and those with chronic illnesses, precision medicine advances
supported by data analytics, integration of both care and wellness
plans, and better consumer engagement, making the care plan a
living document (Sterrett et al., 2022).Summary
It is an important time for health care and technology. EHRs are
evolving to include SDOH, AI, blockchain, and patient engagement
strategies. EHRs will remain central to shaping the future of health
care. In an ideal world, all nurses, from entry-level personnel to
executives, would have a basic competency in nursing informatics,
which would enable them to participate fully in shaping the future use
of technology in the practice at a national level and wherever care is
delivered. Such initiatives as Technology Informatics Guiding
Education Reform (TIGER) and the important nursing terminology
work are imperative for better integration and, ultimately, more
visibility of nursing contributions to health care (HIMSS, n.d.-d).
THOUGHT-PROVOKING QUESTIONS
1. What are the implications for nursing education in relation to preparing nursing
students to leverage the EHR in caring for patients, communicating with other
healthcare professionals, decision-making, and research?
2. What are the ethical considerations related to interoperability and a shared EHR?
3. What are the SDOH? Describe in detail the areas of the EHR where the SDOH
would be captured. In your description, make sure to detail the data and
information. State whether the data would be structured or unstructured and how
meaningful SDOH information could be extracted.
4. You are asked about a diagnosis with which you are unfamiliar. Where would you
start looking for information? How would you determine the validity of the
information?
5. Think about the documentation and knowledge management functions of your
specialty. If you had the opportunity to create a wish list, what would you include in
an EHR to support your work?
6. Reflect on EHRs. Describe in detail how an EHR engages healthcare providers.
How can it engage a patient? Provide a comprehensive rationale for each way you
determine you could use the EHR to engage your patient.R E F E R E N C E S
American Nurses Association. (2018, April 19). Inclusion of recognized terminologies
supporting nursing practice within electronic health records and other health information
technology solutions. www.nursingworld.org/practice-policy/nursing-excellence/official￾position-statements/id/Inclusion-of-Recognized-Terminologies-Supporting-Nursing￾Practice-within-Electronic-Health-Records
American Organization of Nurse Executives. (2009). AONE guiding principles for the nurse
executive to enhance clinical outcomes by leveraging technology.
www.aonl.org/sites/default/files/aone/Leveraging-Technology.pdf
Bayliss, E. A., Ellis, J. L., Shoup, J. A., Chan, Z., McQuillan, D. B., & Steiner, J. F. (2015).
Effect of continuity of care on hospital utilization for seniors with multiple medical
conditions in an integrated health care system. Annals of Family Medicine, 13(2), 123–
129. http://dx.doi.org/10.1370/afm.1739
Burkey, A. (2015, March 9). 7 tips for EMR success from Stage 7 hospitals. Healthcare IT
News. www.healthcareitnews.com/news/7-tips-emr-success-stage-7-hospitals
Bush, G. W. (2004, January 20). Text of President Bush’s 2004 State of the Union Address.
Washington Post. www.washingtonpost.com/wp￾srv/politics/transcripts/bushtext_012004.html
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. (2022). Accountable Care Organizations
(ACOs): General information. www.cms.gov/priorities/innovation/innovation-models/aco
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. (2023). Accountable health communities
model. https://innovation.cms.gov/innovation-models/ahcm
Charles, D., Gabriel, M., & Searcy, T. (2015, April). Adoption of electronic health record
systems among U.S. non-federal acute care hospitals: 2008–2014. Office of the National
Coordinator for Health Information Technology. www.healthit.gov/sites/default/files/data￾brief/2014HospitalAdoptionDataBrief.pdf
Chaudhry, B., Wang, J., Wu, S., Maglione, M., Mojica, W., Roth, E., Morton, S. C., &
Shekelle, P. (2006). Systematic review: Impact of health information technology on
quality, efficiency, and costs of medical care. Annals of Internal Medicine, 144(10), E-12–
E-22. http://cs.oswego.edu/~bichinda/isc471-hci571/impactofHIT.pdf
Dorr, D., Bonner, L. M., Cohen, A. N., Shoai, R. S., Perrin, R., Chaney, E., & Young, A.
(2007). Informatics systems to promote improved care for chronic illness: A literature
review. Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association, 14(2), 156–163.
https://doi.org/10.1197/jamia.M2255
ECG Consultants. (2015). The use of technology in healthcare reform: IT considerations for
accountable care. www.ecgmc.com/thought-leadership/articles/the-use-of-technology-in￾healthcare-reform-it-considerations-for-accountable-care
eHealth Initiative. (2019). The importance of social determinants of health data.
www.ehidc.org/sites/default/files/resources/files/Importance%20of%20SDOH%20Data%
20March%202019.pdf
Embi, P. J., Jain, A., Clark, J., Bizjack, S., Hornung, R., & Harris, C. M. (2005). Effect of a
clinical trial alert system on physician participation in trial recruitment. Archives ofInternal Medicine, 165(19), 2272–2277. http://dx.doi.org/10.1001/archinte.165.19.2272
Federal Register. (2020a). 21st Century Cures Act: Interoperability, information blocking,
and the ONC health IT certification program. Final rule.
www.federalregister.gov/documents/2020/05/01/2020-07419/21st-century-cures-act￾interoperability-information-blocking-and-the-onc-health-it-certification
Federal Register. (2020b). Department of Health and Human Services: Office of the
Secretary, 45 CFR Parts 170 and 171, RIN 0955–AA01, 21st Century Cures Act:
Interoperability, information blocking, and the ONC health IT certification program.
www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-2020-05-01/pdf/2020-07419.pdf
Green, J. (2023, January 5). What are the core functions of EHR? EHR in Practice.
www.ehrinpractice.com/ehr-core-functions.html
Halamka, J. D. (2006). Health information technology: Shall we wait for the evidence?
Annals of Internal Medicine, 144(10), 775–776. https://doi.org/10.7326/0003-4819-144-
10-200605160-00013
Healthcare Information and Management Systems Society. (n.d.-a). Electronic medical
record adoption model: EMRAM. www.himss.org/what-we-do-solutions/digital-health￾transformation/maturity-models/electronic-medical-record-adoption-model-emram
Healthcare Information and Management Systems Society. (n.d.-b). HIMSS Davies Award
of Excellence. www.himss.org/what-we-do-opportunities/davies-award-excellence
Healthcare Information and Management Systems Society. (n.d.-c). Stage 6 and 7 facilities
by location. www.himss.org/what-we-do-solutions/digital-health￾transformation/achievement-list
Healthcare Information and Management Systems Society. (n.d.-d). TIGER: An initiative for
technology and health informatics education. www.himss.org/tiger-initiative-technology￾and-health-informatics-education
Healthcare Information and Management Systems Society. (2014). 6th annual HIMSS
security survey. www.himss.org/sites/hde/files/2013_HIMSS_Security_Survey.pdf
Healthcare Information and Management Systems Society. (2017). EMRAM overview and
criteria update. www.himss.org/what-we-do-solutions/digital-health￾transformation/maturity-models/electronic-medical-record-adoption-model-emram
Healthcare Information and Management Systems Society. (2020). 2019 HIMSS Davies
Award winners: Improving health and wellness through information and technology.
www.himss.org/resource-news/2019-himss-davies-award-winners
Healthy People 2030. (n.d.). Social determinants of health. U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services. https://health.gov/healthypeople/priority-areas/social-determinants￾health
HL7 International. (n.d.). About HL7. www.hl7.org/about/index.cfm?ref=nav
Husk, G., & Waxman, D. A. (2004). Using data from hospital information systems to improve
emergency care. Academic Emergency Medicine, 11(11), 1237–1244.
https://doi.org/10.1197/j.aem.2004.08.019
Institute of Medicine. (2001). Crossing the quality chasm: A new health system for the 21st
century. National Academies Press.
Institute of Medicine. (2003). Key capabilities of an electronic health record system: Letter
report. National Academies Press.Jain, A., Atreja, A., Harris, C. M., Lehmann, M., Burns, J., & Young, J. (2005). Responding to
the rofecoxib withdrawal crisis: A new model for notifying patients at risk and their
healthcare providers. Annals of Internal Medicine, 142(3), 182–186.
https://doi.org/10.7326/0003-4819-142-3-200502010-00008
Juhn, E., & Galvez, E. (2022). Incentivizing data sharing among health plans, hospitals, and
providers to improve quality. The American Journal of Managed Care, 28(12), e426–
e427. https://doi.org/10.37765/ajmc.2022.89277
Kim, T. Y., Hardiker, N., & Coenen, A. (2014). Inter-terminology mapping of nursing
problems. Journal of Biomedical Informatics, 49, 213–220.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbi.2014.03.001
Konschak, C., & Shiple, D. (n.d.). System selection: Aligning vision and technology.
Divurgent. http://divurgent.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/12/White-Paper.Vendor￾Selection.vfinal.pdf
Kutney-Lee, A., & Kelly, D. (2011). The effect of hospital electronic health record adoption
on nurse-assessed quality of care and patient safety. Journal of Nursing Administration,
41(11), 466–472. http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/NNA.0b013e3182346e4b
Matney, S. A., Warren, J. J., Evans, J. L., Kim, T. Y., Coenen, A., & Auld, V. A. (2012).
Development of the nursing problem list subset of SNOMED CT. Journal of Biomedical
Informatics, 45(4), 683–688. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jbi.2011.12.003
Monegain, B. (2010, February 24). Davies goes to multicare. Healthcare IT News.
www.healthcareitnews.com/news/davies-goes-multicare
National Academy of Medicine. (2017). Optimizing strategies for clinical decision support.
https://nam.edu/wp-content/uploads/2017/11/Optimizing-Strategies-for-Clinical-Decision￾Support.pdf
National Institute of Standards and Technology. (2010a). Standards for health IT: Meaningful
use and beyond. www.nist.gov/speech-testimony/standards-health-it-meaningful-use￾and-beyond
National Institute of Standards and Technology. (2010b). Meaningful use test method:
Approved test procedures version 1.0. www.nist.gov/news-events/news/2010/08/nist￾publishes-approved-testing-procedures-electronic-health-records
National Institutes of Health. (2006, April). Electronic health records overview. MITRE
Corporation.
https://webarchive.library.unt.edu/eot2008/20090114061920/http://www.ncrr.nih.gov/publi
cations/informatics/EHR.pdf
Office of the National Coordinator for Health Information Technology. (n.d.). National trends
in hospital and physician adoption of electronic health records.
www.healthit.gov/data/quickstats/national-trends-hospital-and-physician-adoption￾electronic-health-records
Office of the National Coordinator for Health Information Technology. (2015). Understanding
certified health IT. www.healthit.gov/sites/default/files/understanding-certified-health-it￾2.pdf
Office of the National Coordinator for Health Information Technology. (2017a). Benefits of
EHRs. www.healthit.gov/topic/health-it-and-health-information-exchange-basics/benefits￾ehrsOffice of the National Coordinator for Health Information Technology. (2017b). Standard
nursing terminologies: A landscape analysis.
www.healthit.gov/sites/default/files/snt_final_05302017.pdf
Office of the National Coordinator for Health Information Technology. (2019a). Electronic
health records: The basics. www.healthit.gov/faq/what-information-does-electronic￾health-record-ehr-contain
Office of the National Coordinator for Health Information Technology. (2019b). Shared
nationwide interoperability roadmap: The journey to better health and care.
www.healthit.gov/infographic/shared-nationwide-interoperability-roadmap-journey-better￾health-and-care
Office of the National Coordinator for Health Information Technology. (2022). Advantages of
electronic health records. www.healthit.gov/faq/what-are-advantages-electronic-health￾records
Office of the National Coordinator for Health Information Technology. (2023). 2015 edition
cures update test method. www.healthit.gov/topic/certification-ehrs/2015-edition-cures￾update-test-method
Paruk, F. (2019, January 8). Uncovering social determinants of health in your EHR data.
Becker’s Hospital Review. www.beckershospitalreview.com/hospital-physician￾relationships/uncovering-social-determinants-of-health-in-your-ehr-data.html
Ponte, P., Somerville, J., & Adams, J. (2016). Assuring the capture of standardized nursing
data: A call to action for chief nursing officers. International Journal of Nursing
Knowledge, 27(3), 127–128. https://doi.org/10.1111/2047-3095.12136
Poprock, B. (2005, September). Using Epic’s alternative medications reminder to reduce
prescription costs and encourage assistance programs for indigent patients. Paper
presented at the Epic Systems Corporation Users Group Meeting, Madison, WI.
Reed, H. L., & Bernard, E. (2005). Reductions in diabetic cardiovascular risk by community
primary care providers. International Journal of Circumpolar Health, 64(1), 26–37.
https://doi.org/10.3402/ijch.v64i1.17951
Rohatgi, A. (2022). Improve patient outcomes by integrating SDOH data into EHRs. Journal
of AHIMA. https://journal.ahima.org/page/improve-patient-outcomes-by-integrating-sdoh￾data-into-ehrs
Shekelle, P. G., Morton, S. C., & Keeler, E. B. (2006). Costs and benefits of health
information technology. Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality.
www.ahrq.gov/downloads/pub/evidence/pdf/hitsyscosts/hitsys.pdf
Spooner, S. A., & Council on Clinical Information Technology. (2007). Special requirements
of electronic health record systems in pediatrics. Pediatrics, 119(3), 631–637.
https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2006-3527
Sterrett, L., Batra, N., Harris, C., Talbot, C., Chang, C., & Malhotra, R. (2022, October 19).
Preparing for the next generation of electronic health records. Deloitte Insights.
www2.deloitte.com/us/en/insights/industry/health-care/ehr-systems-the-future-of￾electronic-health-records.html
Thompson, D. I., Osheroff, J., Classen, D., & Sittig, D. F. (2007). A review of methods to
estimate the benefits of electronic medical records in hospitals and the need for a
national database. Journal of Healthcare Information Management, 21(1), 62–68.Welter, T. (2015, May 13). The use of technology in healthcare reform: IT considerations for
accountable care. ECG Management Consultants. www.ecgmc.com/thought￾leadership/articles/the-use-of-technology-in-healthcare-reform-it-considerations-for￾accountable-careC H A P T E R 1 5
Informatics Tools to Promote
Patient Safety, Quality
Outcomes, and
Interdisciplinary Collaboration
OBJECTIVES
1. Explore the characteristics of and strategies for developing a safety culture.
2. Appreciate the effect of informatics technology on patient safety.
3. Recognize how human factors contribute to patient safety and errors.
4. Explore interdisciplinary collaboration and communication in relation to patient
safety.
KEY TERMS
adverse event
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ)
alarm fatigue
application (app)
barcode medication administration (BCMA)
clinical decision support (CDS)
computerized provider order entry (CPOE)
electronic medication administration system (eMAR)
failure modes and effects analysis (FMEA)
Government Accountability Office (GAO)
high-hazard drug
human factors engineeringinterdisciplinary collaboration
interprofessional collaboration
just culture
never event
radio-frequency identification (RFID)
root-cause analysis
safety culture
sentinel event
smart pump
smart room
systems engineering
wearable technology
workaroundIntroduction
Nursing professionals have an ethical duty to ensure patient safety.
According to Lavin et al. (2015), “Direct care nurses, at their core,
are risk managers. They attach meaning to what is and anticipate
‘what might be’” (para. 8). As the media and patients circulate stories
about the lack of safety in healthcare institutions, it is no wonder that
healthcare consumers are skeptical and providers are wary. A study
out of Johns Hopkins University (McMains, 2016) suggested that
medical errors are the third-leading cause of death in the United
States. Versel (2016) reminded us, however, that “it’s not the first
time someone has called medical error the No. 3 cause of death in
the U.S. John T. James, founder of a group called Patient Safety
America, did that in a 2013 report in the Journal of Patient Safety”
(para. 2). The World Health Organization (2019) offered this
perspective: “It is estimated that there is a 1 in 3 million risk of dying
while travelling by airplane. In comparison, the risk of patient death
occurring due to a preventable medical accident, while receiving
health care, is estimated to be 1 in 300” (para. 1). In 2022,
Wilsonlaw.com outlined 10 medical errors that can lead to patient
deaths, many of which can be addressed by informatics and
technology. They include communication issues, information flow
issues, medication errors, poor organizational transfer of knowledge,
misdiagnosis, delayed diagnosis, patient identification and
assessment issues, staffing and workflow issues, medical equipment
malfunctions, and inadequate organizational policies.
Increasing demands on professionals in complex and fast-paced
healthcare environments may lead them to cut corners or develop
workarounds that deviate from accepted and expected practice
protocols. These deviations are not carried out deliberately to put
patients at risk but rather are often practiced in the interest of saving
time or preserving a usual workflow or because the organizational
culture is such that risky behaviors are commonplace. Occasionally,these inappropriate actions or omissions of appropriate actions result
in harm or significant risk of harm to patients. The Patient Safety
Network (2022) outlined the issues created by the COVID-19
pandemic and emphasized the additional safety risks for both
patients and healthcare workers. During infection surges, we faced
shortages of ventilators, catheters, and personal protective
equipment (PPE) supplies. Typical unit workflows, staffing (staff were
infected), and communication (wearing PPE) were disrupted. In
addition, ventilated patients were placed in the prone position to
support lung function, and skin integrity was compromised in unusual
places. Some patients also developed additional infections while
hospitalized, which further compromised their illness trajectory. “As
more data become available, highlighting where innovative
approaches were successful at reducing the risk of adverse events
during the pandemic, researchers and policymakers will need to
determine if there are particular best practices that may be suitable
for continued use beyond the pandemic” (para. 9).
A safety issue that results in death, permanent harm, or serious
temporary harm that requires intervention is termed a sentinel event
by the Joint Commission (n.d.). In 2013, the sentinel event definition
was expanded to include safety issues involving anyone on the
institution’s premises (Patra & De Jesus, 2022). Consider the
following case scenario:
A patient being treated for a potential pulmonary embolism was inadvertently given
over 17,000 units of heparin because a smart pump was mis-programmed to run at
1,000 ml per hour rather than 1,000 units per hour (20 ml). (Institute for Safe
Medication Practices, 2007)
The smart pump used in this scenario was equipped with dose￾calculation software that compares the programmed infusion rate to
a drug database to check for dosing within safe limits. This is an
example of a knowledge-based clinical decision support system,
which is discussed later in this chapter. This technology is
particularly important when high-alert drugs, or high-hazard drugs,
are being administered. In this case, however, the available dose￾checking technology had been turned off, and the pump was
operated in standard, rather than smart, mode. A subsequentanalysis of the error event revealed that, to save time, many nurses
in the institution were bypassing the safety technology afforded by
the smart pump. Even though it has been quite some time since this
error occurred, we continue to see alerts and safety checks being
worked around, ignored, or turned off. This chapter focuses on some
of the recommended organizational strategies used to promote a
culture of safety and some of the specific informatics technologies
designed to reduce errors and promote patient safety. Safety is
everyone’s responsibility.What Is a Culture of Safety?
The 2000 Institute of Medicine’s report To Err Is Human is widely
credited for launching the current focus on patient safety in health
care. This report was followed in 2001 by the Institute of Medicine’s
report Crossing the Quality Chasm, which brought to national
attention healthcare quality and safety. This national attention
resulted in a $50 million grant by Congress to the Agency for
Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ) to launch initiatives
focused on safety research for patients. Other initiatives prompted by
these seminal reports were the Joint Commission’s National Patient
Safety Goals (updated yearly since 2002), the National Quality
Forum’s adverse events and never events list (2002), the creation
of the Office of the National Coordinator for Health Information
Technology (ONC) to computerize health care (2004), the formation
of the World Health Organization’s Alliance for Patient Safety (2004),
the Institute for Healthcare Improvement’s (IHI’s) 100,000 Lives
campaign (2005) and 5 Million Lives campaign (2008), congressional
authorization of patient safety organizations created by the Patient
Safety and Quality Improvement Act to promote blameless error
reporting and shared learning (2005), the “no pay for errors” initiative
launched by Medicare (2008), and the $19 billion congressional
appropriation to support electronic health records (EHRs) and patient
safety (Wachter, 2010). In 2013, the Patient Safety Movement
Foundation launched the Open Data Pledge and later announced
three new patient safety challenges in 2016 (Patient Safety
Movement, 2016). The most pressing challenges it identified—
venous thromboembolism, mental health, and pediatric adverse drug
events—reflect those in which patient death could be prevented with
the proper protocols in place during the provision of patient care.
The AHRQ (2019) safety culture primer suggested that
organizations should strive to achieve high reliability by being
committed to improving healthcare quality and preventing medicalerrors and demonstrating an overall commitment to patient safety;
that is, everyone and every level in an organization must embrace
the safety culture. Key features of a safety culture identified by the
AHRQ are as follows:
Acknowledgment of the high-risk nature of an organization’s
activities and the determination to achieve consistently safe
operations
A blame-free environment where individuals can report errors or
near misses without fear of reprimand or punishment
Encouragement of collaboration across ranks and disciplines to
seek solutions to patient safety problems
Organizational commitment of resources to address safety
concerns (para. 1)
The Committee on Patient Safety and Education of the American
Society of Anesthesiologists (2022) emphasized that “[o]rganizations
with strong safety cultures are not characterized by a complete
absence of adverse events, but by their commitment to capturing
and responding to these events, recognizing how each one gives
valuable insight for further system improvement. Unsafe cultures, in
contrast, can be highlighted by a lack of trust, fear of speaking up,
absence of transparency, incivility, or even workplace violence”
(para. 2).
An important part of the safety culture is cultivating a blame-free
environment. Errors and near misses must always be reported so
that they can be thoroughly analyzed to ascertain changes needed
to prevent reoccurrence. All organizations can learn from mistakes
and change their organizational processes or culture to ensure
patient safety. These critical points are reiterated in a recent Sentinel
Event Alert released by the Joint Commission (2018). The Patient
Safety and Quality Improvement Act of 2005 mandated the creation
of a national database of medical errors and funded several
organizations to analyze these data with the goal of developing
shared learning to prevent medical errors. Organizations themselvescan engage in root-cause analysis or failure modes and effects
analysis (FMEA), both of which are systems analyses to examine
medical errors closely to determine the system processes that need
to be changed to prevent similar future errors (Harrison & Daly,
2009; Patient Safety Network, 2019c). A tool for implementing root￾cause analysis, which was developed by the U.S. Department of
Veteran’s Affairs National Center for Patient Safety (n.d.), had three
goals: to determine “what happened, why did it happen and how to
prevent it from happening again” (para. 4). Everyone is encouraged
to submit actual medical errors and/or patient safety issues to the
Patient Safety Network (n.d.). Similarly, the IHI has a website
dedicated to FMEA. “Failure Modes and Effects Analysis (FMEA) is a
systematic, proactive method for evaluating a process to identify
where and how it might fail, and to assess the relative impact of
different failures in order to identify the parts of the process that are
most in need of change” (IHI, n.d.-b, para. 1). This powerful tool can
be viewed at
www.ihi.org/resources/Pages/Tools/FailureModesandEffectsAnalysis
Tool.aspx. The discussion accompanying the systems approach
advocated by the Patient Safety Network (2019c) emphasized “that
most errors reflect predictable human failings in the context of poorly
designed systems (e.g., expected lapses in human vigilance in the
face of long work hours or predictable mistakes on the part of
relatively inexperienced personnel faced with cognitively complex
situations)” (para. 2).
If one embraces a blame-free environment to encourage error
reporting, then where does individual accountability fit in? According
to the AHRQ (2019), one way to balance these competing cultural
values (blameless vs. accountability) is to establish a just culture in
which system or process issues that lead to unsafe behaviors and
errors are addressed by changing practices or workflow processes
and a clear message is communicated that reckless behaviors are
not tolerated. The just culture approach accounts for three types of
behaviors that lead to patient safety compromises: (1) human error
(i.e., unintentional mistakes), (2) risky behaviors (i.e., workarounds),
and (3) reckless behavior (i.e., total disregard for established policiesand procedures). The Joint Commission (2018) indicated that to
encourage reporting in a just culture, leadership must use
accountability assessment tools to distinguish between human error
and reckless behavior: “Leadership must gradually change the
culture so that the need to report and do something about a safety
issue outweighs the fear of being punished” (para. 11).Strategies for Developing a Safety Culture
Strategies for achieving a safety culture have been addressed
frequently in the literature and embraced by several key
organizations. The focus here is limited to those strategies described
by three key organizations: the AHRQ, the Joint Commission, and
the IHI. The AHRQ (2016), based on data from the Hospital Survey
on Patient Safety Culture, suggested that teamwork training,
executive walk-arounds, and unit-based safety teams have improved
safety culture perceptions but have not led to a significant reduction
in error rates. The AHRQ recommended seven steps for action
planning: “1. Understand your survey results. 2. Communicate and
discuss survey results. 3. Develop focused action plans. 4.
Communicate action plans and deliverables. 5. Implement action
plans. 6. Track progress and evaluate impact. 7. Share what works”
(p. 61). Informatics can assist with the analysis, trending, synthesis,
and dissemination of the action plan results. In 2020, the AHRQ
released a report titled “Making Healthcare Safer III.” In this report,
47 patient safety practices in high-risk healthcare areas were
reviewed, using a conceptual framework that “(1) puts the patient in
the center; (2) acknowledges that patients are constantly exposed to
potential harms; and (3) proposes patient safety approaches that
mitigate patients’ past and future vulnerabilities” (para. 3). Access an
overview of the report here and then follow links to specific safety
topics: www.jointcommission.org/standards/national-patient-safety￾goals/hospital-national-patient-safety-goals/. The IHI (n.d.-a)
stressed that organizational leaders must drive the culture change by
making a visible commitment to safety and enabling staff to share
safety information openly. Some of the strategies suggested by the
IHI include appointing a safety champion for every unit, creating an
adverse event response team, and reenacting or simulating adverse
events to better understand the organizational or procedural
processes that failed. The IHI (Frankel et al., 2017) released a whitepaper titled “A Framework for Safe, Reliable, and Effective Care,”
which emphasized the organizational culture, the need to establish a
learning system, and patient engagement as cornerstones of safety.
Access the paper here:
www.ihi.org/resources/Pages/IHIWhitePapers/Framework-Safe￾Reliable-Effective-Care.aspx.
Leadership oversight and support are critical to ongoing sharing
about errors; near misses; and, most importantly, collaborative
solution development to provide safe care and achieve quality
outcomes for all patients. Radick (2016) believed that senior leaders
must be involved to sustain patient safety improvements. The
importance of leadership in a safety culture was emphasized by the
Joint Commission (2018). Leaders understand “that systemic flaws
exist and each step in a care process has the potential for failure
simply because humans make mistakes” (para. 1). In the same
Sentinel Event Alert, three characteristics of a safety culture were
emphasized:
Just culture: People are encouraged, even rewarded, for
providing essential safety-related information, but clear lines are
drawn between human error and at-risk or reckless behaviors.
Reporting culture: People report their errors and near misses.
Learning culture: People are willing and competent to draw the
right conclusions from safety information systems and willing to
implement major reforms when their need is indicated.
Ways must be found to encourage people to report errors, near
misses, and good catches so that systems and processes can be
reviewed and improved and people can learn from errors. Carmack
and Valleru (2022) emphasized the importance of speaking up when
a safety concern or issue is observed. “The act of speaking up is not
automatic; it will occur when there is intentional support from nursing
leaders and medical staff members to remove barriers and enhance
trust, which is critical for success with speaking up and stopping the
line for safety” (p. 352).Each year, the Joint Commission releases Hospital National
Patient Safety Goals. The 2023 goals center around patient
identification, staff communications, medication use, alarms,
infection prevention, identifying patients at risk for suicide, and
prevention of surgical mistakes. Access the 2023 version at this site:
www.jointcommission.org/-/media/tjc/documents/standards/national￾patient-safety-goals/2023/2023-hap-npsg-goals-102122_simple.pdf.
For a comprehensive look at global strategies for safety in health
care, access the World Health Organization’s Global Patient Safety
Action Plan 2021–2030: www.who.int/teams/integrated-health￾services/patient-safety/policy/global-patient-safety-action-plan. The
safety literature is clearly converging to emphasize culture, reporting,
patient and family engagement, and learning.Human Factors and Systems Engineering
We turn now to safety initiatives more specifically related to
technology. A systems engineering approach to patient safety, in
which technology manufacturers partner with organizations to
identify risks to patient safety and promote safe technology
integration, was advocated by Ebben et al. as early as 2008. They
noted that human factors engineering is “[t]he discipline of
applying what is known about human capabilities and limitations to
the design of products, processes, systems, and work environments”
and its application to system design improves “ease of use, system
performance and reliability, and user satisfaction, while reducing
operational errors, operator stress, training requirements, user
fatigue, and product liability” (p. 327). For example, Ebben et al.
described the feel of an oxygen control knob that rotated smoothly
between settings, which suggested to the user that oxygen flows at
all points on the knob, when in fact oxygen flowed only at specifically
designated liter flow settings. Human factors engineering testing
would most likely reveal this design flaw, and the setting knob could
be improved to include discrete audio or tactile feedback (click into
place) to the user to indicate a point on the dial where oxygen flows.
Ebben et al. also emphasized that testing human use factors
provides more objective safety data than the subjective responses
gained from user preference testing. “Understanding how the
equipment shapes human performance is as important as evaluating
reliability or other technical criteria” (p. 329). A World Health
Organization (2016) publication makes an important point about
human factors engineering: “The overall human factors philosophy is
that the system should be designed to support the work of people,
rather than designing systems to which people must adapt” (p. 5).
Further, this publication cautions that issues with information and
information chaos contribute to safety incidents because cliniciansare overwhelmed with information. It defined information chaos as
follows:
Information overload (i.e., too much unnecessary information)
Information underload (i.e., missing or not enough information)
Information scatter (i.e., information located in many different
places and difficult to find)
Erroneous or conflicting information (p. 6)
Organizations that are purchasing medical technology devices
should avail themselves of shared safety data on equipment
maintained by several key organizations, including the Joint
Commission, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA), and the
Medical Product Safety Network (www.fda.gov/medical￾devices/medical-device-safety/medsun-medical-product-safety￾network). Many healthcare practitioners feel that we have not made
great strides in either sharing our data or accessing the available
data to enhance patient safety interests. According to the WISH
Patient Safety Forum (Pronovost et al., 2015), the patient safety
premises that harms are inevitable, data silos (rather than shared
data) are natural, and heroism is the norm “have inadvertently
provided excuses for not addressing patient safety comprehensively”
(p. 9). This forum also stated the following:
The belief that data silos are acceptable in healthcare settings is an irresponsible
view regarding the role of data; it lacks an understanding of the current operational
setting. Healthcare is a complex, multidisciplinary environment that requires
collaboration and sharing of data across an integrated stakeholder community. (p.
9)
As health information technology (IT) evolves and is refined, it
continues to improve patient safety. Banger and Graber (2015)
stated the following:
ONC is involved in a number of initiatives in support of this goal, including plans for
a new national Health IT Safety Center to coordinate these efforts. Combined with
the active engagement from the private sector, there is every reason to be
optimistic that health IT will continue to improve the quality and safety of health
care beyond the accomplishments realized to date. (p. 10)According to the Patient Safety Network (2019b), “busy health
care workers rely on equipment to carry out life-saving interventions,
with the underlying assumption that technology will improve
outcomes” (para. 2). The Patient Safety Network provided the
following descriptions of equipment issues:
An obstetric nurse connects a bag of pain medication intended for an epidural
catheter to the mother’s intravenous (IV) line, resulting in a fatal cardiac arrest.
Newborns in a neonatal intensive care unit are given full-dose heparin instead of
low-dose flushes, leading to three deaths from intracranial bleeding. An elderly
man experiences cardiac arrest while hospitalized, but when the code blue team
arrives, they are unable to administer a potentially life-saving shock because the
defibrillator pads and the defibrillator itself cannot be physically connected. (para.
1)
Once the technology is integrated into the organization, biomedical
engineers can become valuable partners in promoting patient safety
through appropriate use of these technologies (Figure 15-1). For
example, in one organization, the biomedical engineers helped to
revamp processes associated with the new technology alarm
systems after they discovered several key issues: slow response
times to legitimate alarms and multiple false alarms (promoting
alarm fatigue) created by alarm parameters that were too sensitive.
Strategies for addressing these issues included improving the nurse
call system by adding Voice over Internet Protocol telephones, which
wirelessly receive alarms directly from technology equipment carried
by all nurses, thus reducing response times to alarms; feeding alarm
data into a reporting database for further analysis; and encouraging
nurses to round with physicians to provide input into alarm
parameters that were too sensitive and generating multiple false
alarms (Joint Commission, 2013; Schlabig Williams, 2009).Figure 15-1 User–Technology–Patient Safety Scheme
Description
The case scenario, Well-Intentioned Providers, demonstrates how
well-intentioned healthcare providers can cause harm. An audit
conducted by Philips Healthcare (2013) at one of its customer sites
revealed the following:
[A] Telemetry Charge Nurse was found to be receiving and responding to an
average of 3.7 alarms per minute over the duration of the audit. Even allowing for
minimal time to respond to each alarm, it is clear that this situation was
problematic. A majority of that nurse’s time was spent responding to alarms, and
inevitably some were missed. (para. 1)E
Goal 4 of the 2023 Hospital National Patient Safety Goals of the
Joint Commission is “Make improvements to ensure that alarms on
medical equipment are heard and responded to on time” (para. 4).
Interestingly, this goal first appeared in the 2014 edition and has
been included every year since then. Many patient monitoring and
medication administration technologies are equipped with alarms to
alert caregivers of potential problems. At issue is the number of
alarms, especially false alarms caused, for example, by artifact or
patient movement. Multiple false alarms can lead caregivers to
become desensitized so that they ignore or even turn off alarm
systems. Some strategies suggested by the Joint Commission
include developing policies and procedures to establish who can set
or change alarm parameters, when an alarm can be disabled, and
who is responsible for responding to alarms.
CASE SCENARIO: WELL-INTENTIONED PROVIDERS
ven well-intentioned healthcare providers can cause harm. Consider what
should have been done differently in the following case scenario.
Laura, a 25-year-old woman, arrived at the ER complaining of chest pain. She
has two young children at home, a 6-year-old boy and a 4-year-old girl. She
stated that she has been experiencing severe fatigue and fluttering in her chest
for weeks but felt that she needed rest and it was probably nothing. Today, she
had the fluttering with chest pain, and even her teeth and jaw hurt. This scared
her, so she decided to go to the hospital. However, she had to wait 2 hours for her
mother to arrive to watch the children. Her husband is on a business trip and will
not be returning for 4 days. The initial ECG revealed normal sinus rhythm, and all
lab values were normal. The emergency room physician decided to keep her for
observation and sent her to the telemetry unit.
Laura was moved to telemetry and, as she stated, “wired for sound.” The nurse
described the equipment and told her that in addition to all of the monitoring
equipment, they would check her vital signs every hour as well. The nurse no
sooner returned to the nurse’s station when Laura’s cardiac monitor alerted her
that Laura was experiencing severe bradycardia (i.e., heart rate of less than 40
beats per minute). When the nurse arrived at Laura’s bedside, she found Laura
sound asleep. She woke her gently and told her that her monitor was alarming
and that she was going to check her. Laura stated that she felt tired and was
enjoying the peaceful sleep. Laura’s vital signs were fine and her heart rate was
72 beats per minute. The nurse reset the monitor, by which point Laura hadalready fallen back to sleep. The monitor alarmed the same way three more times
within the next hour. Each time, the nurse woke Laura and everything was fine.
The nurse decided to contact the resident. While she was waiting for the resident,
it alarmed twice again, but she just reset it and let Laura sleep. The resident came
and examined Laura. The resident felt everything was OK and that this young
mother needed her rest. The resident suggested that the nurse stop the hourly
vitals; call and have the equipment examined by the biomedical department; and,
in the meantime, turn the alarm off. The nurse agreed, turned off the alarm,
placed a call to the biomedical technician on duty, and left a message.
The nurse had another patient who also had frequent alarms, but his
corresponded to actual medical events. As a result, the nurse was spending a
great deal of time with this elderly gentleman and his wife. Each time she walked
by Laura’s bed, the nurse noted that Laura was sleeping. She realized that it had
been 2 hours since she had turned off the alarm and called the biomedical
technician, so she decided to check on Laura; however, her other patient’s alarm
went off, and since Laura was sleeping, the nurse went to the other patient’s
bedside. At 4 hours after the alarm had been turned off, the biomedical technician
arrived and apologized because one of the other techs called off sick in their
department and they were shorthanded. The nurse explained what had
happened, and the biomedical technician went to check Laura’s monitoring
equipment. The biomedical technician called for the nurse because the patient
was unresponsive. The nurse could not wake Laura, and the monitor was
showing asystole. A code was initiated, and Laura was pronounced dead 5 hours
after she had arrived on the telemetry unit.
This situation was assessed by the patient safety officer and the patient safety
committee. Their determination was that because the monitor was integrated and
all functions ran through the same controller, the nurse did not realize she was
turning off all of the monitors (e.g., pulse oximetry and blood pressure). This
situation was found to be an issue with the equipment itself because the alarm
settings are too close together and not clearly labeled; however, the nurse should
never have turned the alarms off. With the hourly checks canceled and all the
monitoring equipment silenced, Laura was not being monitored at all. Well￾intentioned providers were allowing this young mother to sleep but with fatal
consequences.
It is evident from the case scenario that we have yet to find a
solution to the problem of alarm fatigue and related issues that
negatively affect patient safety.
Clearly, there is more work to be done to create safety cultures in
complex healthcare organizations and to reduce the incidence of
errors. Many organizations are looking to informatics technology to
help manage these complex safety issues by using smart
technologies that provide knowledge access to users and automated
safety checks and that improve communication processes. Harrison(2016) stated that “as nurse leaders in a clinical setting where smart
tools are leveraged to increase the quality and safety of patient care,
we have certain responsibilities to ensure safe implementation,
training, and monitoring” (p. 21). To best utilize the available
technology, nurse leaders and administrators must be able to use
data. More and more graduate programs for nursing administrators
are realizing the need for these emerging nursing leaders to be
skilled in nursing informatics. These leaders must be able to use
data, information, and knowledge efficiently and effectively to assess
and manage their clinical settings and, ultimately, to apply these
informatics skills to improve patient outcomes and the quality of
patient care (Figure 15-2).Figure 15-2 Data and Quality Connection: There are many ways to obtain data and
information. The skill is in knowing how to access, select, and use the data and information,applying nursing informatics to inform practice and improve patient care.
In 2016, the Government Accountability Office (GAO) selected
and assessed six hospitals, from which it identified three challenges
in implementing patient safety practices. The number one challenge
was “obtaining data to identify adverse reactions in their own
hospitals” (para. 2). Nursing informatics skills and knowledge can
address this challenge.
The GAO interviewed patient safety experts and reviewed the
related literature to identify three key gaps where better information
could help guide hospital officials in their continued efforts to
implement patient safety practices. These gaps involve a lack of “(1)
information about the effect of contextual factors on implementation
of patient safety practices, (2) sufficiently detailed information on the
experience of hospitals that have previously used specific patient
safety implementation strategies, and (3) valid and accurate
measurement of how frequently certain adverse events occur” (p.
22). It is clear that implementing solid nursing informatics practices,
skills, and knowledge can close these gaps.Informatics Technologies for Patient Safety
Healthcare technologies are frequently designed to improve patient
safety, streamline work processes, and improve the quality and
outcomes of healthcare delivery. As we continue to look to health IT
to advance patient safety initiatives, we must realize that integrating
health IT presents other challenges and can add to patient safety
issues. For example, Singh and Sittig (2015) stated that health IT
has the “potential to improve patient safety but its implementation
and use has led to unintended consequences and new safety
concerns. A key challenge to improving safety in health IT–enabled
healthcare systems is to develop valid, feasible strategies to
measure safety concerns at the intersection of health IT and patient
safety” (p. 226).
Although technology may certainly help to prevent or reduce
errors, one must always remember that technology is not a
substitution for safety vigilance by the healthcare team in a safety
culture. Harrison (2016) stated that “[p]atient safety should always be
at the center of the design and adoption of any technology
introduced into patient care settings. Technology that’s designed to
improve patient safety is only as good as the person using the
device. It doesn’t replace critical thinking, solid nursing practice, and
careful patient monitoring” (p. 21).
The Wired for Health Care Quality Act of 2005 began a series of
funding streams to promote health IT and sharing of its best
practices and to help organizations implement health IT (Harrison &
Daly, 2009). Many early adopters opted to focus technology and
safety initiatives on medication ordering and administration
processes. Medication errors are the most frequent and visible errors
because the medication administration cycle has many poorly
designed work processes with several opportunities for human error.
Thus, computerized provider order entry (CPOE), automated
dispensing machines, smart pump technologies for IV drugadministration, and barcode medication administration (BCMA)
frequently preceded the adoption of the EHR in many institutions
because of the comparatively lower costs associated with
implementing these technologies. In an ideal world, the EHR would
be adopted concurrently as part of an interoperable health IT
system. In the early EHR systems, clinicians were prompted by
electronic alerts to remind them of important interventions that
should be part of the standard of care, but these alerts tended to be
generalized and not patient specific—for example, “Did you check
the allergy profile?” or “Has the patient received a pneumonia
immunization?” These early alert and care reminders are now
evolving into more sophisticated clinical decision support (CDS)
systems to promote accurate medical diagnoses and to suggest
appropriate evidence-based medical and nursing interventions
based on patient data.
With the addition of triggers to detect adverse events, diagnostic
errors, adverse drug events, hospital-acquired infections, and delays
in diagnoses have been identified. In addition to the National Patient
Safety Goals issued by the Joint Commission, which reference
general safety hazards, other safety organizations and institutes
provide information on top safety concerns. Cheney (2019) reported
on the list of top 10 medical technology hazards of 2020 identified by
the ECRI. The ECRI was founded in 1968 as the Emergency Care
Research Institute and designated by HHS in 2008 as a Patient
Safety Organization; in 2020, it affiliated with the Institute for Safe
Medication Practices and was rebranded as ECRI, “the most trusted
voice in healthcare” (ECRI, n.d.). The medical technology hazards
identified by the ECRI were as follows:
1. Surgical staplers—staple line failures or misapplication
2. Point-of-care ultrasound—issues with user training,
documentation and data archiving
3. Infection risks from sterile processing—especially in medical
and dental offices and ambulatory settings4. Hemodialysis risks with central venous catheters in the home
health setting—risks include infection, clotting or hemorrhage
5. Surgical robotic procedures—limited tactile feedback for forces
exerted on tissue may result in injury
6. Alarm, alert, and notification overload—numerous alarms may
cause a clinically significant issue to be missed
7. Cybersecurity risks in the home health setting—increased
vulnerabilities associated with remote monitoring and network
connected medical technologies
8. Missing implant data for MRI scan patients—implants can heat,
move or malfunction when exposed to MRI’s magnetic field
9. Medication errors from dose timing discrepancies in electronic
medical records—discrepancies between dose timing intended
by the provider and nursing workflow
10. Loose nuts and bolts in medical devices—devices can tip, fall or
collapse if not properly maintained (Cheney, 2019, para. 7)
Many of these issues can be prevented or detected in their early
stages using informatics technologies, although we do see continued
struggles with the same safety issues over several years. Other
technologies designed specifically to promote patient safety include
wireless technologies for patient monitoring, clinician alerts, point-of￾care applications, apps, and radio-frequency identification
applications. Each of these technologies is reviewed here, and the
chapter concludes with a section that discusses future technologies
for patient safety.
Technologies to Support the Medication Administration
Cycle
The steps in the medication administration cycle (i.e., assessment of
need, ordering, dispensing, distribution, administration, and
evaluation) have been relatively stable for many years. Each of the
steps depends on vigilant humans to ensure patient safety, which
resulted in the five rights of medication administration: (1) the rightpatient, (2) the right time and frequency of administration, (3) the
right dose, (4) the right route, and (5) the right drug. Human error
can be related to many aspects of this cycle. Distractions, unclear
thinking, lack of knowledge, short staffing, and fatigue are a few of
the factors that cause humans to deviate from accepted safety
practices and commit medication errors. Integration of technology
into the medication administration cycle promises to reduce the
potential for human errors in the cycle by performing electronic
checks and providing alerts to draw attention to potential errors.
CPOE is an electronic prescribing system designed to support
physicians and nurse practitioners in writing complete and
appropriate medication and care orders for patients. When CPOE is
part of an EHR with a CDS system, the medication order is
electronically checked against specific data in the patient record to
prevent errors, such as ordering a drug that might interact with a
drug the patient is already taking, ordering a dose that is too large for
the patient’s weight, or ordering a drug that is contraindicated by the
patient’s allergy profile or renal function. Because it is impossible for
and unreasonable to expect a clinician to remember the numerous
drugs that require a dose adjustment in the case of renal
dysfunction, for example, safe dosing parameters are provided by
the CDS associated with a CPOE (Patient Safety Network, 2019a).
In a stand-alone CPOE system without a CDS system, the
medication orders are simply checked by the computer against the
drug database to ensure that the dose and route specified in the
order are appropriate for the medication chosen. Specific benefits of
a CPOE system include the following:
Prompts that warn against the possibility of drug interaction,
allergy, or overdose
Accurate, current information that helps physicians keep up with
new drugs as they are introduced into the market
Drug-specific information that eliminates confusion among drug
names that look and sound alike
Reduced healthcare costs caused by improved efficienciesImproved communication among doctors, nurses, specialists,
pharmacists, other clinicians, and patients
Improved clinical decision support at the point of care (Steele &
DeBrow, n.d.)
CPOE solves the safety issues associated with poor handwriting
and unclear or incomplete medication orders. Orders can be entered
in seconds and from remote sites, thereby eliminating the use of
verbal orders, which are especially subject to interpretation errors.
Orders are then transmitted electronically to the pharmacy, thus
reducing the potential for transcription errors that are commonly
encountered in the former paper-based system, such as lost or
misplaced orders, delayed dosing, or unreadable faxes. As with any
technology integration, introduction of CPOE is associated with a
resistance to change in the typical workflow, a learning curve to gain
proficiency, and users must learn to trust the system.
The verification and dispensing functions of the pharmacy can also
be assisted by technology. The pharmacist begins by verifying the
allergy status of the patient and the medication reconciliation
information to ensure that the new medication is compatible with
other medications in the care regimen. This verification function is
computer based, and the medication order is electronically checked
via the knowledge database. If the order is verified as safe and
appropriate, the pharmacist proceeds to the dispensing process.
Barcode medication labeling at a unit-dose level was mandated by
the FDA in 2004, with targeted compliance to be achieved by 2006.
A barcode is a series of alternating bars and spaces that represent a
unique code that can be read by a special barcode reader. Barcode
technology spans both the medication dispensing and the
administration steps in the medication administration cycle. In the
pharmacy, the barcode helps to ensure that the right drug and the
right dose are dispensed by the pharmacy. Medications that are
labeled with barcodes can also be dispensed by robots capable of
reading the codes or automated dispensing machines. In this way,
barcode technology helps with the processes of procurement,inventory, storage, preparation, and dispensing (University of
Rochester Medical Center, n.d.).
The processes of drug storage, dispensing, controlling, and
tracking are easily carried out via automated dispensing cabinets
(ADCs; also known as automated dispensing machines, unit-based
cabinets, automated dispensing devices, and automated distribution
cabinets). These devices have benefits for both the user and the
organization, specifically in the areas of access security (especially
with narcotics administration tracking), safety, supply chain, and
charge functions (Institute for Safe Medication Practices, 2019).
However, as Rhodes and McCarthy (2019) pointed out, errors are
still possible when the override function is used to access
medications from an ADC in emergent situations. They suggest that
when overriding the system, the user should be forced to enter an
indication for use to allow the system to detect an inappropriate
medication selection from an alphabetical list. They provided two
examples, one where diazepam instead of diltiazem was selected
and another where vecuronium instead of Versed was selected. In
the first case, if the user had been required to enter an indication,
such as cardiac disturbance, they would have been prevented from
selecting diazepam. Likewise, if an indication for sedation had been
entered, then the ADC would have prevented dispensing a
neuromuscular blocking agent.
Applications (apps), or mobile apps, are being used by and
prescribed for patients. The apps used for patient education can
engage and inform patients; however, apps must be used judiciously.
If apps are prescribed for patients, then it is the healthcare
personnel’s responsibility to educate the patient and/or family on
their proper use. It is important that patients and their families
understand the benefits and risks of using the app as well as how to
receive help when needed. If data are being exchanged, patients
must comprehend what data will be collected and where, when, and
with whom they will be shared. The University of Florida libraries
developed this website listing patient education apps:
https://guides.uflib.ufl.edu/mobilehealth/patienteducation.There are apps for healthcare personnel as well. iScrub is an app
that is used to monitor hand hygiene, which could help prevent
healthcare-associated infections (Soft112, n.d.). The Patient Safety
Manual for Android was designed as a resource to treat patients
quickly, safely, and effectively (APKPure, 2019). Other popular apps
include Pepid, Pill Identifier, Medical Spanish, Pedi STAT, Critical
Care ACLS Guide, Medscape, Headspace, Pocket Lab Values,
Pocket Pharmacist, and Epocrates (Morris, 2023). Apps will continue
to be used by providers and patients, so all healthcare personnel
must assume the responsibility of making sure that the apps are both
appropriate to use and used appropriately.
Radio-frequency identification (RFID) technology is rapidly
gaining a foothold in healthcare technology and may soon be used in
the medication administration cycle. Although more expensive than
bar coding for packaging, the RFID tags are reprogrammable, and
issues associated with barcode printing imperfections and scanner
resolution can be mitigated (Vecchione, 2015). As discussed later in
this chapter, RFID technologies may also be an important
component of a medication compliance system for patients.
BCMA systems help to ensure adherence to the five rights of
medication administration. Whether BCMA is part of the larger EHR
or a freestanding electronic medication administration system
(eMAR), barcode technology provides a system of checks and
balances to ensure medication safety. The nurse begins by scanning
their badge, thereby logging in as the person responsible for
medication administration. Next, the barcode on the patient’s
identification bracelet is scanned, which prompts the electronic
system to pull up the medication orders. Next, the barcode on each
of the medications to be administered is scanned. This technology
check ensures that the five rights of medication administration are
met. If there is a discrepancy between the order and the medication
that was scanned or a contraindication for administration, an alert is
generated by the system. For example, in an EHR system with CDS,
the nurse may be prompted to check the most recent laboratory
results for electrolytes before administering a potassium supplement.
In a freestanding eMAR without CDS or EHR links, if the medicationorders have recently been changed, the nurse is alerted to the
change. When an alert is generated, the nurse must chart the action
taken in response to that alert. For example, an early dose might
need to be given if the patient is leaving the unit for a diagnostic test.
Despite the promising advances in patient safety afforded by this
technology, it is not fail-safe. Medications that are labeled individually
by the in-house pharmacist increase the potential for human error if
the medication is given an incorrect barcode, such as one signifying
a wrong dose or even the wrong medication. Many hospitals are now
purchasing medications labeled by the manufacturer. Van der Veen
et al. (2020) studied workarounds (defined as temporary practices
deviating from normal workflow expectations) associated with BCMA
systems. In the 5,793 medication administrations, they observed
workarounds in 62.7% of the administrations. “Procedural
workarounds (as not scanning at all) were most common (n = 1,307,
36%). Other workarounds observed were patient scanning-related
(as no barcode wristband on the patient; n = 1,017, 28%) and
medication scanning-related (including scanning before actual
administration of medication, scanning medication for more than one
patient at a time, and ignoring computer or scanner alerts; n = 400,
11%)” (p. 5). They concluded that nurse-to-patient ratios, timing of
the scheduled administrations, and considerations of nurse workload
were all modifiable factors that could improve compliance with this
important patient safety technology. Strudwick et al. (2018) reported
similar types of workarounds with BCMA that contributed to
medication errors. They suggested that careful attention to nurse
workflows was critical to safeguarding the proper use of BCMA.
Smart pump technologies are designed for safe administration of
high-hazard drugs and reducing adverse drug events during IV
medication administration. Smart pumps have software that is
programmed to reflect the facility’s infusion parameters and a drug
library that compares normal dosing rates with those programmed
into the pump. Discrepancies generate an alarm that alerts the
clinician to a safety issue. A soft alarm can typically be overridden by
a clinician at the bedside, but a hard alarm requires the clinician to
reprogram the pump so that the dosing falls within the facility’s IVadministration guidelines for the drug to be infused. All alarms
generated by the smart pump are tracked along with the clinician’s
responses to them (Cummings & McGowan, 2011; Hulen, 2013).
Smart pumps can be seamlessly integrated into BCMA systems, and
data can be fed directly into the EHR. The IHI (n.d.-c) recommends
the following steps to ensure safe implementation of smart pump
technology:
Prior to deploying these pumps, standardize dosing units for a
given drug (for example, agreeing to always dose nitroglycerin in
terms of mcg/min or mcg/kg/min but not both). Asking a nurse to
choose among several dosing units increases the risk of
selection error.
Prior to deploying these pumps, standardize drug nomenclature
(for example, agreeing to always use the term KCl, but not
Potassium chloride, K, Pot Chloride, or others). Asking the nurse
to remember and choose among several possible drug names
increases the risk of selection error.
Perform a Failure Modes and Effects Analysis (FMEA) on the
deployment of these devices.
Ensure that the concentrations, dose units, and nomenclature
used in the pump are consistent with that used on the
Medication Administration Record (MAR), the pharmacy
computer system, and the electronic medical record.
Meet with all relevant clinicians to come to agreement on the
proper upper and lower hard and soft dose limits.
Monitor overrides of alerts to assess if the alerts have been
properly configured or if additional quality intervention is
required.
Be sure the “smart” feature is utilized in all parts of the hospital.
If the pump is set up volumetrically in the operating room but the
“smart” feature is used in the ICU, an error may occur if the
pump is not properly reprogrammed.Be sure there are upper and lower dose limits for bolus doses,
when applicable.
Engage the services of a human factors engineer to identify new
opportunities for failure when the pumps are deployed.
Identify a procedure for the staff to follow in the event a drug
must be given which is either not in the library or when its
concentration is not standard.
Deploy the pump in all areas of the hospital. If a different pump
is used on one floor and the patient is later transferred, this will
create new opportunities for failure. Also, there may be incorrect
assumptions about the technology available to a given floor or
patient.
Consider using “smart” technology for syringe pumps as well as
large volume infusion devices. (para. 12)
Nurses must always engage in best practices and follow all patient
safety practices. There is no substitute for nursing assessment of
patients as a key safety tool.
A CDS can enhance the medication administration cycle by
promoting safety and improving patient outcomes. The CDS is
guided by targeted information delivery, ensuring that the five rights
of CDSs are implemented: the right information provided to the right
person in the right format through the right channel at the right time
in the workflow. For example, during medication selection, a CDS
helps a clinician select an appropriate medication based on client
data, such as clinical condition, weight, renal function, concurrent
medications, and cost. This system ensures that the medication
order is complete by performing checks for drug interactions,
duplications, or allergy contraindications and ensures that the right
dose and the right route are specified. During the verification and
dispensing phase of the medication administration cycle, the CDS
provides double checks for interactions, allergies, and appropriate
dose orders. Consideration is also given to potential infusion pump
programming issues, incompatibilities during infusion, and proper
notation and dispensing when portions of a dose must be wasted.During the administration phase, the CDS assists with patient
identification and current assessment parameters (i.e., blood
pressure and glucose level) that may contraindicate the use of the
medication at that point in time. In addition, checks for interactions
with foods or other medications and timing and monitoring guidelines
are provided to the clinician administering the medication. The CDS
has patient education guidelines and printable handouts to assist
clinicians in educating patients about their medications. The
monitoring functions of the CDS provide a structured data reporting
system to track side effects and adverse events across the
population. Because smart pumps are often used for infusion of
high-hazard drugs, systems are being developed to promote EHR
bidirectional interoperability between the pump and the medical
record. “With this level of bidirectional interoperability, infusion
parameters are wirelessly transmitted from the EHR to prepopulate
the smart infusion pump, and infusion data is also wirelessly sent
back into the EHR” (Institute for Safe Medication Practices, 2017,
para. 1).
Several promising technologies may become more widely
available in the future to assist patients with medication compliance
after discharge. For example, caps of pill bottles may contain RFID
tags that monitor and collect data on when the bottle is opened or
that contain flashing time reminders when a dose is due
(Blankenhorn, 2010). Mason et al. (2022) point out that opening the
pill bottle is a proxy for taking the medication and does not ensure
adherence. Bluetooth-enabled smart inhalers track asthma
medication compliance and whether the device was used properly
(Amedume & Sangave, 2021). Licholai (2019) listed several
technologies that use smartphones to promote adherence: Medisafe,
MyMeds, Care4Today, MedMinder, and AdhereTech. InPen is a
smart insulin pen that couples with a smartphone to calculate insulin
dosages and track injections (Medgadget, 2016a), PillDrill helps
people adhere to a medication schedule and includes a “mood cube”
to track how patients are feeling (Medgadget, 2016b), and Proteus
smart pills have sensors attached to medications to track when the
pill is actually ingested (Medgadget, 2015). In addition, severaltechnologies track adherence and then issue gift card rewards
(Licholai, 2019). These are just a sampling of the newer technologies
for medication adherence; more are expected to emerge in the
future. However, these technologies add costs to the medications
that might preclude widespread adoption.
Additional Technologies for Patient Safety
CDS systems have safety uses beyond the medication
administration cycle. The robust data collection and data
management functions of a CDS embedded in an EHR help to
ensure quality approaches to patient health challenges based on
research evidence and clinical guidelines. A CDS may also ensure
cost effectiveness by alerting clinicians to duplicate testing orders or
suggesting the most cost-effective diagnostic test based on specific
patient data (Charles, 2018).
Early uses of a CDS were limited to pop-up alerts that reminded
clinicians of specific interventions, such as flu/pneumonia shots, diet
counseling for those with abnormal body mass indexes, or smoking
cessation interventions. Newer systems reserve alerts for critical
situations, such as drug interactions/allergies and impending issues
such as sepsis or cardiac failure. Limiting alerts that demanded
action on the part of clinicians has helped to avoid alarm fatigue and
support clinical workflow. Now CDSs are designed to provide
information when requested by giving clinicians access to
searchable databases and clinical guidelines. CDSs are designed to
deliver the following:
the right information (evidence-based guidance, response to
clinical need)
to the right people (entire care team—including the patient)
through the right channels (e.g., EHR, mobile device, patient
portal)
in the right intervention formats (e.g., order sets, flow-sheets,
dashboards, patient lists)at the right points in workflow (for decision making or action)
(Bresnick, 2017, para. 20)
Stay tuned for the increased use of more sophisticated CDSs that
are based on artificial intelligence and machine learning to analyze
data and make predictions and care recommendations based on
diagnoses and trending data (Charles, 2018).
The prompts and instructions provided to the clinician by the CDS
system are detailed and designed to be easy to navigate.
Implementation of a CDS has the potential to optimize care by
ensuring that all the details of a patient’s health issues are presented
to the clinician for management, thereby promoting individualized
approaches to the total health of the patient based on best available
evidence and clinical guidelines (HealthIT.gov, n.d.). According to the
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (n.d.),
CDS is not simply an alert, notification, or explicit care suggestion. CDS
encompasses a variety of tools including, but not limited to:
Computerized alerts and reminders for providers and patients
Clinical guidelines
Condition-specific order sets
Focused patient data reports and summaries
Documentation templates
Diagnostic support
Contextually relevant reference information
These functionalities may be deployed on a variety of platforms. (para. 2)
RFID technologies have both supply chain and patient care
applications to patient safety. An RFID system contains a tag affixed
to an object or a person that functions as a radio-frequency
transponder and provides a unique identification code, a reader that
receives and decodes the information contained on the tag, and an
antenna that transmits the information between the tag and the
reader. When RFID tags are embedded in patient identification
bracelets, they can help with patient tracking during procedures and
testing or function as part of the EHR to communicate pertinent
information to clinicians at the bedside. RFIDs may eventually bepart of the medication administration process, which would replace
barcode technologies. They can be used to track medical supplies
and equipment, thereby reducing staff time in locating such items.
They may also be embedded into surgical supplies to automate
supply-counting procedures, thereby reducing the likelihood that
sponges or tools will be erroneously left in a patient. RFIDs may also
reduce the likelihood of the never events of wrong-patient, wrong￾site surgical procedures (FDA, 2018; Patient Safety Network, 2019d;
Revere et al., 2010). RFIDs used in the medication supply chain
protect patients by reducing the potential that a counterfeit
medication might be inadvertently introduced into the supply and
providing for efficient medication recalls. Potential terrorist
manipulation of the medication supply is also thwarted by RFID
supply chain tracking technology. Blood and blood products can be
efficiently tracked by RFIDs because specialized tags can detect
temperature fluctuations and therefore ensure that the blood or blood
product was stored at the optimal temperature for safe
administration; however, RFID technology will probably not replace
barcodes in blood banking due to the cost (Wray, 2016).
Smart rooms are also being used in healthcare facilities to better
engage patients and families in the hospital experience. As a
caregiver enters the room, the RFID tag on their name badge
announces to the patient on a monitor (typically mounted on the wall
in the patient’s line of sight) exactly who has entered the room and
triggers need-to-know data based on caregiver status to be
displayed on the monitor in the room, thus complying with the Health
Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA). For example,
when a dietary aide enters the room, only dietary information is
displayed; when a physician or nurse enters, all the pertinent
medical data from the EHR are available. Clinicians can review
patient data in real time and chart care at the bedside using touch
screen technology, thereby increasing productivity. One caution,
however, is that patients have to consent to family members and
visitors to be able to view information or they will need to step out as
the caregiver displays information. Some smart room technologies
include workflow algorithms to alert clinicians as they enter the roomabout procedures that need to be implemented for the patient and
can track individual clinician efficiency and effectiveness by
aggregating data over time (Foley, 2017; Heath, 2020; Sharbaugh &
Boroch, 2010). One of the disadvantages of smart room technology
is the cost of outfitting a room with such technologies. More recently,
hospitals are implementing an Internet of Things (IoT) device located
at the bedside that allows the patient to use voice commands to
control the room (i.e., temperature and lighting), search for health￾related information, and improve communication with clinicians
(Bengfort, 2017).
Smart beds, which provide continuous rotation to prevent pressure
ulcers, sense when a patient at risk for a fall leaves the bed, and
continuously monitor vital signs, are also being implemented
(Dubinsky, 2017). Mesko (2017) described several additional
innovations that may be implemented in the near future. They
include robots to clean rooms efficiently and effectively, flat-screen
TVs run by mobile devices for entertainment and patient education,
prompts asking patients to record their pain levels on mobile
devices, and the ability of clinicians to project three-dimensional
images in the room to explain diagnostic findings and treatment
plans.
Other technologies for improving patient monitoring include
wearable technology and wireless area networks, variously called
body area networks or patient area networks. The technologies
provide the ability to wear a small, unobtrusive monitor that collects
and transmits physiological data via a cell phone to a server for
clinician review. Although most of these technologies are designed
for monitoring patients with chronic diseases, they also have safety
implications because they help to identify early warning physiological
signs of impending serious health events (California Healthcare
Foundation, 2013; Kosir, 2015). An early innovation was the wireless
chip on a disposable Band-Aid with a 5- to 7-day battery, which was
developed to monitor the patient’s heart rate and electrocardiogram,
blood glucose, blood pH, and blood pressure and allowed for the
collection of important clinical data outside the hospital (Miller, 2008).
Wearable stress-sensing monitors detect electrical changes in theskin that may signal increased stress in autistic children who are
unable to communicate an impending crisis; caregivers are alerted to
the potential crisis via wireless transmission and can intervene to
reduce the stress and prevent the crisis (Murph, 2019). Other new
technologies promise to aid in home monitoring of an elder’s
movement, sleep, fall detection, health data, and/or medication data,
such as Caregiver Smart Solutions, Forma SafeHome, SenSights,
and Vayyar Care (Orlov, 2020). Smart fabrics with monitoring
technology built in are one of the latest developments in wearable
technology. Hospital gowns made with smart fabric could provide
vital signs monitoring, be customized by type of patient (e.g.,
cardiac), or be programmed to deliver medication via the skin.
Continuous monitoring via wearable technology versus intermittent
vital sign checks allows for the immediate identification of decline
and the need for intervention in hospitalized patients. Wearable
technologies also provide important insights into health status in the
community. While early technologies may have contributed to patient
anxiety related to inaccurate data, the evolution of wearables
promises accuracy, early detection, and timely intervention. As
McGinnis and McGinnis (2022) stated, “The digital medicine
revolution is at the cusp of transforming biomedical research and
clinical practice by providing unprecedented access to ecologically
valid health data and the ability to deliver personalized, data￾informed, health-improving interventions directly to the patient
wherever and whenever needed” (para. 2).
Robotics technologies are also being increasingly tested for safety
and efficiency uses. Robotics has been used in minimally invasive
surgery for some time; as with most technologies, there are risks and
rewards (Kirkpatrick & LaGrange, 2016). Surgical robots continue to
evolve, and newer technologies feature a three-dimensional high￾definition vision system and precision motion controlled by the
surgeon, which enables them to be used in various types of precise
surgeries (Medical Education Network, 2021; Sniderman, 2018).
Robotic exoskeletons are used for gait rehabilitation after serious
injuries (Sniderman, 2018). Robobear, a robot designed in Japan to
assist with patient lifting, provides increased safety for both patientsand clinicians (RIKEN, 2015). Laser-guided robots can move around
hospitals performing such routine functions as emptying and
disposing of trash, cleaning rooms, delivering supplies and meals,
and dispensing drugs. Robots are now able to draw blood and
collect vital signs in hospitals and are used for telehealth visits and to
enhance home care; they are also created to serve as companions
for the aging (typically, as cats or dogs) and for those with autism or
mental health challenges. Nanorobots are being tested for use as
digital pills to repair stomach issues and retrieve swallowed items
(Medical Education Network, 2021). Personalized health care or
precision medicine, which tailors treatment to the specific genetic
characteristics of individual patients and challenges patients to be
more accountable for their own health, is rapidly advancing as
vendors develop targeted therapies. Its potential effect is aligned
with both quality and safety. Researchers pursue specific clinical
trials and make certain that the data, information, and knowledge
generated are captured and disseminated. Building, analyzing, and
sharing large sets of medical data allow for both innovation and
targeted treatments (Medline Plus, 2022).
The International Medical Informatics Association (n.d.) Health
Informatics for Patient Safety Working Group emphasized that health
information systems should be designed specifically to promote and
enhance patient safety and that instances of technology induced
safety hazards should be widely shared to improve safety.Role of the Nurse Informaticist
The human side of patient safety is paramount. As technologies that
can help to reduce errors and increase safety are integrated into
caregiving activities, healthcare professionals must also improve
their ability to properly use and manage these technologies.
Therefore, not only must the technology be scrutinized and tested
routinely but also the users must be maintained and nurtured so that
they are able to use the tools to the patient’s benefit, avoiding harm
and keeping the patient safe. Even the best CDS systems can
contribute to mistakes by providing meaningless, outdated, or
harmful information. Nurse informaticists and the IT team in the
facility must ensure that all systems are properly configured and
maintained. They should routinely monitor and check these systems
while making sure that their users can use the systems accurately to
avoid errors. A technology and its user can never be left to their own
devices.
As we continue to apply informatics to patient safety, data
warehousing and mining, reporting, data trending, and predictive
modeling will enhance our ability to improve patient safety and
provide quality health care. To gather the data and information
necessary to analyze safety issues, monitoring systems, software,
and hardware will continue to evolve. Risk monitoring and incident
reporting software (i.e., reporting software specifically generating
reports regarding incidents only), patient response monitoring
systems, trending and predictive models, and reporting software will
provide enhanced data and information to be analyzed.
Human inputting activities must focus on patient safety to raise the
appropriate issues and sound out solutions. Nurse informaticists
must be involved in all stages of the system development life cycle
as new technologies are introduced while maintaining a focus on
safety. Safety concerns and remedies need to be analyzed,
synthesized, and integrated throughout the system development lifecycle to have a robust tool that provides meaningful information and
enhances patient care while preventing errors and promoting patient
safety. Nurse informaticists can bridge the gap between IT staff,
electronic systems designed to ensure patient safety, and nurses
who are system users by attending to the disruptions inherent in
technology implementation and promoting the best and safest uses
of the systems. The Research Brief describes the results of a 2020
Healthcare Information and Management Systems Society (HIMSS)
survey on the effect of nurse informaticists on patient safety. This
survey is conducted every 3 years, so stay tuned for the 2023
results.
RESEARCH BRIEF
In 2020, HIMSS conducted an Informatics Nurse Impact Survey building upon the
research that began in 2004. This web-based survey yielded 1,359 respondents, which
was an increase from 1,279 in the 2017 survey. Nursing informaticists are “the driving
force behind the development, implementation, and optimization of electronic
medical/health records, nursing clinical documentation, point-of-care clinical decision
support, and computerized practitioner order entry” (HIMSS, 2020, para. 1).
One of the areas assessed was the chief nursing informatics officer (CNIO) role:
The role of CNIO/Senior Nursing Informatics Officer continues to be on the rise
with 41% of respondents reporting that their organization had the formal role. In
2020, 10% of respondents reported holding the title of manager of clinical
informatics as compared with just 1% in 2017. The percent of director-level
respondents increased as well to 11% as compared with 7% in 2017. Still, the
majority of respondents (24%) stated their title was nursing informatics specialist,
a small increase over 2017’s 20%. This year also showed a significant change in
reporting structure, with more nurse informaticists reporting to Nursing (40%),
Quality (12%), and Operations (9%) over the historical trend of reporting to IT
(48%). (HIMSS, 2020, para. 4)
This result demonstrates the belief that nurse informaticists can greatly improve
patient safety. The nurse executives who responded rated the positive effect of nurse
informaticists on patient safety at 6.36 out of 7.
In their conclusion, the researchers stated that
[t]he role of informatics nurses is not limited to IT; this research also suggests that
informatics nurses play an instrumental role with regard to patient safety, change
management and usability of systems as evidenced by their impact on quality
outcomes, workflow, and user acceptance. These additional areas highlight the
value of informatics nurses—their expertise truly translates to the adoption ofmore effective, higher quality clinical applications in healthcare organizations. (p.
11)
The full article appears in: Healthcare Information and Management Systems
Society. (2020). Nursing Informatics Workforce Survey.
www.himss.org/sites/hde/files/media/file/2020/06/19/nursinginformaticsworkforcesurvey
exectivesummary-final.pdf.Interdisciplinary Collaboration
Interdisciplinary collaboration and interprofessional
collaboration are terms used to describe cooperative relationships
among actively engaged professionals where healthcare decision￾making is shared to combine their collective knowledge and skills to
care for their patients. All the professionals are working toward the
same goal: positive patient outcomes. Interprofessional collaboration
is crucial when caring for patients because the open exchange of
ideas, experience, and knowledge helps the professionals develop a
comprehensive plan of care.
It is important for educators and administrators to realize the
potential for preparing collaborators by developing a collaborative
approach and interprofessional educational activities and
opportunities. Successful interprofessional collaborative education
experiences will foster a willingness to participate in interprofessional
collaboration efforts on behalf of patients. Refer to the website of the
Centre for the Advancement of Interprofessional Education (CAIPE)
for information on the principles, values, processes, and outcomes of
interprofessional education: www.caipe.org/about.
Informaticists must recognize their position on the team to promote
interprofessional collaboration; so, too, each professional must
appreciate that they are part of an interprofessional team and are
obligated to collaborate with the other team members for the
patient’s best interests to provide quality care to every patient.
Informaticists must be willing to share, communicate, and deliberate
with other professionals caring for the same patient to achieve the
best outcomes for the patient. All healthcare professionals must work
together to enhance quality and to secure the most positive
outcomes for each and every patient treated.
The informaticist can facilitate interprofessional collaboration to
improve patient care by enhancing the capability for sharing data
and information in both synchronous and asynchronous formats.Therefore, the informaticist’s role is critical to facilitate data,
information, and knowledge exchange in a safe and secure
environment that affords professionals connectivity, access, and
confidence in their ability to collaborate.TABLE 15-1
Summary
Patient safety is an important and ubiquitous issue in health care.
This chapter explored the characteristics of a safety culture and
technologies designed to promote patient safety. The need to
evaluate errors carefully to determine why and how they occurred
and how workflow processes might be changed to prevent future
errors of the same type was emphasized. Technology is changing
rapidly, and the culture of sharing related to technology
implementation, error reporting, and troubleshooting should prompt
continuous process improvements. The key for organizations is to
invest in their users and to choose wisely so that the technologies
they are adopting will not negatively affect safety and will be
interoperable and easily upgradable as technologies and safety
practices evolve.
Organizations must make a commitment to a safety culture in
which everyone at every level is committed to patient safety at every
moment. In an ideal world, everyone would first stop and think “Is
this safe?” before every action, workarounds would not occur, and
everyone would embrace the technologies and workflow processes
designed to promote patient safety. Table 15-1 provides a list of
websites to consult for updates on patient safety technologies. The
nurse informaticists, healthcare providers, patients, ancillary team
members, administrators, settings/environments, infrastructures, and
technologies must all work together to create a safety culture. Every
organization must provide safe, quality health care and prevent harm
or adverse events for every patient under its care by ensuring that
patient safety is critical to the organization’s mission.
Patient Safety WebsitesTitle URL
AHRQ Patient Safety Network https://psnet.ahrq.gov
VHA National Center for Patient
Safety
www.patientsafety.va.gov
Institute for Healthcare
Improvement
www.ihi.org/topics/patientsafety/Pages/default.aspx
Center for Patient Safety www.centerforpatientsafety.org
QSEN (Quality and Safety
Education for Nurses) Institute
https://qsen.org
THOUGHT-PROVOKING QUESTIONS
1. What are the current patient safety characteristics of your organizational culture?
Identify at least three aspects of your culture that need to be changed regarding
patient safety and suggest strategies for change.
2. Describe a current technology that you use in patient care that would benefit from
human factors engineering concepts. What are some ways this technology should
be improved?
3. Identify a workaround that you have used and analyze why you chose this risk￾taking behavior over a behavior that conforms to a safety culture.
4. The GAO (2016) interviewed patient safety experts and reviewed the related
literature to identify three key gaps in patient safety practice implementation: a lack
of (1) information about the effect of contextual factors on implementation of patient
safety practices, (2) sufficiently detailed information on the experience of hospitals
that have previously used specific patient safety implementation strategies, and (3)
valid and accurate measurement of how frequently certain adverse events occur.
(p. 22)
Select one of these gaps and describe in detail how nursing informatics could help
close it.R E F E R E N C E S
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. (2016). Hospital Survey on Patient Safety and
Culture: 2016 user comparative database report.
www.ahrq.gov/sites/default/files/wysiwyg/professionals/quality-patient￾safety/patientsafetyculture/hospital/2016/2016_hospitalsops_report_pt1.pdf
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. (2019). Patient safety primer: Culture of
safety. https://psnet.ahrq.gov/primer/culture-safety
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. (2020). Making healthcare safer III: Executive
summary. www.ahrq.gov/research/findings/making-healthcare-safer/mhs3/exe￾summary.html
American Society of Anesthesiologists. (2022, October 26). Statement on safety culture.
www.asahq.org/standards-and-practice-parameters/statement-on-safety-culture
APKPure. (2019). Patient safety manual for Android. https://apkpure.com/patient-safety￾manual/com.cranworthmedical.patientsafety
Banger, A., & Graber, M. (2015, February). Recent evidence that health IT improves patient
safety. Office of the National Coordinator for Health Information Technology.
www.healthit.gov/sites/default/files/brief_1_final_feb11t.pdf
Bengfort, J. (2017, May 11). How tech is building smarter patient rooms. HealthTech.
https://healthtechmagazine.net/article/2017/05/how-tech-building-smarter-patient-rooms
Blankenhorn, D. (2010, August 13). Can better tools overcome the medical compliance
crazy? ZDNet. www.zdnet.com/article/can-better-tools-overcome-the-medical￾compliance-crazy
Bresnick, J. (2017, December 12). Understanding the basics of clinical decision support
systems. Health IT Analytics. https://healthitanalytics.com/features/understanding-the￾basics-of-clinical-decision-support-systems
California Healthcare Foundation. (2013, February). Making sense of sensors: How new
technologies can change patient care. www.chcf.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/12/PDF￾MakingSenseSensors.pdf
Carmack, A., & Valleru, J. (2022). Empowering perioperative team members to speak up:
The official voice of perioperative nursing. AORN Journal, 116(4), 350–357.
https://doi.org/10.1002/aorn.13794
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. (n.d.). Clinical decision support: More than
just “alerts” tipsheet. www.cms.gov/Regulations-and￾Guidance/Legislation/EHRIncentivePrograms/Downloads/ClinicalDecisionSupport_Tipsh
eet-.pdf
Charles, M. (2018). Clinical decision support system (CDSS). TechTarget.
https://searchhealthit.techtarget.com/definition/clinical-decision-support-system-CDSS
Cheney, C. (2019, October 8). Top 10 medical technology hazards of 2020 announced.
HealthLeaders. www.healthleadersmedia.com/clinical-care/top-10-medical-technology￾hazards-2020-announced
Cummings, K., & McGowan, R. (2011). “Smart” infusion pumps are selectively intelligent.
Nursing, 41(3), 58–59. https://doi.org/10.1097/01.NURSE.0000394383.57568.cdDubinsky, L. (2017, April 4). Can smart hospital beds replace patient monitors? HealthCare
Business News. www.dotmed.com/news/story/36168
Ebben, S. F., Gieras, I. A., & Gosbee, L. L. (2008). Harnessing hospital purchase power to
design safe care delivery. Biomedical Instrumentation & Technology, 42(4), 326–331.
https://meridian.allenpress.com/bit/article/42/4/326/141372/Harnessing-Hospital￾Purchase-Power-to-Design-Safe?searchresult=1
ECRI. (n.d.). ECRI history. www.ecri.org/about/ecri-history-trusted-voice-healthcare/
Foley, T. (2017, January 27). Transforming the patient experience through “smart room”
technologies. HealthTech. https://healthtechmagazine.net/article/2017/01/transforming￾patient-experience-through-smart-room-technologies
Frankel, A., Haraden, C., Federico, F., & Lenoci-Edwards, J. (2017). A framework for safe,
reliable, and effective care. Institute for Healthcare Improvement.
www.ihi.org/resources/Pages/IHIWhitePapers/Framework-Safe-Reliable-Effective￾Care.aspx
Government Accountability Office. (2016, February). Patient safety: Hospitals face
challenges implementing evidence-based practices.
www.gao.gov/assets/680/675390.pdf
Harrison, J., & Daly, M. (2009). Leveraging health information technology to improve patient
safety. Public Administration and Management, 13(3), 218–237.
Harrison, L. (2016). Safely managing smart pumps in the clinical setting. Nursing
Management, 47(6), 20–21. https://doi.org/10.1097/01.NUMA.0000483128.55731.5e
Healthcare Information and Management Systems Society. (2020). Nursing Informatics
Workforce Survey.
www.himss.org/sites/hde/files/media/file/2020/06/19/nursinginformaticsworkforcesurveye
xectivesummary-final.pdf
HealthIT.gov. (n.d.). Tasks for CDS implementation.
www.healthit.gov/sites/default/files/cds/3_5_2_tasks_for_cds_implementation.pdf
Heath, S. (2020, January 24). Smart hospitals making the future of patient experience a
reality. PatientEngagementHIT. https://patientengagementhit.com/features/smart￾hospitals-making-the-future-of-patient-experience-a-reality
Hulen, T. (2013, March). High-tech devices enhance patient care. UAB Magazine.
www.uab.edu/uabmagazine/2013/march/connected
Institute for Healthcare Improvement. (n.d.-a). Develop a culture of safety.
www.ihi.org/knowledge/Pages/Changes/DevelopaCultureofSafety.aspx
Institute for Healthcare Improvement. (n.d.-b). Failure Modes and Effects Analysis (FMEA)
tool. www.ihi.org/resources/Pages/Tools/FailureModesandEffectsAnalysisTool.aspx
Institute for Healthcare Improvement. (n.d.-c). Reduce adverse drug events involving
intravenous medications.
www.ihi.org/resources/Pages/Changes/ReduceAdverseDrugEventsInvolvingIntravenous
Medications.aspx
Institute for Safe Medication Practices. (2007, April 19). Smart pumps are not smart on their
own. www.ismp.org/resources/smart-pumps-are-not-smart-their-own
Institute for Safe Medication Practices. (2017, November 30). EHR-smart pump
interoperability resulted in electronic documentation of different flow rates.www.ismp.org/resources/ehr-smart-pum-interoperability-resulted-electronic￾documentation-different-flow-rates
Institute for Safe Medication Practices. (2019, February 7). Guidelines for the safe use of
automated dispensing cabinets. www.ismp.org/resources/guidelines-safe-use￾automated-dispensing-cabinets
Institute of Medicine. (2000). To err is human: Building a safer health system. National
Academies Press.
Institute of Medicine. (2001). Crossing the quality chasm: A new health system for the 21st
century. National Academies Press.
International Medical Informatics Association. (n.d.). Health informatics for patient safety
WG. http://imia-medinfo.org/wp/health-informatics-for-patient-safety
Joint Commission. (n.d.). Sentinel event policy and procedures.
www.jointcommission.org/resources/sentinel-event/sentinel-event-policy-and-procedures
Joint Commission. (2013). Alarm system safety.
www.jointcommission.org/-/media/tjc/documents/standards/r3-
reports/r3_report_issue_5_12_2_13_final.pdf
Joint Commission. (2018). Sentinel event alert 60: Developing a reporting culture: Learning
from close calls and hazardous conditions. www.jointcommission.org/resources/sentinel￾event/sentinel-event-alert-newsletters/sentinel-event-alert-60-developing-a-reporting￾culture-learning-from-close-calls-and-hazardous-condi
Joint Commission. (2023). 2023 hospital national patient safety goals.
www.jointcommission.org/-/media/tjc/documents/standards/national-patient-safety￾goals/2023/2023-hap-npsg-goals-102122_simple.pdf
Kirkpatrick, T., & LaGrange, C. (2016). Robotic Surgery: Risks vs. Rewards.
psnet.ahrq.gov/web-mm/robotic-surgery-risks-vs-rewards
Kosir, S. (2015, April 15). Top 15 wearables in healthcare. Wearable Technologies.
www.wearable-technologies.com/2015/04/wearables-in-healthcare
Lavin, M., Harper, E., & Barr, N. (2015). Health information technology, patient safety, and
professional nursing care documentation in acute care settings. Online Journal of Issues
in Nursing, 20(2).
http://ojin.nursingworld.org/MainMenuCategories/ANAMarketplace/ANAPeriodicals/OJIN
/TableofContents/Vol-20-2015/No2-May-2015/Articles-Previous-Topics/Technology￾Safety-and-Professional-Care-Documentation.html
Licholai, G. (2019, January 30). Can digital medicine improve drug adherence? Forbes.
www.forbes.com/sites/greglicholai/2019/01/30/digital-medicine-improve-drug￾adherence/#1419db0c2b66
Mason, M., Cho, Y., Rayo, J., Gong, Y., Harris, M., & Jiang, Y. (2022). Technologies for
medication adherence monitoring and technology assessment criteria: Narrative review.
JMIR mHealth and uHealth, 10(3), e35157–e35157. https://doi.org/10.2196/35157
McGinnis, R. S., & McGinnis, E. W. (2022). Advancing digital medicine with wearables in the
wild. Sensors, 22(12), 4576. https://doi.org/10.3390/s22124576
McMains, V. (2016, May 3). Johns Hopkins study suggests medical errors are third-leading
cause of death in U.S. The Hub. https://hub.jhu.edu/2016/05/03/medical-errors-third￾leading-cause-of-deathMedgadget. (2015, July 6). Proteus swallowable smart pills FDA approved to measure
medication adherence. www.medgadget.com/2015/07/proteus-swallowable-smart-pills￾fda-approved-to-measure-medication-adherence.html
Medgadget. (2016a, August 2). InPen: A smart insulin pen that calculates dosage, tracks
injections. www.medgadget.com/2016/08/inpen.html
Medgadget. (2016b, April 19). PillDrill, a smart new medication adherence system.
www.medgadget.com/2016/04/pilldrill-smart-new-medication-adherence-system-2.html
Medical Education Network. (2021, October). From surgeries to keeping company: The
place of robots in healthcare. www.meded.co.za/DocumentPart/?id=5908
Medline Plus. (2022). What are some potential benefits of precision medicine and the
Precision Medicine Initiative? National Library of Medicine.
https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/understanding/precisionmedicine/potentialbenefits
Mesko, B. (2017, June 6). Peek into the future of hospitals: Smart design, technologies and
our homes. Medical Futurist. https://medicalfuturist.com/peek-into-the-future-of-hospitals
Miller, P. (2008, July 19). Wireless chip-on-a-band-aid to monitor patients from home.
Engadget. www.engadget.com/2008-02-05-wireless-chip-on-a-band-aid-to-monitor￾patients-from-home.html
Morris, G. (2023, March 22). 25 must-have mobile apps for every nurse. NurseJournal.
https://nursejournal.org/community/19-must-have-mobile-apps-for-every-nurse
Murph, D. (2019, July 18). Affectiva’s Q Sensor wristband monitors and logs stress levels,
might bring back the snap bracelet. Engadget. www.engadget.com/2010-11-02-
affectivas-q-sensor-wristband-monitors-and-logs-stress-levels.html
Orlov, L. (2020, January 21). Six new technologies for safety, health and in-home
monitoring. Aging and Health Technology Watch. www.ageinplacetech.com/blog/six￾new-technologies-safety-health-and-home-monitoring
Patient Safety Movement. (2016, June 15). Patient Safety Movement announces three new
patient safety challenges. BusinessWire.
www.businesswire.com/news/home/20160615006315/en/Patient-Safety-Movement￾Announces-Three-New-Patient-Safety-Challenges
Patient Safety Network. (n.d.). Submit a case. https://psnet.ahrq.gov/webmm/submit-case
Patient Safety Network. (2019a, September 7). Computerized provider order entry.
https://psnet.ahrq.gov/primer/computerized-provider-order-entry
Patient Safety Network. (2019b, September 7). Human factors engineering.
https://psnet.ahrq.gov/primers/primer/20/human-factors-engineering
Patient Safety Network. (2019c, September 7). Systems approach.
https://psnet.ahrq.gov/primer/systems-approach
Patient Safety Network. (2019d, September 7). Wrong-site, wrong-procedure, and wrong￾patient surgery. https://psnet.ahrq.gov/primers/primer/18/wrong-site-wrong-procedure￾and-wrong-patient-surgery
Patient Safety Network. (2022, January 12). Patient safety events and the role of patient
safety organizations during the COVID-19 pandemic.
https://psnet.ahrq.gov/perspective/patient-safety-events-and-role-patient-safety￾organizations-during-covid-19-pandemic
Patra, K., & De Jesus, O. (2022). Sentinel event. StatPearls.
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK564388Amedume, A., & Sangave, N. A. (2021, March 5). Digital Health: Smart inhalers. Pharmacy
Times. www.pharmacytimes.com/view/digital-health-smart-inhalers
Pronovost, P. J., Ravitz, A. D., Stoll, R. A., & Kennedy, S. B. (2015). Transforming patient
safety: A sector-wide systems approach: Report of the WISH Patient Safety Forum
2015. Imperial College London. www.imperial.ac.uk/media/imperial-college/institute-of￾global-health-innovation/public/Patient-safety.pdf
Radick, L. (2016). Radically redesigning patient safety. Healthcare Executive, 31(2), 36–40,
42.
Revere, L., Black, K., & Zalila, F. (2010). RFIDs can improve the patient care supply chain.
Hospital Topics, 88(1), 26–31. https://doi.org/10.1080/00185860903534315
Rhodes, J. A. M., & McCarthy, B. C. (2019). Automated dispensing cabinet technology
limitations compromise patient safety. American Journal of Health-System Pharmacy,
76(18), 1372–1373. https://doi.org/10.1093/ajhp/zxz153
RIKEN. (2015, February 23). The strong robot with the gentle touch [Press release].
www.riken.jp/en/news_pubs/research_news/pr/2015/20150223_2
Schlabig Williams, J. (2009). Biomeds’ increased involvement improves processes, patient
safety. Biomedical Instrumentation & Technology, 43(2), 121–123.
https://doi.org/10.2345/0899-8205-43.2.121
Sharbaugh, D., & Boroch, M. (2010, March 23). Hospital smart rooms are ready for rollout. I
& S. www.iands.design/cover-story/article/10176980/hospital-smart-rooms-are-ready-for￾rollout
Singh, H., & Sittig, D. F. (2015). Measuring and improving patient safety through health
information technology: The Health IT Safety Framework. BMJ Quality and Safety, 25(4).
http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/bmjqs-2015-004486
Sniderman, D. (2018, February 26). Robotics rise to healthcare challenges. Medical Design
and Outsourcing. www.medicaldesignandoutsourcing.com/robotics-rise-to-healthcare￾challenges
Soft112. (n.d.). iScrub Lite 1.5.2. https://iscrub-lite-ios.soft112.com
Steele, A., & DeBrow, M. (n.d.). Efficiency gains with computerized provider order entry.
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality.
www.ahrq.gov/downloads/pub/advances2/vol4/Advances-Steele_100.pdf
Strudwick, G., Reisdorfer, E., Warnock, C., Kalia, K., Sulkers, H., Clark, C., & Booth, R.
(2018). Factors associated with barcode medication administration technology that
contribute to patient safety: An integrative review. Journal of Nursing Care Quality, 33(1),
79–85. https://doi.org/10.1097/NCQ.0000000000000270
University of Rochester Medical Center. (n.d.). Improved efficiency and enhanced accuracy
in dispensing drugs for hospital patients at Strong Health.
www.urmc.rochester.edu/pharmacy/about/safety/robotics.aspx
U.S. Department of Veteran’s Affairs National Center for Patient Safety. (n.d.). Root cause
analysis. www.patientsafety.va.gov/professionals/onthejob/rca.asp
U.S. Food and Drug Administration. (2018, September 17). Radio frequency identification
(RFID). www.fda.gov/radiation-emitting-products/electromagnetic-compatibility￾emc/radio-frequency-identification-rfid
Van der Veen, W., Taxis, K., Wouters, H., Vermeulen, H., Bates, D. W., van den Bemt, P., &
the BCMA Study Group. (2020). Factors associated with workarounds in barcode-assisted medication administration in hospitals. Journal of Clinical Nursing, 29(13–14),
2239–2250. https://doi.org/10.1111/jocn.15217
Vecchione, A. (2015, June 30). Patient safety driving increased RFID use in hospitals.
Healthcare IT News. www.healthcareitnews.com/news/patient-safety-driving-increased￾rfid-use-hospitals
Versel, N. (2016, May 7). About that Johns Hopkins study on medical errors (podcast).
MedCityNews. http://medcitynews.com/2016/05/hopkins-medical-errors-podcast
Wachter, R. (2010). Patient safety at ten: Unmistakable progress, troubling gaps. Health
Affairs, 29(1), 165–173. https://doi.org/10.1377/hlthaff.2009.0785
Wilsonlaw.com. (2022). Top 10 medical errors that lead to death. www.wilsonlaw.com/fatal￾medical-errors
World Health Organization. (2016). Human factors: Technical series on safer primary care.
http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/252273/9789241511612-eng.pdf
World Health Organization. (2019, March 9). Patient safety. www.who.int/teams/integrated￾health-services/patient-safety/policy/global-patient-safety-action-plan
Wray, B. (2016, February 22). The case for RFID in blood banking. Medical Laboratory
Observer. www.mlo-online.com/home/article/13008632/the-case-for-rfid-in-blood￾bankingC H A P T E R 1 6
Patient Engagement and
Connected Health
OBJECTIVES
1. Define health literacy and eHealth.
2. Explore various technology-based approaches to consumer health education.
3. Assess barriers to the use of technology and the issues associated with health￾related consumer information.
4. Imagine future approaches to technology￾supported consumer health information.
KEY TERMS
artificial intelligence (AI)
blog
connected health
digital divide
domain name
eHealth
eHealth Initiative
empowerment
gray gap
health literacy
HONcode
interactive technology
mobile app
patient engagement
static medium
TRUSTevoice recognition
web quest
weblogIntroduction
Imagine that you have decided to take up running as your preferred
form of exercise in a quest to get in shape. You start slowly by
running a half mile and walking a half mile. You gradually build up
your endurance and find yourself running nearly every day for longer
distances and longer periods of time. But then you notice a nagging
pain in your right hip; over a few weeks, it gradually spreads to the
center of your right buttock and then down your right leg. You try rest
and heat, but nothing seems to help. You visit your doctor, who
indicates that you have developed piriformis syndrome and
prescribes a series of stretching exercises, ice to the involved area,
and rest. You are intrigued by the diagnosis. Upon your return home,
you log on to the internet and begin a search for information about
piriformis syndrome. When you type the words into your favorite
search engine, you immediately get 2,780,000 results in response to
your query.
Your use of the internet to seek health information mirrors the
behavior of many consumers who are increasingly relying on the
internet for health-related information. The challenge for consumers
and healthcare professionals alike is the proliferation of information
on the internet and the need to learn how to recognize when
information is accurate and meaningful to the situation at hand.
This chapter explores consumer information and education needs
and considers how patient engagement and connected health
technologies, including new trends in wearable technology, may help
to meet those needs yet at the same time create ever-increasing
demands for health-related information. It begins with a discussion of
health literacy, eHealth, and health education and information needs
and explores various approaches by healthcare providers to using
technology to promote health literacy. Also examined is the use of
games, web quests, and simulations as a means of increasing
health literacy among the school-age population. Issues associatedwith the credibility of web-based information and barriers to access
and uses for patient engagement are discussed. Finally, future
trends related to technology-supported consumer information and
connectivity are explored.Consumer Demand for Information
This is the Knowledge Age; most people want to be in the know.
People demand news and information and want immediate results
and unlimited access. The same is increasingly true with health
information. More and more people, in a trend known as consumer
empowerment, patient engagement, and connected health, are
interested in partnering with healthcare providers to take control of
their health. These patients are not satisfied with being dependent
on a healthcare provider to supply them with the information they
need to manage their health. Instead, they are increasingly
embracing electronic technologies, such as patient portals, to offer
current and past health statuses, lab results, and secure messaging
with providers; social media interactions; health-related games;
wearable technologies for tracking health; and health management
apps. Refer to Box 16-1 to review three apps and reflect on how
nurses can engage with and connect their patients to their own
health, whether it be diet and exercise help; medication support; or
something specific to their contextual situation, such as pregnancy or
monitoring their heart’s function.
BOX 16-1 MOBILE APPS: APPLICATIONS TO
CONNECT AND ENGAGE PATIENTS
Mobile apps are software programs that operate on smartphones and other mobile
communication devices. They can also be accessories that connect to a smartphone or
other mobile communication device. Given these definitions, they can be a combination
of accessories and software. There are mobile apps for health and medicine that
patients use to manage their own health and wellness. According to Edwards, in 2019,
there were over 97,000 health and fitness apps on the market, 15% of 18- to 29-year￾olds have installed health-related apps on their smartphones, 8% of 30- to 49-year-olds
have installed medical apps, 40% of physicians said these tools can decrease the
number of face-to-face clinical visits, and 93% of physicians believed that mobile apps
can improve the quality of patient health. The fitness app market grew 45% in 2020,
and unique users reached 385 million in 2021 likely as a result of the pandemic (Curry,
2023). Mobile apps have a place in the delivery of health care because they help toengage patients with their own health, wellness, and overall health status. These apps
not only engage but can also empower patients to actively contribute to and participate
in their health care.
THE BUMP
The Bump (www.thebump.com) provides pregnancy and parenting information. It
reviews planning a family, each trimester of pregnancy, and parenting.
MEDISAFE
Medisafe (www.medisafeapp.com) is a personalized medication reminder app for each
medication a person is taking and also provides drug interaction warnings. You can list
caregivers as Medfriends, and the app will send them notifications if you miss a
medication. Easily share the medications you are taking with your healthcare provider
because they reside on your smart device.
KARDIAMOBILE
KardiaMobile (www.alivecor.com/kardiamobile) is an app with a battery-operated device
that has two pads; lightly place your index and middle fingers from one hand on one
pad and your index and middle fingers from the other hand on the other pad. This
device is 3.20 inches (8.2 cm) by 1.25 inches (3.2 cm) by 0.14 inches (0.35 cm) with
two 1.18-inch (3 cm) by 1.18-inch (3 cm) stainless steel electrodes. To use this device,
you must place it near your smartphone, open the app on your smartphone, and
choose record. Your EKG is visible on your smartphone and is recorded and saved to
be shared with healthcare providers. You will see your results after a 30-second
recording and receive a personalized heart health report every 30 days with a summary
of your EKG and blood pressure readings to share with your healthcare provider. This
mobile app is an example of a combination of accessories and software.
REFERENCES
Curry, D. (2023). Most Popular Apps 2023. Business of Apps.
https://www.businessofapps.com/data/most-popular-apps/
Edwards, A. (2019). mHealth: Healthcare mobile app trends in 2019.
https://www.ortholive.com/blog/mhealth-healthcare-mobile-app-trends-in-2019
A national survey by the Pew Research Center’s Internet and
American Life Project (Fox & Duggan, 2013) indicated that 8 in 10
Americans who are online have searched for health information
(these numbers are comparable to the numbers in previous surveys
conducted in 2006 and 2011). The most frequent health topic
searches (69%) were related to a specific disease or medical
problem that the searcher or a member of the family wasexperiencing. Other frequent topics of health-related searches were
weight, diet, and exercise (60%) and health indicators, such as blood
parameters or sleep patterns (33%). The 2011 survey (n = 3,001)
indicated that consumers also searched for information on food
(29%) and drug safety (24%; Fox, 2011). Just over half of “online
diagnosers” (i.e., those who search online for information about
medical conditions) reported that they shared their internet findings
with their healthcare providers, and 41% reported that their findings
were confirmed by a clinician (Fox & Duggan, 2013). It is clear that
patients are increasingly looking to be partners with their healthcare
providers in managing their health challenges and maintaining a
level of wellness. Stansberry et al. (2019) studied 530 participants.
The majority of their comments surrounded their hopes and
concerns over technological changes occurring in their lives; they
referred to technological advances such as “brain-computer
interfaces, virtual immersive experiences that will teach and entertain
users, pervasive connectivity linked to artificial intelligence (AI)
that helps people navigate the world and understand it better, and
predictive and personalized applications that make life easier” (para.
1). Carmona et al. (2022) collected data on 2,437 users of a web￾based symptom checker using AI—Buoy Health. They reported that
over half of the users had pain, a lump or mass, or a gynecological
issue, and many were directed to seek care within a week or to self￾care. “The results of this study demonstrate the potential utility of a
web-based health information tool to empower people to seek
appropriate care and reduce health-related anxiety” (p. 15). Box 16-
2 provides an overview of AI as a patient engagement strategy.
BOX 16-2 ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE (AI) APPLIED AS
A PATIENT ENGAGEMENT STRATEGY
In today’s competitive and confusing healthcare delivery system, it is important that
providers be able to personalize each patient’s experience. Open communication is key
to remaining current with the needs of patients while making them feel connected to the
practice and satisfied with the care they receive. In a blog post on Seismic (2017), it
was stated that “[w]hen it comes to patient engagement, the promise of AI is to improvethe experience by anticipating patient needs, providing faster and more effective
outcomes” (para. 7). Seismic recommended the following:
Engaging patients with insights that are conversational and contextual, and
adjusting based on the situation to respond in real time.
Teaming providers with the intelligent guidance of AI so they can provide patients
with next-best actions, personalized to them.
Empowering patients who want to actively participate and engage in their health
with intelligent guidance and support when needed. (para. 7)
The blog post stated it best:
A smart machine might be able to diagnose an illness and even recommend
treatment better than a doctor; however, it takes a person to sit with a patient,
understand their life situation, and help determine which treatment plan is optimal.
(para. 9)
Heath (2019) stated that a “survey of 2,000 healthcare consumers and 200 business
decision makers (BDMs) revealed that AI may soon be the future of patient care” (para.
2). AI must not only engage patients but also engage healthcare providers and facilitate
their ability to provide healthcare. Marr (2018) stated that AI can help with critical
thinking, clinical judgment, image analysis, robotic-assisted surgery, and diagnosing.
He also described providing virtual nursing assistants to monitor patients and facilitate
communication and information exchange between face-to-face visits. Heath (2018)
discussed the high patient satisfaction scores when patients are provided virtual care:
“[F]orty-seven percent of patients said they prefer a more immediate, virtual care
encounter than having to wait for an encounter that is in person” (para. 7). AI in the
form of virtual nursing assistants can help patients feel connected and engaged in their
care.
Reflect on the following AI virtual patient encounter; assume each role (nurse, Craig,
and patient, Mary), and assess your perspective as each one. The AI virtual nurse is
known as Kate.
AI VIRTUAL PATIENT ENCOUNTER SCENARIO
Mary has an appointment at the nurse-managed clinic next week but has questions
about how she is feeling now. Mary grabs her tablet; opens the virtual AI app; and
reaches out to Kate, her virtual nurse.
Kate is an intelligent virtual nurse who appears as an avatar. She is powered by AI
and is continuously learning about her assigned patients from both the patients and the
nurses with whom she interacts frequently. Kate receives Mary’s call and immediately
reviews her information:
Mary has been in what she classifies as “great health” all her life until now, “hitting
45 did me in.” She is a 45-year-old woman who has never married and was
steeped in her career as an architect, for which she traveled 3 weeks out of every
month. She had a myocardial infarction last month and has since been afraid to
assume her activities of daily living and is terrified of going back to work. She
reaches out at least once per day and submits monitoring data every 3 to 4 hours,at least 5 times per day. Her EKG monitoring device works through her
smartphone and records her EKG, blood pressure, pulse, and respirations.
Kate has been monitoring Mary’s submissions and notices that she is
tachycardic generally once per day in the evening but not the other four times she
submits her EKGs and vital signs. Kate had a discussion with Mary’s nurse, Craig,
last week. Craig had a cardiologist review the EKGs to make sure everything was
fine. The cardiologist did not find an issue with the EKG but wanted to know more
about the tachycardia since it occurs only once daily. Craig shared the results
from the cardiologist’s assessment with Kate. Craig also asked Kate to correlate
Mary’s activities so that they could determine what is occurring in the evening
when she becomes tachycardic since all the other vital sign submissions are
within normal limits. Kate reported to Craig that the tachycardic episodes correlate
to when Mary’s mom leaves to go home for the night.
Kate responds in fewer than 15 seconds to Mary’s call and says, “Hello, Mary. What
can I do for you?”
Mary says she will submit her monitoring information since she feels like her heart is
beating fast this afternoon.
Kate tells Mary that she has received the data and to please wait a moment while
she reviews it. It is immediately evident that Mary is tachycardic. Kate asks Mary all the
appropriate questions related to assessing whether the tachycardia is of concern. She
determines that it is not of concern at this time.
Mary states that she is not feeling dizzy but that she feels her heart race at least
once a day: “It scares me!”
Kate asks whether her mom is still there since it is early afternoon.
Mary states that her mother just left.
Kate remembers that Craig wanted her to ask Mary more detailed questions
surrounding when her mother leaves. Kate begins questioning Mary about what she
has been doing for the past hour and exactly when her mother left.
Mary tells Kate that the only thing she’s done is drink the big cup of hot chocolate
that her mom had made her before she left and that she had to leave early today. “She
takes such good care of me and always leaves me with a magazine and a cup of hot
chocolate.”
Kate asks her to resend a set of vital signs, including EKG, in two hours. Kate also
asks Mary whether she has any other questions or needs anything else at this time.
Mary says that she is fine and will send in her information in 2 hours.
Kate reaches out to Craig and informs him of the hot chocolate Mary’s mom makes
when she is getting ready to leave her. Craig thanks Kate for the information and asks
her to continue to monitor Mary’s EKG and vital signs.
Mary complies and submits her requested data to Kate.
Kate reviews the information Mary has sent and determines that everything is
normal. She calls to let Craig know.
Craig reaches out to Mary to assess her caffeine intake throughout the day and to
verify that she feels OK since her vital signs and EKG indicate that she is doing well.
Mary states that she does not knowingly have any other caffeinated foods or drinks
throughout the day. She says her “mother is going to be very upset since she is the one
causing me to race.”Craig answers all Mary’s questions and assures her that Kate will continue to monitor
her and is readily accessible if she needs anything when Craig is not available.
Craig then calls Kate and has a discussion with her about asking dietary questions
and following up on what is occurring in the patient’s situational context around
variations noticed in EKGs and vital signs with their cardiac patients.
Kate is still learning, and the time Craig spends with her helps to hone her skills and
ability to assess and help their patients.
It is important to note that Kate’s developer, a nurse informaticist, required social
context and patient feelings/insights as required information for the AI virtual nurse to
receive and assess in addition to the healthcare data and information related to the
patient’s health, illness, or care needs.
As the patient, would you want to interact with Kate? Describe your answer.
As the nurse, answer the following questions:
Would you trust Kate to interact with your patients?
How much time would you be willing to spend to help Kate learn?
How would you assess Kate’s performance and growth over time?
Would you be interested in working with the AI developers to better understand her
capabilities, make suggestions, and further enhance Kate’s abilities?
Where do you believe AI capabilities will be in 5 years? How about in 10 years?
REFERENCES
Heath, S. (2018). Patients welcome AI tech to create access to convenient care.
PatientEngagementHIT. https://patientengagementhit.com/news/patients-welcome￾ai-tech-to-create-access-to-convenient-care
Heath, S. (2019). Patients ready to embrace AI, patient engagement technologies.
PatientEngagementHIT. https://patientengagementhit.com/news/patients-ready-to￾embrace-ai-patient-engagement-technologies
Leighton, S. (2017). The role of artificial intelligence in patient engagement. Seismic.
https://seismic.com/company/blog/the-role-of-artificial-intelligence-in-patient￾engagement/
Marr, B. (2018). How is AI used in healthcare—5 powerful real-world examples that
show the latest advances. Forbes.
https://www.forbes.com/sites/bernardmarr/2018/07/27/how-is-ai-used-in-healthcare￾5-powerful-real-world-examples-that-show-the-latest-advances/#2f775cd45dfb
All healthcare professionals must be prepared to listen to their
patients’ ideas about their personal health and at the same time
provide direction toward credible health information supplied by
electronic provider portals on the internet. Here is some good news:
In an attempt to improve the credibility of the results of online
searches about health, in 2015 Google partnered with the Mayo
Clinic to fact check the information in a database for 400 of the most
commonly searched for health issues (Lapowsky, 2015). Accordingto Dr. Pearl (2019), algorithms must be altered to help differentiate
good sources from those providing misinformation, credible sources
should accept direction and assistance from the healthcare
community, and warnings should be added to websites that are
sharing unsafe or dangerous health information. Healthcare is
different from other industries. Dr. Pearl makes a distinction about
the ability of consumers reading sales ads or information from other
sites: “When most shoppers come across a Rolex watch selling for
$19.99 online, they know it’s a scam. But when it comes to medical
information, many patients and parents don’t have the scientific
expertise to discern what’s real from fake” (para. 13). Medical
misinformation exploded on the internet during the COVID-19
pandemic. Shajahan and Pasquetto (2022) stated, “Countering
misinformation requires addressing long-standing challenges that
operate within social, psychological, economic, technological, and
political dynamics” (p. 124). They were part of a team that developed
a misinformation toolkit for providers, MisinfoRx. They suggest that
when patients present inaccurate information that they found on the
internet that providers acknowledge the health information–seeking
behavior and then gently correct misinformation. They also caution
about commenting or arguing on misinformation posts on the
internet, as this boosts the post. Rather, if providers have an online
presence, they should seek to post accurate information and to like
or share the accurate posts of others.
It is important to note that surveys of online health behaviors are
limited to those individuals who are online; therefore, they do not
reflect the health information needs or demands of those persons
who are not online. Digital divide is the term used to describe the
gap between those who have and those who do not have access to
online information. Nurses and healthcare providers must be aware
of the various components of the digital divide to ensure that patients
and clients are receiving the health information they need in a format
that they are interested in and can comprehend. Notably, persons
with chronic diseases are less likely to have internet connectivity.
Fox and Purcell (2010) explained that having a chronic disease is
associated with age, level of education, ethnicity, and income—allfactors that are also associated with the digital divide. Persons living
with a chronic disease who have internet access are likely to use the
internet for blogging and online discussion forums, activities
popularly referred to as peer-to-peer support. An issue brief by the
Council of Economic Advisers (2015) reiterated digital divide factors
as age, education, income, and geographic location. In 2021, the
National Telecommunications and Information Administration
released a countrywide interactive map of the digital divide
(www.ntia.gov/press-release/2021/ntia-creates-first-interactive-map￾help-public-see-digital-divide-across-country). By providing
infrastructure investment monies, the ConnectED initiative was
designed to increase broadband access for schools. A similar
initiative is designed to promote competition among internet
providers, thereby lowering costs and making high-speed internet
connections more affordable and accessible across the country. One
of Healthy People 2030’s overarching goals remains “Eliminate
health disparities, achieve health equity, and attain health literacy to
improve the health and well-being of all” (HealthyPeople.gov, n.d.,
para. 1). Thobias and Kiwanuka (2018) stated that there are
challenges and barriers to information dissemination in low-resource
settings in their study. One area was the lack of access to phones for
mothers. They presented a data model that would leverage the
leaders in the community who owned smartphones and others,
including relatives, to assist with transmitting health education
messages to the mothers. Their study has shown the feasibility of
using phones to communicate with mothers who do not actually own
phones. This is a great example of providing technologies that work
with the constraints of the situation. Another example of addressing
the digital divide is the growing number of health-related websites
that support Spanish and other language formats.Health Literacy and Health Initiatives
The goal of health literacy for all is one that is widely embraced in
many sectors of health care and remains an overarching goal for
Healthy People 2030 (Health.gov, n.d.). Clinicians who have been
practicing for some time recognize that informed patients have better
outcomes and pay more attention to their overall health and changes
in their health than those who are poorly informed. Some of the
earliest formally developed patient education programs, which
included postoperative teaching, diabetes education, cardiac
rehabilitation, and diet education, were implemented in response to
research that suggested the positive effect of patient education on
health outcomes and satisfaction with care.
The Health Resources and Services Administration (2022)
concluded that those persons with low health literacy have difficulty
understanding what healthcare providers are telling them, lower
educational skills, cultural barriers to health care, and issues
managing chronic illnesses. Low health literacy affects the incidence
and management of disease. “Health literacy is the degree to which
individuals have the ability to find, understand, and use information
and services to inform health-related decisions and actions for
themselves and others” (para. 1). For example, healthcare providers
depend on a patient’s ability to understand and follow directions
associated with dietary restrictions or exercising at home. It is also
assumed, sometimes erroneously, that people will correctly interpret
symptoms of a serious illness and act appropriately. Locating and
evaluating health information for credibility and quality, analyzing the
various risks and benefits of treatments, and calculating dosages
and interpreting test results are among the tasks that are essential
for health literacy. Other important and less easily learned health
literacy skills are the ability to negotiate complex healthcare
environments and understand the economics of payment for
services.The National Institutes of Health (NIH; 2021) reported that
numerous studies concerning health literacy demonstrate that a
variety of challenges remain on both the patient and the healthcare
provider sides of the equation. This is still true today, as evidenced in
the Healthy People 2030 overarching goals. Health.gov (2016)
created a health literacy online guide that was last updated in 2016
but that still contains valuable information, such as the Health
Literacy Online Strategies Checklist. According to Health.gov (2021),
“Health literacy and clear communication between health
professionals and patients are key to improving health and the
quality of health care” (para. 1).
It is increasingly clear that better outcomes result when patients
are well informed and engaged in their care. As depicted in Figure
16-1, there are a number of effective strategies to promote better
health, including strategies for building sound relationships,
strategies to ensure that patients are well informed about their health
challenges, and strategies to build partnerships with patients.Developed by the Health Literacy in Communities Prototype Faculty: Connie Davis, Kelly
McQuillen, Irv Rootman, Leona Gadsby, Lori Walker, Marina Niks, Cheryl Rivard, Shirley
Sze, and Angela Hovis with Joanne Protheroe and the Ministry of Health, July 2009.
IMPACT BC, with funding from the BC Ministry of Health.
Figure 16-1 The Health Literacy Umbrella
Description
The eHealth Initiative was developed to address the growing
need for managing health information and promoting technology as a
means of improving health information exchange, health literacy, and
healthcare delivery. Visit the eHealth Initiative website
(www.ehidc.org) for information. Although its scope goes beyond
health literacy, a major goal continues to be empowering consumers
to understand their health needs better and to act appropriately to
those needs. The eHealth Initiative recently released a 2020 roadmap outlining a vision toward patient-centric care. Poor
interoperability among healthcare systems and failure to embrace
national data standards for health care continue to be identified as
barriers to the eHealth Initiative. Further, concerns about privacy and
security of information and the failure to invest appropriately in
technology have slowed the development of this important initiative.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC; 2023b)
provides access to health literacy and eHealth initiatives by state
(www.cdc.gov/healthliteracy/statedata/index.html).Healthcare Organization Approaches to
Engagement
Healthcare organizations (HCOs) use a wide variety of approaches
and tools to engage patients and promote patient education and
health literacy. Although the old standby for disseminating
information is the paper-based flyer, some HCOs are recognizing
that today’s consumers are more attracted to a dynamic medium
rather than to a static medium. In addition, the cost of designing
and printing pamphlets and flyers becomes prohibitive when one
considers the rapidity of changing information; the brochure may be
outdated almost as soon as it is printed. One approach to deal with
these issues is to have patient education information stored
electronically so that changes can be made as needed or information
can be better tailored to the specific patient situation and then
printed out and reviewed with the patient.
Another old standby approach that is still widely used is the group
education class. These classes initially were developed to help
people manage chronic health problems (e.g., diabetes) and were
typically scheduled while people were hospitalized. Now many HCOs
also sponsor health promotion education classes as a way of
marketing their facilities and showcasing their expert practitioners.
The movement from static to dynamic presentations began in
many HCOs with the use of videotapes and then DVDs, which were
shown in groups or broadcast on demand over dedicated channels
via a television in patients’ rooms. HCOs are now also taking
advantage of the fact that patients and families are captive
audiences in waiting rooms by promoting education via pamphlet
distribution, health promotion programs broadcast on television, and
health information kiosks in those locations. The kiosks are typically
computer stations and often contain a variety of self-assessment
tools (especially those related to risks for diabetes, heart disease, or
cancer) and searchable pages of information about specific healthconditions. The self-assessment tools represent yet another step
forward in technological support for education; in addition to being
dynamic, the kiosk is interactive. On the assessment page, the user
is asked to respond to a series of questions and then the health risk
is calculated by the computer program. One caution, however, is that
just because the information is made available does not mean that
people will participate or understand what they have experienced.
Issues related to the level of health literacy, the digital divide, and the
gray gap (i.e., differences in electronic connectivity by age) still exist
in these situations.
Many HCOs have invested time and money in developing
interactive websites and believe that web presence is a critical
marketing strategy. Consider how the information in Box 16-3 might
be attractive to a consumer. Most websites offer physician search
capabilities, e-newsletters, and call-center tie-ins. As with all patient
education materials, there must be a sincere commitment to keeping
information current and easily accessible. Web designers must pay
particular attention to the aesthetics of the site, the ease of use, and
the literacy level of those in the intended audience.
BOX 16-3 THE SCIENCE FICTION–REALITY FACTOR
It is true that we want to have a health-literate and truly engaged patient to partner with
their healthcare journey. It is a stretch at times for patients to comply with or understand
their treatment plan and/or medication regimen. Inc. (2018) brought a new level to
literacy and engaging patients and their significant others or caregivers. It provided the
following example of sci-fi meeting reality when it stated that “3D printing is a cutting￾edge innovation in health care today” (para. 5). It can be used to generate casts, and
“some scientists are now experimenting with 3D-printing organs” (para. 5).
APPLICATION
What if a “child needs a prosthetic hand—printing it at home could drastically lower the
cost” (Inc., 2018, para. 6) as well as decrease the time to receive the replacement.
Reflect on how health literate and engaged the parents and/or caregiver must be to
accomplish this task.
REFERENCESInc. (2018). How technology is changing health care for the better: Technology
advances empower consumers and lead the way to better health.
https://www.inc.com/aflac/changing-healthcare-for-the-better.html
The aim of the review conducted by Reen et al. (2019) was “to
synthesize the usability of specific health information websites”
(para. 2). They provided insights into how to assess website
usability. It is important to collect information on user site
preferences and user satisfaction with websites. “Preferred website
features were interactive content such as games and quizzes, as
well as videos, images, audio clips, and animations” (para. 4). When
considering the adolescent population, it was important for them to
be able to communicate or interact with other like adolescents, and
they wanted to learn about their situation by hearing true stories in
other adolescents’ own words.
The rapid growth of electronic communication through increased
use of computers and access to the internet, particularly for medical
purposes, empowers the clinician as well as the consumer of
healthcare information. The integration of information and
communication technologies and the growing trend of consumer
empowerment have reshaped the delivery of health care. As a result
of meaningful use initiatives, many HCOs have developed secure
patient portals that allow patients to access their health records,
including tracking laboratory results and reviewing the records. Most
HCOs, however, do not allow patients to edit these records. In
addition, patients are occasionally interested in interacting with
others who have the same or similar conditions, and some HCOs are
providing the information necessary to help them connect. This peer￾to-peer support is especially popular with patients who have cancer
diagnoses, diabetes, and other chronic and debilitating conditions
(Lober & Flowers, 2011).
Some HCOs are using social media for health education to
promote actual engagement of audiences rather than as a means of
one-way messaging. Neiger et al. (2013) suggested “that the use of
social media in health promotion must lead to engagement between
the health promotion organization and its audience members, that
engagement must provide mutual benefit, and that an engagementhierarchy culminates in program involvement with audience
members in the form of partnership or participation (as recipients of
program services)” (p. 158). The CDC (2011) has an excellent social
media tool kit that can be used by health educators to guide the
planning and implementation of social media strategies for health
promotion:
www.cdc.gov/healthcommunication/ToolsTemplates/SocialMediaTool
kit_BM.pdf. The CDC (2023a) also has a social media overview
page at
www.cdc.gov/healthcommunication/toolstemplates/socialmediatoolkit
_bm.pdf. The CDC (2023a) also has a digital and social media page
at www.cdc.gov/digital-social-media-tools/index.html.Promoting Health Literacy in School-Age
Children
Promoting health literacy in school-age children presents special
challenges to health educators. There is wide agreement that
childhood obesity is a serious and growing issue, which is related not
only to poor choice of foods but also to the sedentary lifestyles
promoted by video games and television. In addition, the time once
devoted to health and physical education programs in schools has
given way to more time spent on core subjects, such as math and
science. Auld et al. (2020) recommended strategies to support
health-enriching behaviors, such as customizing and personalizing
information and engaging students using age and developmentally
suitable information, materials, teaching techniques, and learning
approaches. The eHealth programs are developed specifically to
appeal to the generational (i.e., highly connected and computer
literate) and cultural needs of this group.
Although sedentary lifestyles promoted by video game
engagement may contribute to obesity, gaming may be an effective
way to promote health literacy. Here are a few examples and an
overview of very early games. As early as 2005, Donovan described
an interdisciplinary web quest designed to appeal to older school￾age children. The quest is interdisciplinary in that it requires reading
comprehension, critical thinking, presentation, and writing; thus, core
skills and health literacy skills are learned in a single assignment.
Students are directed to the web to search for information on the
pros and cons of low-carbohydrate diets and obesity prevention.
Students learn along the way as they search for information, collect
and interpret it, and then develop a presentation and final paper.
The Cancer Game (Oda & Kristula, n.d.) was developed by a
young man taking a college class on Macromedia software who had
previously undergone a bone marrow transplant. Subsequently, he
and a professor collaborated and expanded the project to its presentform. The game is designed as an arcade-style video game for
cancer patients to relieve stress by visualizing the fighting of cancer
cells. Although cancer victims of any age can access and play the
game, it has a special appeal to children and adolescents. Similarly,
Ben’s Game (https://archive.org/details/bensgame) is a video game
designed to help relieve the stress of cancer treatment for children
(Anderson & Klemm, 2008). According to Cullen et al. (2016),
Squires Quest II is a serious video game designed to increase fruit
and vegetable consumption in fourth and fifth graders; these authors
found an increase in fruit intake at breakfast and increased
vegetable intake at dinner. This is a great example of a health
education program designed to appeal to this connected generation
of learners and their intuitive ability to use interactive technologies.
You can access newer games on the internet by typing “health
games” into a search engine. Be sure to review the information
presented in the game for accuracy before you recommend it to
parents and children. The National Library of Medicine maintains a
site dedicated to health learning games for both children and adults
(https://medlineplus.gov/games.html). You can feel confident in
recommending games from this trusted website because it has been
vetted for accuracy and credibility.
Winkelman et al. (2016) reported that only 12% of adults in the
United States are proficient in health literacy, or the ability to
successfully navigate and function in the healthcare system. This is
cause for grave concern because health literacy is one of the
strongest predictors of health; it is more prognostic than gender, age,
income, or educational status (Leiditch, 2021). Low health literacy is
linked with poor child health outcomes, increased healthcare costs,
and higher mortality rates (Schools for Health in Europe, n.d.;
Winkelman et al., 2016). It is easy to understand why the CDC
(2022) has a website on health literacy to support schools
(www.cdc.gov/healthliteracy/education-support/schools.html) and
why health literacy was included in Healthy People 2010 and Healthy
People 2020 and continues as a goal in Healthy People 2030.Supporting Use of the Internet for Health
Education
Nurses and other healthcare providers must embrace the internet as
a source of health information for patient education and health
literacy. Patients are increasingly turning there for instant information
about their health maladies. Health-related blogs (short for
weblogs, or online journals) and electronic patient and parent
support groups are also proliferating at an astounding rate. Clinicians
need to be prepared to arm patients with the skills required to
identify credible websites. They also need to participate in the
development of well-designed, easy-to-use health education tools.
Finally, they need to convince payers of the necessity of health
education and the powerful effect education has on promoting and
maintaining health. Box 16-4 provides more information about
patient education.
BOX 16-4 CONSIDERATIONS FOR PATIENT
EDUCATION
Julie A. Kenney and Ida Androwich
Nurses need to consider many things when teaching patients. They need to assess
patients’ willingness to learn and reading ability, the means by which they learn best,
and their existing knowledge about the subject. These important considerations for
patient education are depicted in Figure 16-2.Photo: © ERproductions Ltd/Blend Images/Getty Images
Figure 16-2 Choosing an Education Strategy
Nurses also need to consider cultural, language, and generational differences when
teaching their patients. If the nurse chooses to use an electronic method to educate the
patient, digital natives (i.e., patients who have grown up with technology) need to be
taught differently from digital immigrants (i.e., those who are late adopters of
technology; “Educational Strategies,” 2006). Digital natives are typically born after 1982
and may also be referred to as Millennials. This generation prefers to learn using
technology and learns quite well if information is presented in a format to which they
are accustomed, such as an interactive video game to introduce them to a topic. This
group is also comfortable using information that they can access via their handheld
devices, such as smartphones and tablets, as well as wearable devices, such as
smartwatches. Those born before 1982 have learning styles that range from preferring
to learn in a classroom setting to reading a book about the topic to learning using a
hands-on, interactive approach (“Educational Strategies,” 2006).A systematic review of the literature related to teaching methods (Friedman et al.,
2011) suggested that all the various modalities ranging from computer technologies to
demonstrations and reviews of written materials can be effective as long as they are
structured and specifically designed for and congruent with the patient’s culture. More
recently, Sawyer et al. (2016) tested a tablet-based education program for patients with
heart failure. They sought to demonstrate the value of the tablet-based education
approach to staff and at the same time find ways to minimize the disruptiveness of the
technology-based education on clinical workflow, ensure patent safety by establishing
specific procedures for device cleaning, and suggest strategies for maintaining the
security of the devices. They conclude that technology-based learning tools may be
effective in helping patients manage their disease after discharge. They also
emphasize the need to consider clinician workflow and device security to ensure a
successful implementation.
The next generation, Generation Z, are those born between 1996 and 2010
(Spitznagel, 2020). This generation is growing up in a highly sophisticated and complex
digital environment and spending more time with digital devices and the internet than
the previous Generation Y. They are also the most ethnically and racially diverse.
These individuals are active problem solvers and comfortable and familiar with getting
information on demand. They do not like lectures and expect to be able to customize
their educational episodes. The teaching strategies should fit with the patient’s culture
and include using up-to-date instructional technologies, including communication and
feedback incorporating social media and smart devices.
REFERENCES
Educational strategies in generational designs. (2006). Progress in Transplantation,
16(1), 8–9. https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/pdf/10.1177/152692480601600101
Friedman, A., Cosby, R., Boyko, S., Hatton-Bauer, J., & Turnbull, G. (2011). Effective
teaching strategies and methods of delivery for patient education: A systematic
review and practice guideline recommendations. Journal of Cancer Education, 26,
12–21. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13187-010-0183-x
Sawyer, T., Nelson, M. J., McKee, V., Bowers, M. T., Meggitt, C., Baxt, S. K.,
Washington, D., Saladino, L., Lehman, E. P., & Brewer, C. (2016). Implementing
electronic tabletbased education of acute care patients. Critical Care Nurse, 36(1),
60–70. https://doi.org/10.4037/ccn2016541
Spitznagel, E. (2020). Generation Z is bigger than millennials—And they’re out to
change the world. New York Post. https://nypost.com/2020/01/25/generation-z-is￾bigger-than-millennials-and-theyre-out-to-change-the-world/
The HONcode and TRUSTe accreditation symbols are two of the
most common symbols that indicate trustworthy and secure
websites. Internet users can also look at the domain name of the
website as a clue to trustworthiness. Many users gravitate toward
university sites (.edu), government sites (.gov), and HCO sites (.org).
Remember that commercial sites (earn money from advertisers andseek to sell products or services) will use the (.com) domain name
and may or may not have credible information to share.
The National Library of Medicine and the NIH jointly sponsor
MedlinePlus (https://medlineplus.gov), a website that has a tutorial
for learning how to evaluate health information and an electronic
guide to web surfing that is available in both English and Spanish. A
similar guide explains the major things one should evaluate when
accessing health-related resources on the web (National Center for
Complementary and Integrative Health, 2018). Suggest that patients
visit these sites to become more adept at identifying whether a
website is credible before they adopt the recommendations provided.
Some healthcare professionals have partnered with their
organizations to develop patient education materials. These
materials must be carefully reviewed for accuracy and usability. The
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (2014) published an
assessment tool for both print and audiovisual patient education
materials. Its tool is designed to assess both understandability and
actionability by providing a series of review criteria for each of these
domains. Clearly, clinicians need to engage patients to partner with
them in the management of their health. Refer to Box 16-4 and Box
16-5 to review effective education methods used in teaching patients
and their families about their health challenges.
BOX 16-5 A CLINICIAN’S VIEW ON PATIENT
EDUCATION
Denise D. Tyler
Knowledge dissemination in nursing practice includes sharing information with patients
and families so that they understand their healthcare needs well enough to participate
in developing the plan of care; make informed decisions about their health; and,
ultimately, comply with the plan of care, both during hospitalization and as outpatients.
There are several effective methods for educating patients and their families. One￾on-one and classroom instruction are traditional and valuable forms of education. One￾on-one education is interactive and can be adjusted at any time during the process,
based on the needs of the individual patient or family; it can also be supplemented by
written material, videos, and web-based learning applications. Classroom education
can be beneficial because patients and families with similar needs or problems cannetwork, thereby enhancing the individual experience. However, the ability to interact
with each member of the group and tailor the educational experience based on
individual needs may be limited by the size and dissimilarities of the group. Individual
follow-up should be available when possible.
Paper-based education that is created, printed, and distributed by individual
institutions or providers can be very effective because materials can be distributed at
any time and reviewed when the patient feels like learning. Many agencies, such as the
CDC, have education for patients available on their websites. These documents can be
reviewed online or printed by healthcare providers or patients. Organizations can also
develop and distribute information and instructions specific to their policies and
procedures. In addition, printed educational material can be purchased from companies
that employ experts in the subject matter and instructional design.
One of the more popular sources of patient education information is the internet.
Many hospitals and HCOs provide proprietary information in this manner, such as
directions to the facility, information on procedures, and instructions on what to expect
during hospitalization. Other health organizations, such as the NIH, provide detailed
information on their websites. Clinicians should be cautious when recommending
websites to patients and families because not all sites are reliable or valid.
Many companies that provide clinical information systems or electronic health
records also include patient education materials linked to the clinical system via an
intranet. Thus, standardized instructions that are specific to a procedure or disease
process can be printed from this computer-based application. Discharge instructions
that are interdisciplinary and patient specific can often be modified via drop-down lists
or selectable items that can be deleted or changed by the clinician. This ability to
modify before printing provides more consistent and individualized instruction. The
computer-based generation of instruction is preferable to free-text and verbal
instruction because it also allows the information to be linked to a coded nursing
language and therefore easily used for measurement and quality assurance reporting.
Relevant triggers may be embedded in the clinical information systems. For example,
when a patient answers yes to a question about current smoking, smoking cessation
information should automatically be printed, or a trigger should remind the nurse to
explore this topic with the patient and then provide the patient with preprinted
information on smoking cessation.
Integration of standardized discharge instructions and patient education into the
clinical system is another way to improve the compliance and documentation of
education; it also streamlines the workflow of clinicians. Printing the information to give
to the patient should be seamless to the clinician who is documenting information into
the patient’s record. The format should be logical and easy to read. The more
transparent the process, the more efficient the system and the easier it is to use for the
clinician. What I envision for the future is a system that “remembers” the style of
learning preferred by patients and their families, prompts the provider to print handouts,
and programs the bedside computer/video education system, based on previous
selections and surveys. This interactive patient and family education would be
integrated into the clinical system and the patient’s personal health record.
Some providers have developed a list of credible websites and
apps that are shared with patients or family members.Recommendations for websites might include the U.S. Department
of Health and Human Services–sponsored MyHealthfinder site
(https://health.gov/myhealthfinder), a website dedicated to helping
consumers find credible information on the internet. Other excellent
sources of reliable information are the NIH, the CDC, MedlinePlus,
and the National Health Information Center (https://health.gov/our￾work/health-literacy/resources/national-health-information-center).
Some of the apps (found on iTunes for iPhones or Google Play for
Android devices) that might be recommended include Mayo Clinic on
Pregnancy, WebMD Pain Coach, MyFitnessPal, and Understanding
Diseases. These are great examples of the wealth of patient
information being developed as apps by hospitals and other
healthcare providers. More apps are being developed every day to
engage people in managing and taking control of their health.
Perhaps the most important thing that healthcare professionals can
stress is that not all apps have credible and valid information. We
must encourage our patients to become savvy users of electronic
information sources.Future Directions for Engaging Patients
Predicting future directions for technology-based health education is
somewhat difficult because one may not be able to completely
envision the technology of the future. One can predict, however, that
some current technologies will be used increasingly to support health
literacy and new technologies will be developed every day. For
example, audio and video podcasts may become more
commonplace in health education and be provided as free
downloads from the websites of HCOs.
Voice recognition software used to navigate the web may reduce
the frustration and confusion associated with attempting to spell
complex medical terms. However, the confusion and frustration may
increase if the patient or client is unable to pronounce the terms.
Voice interactivity should help to reduce the digital access disparity
associated with those who have limited keyboard or mouse skills.
For those persons with visual impairments, some websites may
provide both audio and text information and support increased text
size for greater ease of reading (Anderson & Klemm, 2008).
Many websites associated with government and national
organizations are also providing multiple-language access to health
information and decision support tools (MedlinePlus, n.d.). The
multilanguage access broadens the population to whom education
can be provided, and the decision support programs allow users to
access results that are tailored to their age, risk factors, or disease
state (Anderson & Klemm, 2008).
As patient engagement strategies become more commonplace,
we will also see a movement toward connected health. Those
individuals who are frequent email users may be interested in being
able to communicate with physicians and other healthcare personnel
via email or a practice portal messaging system rather than the
telephone. This idea previously met with some resistance from
physicians who perceived email correspondence as bothersome andtime-consuming. However, it is possible that work efficiency might
increase if patients and their needs are screened via secure email or
message before an office or a clinic visit. For example, as a result of
an email correspondence in lieu of an initial office visit, medications
could be changed or diagnostic tests could be performed before the
office visit. In addition, patients could be directed to an interactive
screening form housed on a secure website where they would
answer a series of questions that would help them decide whether
they should call for an appointment, head for the emergency room,
or self-manage the issue. If self-management is the outcome of the
screening tool, then the patient or caregiver could be directed to a
credible website for more information. The idea is not to interfere
with or replace the face-to-face visit but rather to supplement the
provider–patient relationship and perhaps streamline the efficiency of
healthcare delivery. Interestingly, Diaz (2022) noted that many
physicians and healthcare systems are now billing for email
correspondence if the correspondence required physician expertise
and took more than 5 minutes.
Wearable technologies are becoming increasingly popular among
tech-savvy patients. These technologies are promoting a paradigm
shift from provider-centric to consumer-centric care.
The most common consumer-based wearables are fitness
trackers, but there are no clear guidelines as to how to integrate the
data these devices collect into a patient’s health record and make
them actionable.
Medgadget (2020) announced its breathable, stretchable,
electronic fabric for new medical wearables that offers the “potential
to monitor the body over extended periods of time in unprecedented
ways. The heart’s rhythms, flexion of joints, and other biomedical
parameters can be tracked with high fidelity and continuously using
devices that can conform to the body” (para. 1). The breathability is
the key to the success of its product, with the electronics embedded
into the stretchable material. This material permits gases “such as
volatile organic compounds and sweat to come through thereby
allowing it to be worn over the skin for many days” (para. 2). The
more we can make our tools easy to comprehend and use, the moreengaged and compliant our patients will be in their health and
wellness journey. Virtual and augmented reality tools are increasingly
being used for “stress relieving, relaxation, visualization, and guided
meditation tools” (Polet, 2022, para. 3). The literature is beginning to
reflect an expansion of concepts beyond patient engagement to
enablement, empowerment, and action. LeRouge et al. (2022) stated
that “the path to empowered activation includes healthy consumers’
responses to critical personal assessments, leading to emergent
states of engagement, enablement, and empowerment” (p. 2). They
defined engagement as “individual motivation to participate in self￾management behaviors”; enablement as “having appropriate
knowledge, skills, and abilities to understand one’s health condition
and make decisions”; and empowerment as “a consequence of
enablement and engagement and takes a form of an emergent state
and process” (p. 3) leading to action.Summary
The healthcare delivery system is honing its engagement strategies
for patient-centered, connected health. Hospitals are using social
media to engage and connect with their patients. The consumer
empowerment and connected health movement will continue to drive
the need for access to quality health education, engagement, and
support programs. In an ideal world, practitioners would design
educational materials that are user friendly, culturally competent,
interesting, dynamic, and interactive and that meet the skills,
education needs, and interests of the user.
THOUGHT-PROVOKING QUESTIONS
1. Choose two patient engagement or connectivity tools and discuss specifically how
you would use them to deliver care in your practice.
2. Formulate a patient education plan for a common chronic health challenge related
to your practice. Provide a rationale for each approach and describe a technology
tool you would use to engage and educate the patient and their family.
3. Reflect on connected health potentials in your practice. What are you doing
currently that connects and engages your patients in managing their health?
Describe in detail what you plan to do in the next 6 months to a year.
4. Explore the Healthy People 2030 framework
(https://health.gov/healthypeople/priority-areas/health-literacy-healthy-people￾2030). How would you explain health literacy based on the 2030 goal? Determine
and describe in detail several ways to promote health literacy across the life span.R E F E R E N C E S
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. (2014). The Patient Education Materials
Assessment (PEMAT) and user’s guide.
www.ahrq.gov/sites/default/files/publications/files/pemat_guide.pdf
Anderson, A., & Klemm, P. (2008). The internet: Friend or foe when providing patient
education? Clinical Journal of Oncology Nursing, 12(1), 55–63.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1188/08.CJON.55-63
Auld, M. E., Allen, M. P., Hampton, C., Montes, J. H., Sherry, C., Mickalide, A. D., Logan, R.,
Alvarado-Little, W., & Parson, K. (2020). Health literacy and health education in schools:
Collaboration for action. NAM Perspectives. National Academy of Medicine.
https://doi.org/10.31478/202007b
Carmona, K. A., Chittamuru, D., Kravitz, R. L., Ramondt, S., & Ramírez, A. S. (2022).
Health information seeking from an intelligent web-based symptom checker: Cross￾sectional questionnaire study. Journal of Medical Internet Research, 24(8), e36322.
https://doi.org/10.2196/36322
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2011). The health communicator’s social
media toolkit.
www.cdc.gov/healthcommunication/ToolsTemplates/SocialMediaToolkit_BM.pdf
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2022). Health literacy: Schools.
www.cdc.gov/healthliteracy/education-support/schools.html
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2023a). CDC social media.
www.cdc.gov/digital-social-media-tools/index.html
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2023b). Health literacy.
www.cdc.gov/healthliteracy
Council of Economic Advisers. (2015, July). Issue brief: Mapping the digital divide.
https://obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/sites/default/files/wh_digital_divide_issue_brief.p
df
Cullen, K. W., Liu, Y., & Thompson, D. I. (2016). Meal-specific dietary changes from Squires
Quest! II: A serious video game intervention. Journal of Nutrition Education and
Behavior, 48(5), P326–P330. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jneb.2016.02.004
Curry, D. (2023, August 16). Fitness app review and usage statistics (2023). Business of
Apps. www.businessofapps.com/data/fitness-app-market
Diaz, N. (2022, November 28). More health systems charging for MyChart messages.
Becker’s Healthcare. www.beckershospitalreview.com/ehrs/more-health-systems￾charging-for-mychart-messages.html
Donovan, O. (2005). The carbohydrate quandary: Achieving health literacy through an
interdisciplinary WebQuest. Journal of School Health, 75(9), 359–362.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1746-1561.2005.00050.x
Fox, S. (2011, February 1). Health topics. Pew Research Center. www.pewinternet.org/wp￾content/uploads/sites/9/media/Files/Reports/2011/PIP_Health_Topics.pdf
Fox, S., & Duggan, M. (2013, January 15). Health online 2013. Pew Research Center.
www.pewinternet.org/2013/01/15/health-online-2013Fox, S., & Purcell, K. (2010, March 24). Chronic disease and the internet. Pew Research
Center. www.pewinternet.org/2010/03/24/chronic-disease-and-the-internet
Health.gov. (n.d.). Health literacy in Healthy People 2030.
https://health.gov/healthypeople/priority-areas/health-literacy-healthy-people-2030
Health.gov. (2016). Health literacy online: A guide for simplifying the user experience.
https://health.gov/healthliteracyonline
Health.gov. (2021). Health literacy. https://health.gov/our-work/health-literacy
Health Resources and Services Administration. (2022). Health literacy.
www.hrsa.gov/about/organization/bureaus/ohe/health-literacy/index.html
Heath, S. (2018, March 8). Patients welcome AI tech to create access to convenient care.
PatientEngagementHIT. https://patientengagementhit.com/news/patients-welcome-ai￾tech-to-create-access-to-convenient-care
Heath, S. (2019, February 19). Patients ready to embrace AI, patient engagement
technologies. PatientEngagementHIT. https://patientengagementhit.com/news/patients￾ready-to-embrace-ai-patient-engagement-technologies
Inc. (2018, October 24). How technology is changing health care for the better.
www.inc.com/aflac/changing-healthcare-for-the-better.html
Lapowsky, I. (2015, February 10). Google will make health searches less scary with fact￾checked results. WIRED. www.wired.com/2015/02/google-health-search
Leidich, J. (2021, January 19). Improving adherence through patient health literacy. Hayes
Hall Gazette. https://desis.osu.edu/seniorthesis/index.php/2021/01/19/improving￾adherence-through-patient-health-literacy
LeRouge, C., Durneva, P., Lyon, V., & Thompson, M. (2022). Health consumer engagement,
enablement, and empowerment in smartphone-enabled home-based diagnostic testing
for viral infections: Mixed methods study. JMIR mHealth and uHealth, 10(6), e34685.
https://doi.org/10.2196/34685
Lober, W. B., & Flowers, J. L. (2011). Consumer empowerment in health care amid the
internet and social media. Seminars in Oncology Nursing, 27(3), 169–182.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.soncn.2011.04.002
Medgadget. (2020, May 1). Breathable, stretchable electronic fabric for new medical
wearables. www.medgadget.com/2020/05/breathable-stretchable-electronic-fabric-for￾new-medical-wearables.html
MedlinePlus. (n.d.). Health information in multiple languages.
www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/languages/languages.html
National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health. (2018). Finding and evaluating
online resources. www.nccih.nih.gov/health/finding-and-evaluating-online-resources
National Institutes of Health. (2021). Clear communication: Health literacy.
www.nih.gov/clearcommunication/healthliteracy.htm
Neiger, B. L., Thackeray, R., Burton, S. H., Giraud-Carrier, C. G., & Fagen, M. C. (2013).
Evaluating social media’s capacity to develop engaged audiences in health promotion
settings: Use of Twitter metrics as a case study. Health Promotion Practice, 14(2), 157–
162. https://doi.org/10.1177/1524839912469378
Oda, Y., & Kristula, D. (n.d.). The Cancer Game: A side-scrolling, arcade-style, cancer￾fighting video game. www.cancergame.orgPearl, R. (2019, April 17). 3 ways to advance the credibility of online health information.
KevinMD.com. www.kevinmd.com/blog/2019/04/3-ways-to-advance-the-credibility-of￾online-health-information.html
Polet, D. (2022, January 19). 5 ways patient engagement technology is changing
healthcare. Wellbe. https://wellbe.me/5-ways-patient-engagement-technology-is￾changing-healthcare
Reen, G., Muirhead, L., & Langdon, D. (2019). Usability of health information websites
designed for adolescents: Systematic review, neurodevelopmental model, and design
brief. Journal of Medical Internet Research, 21(4): e11584.
http://dx.doi.org/10.2196/11584
Schools for Health in Europe. (n.d.). Health literacy: Resources and glossary.
www.schoolsforhealth.org/resources/glossary/health-literacy
Seismic. (2017, May 30). The role of artificial intelligence in patient engagement.
https://seismic.com/blog/the-role-of-artificial-intelligence-in-patient-engagement
Shajahan, A., & Pasquetto, I. V. (2022). Countering medical misinformation online and in the
clinic. American Family Physician, 106(2), 124–125.
Stansberry, K., Anderson, J., & Rainie, L. (2019, October 28). Themes about the next 50
years of life online. Pew Research Center.
www.pewresearch.org/internet/2019/10/28/themes-about-the-next-50-years-of-life-online
Thobias, J., & Kiwanuka, A. (2018). Design and implementation of an m-health data model
for improving health information access for reproductive and child health services in low
resource settings using a participatory action research approach. BMC Medical
Informatics and Decision Making, 18(45). https://doi.org/10.1186/s12911-018-0622-x
Winkelman, T., Caldwell, M., Bertram, B., & Davis, M. (2016). Promoting health literacy for
children and adolescents. Pediatrics, 138(6), e20161937.
https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2016-1937C H A P T E R 1 7
Using Informatics to Promote
Community and Population
Health
OBJECTIVES
1. Provide an overview of community and population health informatics.
2. Assess informatics tools for promoting community and population health.
3. Explore the roles of federal, state, and local public health agencies in the
development of public health informatics.
KEY TERMS
Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR)
Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System
bioterrorism
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)
community risk assessment (CRA)
crowdsourcing
Division of Health Informatics and Surveillance (DHIS)
National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey
national health information network
prevention informatics
public health
public health informatics (PHI)
Public Health Information Network (PHIN)
public health intervention
quality, research, and public health (QRPH)regional health information exchange
risk assessment
social media
Suicide Prevention Community Assessment Tool
surveillance
surveillance data system
syndromic surveillance
Youth Risk Behavior Surveillance SystemIntroduction
The need for informatics tools to promote and support public health
has never been more apparent. Note the following global public
health crises of the past two decades alone: SARS, MERS, Ebola,
H1N1 (swine flu), Zika, and COVID-19.
In the late fall of 2002, severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS),
the first of several novel coronaviruses, appeared in China. By
March 2003, SARS had become recognized as a global threat.
According to data from the World Health Organization (WHO; 2021),
more than 8,000 people from 29 countries became infected with this
previously unknown virus, and more than 700 people died. By 2004,
the last SARS cases were caused by laboratory-acquired infections.
Because of computerized global data collection, the potentially
negative effect of a widespread global epidemic was averted. Middle
East respiratory syndrome (MERS) emerged in Saudi Arabia in 2012
and was primarily limited to Arabian countries, with a mortality rate of
3 or 4 out of 10 cases (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
[CDC], 2015). In the late fall of 2019, SARS-CoV-2 (COVID-19)
emerged in Wuhan, China; spread rapidly around the world; and was
declared a pandemic by the WHO on March 11, 2020 (Felman,
2021). This pandemic resulted in lockdowns in many countries with
policies for extreme social distancing enforced to slow the spread of
the disease.
Previous pandemic declarations had all been related to flu viruses:
H1N1 in 1918, H2N2 from 1957 to 1958, H3N2 in 1968, and H1N1 in
2009 (CDC, 2018b). The 2009 H1N1 swine flu outbreak infected
60.8 million people in the United States, with a mortality rate of 0.2%
(Hickok, 2020). Klobucista and Renwick (2020) reported that during
the 2014 Ebola epidemic, 11,316 people died, with most cases
confined to West Africa. As the Zika virus threat emerged, the CDC
(2022d) reported that its Emergency Operations Center (EOC)was activated for Zika on January 22, 2016, and moved to a level 1 activation—the
highest level—on February 8, 2016. The EOC is the command center for
monitoring and coordinating the emergency response to Zika, bringing together
CDC scientists with expertise in arboviruses like Zika, reproductive health, birth
defects and developmental disabilities, and travel health. (para. 1)
The CDC’s EOC staff works in collaboration with local, national,
and international response partners to analyze, validate, and
efficiently exchange information about outbreaks.
As nurses navigated these outbreaks, they appreciated the need
for timely information to be shared with the world population as well
as with the healthcare workers responsible for caring for them.
Modjarrad et al. (2016) reported on a WHO meeting in which
participants “recognized that it is not enough for parties to simply
agree, in principle, on sharing primary data, as the world must also
commit to tackling the technical challenges of implementing data
sharing agreements by simplifying and standardizing data capture
procedures, assuring data quality, and harmonizing disparate data
platforms” (para. 5). These concepts are central to informatics.
The CDC (2022c) public health surveillance center defines
surveillance as “the collection, analysis and use of data to target
public health prevention. It is the foundation of public health practice”
(para. 1). The CDC provides interactive databases and surveys, as
well as methods, to guide conducting and evaluating surveillance
systems and data standardization. In 2018, Lee et al. reported that
the CDC had more than 110 surveillance systems, many of them for
single diseases or conditions that were added as a need arose,
which resulted in poor coordination and burdensome experiences for
users.
Many surveillance systems, loosely termed syndromic surveillance
systems, use data that are not diagnostic of a disease but that might
indicate the early stages of an outbreak (see Figure 17-1). Outbreak
detection is the overriding purpose of syndromic surveillance for
terrorism preparedness. Enhanced case finding and monitoring the
course and population characteristics of a recognized outbreak are
also potential benefits of syndromic surveillance. In recent years,
new data have been used by public health officials to enhancesurveillance, such as patients’ chief complaints in emergency
departments, ambulance log sheets, prescriptions filled, retail drug
and product purchases, school or work absenteeism, and medical
signs and symptoms in persons seen in various clinical settings.
With faster, more specific, and more affordable diagnostic methods
and decision support tools, timely recognition of reportable diseases
with the potential to lead to a substantial outbreak is now possible.
Tools for pattern recognition can be used to screen data for patterns
needing further public health investigation. For example, during the
2003 SARS epidemic, the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC) worked to develop surveillance criteria to identify
persons with SARS in the United States, and the surveillance case
definition changed throughout the epidemic to reflect increased
understanding of SARS (CDC, 2017). At this writing, COVID-19
surveillance is ongoing and consists of several data sources,
including but not limited to virus and flu surveillance systems,
academic systems, case reporting systems, research labs, and
commercial testing labs. The CDC (2023b) lists the following goals
for COVID-19 surveillance:Figure 17-1 Syndromic Surveillance System
Description
To monitor spread and intensity of COVID-19 disease in the
United States
To understand disease severity and the spectrum of illness
To understand risk factors for severe disease and transmission
To monitor for changes in the virus that causes COVID-19
To estimate disease burden
To produce data for forecasting COVID-19 spread and impact
(para. 3)
Information acquired by the collection and processing of
population health data becomes the basis for knowledge in the field
of public health. There is an ever-increasing need for timely
information about the health of communities, states, and countries.Knowledge about disease trends and other threats to community
health can improve program planning, decision-making, and care
delivery. Patients seen from the perspective of major health threats
within their communities can benefit from opportunities for early
intervention.
This chapter focuses on the application of informatics methods to
public health surveillance. The availability of clinical information for
public health has been fundamentally changed by the introduction of
the electronic health record (EHR) and health information technology
(IT), both of which allow for the efficient collection and sharing of
data that can be “leveraged for quality improvement and prevention
activities” (HealthIT.gov, 2023a, para. 1).Public Health Essential Services
Public health focuses on health promotion and disease prevention.
According to the CDC Foundation (n.d.),
[p]ublic health is the science of protecting and improving the health of people and
their communities. This work is achieved by promoting healthy lifestyles,
researching disease and injury prevention, and detecting, preventing and
responding to infectious diseases.
Overall, public health is concerned with protecting the health of entire populations.
These populations can be as small as a local neighborhood, or as big as an entire
country or region of the world. (para. 1–2)
In the late 1980s the core public health functions were identified as
assessment, policy development, and assurance. However, these
categories were so broad that they did not provide direction for
public health practitioners. In the 1990s, a task force identified 10
essential services of public health, which better defined how local
health departments could protect community health (Correll, 2022).
The essential functions as defined by the CDC (2023c) are as
follows:
1. Assess and monitor population health status, factors that
influence health, and community needs and assets
2. Investigate, diagnose, and address health problems and
hazards affecting the population
3. Communicate effectively to inform and educate people about
health, factors that influence it, and how to improve it
4. Strengthen, support, and mobilize communities and
partnerships to improve health
5. Create, champion, and implement policies, plans, and laws that
impact health
6. Utilize legal and regulatory actions designed to improve and
protect the public’s health7. Assure an effective system that enables equitable access to the
individual services and care needed to be healthy
8. Build and support a diverse and skilled public health workforce
9. Improve and innovate public health functions through ongoing
evaluation, research, and continuous quality improvement
10. Build and maintain a strong organizational infrastructure for
public health (para. 3)What Is Public Health Informatics?
Historically, Dr. John Snow can be designated as the “father” of
public health informatics (PHI) (Figure 17-2). In 1854, he plotted
information about cholera deaths and was able to determine that the
deaths were clustered around the same water pump in London. He
convinced authorities that the cholera deaths were associated with
that water pump; when the pump handle was removed, the cholera
outbreak ended. It was Dr. Snow’s focus on the cholera-affected
population as a whole rather than on a single patient, as well as his
meticulous collection and plotting of data, that led to his discovery of
the source of the cholera outbreak (Boston University Medical
Campus, n.d). Notice the relationship to the DIKW (data, information,
knowledge, and wisdom) paradigm: Data were collected and
interpreted (information), and knowledge was generated that led to a
wise decision (wisdom).
Figure 17-2 Public Health Informatics
DescriptionFlorence Nightingale should also be recognized as an early public
health informaticist. Her recommendations about medical reform and
the need for improved sanitary conditions were based on data about
morbidity and mortality that she had compiled from her experiences
in Crimea and England. Her efforts led to a total reorganization of
how and which healthcare statistics were collected (Dossey, 2000).
Just as information has been recognized as an asset in the
business world, health care is now recognized as an information￾intensive field that requires timely, accurate information from many
sources. Health information systems address the collection, storage,
analysis, interpretation, and communication of health data and
information. Many health disciplines, such as medicine and nursing,
have developed their own concepts of informatics. That trend has
reached the field of public and community health. “When applied to
public health, informatics can be used to enable effective monitoring
and surveillance, support improved decision-making, and improve
population health” (Public Health Informatics Institute, n.d.-b, para.
4). This area of informatics differs from others because it is focused
on the promotion of health and disease prevention in populations
and communities. PHI efficiently and effectively organizes and
manages data, information, and knowledge generated and used by
public health professionals to fulfill the core functions of public
health: assessment, policy, and assurance. Public health changes
the social conditions and systems that affect everyone within a given
community. Because of public health initiatives, people understand
the importance of clean water, the dangers of secondhand smoke,
and that seat belts save lives. Community empowerment can be
realized through the collaborative collection and analysis of data that
leads to improved community health outcomes and transformed
public health.
PHI addresses the data, information, and knowledge that public
health professionals generate and use to meet the core functions of
public health. Public health initiatives include prevention of
epidemics and the spread of disease; protection against
environmental hazards; promotion of health, disaster response, and
recovery; and provision of access to health care. All these initiativesare dependent on quality data and information exchange. As the
Public Health Informatics Institute (n.d.-b) explained,
[p]ublic health informatics assures that the right technologies are used to improve
timely delivery of quality data and assists data-driven decision making. It builds
bridges across siloed public health work areas by “translating” between these
communities, creating opportunities for interoperable information pathways.
Ultimately, public health informatics empowers disease interventions and
prevention—leading to better health of individuals and the community in which they
live. (para. 4)
The Integrating the Healthcare Enterprise initiative, to ensure that
healthcare information can be shared more easily (using common
standards) and used more effectively, has inspired the creation of
the domain known as quality, research, and public health (QRPH).
Participants in this domain address the repurposing of clinical,
demographic, and financial data collected in the process of providing
clinical care to the monitoring of disease patterns; incidence,
prevalence, and situational awareness of such patterns; and
identification of new patterns of disease not previously known or
anticipated. Such data can be incorporated within existing public
health population analyses and programs for direct outreach and
condition management through registries and locally determined
appropriate treatment programs or protocols (Integrating the
Healthcare Enterprise, n.d.).Community Health Risk Assessment: Tools
for Acquiring Knowledge
As the public has become more aware of harmful elements in the
environment, risk assessment tools have been developed. Such
tools allow assessment of pesticide use, exposure to harmful
chemicals, contaminants in food and water, and toxic pollutants in
the air to determine whether potential hazards need to be
addressed. One such tool is the Public Health Risk Assessment Tool
(PHRAT) developed by Drexel University. “The tool defines risk as
the expectation of loss from a hazard and calculates risk as the
product of a hazard’s probability and severity, as measured by its
impact across five domains: human health, health care services,
inpatient health care infrastructure, community health, and public
health services” (Peters et al., 2019, p. S286). Risk factor
assessments provide quantitative measures of the effect of a hazard
as well as adjusted risk scores, which are calculated based on the
relative effect of a hazard in a subpopulation. The PHRAT also
measures preparedness based on a public health agency’s self￾assessment of capability for emergency response and healthcare
capacity. The results of the assessment are used “to prioritize
planning and plan exercises for specific hazards” (p. S288), such as
weather emergencies and outbreaks of infectious diseases.
The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA; 2023a) “uses
risk assessment to characterize the nature and magnitude of risks to
human health for various populations—for example residents and
recreational visitors, both children and adults. The EPA also
estimates risks to ecological receptors, including plants, birds, other
wildlife, and aquatic life” (para. 4) and to weigh the benefits and
costs of various program alternatives for reducing exposure to
potential hazards. It may also influence public policy and regulatory
decisions. Health risk assessment is a constantly developing
process, based in sound science and professional judgments. Thereare usually four steps ascribed to human health risk assessment
(Figure 17-3):
Modified from: U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. (2016). Conducting a human health
risk assessment. www.epa.gov/risk/conducting-human-health-risk-assessment.
Figure 17-3 Four-Step Risk Assessment Process
Description
1. Hazard identification examines whether a stressor has the
potential to cause harm to humans and/or ecological systems
and, if so, under what circumstances.
2. Dose-response assessment examines the numerical
relationship between exposure and effects.
3. Exposure assessment examines what is known about the
frequency, timing, and levels of contact with a stressor.
4. Risk characterization examines how well the data support
conclusions about the nature and extent of the risk from
exposure to environmental stressors. (EPA, 2023b, para. 2)
The overall question the risk assessment must answer is, “How
much risk is acceptable?” Risk factor systems are used throughoutthe United States and may be local, regional, or national in scope.
Specific risk assessment tools exist for specific health issues, such
as the Suicide Prevention Community Assessment Tool, which
addresses general community information, prevention networks, and
the demographics of the target population and community assets
and risk factors. Other risk assessment tools include the Youth Risk
Behavior Surveillance System, Behavioral Risk Factor
Surveillance System, and National Health and Nutrition
Examination Survey.
Determining the presence of risk factors in a community is a key
part of a community risk assessment (CRA). Communities may be
concerned about which elements in the environment affect or may
affect the community’s health, the level of environmental risk, and
other factors that should be included in public health planning. The
value of a CRA derives from its ability to provide information crucial
to planning, build consensus regarding how to mobilize community
resources, and allow for comparison of risks with those of other
communities. The goal of a CRA is risk reduction and improved
health. A CRA may identify unmet needs and opportunities for action,
which may help set new priorities for local public health units. It may
also be used to monitor the effect of prevention programs.Processing Knowledge and Information to
Support Epidemiology and Monitoring
Disease Outbreaks
There is a need to define the role of federal, state, and local public
health agencies in the development of PHI and IT applications. The
availability of IT today challenges all stakeholders in the health of the
public to adopt new systems that can provide adequate disease
surveillance; it also challenges people to improve outmoded
processes.
Preparedness in public health requires more timely detection of
potential health threats, situational awareness, surveillance,
outbreak management, countermeasures, response, and
communications. Surveillance uses health-related data that signal a
sufficient probability of a case or an outbreak that warrants further
public health response. Historically, although syndromic surveillance
has been used to target investigations of potential infectious cases,
its use to detect possible outbreaks associated with bioterrorism is
increasingly being explored by public health officials (CDC, 2018a).
Early detection of possible outbreaks can be achieved through timely
and complete receipt, review, and investigation of disease case
reports; by improving the ability to recognize patterns in data that
may be indicative of a possible outbreak early in its course; and
through receipt of new types of data that can signify an outbreak
earlier in its course. Such new types of data might include
identification of absences from work or school; increased purchases
of healthcare products, including specific types of over-the-counter
medications; presenting symptoms to healthcare providers; and
laboratory test orders. The University of Pittsburgh’s Real-time
Outbreak and Disease Surveillance Laboratory (RODS), for
example, developed the National Retail Data Monitor (NRDM)
system. The NRDM collects data on over-the-counter medications
and other healthcare products from 28,000 stores and usescomputer algorithms to detect unusual purchase patterns that might
potentially signal a disease outbreak (RODS Laboratory, 2020).
Keshavamurthy et al. (2022) described the use of infectious disease
(ID) prediction models using artificial intelligence (AI) and machine
learning processes to provide early warning in disease outbreaks.
“By combining robust data collection at the speed of relevance,
engineering, and analytic strategies, models can now predict disease
event information, such as location, timing, intensity, and the
influence of various factors responsible for its occurrence, which can
be used to effectively mitigate ID impacts” (pp. 1–2). A
comprehensive surveillance effort supports timely investigation and
identifies data needs for managing the public health response to an
outbreak or a terrorist event. Informatics tools are becoming
increasingly important in these public health efforts.
To appropriately process public health data, PHI needs a
standardized vocabulary and coding structure. This is especially
important as national public health data are collected and data
mining performed so that data variables can be understood across
systems and between agencies. Health information organizations
(HIOs) have been established to support data sharing via health
information exchanges (HIEs), as promoted by the meaningful use
criteria of the EHR. Central to these initiatives is the need for
standardized codes and terminologies that may be used by the HIOs
to map data from disparate sources (Hyde et al., 2013; Shapiro et
al., 2011). The CDC’s Public Health Information Network (PHIN)
promotes semantic interoperability and secure data exchange
among public health information systems. Among the tools and
resources managed by this CDC (2022b) division are the following:
PHIN Vocabulary Access and Distribution System (PHIN VADS)
PHIN Messaging System
PHIN Public Health Directory (PHIN DIR)
PHIN Vocabulary Standards (para. 3–4)Learn more about these critical initiatives by visiting
www.cdc.gov/phin/index.html. In the early 1990s, the CDC launched
a plan for an integrated surveillance system that moved from stand￾alone systems to networked data exchange built with specific
standards. These early initiatives have evolved into a comprehensive
system for the collection, processing, and sharing of public health
data.
Certainly, the events of September 11, 2001, indicated the need
for the United States to increase its efforts directed toward
prevention of terrorism and accelerated the need for informatics in
public health practice. Today, response requirements include fast
detection, science, communication, integration, and action. In 2005,
the CDC created the National Center for Public Health Informatics
(NCPHI) to provide leadership in the field. This center has since
evolved into the Division of Health Informatics and Surveillance
(DHIS). The DHIS manages two comprehensive public health
surveillance systems, the National Notifiable Diseases Surveillance
System (NNDSS) and the National Syndromic Surveillance Program
(NSSP), and a data hub for research, the CDC Data Hub. It also
develops information systems to support data collection exchange
and processing. DHIS’s stated mission is to “[p]rovide leadership in
surveillance and informatics and support CDC and its partners with
state-of-the-art information systems, capacity building services, and
high-quality data to guide public health decisions and actions” (CDC,
2022a, para. 2). Learn more about these important services at
www.cdc.gov/csels/dhis/strategic-framework.html#Focus-Areas.
The CDC also manages several surveillance systems related to
tracking and managing chronic diseases. For example, there are
systems for cancer, diabetes, kidney disease, smoking, and
pregnancy risk and mortality. Review these systems at
www.cdc.gov/chronicdisease/data/surveillance.htm.
Information is vital to public health programming. The data
processed into public health information can be obtained from
administrative, financial, and facility sources. Included in this data
stream may be encounter, screening, registry, clinical, laboratory,
and surveillance data. Public healthcare professionals recommendedthat the functions of population health beyond surveillance be
integrated into the EHR and the personal health record. Such an
initiative might allow for population-level alerts to be sent to clinicians
through these electronic record systems. Systems now being
developed allow for automated syndromic surveillance of emergency
department records and media surveillance, which in turn supports
early detection of potential pandemic occurrences. Such systems
were tested during the 2009 H1N1 flu, 2014 Ebola, and 2015 Zika
outbreaks and were certainly utilized during the COVID-19 crisis to
track incidence. The public health–enhanced electronic medical
record can provide immediate detection and reporting of notifiable
conditions. The incorporation of geographic information systems
allows public health data to be mapped to specific locations, which
may indicate an immediate need for intervention (CDC, 2019a;
Grannis & Vreeman, 2010). Modernization of data collection and
analysis systems can “engage robustly with healthcare,
communicate meaningfully with the public, improve health equity,
and have the means to protect and promote health” (CDC, 2023d,
para. 2).
Vital statistics databases (e.g., births, deaths, and cancer
diagnoses) from state and local governments are also used for
public health purposes. It should be noted that databases created
with public funds are public databases that are readily available for
use (CDC, 2023a). Access these data via the CDC Wide-ranging
ONline Data for Epidemiologic Research (CDC WONDER) program
at https://wonder.cdc.gov.
The widespread implementation of EHRs is facilitating the concept
of a bidirectional public health–enabled record, which can
automatically send patient information alerts from the point of care to
public health departments when reportable symptoms, conditions, or
diseases are encountered as well as allowing public health
information and recommendations for treatment to be accessible at
the point of care. Kruse et al. (2018) conducted a systematic review
of the literature on the effects of EHRs on population health and
found that EHR use supported population health by increasing
productivity of practitioners, promoting surveillance for chronicdiseases and health promotion activities, and supporting more
comprehensive documentation and data sharing. During the COVID￾19 pandemic, Reeves et al. (2020) described how a team at one
academic health center built and implemented EHR applications to
help manage the pandemic. Among the tools the team built were
screening protocols, EHR templates, and department-specific order
panels that could be modified in real time as learning about the virus
continued; reporting and analytics functions; secure communication
and messaging functions; and optimizing patient-facing technologies
to support telemedicine visits. The health center team concluded that
“[t]he electronic health record and associated technologies are vital
and requisite tools in supporting outbreak management that should
be leveraged to their full potential, and we hope that our experiences
in developing these tools will be helpful to other health systems
facing the same challenge” (p. 16).
Potential applications of HIE to public health have been described
by HealthIT.gov (2023d) and Shapiro et al. (2011). These
applications include syndromic surveillance using data generated
from mandated and nonmandated laboratory results, physician
diagnoses, and emergency or clinic chief complaints; strategies to
locate loved ones in mass-casualty events; and public health alerts
at the individual and population levels. There were three main types
of HIE identified by HealthIT.gov (2023b):
1. Directed exchange is used by a provider to send secure patient
information to another provider.
2. Query-based exchange allows a provider to search for health
information on a patient in an unplanned healthcare encounter,
such as an emergency room visit.
3. Consumer-mediated exchange allows patients to securely
manage their information online and share it as they choose.
(para. 1)
HIE supported by an EHR resulted in better reporting rates for
notifiable diseases (e.g., sexually transmitted infections and
hepatitis): “The results of the study indicate that electronic, pre-populated case reporting forms integrated into providers’ EHR
systems and workflow, enabled by an interoperable HIE network,
can be effective at increasing clinic reporting rates” (Dixon et al.,
2019, para. 10).Applying Knowledge to Health Disaster
Planning and Preparation
The availability of data and the speed of data exchange can have a
significant effect on critical public health functions, such as disease
detection and monitoring, syndromic surveillance, timely intervention,
and overall public health planning. PHI makes real-time surveillance
data available electronically, and investigations and emergencies
can be managed with the tools of informatics. Surveillance data
systems, such as infectious disease trackers, which collect data on
adverse health effects, are invaluable tools for public health officials
to tap for planning, evaluation, or implementation of public health
interventions. The Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease
Registry (ATSDR), for example, is a federal agency that acts as a
repository for research and data regarding hazardous materials. It
serves the public “by responding to environmental health
emergencies; investigating emerging environmental health threats;
conducting research on the health impacts of hazardous waste sites;
and building capabilities of and providing actionable guidance to
state and local health partners” (ATSDR, 2023, para. 1). Prior to the
2009 H1N1 pandemic, there was no common infrastructure to
respond to pandemics, but the development of health IT is creating
opportunities that go far beyond national boundaries to affect global
public health initiatives. In May 2017, the WHO released an updated
report (previous versions were released in 2009 and 2013) titled
“Pandemic Influenza Risk Management,” with the goal of informing
and harmonizing national and international pandemic preparedness
and response. In a similar vein, the U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services (2017) released a pandemic influenza plan
designed to direct planning for 10 years. The plan detailed seven
domains for action:
1. Surveillance, Epidemiology, and Laboratory Activities2. Community Mitigation Measures
3. Medical Countermeasures: Diagnostic Devices, Vaccines,
Therapeutics, and Respiratory Devices
4. Health Care System Preparedness and Response Activities
5. Communications and Public Outreach
6. Scientific Infrastructure and Preparedness
7. Domestic and International Response Policy, Incident
Management, and Global Partnerships and Capacity Building
(pp. 5–6)
In New York City, a primary care information project, funded by the
CDC, developed a multifaceted initiative, the Center of Excellence in
Public Health Informatics, to address issues of measurement of
meaningful use, disease and outbreak surveillance, and decision
support alerts at the point of care (Hripcsak, n.d.). As a result of the
continued learning prompted by the COVID-19 pandemic, we can
expect to see even more knowledge tools being developed and
shared in the near future.Informatics Tools to Support Communication
and Dissemination
The revolution in IT has made the capture and analysis of health
data and distribution of healthcare information more achievable and
less costly. Since the early 1960s, the CDC has used IT in its
practice, and PHI emerged as a specialty in the 1990s. PHI has
become more important with improvements in IT; changes in the
care delivery system; and the challenges related to emerging
infections, resistance to antibiotics, and the threat of chemical and
biological terrorism. Two-way communication between public health
agencies and community and clinical laboratories can identify
clusters of reportable and unusual diseases. In turn, health
departments can consult on case diagnosis and management, alerts,
surveillance summaries, and clinical and public health
recommendations. Ongoing healthcare provider outreach and
education and 24-hour access to public health professionals may
lead to the discovery of urgent health threats. The automated
transfer of specified data from a laboratory database to a public
health data repository improves the timeliness and completeness of
reporting notifiable conditions.
Public health information systems represent a partnership of
federal, state, and local public health professionals. Such systems
facilitate the capture of large amounts of data, rapid exchange of
information, and strengthened links among these three system
levels. Dissemination of prevention guidelines and communication
among public health officials, clinicians, and patients have emerged
as major benefits of PHI. IT solutions can be used to provide
accurate and timely information that guides public health actions. In
addition, the internet has become a universal communications
pathway and allows individuals and population groups to be more
involved and to take greater responsibility for management of their
own health status. Ghio et al. (2021) conducted a systematic reviewto gather evidence of quality public health messaging. They
emphasized that [m]iscommunication or contradictions can result in
lower compliance of preventative behaviours. Literacy is
fundamental to the understanding and acceptance of any public
health messaging campaign. Therefore, public health messaging
should focus on clarity, simplicity, transparency and unified
messaging even if tailoring to different groups regardless of the level
of literacy. Even when the message is understood, different
populations have different barriers to address in order to change
behaviour. (p. 6) The COVID-19 pandemic has sparked innovation in
the use of informatics tools for managing the health system’s
response to the outbreak. As Raths (2020) reported, “In an April 9
AMIA [American Medical Informatics Association] presentation,
executives describ[ed] the role clinical informatics is playing in the
rapid switch to virtual care as well as public health data sharing and
the creation of dashboards and registries. A common theme was that
the rapid spin-up of solutions was possible because of years of work
creating the informatics framework and developing standards” (para.
1). Here are examples of some of the innovations reported during
the pandemic: Artificial intelligence tools have been used to screen
lung scans for evidence of COVID-19–specific lung lesions and
predict outbreak hot spots and resurgence by analyzing HIE and
social media data; AI-based chatbots have been used to screen and
triage callers to health systems after hospital lines were unable to
keep up with calls; robots, facial thermal scan cameras, and no￾contact infrared sensor systems were used for temperature
screening to detect people with fevers and prevent or triage for
hospital visits; and many systems have ramped up their use of
telehealth both in and outside the hospital to minimize face-to-face
interactions and save scarce personal protective equipment (McCall,
2020; Wittbold et al., 2020). As Wittbold et al. summarized, “While
we race to dampen the virus’s spread, we can optimize our response
mechanisms, digitizing as many steps as possible. This is because
traditional processes—those that rely on people to function in the
critical path of signal processing—are constrained by the rate at
which we can train, organize, and deploy human labor” (para. 8).Stay tuned for a literal digital transformation of health care in
response to this pandemic. Now more than ever, we will need
informatics-trained public health professionals.
Few long-term public health professionals have received formal
informatics training. There is evidence, however, that informatics
competency is increasingly emphasized in academic programs that
prepare public health practitioners (Wholey et al., 2018). Public
health practitioners are dependent on data and information to inform
and perform their practice. In 2016, the Public Health Informatics
Institute (n.d.-a) published the Applied Public Health Informatics
Competency model, which “frames the knowledge, skills, and
abilities that public health practitioners need to address the
informatics challenges at their agencies” (p. 2). Key components of
this model include the following:
1. Principles and Strategy: Ability to apply informatics principles
and strategic thinking to public health information needs,
ensuring organizational strategic alignment.
2. Standards and Interoperability: Applies informatics standards to
ensure interoperability between disparate information systems.
3. Project Management: Practices project management techniques
to engage stakeholders and achieve needs and expectations.
4. Information Systems: Fundamental knowledge of hardware,
software and network infrastructure essential to ensuring that
public health requirements are met.
5. Communication: Practices active, effective communication
between IT, public health and other relevant stakeholders.
6. Evaluation: Applies rigorous methods to evaluate the
effectiveness of workflows and information technology.
7. Analysis, Visualization, and Reporting (AVR): Translates data to
information and knowledge that leads to action.
8. Policy: Ensures that information projects adhere to relevant
laws, rules and regulations. (pp. 3–10)Access the full model here for explanatory statements related to
each of the competencies listed: https://phii.org/wp￾content/uploads/2021/06/Applied-Public-Health-Informatics￾Competency-Model.pdf.Using Feedback to Improve Responses and
Promote Readiness
Improvement of community health status and population health
depends on effective public and healthcare infrastructures. In
addition to information from public health agencies, there is now
interest in the capture of information from hospitals, pharmacies,
poison control centers, laboratories, and environmental agencies.
Timely collection of such data allows for early detection and analysis,
which can increase the rapidity of response with more effective
interventions. Great strides have been made toward a national public
health information system, but informaticists currently are still striving
to make this a reality. Initially, there was a 10-year vision to achieve
an interoperable health IT infrastructure in the United States
(HealthIt.gov, 2014). In 2022, the Office of the National Coordinator
for Health Information Technology (2022) released the 2022
Interoperability Standards Advisory:
www.healthit.gov/isa/sites/isa/files/inline-files/2022-ISA-Reference￾Edition.pdf. We have yet to fully achieve the 10-year interoperability
goal.
Population health data must be considered an important part of
the infrastructure of all regional health information exchanges,
which are the building blocks for a national health information
network. Organizations and agencies interested in promoting and
protecting the public’s health must commit to collaboration and
seamless data sharing (HealthIt.gov, 2014). Public health data
include data related to surveillance, environmental health, and
preparedness systems as well as client information, such as data
from immunization registries and laboratory results reporting and
analysis. These types of data can provide information about
outbreaks, patterns of drug-resistant organisms, and other trends
that can help improve the accuracy of diagnostic and treatment
decisions and advance public health research (National Institutes ofHealth, n.d.). A regional HIE and national health information network
can also support public health goals through broader opportunities
for participation in surveillance and prevention activities, improved
case management and care coordination, and increased accuracy
and timeliness of information for disease reporting. In 2019,
HealthIT.gov released the second draft of the Trusted Exchange
Framework and Common Agreement (TEFCA) and, in 2022, the
Qualified Health Information Network framework (QHIN) to promote
electronic health information exchange across disparate systems.
For more complete information about the TEFCA, access the user’s
guide here: www.healthit.gov/sites/default/files/page/2019-
04/TEFCADraft2UsersGuide.pdf.
Much public health information is focused on reaction to issues
and timely intervention rather than on harnessing information
technology for disease prevention. As early as 2011, Fuller
advocated for a shift to prevention informatics by harnessing real￾time social data and aggregating and representing these data in a
meaningful way so that an appropriate prevention response can be
mounted. For example, internet searches related to flu symptoms
might prompt a public health prevention response, such as a school
closure, to minimize spread. A software tool that supports mapping
and real-time data visualization is Ushahidi, which supports
“gathering of distributed data from the web and other data streams”
(Fuller, 2011, p. 40). “Prevention informatics offers a useful paradigm
for re-imagining health information systems and for harnessing the
vast array of data, tools, technologies and systems to respond
proactively to health challenges across the globe” (Fuller, 2011, p.
41).
Harnessing data from social media, such as X (Twitter) and
Facebook, provides yet another example of using citizen-generated
information (i.e., crowdsourcing) in community health. Merchant et
al. (2011) described how mining data generated in social media can
improve the response to mass disasters by helping responders
locate people who require help and identifying areas that need
resources, building social capital, and promoting community
resilience after the disaster. “Tweets and photographs linked totimelines and interactive maps can tell a cohesive story about a
recovering community’s capabilities and vulnerabilities in real time”
(Merchant et al., 2011, p. 291). These authors cautioned, however,
that social media should be used to augment—not replace—current
disaster response and communication systems because not all
communications in social media are entirely trustworthy. In addition
to utilizing social media posts, Benforado’s (2015) presentation to
the EPA on Citizen Science and Crowdsourcing asked the question,
“If you had 100,000 people to help you with your work, what would
you do?” (slide 2). Enlisting and empowering people can promote
volunteerism and advance science. There is power in investing in
citizen science approaches and harnessing the efforts of volunteers.
The use of social media data during public emergencies has been
variously termed crisis informatics or disaster informatics. Palen and
Anderson (2016) suggested that social media use is important during
disaster response because it gives people affected by the disaster a
voice and a means to participate in a response.
Reuter and Kaufhold (2018) identified four types of communication
capability via social media during a crisis: citizen to citizen (C2C),
authorities to citizens (A2C), citizens to authorities (C2A), and
authorities to authorities (A2A). Further, they argued that not all
social media use during a disaster or crisis is positive, especially in
the case of dissemination of false or misleading information. They
concluded that “[t]rust is the main issue, so future work might focus
on the key enablers, like positive examples of social media use. The
feeling to be part of a movement that productively works together to
overcome crises and emergencies is the intended result of this” (p.
52). Basch et al. (2022) stated, “Our work indicates that the content
of official public health agency social media accounts does not
receive as many views as communications posted by popular
entertainers, influencers, or, in some cases, even consumers.
Partnerships with carefully vetted content creators may help to
extend the reach of accurate health information on social media,
particularly to young people who tend to use these platforms in
higher numbers than older adults” (pp. 3–4). The use of social media
during the COVID-19 pandemic increased exponentially. However,the credibility of the information that is crowdsourced is difficult to
discern. During a crisis, it is best to seek information from credible
sources, such as the CDC. The CDC can be followed on various
social media, such as Facebook, Twitter, and YouTube. It has a
comprehensive toolkit guiding the use of social media. Access the
Social Media Toolkit here:
www.cdc.gov/healthcommunication/toolstemplates/socialmediatoolkit
_bm.pdf.TABLE 17-1
Summary
PHI strives to ensure that evolving health data systems will meet the
data needs of all organizations interested in population health as
national and international standards are developed for healthcare
data collection. The data included in this standardization process are
environmental, sociocultural, economic, and other data that are
relevant to public health. As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, PHI
will likely garner more widespread appreciation and respect as well
as creative innovation that will affect public health initiatives for years
to come. Table 17-1 provides the names, addresses, and URLs for
important organizations dedicated to public health data and
informatics.
Important PHI Sites
Name Address Website
American Public Health
Association
800 I Street NW, Washington, DC
20001
www.apha.org
Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention
1600 Clifton Road, Atlanta, GA 30333 www.cdc.gov
AHIMA Public Health Data
Standards Council
233 N. Michigan Avenue, 21st Floor,
Chicago, IL 60601-5809
www.ahima.org
Public Health Institute 555 12th Street, 10th Floor, Oakland,
CA 94607
www.phi.org
The future of practice in public health depends on how efficiently
and effectively public health data are captured, analyzed, and
disseminated for regional, national, and global health planning and
management. In an ideal world, we would see seamless datacollection and sharing with a commitment to prevention and global
health planning.
THOUGHT-PROVOKING QUESTIONS
1. Imagine that you are a PHI specialist and that you and your colleagues are
concerned about the response to the COVID-19 pandemic. Review the public
health data that were used to determine the response to the pandemic. Which data
would need to be collected to assess the outcomes of the pandemic response?
2. What are the advantages and disadvantages of using crowdsourced social media
data during a disaster response?
3. Choose an informatics tool that was developed or modified during the COVID-19
pandemic. Assess its long-term sustainability.R E F E R E N C E S
Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry. (2023). Home page. www.atsdr.cdc.gov
Basch, C. H., Basch, C. E., Hillyer, G. C., & Meleo-Erwin, Z. C. (2022). Social media, public
health, and community mitigation of COVID-19: Challenges, risks, and benefits. Journal
of Medical Internet Research, 24(4), e36804. https://doi.org/10.2196/36804
Benforado, J. (2015 December 1). Citizen science and crowdsourcing. Environmental
Protection Agency. www.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2016-02/documents/citizen￾science-crowdsourcing.pdf
CDC Foundation. (n.d.). What is public health? www.cdcfoundation.org/content/what-public￾health
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2015). Information about Middle East
respiratory syndrome (MERS). www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/mers/downloads/factsheet￾mers_en.pdf
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2017). Severe acute respiratory syndrome
(SARS). www.cdc.gov/sars/index.html
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2018a). Emergency preparedness and
response: Video: “The history of bioterrorism.”
http://emergency.cdc.gov/training/historyofbt/index.asp
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2018b). Influenza (flu): Past flu pandemics.
www.cdc.gov/flu/pandemic-resources/basics/past-pandemics.html
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2019a). Division of Health Informatics and
Surveillance: DHIS overview. stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/40601
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2022a). Division of Health Informatics and
Surveillance: DHIS strategic framework. www.cdc.gov/csels/dhis/documents/DHIS￾Strategic-Framework-Flyer-508.pdf
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2022b). PHIN tools and resources.
www.cdc.gov/phin/index.html
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2022c). Surveillance Resource Center.
www.cdc.gov/surveillancepractice/index.html
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2022d). Zika virus. www.cdc.gov/zika
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2023a). CDC WONDER.
https://wonder.cdc.gov
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2023b). FAQ: COVID-19 data and
surveillance. www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/covid-data/faq-surveillance.html
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2023c). Public health professionals gateway:
10 essential public health services.
www.cdc.gov/publichealthgateway/publichealthservices/essentialhealthservices.html
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2023d). Public health surveillance and data:
Data Modernization Initiative. www.cdc.gov/surveillance/surveillance-data￾strategies/data-IT-transformation.htmlCorrell, R. (2022, August 28). The 10 essential public health services. Verywell Health.
www.verywellhealth.com/essential-public-health-services-4150535
Dixon, B. E., Grannis, S. J., & Gibson, J. (2019). Enhancing provider reporting of notifiable
diseases using HIE-enabled decision support. Online Journal of Public Health
Informatics, 11(1). https://doi.org/10.5210/ojphi.v11i1.9706
Dossey, B. M. (2000). Florence Nightingale: Mystic, visionary, healer. Springhouse.
Felman, A. (2021, Feburary 1). What to know about coronaviruses. Medical News Today.
www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/256521
Fuller, S. (2011). From intervention informatics to prevention informatics. Bulletin of the
American Society for Information Science & Technology, 38(1), 36–41.
https://doi.org/10.1002/bult.2011.1720380112
Ghio, D., Lawes-Wickwar, S., Tang, M. Y., Epton, T., Howlett, N., Jenkinson, E., Stanescu,
S., Westbrook, J., Kassianos, A. P., Watson, D., Sutherland, L., Stanulewicz, N., Guest,
E., Scanlan, D., Carr, N., Chater, A., Hotham, S., Thorneloe, R., Armitage, C. J., . . .
Keyworth, C. (2021). What influences people’s responses to public health messages for
managing risks and preventing infectious diseases? A rapid systematic review of the
evidence and recommendations. BMJ Open, 11(11), e048750. doi.org/10.1136/bmjopen￾2021-048750
Grannis, S., & Vreeman, D. (2010). A vision of the journey ahead: Using public health
notifiable condition mapping to illustrate the need to maintain value sets. AMIA Annual
Symposium Proceedings, 2010, 261–265.
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3041316
HealthIt.gov. (2014). Connecting health and care for the nation: A 10-year vision to achieve
an interoperable health IT infrastructure.
www.healthit.gov/sites/default/files/ONC10yearInteroperabilityConceptPaper.pdf
HealthIT.gov. (2023a). Improving public and population health outcomes.
www.healthit.gov/faq/how-can-electronic-health-records-improve-public-and-population￾health-outcomes
HealthIT.gov. (2023b). The three key forms of health information exchange.
www.healthit.gov/faq/what-are-different-types-health-information-exchange
HealthIT.gov. (2023d). What is HIE? www.healthit.gov/topic/health-it-and-health-information￾exchange-basics/what-hie
Hickok, K. (2020, March 18). How does the COVID-19 pandemic compare to the last
pandemic? Live Science. www.livescience.com/covid-19-pandemic-vs-swine-flu.html
Hripcsak, G. (n.d.). NYC Center of Excellence for Public Health Informatics.
http://grantome.com/grant/NIH/P01-HK000029-03
Hyde, L., Rihanek, T., Santana-Johnson, T., Scichilone, R., Simmons, C., Turner, J. B., &
Zumar, W. (2013). Data mapping and its impact on data integrity. American Health
Information Management Association. http://library.ahima.org/PdfView?oid=107154
Integrating the Healthcare Enterprise. (n.d.). Quality, research and public health.
www.ihe.net/ihe_domains/quality_research_and_public_health
Keshavamurthy, R., Dixon, S., Pazdernik, K. T., & Charles, L. E. (2022). Predicting
infectious disease for biopreparedness and response: A systematic review of machine
learning and deep learning approaches. One Health, 15, 100439.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.onehlt.2022.100439Klobucista, C., & Renwick, D. (2020, July 1). What is the Ebola virus? Council on Foreign
Relations. www.cfr.org/backgrounder/ebola-virus
Kruse, C. S., Stein, A., Thomas, H., & Kaur, H. (2018). The use of electronic health records
to support population health: A systematic review of the literature. Journal of Medical
Systems, 42(214), 1–16. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10916-018-1075-6
Lee, B., Martin, T., Khan, A., Fullerton, K., Duck, W., Kinley, T., Stoutenburg, S., Hall, J.,
Crum, M., Garcia, M. C., Iademarco, M. F., & Richards, C. L. (2018). Modernizing
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention informatics using surveillance data platform
shared services. Public Health Reports, 133(2), 130–135.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0033354917751130
McCall, B. (2020). COVID-19 and artificial intelligence: Protecting health-care workers and
curbing the spread. Lancet Digital Health, 2(4), e166–e167.
https://doi.org/10.1016/S2589-7500(20)30054-6
Merchant, R., Elmer, S., & Lurie, N. (2011). Integrating social media into emergency￾preparedness efforts. New England Journal of Medicine, 365, 289–291.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1056/NEJMp1103591
Modjarrad, K., Moorthy, V. S., Millett, P., Gsell, P.-S., Roth, C., & Kieny, M.-P. (2016).
Developing global norms for sharing data and results during public health emergencies.
PLoS Medicine, 13(1), e1001935. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1001935
National Institutes of Health. (n.d.). Health data resources: Common data types in public
health research. www.nihlibrary.nih.gov/resources/subject-guides/health-data￾resources/common-data-types-public-health-research
Office of the National Coordinator for Health Information Technology. (2022). 2022
interoperability standards advisory, reference edition.
www.healthit.gov/isa/sites/isa/files/inline-files/2022-ISA-Reference-Edition.pdf
Palen, L., & Anderson, K. M. (2016). Crisis informatics—New data for extraordinary times.
Science, 353(6296), 224–225. http://dx.doi.org/10.1126/science.aag2579
Peters, R., Hipper, T. J., Kricun, H., & Chernak, E. (2019). A quantitative public health risk
assessment tool for planning for at-risk populations. American Journal of Public Health,
109(S4), S286–S289. https://doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.2019.305181
Public Health Informatics Institute. (n.d.-a). Applied public health informatics competency
model. https://phii.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/06/Applied-Public-Health-Informatics￾Competency-Model.pdf
Public Health Informatics Institute. (n.d.-b). INFOR-WHAT-ICS? Defining public health
informatics. www.phii.org/defining-public-health-informatics
Raths, D. (2020, April 10). COVID-19 preparedness: “Every answer touches clinical
informatics in some way or another.” Healthcare Innovation.
www.hcinnovationgroup.com/clinical-it/workflow/article/21133486/covid19-preparedness￾every-answer-touches-clinical-informatics-in-some-way-or-another
Reeves, J., Hollandsworth, H., Torriani, F., Taplitz, R., Abeles, S., Tai-Seale, M., Millen, M.,
Clay, B., & Longhurst, C. (2020). Rapid response to COVID-19: Health informatics
support for outbreak management in an academic health system. Journal of the
American Medical Informatics Association, 27(6), 853–859.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/jamia/ocaa037Reuter, C., & Kaufhold, M. (2018). Fifteen years of social media in emergencies: A
retrospective review and future directions for crisis informatics. Journal of Contingencies
and Crisis Management, 26(1), 41–57. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/1468-5973.12196
RODS Laboratory. (2020). About the National Retail Data Monitor.
www.rods.pitt.edu/content/blogsection/4/42/index.html
Shapiro, J. S., Mostashari, F., Hripcsak, G., Soulakis, N., & Kuperman, G. (2011). Using
health information exchange to improve public health. American Journal of Public
Health, 101(4), 616–623. http://dx.doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.2008.158980
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (2017). Pandemic influenza plan: 2017
update. www.cdc.gov/flu/pandemic-resources/pdf/pan-flu-report-2017v2.pdf
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. (2016). Conducting a human health risk
assessment. www.epa.gov/risk/conducting-human-health-risk-assessment
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. (2023a). About risk assessment.
www.epa.gov/risk/about-risk-assessment
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. (2023b). Human health risk assessment.
www.epa.gov/risk/human-health-risk-assessment
Boston University Medical Campus. (n.d.). John Snow - The Father of Epidemiology. A Brief
History of Public Health. https://sphweb.bumc.bu.edu/otlt/mph￾modules/ph/publichealthhistory/publichealthhistory6.html
Wholey, D. R., LaVenture, M., Rajamani, S., Kreiger, R., Hedberg, C., & Kenyon, C. (2018).
Developing workforce capacity in public health informatics: Core competencies and
curriculum design. Frontiers in Public Health, 6.
http://dx.doi.org/10.3389/fpubh.2018.00124
Wittbold, K., Carroll, C., Iansiti, M., Zhang, H., & Landman, A. (2020, April 3). How hospitals
are using AI to battle Covid-19. Harvard Business Review. https://hbr.org/2020/04/how￾hospitals-are-using-ai-to-battle-covid-19
World Health Organization. (2017). Pandemic influenza risk management: A WHO guide to
inform and harmonize national and international pandemic preparedness and response.
https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/259893
World Health Organization. (2021). World Health Organization declares SARS contained
worldwide. www.history.com/this-day-in-history/world-health-organization-declares-sars￾contained-worldwideC H A P T E R 1 8
Telenursing and Remote
Access Telehealth
OBJECTIVES
1. Explore the use of telehealth technology in nursing practice.
2. Apply the Foundation of Knowledge model to home telehealth.
3. Identify the socioeconomic factors likely to increase the use of telehealth
interventions.
4. Describe clinical and nonclinical uses of telehealth.
5. Specify and describe the most common telehealth tools used in nursing practice.
6. Explore telehealth pathways and protocols.
7. Identify legal, ethical, and regulatory issues of telehealth practice.
8. Describe the role of the telenurse.
KEY TERMS
call center
central station
chronic disease
home health care
home telehealth care
medication management device
patient informed consent
peripheral biometric (medical) device
personal emergency response system
portal
real-time telehealth
sensor and activity-monitoring systemstore-and-forward telehealth transmission
telehealth
telehealth care
telemedicine
telemonitoring
telenursing
telepathology
telephony
teleradiology
web serverIntroduction
Telehealth refers to a wide range of health services that are
delivered by telecommunications-ready tools, such as the telephone,
videophone, smartphone, and computer. The telephone, the most
basic of telecommunications technologies, has been used by health
professionals for many years. For example, nurses may counsel a
patient by telephone, or doctors may respond to patient status
changes or family requests. Because of these widespread uses,
people are already somewhat familiar with the value of the direct,
expedient contact that telecommunications-ready tools provide for
healthcare professionals. However, physicians and patients alike
largely valued traditional face-to-face office visits because of the
personal interactions they afforded. In addition, barriers to telehealth
included reimbursement, connectivity, and equipment issues. Then,
in March 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic surfaced. Roth (2020)
provided this insight: “With the arrival of the COVID-19 pandemic,
telehealth has finally come of age. Like a lonely teenager who once
struggled to make connections with a broader network of friends and
was bound by strict parental controls, suddenly, telehealth has
blossomed into the most popular kid in school by becoming an
essential tool in the healthcare armament against this pandemic”
(para. 1). Up until March 2020, Medicare beneficiaries were able to
enjoy paid access to telehealth services only if they lived in a rural
area and had certain chronic medical conditions. On March 13,
2020, President Trump announced widespread expansion of
telehealth services for Medicare beneficiaries and relaxation of rules
so that seniors could avoid exposure to COVID-19 in physicians’
offices and clinics (Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services
[CMS], 2020b) and virtual consultations could help triage patients for
further treatment as necessary. As a result, the demand for
telehealth and virtual visits increased exponentially, which taxed a
system that was not prepared for this type of growth (Brodwin &Ross, 2020). Several key groups raced to provide the support and
guidance that physicians, nurses, and healthcare systems would
need to ramp up their telehealth services by using virtual platforms
(i.e., Skype, WebEx, and Zoom), existing patient portals, messaging
apps, or phone calls. For example, the American Hospital
Association (AHA, 2020) released a best practices document, CMS
(n.d.) released the General Provider Telehealth and Telemedicine
Tool Kit, and the American Medical Association (AMA, 2023)
released the AMA Telehealth Quick Guide (released in 2020 and
updated in 2021), all in a matter of a few weeks.
In 2019, the AHA reported that 76% of hospitals used telehealth to
provide some services and connect clinicians for consultations at a
distance, up from 35% reported in 2010. At the time, the AHA also
reported limitations on coverages for Medicare recipients; broadband
limitations for patients in rural areas; cross-state licensing issues;
and concerns about online prescribing, security, and privacy (AHA,
2019). The growth of telehealth services, prompted by necessity
during the COVID-19 pandemic, is leveling off as we emerge from
the pandemic (Melchionna, 2022). “In 2022, 38 percent of care was
virtual. Researchers expect that in the years to come, telehealth will
be optimal not as a replacement to in-person visits but as a
complementary service” (Melchionna, 2022, para. 4). This will
provide nurses with many future opportunities to contribute to care
delivery via telehealth services. Fauteux (2022) called the growth of
telehealth the pandemic’s silver lining. Let’s examine a potential
nursing contribution using the Foundation of Knowledge model.M
The Foundation of Knowledge Model and
Home Telehealth
There is much to learn about usual home telehealthcare service
delivery, particularly to the elderly and chronically ill patients. Using
the Foundation of Knowledge model is key to learning how to use
telehealthcare tools with typical patients (e.g., elderly patients and
patients needing pointed care) and to operate effectively as
telenurses. To understand the mechanics and effectiveness of home
telehealth delivery within the Foundation of Knowledge model, the
discussion will begin with a typical home telehealth case, through
which the telenurse’s role in this model can be explored.
CASE STUDY: THE ROLE OF A HOME TELEHEALTH
NURSE
rs. A. is an 84-year-old woman who was recently discharged from the hospital
with a diagnosis that includes an exacerbation of congestive heart failure
(CHF). She also has diabetes and hypertension. Mrs. A. was discharged from
the hospital on multiple medications and lives alone.
Home care services were initiated with skilled nursing care visits, some home health
aide support, and orders to include daily telemonitoring of her vital signs. The telehealth
device will remotely monitor Mrs. A.’s blood pressure, heart rate, oxygen saturation,
and weight. In addition, the patient will answer customized questions about her disease
on a daily basis. This information will then be transmitted daily to the home care
agency, where the telenurse can determine appropriate clinical actions based on the
data trends and preset baseline alerts that indicate when set parameters have been
exceeded.
Knowledge Acquisition
As the case study illustrates, knowledge acquisition involves the
telenurse receiving information from the telehealth devices via a
variety of communication modes. For example, the telenurse
receives the patient’s vital signs taken in the home and the patient’sresponses to customized questions. All of this information is
transmitted to a remote server or site (i.e., a central station or
website) that is easily accessible to the telenurse.
Knowledge Processing
As a result of the telenurse’s knowledge acquisition, the next step is
knowledge processing (i.e., understanding a set of information and
the ways it can be applied to a specific task). In the case study, the
telenurse assesses Mrs. A.’s vital signs along with subjective data
received from her as a result of the customized questions that she is
asked. For example, she might be asked whether she feels shorter
of breath on a given day compared to how she normally feels. The
telenurse then combines this information with the patient’s overall
history and diagnosis to get an up-to-date view of the patient’s status
and considers where this information fits into the clinical picture
being presented for this patient.
As an example, the telenurse notes the following: Postacute heart
failure patient shows trended data with weight gain of 5 pounds over
2 days, elevated blood pressure, and decreased oxygen saturation
and answers yes to questions about increased shortness of breath
and increased fatigue. After processing all the current information,
the telenurse is able to target the next appropriate steps involving
knowledge generation and knowledge dissemination.
Knowledge Generation
By using her own nursing skills and clinical knowledge of the disease
process, the telenurse considers all the data as they apply to Mrs. A.,
decides the best course of action to take, and acts on the data. The
telenurse may, in addition, ask a variety of questions to ensure that a
complete and accurate decision about the next steps for the patient
is made. These questions might include the following:
Do I need to gather additional data?
Do I need to call the patient?Do I need to call the physician and inquire about a change in the
current plan of care?
Knowledge Dissemination
Finally, the telenurse determines how the knowledge will be used
and disseminated. Various questions that were posed in the
knowledge-generation stage are acted on, including the following
possibilities:
Calling the doctor
Obtaining a change in medication order
Calling the patient and instructing her in a medication change
Reviewing activities that could have led to the changes (e.g.,
eating salty foods)
Educating the patient on the disease process, symptom
management, and self-management techniques
Continuing to monitor the patient on an ongoing basis
As the case illustrates, the nurse used various technologies to
acquire data; interpreted the meaning of the data, thus generating
information and knowledge; and then used that knowledge and
wisdom to intervene appropriately.Nursing Aspects of Telehealth
Understanding telehealth and the potential use of telehealth
technology in nursing practice is necessary in today’s changing
healthcare arena. As this chapter describes, nurses using telehealth
have much greater access to their patients’ conditions and needs
and are able to respond in a timelier way than is possible using only
face-to-face visits. Patients’ responses to new medications, for
example, can be tracked within hours rather than the several days
that elapse between face-to-face visits. The telecommunications￾ready tools that can be used to achieve these results are described
here, and cases that have demonstrated successful outcomes are
highlighted.
Telehealth is still a new and evolving technology; while the off-site
interventions or contacts often lead to less time being wasted on
non–care-oriented tasks because of the efficiencies offered by the
technology applications, its use must never be associated with less
care. It is also important to note that nursing activity in telehealth still
follows the same best practice standards as those espoused in
conventional care. One should simply look at the use of telehealth
tools as a means for nurses to do their work better.
As the case study demonstrated, a home healthcare nurse
working with telehealth tools was able to detect and respond to a
patient’s condition more expediently than if the nurse had relied
solely on scheduled home visits and thus was able to intervene to
prevent a potentially serious deterioration in the patient’s condition.History of Telehealth
In the early 1960s, President John F. Kennedy gave the National
Aeronautics and Space Administration the goal of landing an
American on the moon. A surprise benefit of the space program was
the demonstration of effective remote monitoring of the astronauts;
thus, modern telehealth was born.
Although most of the advances in telehealth have taken place in
the past 30 years, Craig and Patterson (2005) described much
earlier examples, such as the use of bonfires to alert neighboring
villages of the arrival of bubonic plague during the Middle Ages.
Postal services and telegraphs were used to transmit health
information in the mid-19th century, and 1910 marked the first
transmission of stethoscope sounds over a telephone. Radio
communications were used to provide medical support for crews on
ships; the Seaman’s Church Institute of New York (1920) and the
International Radio Medical Center (1938) are two examples of
organizations founded to provide health support at a distance. These
services were later expanded to cover air travel (Craig & Patterson,
2005). As technology evolved, its use in health care continued to
grow. The first reported use of television to monitor patients in a
clinical facility occurred in the 1950s, which then led to the
development of interactive closed-circuit applications in the mid￾1960s. These early applications of television to health care occurred
within the facility but still had the benefit of extending the reach of the
caregivers because they did not need to be in the same room as
their patients to monitor them effectively (Prial & Hoss, 2009).
In the 1970s, uses of more advanced forms of telehealth in the
medical field, referred to as telemedicine, included teleradiology
and telepathology—radiological and pathological images
transmitted to specialists who were located at some distance (Allan,
2006). As additional specialties, such as dermatology and
ophthalmology, entered the telemedicine arena, telehealth useenabled even more physicians to access information about their
patients, regardless of the distances between themselves and the
patients and in sites other than conventional healthcare settings.
Success in telehealth was achieved after decades spent refining
the technology, which resulted in clearer imaging, speedier
transmissions, and accurate replication of data from remote locations
to a central hub. The end results of telehealth interactions today
have helped to ensure that professionals, whether working off-site or
directly with patients, can replicate the usual clinical interactions in
all specialties, regardless of the distance involved in the contact.
The ability to provide better healthcare access is the number one
benefit of using telehealth. By reducing the need for face-to-face
interaction with the patient, the nurse, physician, or technician can
be much more productive. When information is collected in the
home, it becomes much more convenient for the patient, and the
quality and timeliness of the information are improved dramatically.
Home telemonitoring should be viewed as an enhancement to care
because it allows more direct, physical intervention to occur only
when it is actually needed. Care is not directed by a prescheduled
appointment or by subjective perceptions of a condition but instead
can be determined by objective measures of physical status. With
telehealth, care can also be delivered at the most appropriate site of
care, which reduces reliance on emergency departments and
inpatient facilities (Prial & Hoss, 2009).Driving Forces for Telehealth
A significant increase is expected in the use of information
technology tools in nursing venues in the coming decades, based on
several factors in Western society. The following factors are drivers
of the growing trend toward telehealth and technology use and will
influence nursing practice significantly in the next decades:
demographics; nursing and healthcare worker shortages; chronic
diseases and conditions and the pandemic; the new, educated
consumers; and excessive costs of healthcare services that are
increasing in need and kind.
Demographics
One significant factor is that the baby boomers are getting older and
people are living longer. In 2000, 13% of the U.S. population was
older than age 65, and the number of older adults continues to grow
significantly each day. According to the U.S. Census Bureau (n.d.),
every day, 10,000 people turn 65. Consequently, by 2030, 19% of
the U.S. population will be 65 years old or older, and the oldest-old
(85 years or older) will increase by 3 million persons between 2010
(5.8 million) and 2030 (8.7 million; Vincent & Velcoff, 2010). Also on
the rise is the number of older Americans living with at least one
chronic disease or condition. The National Council on Aging (2023)
reported that nearly 95% of older adults have at least one chronic
illness and nearly 80% of the U.S. population over age 65 have two
or more chronic illnesses. This trend should alert clinicians to the
much greater demand for planned professional care that will arise in
the coming years.
CASE STUDY: EARLY DETECTION OF A CHANGE IN
CONDITIONM
rs. C., an independent 96-year-old woman, has a history of rehospitalization
because of atrial fibrillation, which resulted from CHF and hypertension.
After her most recent hospitalization, Mrs. C. was treated and released into
home care at an agency in Washington. A home telemonitoring system that tracks and
transmits patients’ vital signs was placed in her home. The primary goal of placing this
patient on the telemonitor was to provide daily monitoring of her condition, thereby
avoiding unnecessary rehospitalizations.
One morning, Mrs. C.’s telenurse detected an alarmingly low oxygen saturation level
in the patient’s transmitted data. In response, the nurse telephoned Mrs. C. and asked
her to retake her oxygen reading. The reading was confirmed, and the telenurse
contacted the patient’s physician, who requested immediate transportation of the
patient to the hospital emergency room. Medics were called, and Mrs. C. was taken to
the hospital, where she was diagnosed with a pulmonary embolism.
The prompt response resulted from early detection and timely intervention enabled
by the home telehealth equipment and a home health nurse’s oversight. One notable
fact in this case is that although the primary goal of monitoring patients is to avoid
unnecessary hospitalization, in this case the hospitalization was necessary for the
patient as a result of her elevated blood pressure and compromised oxygen saturation
levels. The patient was still asymptomatic at the time of detection. However, the
telehealth intervention and subsequent hospitalization allowed for the embolism to be
treated before any serious damage had occurred.
Under the traditional home care model, this patient might have been seen by a nurse
only two or three times per week, and the clinician would not have knowledge of the
patient’s condition in between visits. However, having vital patient data tracked and
transmitted daily allowed for a rapid response, which resulted in a positive outcome,
perhaps a lifesaving intervention for this patient.
Nursing and Healthcare Worker Shortages
The crisis related to the well-known nursing shortage has two key
aspects: a greater need for nurses by more persons, particularly
those living with multiple comorbidities, and a significant decrease in
the number of young people entering the nursing profession.
Nationwide, the demand for nurses is clearly exceeding the supply.
The American Association of Colleges of Nursing (AACN, 2022)
reported, “The U.S. is projected to experience a shortage of
Registered Nurses (RNs) that is expected to intensify as Baby
Boomers age and the need for health care grows. Compounding the
problem is the fact that nursing schools across the country are
struggling to expand capacity to meet the rising demand for care
given the national move toward healthcare reform” (para. 1). TheAACN projected a 6% increase in the nursing workforce between
2021 and 2031 and a need for 203,200 new RNs per year.
The very serious shortage of healthcare workers in the United
States must be addressed with some foresight. Although there is
currently more focus on training laypeople, such as aides and other
paraprofessionals, to perform certain nursing tasks, this venture
certainly cannot replicate the clinical expertise of trained nurses
skilled in nursing science. We must begin to look seriously at using
effective adjuncts to skilled care, with telehealth being one of these
important developments. Some organizations have already begun to
do so.
Chronic Diseases and Conditions
Today, chronic conditions are the leading cause of illness, disability,
and death in the United States. The number of elderly persons living
with chronic disease is estimated at 140 million in the United States
and accounts for more than 80% of healthcare expenditures (Dorsey
& Topol, 2016). Both chronic conditions and the number of persons
with chronic illnesses are expected to increase dramatically in the
United States in the next few decades. Many age groups are also
affected by chronic disease, not just the elderly. As noted in a report
from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC, 2022), 6
in 10 adults in the United States have a chronic disease, and 4 in 10
have two or more (para. 1). Note that this statistic is referring to
adults of any age, when earlier in the demographics section we
reported on chronic diseases for the aging population. You can follow
the CDC’s chronic disease surveillance activities at this website:
www.cdc.gov/chronicdisease/data/index.htm.
Securing appropriate, adequate, and affordable care services for
these populations should be a national concern.
Educated Consumers
The wave of today’s aging baby boomers is steering some of the
usual health service practices toward a very different course. Manyof these individuals are more educated than their parents and more
comfortable with the use of technology. They want to become more
informed and involved with their care plans. These empowered
consumers will be financially motivated with the introduction of
consumer-directed healthcare plans that reward healthier lifestyles
and better disease management of chronic conditions. All these
circumstances will further drive the use and innovation of new
technologies to meet consumer need. New plans for this new
generation of consumers very much lean toward meeting their
demands for when-needed, as-needed care, or care services
delivered on their own terms and timing.
Economics
When the drivers of today’s healthcare market—the demographics,
nursing shortages, and increased number of persons living with
chronic conditions and their extensive use of healthcare services—
relate to excessive costs of this health care, the critical need for
solutions becomes obvious. The CMS (2022) reported that “U.S.
health care spending grew 2.7 percent in 2021, reaching $4.3 trillion
or $12,914 per person. As a share of the nation’s Gross Domestic
Product, health spending accounted for 18.3 percent” (para. 2).
Much more will be spent annually in the coming decades. Taking all
the driving factors of today’s healthcare market into account, the
question must be asked, What needs to be done to address
healthcare issues in the United States to meet the burgeoning
numbers and needs of patients?
One solution is to develop a new clinical model for U.S. health
care that includes technology. Telehealth technology should be
included to fill the gap resulting from an overabundance of patients
and a scarcity of healthcare providers. This concept is indicated in
Figure 18-1.Data from Honeywell.
Figure 18-1 Technology Fills the Gap
Description
Consider the use of technology that might potentially fill the current
gaps in the healthcare system. Tools of telehealth can, for example,
help render needed services without requiring in-person professional
care at all contacts. The remote, or virtual, visit made by skilled
clinicians is just one approach to using the range of health
technologies available today. More needs to be learned about what
telehealth is, how it works, and which aspects have been successful
so that clinicians can plan to incorporate its use into routine clinical
care.Telehealth Care
To begin this discussion, a basic definition of telehealth care is
needed. The American Telemedicine Association (ATA, n.d.)
provided the following definition:
In brief, telemedicine is the remote delivery of health care services and clinical
information using telecommunications technology. This includes a wide array of
clinical services using internet, wireless, satellite and telephone media. (para. 1)
The Health Resources and Services Administration (2022) offered
this definition: “Telehealth is defined as the use of electronic
information and telecommunication technologies to support long￾distance clinical health care, patient and professional health-related
education, health administration, and public health” (para. 1). Indeed,
telehealth is generally used as an umbrella term to describe all the
possible variations of healthcare services that use
telecommunications. Telehealth can refer to clinical and nonclinical
uses of health-related contacts. Delivery of patient education, such
as menu planning for patients with diabetes or the transmission of
medication reminders, is an example of the health-promoting
aspects of telehealth.
Clinical Uses of Telehealth
A few clinical uses for telehealth technologies and sample clinical
applications include the following:
Transmitting images for assessment or diagnosis. One example
is transmission of digital images, such as images of wounds for
assessment and treatment consults.
Transmitting clinical data for assessment, diagnosis, or disease
management. An example is remote patient monitoring and
transmitting patients’ objective or subjective clinical data, suchas monitoring of vital signs and answers to disease management
questions.
Providing disease prevention and promotion of good health.
Examples include case management provided via telephone or
smartphone app and patient education provided through asthma
and weight management programs conducted in schools.
Using telephonic or video interactive technologies to provide
health advice in emergent cases. An example is performing
teletriage in call centers or real-time stroke consultation between
a rural health center and an academic medical center.
Using real-time video. An example is exchanging health services
or education live via videoconferences.
Telehealth Transmission Formats and Their Clinical
Applications
Nurses must become familiar with the many and varied clinical and
nonclinical transmission formats and applications of telehealth
technologies so that they can make informed choices about the tools
that are available for their use. Among these applications are store￾and-forward telehealth, real-time telehealth, remote monitoring,
telephony, and mobile health (mHealth). The Center for Connected
Health Policy has provided video overviews of the telehealth
transmissions and clinical applications. To access these videos, go
to www.cchpca.org/resources. Several of the videos posted there
reflect telehealth changes in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Store-and-Forward Telehealth
In a store-and-forward telehealth transmission, digital images,
video, audio, and clinical data are captured and stored on the client’s
computer or device; then, at a convenient time, the data are
transmitted securely (forwarded) to a specialist or clinician at another
location, where they are studied by the relevant specialist or
clinician. If indicated, the opinion of the specialist or clinician is then
transmitted back. Based on the requirements of the participatinghealthcare entities, this round-trip interaction could take anywhere
from a few minutes to 48 hours. In many store-and-forward
specialties, such as teleradiology, an immediate response is not
critical. Dermatology, radiology, and pathology are common
specialties whose practices are conducive to store-and-forward
technologies. Transmission of wound care images for assessment by
specialty care nurses or other specialists has become a frequently
used and important form of home telehealth nursing practice.
Real-Time (or Interactive) Telehealth
In real-time telehealth, a telecommunications link between the
involved parties allows a real-time, or live, interaction to take place.
Videoconferencing equipment is one of the most common forms of
technologies used in synchronous telehealth. In addition, peripheral
devices can be attached to computers or to the videoconferencing
equipment to facilitate an interactive examination. Use of computers
for real-time two-way audio and video streaming between centers
over ever-improving and cheaper communication channels is
becoming common. These developments have contributed to the
lowering of costs in telehealth. See Figure 18-2 for a depiction of
this interaction.Reproduced from: Ohio Supercomputer Center. (2008). Governor Strickland, international
panel of experts consider establishing telehealth video resource center.
www.osc.edu/press/governor_strickland_international_panel_of_experts_consider_establish
ing_telehealth_video.
Figure 18-2 Physician-to-Physician Consult Using Telehealth
Examples of real-time clinical telehealth applications include the
following:Telemental health, which uses videoconferencing technology to
connect a psychiatric nurse with a mental health client.
Telerehabilitation, which uses video cameras and other
technologies to assess patients’ progress in home rehabilitation.
Telehomecare, which uses video technologies to observe,
assess, and teach patients living in rural areas.
Teleconsultations, which use a variety of technologies to enable
collaborative exchanges or consultations between individuals or
among groups that are involved with a case. These teleconsults
may be transmitted live using videoconferencing technology.
They may, for instance, involve teaching a certain technique to a
less experienced clinician, or they may provide several clinicians
with an opportunity to discuss an appropriate approach to a
difficult case.
Telehospice, or telepalliative care, which can use real-time or
remote monitoring to provide psychological support to patients
and caregivers. Telehealth devices can also play a role in
symptom management, in effect helping end-of-life patients
achieve an optimal quality of life.
Remote Monitoring (Telemonitoring or Remote Patient
Monitoring)
In remote monitoring, devices are used to capture and transmit
biometric data. For example, a tele-electroencephalogram device
can monitor the electrical activity of a patient’s brain and then
transmit those data to a specialist assigned to the case. This
interaction could occur either in real time or as a stored and then
forwarded transmission. Examples of telemonitoring include the
following:
Monitoring patient parameters during home-based nocturnal
dialysis
Cardiac and multiparameter monitoring of remote intensive care
units (ICUs)Home telehealth—for example, daily home telemonitoring of vital
signs by patients and subsequent transmission of those data
that enables off-site nurses to track their patients regularly and
precisely and address noticeable changes through education
and information suggestions about diet or exercise
Disease management
Telephony
Telephone monitoring (telephony) is the most basic type of
telehealth. It can be described as remote care delivery or monitoring
in which scheduled patient encounters via the telephone occur
between a healthcare provider and a patient or caregiver. Some
telephone consultations are automated, with alerts sent to the
professional for intervention if a patient issues a negative response
to a screening question during an automated call. Bhatia et al.
(2022) reported that the majority of their study participants “preferred
video over phone-only visits because they felt communication was
better and more effective with video” (p. 3489).
mHealth
The use of mobile phones, tablets, and personal digital assistants for
managing health is a rapidly advancing form of telehealth. There are
numerous applications (apps) that target specific health behaviors
and illnesses and that provide a platform for management at a
distance. One such management technique is a targeted text
message to remind patients to perform a certain behavior, such as
monitoring their peak flow to manage asthma or to take medications.
Other apps are more specific to public health or provider education.
Vo et al. (2019) performed a meta-analysis of qualitative studies
published on users’ perceptions of mHealth apps. “From the patients’
point of view, mHealth could facilitate communication with health
care providers and other patients, encourage them to be more
participative during clinical encounters, and promote the use of
coping techniques to manage their illness” (para. 40). Müeller et al.
(2022) collected data on mHealth and digital contact tracingtechnologies that emerged as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic in
four countries (United Kingdom, Canada, Kenya, and Rwanda). “It is
evident that a wide variety of mHealth and virtual care tools with
parallel functionality are being used in different sectors of health care
throughout North America, Europe, and Africa” (p. 5). They
concluded that “[t]he staggering international increase in the
adoption of mHealth and virtual care interventions facilitates
researching and comparing their efficacy, paving the way to
incorporating them into everyday health care globally” (p. 6).
Nonclinical Uses of Telehealth Technologies
There are also many nonclinical uses of telehealth technologies.
Currently, these applications include distance education, including
continuing medical and nursing education, grand rounds, and patient
education; administrative uses, including meetings among telehealth
networks, supervision, and presentations; and research using the
internet and other online sources for information and health data
management.
All these telecommunications-assisted activities overcome
obstacles of distance and provide access to needed health-related
information. Clearly, with telehealth, the range of patient care
possibilities broadens significantly.Telenursing
Where does telenursing (nurses using telehealth) fit into today’s
healthcare delivery arena? As early as 1988, Skiba referred to
telenursing as the use of telecommunications and information
technology to provide nursing services in health care and to enhance
care whenever a physical distance exists between patient and nurse
or among any number of nurses. As a clinical field, telenursing is part
of telehealth and has many points of contact with other medical and
nonmedical applications, such as telediagnosis, teleconsultation, and
telemonitoring. Telenurses serve as an integral part of the healthcare
delivery team, no matter their location. For example, the National
Telenursing Center provides expert consultation and support to
remote clinicians as they perform sexual assault forensic
examinations and collect and preserve evidence to aid in
prosecution of the perpetrator (Mass.gov, n.d.). Read more about
this center and the services it provides here: www.mass.gov/info￾details/about-the-national-telenursing-center.
Applications of Telenursing in Home Care
Health services or health education and support delivered at a
distance to a patient’s home using communication devices is defined
as home telehealthcare (Kinsella, n.d.). Two key values of
telehomecare were also emphasized by Kinsella:
1. Nurses can be more alert to patients’ current needs and address
these needs in a more timely manner than ever before;
2. Patients who receive telehealth interventions can receive more
comprehensive management, leading to more rapid stabilization
and, ideally, learn how to become more competent in self￾management skills (learning self-management being the most
cost effective home health service interaction of all). (para. 4)Joo (2022) reiterated that home “telehealth with nurses’ care
services offers broad access to patients and suggests that it may
help reduce health disparities” and that telehealth provides
“continuous and person-centered care” (p. 810). Weaknesses of
nurse-led telehealth identified by Joo were the lack of evidence￾based practice guidelines, physical assessments that were limited by
monitoring tools, and difficulties with psychological care.
As telehomecare has evolved, this definition has expanded to
include a broader arena of delivery. In fact, the definition of home
has expanded to include anywhere outside of an acute inpatient
setting—for example, nursing homes, assisted living facilities, and
other living situations beyond the single-family home or apartment.
Wherever the home setting may be, people want to be cared for
there. Today’s burgeoning senior population, in particular, has
become quite vocal about this preference, and estimates for
preferences of aging in place at home are around 90%
(AgingInPlace.org, 2023). Fortuitously, the reach of nurses using
telecommunications-ready tools in the home is now remarkably
extended. Not only have the settings for home care expanded
beyond what was usual (the family home) in the past four decades of
home health’s formal existence, but the types of services delivered
to the home have also become more advanced. The home care
industry’s newest challenge is to work with sicker patients, many of
whom have been discharged from hospitals to home earlier than in
the past.
This challenge to extend the range of conventional home care is
why telehealth can and must be provided to a wide range of patients,
including those who
are immobilized;
live in remote or difficult-to-reach places;
have chronic ailments, such as chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD), diabetes, and congestive heart disease; and
have debilitating diseases, such as neural degenerative
diseases (e.g., Parkinson’s disease, Alzheimer’s disease, andamyotrophic lateral sclerosis).
All of these patients may stay at home and be visited and assisted
regularly by a nurse via videoconferencing, internet, videophone, or
other telecommunications means. These telecommunications-ready
tools enable home telenurses to follow through with advanced levels
of care as needed.
Still other applications of home telehealth care involve the care of
patients in immediate postsurgical situations, those needing care of
wounds and ostomies, and handicapped individuals needing
physical therapy interventions or telerehabilitation. In addition to this
extended range of patients who can be served with telehealth, many
more patients can be seen when telehealth is used. For example, in
conventional home health care, depending on the distances of
travel involved, one nurse may be able to visit as many as seven
patients per day. Using telenursing, however, one nurse can
remotely visit, or televisit, 12 to 16 patients in the same amount of
time using interactive telehealth. Over the past decade, the
efficiencies of telenursing have been well documented, as have the
resulting improved patient care outcomes that can be expected by
frequent telecontact.
Another outpatient application of telenursing is telephony-based
call centers, which may be operated by managed care
organizations, hospitals, and other health organizations. Some call
centers also include telemonitoring services, which allow the patient
to stay at home and use different telehealthcare devices to transmit
biometric and other medical information back to the call center.
Monitoring can be intermittent or continuous. This use of the
teletechnology allows clinicians to evaluate patients’ status and use
the data to make decisions to better manage patients’ health
conditions.
Many features of call centers’ services are comparable to
conventional hands-on care in the home. For instance, call centers
are typically staffed by RNs who act as case managers or perform
patient triage. These professionals can provide information and
counseling to patients as part of a disease management programand to educate them on their disease process. In effect, their goal is
to offer appropriate access to care (from nurses at the call centers)
and help patients to prevent avoidable emergency room visits and
rehospitalizations. An example of this assistance includes a nurse
calling (i.e., not waiting for a patient to contact the call center) a
recently discharged patient with diabetes on a regularly scheduled
basis to evaluate progress at home, activity tolerance, medication
compliance, foot care, and diet management. This empowering of
patients toward self-management is a very significant and needed
part of telenursing.
Home care telenursing can also involve other activities, such as
providing customized patient education in dietary or exercise needs,
nursing teleconsultations, review of results of medical tests and
examinations, and assistance to physicians in the implementation of
medical treatment protocols. The work can be wide ranging; for
example, some home-based telecardiology programs involve the
patient, the family, the physician, and a specialized cardiac
monitoring center. A multidisciplinary approach is used along with
best practice–defined protocols to manage the patient; improve the
patient’s quality of life; and reduce healthcare costs, especially
hospitalization costs. Nurses play a key role in this network of care.
A relatively new role for advanced practice nurses is that of a tele–
intensive care unit (tele-ICU) nurse. These nurses provide remote
monitoring, oversight, and expert consultation for patients in rural
ICUs by examining real-time data collected at the bedside and
communicated to a central station. The tele-ICU nurses use
computer programs, algorithms, and clinical decision support tools to
look for trends indicating that an intervention is needed and then
they alert the bedside nurse of the need, thereby providing an extra
set of eyes and an advanced level of expertise. Rincon and
Henneman (2018) reported that there are over 300 hospitals using
tele-ICU services. A typical caseload for a tele-ICU nurse is 30 to 40
patients because (1) the use of high-tech audio and video and other
telecommunications tools allows clinicians to move more efficiently
between patients; (2) alerts and clinical decision support tools assist
with triage and surveillance; and (3) the primary responsibilities ofthe tele-ICU team are to gather information, monitor for adverse
events, and ensure compliance with best practices (p. 42). The tele￾ICU market is expected to continue to grow in the coming years
because of increased demand and a shortage of intensivists
(Fact.MR, 2022).
By reviewing all these examples of telenursing practice, one can
see that nurses using telenursing can broaden their involvement in
the targeted care of their patients. Some sources have predicted that
home care will soon become the hub of much patient activity: The
home will be where care that is begun in hospitals and other settings
will be managed over the very long term and in the most cost￾effective healthcare setting. Home care telenurses can expect to
play a vital and dynamic role in the changing delivery systems that
are likely to be put in place in the coming decades.Telehealth Patient Populations
1
Any patient who has a condition that must be monitored is a
candidate for home telemonitoring. Patients with chronic illnesses
have particularly benefited from ongoing monitoring to prevent acute
episodes. Patients who are homebound or who have limited access
to transportation are also appropriate candidates for such
monitoring. Bhatia et al. (2022) reported that “telemedicine
eliminated the time, stress, and cost of commuting and parking at
appointments or waiting in clinic rooms and avoided difficulties with
stairs or walking distances to reach offices” (p. 3489).
Patients With Chronic Diseases
Given demographics and advances in medical practice, there has
been unprecedented growth in the number of patients with chronic
diseases. Those patients are at significant risk of having an acute
episode when subtle but significant changes in their medical
condition occur. The ability to identify these changes in a timely
fashion allows for changes in medication, lifestyle, or treatment to
occur. Identification of a 3-pound weight gain over 5 days in a patient
with CHF, for example, allows for interventions that could prevent an
emergency room visit and subsequent hospitalization. The
categories of patients with chronic diseases who are most monitored
today include those with CHF, COPD, or diabetes and those who
require long-term wound care.
These patients, particularly those with higher acuity levels, are at
significant risk of having a medical crisis that might necessitate
emergency or unplanned acute interventions. Many other patients
with chronic diseases are less susceptible to a health crisis but
would greatly benefit from home telemonitoring to improve care and
reduce costs.At-Risk Populations
Telemonitoring can be used effectively on patients who are at greater
risk for an episode of acute illness. Patients who have a
predisposition to disease are at increased risk of medical problems
associated with employment, lifestyle, or location, and those patients
who have displayed early signs of potentially serious health
problems could be placed on preventive monitoring. In such cases,
monitoring is used to ensure that interventions are timely and that
acute incidents are avoided. Such technology could be part of a
healthcare early-warning system and support preventive models of
care.
Isolated Patients
Home telemonitoring is effective for patients who cannot physically
access healthcare services. The homebound elderly have been
among the first to benefit from this technology in conjunction with the
home health services they receive. With increasing limits affecting
the ability of patients to receive services in the home because of
staffing shortages and coverage limitations, telemonitoring
technology takes on greater importance in managing homebound
patients.
Patients in remote geographic areas have been longtime users of
telemedicine interventions. With few rural healthcare facilities being
built and access problems becoming more difficult, the use of
technology in the home will increase. Even in suburban and rural
areas, access is becoming more problematic, requiring greater use
of home telemonitoring interventions. A lack of primary care and
emergency resources in many urban core areas has prompted many
health systems to consider managing certain patients through
telemonitoring options and better staging of patient access. Ross
(2018) described a home care robot called Rudy:
At the average height of a 10-year-old child, Rudy can also provide light in dark
areas, call emergency numbers for help, carry objects, set reminders and notify
family members or friends on demand. Rudy can work on its own, or it can be
controlled by a nurses’ aide or family member from an app. The robot takes thelead and provides care to the older adult, making note of medication usage,
response times and more. (para. 6)
Incarcerated Patients
Telehealth services are used extensively in several states to provide
mandated medical services for prison populations. Incarcerated
patients are considered a vulnerable population and frequently have
numerous chronic diseases (e.g., hepatitis C, HIV, COPD, asthma,
diabetes, and hypertension) and mental health issues (especially
substance abuse) that require continuous care (Young & Badowski,
2017). Correctional telemedicine programs can be cost effective and
promote public safety and more humane care by not having to
transport prisoners to healthcare facilities for care (UNC School of
Medicine, 2021; Weinstein et al., 2014). As Young and Badowski
pointed out,
[i]ncarcerated individuals often do not have easy, or any, access to medical
professionals with subspecialty training and experience due to the common
barriers of geography, limited transportation and cost. . . . For the incarcerated,
technology-based solutions must be utilized to improve access to care, connecting
patients with providers in a way that removes geographic barriers and the
healthcare restrictions of the correctional environment. (pp. 1–2)
Wurzburg (2021) indicated the need for dedicated spaces in
prisons for telehealth consultations to ensure patient privacy. Expect
that technology-based solutions will increase in the future to provide
effective care to this population.
Hospitalized Patients
Home telemonitoring has proved effective in managing the flow of
patients into and out of hospitals and other inpatient facilities.
Patients are monitored to determine when they are admitted, predict
how long they might stay, and prevent unfunded readmissions.
Patients undergoing semi-elective procedures can be better staged
with scheduling options when they are monitored in the home before
admission. If deterioration of the patient’s condition is observed, aprocedure can be accelerated or planned interventions can be
changed.
Monitoring can also be used effectively in length-of-stay reduction
strategies. Physicians and surgeons are more confident in
discharging patients early when they know that vital signs will be
monitored and any decline in condition will be noted in a timely
fashion. Use of monitoring effectively allows for an extension of step￾down models of care into the patient’s home. These length-of-stay
management strategies have been particularly useful when hospital
beds are in short supply.
Unplanned readmissions are a serious patient care and financial
management issue for hospitals. The use of monitoring in the home
has consistently reduced unplanned and unfunded readmissions by
enabling healthcare providers to obtain reliable information on the
patient and intervene appropriately to keep the patient at home.
Emergency Response Situations
Telemedicine will likely be a major component of effective patient
management in a major disaster; large-scale nuclear or biochemical
attack; and as we have experienced in 2020, the outbreak of a highly
infectious disease. In such situations, traditional healthcare delivery
systems may become overwhelmed, and patients will need to be
more effectively triaged and managed by remote providers.
Telemedicine applications allow for a dramatic extension of patient
management, triaging options, and off-site providers to be involved
in care. If an infectious or communicable disease is involved, patient
isolation could be accomplished in the home using telemedicine
technology.
Concerned Patients and Families
Perhaps the largest potential market for home telemonitoring is
patients and families who want to have reliable and objective
information that allows for their involvement in healthcare decision￾making. At one extreme is a young person who wants to monitorphysiological data as part of a personal wellness or fitness program.
At the other extreme are families who want information on the status
of a terminally ill loved one in another city. In between, there is a
wide range of opportunities for individuals and families to obtain
information that promotes realistic and meaningful dialogue with
healthcare professionals.
Assisted Living and Subacute Patients
In assisted living facilities or subacute care centers, a kiosk can be
used to obtain vital signs for large groups of people. Vital signs
reports can then be forwarded on a regularly established schedule to
physicians and others involved in the patient’s care. This approach
allows for better individual care management and lends itself to
developing intervention strategies and education options to benefit
the entire population of a facility. The CMS issued a telehealth tool
kit in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. The tool kit detailed the
plan for payment for telehealth services and relaxed some of the
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA)
requirements. Two additional requirements are that the provider
must use an interactive video and audio platform that permits real￾time communication and that a staff member at the facility must
manage the technology during the telemedicine visit (CMS, 2020a).
Some facilities have even used access to telemonitoring systems as
an inducement to attract potential residents.
Employers and Wellness Programs
Health care is a vital concern for employers. They have a direct
financial interest in lowering costs and are financial beneficiaries of
long-term–illness preventive strategies. If they can monitor their
workers (e.g., offer telehealth options as a wellness program), they
will see many benefits for themselves, such as reduced absenteeism
and increased productivity. Effective monitoring programs can
ultimately lower healthcare costs and associated insurance
premiums. Some companies are now exploring the creation offinancial incentives for employees who achieve healthcare
objectives, such as appropriate weight, reduced blood pressure, and
levels of exercise. Monitoring could very well be used as a means of
tracking performance in this regard. Friedman (2019) described a
comprehensive employee health telemedicine system developed by
Tampa General Hospital. The ultraviolet light–sanitized kiosks
provide high-definition video and audio visits that allow for general
health screening (e.g., height, weight, temperature, pulse, blood
pressure, and oxygen saturation) and provide prescription services
and self-administered lab kits. “Once the prototype stage for these
new kiosks is completed, the hospital says it has plans to deploy
them in other venues like airports, colleges, and hotels” (para. 4).
The Kaiser Family Foundation (2021) reported that support for
telemedicine use by employers increased as a result of the
pandemic and that many employers expanded telemedicine
coverage for mental health services.
Tools of Home Telehealth
A wide and growing range of telecommunications-ready tools are
available for nurses’ and patients’ use in the home.
Central Stations, Web Servers, and Portals
Central stations, web servers, and portals are various terms for
the technologies presently used as part of multifunctional
telehealthcare platforms and application servers. These clinical
management software programs receive and display patients’ vital
signs and other information transmitted from a medical device,
including blood pressure, weight, and glucose information. Such
transmission was initially most accomplished over plain old
telephone system (POTS) lines; however, network access and
wireless communication are more commonly used as technology
advances and access improves.
Central stations and web servers are key components of
telehealth that can be as minimal as a single-screen display or ascomprehensive as software applications that provide various
functions, including triaging the data based on medical alerts, which
allows clinicians to quickly identify those patients requiring
immediate attention. Other features found in these packages allow
clinicians to build personal medical records for patients and provide
trended patient data and analysis reports to support improved patient
outcomes using telehealth. In addition, some of the software
packages provide remote programming capabilities that allow the
clinician to remotely program the medical device in the patient’s
home. Such an application can change monitoring report times for
patients, individualize alert parameters, set up reminders, and send
educational content to a patient.
Peripheral Biometric (Medical) Devices
Peripheral biometric (medical) devices can consist of fully
integrated systems, such as a vital signs monitor, or they may be
stand-alone telecommunications-ready devices, such as blood
pressure cuffs and blood glucose meters. These devices plug
directly into a household telephone jack to send data to a central
server location or use Bluetooth technology to transmit data.
An ever-increasing number of peripheral devices are being introduced to the
market. Examples of other peripheral devices seen today in home telehealth
include pulse oximeters, international normalized ratio meters (measure
prothrombin time), spirometers, peak flow meters, electrocardiogram monitors, and
card readers and writers that use smart card technology and enable multiple users
to use one device.
Rose et al. (2022) assessed the reliability of sensors for assessing
gait and chair stand function and concluded that “[w]earable sensors
could be used to remotely monitor gait and chair stand function in
participant’s natural environments at a lower cost, reduced
participant and researcher burden, and greater ecological validity
overcoming many limitations of lab visits” (p. S19).
TelephonesTelephones are already the most familiar household communications
tool used in telehealth care. A telephone device can be augmented
with a lighted dial pad, an autodial system, or a louder ringer for
easier use by patients who need such augmentation. Telephone
systems are still and will continue to be important when there is no
internet access in the home.
Video Cameras and Videophones
Video cameras, videophones, and smartphones are readily available
consumer items that can be used in telehealth for show-and-tell
demonstrations by nurses for patients or to capture wound healing
progress, among other applications. Typically, these products
operate as a standard telephone or as a video picture telephone,
using standard telephone lines to transmit information or
interactions. If the patient has a Wi-Fi network, then a smartphone
can easily transmit images in this manner.
Currently, the image quality over a POTS is limited by the
bandwidth of POTS technology, which favors use of such images for
assessment rather than for delivering diagnostic-quality images.
These imaging capabilities will improve as integrated services digital
network lines become more widely available in the home
environment. Typically, medical centers and hospitals have access to
larger bandwidth capabilities for image transmission and viewing,
thus ensuring high-quality diagnostic images and point-to-point
consultations in hospital-based or medical center–based settings.
Personal Emergency Response Systems
Personal emergency response systems are signaling devices
worn as a pendant or otherwise made easily accessible to patients to
ensure their safety and enable them to quickly access emergency
care when needed, usually in case of a fall. A preset telephone
number is alerted by the patient pushing a button on the pendant;
upon this signal, predesignated emergency help is dispatched. Many
newer sensor options for tracking patients at home are beingincorporated into multifunctioning personal emergency response
system devices, such as alerting a central call center to water
flooding or smoke in a patient’s home. The next subsection provides
details on these sensors and monitors.
Sensor and Activity-Monitoring Systems
Sensor and activity-monitoring systems can track activities of
daily living of seniors and other at-risk individuals in their place of
residence. These sensors and monitoring systems can provide
insight into behavior changes that might signal changes or
deterioration of health status. Such technologies consist of wireless
motion sensors that are strategically placed around the residence
and can detect motion on a 24-hour basis.
Data from these sensors are wirelessly sent to a receiver and
base station, which periodically transmit the information to a
centralized server. Sophisticated algorithms analyze and compile
data on each individual’s normal patterns of behavior, including
bathroom usage; sleep disturbance; meal preparation; medication
interaction; and general levels of activity, including fall detection.
Deviations from these norms can be important warning signs of
emerging health problems, and the alerts provided can enable
caregivers to intervene early (Breaux, 2023).
In addition to widely used fire, security, and home gas detectors,
other sensors can monitor appliances to detect whether a household
appliance is turned on or off and, with some devices, actually switch
the appliance on and off for the resident. Typical applications for
affixing programmable sensors can include lamps, television sets,
irons, and kitchen stoves. Such sensors might be very valuable for
ensuring the safety of elderly, forgetful persons who live alone. One
excellent example of today’s sensor use for assistance with the
elderly are sensors placed in or on stovetops to alert users when
they are standing too close to the equipment or the kettle or pot has
boiled over. Benefits realized from these technologies include
enabling people to live independently with an improved quality of life.
They can also provide peace of mind for other family members livingat a distance. Smart home technologies have continued to evolve
and become more sophisticated and reliable (Hipp, 2023; Matte,
2018), thus providing benefits, such as safety and security, and
supporting independent living and providing peace of mind.
Medication Management Devices
Medication management devices address a well-recognized major
problem in health care, medication management and compliance.
The failure of patients to take medications as prescribed has become
a national problem in health care today. This noncompliance can
have devastating consequences, particularly for those patients living
with chronic illnesses. Lloyd et al. (2019) reported that medication
nonadherence ranged from 23% for heart failure to as high as 38%
for managing hyperlipidemia. Annual costs of nonadherence, ranging
in the billions of dollars, are based on emergency department visits
and inpatient hospitalizations as a result of poor disease
management.
To address some of these very pressing problems, a host of
telecommunications-ready medication devices have become
available, and many more are in development. Devices are as
simple as a watch that reminds a person to take medications and pill
organizers with audible reminders, and some can even be
programmed to dispense prefilled containers with medications and
alert a patient or caregiver of a missed dose. Furthermore, some of
these medication tools send data from the device back to a central
server so that patients’ medication compliance can be tracked.
These telecommunications-ready devices can organize, manage,
dispense, or remind, and they will play an increasingly important role
in helping people live independently and manage their disease
processes through medication compliance. For more information on
these devices, see Chapter 15, Informatics Tools to Promote Patient
Safety, Quality Outcomes, and Interdisciplinary Collaboration.
Special Needs Telecommunications-Ready DevicesSpecial needs telecommunications-ready devices can include
preprogrammed, multifunctional infusion pumps for meeting a range
of infusion needs, including medications for pain management and
other infusion delivery needs, such as hydration and nutrition, peak
flow meters, and electrocardiogram monitors. Many such tools are in
development to meet the more demanding and challenging needs of
today’s at-home patients. The common goal of these tools is to
increase communications between nurse and patient and to increase
the nurse’s knowledge of the patient’s status in a timely manner. A
relatively new device approved for home use by the U.S. Food and
Drug Administration (FDA) is Tyto, described by McDaniel et al.
(2019) as follows:
The Tyto device (TytoCare Ltd., Israel) is a novel examination system that includes
a built-in examination camera, an infrared thermometer, a wireless communication
unit, a lithium ion battery, and a touch screen. The system also incorporates a
digital stethoscope, a digital otoscope, and a tongue depressor. The Tyto platform
enables the capacity for live video or store and forward applications, and users can
be directed by voice or on-screen instructions to obtain images and sounds to
comport with the standard of care by enabling a remote physical examination. (p.
2)
Read more about this device and see illustrations provided on the
product’s web page at www.tytocare.com.
Figure 18-3 illustrates the process for managing home telehealth.Elderly patients at a consultation: © Monkey Business Images/Shutterstock; telenurses
looking at computer screen: © Rocketclips, Inc./Shutterstock; computer technicians: ©
dotshock/Shutterstock.
Figure 18-3 Managing Home Telehealth
Description
1 This section is adapted from Prial and Hoss (2009).Home Telehealth Software
2
As important as the gathering of data is the organizing of information
to support decision-making by clinical professionals. The telehealth
software that supports home telehealth programs has become much
more sophisticated in recent years and now allows for greater
numbers of patients to be better managed by a single clinician.
Areas of significant improvement in software include trending, triage,
communications protocols, access, and sharing.
Trending
One of the key advantages of home telemonitoring is the creation of
a digital health record that allows information to be recorded over
time. If patients take their weight and blood pressure daily, most
software will graphically display these data over time so that subtle
trends can be observed. This type of trend data is much more useful
in identifying emerging or developing conditions than is snapshot
data, which are collected every 6 to 8 weeks at a physician’s office.
Trend information can also be developed for groups of patients or
populations, which allows for population-based analyses of
interventions. For example, one might gather trend information on
patients with COPD, patients of a particular physician, or all patients
receiving a certain medication.
Triage
Most home telemonitoring systems set an acceptable range of
values for individual patients when they are enrolled in the
monitoring program. For example, if oxygen saturation, blood
pressure, or weight values go above or below predetermined
amounts, then the software alerts the appropriate party. More
sophisticated software looks at readings from multiple pieces of
equipment on a single patient and can give higher priority to patientsat risk of an acute episode. These systems help clinicians better
organize their work and arrange for appropriate interventions.
Communications
Advanced telemonitoring software utilizes sophisticated electronic
notification protocols. Often, when information will be communicated
and to whom it is sent are predetermined. Sophisticated protocols
can be developed related to both routine and alert information,
thereby more effectively organizing communications with physicians,
nurses, and caregivers. Some systems also have the capacity to
communicate back to the patient or seek additional information
under predetermined circumstances.
Data Access and Information Sharing
Many telemonitoring systems house information in web-based
formats. This format allows for easy access to the data from any
location that has access to the internet. Multiple parties can
simultaneously share and view data. Data can also be conveniently
transmitted to other clinicians and are updated almost immediately
when new values are received. Web-based records are fully HIPAA
compliant when appropriate protections and controls are in place.
2 This section is adapted from Prial and Hoss (2009).Home Telehealth Practice and Protocols
The tools of telehealth described previously are devices that enable
remote care delivery, enhance patient care, and improve outcomes.
It is important to note that the data received from these tools are
useless without some type of clinical oversight. Such tools do not
replace the nurse but rather give the nurse the ability to make more
informed clinical decisions based on reliable data and a
comprehensive picture of the patient’s status. In home care, they
also direct the clinical resources to patients based on need. The
resulting patient-centered approach to care delivers improved patient
outcomes and clinical efficiencies.
Home telehealth is indeed a practice, albeit one that represents a
change in the current clinical model of practice for home care. Use of
the telehealth tools is integrated into the practice to improve patient
outcomes. As with any tool, however, the effectiveness is directly
proportional to the appropriateness of the tool’s application and use.
Home telehealth programs differ depending on the type of
technology used and the foci of the telehealth programs. However,
every program should have telehealth use criteria established,
including provisions for informed consent and assessment of the
appropriateness of telehealth use for specific situations. The ATA
regularly develops and issues practice guidelines, which can be
accessed at its website:
www.americantelemed.org/resource_categories/practice-guidelines.
Note that the ATA requires you to register with them to access the
guidelines.
Other professional organizations, such as the American Nurses
Association (ANA), the AACN, and the American Academy of
Ambulatory Care Nursing (AAACN), also provide telehealth practice
guidelines. Patient criteria for telehealth should be governed by
established inclusion and exclusion guidelines that detail who is
eligible and appropriate for each type of technology. Other criteriaT
include establishing policies and procedures that address patient
enrollment, education, and equipment setup; patient and caregiver
and home assessment; patient informed consent; and privacy and
confidentiality rights. In addition, a clinical plan of care that is specific
to patient needs should be developed. Telehealth pathways and
protocols ensure more focused work with patients and allow for
targeted interventions.
CASE STUDY: HOME TELEMONITORING OF
MULTIPLE ILLNESSES
he patient is a 71-year-old male who has stage 4 cardiomyopathy/pulmonary
hypertension, atrial fibrillation, COPD, and type 2 diabetes mellitus. He has been
an active patient with a home healthcare agency for several years, with an
admitting diagnosis of CHF.
Initially, the patient was seen three times a week by an RN for CHF assessment and
management. The patient’s history included frequent hospitalizations for exacerbation
of CHF and uncontrolled atrial fibrillation. He experienced a total of four hospitalizations
in the year before placement of a telemonitoring system in his home, after about 6
months of receiving conventional home care.
Ever since the patient was placed on a telemonitoring system for daily tracking more
than 8 months ago, he has not been hospitalized. The telemonitoring interactions with
his nurse have made him very conscious of the role that his medications, diet, and fluid
restrictions play in his overall health status.
In addition, the telemonitor has proved its benefits to local physicians. The patient’s
family physician, cardiologist, and pulmonologist were able to provide better care for
the patient by examining the tabular and graphical trends that were elicited from the
daily vital signs monitor. This information aided in the titration and addition of the
various medications needed to control the patient’s CHF and atrial fibrillation. The
physicians were able to ascertain the response to the medication adjustments and
other treatment modalities, such as oxygen titration. At the start of care, the patient’s
weight was 196 pounds; it is now at a stable 187 pounds, with the symptoms more
controlled than they have ever been.
The patient’s nurses, meanwhile, have peace of mind knowing they can keep an eye
on their patient daily while making additional visits as needed, with the documentation
being provided by the system to justify the additional nursing visit. This tool can also be
incorporated into the nurses’ care plan, enabling a higher standard of care to the
patient.
At present, the patient is being case managed by nursing staff visits that occur once
per month. He now enjoys a newfound peace of mind and security and an improved
state of health, something this patient had not experienced in more than a year.Clearly, by using a protocol for patients who regularly use
telehealth equipment for tracking their status, nurses receive a good
deal more targeted information than can possibly be obtained during
scheduled in-person visits. As a result, the use of telehealth tools,
together with clinical oversight and practice, makes possible more
efficient and effective clinical management by allowing the patient’s
needs to drive the care. As home telehealth protocols are used more
extensively, the improved clinical and operational efficiencies may
ultimately affect the home care agency’s bottom line.
It is important that this clinically driven, as-needed approach to
care services is not misunderstood as providing less care. In the
previous case study, a proactive, patient-centered approach enabled
a home healthcare agency to identify early exacerbations in a
patient’s condition and take appropriate action.Legal, Ethical, and Regulatory Issues
Telehealth is affected by certain legal, ethical, and regulatory issues
of which nurses should be aware. Prior to the COVID-19 pandemic,
interstate practice of telenursing, for example, required nurses to be
licensed to practice in all the states in which they provided telehealth
services and directly interacted with patients. This was particularly
important when nurses worked for health systems that are located
near state borders and draw patients from both states. A possible
solution is the development of the federally sponsored physician
Interstate Medical Licensure Compact and Nurse Licensure
Compact (NLC) to facilitate portability of licensure across state lines.
However, this federal initiative has met opposition from some states
that are unwilling to share licensing authority. Gaines (2023) reported
that the original NLC was updated in 2018 to the Enhanced Nursing
Licensure Compact (eNLC). The eNLC requires criminal background
checks and fingerprinting. Currently, 40 states have enacted eNLC
licensure, and 4 states have legislation pending. Follow these
developments at your state licensing boards. The Center for
Connected Health Policy provides an interactive map of current and
pending state laws and reimbursement policies at
www.cchpca.org/telehealth-policy/current-state-laws-and￾reimbursement-policies.
Some evidence exists that these regulations are slowly changing,
so it is important for all licensed professionals to be aware of
legislation governing specifically their practice. For example, during
the COVID-19 pandemic, some laws and regulations related to
telehealth practice were temporarily suspended. Telehealth laws and
regulations are likely to change again as a result of the end of the
public health emergency declaration. Shachar et al. (2020) indicated
that “[t]o maintain the impetus for change and the momentum for
telehealth services that have resulted from the COVID-19 pandemic,
the US cannot revert to prepandemic telehealth regulations. Neithercan the US simply adopt the recent changes, because they lack
nuance to support clinicians while ensuring safety and privacy for
patients: a third regulatory path is needed” (p. 2376). Follow these
developments at the official U.S. government website:
https://telehealth.hhs.gov/licensure/getting-started-licensure.
Patient confidentiality and the privacy and safety of clinical data
must be given special consideration. Informed consent releases to
receive telehealth services are a critical first step and recommended
by the Center for Connected Health Policy (n.d.). A typical informed
consent for telehealth is a written document that describes what the
patient can expect and the security measures that are in place to
protect privacy. Informed consent policies for telehealth may vary by
state (Center for Connected Health Policy, n.d.). You will also find
important informed consent information at
https://telehealth.hhs.gov/providers/preparing-patients-for￾telehealth/obtaining-informed-consent. Pointed efforts must be
continually undertaken by the nurses’ agencies to upgrade their
information systems to ensure that a high level of data security is
provided at all times. Telehealth providers must adhere to all data
privacy and confidentiality guidelines and remain vigilant to ensure
that all involved parties, including the technical staff support
assistants, have appropriate training in privacy and confidentiality
issues.The Patient’s Role in Telehealth
The range and sophistication of home telehealth tools are expanding
consistently, and a concern of nurses when choosing appropriate
tools for their patients is whether their patients will use these
devices. For example, to assist in wound care tracking, elderly
patients may find the monitoring technology and video cameras that
are placed in their homes to be a daunting introduction to home
health care. To assuage the possible discomfort, these and other
such tools have undergone many iterations so that they are easier to
use and patients’ ability to turn them on and off is ensured. When
patients are scheduled for a televisit, these devices can be turned on
and used. Patients’ use of these devices is critical so that the
necessary information about them can be gathered and transmitted
and telenurses can attend to their needs. Consideration of
technology usability issues when initiating telehealth applications
with elders, who may have sensory, cognitive, and motor disabilities,
should be paramount. The use of the technology should not be
stress producing for the patient or the family.Telehealth Research
Telehealth research focuses primarily on clinical outcomes, such as
effectiveness of telehealth compared to usual care, cost￾effectiveness of telehealth intervention, and patient and family
satisfaction.
To follow the progress in telehealth research, bookmark the sites
provided in Box 18-1.
BOX 18-1 TELEHEALTH RESEARCH AND
INFORMATION CENTERS
Center for Telehealth and e-Health Law: www.ctel.org
International Society for Telemedicine and eHealth: www.isfteh.org
National Consortium of Telehealth Resource Centers:
www.telehealthresourcecenter.org
Telehealth Research Centers of Excellence (TRACE):
https://healthcaredelivery.cancer.gov/telehealth/trace.html
Rural Telehealth Research Center: www.ruralhealthresearch.org/centers/telehealth
Telehealth.HHS.gov: https://telehealth.hhs.gov/for-researchers
Virginia Telehealth Network: www.ehealthvirginia.orgEvolving Telehealth Models
Previous telehealthcare deliveries were largely provider initiated;
however, we are beginning to see that consumers will drive the way
health care is delivered in the future. Consider that tomorrow’s
healthcare facility might have no walls. The evolving roles of the
internet, electronic and personal health records, mHealth, health
information exchanges, and telehealth will support a more integrated
healthcare model. This convergence of trends and solutions will
continue to expand with the introduction of new business practice
models, such as retail clinics and direct-to-consumer telehealth
services.
Retail clinics, such as CVS’s MinuteClinics, began to emerge in
2001 and numbered 2,800 in 2017, and are likely to continue to grow
(Advisory Board, 2019). These clinics focus on prevention services,
such as vaccines; treatment of minor injuries, minor illnesses, and
aches and pains; and health monitoring and medication
management services for chronic illnesses. The clinics offer
affordable, accessible, walk-in and after-hours care and are helping
to fill the primary care gap created by the Affordable Care Act.
Adding telehealth services is allowing these clinics to expand their
services. Wicklund (2019) reported that “Walgreens, CVS Health,
Rite Aid, Publix, Target and Walmart are either teaming up with local
health systems, partnering with telehealth providers and migrating
healthcare services to an mHealth platform or looking to develop
clinics that facilitate care management, rather than one-off visits”
(para. 4). As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, it is likely that these
retail clinic telehealth services will grow even more rapidly, especially
because of the expanded payments allowed by CMS in response to
the pandemic. As Dacey (2020) pointed out, “[a]nd once we are
through the healthcare crisis facing us all CMS will face another
challenge, perhaps more difficult in a way. How are they going to get
the telehealth genie back in the bottle?” (para. 12).Several telehealth organizations also provide downloadable
telehealth apps for consumers to consult directly with board-certified
doctors via smartphones, tablets, and computers. For more
information, please visit https://business.amwell.com,
www.doctorondemand.com, or www.teladoc.com as examples of
online consultation. New telehealth companies are entering the
market nearly every day, with a predicted growth of 22.5% in the
next 5 years (Cision PR Newswire, 2020).
Several new trends include more robust mobile devices that
connect with each other (Internet of Things) to provide real-time data
on patients’ fitness and exercise and health data, such as
electrocardiograms, heart rates, and blood sugars, to their
physicians’ offices. The difficulty with these devices is ensuring
security of data transmissions as well as the possibility of
overwhelming physicians with data (TechTarget, 2017). As one
physician mused, “While still recovering from this inescapable
occupational hazard of the new digital documentation, a
technological surge of broadband-enabled technology has inundated
us. These have surfaced as ingestible, wearable and embeddable
based on the route of placement. Are we physicians labeling the data
provided by them as patient health information (PHI)?” (Thingalaya,
2018, para. 2). Even though these wearables are becoming more
sophisticated, they are still subject to artifacts and measurement
inaccuracies. They can, however, alert patients of potential issues
and prompt them to seek medical consultation.
The Telemed Tablet is an FDA-approved device that provides
access to a pool of specialists for consultation in rural clinics, at the
bedside in hospitals, or in emergency rooms. It also allows on-call
providers to consult remotely. More information about this product
can be found at
https://static.americanwell.com/app/uploads/2016/03/Telemed￾Tablet-Brochure.pdf.
TytoCare provides an at-home reusable diagnostic kit (one-time
fee) that enables high-quality video and audio to be sent to a
consulting physician (billed each visit): www.tytocare.com/home￾smart-clinic.We expect ever-more innovative and sophisticated products to
arrive on the market in the coming years.Parting Thoughts for the Future
Telehealth is here to stay and will become increasingly important in
the future. The barriers to telehealth related to broadband access
must be addressed soon.
The care continuum will need to be supported by a clinical and
caregiver structure that uses the data collected from patients to
make better and more informed healthcare decisions. Health
parameter data could be used by the end user for personal direct￾care decision-making or by a member of the healthcare community
to determine appropriate healthcare interventions.
The technology of today will be different from the technology of
tomorrow as access to broadband communications systems,
acceptance of technology, and mobility and data transfer continue to
evolve. As a result of emerging needs, many companies will enter
the market and offer a wide range of information technology tools,
ranging from embedded and worn sensors to remote monitoring
devices. User interfaces will become increasingly sophisticated and
more patient centric.
Clearly, by making key information readily accessible, solutions
across all areas will facilitate collaboration in care delivery and health
information. Products that integrate into consumers’ and patients’
everyday lives to improve their quality of life will continue to emerge.
Telehealth and telenursing will play an important role in improving
quality of life and care for the patients served.
Foremost, nurses must be open to change and willing to embrace
ever-evolving practice models. Tools should always be used to
improve care delivery models to make more targeted contact with
and about patients. In an ideal world, there would be seamless
integration of clinical data systems and robust data exchange to
provide quality care for patients no matter their location.Summary
Telehealth is a rapidly developing mode of health service delivery, in
which nurses can expect to play a significant role. The most
promising area of concentration for nurses is in home telehealth
care, an area that is expected to provide extensive care to the
burgeoning number of American elderly persons living with
challenging chronic diseases and conditions. Many
telecommunications-ready tools to assist nurses in delivering this
care are currently available, and their effectiveness in maintaining or
improving patients’ health outcomes is well documented. Today’s
nurses are providing telehealth services to typical home care
patients (i.e., elderly patients and patients needing regular and
targeted care) and operating effectively as telenurses. The practice
of telehealth will provide opportunities for telenurses to become key
players in care management across the healthcare continuum.
THOUGHT-PROVOKING QUESTIONS
1. Will the increased use of telehealth technology tools be viewed as dehumanizing
patient care, or will it be viewed as a means to promote more contact with
healthcare providers and as new ways for people to stay connected (e.g., online
disease support groups), thereby creating better long-term disease management
and patient satisfaction?
2. Which types of resistance to new technologies might be evident among patients,
caregivers, and nurses? Which evidence and strategies might help to diminish
these resistances?
3. As telehealth technology advances toward seamless data access, regardless of
distance or health system, how can patient privacy rights and the confidentiality of
personal medical data be protected?
4. Consider a recent patient care scenario, and describe how it could have been
managed at a distance.
Which training would be needed?
Which equipment would be used?
How would the patient and their family respond to home telemonitoring?R E F E R E N C E S
Advisory Board. (2019, May 28). Coming to a mall near you: Cancer care, mental health
clinics and more. www.advisory.com/daily-briefing/2019/05/28/retail-clinics
AgingInPlace.org. (2023, April 24). Aging in place vs. assisted living.
www.aginginplace.org/aging-in-place-vs-assisted-living
Allan, R. (2006, June 28). A brief history of telemedicine. Electronic Design.
http://electronicdesign.com/components/brief-history-telemedicine
American Association of Colleges of Nursing. (2022). Nursing shortage fact sheet.
www.aacnnursing.org/News-Information/Fact-Sheets/Nursing-Shortage
American Hospital Association. (2019). Fact sheet: Telehealth.
www.aha.org/system/files/2019-02/fact-sheet-telehealth-2-4-19.pdf
American Hospital Association. (2020). COVID-19: Telehealth and virtual care best
practices. www.aha.org/system/files/media/file/2020/04/COVID-19-Telehealth-Best￾Practices_final.pdf
American Medical Association. (2023, May 10). AMA telehealth quick guide. www.ama￾assn.org/practice-management/digital/ama-quick-guide-telemedicine-practice
American Telemedicine Association. (n.d.). Telehealth: Defining 21st century care.
www.americantelemed.org/resource/why-telemedicine
Bhatia, R., Gilliam, E., Aliberti, G., Pinheiro, A., Karamourtopoulos, M., Davis, R. B.,
DesRochers, L., & Schonberg, M. A. (2022). Older adults’ perspectives on primary care
telemedicine during the COVID-19 pandemic. Journal of the American Geriatrics
Society, 70(12), 3480–3492. https://doi.org/10.1111/jgs.18035
Breaux, E. (2023, January 30). Best personal emergency response systems (PERS) for
older adults. AgingInPlace.org. www.aginginplace.org/comprehensive-guide-to-personal￾emergency-response-systems
Brodwin, E., & Ross, C. (2020, March 17). Surge in patients overwhelms telehealth services
amid coronavirus pandemic. STAT. www.statnews.com/2020/03/17/telehealth-services￾overwhelmed-amid-coronavirus-pandemic
Center for Connected Health Policy. (n.d.). A deeper dive into telehealth policy: Informed
consent. www.cchpca.org/telehealth-policy/informed-consent
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2022). About chronic diseases.
www.cdc.gov/chronicdisease/about/index.htm
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. (n.d.). General provider telehealth and
telemedicine tool kit. www.cms.gov/files/document/general-telemedicine-toolkit.pdf
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. (2020a). Long-term care nursing homes
telehealth and telemedicine tool kit. www.cms.gov/files/document/COVID-19-nursing￾home-telehealth-toolkit.pdf
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. (2020b). President Trump expands telehealth
benefits for Medicare beneficiaries during COVID-19 outbreak.
www.cms.gov/newsroom/press-releases/president-trump-expands-telehealth-benefits￾medicare-beneficiaries-during-COVID-19-outbreakCenters for Medicare and Medicaid Services. (2022). National health expenditure data:
Historical. www.cms.gov/Research-Statistics-Data-and-Systems/Statistics-Trends-and￾Reports/NationalHealthExpendData/NationalHealthAccountsHistorical
Cision PR Newswire. (2020, January 28). Telehealth companies who are disrupting the $10
trillion healthcare industry. www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/telehealth-companies￾who-are-disrupting-the-10-trillion-healthcare-industry-300994118.html
Craig, J., & Patterson, V. (2005). Introduction to the practice of telemedicine. Journal of
Telemedicine and Telecare, 11(1), 3–9. https://doi.org/10.1177/1357633X0501100102
Dacey, B. (2020 June 3). Telehealth is the future and the future has arrived. Medical
Economics. www.medicaleconomics.com/view/telehealth-future-and-future-has-arrived-0
Dorsey, E. R., & Topol, E. J. (2016). State of telehealth. New England Journal of Medicine,
375(2), 154–161. https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMra1601705
Fact.MR. (2022). Tele-ICU services market. www.factmr.com/report/1100/tele-icu-services￾market
Fauteux, N. (2022). The growth of telehealth. American Journal of Nursing, 122(3), 16–17.
https://doi.org/10.1097/01.NAJ.0000822960.95263.e5
Friedman, B. (2019, October 24). Improvements in telehealth kiosks; Tampa General
deploys new version for employee health. Lab Soft News.
https://labsoftnews.typepad.com/lab_soft_news/2019/10/the-telehealth-kiosk-as-a￾patient-examining-room.html
Gaines, K. (2023, July 25). Compact nursing states list 2023. Nurse.org.
https://nurse.org/articles/enhanced-compact-multi-state-license-eNLC
Health Resources and Services Administration. (2022). What is telehealth?
www.hrsa.gov/rural-health/topics/telehealth/what-is-telehealth
Hipp, D. (2023, May 16). Smart home upgrades for aging in place, recommended by
experts. Forbes Health. www.forbes.com/health/healthy-aging/smart-home-upgrades￾for-aging-in-place
Joo, J. Y. (2022). Nurse-led telehealth interventions during COVID-19: A scoping review.
Computers, Informatics, Nursing, 40(12), 804–813.
https://doi.org/10.1097/CIN.0000000000000962
Kaiser Family Foundation. (2021, November 10). 2021 employer health benefits survey.
www.kff.org/report-section/ehbs-2021-section-13-employer-practices-telehealth-and￾employer-responses-to-the-pandemic
Kinsella, A. (n.d.). About home telehealth. National Care Planning Council.
www.longtermcarelink.net/eldercare/home_telehealth.htm#is
Lloyd, J. T., Maresh, S., Powers, C. A., Shrank, W. H., & Alley, D. E. (2019). How much does
medication nonadherence cost the Medicare fee-for-service program? Medical Care,
57(3), 218–224. http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/MLR.0000000000001067
Mass.gov. (n.d.). About the National TeleNursing Center. www.mass.gov/info-details/about￾the-national-telenursing-center
Matte, C. (2018, September 18). Beyond novelty: Smart homes for safety, security, and
personal well-being. IoT Evolution. www.iotevolutionworld.com/smart￾home/articles/439553-beyond-novelty-smart-homes-safety-security-personal-well.htm
McDaniel, N., Novicoff, W., Gunnell, B., and Gordon, D. (2019). Comparison of a novel
handheld telehealth device with stand-alone examination tools in a clinic setting.Telemedicine and e-Health, 25(12), 1225–1230. https://doi.org/10.1089/tmj.2018.0214
Melchionna, M. (2022, March 4). 38% of patients have received virtual care in 2022.
Telehealth News. https://mhealthintelligence.com/news/38-of-patients-have-received￾virtual-care-in-2022
Müller, A., Cau, A., Muhammed, S., Abdullahi, O., Hayward, A., Nsanzimana, S., & Lester,
R. (2022). Digital mHealth and virtual care use during COVID-19 in 4 countries: Rapid
landscape review. JMIR Formative Research, 6(11), e26041.
https://doi.org/10.2196/26041
National Council on Aging. (2023). Get the facts on healthy aging. www.ncoa.org/article/get￾the-facts-on-healthy-aging
Ohio Supercomputer Center. (2008). Governor Strickland, international panel of experts
consider establishing telehealth video resource center.
www.osc.edu/press/governor_strickland_international_panel_of_experts_consider_estab
lishing_telehealth_video.
Prial, S., & Hoss, S. (2009). Overview of home telehealth. In D. McGonigle & K. Mastrian
(Eds.), Nursing informatics and the foundation of knowledge (pp. 265–281). Jones and
Bartlett.
Rincon, T. A., & Henneman, E. (2018). An introduction to nursing surveillance in the tele￾ICU. Nursing Critical Care, 13(2), 42–46.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/01.CCN.0000527223.11558.8a
Rose, M. J., Neogi, T., Friscia, B., Torabian, K. A., LaValley, M. P., Gheller, M., Adamowicz,
L., Georgiev, P., Viktrup, L., Demanuele, C., Wacnick, P., & Kumar, D. (2022). Reliability
of wearable sensors for assessing gait and chair stand function at home in people with
knee osteoarthritis. Osteoarthritis and Cartilage, 30, S18–S19.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joca.2022.02.014
Ross, C. (2018, April 10). Robots: The future of home healthcare? MindFlow Design.
www.mindflowdesign.com/insights/robots-the-future-of-home-healthcare
Roth, M. (2020, March 24). 4 ways you haven’t thought about using telehealth during the
COVID-19 pandemic. HealthLeaders. www.healthleadersmedia.com/innovation/4-ways￾you-havent-thought-about-using-telehealth-during-covid-19-pandemic
Shachar, C., Engel, J., & Elwyn, G. (2020). Implications for telehealth in a postpandemic
future: Regulatory and privacy issues. Journal of the American Medical Association,
323(23), 2375–2376. https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2020.7943
Skiba, D. J. (1988). Health-oriented telecommunications. In M. J. Ball, K. J. Hannah, S. K.
Newbold, & J. V. Douglas (Eds.), Nursing informatics: Where caring and technology
meet (pp. 40–53). Springer.
TechTarget. (2017, March). A guide to healthcare IoT possibilities and obstacles.
https://searchhealthit.techtarget.com/essentialguide/A-guide-to-healthcare-IoT￾possibilities-and-obstacles
Thingalaya, N. (2018, October 18). Why physicians should embrace fitness trackers.
KevinMD.com. www.kevinmd.com/blog/2018/10/why-physicians-should-embrace￾fitness-trackers.html
UNC School of Medicine. (2021, August 25). Telemedicine in prison allows continued care,
shows positive patient-provider experiences.https://web.archive.org/web/20210827022005/https://www.med.unc.edu/medicine/telem
edicine-in-prison-allows-continued-care-shows-positive-patient-provider-experiences
U.S. Census Bureau. (n.d.). 2020 census will help policymakers prepare for the incoming
wave of aging boomers.
https://content.govdelivery.com/accounts/USCENSUS/bulletins/270be9a
Vincent, G. K., & Velcoff, V. A. (2010, May 1). The next four decades: The older population
in the United States: 2010 to 2050. U.S. Census Bureau.
www.census.gov/library/publications/2010/demo/p25-1138.html
Vo, V., Auroy, L., & Sarradon-Eck, A. (2019). Patients’ perceptions of mHealth apps: Meta￾ethnographic review of qualitative studies. JMIR mHealth and uHealth, 7(7): e13817.
https://doi.org/10.2196/13817
Weinstein, R. S., Lopez, A. M., Joseph, B. A., Erps, K. A., Holcomb, M., Barker, G. P., &
Krupinski, E. A. (2014). Telemedicine, telehealth, and mobile health applications that
work: Opportunities and barriers. American Journal of Medicine, 127(3), 183–187.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.amjmed.2013.09.032
Wicklund, E. (2019, October 30). Walgreens shutters retail health clinics, eyes telehealth
partnerships. Telehealth News. https://mhealthintelligence.com/news/walgreens￾shutters-retail-health-clinics-eyes-telehealth-partnerships
Wurzburg, S. (2021, April 12). Three things to know about implementing telehealth in
correctional facilities. Justice Center: The Council of State Governments.
https://csgjusticecenter.org/2021/04/12/three-things-to-know-about-implementing￾telehealth-in-correctional-facilities
Young, J. D., & Badowski, M. E. (2017). Telehealth: Increasing access to high quality care
by expanding the role of technology in correctional medicine. Journal of Clinical
Medicine, 6(2), 20. https://doi.org/10.3390/jcm6020020© nadla/E+/Getty ImagesChapter 19
Chapter 20
SECTION V
Education Applications of Nursing
Informatics
Nursing Informatics and Nursing Education
Simulation, Game Mechanics, Virtual Worlds, and the
Realities in Nursing Education
Nursing informatics (NI) provides more tools and capabilities than
can be imagined. Just as NI has changed the way nursing is
administered and practiced, it has dramatically affected nursing
education practices.
Nursing education is evolving with the increased integration of NI
and other technology tools to promote learning. The tools that are
available must be used prudently by reflecting on and applying
knowledge of teaching styles, learning styles, and other pedagogical
concerns. As informatics capabilities continue to expand, a
phenomenal amount of potential for virtual reality–embedded
education looms on the horizon. Once the purview of gamers and
geeks, virtual reality has exploded onto the academic scene. The
use of virtual reality has the potential to cross over into the
curriculum, the university, and even the learning systems
themselves. Many university departments will experiment with virtual
reality in hopes of staying current and appealing to their young and
demanding “Generation Next” constituency. However, much of
society loves the feel of books too much to dismiss them as archaic.
There is room for both books and technology in education. Students,
educators, and administrators will ultimately return to a modified form
of face-to-face classroom teaching, even with the availability of
newer and more adventuresome teaching technologies.
Furthermore, after fast, high-burn technologies (technologies that
come on the market with lots of hype but flame out quickly) stopflooding the marketplace and big business provides opportunities for
proprietary online universities, modified traditions will take their
place, creating new spaces for nontraditional students and members
of the Net Generation and Generation Z, with both being anxious for
technology use in the classroom for very different reasons. Artificial
intelligence (AI) has exploded onto the academic scene, and this
disruption must be addressed.
The material in this book is placed within the context of the
Foundation of Knowledge model (Figure V-1) to meet the needs of
healthcare delivery systems, organizations, patients, and nurses.
Nursing education promotes scholarship and evidence-based
teaching and learning. Through the sound integration of information
management and technology tools, teaching and learning strategies
promote the social and intellectual growth of the learner. As teachers’
and learners’ quest for knowledge, the need for the pursuit of lifelong
learning is instilled. Teachers and learners involved in the process of
education are also involved with all levels of the model. Typically,
they acquire and process data and information and generate and
disseminate knowledge within the frame of reference of their
educational institution. Their knowledge generation remains on a
limited individual, course, or school basis unless they become
involved with developing publications and educational research that
inform others in the nursing profession.Designed by Alicia Mastrian
Figure V-1 Foundation of Knowledge Model
Description
The reader of this section is challenged to ask the following
questions: (1) How can I apply the knowledge I gain from my
education to benefit my patients and enhance my practice? (2) How
can I help my colleagues, patients, and fellow students understand
and use the current technologies to promote learning? (3) How can I
use my wisdom to help create the theories, tools, and knowledge of
the future?C H A P T E R 1 9
Nursing Informatics and
Nursing Education
OBJECTIVES
1. Describe nursing education in relation to the Foundation of Knowledge model.
2. Explore knowledge acquisition and sharing.
3. Assess technology tools and delivery modalities used in nursing education and
continuing education.
4. Compare and contrast knowledge assessment methods.
KEY TERMS
advocate
artificial intelligence (AI)
asynchronous
audiopod
blended
Blockcerts
blockchain
blog
case scenario
collaboration
computer based
continuing education (CE)
copyright
distance education
distributed ledger technology (DLT)
e-learningelectronic mailing list
email
evidence
face-to-face
fair use
Foundation of Knowledge model
Generation Z (Gen Z)
hybrid
hypertext
information literacy
instant message (IM)
iPod
learning management system (LMS)
MP3 aggregator
MP4
multimedia
Net Generation
online chat
podcast
portal
portfolio
problem based
professional networking
real time
really simple syndication (RSS)
reflective commentary
resource description framework (RDF)
role-playing
simulation
smartphone
tutorial
videopod
virtual reality (VR)
web based
webcast
web enhanced
webinar
web publishing
wikiIntroduction: Nursing Education and the
Foundation of Knowledge Model
Nursing informatics facilitates the integration of information, data,
and knowledge to support nurses, patients, and other providers in
their particular settings and decision-making roles. The Foundation
of Knowledge model specifically prompts nurses to extend their
theoretical and metaphorical knowledge into practical, holistic
determinations based on a variety of factors and contexts. Because
competencies in informatics include but are not limited to
information literacy, computer literacy, and the ability to use
strategies and system applications to manage data, knowledge, and
information, the ability of nursing students to use computer-mediated
communication skills is essential to their success in the nursing field
and as a means to improve patient safety.
The COVID-19 pandemic caused an immediate rise of
telecommunications and virtual technology use in health care. At the
same time, education programs were also increasing their use of
virtual or online teaching strategies to meet the needs of their
learners, and nursing was no exception. Now, going far beyond the
simple applications of word processing software or spreadsheets,
technology applications have evolved greatly, taking advantage of
modern capabilities to provide nursing and related healthcare
students with simulations, complex multimedia, virtual reality–
assisted clinical scenarios, and a host of information- and literature￾gathering internet tools.Knowledge Acquisition and Sharing
The COVID-19 pandemic triggered a paradigm shift with the
shutdowns causing the loss of clinical access and face-to-face
meetings. Those who only wanted to test the waters of virtual
teaching and learning prior to the pandemic were now diving in to
help their students continue their educational programs. Web￾enhanced courses were developed that included online chats,
forum discussions, instant messaging, blogging, and use of email,
all of which ask the student to engage, digest, use, and disseminate
information in new ways (Figure 19-1). In addition, mannequin￾based or virtual simulations replaced 25% to 50% of some clinical
experiences. How nursing students learned and were career readied
had changed. Karim (2021) reported that “[p]rior to the pandemic,
nursing students were required to spend at least 75% of their clinical
time providing direct care to patients in hospitals” (para. 12). Many
Boards of Registered Nursing reviewed their regulations and
permitted 25% to 50% of the clinical hours to be completed using
simulated experiences.Data from: Juliano, R. (2014). Best practices guide to converting face to face courses to a
distance learning format: Educational technology. www.manula.com/manuals/rachael￾juliano/best-practices-guide-to-converting-face-to-face-courses-to-a-distance-learning￾format/1/en/topic/educational-technology.
Figure 19-1 Types of Interactions in Web-Based Courses
DescriptionEvolution of Learning Management Systems
Twenty-first-century nursing informatics emphasizes technology
usability, functionality, and accessibility in education and practice.
Consequently, the need to learn nursing skills presented endless
potential for software development. Recall that software comprises
the instructions that direct a computer’s hardware to work, whereas
hardware consists of physical computer components, such as a
mouse, keyboard, and monitor. Software essentially translates
commands into computer language to allow the hardware to perform
its functions. Applications software refers to the various programs
individuals use to communicate with others, work, play games, or
watch multimedia on a computer.
When evaluating software or hardware for purchase, careful
assessment of the products and services will help an educator,
administrator, or student make the best choices. The most important
thing when evaluating software is to understand how well the
software’s functionality matches the learning goals and objectives.
Although many programs are available for assisting a nurse educator
who is evaluating software for particular learning purposes, the main
criteria are content (Is the information accurate? Is it relevant?),
format (How is information visually presented? Is it in frames? Does
it come with graphics?), documentation style (What is the tone? Is it
scholarly and applicable?), and strategies (Is the software useful for
all students, including students with disabilities and remedial and
accelerated students?) (Edwards & Drury, 2000). In addition,
consider diversity, equity, and inclusion (DEI).
Hardware decisions depend on the way a computer system will be
used in addition to considerations related to cost, ease of use, and
durability. Systems purchased for personal use may differ
dramatically from those purchased for online learning, virtual
simulation, or smart classrooms. Remember that you must always
consider the level of security that is needed. Because the technologyinherent to workstations, servers, and computers, in general, tends
to change rapidly, discussing large-system decisions with an
information technology expert is likely to yield a better-informed
decision. Other hardware considerations arise from the use of virtual
simulation, including the realities and, specifically, virtual reality (VR).
What type of head mounted-display (HMD) and controllers will be
needed, and if entering the VR environment in non-VR, does this
affect the type of computer the learner will need? Education
innovators realized the need for additional functionality. Integrated
learning systems have evolved from tracking, content management,
and more individualized instruction or primarily the administration of
the course and content, providing convenience for instructors and
learners. The learners typically had only one learning management
system (LMS) to learn. The LMS was used throughout the program,
and the faculty and learners became proficient in its use. The next
evolutions that are still in progress are the transition to a learner￾centered approach and the integration of adaptive learning. Learning
should be tailored to the learner, thus allowing them to have control
over their learning, such as how they engage with the content and
the pacing of learning. This means that the content must be available
in a variety of formats to meet the learning style of each learner as
well as providing teacher support and additional content delivery
methods for clarity if they do not reach mastery. The LMS with
integrated adaptive learning will not only track mastery but also be
able to help the student achieve it. The faculty member must be able
to offer any necessary support to each learner while monitoring the
progress and needs of all the students in the course or learning
episode.Delivery Modalities
Nursing educators are discovering that today’s learners may not
always respond in the same ways that the educators did during their
own tenure as learners. Technology-savvy learners from the
millennial age demand instant information delivered in an
entertaining fashion, an expectation built on extensive exposure to
email, text messaging, online chatting, and the internet (Ridley,
2007). In addition, many nursing departments are facing an increase
in student enrollment and a corresponding growth in faculty.
Although new nursing faculty members bring significant clinical
experience to their academic positions, also apparent for some is an
underlying tension and unfamiliarity with technological advances,
outcomes-based accreditation initiatives, and teaching itself. Schools
of nursing are scrambling to provide professional development for
busy nursing faculty members and introduce them to best practices
in teaching (Shaffer et al., 2006).
Learning is a multispatial function, and in the age of technology
innovation, instructional delivery can inhabit many forms in both
physical and virtual spaces. Spaces in academia are no longer
defined by a class or its content but instead by the learning the class
is trying to promote. To this end, learning spaces should support
multiple modes of learning and delivery, including reflection,
discussion, and experience, and facilitate face-to-face and online
interaction within and beyond classrooms. Truly innovative delivery
must support the learning activities whether in face-to-face
classroom interaction, online engagement, virtual simulation, the
realities, or a blended hybrid of technology and traditional classroom
teaching.
Face-to-Face Delivery
Ridley (2007) suggested that although it is the most widely used
teaching method among nurse educators, traditional face-to-facelecture yields only a 5% information retention rate over a 24-hour
period, a rate that compares unfavorably with demonstration (30%),
discussion groups (50%), practice activities (75%), and peer
teaching (90%) (as cited in Sousa, 1995).
In addition, the inability of physical space to keep pace with the
evolution of learning models inhibits the benefits gained from face-to￾face interaction between teacher and student. For example,
collaborative learning grinds to a halt when class is held in a room
with chairs bolted to the floor, facing a lectern (Oblinger, 2005); this
kind of spatial arrangement prohibits a sense of classroom
community by inhibiting easy peer interaction, reducing students’
ability to see one another, and concentrating all attention on the
professor.
Conversely, in a collaborative learning environment, the professor
guides conversation and sets up discussion, acting less as the
classroom authority and more as a facilitator, helping students
maintain focus, gently guiding discussion, and ultimately
empowering students to push knowledge boundaries in a safe and
secure atmosphere of peer support. This inductive, epistemological
approach promotes active, critical thinking skills and assists students
in learning not just facts but also how to learn. As future healthcare
professionals determined to rely on quantification and rationale,
nursing students will benefit from face-to-face classroom interaction
that hones their ability to manufacture new personal truths through
interaction with people and ideas in ways that cannot always be
measured and counted.
Ridley (2007) suggested that such interactive, cooperative
learning strategies might include gaming, role-playing, and
problem-based learning. Because games are nonthreatening and
fun, they promote critical thinking and teamwork by pushing students
to work together in groups to find answers and achieve success.
Role-playing is similar in that it allows students to try on real-life
scenarios by filling either scripted or ad-libbed roles (e.g., doctor,
nurse, patient, or clinician) without the fear or pressure of putting
another’s life at risk while trying to determine the best course of
action or find a solution for a fictitious patient’s health issue.Problem-based learning, a well-accepted form of interactive
learning, takes assignments out of a contextual vacuum and applies
real-life scenarios to problems or challenges. Students work in
groups to solve the dilemma presented by real patient cases and
build on prior knowledge, using higher-level thinking skills and
progressive inquiry to resolve the problem (Ridley, 2007). This
process enhances the student’s critical skills for acquiring and
maintaining knowledge in practice.
Online Delivery
E-learning, online learning, and web-based education have caused
a significant shift in learner–teacher relationships in nursing
education. According to Oblinger (2005), not only are learning
spaces no longer physical or formal, especially on campuses with
wireless capabilities, but nursing students also expect to make use
of wide ranges of cutting-edge technology during their academic
tenure, exchanging the traditional “sage on the stage” for a
technologically savvy “guide on the side” (Leasure et al., 2000) who
gives up the role of gatekeeper and instead promotes and facilitates
dialogue as central to teaching and learning (Aquino-Russell et al.,
2007).
Learner centered and no longer limited to the domain of the
classroom, laboratory, or even a patient’s bedside, online learning
allows educators to translate theory into practice by creating a virtual
classroom space that promotes collaboration, engagement,
discussion, and analysis. Studies show that web-based courses not
only continue to gain in popularity but also enhance learning in ways
that encourage learners to share personal experiences and support.
Researchers cite many factors that make online learning laudable,
with accessibility and convenience being two of the most frequently
cited issues (Aquino-Russell et al., 2007).
The asynchronous and time-independent elements of web-based
courses respond to the huge need for flexible class times among
today’s growing population of nontraditional learners. In addition,
web-based and place-independent learning allows anyone withaccess, anywhere in the world, to participate. Exposure to online
learning during healthcare professional education programs will
facilitate continuing professional education during the practice
tenure. Related to this issue is the democratizing effect of online
learning such that all students have the same opportunity to
participate without judgment. Web-based classes provide an easily
accessible permanent record, a convenience for both teachers and
learners (Aquino-Russell et al., 2007).
One of the challenges and criticisms of online education has been
that the instructor does not know whether the student enrolled in the
class is actually the person who takes the test or writes the paper.
But the same can be said for instructors in face-to-face classes
regarding who actually completes papers and out-of-class
assignments. The only sure thing is that if students test in a
classroom with the instructor, the instructor knows that they are the
ones taking the test. Thus, verification of students’ identity is critical
to ensure that credit is given to the student who completed the work
or took the test, especially in an online testing environment. Learner
identity verification tools continue to evolve. Some critics believe that
as with other technologies, students can find work-arounds. To meet
the federal regulations and secure the testing environment, many
believe that instructors should use one or more identity verification
tools combined with a method for live proctoring. It is imperative that
nurse informaticists and information technology experts work with
educators and administrators to determine the technology tools
necessary to accomplish student identity verification, based on their
specific infrastructure and needs.
It is important to use tools that facilitate learning, such as
introducing social media into nursing education. X (formerly Twitter;
https://twitter.com/home) can be used to focus and hone student
perspectives. Each posting, or tweet, cannot exceed 280 characters.
As learners critically think about what they want to add to the
discussion, they must act as wordsmiths to express their views
succinctly and concisely given the character limitation. Other social
media that can be used in education include the following sites:Diigo (www.diigo.com), a social bookmarking tool to collect, tag,
and share online sources (Meyer, 2015)
Feedly (https://feedly.com/i/welcome), an online feed aggregator
to notify the subscriber of new content on blogs and websites of
interest (Meyer, 2015)
Flickr (www.flickr.com), for photo sharing
Instagram (www.instagram.com), for customizing and sharing
photos and videos (Meyer, 2015)
Pinterest (www.pinterest.com), a social bookmarking tool used to
prime discussions (Meyer, 2015)
Pixton (www.pixton.com), to create comics or cartoons
Prezi (https://prezi.com), to create zooming presentations
Scoop.it (www.scoop.it), an online content curation tool used to
collect web resources, comment on them, and publish the
source and commentary (Meyer, 2015)
SlideShare (www.slideshare.net), a community for sharing
presentations
YouTube (www.youtube.com), to watch and share videos
VoiceThread (https://voicethread.com), to share images, videos,
documents, and commentary (Meyer, 2015)
Wordle (www.wordle.net), to create word clouds from text
Students can use these sites to facilitate their presentations and
for team collaboration. The use of social media not only exposes the
students to their use but also promotes the development of skills that
will support professional collaboration as students enter the practice
arena. Meyer (2015) reported that using social media in education
helps students put concepts in context, maintains currency in course
content, and fosters a sense of community. Figure 19-2
demonstrates the purposes and time required for proper use of
social media.Data from: Holly A. (2016). Find 10 tips that help you take time to be social. The Social
Observer.
Figure 19-2 Social Media Time Estimates
Description
EDUCATIONAL APPLICATIONS FOR BLOCKCHAINS
AND DISTRIBUTED LEDGER TECHNOLOGY
As you read about these applications, envision how this technology could work, and
think about other educational uses for it.
DECREASE FAKE DIPLOMAS
There are more than 200,000 fake diplomas sold by fake diploma mills every year in
the U. S., and recently there were arrests surrounding more than 7,600 fake nursing
diplomas issued from Florida schools alone (Bernstein, 2023). The verification processis personnel intensive, and some have suggested that blockchain technology can be
used to store these credentials. Learning Machine “has collaborated with the MIT
Media Lab to launch Blockcerts—an open infrastructure for creating, issuing, viewing
and verifying blockchain-based certificates” (Vander Ark, 2018, para. 4). The issue of
diploma fraud and fake diplomas could be eliminated with the use of blockchains
because Blockcerts would facilitate verification of blockchain educational credentials
(McArthur, 2018). According to Coca (2021), if all institutions would put blockchain in
place to protect against fake information, the number of diploma mills and fake
universities would decrease.
FILE STORAGE AND SECURITY
Educational entities must protect their student information from being corrupted,
altered, or lost. Distributed ledger technology (DLT) cloud storage could offer a safer
and less expensive alternative to traditional options (Vander Ark, 2018; Yedigaryan,
2019).
LIBRARY HOLDINGS
DLT could facilitate a library’s expansion of its “services by building an enhanced
metadata archive, developing a protocol for supporting community-based collections,
and facilitating more effective management of digital rights” (Vander Ark, 2018, para.
34).
CREDITS OR CREDENTIALS FROM MULTIPLE
EDUCATIONAL ENTITIES
Blockchains or DLT could track and maintain credits received over time from multiple
educational entities. This technology would provide authentic, verifiable, accurate
records of student credentials and competencies (McArthur, 2018).
REFERENCES
Bernstein, L. (2023, May 18). Bogus nurses, fake diplomas: Officials search for
unqualified health workers. Washington Post.
www.washingtonpost.com/health/2023/05/18/fake-nurses-bogus-diplomas
Coca, A. (2021, February 22) Designing applications to reduce academic fraud.
AACSB. ww.aacsb.edu/insights/articles/2021/02/designing-the-application-process￾to-reduce-academic-fraud
McArthur, D. (2018, May 21). Will blockchains revolutionize education? EDUCAUSE
Review, https://er.educause.edu/articles/2018/5/will-blockchains-revolutionize￾education
Vander Ark, T. (2018, August 20). 20 ways blockchain will transform (okay, may
improve) education. Forbes. www.forbes.com/sites/tomvanderark/2018/08/20/26-
ways-blockchain-will-transform-ok-may-improve-education/?sh=7d64aa6f4ac9Yedigaryan, L. (2019). Blockchain applications in education: Use cases. Nooor.
https://nooor.io/blog/blockchain-in-education/
Hybrid or Blended Delivery
Traditional courses are more frequently being offered as online
virtual classes (i.e., distance education)—learning that occurs other
than in the traditional classroom and consequently requires special
course design, planning, techniques, and communication. A hybrid
of this delivery mode includes learning in which traditional classroom
time is enhanced or broken up with online components, thereby
creating a class in which blended learning occurs. Forms of hybrid
learning include web-enhanced learning, such as asking students to
blog responses to a reading or class discussion, and learning that
takes place in and makes use of smart classrooms (e.g., teaching in
a wired room equipped with classroom learning technologies).
Smart classrooms, also known as digital and multimedia
classrooms, integrate computer and audiovisual technologies by
providing a ceiling-mounted projector with an access point at the
front of the room, an instructor podium or workstation, sound, and
network access. An enhanced smart classroom also provides
networked student workstations instead of traditional desks, allowing
students to follow along online and perform network or web
searches, chat, blog, or a myriad of other activities as directed by the
professor. For example, at the Penn State College of Nursing, users
can access announcements, course materials, faculty information,
websites, and other tools through the electronic course management
system, which enables the nursing faculty to extend learning beyond
the physical classroom walls.
Competency-Based Learning
More robust LMSs are particularly well suited to support
competency-based learning. Nursing competencies have been well
defined by professional and accrediting organizations, such as
Quality and Safety Education for Nurses (QSEN); AmericanAssociation of Colleges of Nursing (AACN), through its Technology
Informatics Guiding Education Reform (TIGER) initiative and the
essentials of nursing education delineated for undergraduate and
graduate study; and Healthcare Information and Management
Systems Society (HIMSS), through its promotion of informatics
competencies.
Database technologies within LMSs offer the ability to track
competency achievement, as Pijl-Zieber et al. (2014) explained:
“Such technologies could be shared, at least to some degree,
between nursing student and nursing instructor, much like clinical
evaluation tools are shared on paper, to jointly track skills,
knowledge, abilities, critical thinking, clinical reflection, and
developing competence” (p. 677).Technology Tools Supporting Education
Certain social trends emerging from the morass of both traditional
and innovative technology tools include the use of technologies
attempting to meet the needs of members of the Net Generation, or
the millennials (i.e., those born between 1981 and 1996). These
students have grown up inside a wired world of instant access and
online everything, and they are connected, digital, experiential, and
social learners. Through the use of software, hardware, drivers,
dedicated servers, plug-ins, and internet connections, students can
chat, collaborate, play games, or interact electronically with a peer in
some way, all with little to no learning curve or effort. Because visual
media are now the vernacular of this highly digital culture, such tools
might take the shape of interactive tutorials, a created city within a
virtual reality landscape, high-fidelity simulations, serious games, or
even a multimedia action maze that prompts users to choose
different outcomes within a scenario. Generation Z (Gen Z) learners
are those born between 1997 and 2012. Schrader (2022) believed
that their learning must be flexible so that they can self-pace and be
highly collaborative in nature. These learners want their reality to be
seamless from the real world through any of the virtual reality
experiences.
Members of Gen Z are entering nursing schools and the
workplace. This generation is currently the most racially and
ethnically diverse of all the other generations, and they are very
comfortable with technology, especially when using the internet and
wireless devices to obtain information when they need it. The
number of technologies and devices they use could cause them to
mainly interact virtually; their expert use of sophisticated digital tools
could result in immature social skills and the inability to make and
maintain relationships, placing them at risk for isolation and related
issues of anxiety, loneliness, and depression. Stillman (2019) stated
that “about half of Generation Z spend 10 hours or more each dayonline. . . . [The] favorite social media sites of Generation Z include
Instagram, YouTube, and Snapchat” (para. 2). Gen Z will be a 2.56
billion population by 2020. When Gen Z grows up, they’ll make up
40% of U.S. consumers. In view of the size of the Gen Z population,
all educational institutions must consider and adjust to their learning
needs (Morgan, 2020; Todorov, 2023).
Regardless of the particular tool employed, technology can
perform only as well as the pedagogy that drives it. Therefore, the
faculty and learners must be considered and supported in order to
sustain the nursing programs.
Tutorials
The modern tutorial mimics lectures by guiding users through a
series of objectives or tasks, which they are usually allowed to
complete at their own pace (Edwards & Drury, 2000). Generally,
tutorials stand alone as autonomous multimedia that may use
animation, text, graphics, sound, questions, and various kinds of
interactivity to engage and intrigue the user. They tend to promote
active learning by prompting users to answer sets of questions,
follow clickable hypertext, or complete quizzes. For example, users
might be asked to fill in worksheets after reviewing anatomy
concepts, take a quiz, post an answer to a question, or click through
a scenario by choosing the best course of action in a mock clinical
situation.
Some tutorials, such as those used by medical students at the
Morgan Stanley Children’s Hospital of New York, are designed to be
brief (10 minutes), interactive, very focused, and immediately
relevant. In this case, medical students bustling through a busy
clinical rotation who accessed the tutorials actually raised
examination grades (Pusic et al., 2007).
Because most students benefit from being able to contextualize a
lesson’s framework and purpose, the most effective tutorials provide
users with understandable navigation, such as a table of contents at
its beginning, or additional navigational aids, such as icons, buttons,
or text, that indicate where and how they need to progress (Dewald,1999). Effective tutorials surpass the simple presentation of
information in a web-based format; instead, they address certain
pedagogical and student-centered needs by identifying and
considering specific factors, such as instructional content, the
educator’s purpose and teaching goal, the initiative’s overall
purpose, the potential need for special conceptual input, the
learners’ ultimate objectives in completing the tutorial, and the
standards that determine what qualifies as successful completion of
the tutorial (DeSantis, 2002).
Although most tutorials are created to stand alone, some of them
may also benefit and supplement face-to-face instruction, such as
the interactive information skills tutorial developed at the Institute for
Health and Social Care Research in Salford, United Kingdom. This
tutorial divides a traditional lecture series into chunks and
incorporates questions into the text that would normally arise during
the session and provides hyperlinks to the answers. This
organization allows users to browse to different parts of the tutorial,
open a database in a new window to perform a practice search, and
access other features (Grant & Brettle, 2006). In all their iterations,
tutorials urge students to hone and develop effective critical thinking
skills. Short tutorials may also be created on an organization’s
intranet to educate practicing professionals on a new policy,
procedure, organizational initiative, or healthcare technology. Since
the tutorial is electronic, access and time spent on the tutorial can
easily be tracked.
Case Scenarios
Professional organizations are increasingly recommending
performance-based assessments of students in professional degree
programs, and enacting case scenarios provides an opportunity for
students to practice procedural responses and improve patient
safety. The case scenario, a form of problem-based learning, has
evolved and is now available through simulation software and virtual
reality programming. This kind of learning assessment, in which
students must respond within context to a perceived situation ratherthan a theoretical or fact-based question, allows educators to gauge
procedural knowledge and determine how well a student executes a
skill or applies concepts and principles to specific situations
(Garavalia et al., 2008). For example, in a clinical context, a student
could explain a specific procedure, but such knowledge is
declarative rather than procedural; therefore, for some evaluators, it
is not as valuable. Conditional knowledge is also often reflected in
procedural knowledge that demonstrates a student’s ability to know
when and why action is or is not taken and how. As more programs
move toward interprofessional education, case scenarios are a great
way for students to hone collaboration skills and gain an
understanding of the roles of other professionals.
Portfolios
Portfolios in healthcare professional education have grown in
popularity as useful tools for documenting students’ exposure to
educational experiences. A portfolio allows a student to document a
variety of unquantifiable skills, such as creativity, communication,
and critical thinking. Further, portfolios can reflect achievement of
goals, self-evaluation, and professional development and provide a
way for returning students to log and document past work or life
experiences in a creative but structured way without taking a
standardized test. The usefulness of a portfolio for an undergraduate
depends on a structured system of organization, such as an
identification page with a résumé, a table of contents, and separate
and clearly marked sections. In this way, portfolios can monitor
program outcomes, positively influence employment and graduate
school admission, and provide a clear snapshot of a student’s
strengths and abilities. See Box 19-1 for an overview of electronic
portfolios and specific information on developing a professional
portfolio.
BOX 19-1 WHAT IS AN ELECTRONIC PORTFOLIO?Glenn Johnson and Jeff Swain
Today’s information technology infrastructure allows users to easily build web-based
collections that include evidence of their knowledge and skills. Users can upload
artifacts that represent evidence of their learning experiences, inside and outside of the
classroom. Electronic portfolios (e-portfolios) may also contain a blog element where
students reflect on their total experience and demonstrate growth in their areas of
study.
E-portfolios can be built using a range of technologies. Some individuals use
PowerPoint presentations to capture and present evidence. Web-based e-portfolios are
built using common web publishing tools to create web pages, such as Web 2.0, Web
3.0, or open source tools; the web pages are then published on the internet. Web 3.0
and an increasing number of institutional e-portfolio systems have emerged to
transform how students, educators, and institutions can log on and then upload, enter,
and share information or evidence related to their experiences. Students and educators
can interact, collaborate, and share learning accomplishments. Examples of e-portfolio
systems include the following:
Association for Authentic, Experiential, and Evidence-Based Learning:
https://aaeebl.org
Digication: www.digication.com
Facebook: www.facebook.com
LiveText: www.livetext.com
Myspace: https://myspace.com
PebblePad: www.pebblepad.co.uk
Typepad: www.typepad.com
Watermark: www.watermarkinsights.com
WHY CREATE AN E-PORTFOLIO?
Although academic institutions may use e-portfolios for assessment of student learning,
for the individual, e-portfolios are all about opportunity. Such opportunities might
include supporting a working relationship with a mentor, networking with other
professionals, or representing certain qualities and characteristics to prospective
employers. The e-portfolio allows students to track, monitor, and assess their learning
to gain significant insights throughout their program of study. In all of these cases,
going through the process of developing an e-portfolio requires critical examination of
which qualities make individuals who they are and why these qualities are important to
them and their profession. It is important for all professionals to have a foundational
understanding of where they are in their career trajectory and how this fits with their
long-term professional goals.
Practically speaking, e-portfolios are efficient. When introducing oneself in an email
message, a self-starting individual who has taken the initiative to develop and publish
an e-portfolio can add this line to the message: “Here is a link to my e-portfolio.” The
recipient can click on this link, which automatically opens that individual’s e-portfolio in
a web browser. Metaphorically, the senders of such messages have just walked into
the recipient’s office with information that illustrates who they are, what they know, whatthey can do, and what they value as important; they have just walked in with what could
be a multimedia showcase of their qualities. The internet is a very powerful
communication medium, and individuals with professional e-portfolios are simply taking
advantage of this fact.
E-PORTFOLIOS IN HIGHER EDUCATION
As an instructional strategy, portfolios have been around for a long time. Instructionally,
portfolios, whether electronic or paper based, require students to demonstrate or
provide evidence that they have attained specific learning outcomes. For instance, in
the arts, portfolios have been used to demonstrate the depth and breadth of the work of
an artist. Although performance-based programs of study are more likely to be familiar
with the concept of the portfolio as a demonstration of what a student knows and can
do, other areas of study have also begun to adopt this method of assessment.
Portfolios can be particularly helpful in areas where higher-level thinking and analysis
are essential. For instance, being a good healthcare professional encompasses much
more than simply being able to get high scores on examinations. Professionals need to
be able to collect information, analyze the information presented and relate it to past
experience, apply related knowledge, and evaluate various options and, from all this,
present a diagnosis and a plan of action. In short, healthcare professionals need to be
able to think critically and make informed decisions. In learning to become a healthcare
professional, portfolios can be used to capture, support, and improve this type of
thinking as it develops.
Like the artist, the healthcare professional student can connect, share, and present
cases and findings and include with this evidence the reflective commentary that
serves to unveil how they arrived at a decision, which information or experiences were
vital, and how their action plan evolved. However, given the vast variety of evidence
that individuals might potentially use to represent themselves, what should one select,
and how should this be shared?
E-PORTFOLIOS FOR PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT
Using an e-portfolio to support professional networking involves a predetermined and
focused purpose. This purpose may be to foster better communication between oneself
and a mentor, or it may be to establish how what a professional is doing fits with the
goals of the institution for which the individual works or would like to work. A
professional e-portfolio is evidence based and uses this evidence to make a case that
highlights the individual’s capacity not only to perform but also to grow and develop
professionally within their chosen field.
THE E-PORTFOLIO PROCESS
The four steps involved in developing an e-portfolio are recursive in nature, meaning
that during the process, one can backtrack to fill in missing pieces or reevaluate earlier
decisions that were made. The four steps are (1) collect, (2) select, (3) reflect, and (4)
connect. See Figure 19-3 for an image of the portfolio creation process.Figure 19-3 Portfolio Creation Process
Collect
Evidence should demonstrate what a person knows and can do or the values that they
hold as being important. When it comes to developing e-portfolios, it is important to
think of evidence in very broad terms. This evidence might include the results of what
someone has learned in courses taken as a student, especially in terms of
demonstrating a new skill or knowledge of a subject. More importantly, evidence can
come from experiences that take place outside of the classroom. For instance,
someone may have been involved in an internship or clinical observation where they
had the opportunity to connect what was learned in the classroom with how this
information is applied in a real-world setting. Such an experience not only is valuablebut also represents the individual’s understanding of how this knowledge can be
applied; thus, it enhances others’ perceptions of the depth of what the person knows.
Résumés are evidence documents. They are very important, and every professional
should have an updated copy available. However, résumés simply list an individual’s
experiences or accomplishments. By comparison, e-portfolios go beyond the résumé to
emphasize personal attributes that are very important in the specific profession. These
attributes include, but are not limited to, interpersonal skills, leadership skills,
appreciation of diversity, ability to work in a team, and self-sufficiency. These attributes
are difficult, if not impossible, to demonstrate in a résumé. When reflective commentary
accompanies evidence of an individual’s involvement, these attributes and values can
become the highlights of an e-portfolio.
Select
Everyone has their own unique pool of evidence from which to pull, and over time this
evidence pool can become quite large. What will someone choose to feature and why?
Putting together a professional e-portfolio requires that several intertwining questions
related to purpose and audience be addressed.
What is the purpose? What is it that someone is attempting to gain by putting an e￾portfolio together? Is the purpose related to personal development (i.e., feedback and
advice about the professional direction that is being taken)? Is the purpose to connect
with colleagues? An individual may, for example, be interested in using their e-portfolio
to find a job or gain admission into a graduate program.
Although an e-portfolio can link to everything that a person has accomplished, this
may not be the best strategy. Instead, it is essential that an individual consider the
audience and establish a plan that enables them to select the most appropriate pieces
of evidence for their particular purpose and audience. A helpful way to start is to select
the top five pieces of evidence that support the plan. Next, the individual should
consider why they selected these pieces of evidence. What is it about each piece of
evidence that makes it representative of who the individual is and what they know, can
do, and value as important?
Reflect
Reflection and reflective commentary take an e-portfolio to the next level. This
component may take the form of a single reflective statement, or it may be attached to
the evidence throughout the e-portfolio. Reflective comments should open up a window
into why an individual thinks this evidence is important, the ways in which the individual
values what they learned, or why the individual thinks it is important for the larger
profession. For instance, the individual may present an experience where they were
challenged to provide assistance. Describing this experience would be important;
however, the reflective comments can extend this description, enabling the individual to
talk about the alternatives considered as the basis for how they made a decision to
provide the specific type of assistance and the manner in which it was provided. By
itself, a description of this experience is good. With reflective comments, readers have
a much more thorough perception of and insight into an individual’s professional
thinking. This is where having a blog element as part of an e-portfolio becomes
extremely powerful.Unlike static web pages, a blog page is a space designed to be interactive. The blog
owner posts commentary, thoughts, and experiences for others to read and respond to.
Regular entries on a blog give others a reason to return to one’s e-portfolio site
repeatedly. It is an opportunity to share one’s perspective on topics of interest and is
critical to the chosen field. A blog is a place where conversation happens. It provides a
nice counterbalance to the static web pages, such as a résumé and project pieces.
Most blogging platforms allow users to select from a range of templates, which
include a blogging element along with static web pages. Platforms such as WordPress,
Moveable Type, and Google are free for at least the basic service, which enables the
user to create a dynamic e-portfolio without having to build web pages. Most platforms
allow entries to be in both text and multimedia format, so the blog becomes the perfect
place for personal expression. A blog is quickly becoming a standard part of an e￾portfolio.
Connect (Connections) and Feedback
The connection and feedback step is important to validate the assertions people make
about what they know, understand, or value. Individuals may choose to receive
feedback from those who are close to them and then from there reach out to others,
who may provide different perspectives. For instance, if healthcare professionals were
thinking about using their e-portfolio to apply for a position, they might want to start by
getting feedback from friends and family. They might also share their e-portfolio with a
mentor or faculty member, which raises the bar by getting professionally grounded
feedback before sharing their e-portfolio with a prospective employer.
CHALLENGES AND ISSUES: PRIVACY AND SECURITY
The ease and popularity of web-based social networking and professional e-portfolio
tools also raise several challenges and issues for users. Never before has information
for individuals been so accessible, nor has such personal information been so readily
made public. For this reason, issues related to privacy and security need to be
addressed. What might be appropriate socially can be deadly in a professional context.
E-PORTFOLIO PROCESS: SUMMARY COMMENTS
In summary, one might think about the process of developing a professional e-portfolio
as boiling down to the telling of a rather simple story, albeit a story that has three parts:
looking back, looking around, and looking ahead. Readers should think of their own
evidence pool as they answer these questions:
1. Looking back: What have you done? In which activities and with which
organizations have you been involved? Where have you been? With whom have
you worked? How did this help get you where you are today?
2. Looking around: In what are you currently involved? Why are you doing this? What
are you getting out of it?3. Looking ahead: Where would you like to be in 2 years? Where would you like to be
in 5 years? Why do you feel this way? What makes you think your goals are
realistic?
Simulations
Simulations have been widely used within healthcare circles, but
they experienced a recent upsurge due to the pandemic and the
widespread availability of high-quality simulation equipment and
software along with a reduction in the cost of this technology.
Ranked by fidelity, or the level of realism the equipment provides,
simulation may take various forms, from mannequin-based to
computer-based simulation in which software is used to simulate a
subject or situation (e.g., an interactive tutorial featuring a nurse–
patient situation) to full-scale simulation in which all the elements of
a healthcare situation are recreated using real physiology, people,
and interaction to, as closely as possible, resemble a real-life
environment. These immersive virtual simulations make the learners
suspend reality and feel like they are really in the situation.
Simulation scenarios aid nursing instructors in assessing
competency achievement. For a more comprehensive discussion of
simulation as a teaching and learning tool, please see Chapter 20,
Simulation, Game Mechanics, Virtual Worlds, and the Realities in
Nursing Education.
Virtual Reality
In traditional virtual reality (VR), the user receives multiple sensory
inputs either mediated or generated by a computer through nasal
stimulation as smells or scents, visual stimulation (i.e., glasses,
goggles, and screens), audio input (i.e., earphones, microphones,
and synthesizers), and touch (i.e., gloves and bodysuits). A form of
simulation training that was once considered a science fiction
technology of the future is the increasing use of virtual reality
healthcare training.Because virtual worlds foster unintentional learning through
gamelike technology in which students discover and create
knowledge to accomplish something rather than experiencing
traditional outcome-based learning, their experiences may result in
greater comprehension and deeper knowledge. In a virtual clinical
scenario, for example, a simulated, immersive environment presents
invaluable learning opportunities for the student who is assuming the
role of healthcare provider. Faculty can monitor the interaction and
interrupt as necessary to leverage those teachable moments and
assess the learner’s thought process and proposed next actions to
apply specific skills within a clinical setting. Scott (2018) stated that
VR “is being incorporated into college classrooms all over the
country. Making sure they [the classrooms] are ready for deployment
is just as important as the lessons being taught” (para. 1). This surge
occurred prior to the pandemic and then the pandemic helped to
continue its use. Because so much of the data nurses rely on are
complex and because so many patients’ cues are lacking in concrete
language or responses, the animated, immersive, three-dimensional
environment of virtual worlds allows students to practice skills, try
new ideas, and learn from their mistakes while receiving feedback
from educators within a globally networked classroom environment.
Virtual reality tools are a great way to implement competency-based
education. Some students may struggle to participate in virtual
communities for various reasons. Increasing comfort with
multidisciplinary learning among students and educators improves
patient safety and encourages the refinement of best practices.
Chapter 20, Simulation, Game Mechanics, Virtual Worlds, and the
Realities in Nursing Education, provides a more comprehensive
discussion of this technology.Internet-Based Tools
The consensus in nursing education suggests that any technology
that allows users to interact and engage with materials and one
another is useful. More specifically, the Foundation of Knowledge
model qualifies this observation with the caveat that technology must
display user-friendly capabilities to provide benefits to its users,
thereby allowing students not just to find information and one
another online but also to engage, challenge, and institute their
discoveries. Providing nursing students with easy-to-use, free
internet tools for reaching the first step in this process (i.e., gaining
access to materials and peers) has been addressed by the
proliferation of communication technologies available to any user
with an internet connection. Beyond the gadgetry, with the
development of new strategies, practices, applications, and
resources in technology comes the need for instructional strategies
that not only appeal to this newer generation of students but also
enhance learning. Such strategies, when coupled with easily
accessible and highly functional tools, encourage nursing students to
see beyond the right answer and seek out information that
encourages them in developing approaches to issues and
resolutions for problems. According to Hughes (2022), “Make sure
that your strategies are agile, customizable, and ready for the
momentum of Generation Z” (para. 33).
Digital Books (eBooks)
There is an unmistakable trend toward the development and use of
digital books. It is clear that the ability to create eBooks that use the
interactional capabilities brings more to the learning experience than
just replicating a print-based text as an eBook. Affordability is one
key advantage of eBooks. The possibility also exists of embedding
content into the eBook, which could provide a link to a multimedia
video or a website. The good news is that the quality of eTextbooksis greatly improving. It is a trend worth following in the future,
especially because “Gen Z might not be picking up a novel, but they
are reading content on the internet, and they’re finding themselves
represented in formats like manga” (Jensen, 2019, para. 22). These
learners are used to collaborating and interacting digitally and are
looking for the same in their learning episodes.
Webcasts and Webinars
A webcast is a broadcast of a presentation delivered by way of the
web. Webcasts offer great potential for helping students and faculty
to engage with both information and one another globally by tapping
into students’ multiple intelligences to enable them to access what
they need. Because of the growing ease of producing streaming
video and subsequently delivering it via larger bandwidth, webcasts
have grown in popularity and are especially favored by programs
that feature distance education components. Although some
institutions create their own webcast delivery system, most users
rely on a few standard providers, which in turn present the webcast
online. Although these presentations are often delivered live, which
allows audience members to participate in the broadcast, many
instructors use webcasts as an access point for prerecorded
archives of lectures and presentations by experts whom their
students would not otherwise have the opportunity to see or hear.
Studies show that students enthusiastically embrace webcast
technology by accessing archived presentations more repeatedly
than traditionally filmed sessions of guest lecturers; this dynamic
level of engagement aids learners in better grasping the subject
matter, especially when they are prebriefed and understand the
learning outcomes before they view the webcast.
A webinar is a web-based seminar that uses web conferencing
software, which allows educators to share their computer screen and
files and interact with their students. Some webinar services allow for
interactive sessions in which the audience can engage with the
presenter. According to Waas (2019), “interacting with the hosts
leads to higher engagement and longer total time spent on thewebinar” (para. 11). Webinars are typically delivered live but can be
recorded. In this geographically dispersed online world of learners,
webinars provide another avenue for sharing and collaborating.
There is a key difference between webcasts and webinars.
Webcasts present material to the audience with limited or no
interactivity. By comparison, webinars are generally live, interactive,
educational sessions. Both of these venues provide access to the
educator and, depending on the level of interactivity, to other
learners.
Searching
One of the most common and proliferative search tools in technology
today is the wiki. Wikis are websites or hypertext document
collections that allow users to edit and add content in an open-ended
forum. The appeal of (and objection to) wikis resides in their ability to
let anyone with an interest and an internet connection participate in a
once-exclusive community of knowledge creators and seekers. As
an environment that encourages practice and learning, wikis support
learning communities in which learners collaborate online or virtually.
Higher education has evolved from a place of straightforward
knowledge transmission to a place where one strives to become a
member of an expert community, and wikis promise to create
opportunities for individuals to participate in this community in
heretofore untapped ways.
The most objectionable aspects of wikis are their lack of
organizing principle (many are organized alphabetically) and the
ability for anyone to edit entries, the latter of which creates new
intellectual property rights challenges. Wikipedia, for example, is the
best-known wiki project on the web; it is an online encyclopedia of
sorts whose open access policy regarding its content keeps
educators and professionals wary of inaccurate information to be
found there. Wikipedia works well as an initial source of information
on a topic or as a quick overview reference, but we must educate our
learners that it should not be relied on as a sole source of
information. For more information on the appropriate use ofWikipedia, see this online tutorial:
https://libguides.cmich.edu/web_research/wikipedia.
Instant Messaging
Instant messaging, one of many collaborative web chat tools
available to any user with a computer and internet access, continues
to establish itself as a working, useful tool for informatics learning by
providing instant access to and communication among people,
information, and technology. Although some instant message (IM)
services provide voice and video messages, all instant messaging
(IM’ing) clients provide text in real time, which allows users to
interact in the form of an on-screen conversation through a
technology that is free, already quite popular with users, and web
based; does not require additional hardware or software; and has a
very low learning curve for those few to whom it is unfamiliar.
Beyond having a real-time conversation, IM’ing an individual allows
the user to share links, pictures, and files. When learners are logged
on, this kind of easy accessibility allows them to collaborate, seek
real-time help from professors or librarians, and engage others
working on the same learning content.
Chats and Online Discussions (Blogs)
Real-time chats occur all over the internet, at every hour of every
day. The best￾known chat tools are instant messenger clients, but chatting also
refers to real-time discussion venues in which users meet in virtual
chat rooms to engage in conversations by posting messages. Chat
rooms provide a comfortable, recognizable way of communicating for
Net Generation students used to surfing the web and interacting
online. In a chat, students can meet, discuss, and engage one
another over any topic. Chats take various forms, the most complex
of which involve highly evolved virtual communities in which users
step into various rooms where they interact with other individuals
who are in the room at the same time. Initially, the exclusive purviewof gamers or hard-core programmers who created private online
communities, chat rooms now exist for a wide variety of topics and
interests.
Web logs, also known as blogs, have emerged as low-investment
and easy-to-use writing tools. Their very setup and appearance
enhance health professionals’ communication, writing, reading,
information-gathering, and collaboration skills. Blogs are a kind of
online journal created by individuals who then invite comments from
visitors to that web space. Compared to technically complex online
projects, such as tutorials and various multimedia, blogs are
immediate, free to set up and access with an internet connection,
and easily negotiable by even the technically ambivalent. They are
especially useful for study groups interested in reflecting on material
and evaluating ideas in a collective, collaborative way, since blogs
present a built-in discussion area to the user. Blogs are a great way
for students and professionals to reflect on and share clinical
experiences and questions with one another. It is important,
however, to be mindful of protecting private health information and to
share within the confines of Health Insurance Portability and
Accountability Act (HIPAA) guidelines.
Electronic Mailing Lists
One low-investment information-gathering tool for use by nursing
professionals is membership in an electronic mailing list. These
electronic discussion groups use email to communicate and promote
communication and collaboration with others interested in a
particular field of study since they have very few requirements for
participating, usually just a free subscription and email capability.
Such lists are available on any subject, but most lists share common
features, such as the need to subscribe and then log on to
participate. The moderators of an electronic mailing list have specific
instructions on how to post messages and set subscription controls.
Posting information means that when a user replies to a topic thread,
they generally have sent information to every member of the list. Like
other technologies, the capabilities of electronic mailing lists continueto change and expand and provide ongoing viability for use in
nursing education.
Portals
Like electronic mailing lists in the way they deliver specific
information to one’s email, a portal organizes information from web
pages into simple menus so that users can choose what content
they want to view and how to view it. For example, WebMD is one of
the most popular and best-known portals, which allows users to
create accounts, bookmark their favorite information, and sign up for
email notifications. Portals, like most web technologies, require an
internet connection and a free subscription, which allows the user to
log on.
Podcasts: Audiopods and Videopods or Videocasts
A podcast is an audio recording linked to the web that is then
downloaded to an MP3 or MP4 player, a smartphone, or a computer
through which the listener can then access the recording or video.
An outgrowth of the Apple iPod market, podcasts are developed and
delivered by way of the internet and require minimal investment—
namely, a microphone, an internet connection, and (often free)
editing software.
Beyond possibilities for global accessibility to whatever information
the user may record, podcasts allow for automatic updates in the
form of a really simple syndication (RSS) (also known as a
resource description framework [RDF] site summary) feed, which
lets subscribers receive an automatic notification whenever a
podcast is updated. Refer to Box 19-2 for more information.
BOX 19-2 PODCASTS
Jackie RitzkoA basic web search using the search term “free nursing podcast” produced over 1
million hits on one search engine. But what does this information mean in the context of
nursing informatics? The implication is that there are many resources on the internet
that involve podcasts with a nursing focus. How these sites might be of use to a
professional in the nursing field is the focus of this feature. Before any discussion of the
educational uses of a technology tool can take place, however, there needs to be an
understanding of the hardware, software, training, and support that are required to use
the tool as well as the history of the development of the tool.
Podcast is a term coined from the words iPod and broadcast. iPod is the name given
to a family of portable MP3 players from Apple. MP3 is a common file format for
electronic audio files. Audio files—in particular, MP3 files—can contain verbal speech,
music, or a combination of both. MP3 files can be listened to using an MP3 player. MP3
players can be portable devices, such as the iPod, or simply software that is installed
and used on a computer, tablet, or smartphone. Thus, a podcast is simply an MP3 file
that can be played on an MP3 player. Broadcast, in its simplest usage, refers to the
ability to send out. In terms of podcasts, broadcasting is the ability to share MP3 files in
such a way that the files are delivered to the user, through a subscription, whenever
new versions are available. This ability to share and access the most up-to-date
resources is a great advantage, especially for the educational community.
The discussion now turns to the function of podcasts, ranging from the more basic to
the more advanced functions: finding, listening to, creating, and sharing podcasts.
Finding podcasts at a minimal level requires only an internet connection and a web
browser. As noted earlier, a basic web search for the term “free nursing podcast”
produced many sites. Performing a basic web search, however, may provide a user
with only limited search capabilities. An MP3 aggregator is a program that can
facilitate the process of finding, subscribing to, and downloading podcasts. One popular
aggregator is Apple’s iTunes, which is a free program available as a download at
www.apple.com/itunes. Although iTunes is widely used, it is not the only program of this
type. A program such as iTunes gives the user the ability to search for podcasts based
on many criteria, including category, author, or title. The iTunes program provides
access to audio downloads that may be either songs or podcasts. In both cases, users
may find downloads that are free and those that require payment.
Because podcasts are largely MP3 audio files (Advanced Audio Coding [AAC] is a
newer format but is not as widely used), an MP3 player is needed to listen to a podcast.
As noted, listening to a podcast can be done on a smartphone, a computer with an
MP3 player, or a portable MP3 player. Podcasts can be downloaded in two ways:
manually or by subscribing to a podcast. In the case of a subscription, once a new track
is added to the podcast, iTunes automatically delivers it to a computer. Continuing to
use iTunes as an example, once a podcast is found, it can also be manually
downloaded from iTunes to a computer. Once on the computer, it can be listened to or
transferred to a portable device or accessed via a tablet or smartphone.
Users may also choose to produce or record podcasts. Typically, as with most
technology solutions, hardware and software requirements must be met to create
podcasts. The hardware for recording a podcast can vary. In a stationary setup, a
microphone can be connected to a desktop or laptop computer. Stand-alone audio
recorders can also record podcasts, and some MP3 players contain built-in recorders.
Free recording software is available for most computer platforms.Sometimes a podcast is created for the sole use of the creator. More often, however,
a podcast is created with the intention of it being shared with and listened to by others.
Podcasts can be stored on web servers for distribution and shared via tools such as
iTunes. Within iTunes, for example, educational institutions are able to host podcasts in
the area known as iTunes U.
Podcasts have many uses in education in general and in nursing education in
particular. Informal learning can take place when a nursing student listens to nursing
podcasts. Listening to or creating podcasts may be a formal class assignment, which
provides new ways to interact with course material.
Short discussions of what is new in the field may appear as podcasts on the internet,
in particular on news and research sites. Learners may rely on the portability of MP3
players to take learning with them on the road. Commuters, walkers, and joggers are
often seen listening to MP3 players. Because creating podcasts is relatively easy and
inexpensive, such presentations can be produced by students as review files for
common terms or used as ways for students to self-assess their ability to discuss
topics. The uses of podcasts from an educational perspective are limitless.
Bringing the discussion of podcasts back to the Foundation of Knowledge model, for
each task or process in the model, one can see how podcasts fit with that concept.
Podcasts can be used to acquire new knowledge from sources on the web. Listening to
podcasts provides learners with another tool for learning in addition to readings and
lectures, thereby addressing a wider audience whose members have varying learning
styles. Because podcast creation is simple and inexpensive, podcasts are an ideal way
to generate and disseminate knowledge.
Audiopods
Audiopod is a term used to describe a traditional, or audio-based,
podcast. Participating in podcasting can exercise not just basic
technology skills but also writing, editing, and speaking skills. An
excellent exercise for learners could be in the creation of the
audiopod, using critical thinking to write the script and deliver the
information. The technology itself allows global access to information
by faculty, teachers, and learners anywhere, anytime. Both faculty
and students can create audiopods with little difficulty to share
additional class materials, updates, and even entire lectures.
Videopods or Videocasts
Like an audiopod in setup and accessibility, a videopod is a podcast
that provides video in addition to audio functionality. Faculty might
use videopods to demonstrate concepts and skills or even interview
experts in the field and assess student progress.Multimedia
As technologically savvy students continue to demand accessible,
interactive learning tools to keep them engaged, an increasing
number of LMSs are incorporating or interfacing with multimedia
tools that permit videos or other media to be embedded so that
interactive exercises can be generated using the media. They
interface with applications such as those that will upload a video and
generate a script from the video so that both can be embedded into
the LMS for the learners to view. The term multimedia refers to a
computer-based technology that incorporates traditional forms of
communication to create a seamless and interactive learning
environment, such as interactive tutorials, streaming video, and
problem-solving programs. With the new user-friendly advances in
multimedia creation, faculty members are able to add such
innovations as simulations and virtual reality to their healthcare
training, providing a way for students to learn procedural skills, such
as insertion of needles and physical assessment, without any risks to
an actual patient.
Research suggests that the seeing, hearing, doing, and interacting
afforded by multimedia facilitates learning retention, with multimedia
being at least as effective as traditional instruction but offering the
benefit of greater learner satisfaction. As always, the faculty must
design or lead the development using appropriate pedagogy as they
intentionally combine the text, graphics, video, animation, and sound
of their multimedia product. Some schools of nursing have
instructional designers and multimedia developers on staff to assist
nursing faculty with the development of multimedia to support
learning.
Beyond providing a flexible method of delivery for instructional
information, multimedia promise to accommodate different learning
styles and motivate students by requiring them to analyze evidence
in ways that require higher-order thinking and problem-solving skills.
Box 19-3 provides an overview of the capabilities of smartphones
and their use in education.BOX 19-3 SMARTPHONES AND OTHER SMART
DEVICES IN NURSING EDUCATION
Smartphones are another tool for the educational arena. As Yu (2012) stated, “Smart
phone technology, with its pervasive acceptance and powerful functionality, is inevitably
changing peoples’ behaviors” (para. 6). According to Georgiev (2023), the following are
the current statistics concerning smartphone usage: Worldwide 2.71 billion people use
smartphones, 81% of Americans own a smartphone, more than 285 million people in
the United States with 94% of people aged 18 to 29 and 98% of Gen Zs. Nursing
educators’ use of a technology, such as smartphones, not only affects the learning
episode but also influences how students are prepared to embrace and use
technologies appropriately. They want their students to remain competitive in a highly
technologically dependent world. Nursing is a data- and information-driven profession,
and nurses must rely on technology to provide the data and information necessary to
provide safe and high-quality care to their patients.
If students have smartphones, nursing educators can share text; graphics, such as
PowerPoint presentations; podcasts; and other audio and video media with them prior
to the learning episode. When all students have access to the same information, the
dialogue and topical discussion centered on that information are enhanced. Nursing
educators can use smartphones to distribute announcements, reminders, and even
pertinent notes that the students need. Students can also be polled using these
devices. Smartphones can even replace huge textbooks with electronic files. Smart
devices and their calendars and messaging features help both educators and students
organize their lives and keep their hectic schedules straight. The use of smart
technology can facilitate interactions around the world. Students can consult with other
students and experts from anywhere on the globe. As this brief list of applications
suggests, educators continually think of ways in which to incorporate smartphones into
their learning episodes.
In conclusion, we would like to leave you thinking about a money-saving alternative
for many schools. Instead of requiring a laptop computer, what if your school required
every student to have a smartphone? Could we replace the expensive computer labs
on our campuses while better connecting our online and blended students to their
educational milieu?
REFERENCE
Georgiev, D. (2023, May 20). 39+ smartphone statistics you should know in 2023.
Review42. https://review42.com/resources/smartphone-statistics.
Yu, F. (2012). Mobile/smartphone use in higher education.
www.swdsi.org/swdsi2012/proceedings_2012/papers/Papers/PA144.pdfPromoting Active and Collaborative Learning
Because of the shift within the teaching–learning context from the
individual seeking answers to the group trying to construct new
knowledge from available information, the most effective learning
solutions require new digital communication skills, new paradigms,
new pedagogies, and new practices. A collaborative, student￾centered approach uses the best tenets of inductive teaching by
imposing more responsibility on students for their own learning than
is assumed in the traditional lecture-based deductive approach.
These constructivist methods are built on the widely accepted
principle that students are constantly constructing their own realities
rather than simply absorbing versions presented by their teachers.
Collaborative methods often involve students’ discussion of
questions and in-class problem-solving, with much of the work (in
and out of class) done by students in groups rather than individually
(Felder & Prince, 2007).
Johnson and Johnson (1990) identified five significant elements
for successful collaborative learning that are still pertinent today:
1. Face-to-face interaction between students, allowing them to
build on one another’s strengths
2. Mutual learning goals, which in turn prompt students to exhibit
positive interdependence rather than individualized competition
3. Equal participation in the work process and personal
accountability for the work one contributes
4. Regular debriefing sessions as a group after meetings or
presentations, during which time feedback is shared and
observations are analyzed
5. Use of cooperative group process skills learned in the
classroomAlthough collaborative learning relies heavily on student
investment and participation, institutions must ultimately create the
best physical, electronic, and immersive settings in which
collaboration is encouraged. Creating these settings can be
achieved with a sound educational and technological infrastructure,
reliance on proven working models, adaptable physical spaces, and
even pedagogical support in the form of preceptors or mentors.
Especially useful for nursing students is the collaborative fieldwork
model in which two or more students share a clinical setting and the
same fieldwork educator. In this model, learning happens in a
reciprocal fashion, with students constructing knowledge by watching
each other and exchanging ideas. The most effective fieldwork
experiences are highly structured with clear outlines of
responsibilities, duties, and expectations to ensure that the
experience matches the learner’s expectations. The sharing of
perspectives and viewpoints results in the generation of new
knowledge and the restructuring or reorganization of existing
knowledge. All activities performed by students, such as conducting
evaluations, are done jointly so that peers provide each other with
objective feedback, which eventually leads to increased self￾confidence (Costa, 2007).
Libraries have also begun to recognize their role in students’
success with and predisposition toward collaborative learning by
creating redesigned spaces that reflect students’ need to huddle in
small groups; sit closely together without barriers; chat about their
work; and view digital information without physical hindrances, such
as carrels or work stalls. A leader in this movement has been Indiana
State University, whose information commons features completely
overhauled furniture, software, monitors, processing power, and
wireless access to the university’s network. Students can now collect
as a group at kidney-shaped tables; better see the information
loaded on the flat-screen monitors; make use of brainstorming,
design, and planning software; and discuss their work in a chat￾friendly zone. Some faculty members have even scheduled classes
at the learning stations, and students, including those in nursing,have responded enthusiastically to the evolved space (Gabbard et
al., 2007).
In addition to adaptable physical spaces that encourage
discussion and group work, students require a supportive
infrastructure that provides the essential elements for successful
research and scholarship. These elements include professional
development support in the form of workshops that help students
acquire or refresh skill sets; presentation opportunities; and
hardware, software, and resource support. One such example
involves the participation by nursing students at the University of
Texas Medical Branch School of Nursing in the Scholarly Talk About
Research Series (STARS), in which students and faculty give
presentations of their work before presenting those materials at
professional conferences (Froman et al., 2003), thereby eliciting
collegial feedback, collaborative troubleshooting, and shared
research ideas. Imagine how powerful such a process would be in a
cross-discipline healthcare education school.
Simply adopting a collaborative, inductive method of learning,
however, will not necessarily lead to better learning and more
satisfied students. As with any form of instruction, collaborative
teaching methods need skilled and careful implementation. Because
students can be resistant to instruction that makes them more
responsible for their own learning, those who attempt to implement
an inductive learning method should adhere to best practices, such
as providing adequate scaffolding, which is extensive support and
guidance when students are first introduced to the method and
gradual withdrawal of that support as students gain more experience
and confidence in its use (Felder & Prince, 2007).
Nursing preceptors and mentors, for example, can provide this
kind of scaffolded support as clinically active role models (Armitage
& Burnard, 1991) and problem-solving advocates and collaborators
(Gagen & Bowie, 2005). As individuals who are primarily concerned
with the teaching and learning aspects of the relationship, preceptors
help students learn by acting as clinical practitioner role models from
whom the students can copy appropriate skills and behaviors.
Kramer (1974) introduced the concept of nurse preceptor to addressthe theory and practice gap, which is the difference between what is
taught in class and what actually happens in nursing practice.
Preceptors enhance clinical competence through direct role
modeling, which is especially valuable in a field where competence
and clinical ability are paramount (Armitage & Burnard, 1991).
Mentors, who are similar to preceptors, provide equally valuable
assistance to nursing students in the form of a facilitator. Mentors are
most often used in nursing and education to support new
professionals who are trying to fulfill the rigors of a new position
while negotiating the stress inherent to a new environment (Gagen &
Bowie, 2005). According to Jokelainen et al. (2011), “student
mentoring in nursing clinical placements integrates environmental,
collegial, pedagogical and clinical attributes” (para. 6). Mentors tend
to address student needs through open conversation, student
advocacy, feedback on student progress, facilitation, teaching, and
general support (Neary, 2000). Artificial intelligence (AI) agents
are also available to students to support them throughout their
educational programming.
Generally, these and other forms of institutional support promote
students’ adoption of a meaning-oriented approach to learning, as
opposed to a surface or memorization-intensive approach.
Collaborative, inductive learning promotes intellectual development
that challenges the dualistic thinking that characterizes many
entering college students, which holds that all knowledge is certain,
professors have it, and the task of students is to absorb and repeat it
(Felder & Prince, 2007, p. 55). Further, this kind of learning helps
students acquire the self-directed learning and critical thinking skills
that characterize the best scientists and engineers (Felder & Prince,
2007). The active, engaging elements of collaborative learning
increase self-confidence, promote autonomy in students, and foster
a commitment to lifelong learning (Costa, 2007), all of which are
necessities for the success of a new millennial information-literate
student.APPLICATION OF AI TO NURSING EDUCATION:
INTELLIGENT VIRTUAL ASSISTANTS FOR STUDENTS
The intelligent virtual assistant for students is powered by AI. AI agents have the ability
to learn based on their foundational core of algorithms or sequential instructions that
ensure a particular task completion. The algorithms become a set of well-constructed
rules that help the AI agent learn on its own. The pillar of AI is built by putting
algorithms together in a layered approach.
The AI agent can help students with the following:
Student services
Campus life
Extracurricular school activities
Class and clinical activities and assignments
How to study
Library access and help
Locating, organizing, and learning from their educational materials
Tracking progress on assignments and due dates
Creating their e-portfolios
Learning how they learn, to present material and pace learning based on their
needs
Motivating them
As more nursing programs are implementing AI agents, they are refining what they
can do for their students and how they can enhance the student experience. Just as we
have seen increased satisfaction from patients when they have access to intelligent
virtual assistants, we are seeing the same reaction from students who receive
immediate help, feedback, and encouragement. “Learners who receive feedback
immediately show greater improvement” (Jones, 2020, para. 8).
AI can affect how we interact with learning tools and information while facilitating and
directing individualized learning through adaptive learning and serious games and
providing the ability for students to work at their own pace. The AI agent could act as a
tutor to help students achieve higher-order thinking. AI is being used to support the
development of critical thinking, clinical judgment skills, and clinical competence, and
therefore it positively affects the nursing process, patient care, and patient safety.
The idea behind and motivation for using AI is to drive positive educational outcomes
while improving the student experience and enhancing student satisfaction. As you
think about AI, reflect on the following quote, which depicts the challenge of humanizing
AI to optimize the results: “The future will be about pairing the artificial intelligence of
computers with the cognitive, social and emotional capabilities of humans, so that we
educate first-class humans, not second-class robots” (Organisation for Economic Co￾operation and Development, 2019, para. 3).
REFERENCESTABLE 19-1
Jones, K. (2020). How technology is shaping the future of education. Visual Capitalist.
www.visualcapitalist.com/how-technology-is-shaping-the-future-of-education/
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. (2019). Envisioning the
future of education and jobs. www.oecd.org/education/Envisioning-the-future-of￾education-and-jobs.pdf
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE (AI)
At the end of November 2022, OpenAI released ChatGPT. OpenAI (2023) stated that
they have “trained a model called ChatGPT which interacts in a conversational way.
The dialogue format makes it possible for ChatGPT to answer follow-up questions,
admit its mistakes, challenge incorrect premises, and reject inappropriate requests”
(para. 1).
Learning was truly disrupted by AI in the beginning of 2023 when the AI capabilities
of ChatGPT exploded onto the education scene. Students were experimenting with its
use, and educational administrators and faculty were and still are scrambling to decide
their response to ChatGPT use by learners. Some faculty have banned its use in their
courses, others are waiting for program- or university-level decisions to be made, while
still others have accepted its use under certain circumstances. One faculty member
shared that they would allow it to be used if the student acknowledged how much of the
assignment or discussion response was generated by ChatGPT, what they asked
ChatGPT, and what they edited and added. Other faculty want ways to know that
ChatGPT actually did the work. To that end, OpenAI created and released a tool to
detect human writing from AI-generated text, even from ChatGPT (Wiggers, 2023). In
addition, Turnitin also provided a sneak peek at its AI-detection capability, which is even
able to detect ChatGPT (Chechitelli, 2023). We are seeing more AI tools being released
along with those that can detect their use. Expect to see AI capabilities expanding
rapidly. Academic units and faculty must work to harness and leverage the use of AI
within their rules of use for their students. To test ChatGPT’s capabilities, Dr. McGonigle
accessed ChatGPT, and their interaction is shared in Table 19-1.
ChatGPT Responds to Dr. McGonigle’s
Queries
Dr.
McGonigle’s
Query
ChatGPT’s Response
What is AI? AI (artificial intelligence) refers to the simulation of human
intelligence in computers and machines. It involves
developing algorithms and statistical models that enable
computers to perform tasks that typically require human
cognition, such as understanding natural language,Dr.
McGonigle’s
Query
ChatGPT’s Response
recognizing objects in images, and making decisions. The
goal of AI is to create systems that can perform these
tasks as accurately and efficiently as possible,
approaching or even surpassing human ability in some
cases. AI technologies such as machine learning and deep
learning allow computers to learn from data and improve
their performance over time, leading to many exciting new
applications in various fields.
Describe AI. AI (artificial intelligence) refers to the simulation of human
intelligence in machines that are designed to think and act
like humans. This can be achieved through a variety of
techniques such as machine learning, deep learning,
natural language processing, and computer vision. The
goal of AI is to create systems that can perform tasks that
typically require human intelligence, such as recognizing
images, understanding natural language, and making
decisions.
AI has the potential to revolutionize many industries,
including health care, finance, education, and
transportation, by automating repetitive tasks, improving
efficiency, and enabling new and innovative applications.
However, there are also concerns about the ethical and
societal implications of AI, such as job displacement,
biased algorithms, and privacy concerns.
How can faculty
members leverage,
harness, and control
AI use in their
courses?
Faculty members can leverage, harness, and control AI
(artificial intelligence) use in their courses in several ways:
1. Incorporating AI technology into course material: AI
can be used to enhance the teaching and learning
experience in a variety of ways, such as using
chatbots for answering student questions, using AI￾powered tutors for personalized instruction, and using
machine learning to analyze student performance
data.
2. Developing critical thinking skills: Incorporating
discussions and activities that challenge students to
think critically about AI, its impact on society, and its
limitations can help students understand the
implications of using AI and develop their own ethical
framework.Dr.
McGonigle’s
Query
ChatGPT’s Response
3. Establishing guidelines and policies: Faculty members
can establish clear guidelines and policies for using AI
in their courses, such as guidelines for ethical use and
data privacy and policies for student data
management.
4. Staying current: Staying up to date with AI
advancements and best practices for incorporating AI
into teaching and learning can help faculty members
stay ahead of the curve and effectively leverage AI in
their courses.
By leveraging and harnessing AI, faculty members can
create a more dynamic and engaging learning environment
while still maintaining control and ensuring ethical and
responsible use of AI technology in the classroom.
How is AI being used
in health care?
Artificial intelligence (AI) is being used in health care in a
variety of ways to improve patient outcomes, streamline
processes, and increase efficiency. Some examples of AI
applications in health care include:
1. Diagnosis and treatment planning: AI-powered tools
are being used to analyze medical images, such as X￾rays and MRIs, and to provide more accurate
diagnoses and treatment plans.
2. Predictive analytics: AI algorithms can analyze large
amounts of patient data to identify trends and predict
outcomes, enabling healthcare providers to make
more informed decisions and improve patient care.
3. Chatbots and virtual assistants: AI-powered chatbots
and virtual assistants are being used to provide 24/7
patient support, answer questions, and schedule
appointments.
4. Drug discovery and development: AI algorithms can
analyze vast amounts of data and help identify new
targets for drug development, speed up the discovery
process, and reduce the time and cost of bringing new
drugs to market.
5. Clinical decision support: AI algorithms are being
integrated into electronic health records (EHRs) to
provide real-time decision support to healthcareDr.
McGonigle’s
Query
ChatGPT’s Response
providers, reducing the risk of medical errors and
improving patient outcomes.
By leveraging AI, healthcare organizations can improve
patient outcomes, streamline processes, and increase
efficiency while reducing costs and improving patient
satisfaction. However, it’s important to note that AI in
health care is still in its early stages and further
development and testing are needed before widespread
implementation.
How would you
describe ChatGPT?
ChatGPT is an AI-powered language model developed by
OpenAI, capable of generating humanlike text based on
input prompts. It uses deep learning algorithms and a
massive amount of text data to generate responses to
questions, carry out conversations, summarize long
articles, and perform various other language-related tasks
with high accuracy.
What are the
benefits,
weaknesses, and
concerns about using
ChatGPT as a
student?
Benefits:
Can save time by quickly providing relevant information
on a wide range of topics
Can help with writing and language-related tasks by
suggesting text completions, proofreading, and
providing writing suggestions
Can improve language skills by exposing users to
diverse writing styles and ways of expressing ideas
Weaknesses:
Does not always provide accurate or reliable
information, especially when it comes to subjective or
opinion-based questions
Cannot replace human interaction or creativity in some
areas such as personal expression, critical thinking, and
problem-solving
Potential ethical concerns, including the role of AI in
shaping human thoughts and behaviors
Concerns:
The use of language models like ChatGPT raises
questions about the reliability and trustworthiness ofDr.
McGonigle’s
Query
ChatGPT’s Response
information generated by AI.
There are also privacy and security concerns around
the vast amount of data these models collect and the
potential misuse of such data.
It’s important for students to be critical and evaluate the
information provided by ChatGPT and use it as a starting
point for their own research and learning rather than
relying solely on the information it provides.
ChatGPT has the capability to write a paper or an article, craft a response to a
discussion question, and even build a course. Refer to Chapter 25, Our Expanding
Realities and the Metaverse, to see what ChatGPT generated about the metaverse.
Reflect on the ethical concerns of using AI. Please review the Ethical AI Database
(2023) report on the state of the ethical AI ecosystem at
www.eaidb.org/reports/2023H1.
Note that there are also AI image generators that translate text into beautiful images.
This eruption of AI into our professional and personal lives is just beginning.Knowledge Dissemination and Sharing
Sharing stories and experience from a clinical point of view
accomplishes much more than simply promoting camaraderie or
empathy (although this kind of engagement is infinitely valuable in its
own way); sharing experiences of clinical learning can help convey
lifesaving information to other clinicians in a way that is more
memorable and palatable and less imposing than warnings delivered
outside a social context. Clinical and caring knowledge, often rooted
in everyday exchanges, becomes socially embedded such that those
with experience in particular clinical settings share common
knowledge and understanding. The social embeddedness of caring
and clinical knowledge is a result of shared and shaped collective
understanding of practice and sometimes provides an alternative
view.
The power of pooled knowledge in combination with knowledge
produced in dialogue with others helps to limit tunnel vision and is a
powerful strategy for maximizing the clinical knowledge of a group.
Whether the nurse is networking, presenting, or seeking continuing
education or recertification, an understanding of socially embedded
knowledge coupled with the multiple perspectives of skilled
practitioners allows for a rich and vibrant opportunity to apply nursing
skills effectively (Benner et al., 1997).
Networking
Considered crucial to career development because of opportunities
for collaboration and information exchange, networking encourages
professional support by making successful professionals accessible
to their colleagues. Further, developing interactive professional
networks between academic and clinical nurses can benefit practice
in diabetes, stroke, and mental health care and community nursing—
the latter being a field in which practitioners are encouraged to
collaborate (Gillibrand et al., 2002).The value of networking to members of male-dominated
professions, such as law, business, and medicine, resides in
opportunities to make contact with fellow professionals and in turn
further one’s career. This observation is especially poignant for
nursing, a predominantly female profession.
Because nurses tend to gather their information from personal
networks, such as colleagues or professional meetings, the
increased availability of technology to assist in networking has
greatly facilitated information exchange. Blogs, email, websites,
electronic mailing lists, and other communicative technologies have
opened an endless stream of collaboration and networking
possibilities, which has allowed nurses to more easily access and
learn from colleagues’ experiences. Using the internet allows for the
discovery of information heretofore unavailable through traditional
information sources (Pravikoff & Levy, 2006), which helps nursing
professionals decide whether, for example, pursuing research
opportunities or collaboration on specific professional projects seems
viable.
A formal network such as the ICN Nurse Practitioner/Advanced
Practice Nurse Network (INP/APNN), unveiled in 2000, promotes the
exchange of knowledge, resources, and expertise to enhance the
presence of nursing in primary health care. Created in response to
the globalization of nurse practitioner and advanced practice nursing
network roles, the network enables the enhancement and
advancement of practice for countries just beginning to initiate
advanced practice nursing roles.
Membership and participation in professional associations also
provide ways to network and advance one’s profession. Professional
associations represent venues through which members may set
standards for professional practice, establish codes of ethics,
become involved in advocacy, engage in continuing education
opportunities, access job banks, subscribe to professional journals,
and act as a common voice for the profession. For example, the
American Association of Occupational Health Nurses is instrumental
in maintaining healthcare issues on the political agenda. There are
also several opportunities for nurses to network in specificinformatics associations, such as the American Nursing Informatics
Association and the nursing work group associated with HIMSS.
Research shows that sometimes nurses hesitate to join professional
organizations because of barriers associated with cost, distance to
meetings, lack of activities in their geographic area, and inability to
attend meetings. Because networking creates fertile areas for the
development of new ideas, partnerships, jobs, and strategies, both
national and state associations would benefit from creating greater
opportunities for healthcare practitioners to earn continuing
education credits and network with others in their field.
Presenting and Publishing
Just as the AACN maintains standards for nursing education, so too
do professional journals hold their contributors to rigorous standards
and provide a valuable venue in which nursing professionals might
share ideology and innovations in the field. With the proliferation of
online journals and the availability of nursing information via multiple
media, publishing remains an excellent way to participate in the
dissemination of professional information. Both nursing magazines
and journals reach considerable audiences; journal distinctions lie in
their authorship and audience. Although journal articles are written
by and for scholars, with refereed or peer-reviewed journals requiring
a blind review by a group of reviewers to eliminate bias, magazine
articles may be written by a professional in the field, an editor, a
freelancer, or some other author. Publishing provides excellent
opportunities to extend knowledge and share research. The
scholarly, peer-reviewed Online Journal of Nursing Informatics
(OJNI) was the first online nursing informatics journal cofounded by
Dr. Dee McGonigle and Dr. Renee Eggers in 1996 and transferred to
HIMSS leadership in 2013.
Like publishing, making presentations at contemporary
professional conferences allows nursing educators and students to
gain experience and share scholarship with colleagues.
Presentations must meet certain standards for an audience to find
them credible and effective. Because audience members retain 50%of what they see and hear in a presentation versus 20% if they only
hear it, experts suggest the use of audiovisual aids to create the
most effective professional presentations (Bergren, 2000). A
noteworthy presentation could involve multiple levels of complexity,
from a simple PowerPoint slide to an animated tutorial. Because
technology and well-designed visuals cannot make up for lack of
preparedness or research, however, presenters should be aware of
their target audience and the details of the research being
presented. Regardless of the medium or presentation style,
audiovisual presentations should be designed consistently and
simply, using colors and fonts that are easy to read and understand
and audience-appropriate language.
Conferences often host poster presentations, which enable
contributors to share research findings, innovations, and exemplar
programs in a low-investment but visually captivating way. Because
posters are primarily visual, with little or no verbal supplementation,
most important for consideration are room elements, such as size,
space limitations, and lighting. The best nursing practitioner posters
feature consistent visual components, such as appropriately sized,
readable font and simple colors, and are based on a research
concept or clinical objective (Berg, 2005). A high-tech alternative to a
paper poster is an electronic poster, which is a continuously running
PowerPoint presentation either projected for larger audiences or left
to run from a laptop or desktop computer for smaller audiences
(Bergren, 2000). Both publishing and presenting provide
opportunities for the nursing practitioner to disseminate new
knowledge and stay abreast of information in the field. Some
educational institutions provide opportunities for undergraduates to
showcase projects and research at undergraduate research
conferences. These conferences are excellent ways for developing
professionals to hone knowledge dissemination skills that will serve
them well in their professional practice.
Continuing Education and RecertificationNationally, nursing employers and institutions have, because of
budgetary constraints, begun to eliminate continuing education
(CE) programs traditionally reliant on classes, conferences, and
workshops; consequently, reliance on outside agencies and
technology has increased to meet this need. The traditional
approach to obtaining CE credits has included home study offered
by professional journals and organizations in which the client reads
articles, answers related questions, and sends in the test form and
fee. With the ubiquitous technology influx and the accessibility it
affords, obtaining CE credits through e-learning is considered a
beneficial delivery method for mandatory educational programs and
other programs that provide employees with opportunities to
maintain or improve skills. Benefits of e-learning for CE training
include the ability to access information at any time (thus creating a
flexible schedule) and experience instant feedback and
individualized instruction by seeking out specific, additional
information as needed.
E-learning can also benefit administrative support of CE credits by
providing instantly accessible computerized records and other
tracking features, such as records of success and completion,
associated costs of program development, and staff productivity.
Allowing nursing professionals to complete mandatory training on
demand represents a huge benefit of e-learning.
In some cases, acquiring CE credits may also help the nurse
achieve recertification. Available through myriad professional
organizations, recertification ensures that nurses are staying current
in their fields and some specialties; for example, the field of pediatric
nursing requires annual recertification to maintain professional
status. During recertification, the Pediatric Nursing and Certification
Board offers each certified pediatric nurse options for ensuring that
they are maintaining national standards within the specialty of
pediatric nursing (Pediatric Nursing Certification Board, n.d.).
As an added benefit, some hospitals provide higher salaries to
nurses who maintain certification. In addition, 90% of nurse
managers indicate that they would prefer to hire a certified over a
noncertified nurse. The trend in Magnet hospitals to encourage,reward, and promote certified nurses is spreading to other facilities
and healthcare settings, with retirement centers and home health
agencies now beginning to seek certified nurses because of the
perceived extra benefit to their customers and the marketing
advantage obtained from hiring nurses with guaranteed levels of
competence (Peterson, 2007). For a comprehensive list of nursing
certifications provided by the American Nurses Credentialing Center,
visit www.nursingworld.org/ancc.Exploring Information Fair Use and
Copyright Restrictions
As we adopt more technology-based tools in education, we need to
be mindful of what constitutes fair use of materials and copyright
laws. Nurse educators should be careful to model ethical behaviors
by attributing works to their rightful authors as they acquire and use
education materials. Fair use refers to a legal concept that permits
the use of copyrighted works for specific purposes without obtaining
permission from the author or paying for the use of the work.
Originally, fair use evolved for written work and allowed for uses that
include journalists’ reporting the news, teaching, or scholarly
research. As digital technology and the web burst upon the scene,
fair use expanded to apply to the copying and redistribution of digital
media, including photographs, graphics, music, videos, audio, and
software or computer programs.
Four factors must be considered in determining whether a
particular use is fair. These factors are derived directly from the fair
use provision (www.copyright.gov/title17/92chap1.html#107) of
Section 107 of the U.S. Copyright Law (U.S. Copyright Office, n.d.):
1. The purpose and character of the use, including whether such
use is of commercial nature or is for nonprofit educational
purposes
2. The nature of the copyrighted work
3. The amount and substantiality of the portion used in relation to
the copyrighted work as a whole
4. The effect of the use upon the potential market for, or value of,
the copyrighted work
The first factor tends to favor educational institutions and nonprofit
entities. The second factor relates to the nature of the work; courts
have consistently protected creative works and those that have notyet been published. The third factor that must be considered relates
to the amount of use. Typically, you should determine how much of
the overall work you are using; if it represents the core, or essence,
of the work, you should not replicate or use it. The fourth and final
factor relates to the effect on the creator’s market share. If you are
using a substantial portion of a text or software work that is offered
for sale, you can adversely affect its owner’s earning potential. The
term itself should make you reflect on all these factors and decide
whether your proposed use is fair.
Copyright refers to the exclusive right of the creator of a work to
distribute, sell, publish, copy, lease, or display that work in whatever
manner they choose. Copyright laws are not only misinterpreted but
also are constantly being challenged by our advancing technological
capabilities. Think about AI and ChatGPT. Who owns the content AI
generates? How should we cite it? Even though you use American
Psychological Association formatting, for example, and cite the
authors, you might be overstepping your rights and infringing on the
author’s copyright; you might not be accused of plagiarism, but you
should always cite where you obtained your information or digital
media.
All users of others’ work, in whatever medium, must fully
understand, be aware of, and comply with copyright and fair use
principles. Typically, you should try to think of what reasonable use is
and always make sure that you cite the authors. Reflect on all four
fair use factors before making your decision to use another’s work
for educational purposes. Also, remember that you are serving as a
role model regarding copyright and fair use behaviors for your
students.The Future
There are several exciting and interesting education technology
trends to monitor in the future. Virtual reality–embedded education
has exploded onto the academic scene and offers the potential for
interdisciplinary inquiry and sharing across the curriculum and
university and globally. Makerspaces are labs provided on university
campuses (and in some healthcare institutions) to allow students
and healthcare workers to experiment with developing new
technologies or modifying existing technologies and equipment to
better fit needs. These spaces are frequently equipped with three￾dimensional printers and lots of tools and materials that allow for
rapid prototyping of ideas.
Several universities around the country, such as the University of
South Florida, University of Pittsburgh, Yale University, and Arizona
State University, are sponsoring healthcare innovation competitions.
Other universities are partnering with industry leaders to sponsor
student ideas for healthcare innovations. The Internet of Everything
(IoE), which is another trend, is touted as the next step beyond the
connections of physical things (Internet of Things, or IoT): IoT
focuses only on sensor networks—machines communicating with
other machines, and the data created as a result. As things add
capabilities (such as context-awareness, increased processing
power, and energy independence), and as more people and new
information are connected, IoT becomes IoE, a network of networks
where billions, or even trillions, of connections create unprecedented
opportunities and new risks. (Sepulveda Galvis, 2013, p. 3)
Education innovations related to the IoE hold promise for improving
education processes, outcomes, and instruction. For example,
mobile devices and wearables allow for the collection of learner
behaviors, and these data can be translated into targeted,
personalized learning. Data generated from the IoE may also be
used for professional development to improve teaching andcurricular approaches and effectiveness. These are but a few of the
education technology trends to watch for in the future.Summary
This chapter highlighted the technology tools and delivery modalities
that support nursing education. Nursing education is evolving and
will be structured by competency achievement and supported by
technologies. In an ideal world, nurses would work against the
assumption that technology runs itself and take proactive roles in
helping to design the education and technologies necessary to best
prepare them for real-world scenarios. Consider that flash is not
substance and drama is not depth; technology performs only as well
as the pedagogy that undergirds and sustains it. Plan for and use
technology with care so that its best features consequently enrich
your experiences as an educator or a learner.
THOUGHT-PROVOKING QUESTIONS
1. What are some of the forces behind the push toward a more wired learning
experience in nursing education?
2. Which of the technologies discussed here most appeals to you? Why?
3. Explore one of the newer learning technologies in more depth. How would the use
of this technology benefit you in your practice or education setting? Why do you
find this tool useful? From your perspective, how could you enhance this tool?
4. Jean, a diabetes nurse educator, recently read an article in an online journal that
she accessed through her health agency’s database subscription. The article
provided a comprehensive checklist for managing diabetes in older adults, which
Jean prints out and distributes to her patients in a diabetes education class. Does
this constitute fair use, or is it a copyright violation? Explain your answer.
5. Reflect on your thoughts about ChatGPT. In detail, describe your perspective about
its use:
1. by students,
2. in relation to copyright, and
3. by faculty.
6. Describe Generation Z in detail in relation to nursing education. How would a
Generation Z student have handled the dissemination of the article in question
number 4? Provide a detailed rationale for your Generation Z approach.R E F E R E N C E S
Aquino-Russell, C., Maillard Strüby, F. V., & Reviczky, K. (2007). Living attentive presence
and changing perspectives with a web-based nursing theory course. Nursing Science
Quarterly, 20(2), 128–134. https://doi.org/10.1177/0894318407299883
Armitage, P., & Burnard, P. (1991). Mentors or preceptors? Narrowing the theory/practice
gap. Nurse Education Today, 11(3), 225–229. https://doi.org/10.1016/0260-
6917(91)90064-H
Benner, P., Tanner, C., & Chelsa, C. (1997). The social fabric of nursing knowledge.
American Journal of Nursing, 97(7), 16BBB–16DDD.
Berg, J. A. (2005). Creating a professional poster presentation: Focus on nurse
practitioners. Journal of the American Academy of Nurse Practitioners, 17(7), 245–248.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1745-7599.2005.0041.x
Bergren, M. D. (2000). Power up your presentation with PowerPoint. Journal of School
Nursing, 16(4), 44–47. https://doi.org/10.1177/105984050001600406
Chechitelli, A. (2023, January 13). Sneak preview of Turnitin’s AI writing and ChatGPT
detection capability. Turnitin. www.turnitin.com/blog/sneak-preview-of-turnitins-ai-writing￾and-chatgpt-detection-capability
Costa, D. M. (2007). The collaborative fieldwork model. OT Practice, 12(1), 25–26.
DeSantis, S. (2002). Re-envisioning the pedagogical bridge: The new instructional designer.
Presented at the Pennsylvania Association for Educational Communications and
Technology, Hershey, PA.
Dewald, N. H. (1999). Transporting good library instruction practices into the web
environment: An analysis of online tutorials. Journal of Academic Librarianship, 25(1),
26–32. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0099-1333(99)80172-4
Edwards, M. J. A., & Drury, R. M. (2000). Using computers in basic nursing education,
continuing education, and patient education. In M. J. Ball, K. J. Hannah, S. K. Newbold,
& J. V. Douglas (Eds.), Nursing informatics: Where caring and technology meet (pp. 49–
68). Springer.
Ethical AI Database. (2023). EAIDB 1H2023 report: State of the ethical AI ecosystem.
www.eaidb.org/reports/2023H1
Felder, R., & Prince, M. (2007). The case for inductive teaching. Prism, 17(2), 55.
www.engr.ncsu.edu/wp-content/uploads/drive/1L￾zl5XFwGXzfYAkNBj7mqsrdiT6bRxk9/2007-Induction(PRISM).pdf
Froman, R. D., Hall, A. W., Shah, A., Bernstein, J. M., & Galloway, R. Y. (2003). A
methodology for supporting research and scholarship. Nursing Outlook, 51(2), 84–89.
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0029-6554(02)05457-X
Gabbard, R. B., Kaiser, A., & Kaunelis, D. (2007). Redesigning a library space for
collaborative learning. Computers in Libraries, 27(5), 6–11.
Gagen, L., & Bowie, S. (2005). Effective mentoring: A case for training mentors for novice
teachers. Journal of Physical Education, Recreation & Dance, 76(7), 40–45.
https://doi.org/10.1080/07303084.2005.10609312Garavalia, L. S., Marken, P. A., & Sommi, R. W. (2008). Selecting appropriate assessment
methods: Asking the right questions. American Journal of Pharmaceutical Education, 66,
108–112. www.researchgate.net/profile/Roger￾Sommi/publication/250704767_Selecting_Appropriate_Assessment_Methods_Asking_th
e_Right_Questions/links/00b7d529dcb737b275000000/Selecting-Appropriate￾Assessment-Methods-Asking-the-Right-Questions.pdf
Georgiev, D. (2023, May 20). 39+ smartphone statistics you should know in 2023.
Review42. https://review42.com/resources/smartphone-statistics.
Gillibrand, W. P., Burton, C., & Watkins, G. G. (2002). Clinical networks for nursing
research. International Nursing Review, 49(3), 188–193. https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1466-
7657.2002.00124.x
Grant, M. J., & Brettle, A. J. (2006). Developing and evaluating an interactive information
skills tutorial. Health Information and Libraries Journal, 23(2), 79–88.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1471-1842.2006.00655.x
Hughes, J. (2022, August 24). Communicating with Generation Z: Everything you need to
know. Keystone Education Group. www.keystoneacademic.com/news/communicating￾with-generation-z-everything-you-need-to-know
Jensen, K. (2019, March 4). How does Generation Z read? Book Riot.
https://bookriot.com/2019/03/04/how-does-generation-z-read
Johnson, D. W., & Johnson, R. T. (1990). Learning together and alone: Cooperative,
competitive and individualistic learning. Allyn & Bacon.
Jokelainen, M., Turunen, H., Tossavainen, K., Jamookeeah, D., & Coco, K. (2011). A
systematic review of mentoring nursing students in clinical placements. Journal of
Clinical Nursing, 20(19–20), 2854–2867. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-
2702.2010.03571.x
Juliano, R. (2014). Best practices guide to converting face to face courses to a distance
learning format: Educational technology. www.manula.com/manuals/rachael￾juliano/best-practices-guide-to-converting-face-to-face-courses-to-a-distance-learning￾format/1/en/topic/educational-technology.
Karim, S. (2021, March 25). Nursing schools turned to computer simulations during the
pandemic. Are students learning? KPBS Public Media. www.kpbs.org/news/midday￾edition/2021/03/25/nursing-schools-computer-simulations-learning
Kramer, M. (1974). Reality shock. Mosby.
Leasure, A., Davis, L., & Thievon, S. (2000). Comparison of student outcomes and
preferences in a traditional vs. World Wide Web–based baccalaureate nursing research
course. Journal of Nursing Education, 39(4), 149–154.
Meyer, L. (2015, January 7). 6 alternative social media tools for teaching and learning.
Campus Technology. http://campustechnology.com/Articles/2015/01/07/6-Alternative￾Social-Media-Tools-for-Teaching-and-Learning.aspx?Page=1
Morgan, B. (2020, February 28). 50 stats all marketers must know about Gen-Z. Forbes.
www.forbes.com/sites/blakemorgan/2020/02/28/50-stats-all-marketers-must-know￾about-gen-z/?sh=337297d776d0
Neary, M. (2000). Supporting students’ learning and professional development through the
process of continuous assessment and mentorship. Nurse Education Today, 20(6), 463–
474. https://doi.org/10.1054/nedt.2000.0458Oblinger, D. G. (2005). Learners, learning, and technology: The EDUCAUSE learning
initiative. EDUCAUSE Review, 40(5), 66–75.
OpenAI. (2023). Online ChatGPT: Optimizing language models for dialogue. https://online￾chatgpt.com
Pediatric Nursing Certification Board. (n.d.). PNCB annual recertification programs.
www.pncb.org/pncb-recertification-programs
Peterson, T. (2007, September 27). Here’s the skinny: What you need to do to become and
stay certified. Medscape. www.medscape.com/viewarticle/562945
Pijl-Zieber, E. M., Barton, S., Konkin, J., Awosoga, O., & Caine, V. (2014). Competence and
competency-based nursing education: Finding our way through the issues. Nurse
Education Today, 34(5), 676–678. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nedt.2013.09.007
Pravikoff, D. S., & Levy, J. R. (2006). Computerized information resources. In V. Saba & K.
A. McCormick (Eds.), Essentials of nursing informatics (4th ed., pp. 517–532). McGraw￾Hill.
Pusic, M. V., Pachev, G. S., & MacDonald, W. A. (2007). Embedding medical student
computer tutorials into a busy emergency room department. Academic Emergency
Medicine, 14(2), 138–148. https://doi.org/10.1197/j.aem.2006.10.105
Ridley, R. T. (2007). Interactive teaching: A concept analysis. Journal of Nursing Education,
46(5), 203–209. https://doi.org/10.3928/01484834-20070501-03
Schrader, J. (2022, February 23). How Gen Z learns: It’s more self-paced and collaborative
than ever. Metro Parent. www.metroparent.com/education/school-issues/how-gen-z￾learns/
Scott, A. (2018, May 14). Virtual reality in higher education. EDUCAUSE Review.
https://er.educause.edu/blogs/sponsored/2018/5/virtual-reality-in-higher-education
Sepulveda Galvis, A. (2013, October 4). Education and the Internet of Everything. Cisco
Blogs. https://blogs.cisco.com/education/education-and-the-internet-of-everything
Shaffer, S. C., Lackey, S. P., & Bolling, G. W. (2006). Blogging as venue for nurse faculty
development. Nursing Education Perspectives, 27(3), 126–128.
Sousa, D. A. (1995). How the brain learns. National Association of Secondary School
Principals.
Stillman, D. (2019, November 14). Generation Z statistics that can make or break your
business. GenGuru. https://genguru.com/generation-z-statistics
Todorov, G. (2023, May 11). Top Generation Z marketing statistics 2023 [facts and trends].
ThriveMyWay. https://thrivemyway.com/gen-z-marketing-stats
U.S. Copyright Office. (n.d.). Copyright law of the United States of America and related laws
contained in Title 17 of the United States code. www.copyright.gov/title17
Waas, D. (2019, October 13). 9 great webinar examples—Watch and learn from the best.
DanielWaas.com. https://danielwaas.com/great-webinar-examples
Wiggers, K. (2023 January 31). OpenAI releases tool to detect AI-generated text, including
from ChatGPT. TechCrunch. https://techcrunch.com/2023/01/31/openai-releases-tool-to￾detect-ai-generated-text-including-from-chatgptC H A P T E R 2 0
Simulation, Game Mechanics,
Virtual Worlds, and the
Realities in Nursing Education
OBJECTIVES
1. Distinguish among learning environments as simulations, virtual worlds, or games.
2. Describe the role of simulation in nursing informatics education.
3. Compare and contrast simulations, virtual worlds, and games as informatics tools
for nursing education.
4. Assess strategies for choosing among a simulation, virtual world, or game as the
best choice for instructional delivery in a given educational situation.
5. Explore the role of simulation, virtual worlds, and games in nursing education.
6. Differentiate between using a live clinical information system or simulated electronic
health records for educational purposes.
7. Assess the realities of augmented reality and virtual reality in relation to nursing
education currently and within the foreseeable future.
KEY TERMS
academic electronic medical record (AEMR)
assessment
augmented reality (AR)
augmented-reality game (ARG)
avatar
clinical information system
database
debrief
dynamic web page shelledutainment
enactment
engage
feedback
fidelity
game
game mechanics
gameplay
immersive experience
latex-based simulation
massive multiplayer online role-playing game
massive open online course (MOOC)
Multimedia Educational Resource for Learning and Online Teaching (MERLOT)
multiuser dungeon
nonplayer character (NPC)
object-oriented multiuser dungeon
prebrief
prebrief, enactment, debrief, and assessment (PEDA)
reusable learning object (RLO)
scaffolding
Second Life (SL)
serious game
server
simulated documentation
simulation
simulation scenario
simulator
three-dimensional (3D)
virtual reality (VR)
virtual simulation
virtual worldIntroduction
The use of latex-based and virtual simulation (Figure 20-1), virtual
worlds, and game mechanics in nursing education was increasing,
but with the COVID-19 pandemic, their integration really escalated to
meet the needs of students who could not attend clinical experiences
or classes. Many schools and staff education departments have
employed these techniques to provide efficient, effective, and
engaging educational experiences for their students and staff. The
schools and other educational entities began realizing the benefits of
these educational modalities. The monumental National Council of
State Boards of Nursing (NCSBN; Hayden et al., 2014) simulation
study brought national attention to the need to enhance, extend, or
replace clinical and practicum hours with other effective means, such
as simulation. In this chapter, we will explore simulated
documentation, simulation, virtual worlds, and game mechanics used
in teaching nursing informatics competencies and nursing education.Figure 20-1 Latex-Based Simulation
Even though there are many nursing students, nursing educators,
and nurses using these technologies, no clear understanding of the
terminology associated with these learning modalities exists.
Therefore, it is important to define this terminology when discussing
these technologies and their effect on nursing informatics and
nursing education.
Simulations are imitations of real-life events or circumstances;
in nursing education, simulations are used to replicate a clinical
scenario to provide an opportunity for practice in a mock
situation. These simulations can be done with mannequins
(latex-based simulation) or via role-play, web-based
applications, or virtual simulation in a virtual world.A simulator is a mechanical or electronic device that provides
an environment in which a simulation can occur.
Simulated documentation refers to any simulated electronic
format or electronic health record (EHR) that is accessed and
used by the learner to actually document simulated nursing care
for educational purposes.
A simulation scenario is a situation or case developed in a
simulation setting to mimic an actual practice situation.
A game is a structured activity undertaken for enjoyment.
In education, edutainment is the combination of education and
entertainment to make learning fun.
Game mechanics are the rules, instructions, directions, and
constructs that the learner interacts with while playing the game.
For educators, it is essential that any game mechanics they use
be engaging and satisfying for the learner.
Gameplay is how the learner interacts with or plays the game.
This is extremely important to understand to be able to
appreciate how the game functions and the learners function,
play, and learn.
As you progress through the chapter, you will delve into simulated
documentation, simulation, game mechanics, virtual worlds, and the
realities.Examples of Simulation in Nursing
Informatics Education
Following are two examples of using simulation in nursing
informatics education. In the first example, the EHR is part of a
larger simulation scenario that mimics a real-life clinical case, and in
the second example, the EHR itself functions as a simulator and
becomes a true-to-life learning tool.
In the first example, the patient call bell is ringing; you enter the
room to find the patient verbalizing complaints of chest tightness. In
a moment, the patient becomes unresponsive, and a code is called.
The team quickly responds, initiating resuscitation measures per the
advanced cardiac life support protocol. You review the EHRs with the
attending physician while discussing your assessment before the
code. After a short while, the resuscitation efforts are successful, and
the patient is stable enough for transfer to the intensive care unit.
You complete your documentation in the patient’s EHR, the
simulation scenario ends, and the debriefing begins. The instructor
provides feedback not only on actions taken within the simulation
scenario but also on the use of the EHR as an important resource for
patient information and documentation.
In the second example, it is the first day of a new course, and
rather than a lecture-based class with an accompanying textbook,
the instructor uses an active learning approach with case studies
delivered through an EHR interface to facilitate the learning and
application of clinical concepts. In this example, rather than being
part of an entire simulation scenario, the EHR itself is the learning
tool providing learners with a hands-on learning opportunity centered
on accessing and using the information contained within the patient
record. Choi et al. (2016) concluded that academic electronic
medical records (AEMRs) would improve students’ understanding
of clinical practice: “[T]he findings of this study will provide important
developments by applying an AEMR, which will augment students’informatics competencies and critical thinking, into the nursing
curricula to better prepare the future workforce” (p. 264).
APPLICATIONS IN EDUCATION TO ENHANCE
LEARNING
You are learning about informatics. What role or roles would the nurse informaticist
assume in relation to each of these strategies? Reflect on nursing informatics’ effect on
each of the following instructional technologies and educational strategies described.
MASSIVE OPEN ONLINE COURSE
A massive open online course (MOOC) is a virtual or an online course with unlimited
participation and open access via the web. The course runs over a set number of
weeks using materials and resources available online. Some MOOCs have had up to
150,000 learners enroll, but most learners will not stay to complete the course. Murray
(2019) reported “an astronomical dropout rate of about 96 percent on average” (para.
2). Traditionally, MOOCs are free and typically provide interactive opportunities using
social media or other tools to support community interactions among learners and
teachers. Learners select the courses they want to take and are in control since they
set their own pace and attend or quit when they want. These factors place the
responsibility of learning on the learner. “Much of the early enthusiasm for massive
open online courses, or Moocs, focused on how they could disrupt and democratise
education” (Murray, 2019, para. 1).
REUSABLE LEARNING OBJECT
A reusable learning object (RLO) is an approach to content development, consisting
of independent, self-contained, digital, multimedia e-learning resources, that breaks the
content into chunks so that each object can be swapped, interchanged, substituted,
and exchanged as needed, based on the characteristics of the learners and their
specific learning needs. Typically, RLOs contain a presentation, an activity, links and
resources, and a self-assessment. They are based on the object-oriented model from
computer science; this paradigm intends to assimilate the advantages of modules and
seeks to recycle these objects as needed.
RLOs can be used repeatedly in a variety of learning episodes. Each RLO has its
own learning objective and can stand alone, but when many RLOs are strategically
combined, a comprehensive learning experience can be crafted. To facilitate the ability
to plug and play, RLOs must be easily adaptable, interoperable with the infrastructure,
and organized using targeted metadata so that they can readily be extracted for reuse.
RLOs are little chunks of learning that provide the right amount of information needed
to assist the learner in meeting a specific learning objective.MULTIMEDIA EDUCATIONAL RESOURCE FOR LEARNING
AND ONLINE TEACHING
Multimedia Educational Resource for Learning and Online Teaching (MERLOT)
(www.merlot.org/merlot) is a web-based open resource that “provides access to
curated online learning and support materials and content creation tools led by an
international community of educators, learners, and researchers.” It also includes an
information technology community portal
(www.merlot.org/merlot/InformationTechnology.htm).
ADAPTIVE LEARNING
Adaptive learning is an educational strategy that manipulates how the learning
environment is displayed to the learner to allocate and mediate the learning resources,
based on each learner’s unique learning needs. The adaptive behaviors and activities
are based on mathematical paradigms of knowledge and use artificial intelligence (AI)
in an approach to actively tailor content to meet each learner’s needs by adapting to
the knowledge of the learner. This is a learner-centered approach because the
learner’s needs drive which educational episodes they are afforded.
REFERENCES
Murray, S. (2019, March 3). Moocs struggle to lift rock-bottom completion rates.
Financial Times. www.ft.com/content/60e90be2-1a77-11e9-b191-175523b59d1dNursing Informatics Competencies in
Nursing Education
In the late 1990s, researchers identified that healthcare
professionals needed to possess both skills in and knowledge of
informatics (American Association of Colleges of Nursing, 1999;
Gassert, 1998; Pew Health Professions Commission, 1998). In
addition, information technology was identified as a key measure in
improving patient safety and quality of care (American Academy of
Nursing, 2003; Institute of Medicine, 2000). In response to the
increasing demand for practitioners to become skilled in this area,
coupled with the absence of research-based informatics
competencies, a Delphi study was used to identify informatics
competencies for nurses at four levels of practice (Staggers et al.,
2002). In essence, this seminal study created informatics
competencies for entry-level nurses through informatics specialists
and innovators, with a focus on computer skills, informatics
knowledge, and informatics skills.
Although informatics competencies for nurses have been
identified, the degree to which schools of nursing have woven them
into the curriculum varies greatly (Carty & Ong, 2006). In a study
conducted by Fetter (2009), a survey of graduating senior nursing
students ranked the following competencies with which they had no
experience or minimal skill: (1) using applications to document, (2)
creating an electronic care plan, (3) valuing informatics knowledge
for practice, (4) valuing informatics knowledge for skill development,
and (5) using applications for data entry. Hunter et al. (2013)
developed an online self-assessment tool, the TIGER-Based
Assessment of Nursing Informatics Competencies (TANIC); this
instrument assesses the Level 1 Beginning Nurse and Level 2
Experienced Nurse competencies. McGonigle et al. (2013)
developed the Nursing Informatics Competency Assessment (NICA)
for Level 3 Informatics Nurse Specialist and Level 4 InformaticsInnovator, based on the seminal work of Staggers, the current
literature, and expert input. This online self-assessment was noted in
the 2014 American Nurses Association Nursing Informatics: Scope
and Standards of Practice, Second Edition. These self-assessment
tools are discussed in Chapter 7, Nursing Informatics as a Specialty.
The question then becomes, Which best practices will ensure that
students become prepared in informatics? The National League for
Nursing (2015) realized the need to prepare students for the
technology-rich healthcare environments. Nursing educators and
administrators indicated the need to make sure that informatics is
integrated throughout the curriculum and that experience with
nursing informatics is provided during clinical rotations as well. Little
clinically related informatics content and few such learning
experiences were provided in nursing programs. Technology tools
containing care planning software and clinical information
systems were least likely to be incorporated into the courses, and
the lack of these tools continues to be an issue. Another area of
concern is the preparation of the nursing informatics faculty in the
use of these tools. Rajalahti et al. (2014) made several
recommendations about competencies, including the following: “A
description of nursing informatics competencies for nurse educators
is needed at a national and global level. Advanced nursing
informatics programmes are needed in the nurse educators’ training
programme” (p. 64). Nursing faculty must be prepared to use these
technologies. With emerging technologies in nursing and healthcare
education, the use of these technologies, including simulation, to
allow students to use informatics in an active manner and in an
authentic and realistic learning context is one potential approach to
remedying these shortcomings.TABLE 20-1
A Case for Simulation in Nursing Informatics
Education and Nursing Education
A simulation recreates a real-life set of conditions or events with as
much fidelity as possible (Alessi, 1988). Aldrich (2010) contended
that simulations develop cognition (i.e., learning-to-know skills),
ethics and roles (i.e., learning-to-be skills), and application
capabilities (i.e., learning-to-do skills). Unlike games, however,
simulations are not necessarily designed to be fun.
Simulations contain four major components: prebrief, enactment,
debrief, and assessment (PEDA) (refer to Table 20-1). Every
simulation should have these elements in order to prepare and
assess students while also facilitating learning through doing and
reflection. The most important translational PEDA components are
the prebrief and debrief. It is imperative that learners know exactly
what is expected and be prepared for the enactment in the
prebriefing. When done well, debriefing helps learners reflect on the
authentic experience and solidifies the learning by facilitating the
transfer of theory and skills to their real practice setting. Graduate
nursing education is an area that is expanding learners’ simulated
learning episodes. Woroch et al. (2018) described a drug-seeking
telephone triage scenario simulation in which family nurse
practitioner (FNP) students collaborated with psychiatric mental
health nurse practitioner students. Robinson-Reilly et al. (2020)
stated that “[s]imulated telehealth allows students to engage in a
learning environment that closely reflects real-life experiences
without posing a threat to either the student or the patient” (p. 49).
Harris (2020) simulated lacerations, abscesses, and suspicious
lesions with nurse practitioner students. Harris et al. (2016) believed
that simulation could assist FNP students with their role transition
from generalist to advanced practice by doing the following:
Simulation PEDAEach simulation must have four components:
1. Prebrief
2. Enactment
3. Debrief
4. Assessment
Prebrief Students receive the simulation information, the goal, the educational
outcomes, and the related course or program outcomes. The simulation
should be explained and focused for students. They should know how to
prepare for the activity and be told what is expected, provided with the
background necessary to be able to fully enact their role in the activity,
and given the specifics about how they will be assessed. They must also
be provided with the time frame within which the simulation must be
completed.
Enactment The simulation area is prepared to facilitate the activity. Students enact
the role assigned and complete their assigned activities during the
established time frame.
Debrief Debriefing is “a student-centered discussion during which the
participants and observers reflect on performance during the scenario
and make recommendations for future practice” (Mastrian et al., 2011, p.
351). The debriefing can be done one-on-one or with entire teams.
Faculty can help students during and after their activities by focusing on
breakdowns and areas of growth to hone future learning episodes
(Tanner, 2006).
Following the completion of each activity, it is important to do the
following:
Answer students’ questions.
Address students’ perspectives, perceptions, and concerns.
Emphasize and reinforce specific learning outcomes.
Create authentic linkages to the real world.
Assess students’ learning. What did they learn?
Validate what students learned.
Ask the students to reflect on the simulation activity, both how they felt
during the activity and how they feel now that the activity is completed.
1. What did students enjoy the most and the least about the activity?
2. What were students’ perceptions regarding the activity?
Can students describe the emotions they experienced while
completing the activity?
How do students describe the interpersonal interactions or the
enactment of their role?3. What were the major points of the activity?
4. Did students experience any problems that affected their ability to
make the necessary decisions during the activity?
How could you prevent these problems in the real world?
If you could not prevent them, how could you avoid them in the
real world?
5. What did students learn?
What did students learn that was new to them?
Did things that students already know take on new meanings after
the activity?
Was there a specific aspect of the activity where students learned
the most?
Reflect on students’ perceived learning and validate what they
learned.
6. Would students recommend any changes to enhance the activity? If
yes, what changes, and how would each change enhance the
activity?
7. What will students take with them after having completed this
activity?
Assessment Students should be provided with a detailed explanation of how they will
be assessed and graded, which relates to the goal; educational
outcomes; and, if applicable, course or program outcomes. Detailed
rubrics are recommended. The assessment process must be shared
during the prebriefing. If the activity is not being graded, a self￾assessment should be provided for students so that they know how to
evaluate their own performance.
Developed by Dee McGonigle.
“Allowing FNP students opportunities to gain confidence in a
risk-free environment.
Providing FNP students an entire comprehensive office-based or
acute patient care experience.
Reinforcing classroom content and bridging the theory to
practice gap” (p. 14).
Simulations may be experiential and task based, in which the
learner takes on a first-person role and executes a self-chosen
series of decisions by manipulating the variables in the simulationtoward a desired outcome (Aebersold & Tschannen, 2013; Gredler,
1996). Simulations may also be symbolic scenarios in which the
learner directly manipulates variables, sees the results of changes,
and then makes decisions on how to continue in the simulation.
Spreadsheets are often used for this type of simulation. Symbolic
simulations are good choices for discovering principles,
misconceptions, and relationships and for fostering understanding,
prediction, and solution development (Mastrian et al., 2011).
Simulations may use a process known as scaffolding (Jonassen,
1999; Podolefsky et al., 2013) to assist in acquiring the accepted
level of proficiency. An example of scaffolding is when corrective
feedback is initially used to correct user mistakes and ensure
success and then the feedback fades away when it is no longer
needed.
Medical simulations use realistic three-dimensional computer
models of humans to investigate new medical possibilities and test
assumptions (i.e., learning-to-know skills). Simulations of drawing
blood and performing complex medical operations are used to teach
learning-to-do skills.
In general terms, a simulator can perhaps best be described as a
tool designed to emulate some aspect of the clinical practice
environment, which may be focused on a single task or designed to
mimic a complete patient care situation (Gaba & DeAnda, 1998). At
its essence, it is any device that is used to create a realistic learning
experience for the learner but that removes the risk associated with
learning during hands-on patient care. A simulator offers the unique
ability to create a realistic learning environment that is safe,
structured, and supportive for the learner (Bligh & Bleakley, 2006).
Simulators encompass a broad range of devices, such as partial
task trainers (e.g., an IV insertion arm); screen-based simulations,
including simulated EHRs, documentation, and environments that
replicate a realistic patient-care area (virtual simulation); and
complex computer-driven human–patient simulation mannequins
(i.e., latex-based simulation). Web-based virtual standardized
patients are also increasing in use. It is important to understand
which of these products you are using, one in which you enter andinteract in a virtual world, access a web-based product, or interact in
a latex-based lab. Although each of these simulation modalities can
be used alone, they can be powerful learning tools when used
together to create a realistic patient care scenario. When designing
simulation learning environments, “[i]nnovative educators design
learning environments that encourage active engagement in the
learning process. . . . Active engagement creates a personal
connection with the learning experience and motivates the learner to
take greater responsibility in the learning process” (Fisher, 2016, p.
9). According to Gaba (2004), the goal of simulation is a seamless
immersion into the simulated practice environment during which
learners are drawn into the reality of the environment or task at
hand. Hertel and Millis (2002) noted that this is a cooperative
process whereby learners come together in an authentic setting and
begin to learn from one another. Darragh et al. (2016) recommended
realistic scenarios that elicit autonomous problem-solving and
decision-making to immerse and engage the participants in active
learning and critical thinking (Figure 20-2).
Figure 20-2 Simulation Can Bridge the GapConsidering the realistic nature of simulation and its hands-on
active approach to learning, it seems that the use of simulation
modalities can be a powerful tool in moving student nurses—indeed,
any practitioners—toward achieving the informatics competencies.
Recall the examples given at the beginning of this chapter. In both
examples, simulation is used to incorporate nursing informatics into
the context of patient care, thereby giving students an authentic
learning experience that can be applied in clinical practice.
According to the NCSBN national simulation study (Hayden et al.,
2014), 50% simulation can be effectively used in various program
types, in different geographic areas, and in urban and rural settings
with good educational outcomes. The NCSBN study results and the
lack of available quality clinical and practicum placements are
prompting the move to integrate more simulation into nursing
education. Virtual and latex-based simulations are valuable
educational assets at all levels of nursing education. They provide a
safe, authentic environment in which to develop knowledge, skills,
and attitudes before interacting with actual patients. There is no risk
to patients, and students can practice and receive assessment and
feedback for controlled episodes, including unusual events.
Simulation relates well to adaptive learning methods, such as
branching logic, that allow the learner to guide the learning. The
nurse educator can tailor the simulation to the learning needs of the
students and provide deliberate practice with feedback. The learner
can learn, relearn, and hone skills while safely practicing in dynamic
and complex situations with a view to decreasing and eliminating
mistakes.Incorporating EHRs Into the Learning
Environment
There are two main approaches to the incorporation of an EHR into
the learning environment, whether used within a simulated clinical
environment as part of a patient care scenario or as a stand-alone
learning tool. First, the EHR can be created specifically for simulation
purposes; options range from a well-developed Microsoft Access
database to commercially available products designed specifically
for simulation purposes. Second, the simulation may use a real EHR
system either within a hospital-based simulation center or through a
partnership with a healthcare facility or an EHR vendor. Raths (2020)
found that many health centers are using commercial EHRs.
There are certain advantages and disadvantages to each
simulated documentation solution (Figure 20-3). Live documentation
systems provide learners with a realistic experience and can be
incorporated into the learning environment, but they also present
certain drawbacks: (1) They are designed for the patient care
environment, not the learning environment, and therefore lack an
efficient feedback mechanism for learners; (2) they are designed to
work in real time, not simulated time, which creates issues with data
recall, especially when a record may be used repeatedly over a
period of months or years; and (3) if a system is overly complex, it
may unintentionally focus the learning on the specific system rather
than on the process of data retrieval and documentation. Refer to
Research Brief 1 for more on the challenges of teaching clinical
documentation skills in an EHR.Figure 20-3 Simulated Documentation Nurse/Patient. You are working as a team. This is
Mr. Poli, and as your simulated patient, you will be saving him from falling when you assist
him to the restroom and determining why he is unsteady. At the end of your shift, you will
document the nursing care you provided to this patient. When you leave, Mr. Poli will tweet
about his experience with each of you as his nurse and post comments about the care you
provided. It is important to simulate not only what the nurse must document but also what
the patients document and how they use social media to describe their care experience. It is
important that you realize that patients take note of your actions and use social media to
share their opinions and observations. Think about your best and worst experiences in
health care. They might be something you experienced yourself or with a loved one. Where
and what would you share through social media?
One system designed specifically for simulation is the web-based
medical chart (WMC). This system requires four components: (1) a
database, (2) dynamic web page shells, (3) a server, and (4)
computers with access to the internet. With this system, a Microsoft
Access database is created to hold administrative information about
the simulation scenario and other pertinent overview informationaccessible by only the instructor and the simulated patient data,
simulated patient documentation, student documentation entries,
and learner feedback from instructors. Each time a learner logs in to
the WMC system via the internet, the server custom creates the
requested page using the existing database information, user￾specific information, and web page shells to create a realistic EHR
for use by the student. Although this type of system offers a great
deal of flexibility because it is custom created by the end user (and is
certainly a cost-effective solution), it requires that the simulation
instructor have a strong background in computer science and
information technology to create and maintain the database and
supporting materials.
RESEARCH BRIEF 1
Faculty perceptions of the challenges of teaching undergraduate students proper
clinical documentation in both paper-based and electronic systems are described in a
qualitative research study by Mahon et al. (2010). In this study, participants (N = 25)
were interviewed using both open- and closed-ended questions, and results were
analyzed using a constant comparative method. The most common method of teaching
documentation skills was some variation of the demonstration–return–demonstration
method. Faculty members were concerned about the amount of time it took to hone
documentation skills in the actual clinical area, indicating that a median of 2 hours of an
8-hour clinical day were consumed by this task, and shared that there was seemingly
little documentation taught in the classroom or laboratory. Faculty relied heavily on
experts in the clinical setting and used their documentation as models for students to
emulate. In the case of the EHR documentation, on-site nursing experts proficient in
the use of the system were especially useful as role models. However, faculty remained
concerned that using the electronic system and the endless drop-down menus might
actually interfere with the development of nursing expertise and critical thinking.
One crucial issue that was shared by faculty regarding electronic documentation was
that the clinical facility provided the instructor with only one access code so that all the
students in the clinical group used the same code to document and there was limited
access to computers on the clinical unit. The faculty was very concerned about the
legal and ethical issues for appropriate documentation and the provision of care, such
as on-time medication administration in a group of 8 to 10 students with one access
code.
The authors suggested the need to integrate information competencies throughout
the curricula and provide opportunities for faculty development in informatics. They
suggested that “faculty competencies in the area of informatics must be identified and
standardized” and faculty must learn to “model self-efficacy: the patience, support andpersistence that characterize individual development within a professional discipline”
(p. 620).
The full article appears in: Mahon, P. Y., Nickitas, D. M., & Nokes, K. M. (2010). Faculty
perceptions of student documentation skills during the transition from paper-based to
electronic health records systems. Journal of Nursing Education, 49(11), 615–621.
https://doi.org/10.3928/01484834-20100524-06.
A qualitative research study by Kennedy et al. (2009) described the experiences and
development of nursing process skills in nursing students (N = 5) using the Simulated
E-hEalth Delivery System (SEEDS) learning innovation. In the SEEDS learning
innovation, students were given written case studies and asked to enter the patient
data in a simulated EHR and generate a care plan for the patient and family. The
authors concluded that “[t]he technology provided an interactive venue for developing
nursing process skills by linking assessment data from case studies with foundational
concepts in nursing. . . . The exercise was authentic, dynamic, and learner centered”
(p. 99). As a result of the themes discovered in this qualitative study, the authors
proposed two hypotheses for future research to explore learning outcomes resulting
from the use of a simulated e-health system:
Interaction is greater among technologically competent students who use
electronic documentation for patient data during clinical conferences. These
students interact more freely with other students and their faculty members and
experience enhanced learner satisfaction. These students also demonstrate
superior nursing process skills compared to students using traditional post clinical
group discussion about patient care.
Technologically competent students also have higher test scores on specific topics
compared to students who use paper-and-pencil means to organize the assessment
data and develop care plans.
The full article appears in: Kennedy, D., Pallikkathayil, L., & Warren, J. J. (2009). Using
a modified electronic health record to develop nursing process skills. Journal of Nursing
Education, 48(2), 96–100. https://doi.org/10.3928/01484834-20090201-07.
Debriefing a simulation scenario is enhanced when a fully
functional EHR is included. The EHR is linked to the simulation
scenario and contains all the pertinent patient information for
learners to access before or during the simulation scenario. It is
imperative that the system incorporate the ability for learners to
document just as they would in an actual clinical setting, with the
capability of submitting the documentation to the instructor for
evaluation and feedback. Being able to do this helps students feel
practice ready. A major strength of this type of system is that it is a
prepackaged, web-based solution that does not need to be created
from scratch. Vanderbilt University Medical Center went with Epic.According to Raths (2020), “A decade ago, many academic medical
centers built homegrown EHRs based on the innovative work of their
own informaticians. Now, by and large, those same health centers
use commercial EHRs from Epic or Cerner” (para. 1). Vanderbilt
wants to guarantee that students, faculty, and clinicians can access
data, investigate and test innovations, and assess the results.
In addition, many learning systems designed for simulation contain
all the necessary tools for the instructor or simulation center staff to
build the simulation scenario, including but not limited to
programming guides, staging and scripting information for the
scenario, and debriefing guides. Two potential disadvantages with
any commercially available solution, however, are the cost to
purchase it, which varies depending on the product and vendor, and
the ability for or cost associated with customization.
Although the main disadvantages of a live system were discussed
at the beginning of this section, the use of a real EHR system clearly
provides learners with a truly authentic experience. One innovative
solution to bridge this gap was developed out of an academic–
business partnership between the Cerner Corporation and the
University of Kansas School of Nursing. The SEEDS incorporated
the use of Cerner Corporation’s clinical information system and
PowerChart application (Connors et al., 2002). This system was
specifically adapted for educational purposes to address the
learner’s informatics needs. Similar to the WMC system, discussed
previously, instructors developed the patient data stored within the
Cerner Corporation’s clinical information system database to create
virtual patients within the system. Students could navigate through
the system to view pertinent patient data and then document
assessment information and create a plan of care within the
PowerChart application. In addition, the instructor could access
student documentation for evaluation and feedback. The SEEDS
marked the first time a clinical information system was used in a
simulated way for teaching curriculum content to health professional
students (Kennedy et al., 2009). Refer to Research Brief 1 for a
discussion of a study on the use of the SEEDS approach.Challenges and Opportunities
The adoption and use of simulation technologies present unique
advantages and disadvantages. Using simulated medical records,
either as a stand-alone learning tool or in conjunction with a
complete simulation scenario, provides the learner with an
opportunity for a realistic, hands-on learning experience. Major
considerations when looking to adopt a simulated EHR include (1)
cost, (2) ease of use for the instructor and learner, (3) technical
support from the vendor, (4) time to build or develop the patient
database, (5) additional simulation materials included with the
package, (6) flexibility of the system to be customized and used as a
stand-alone tool or in the setting of a full-scale simulation scenario,
and (7) overall fidelity (i.e., realism).
In 2006, a coalition consisting of experts from the fields of health
care, informatics, business and industry, and nursing proposed the
Technology Informatics Guiding Education Reform (TIGER) initiative
(Healthcare Information and Management Systems Society [HIMSS],
n.d.). The aim of this group is to advance the integration of
informatics core competencies into nursing education to provide
better and safer care to patients. Of particular interest is the call to
take an active role in the design and integration of informatics tools
that are intuitive, affordable, usable, responsive, and evidence based
(HIMSS, n.d.). This approach promotes truly new and innovative
strategies for informatics education and creates significant
opportunities for collaboration among industry, academia, and
clinical practice.The Future of Simulation in Nursing
Informatics Education
Simulation will clearly play an important role in the development of
informatics competencies for student nurses and practitioners. One
theme of simulation-based learning is practicing just as a nurse
would in the actual clinical setting. Regarding facilitating the growth
of informatics competencies, it is no different. If there are
expectations regarding the use of clinical information systems and
EHRs in the clinical setting, then the opportunity also exists for the
incorporation of such tools into the classroom and simulated clinical
setting.
Aside from using the simulated EHR in the setting of a clinical
simulation scenario, opportunities also exist to incorporate the
simulated EHR into the classroom in new and innovative ways. As
mentioned at the beginning of the chapter in the second simulation
example, the EHR can be used as an active learning tool within the
classroom. Rather than requiring students to absorb information from
a book, the EHR can become a powerful way for learners to make
important connections about caring for patients with a specific
disease process or to learn concepts of pathophysiology or
pharmacology.Game Mechanics and Virtual World
Simulation for Nursing Education
Setting the Stage
The use of game mechanics in educational, or serious, games and
virtual world simulation continues to grow, with a great deal of
research effort and funds directed toward the discoveries of their
best uses. Educational games and virtual world simulations share
some characteristics, and it is difficult to find a pure experience in
any of the genres. Simulations may have gamelike qualities, and
virtual worlds may be used to present a simulation.
Case Scenario
Joe sits down at the computer and logs in to StratWorld, a virtual
world that enables users to create their own team and then compete
against other teams created by other StratWorld players. The
developers of StratWorld created interesting challenges, part
intellectual and part brute force, which teams strive to solve before
competing teams solve them first.
After Joe logs on, he is presented with a three-dimensional (3D)
view of a forest. Directly in front of him is a 3D figure that looks very
much like Joe, except for having broader shoulders, a more rugged
face, and better skin complexion. This is Joe’s avatar, his
representation of himself in StratWorld. Joe can change his avatar’s
appearance as he wishes, but he likes to stick to something close to
what he actually looks like. All the members of one of his opposing
teams in StratWorld prefer to appear as masses of glowing tubes,
but Joe thinks they are strange.
Today, he is recruiting for his virtual team, so he ducks into his
inventory (i.e., a place to store items his avatar can wear and use)
and dons his manager’s jacket. “Joe’s Team” is proudly displayed on
the back. Joe is proud of the jacket; he created the lettering himselfin a graphics program, uploaded it to StratWorld, and then added it
to a plain jacket and gave a copy to all new members of his team. As
in many virtual worlds, clothes do make the man, woman, or thing.
Using the arrow keys and the mouse to manipulate his avatar, Joe
begins to make his avatar walk down the forest trail. He is looking to
recruit an ogre for his team to beef up its physical offensive
capabilities and replace the recent loss of Charlie the unicorn. Ogres
are big and strong, perfect for the task. Joe is a little nervous
because he has never been to this part of StratWorld before and
explorations in new areas can be fraught with peril. After a brief
sojourn, Joe comes upon an ogre sitting in a daisy-strewn clearing,
picking its teeth with a small sapling ripped from the ground. “Ogre!”
Joe shouts. “I need someone to smash through things for my team.
Interested?”
“What’s in it for me?” the ogre asks, thumping its chest with the
remains of the sorry sapling and splintering it into oblivion. “Darn!
That was a good toothpick!” The chirping of birds and the droning of
insects in the foliage, all part of the normal background noise here,
suddenly stop. Joe picks up on this environmental clue and, just as
in the real world when this happens, knows he is in danger.
Joe ponders the question. He knows he is talking to a nonplayer
character (NPC), one that seems to have a brain behind the 3D
facade but that in reality has very clever programming attached to it
so that it can seem to carry on an intelligent conversation. Some
companies call this artificial intelligence, but both the creators of
these environments and the scholars who study them hotly debate
the proper use of that term. Joe also knows that the world is
constructed so that he has to balance his profits from game wins
with overhead costs, such as players’ salaries and equipment
maintenance. He needs to make an offer to the ogre. An offer of too
little would insult the ogre, and a fight between it and Joe would be
the probable result. Joe’s avatar could die, an inconvenience that
would cost him time and loss of reputation with other StratWorlders.
A generous offer would probably be accepted but might bankrupt Joe
over time. Joe needs to balance his needs and costs and think
outside the box. It is a complex problem-solving situation!“Okay, Ogre, here’s the deal. Pay is $900 a month, and . . .” Joe
attempts to continue, but the ogre quickly rises in an aggressive
manner. “Wait! Let me continue! I know that’s a little less than
normal, but I’ll throw in a nice, new sapling each week for tooth
maintenance! How about it?”
The ogre sits back down and eyes Joe warily. “Just need to pick
tooths, not maintain ants. Contract for . . .” (the ogre pauses to
quickly count its fingers) “10 months?”
“Sure, sure, but if you are injured, you go to half pay until you can
play again,” Joe answers.
“I still get toothpick each week, even if hurt?”
“Absolutely. I mean, yes.”
The ogre leans forward on its haunches. “Sound good! You go. I
follow.”
“One more thing, Ogre. What do I call you?” Joe asks.
“Daisy! You managers sure are stupid!”
Joe takes Daisy back to his office by teleporting there, which is a
way to move from one place to another with a simple click of a
button. Joe pulls up a map of StratWorld, locates the land he owns,
and clicks on it for instantaneous transport. Joe sends Daisy the
ogre to practice smashing down walls in his training field and then
pauses for a moment to admire his recreation of his grandfather’s old
rolltop desk. He recreated it from an old photograph just for his office
in StratWorld. Looking out the window, he sees Daisy running out on
the training field. He sits down at his desk to go over his team’s
statistics. With the addition of Daisy to the team, Joe needs to
recalculate all his strategies. He must determine how he can acquire
a sapling each week for Daisy. Where will he get one, and how much
will it cost? Then he needs to send out an acceptance to a recent
invitation from the game developers to participate in next week’s
challenge. A win would be sweet, but it will be a busy week of
preparation!
Before Joe hunkers down to work, he sends an instant message to
Kathy, an admirable opponent in StratWorld against whom he has
competed several times. Typing furiously and with a certain glee, hewrites, “Hi, Kathy, guess what? I’m gonna DUST your team in the
next challenge!” Kathy’s reply is swift: “Bring it on, Joe, bring it on!”
Case Scenario Discussion
This is a brief description of what occurs in many online virtual
environments today. People create a presence in the environment
and then manipulate events for a desired outcome. They explore,
build things, interact with others, and try to achieve goals. The story
is fictional; there is no StratWorld, but games do exist for which
people build teams and compete against one another. So is
StratWorld a simulation, a virtual world, or a game? What do you
think? Think about simulations you have experienced or heard of,
games you have played, and anything you have read about virtual
worlds. Try looking up some definitions online. Write down your
thoughts, and come up with some justifications that back your
decision.
Note that avatar realism continues to improve; some are so
humanlike that they are referred to as virtual humans (Stuart, 2018).Game Mechanics and Educational, or
Serious, Games
Game mechanics are, simply put, the rules and limitations in which a
game takes place. It is imperative that the rules be clearly stated in
the instructions so that the players know what is expected of them
and what the rules are that the game itself must follow. The
mechanics determine how the players interact with the rules and the
game responds to the players’ moves or behaviors within the game,
thus connecting the players’ actions to the purpose of the game.
People voluntarily play games because they are fun and embody
many motivational aspects (Mastrian et al., 2011). Great games
provide an optimally challenging state between boredom and
frustration (Csikszentmihalyi, 1990). Games exist within a set of
rules (Kelley, 1988; Salen & Zimmerman, 2003), and players receive
feedback from their interactions in the game and rule space.
According to Chen (2012), the rule space model facilitates the
cognitive assessment and breakdown of a learner’s skill and
provides an understanding of the learning topics or concepts that are
weaknesses or strengths for each learner.
Educational, or Serious, Games
Educational games are created intentionally for learning and fun, or
edutainment; these games are referred to as serious games. They
are a melding of educational content, learning principles, and
computer games (Prensky, 2001) that should emphasize the value of
the experience (Nemerow, 1996). Mungai et al. (2002) stated that
the flow of an educational game may be under the designer’s control
more than that in a noneducational game and that feedback should
be used to stress competency, not just achievement. The trick in
designing an educational game is to maintain the same fun state
found in noneducational games (Koster, 2004). “Contemporaryteachers wishing to incorporate game-based learning whether doing
so within a virtual environment, through video games, or by
leveraging mobile apps and other technologies are at the forefront of
a paradigm shift” (Bauman, 2016, p. 110).
Many types of games exist, and each type has a different potential
for educational use (Mastrian et al., 2011). To learn to respond
quickly and hone reflexes, action games may be used. Adventure
games may be used to discover the unknown, such as diagnosing a
patient’s illness. Construction and building games could be used for
building complex mental constructs that can be understood only
through knowledge of their constituent parts and the ways in which
they interrelate. Strategy games are great for nursing education
teaching moments where careful, up-front planning is critical and on￾the-fly adjustments to one’s plan may be needed to ensure its
success.
In role-playing games, the player takes on the role of one or more
characters and improves the character while progressing through a
storyline. Today, massive multiplayer online role-playing games
are very popular; they use the internet to provide a shared,
simultaneous experience for dozens or even hundreds of players.
Role-playing games are an excellent way for nurse educators to
guide students through any situation where a sequenced step-by￾step introduction to the parts of the job or skill is required.
Casual games, also known as mini-games, are fairly new. These
games are designed to be played in a short time span or for a few
minutes a day over several days, weeks, or even months. Many
online, browser-based games fit this category. Casual games may
be useful for continuous reinforcement of basic concepts, emulating
a slowly changing environment, and modifying the players’ attitudes
on a given topic over a period of time. To date, these games remain
largely untapped as educational tools.
There are also gaming simulations. A simulation game uses game
mechanics to imitate real-life activities in the form of a game. Refer
to Research Brief 2 for a mixed-methods, quantitative and
qualitative, study on the health and safety of home healthcare
professionals, including nurses.RESEARCH BRIEF 2
Darragh et al. (2016) stated that the rapid increase in home healthcare services is
driving a need for additional trained home healthcare professionals. The training must
be effective for managing personal health and safety hazards encountered when
providing healthcare services in the home environment. The process of developing and
evaluating an interactive virtual simulation training system to educate home healthcare
professionals, including nurses, was described.
Sixty-eight home healthcare professionals participated in the study, with the majority
being white (71%) and female (95%), with an average age of 49 years (with a standard
deviation of 11.8 years). Sixty-seven percent worked in Ohio and Kentucky. The
participants represented registered nurses, aides, homemakers, administrators,
educators, occupational therapists, and physical therapists.
A mixed-methods design, qualitative and quantitative, using an interdisciplinary,
participatory design methodology was used to develop a virtual simulation system to
train home healthcare professionals to identify and manage health and safety hazards
in the home using a gaming simulation learning approach. The participants identified
the layout and features of a typical client’s home to the interdisciplinary research team.
Once the working version of the virtual simulation training system was created,
assessment of its usefulness, usability, and desirability was ongoing to continually
develop and modify the system.
Quantitatively, the researchers used the Modified Home Healthcare Worker
Questionnaire (MHHWQ) and the usefulness, usability, and desirability (UUD) survey.
Qualitative data collection consisted of structured focus groups and individual
interviews. The participants described 353 hazard management dilemmas and
explained multiple types of “making do” solutions for the hazards, most of which were
classified as “less-than-optimal.”
The simulation game facilitated active learning and critical thinking processes crucial
for these professionals because they are typically highly autonomous professionals
who work independently in unpredictable environments where they must problem solve
to create solutions to unforeseen or complex events that affect their health and safety
as well as the health and safety of their clients.
To prepare professionals using health and safety trainings, the training must focus on
realistic scenarios, flexible solutions, and independent problem-solving activities. The
virtual simulation training system includes immersion and engagement through a
process of identification, response, problem-solving, and feedback. The professionals
had to assess the environment for hazards in several rooms. Then they received
feedback about correct identification and right and wrong answers, problem-solving
about potential strategies, and assessment of progress in both a training and an
evaluation environment; the feedback facilitated deliberate practice, which is a powerful
component of skill acquisition.
The researchers concluded that participatory methods are a useful and effective way
to design a virtual simulation training system that is interactive, engaging, and
informative. Since this project is ongoing, their long-term goal is to improve the health
and safety of home healthcare professionals who work in clients’ homes.The full article appears in: Darragh, A., Lavender, S., Polivka, B., Sommerich, C., Wills,
C., Hittle, B., Chen, R., & Stredney, D. (2016). Gaming simulation as health and safety
training for home health care workers. Clinical Simulation in Nursing, 12(8), 328–335.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecns.2016.03.006Virtual Worlds in Education
A 3D virtual world often mimics a real-world environment, although it
may also include supernatural abilities, such as flying unaided
(Mastrian et al., 2011). Users of virtual worlds are often quick to
stress that these creations are not games, although this confusion is
easy to understand because virtual worlds share many of the same
interface characteristics as 3D action and role-playing games.
The best use of virtual worlds for educational purposes may occur
when there is a need for an immersive experience coupled with a
need for social interaction. For example, in the virtual world of
Second Life, one university has developed a virtual hacienda for
students learning Spanish (Clark, 2009). Students interact with the
environment and the objects in the hacienda while speaking to one
another in Spanish, thereby participating in authentic learning
activities. Some of the Second Life scenarios used by a college of
nursing include a real human resources representative whom the
student must call; the pair must discuss the situation, and the
student then determines a solution based on the representative’s
input. This activity immerses the students in their role and fully
engages them in the learning episode. Cohen et al. (2012) tested the
use of a virtual world as a training site for emergency preparedness
and coordination for first responders in major incidents (e.g., a
terrorist attack) and concluded that [m]ajor incident exercises are
complex in nature and expensive and they thereby require novel
methodologies to aid training and preparation. This study has
established the feasibility of developing low-cost, immersive,
accessible virtual environments for major incident preparation using
a systematic approach. Both the environment and scenarios were
deemed realistic and acceptable for training and testing of existing
plans by clinicians. (pp. 83–84) Virtual worlds need not be 3D.
Predecessors to the 3D environment include the multiuser
dungeon, object-oriented multiuser dungeon, and multiusershared hallucination. All of these environments are text based, so the
user receives environmental information as passages of text,
manipulates objects, and talks to others by typing text commands.
Multiuser dungeons, object-oriented multiuser dungeons, and
multiuser shared hallucinations are still in use today.Choosing Among Simulations, Serious
Games, and Virtual Worlds
Simulations; educational, or serious, games; and virtual worlds
overlap a great deal. Games may be placed in virtual worlds, and
simulations may have gamelike elements. Yet these three tools also
have distinctive characteristics. By examining several of these key
characteristics (i.e., goal orientation, competition, fun factor,
exploratory learning, and social interaction), choosing the correct tool
for teaching purposes becomes easier.
Games are goal oriented and may be competitive in nature. They
should be fun and perhaps a bit fantastical and lighthearted. A
particular game may or may not include exploratory learning and
social interaction. Although simulations are also goal oriented, the
competition is generally subdued. Simulations are typically more
realistic and not necessarily fun to use. A particular simulation may
or may not include exploratory learning and social interaction. Virtual
worlds do not intrinsically have goals or competition; it is up to the
player to construct them and add them to the world. Virtual worlds
may include fantastical elements. Virtual worlds generally lend
themselves to exploratory learning and social interaction. When
educators develop virtual worlds for education, they can control the
scenarios or activities that the learners experience. Virtual worlds
used for simulation also include a debriefing process for their
learners, which solidifies the learning.
Realities
The realities have been described as disruptive innovations (see the
Disruptive Innovations box). Using virtual realities in education
requires immersion. The expectation of immersive learning is that
learners will become absorbed, engrossed, and engaged in the
learning activity to the point that they suspend their own reality andtruly experience the virtual scenarios and simulations as if they were
real; they feel that they are actually participating in a physical setting
instead of the virtual, synthetic, artificially generated environment.
Augmented reality (AR) and virtual reality (VR) are technological
examples of immersive environments used in learning episodes to
enhance the learning experience in a safe setting.
Augmented Reality
Augmented reality (AR) is an interactive experience within a real￾world environment that enhances real-world objects using virtually
simulated, or computer-generated, perceptual information.
Integrating AR into educational venues provides stimulation, or input,
for multiple senses, including olfactory, visual, auditory, haptic, and
somatosensory (e.g., pressure, pain, or warmth). It comprises apps;
wearable technologies, such as glasses; and software that not only
interacts with users but also enhances their senses with data,
information, audio, and images.
DISRUPTIVE INNOVATIONS
Disruptive innovations are new developments that radically change, or disrupt, the way
structures or industries function. They are the introductions of products or services into
well-known or established industries that outperform all other products or services (i.e.,
are more efficient and lower priced), thereby obtaining competitive advantages, which
capture the market share and alter and transform those industries.
Thinking about the internet, how did it disrupt education? Examples of disruptive
innovations that are game changers follow. Reflect on each of them, the disruption they
have caused as they evolved and how their disruption affects nursing education.
Surgeon using VR to practice a surgery using the patient’s own anatomy so that in
the actual surgery, the risk of the surgeon being met with an unanticipated event is
minimized. Will this preparation be the norm for all surgeries going forward? If so,
how do we educate current practitioners and students who will be the future
healthcare professionals in the workforce?
Artificial intelligence (AI)
Internet of Things (IoT) and Artificial Intelligence of Things (AIoT)
Blockchain technology
RoboticsWhat other disruptive innovations can you think of, and why were or are they
disruptive, or game changers?
AR does not require specialized equipment; the digital information
is overlaid on an image of something being viewed through a smart
device’s camera. AR has been integrated into nursing curriculums to
help nursing students achieve and improve clinical skill proficiency.
AR improves the abstract, or conceptual, comprehension of
phenomena. Faculty members can bring abstract concepts to life
with AR expeditions in which they and the students actively explore.
Learners can view and manipulate digital animations, such as a
beating heart or human brain, by bringing them into their real
background. This helps nursing students understand the
relationships of diseases and normal pathophysiology. Nursing
students can also better understand the effect of procedures in
relation to the anatomy and physiology of their patients. AR is a
learning experience that enhances critical thinking skills and clinical
judgment.
Virtual Reality
Virtual reality (VR) is infiltrating health care to improve plans of care
and patients’ outcomes. Heady (2019) described the use of VR at
the University of California at Los Angeles to explore the patient’s
own anatomy prior to surgery. VR “models to prepare for kidney
tumor surgeries resulted in substantial improvements, including
shorter operating times, less blood loss during surgery and a shorter
stay in the hospital afterward” (para. 1). VR is also being used to
distract patients during painful and/or lengthy procedures, such as
helping patients stay relaxed and comfortable while receiving
chemotherapy (Pratt, 2017), and for pain management. Brody (2019)
said that for pain management, it is more than a distraction: “It’s
more like a brain hack that occupies the brain so fully that it has no
room to process pain sensations at the same time” (para. 1).
“Through the hospital’s [Stanford Medicine Children’s Health]
CHARIOT program
[www.stanfordchildrens.org/en/innovation/chariot], PackardChildren’s is one of the only hospitals in the world to have VR
available on every unit to help engage and distract patients
undergoing a range of hospital procedures” (Stanford Medicine
Children’s Health, n.d., para. 2). VR integrations such as these
demand that nurse educators prepare nurses to function in
environments that expand into VR so that they can actively
participate in the evolution of the technologies being used to
enhance patient care.
See Research Brief 3, which discusses VR airway research. Dr.
McGonigle worked with the students and faculty as they experienced
the VR airway lab during this research project; she felt their
excitement and how they reacted to the immersive VR environment.
Based on this type of research, innovative nurse educators and
experts in nursing education and informatics are designing VR
scenarios and simulations for nursing students. The VR learning
episodes exist in a controlled virtual environment that immerses
nursing students in the educational experience. They are able to
practice and learn by doing in VR and are being familiarized to this
technology.
TOWARD A VIRTUAL FUTURE OF MEDICAL
SIMULATION
Medical simulation is a vitally important learning modality and has been proven to
reduce errors, improve patient outcomes, and save lives. However, access remains
relatively expensive and dependent on the physical hardware space of simulation
centers and high-fidelity mannequins. Virtual technologies offer the opportunity to
massively expand access to medical simulation to anyone, anywhere, anytime.
Following the trend of so many industries touched by virtualization, medical
simulation is beginning to realize a similar trajectory. The physical infrastructure
required to support industries such as film, newspapers, music, and magazines is an
example of this transcendence into digital counterparts. In each case, this transition
substantially lowered costs and increased access while introducing explosive new
growth opportunities that were never before possible. The same will be true of medical
simulation.
Virtual counterparts to the physical “stuff” of simulation are already growing rapidly as
numerous studies validate their efficacy. Perhaps most importantly, those who never
before had access will soon enjoy expansive libraries of digital environments,equipment, patients, and scenarios to advance their hands-on and critical thinking
skills.
Virtual simulation also introduces powerful network effects by building bridges
between experts and participants joining from rural or remote locations. The simulation
center of the future is no longer an isolated physical location but rather an
interconnected node with real-time access to a perpetually evolving library of expertise
and validated best practices.
Virtualization also enables simulation to take lateral steps and expand beyond an
isolated scenario narrative into a broader chronology of events that are more akin to
the realities of clinical experience. It can more easily bridge between professions, thus
enabling cross-disciplinary training on a level that has never before been possible.
Looking ahead to the future of virtual simulation, we may begin to completely rethink
and expand its role far beyond what is familiar today. Moving beyond the mere
simulation, we might envision fictitious patients and scenarios transitioning into a mirror
world of real-time patient interactions that span the entire spectrum of health care.
Patients in the future might opt in to maintain a real-time, digital counterpart of
themselves and thus enable procedures to be rehearsed virtually. Imagine an
emergency room team rehearsing lifesaving procedures on a patient’s virtual replica,
trying different approaches and realizing potential complications long before the
ambulance arrives.Actual image from Acadicus. Inclusion in this text was permitted by Jon Brouchoud,
CEO, Arch Virtual, Developers of Acadicus
RESEARCH BRIEF 3 TEACHING AIRWAY INSERTION
SKILLS TO NURSING FACULTY AND STUDENTSUSING VR: A PILOT STUDY
PURPOSE OF INVESTIGATION
To examine whether an educational intervention with a pilot contemporary immersive
virtual reality simulation (CIVRS) builds knowledge and is feasible to implement among
nursing students and faculty.
INTERVENTION
VR airway lab intervention with six adjunct narrated lessons:
1. Bag valve mask
2. Oropharyngeal airway
3. Nasopharyngeal airway
4. King laryngeal airway tube
5. Laryngeal mask airway
6. Endotracheal tube
SURVEY SAMPLING
N = 31 (10 faculty members and 21 students)
THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK
Bauman’s Layered-Learning model
Situated and multimodal approach
Knowledge building occurs by leveraging contemporary educational technologies
Scaffolding knowledge transfer for learners
Faculty roles shift to facilitate users’ discovery of knowledge
Technology enhances opportunities for mastery learning, moving learners from
didactic preparation to and through the simulation to the practice pathway
METHODOLOGY
Survey sampling
Quasi-experimental
One-group pre- and posttest design
APPROACH
Enact the VR intervention
Virtual Presence Questionnaire
Virtual Reality Sickness QuestionnaireKnowledge test
RESULTS
Faculty and students rated the VR airway lab as having a high level of virtual presence
and reported no cybersickness and significant improvement of knowledge of airway
management (p < 0.0001).
CONCLUSIONS
The VR airway lab was an efficacious means of teaching difficult airway
management skills to nursing students.
A VR airway intervention was presented to teach difficult airway management using
six different airway adjuncts.
Students and faculty widely accepted the intervention.
The researchers recommended that further research be conducted to evaluate this
immersive, educational delivery medium.The Future of Simulations, Serious Games,
Virtual Worlds, and the Realities in Nursing
Education
The use of simulations, games, and virtual worlds in Western society
continues to increase. The combination of best practices supported
by sound research, the ever-growing power of technology, and
learners who grew up using these environments will lead to greater
use of these tools for learning (New Media Consortium, 2007).
In addition, games are becoming less expensive to produce and
consume. Game development engines, which were long the
exclusive domain of major game development companies, are now
available at a cost that many users and organizations can afford.
Some games come with built-in development tools, which are the
game producers’ attempt to use free labor to extend their products
(Dyer-Witheford & de Peuter, 2009). The growth of indie (i.e.,
independent) game companies is leading to a plethora of cheap yet
high-quality games. The same holds true for virtual worlds. New
virtual worlds spring up all the time. Many offer free (sometimes with
limited functionality) accounts, and educators are exploring these
spaces with increasing regularity for building fantastic learning
environments.
Companies are tapping mobile devices as another avenue to push
out their games. These devices are already used for a variety of
communication and social functions, so why not expand that platform
with casual games that rely on social interactions? Expect to see
much more happening in this space in the near future.
Another related area of growth is in augmented-reality games
(ARGs). Augmented reality occurs when one uses a device, such as
a smartphone, to overlay additional information on the real world
(Klopfer & Squire, 2008). For example, one might use the camera in
the phone to view the stars at night and see on the phone’s screen
both the stars and the constellation labels and linking lines betweenthe stars in a constellation. ARGs exploit this concept in gamelike
ways, bringing people together physically and virtually to solve a
series of challenges. In education, ARGs may be used to provide a
fun way to collect and analyze data, collaborate with other students,
and access information resources and a new way to look at the
world.
Serious games may also have a place in helping practicing nurses
maintain or hone skills. Baker (2009) suggested that gaming has a
place in continuing education. The science of nursing practice
encourages nurses to ask questions, promote dialogue, share
lessons learned willingly and openly, and make the outcomes of their
patients constructive and positive. Rigorous, high-quality evaluation
and research into the teaching and learning techniques offered by
serious games can offer insight into future changes not currently
conceived of. For example, if a serious game could effectively assist
nurses in maintaining the skill set required to care for a patient who
is experiencing hypothermia, would that be worth the investment? If
a serious game could reduce medication errors in the operating
room by 50% to 75% compared to what has been demonstrated in
the past, would that have value? If it were found that after
implementation of a serious game, a facility experienced zero errors
in right-site, right-procedure, and right-patient events during a 10-
year period, would this be of value (Baker, 2009, p. 173)?
Serious games can be used to educate health professionals or
use their collective knowledge. Foldit (2018) was designed to solve
puzzles for science. Foldit had a crowdsourcing computer game that
challenged its players to create a protein that could be used as a
vaccine for malaria.
The best uses of all these technologies and approaches related to
nursing education remain a bit murky (Bauman, 2016, p. 110).
Fortunately, the findings of a great deal of research that is currently
underway will guide future educators toward the most effective uses
of educational games, simulations, and virtual worlds. In an ideal
world, educators would have a plethora of available, well-designed,
and educator-certified games from which to choose that mesh with
the educational objectives of their classes, courses, and curricula.The two realities of AR and VR are revamping nursing education.
They can enhance critical thinking, clinical judgment, and
competency and skill attainment. These realities are typically
available to the student 24/7 for exploration and practice. As
disruptive innovations, they are transforming our educational
paradigms and providing interactive, experiential learning. In the
future, what is now innovative will be mainstream. Please refer to
Chapter 25, Our Expanding Realities and the Metaverse, for more
about reality and the realities.
A STUDENT IN THE NOT TOO DISTANT FUTURE
Dee McGonigle
Nell walks up the steps of the Diamond building on Treemaunt campus. It’s a nice day,
and she quickly uses her cybervision contacts, or “Cyves,” to check the weather.
Appearing before her in midair is a map of the local area, with weather data on her
visual periphery. Even though all of the map looks clear, she flicks her eyes toward the
data, causing them to move toward her center of vision. Sure enough, there is a 20%
chance of rain by 4:00 p.m. Bummer. Nell dismisses her private heads-up display with
another flick of her eyes and proceeds into the building. “Oh well,” she muses, “at least
I’ll be home well before then.”
Nell steps into the classroom for the first time. She’s early; only a few other students
have preceded her. Sitting down, she again calls up her Cyves and checks her social
networks. One friend is at the beach and live broadcasting a view of the tide coming in.
Another is at work, lamenting the slow, archaic T9 connection he has to the internet.
More students file in. Nell fires a quick note to her working friend. “Archaic! You
should see this classroom! Probably the same chairs my grandmother sat in!”
“Hey!” her friend replies. “I read all about the Diamond building. It may look old, but
it’s outfitted with the latest stuff. Wait till you get one class in—you’ll see!”
Nell takes a moment to review the results of a smart scan she started last night on
the upcoming gardening season; correlated for her are a set of recommendations for
her gardening efforts this year. It looks like it will be a dry season, so the tomato variety
she grew 4 years ago will probably do well, although the report notes that she rated
them only a 3 out of 5 on her personal taste scale. The smart scan also lists a number
of new tomato varieties she might want to use, inferred from her personal taste scale,
which she’s added to over the years.
Just then, an older woman enters the room. She is dressed casually but has an air of
authority about her. Must be the prof, thinks Nell. A quick scan with her Cyves confirms
it. Around the woman springs virtual data, visible only to Nell:
Name: Dr. Janice Stephenson
Occupation: Professor of Sociology, Treemaunt UniversityHobbies: Golfing and reading
The rest of the data are scrambled. Only people whom Dr. Stephenson has given
rights to can view them. “Probably pictures of her cats,” Nell quietly snorts.
While Nell is sizing up her professor, the professor is doing the same with the entire
class. The professor gives Nell a quick look and a brief smile, leaving Nell a bit
disconcerted. What did she read? What DIDN’T she read when she scanned me? Oh
boy.
“Welcome, class!” begins Dr. Stephenson. As she speaks, a large video screen
behind her springs to life, and an avatar of her uses sign language to also greet the
class. The text of her voice is also visible above the avatar. Nell realizes that everything
is being recorded for everyone to view whenever they want. She always prefers the
summary personalized to her learning styles that will be available to her.
“This class is an introduction to Treemaunt U and its intelligent enhancements, but
it’s really more about how to make the most of your experiences here. Many of you
probably think this classroom is old fashioned, and until recently, you’d have been
correct. But take a closer look. Embedded in each chair is a full connection to the
internet. Just push the green button on the side. Go ahead; it’s OK,” she prompts.
Nell pushes her button and sees her classmates doing the same. Sure enough, a
virtual monitor, or air screen, and keyboard appear in the air before her. The chair must
have read her public information because it is displaying it just as she views it from her
own computer.
“Now,” Dr. Stephenson continues, “most of you have Cyves, so you probably don’t
need this internet access. But it’s here for those who do not. You might also notice that
the chairs are highly mobile, automatically adjust to your contours, and can be
configured in several ways. So breaking up into groups is easy. We can also pull up
screens from the floor to partition the room off if need be. Lighting is controllable via
several quadrants, making the room very flexible. Imagine what it was like for your
parents in college. Can you believe some classrooms had no technology, the chairs
were fixed to the floors, and people were actually uncomfortable as they learned?
Amazing! Even the classrooms that had technology were limited. Usually, only the
professor had access to the video projectors and the internet. In fact, some professors
liked it that way. They actually discouraged students from bringing technology to class. I
can’t imagine how anyone could really learn without the constant access to information
we now have.
“But I digress. Sure, we all know that learning happens many ways. Hopefully, you’ll
even find me useful as part of your learning experience. You also have access to
sources of information that continue to astound me. Most importantly, you have access
to each other. Remember that.
“Now, if you look to your right with your Cyves, you will see our virtual eduspace. If
you do not have Cyves, use the air screen that popped up when you accessed the
internet. The screen will allow you to scan the room like Cyves. You can choose to
enter in either two- or three-dimensional mode. Let me know if you cannot see our
virtual eduspace.
“Everyone seems good to go. Please enter the virtual eduspace, and find your
personalized information packet for review. Your parents probably knew this as virtual
reality, but we have gone light-years beyond that. If you have not experienced our
virtual settings as of yet, please take some time after class to explore. Remember, you
will each have a personal preceptor, an artificially intelligent agent, assigned to you.You will meet your preceptor in our virtual eduspace, which will appear as an intelligent
avatar, or intellivar, that you can name and customize. You will also decide which
channel it will reside on for you. Your preceptor will be with you throughout the
program. It will learn how you learn so that it can help you based on your preferences.
There are always hidden gems to uncover and new spaces to discover in the virtual
territory for this class.”
A man three seats to Nell’s right raises his hand. “Yes, uh, Joe?” responds Dr.
Stephenson.
“Meaning no disrespect, Professor, but why do we need classrooms at all? We could
all just meet virtually, couldn’t we?”
“An excellent question, Joe. You’re right; we could just meet virtually. We could use
Cyves, air screens, or other devices. Yet despite all the wonderful technology we
possess, people are still social creatures. We need to be with others, not all the time,
but enough so that classrooms are still needed. For this class, we’ll meet once a week
here. The other two classes will be held in our virtual eduspace. Remember, you can
always ask your intellivar to attend a class for you if you are unable to attend.
“Other questions? Ah, I see Mary has posed a question on the back channel for the
class. For those of you who are new to all this, we use the technology to create another
channel of information, a back channel, as the class proceeds. It’s a great way to strike
while the fire is hot. Your questions and comments are immediately available and
addressed. In this case, our back channel is simply text on a web page we can easily
display. Let’s call it up now.”
Dr. Stephenson proceeds to display the back channel page on the video screen. It
reads as follows:
Mary: I know this is supposed to be an introduction to life as a student, but I’m a
transfer student. Do I really need all of this?
Dr. Stephenson smiles. “Thirty years ago, you would have been forced to sit through
classes where I, the fount of all knowledge and goodness, would have imparted
redundant knowledge into your head. Today, we have ways to avoid that. Remember
the battery of tests and quizzes you took as part of your entrance process? They’re not
just busywork. We’ve used them to put information about you into our learning
management system, Aether. The learning management system will work with your
intellivar and prescribe things specifically for you here at Treemaunt U, things you might
be interested in and things you definitely need. And for things you already know, you’ll
be given the chance to opt out of them. You will also receive instruction in the forms
you like but not all the time. For example, if you like games and there is a game ‘in the
open,’ meaning it has an Innovative Commons License attached to it so that Treemaunt
U can use it legally, and it covers the content you need, guess what? You’ll be playing a
game! So I believe for you, Mary, there will be some specialized assignments you’ll
receive—subject to my approval, of course. Maybe I’ll even ask you to contribute your
information and insights for future classes. Yes, this class and its information are more
than just me. They are you. And you, and you, and you. You are all part of the process,
so be prepared to be active participants in your learning, not just passive recipients.
“OK, we could probably get through today’s class just with me answering your
questions, but why don’t I go ahead with my outline and whatever I don’t cover we can
talk about afterward. Oh, and please turn your friend alerts off or on color alert. I know
some of you have to take calls and such, but please respect me and your classmates.”The preceding story was a tiny slice of the many possibilities the future holds. It does
not begin to touch on the opportunities that nanotechnology, cheap fusion power, or
what embedded communication devices might bring to education. Instead, it
concentrated on the more tangible possibilities that are logical extensions of what we
can do today. The following key elements are alluded to in the story:
Back channels
Cyves
Next-generation morphing classrooms
Advanced web technologies, social networking, user-created content, and collective
intelligence
Intellivars
Cloud computing
Semantic-aware applications
Smart objects
Open source technologies
Learning management systems (LMSs)
Personal learning environments (PLEs)
Personalized learning
Adaptive learning
Specialized educational modules delivered just in time
Mobile devices
Virtual eduspaces; virtual worlds; simulations; and educational, or serious, games
CYVES DEFINITION
Cyves stands for computerized yagi visual earshot sensations. They are computer
processors embedded in contact lenses equipped with a visual display as well as
auditory channels for communicating. A yagi is a sharply directional antenna.Summary
Simulated experiences in nursing education contain the PEDA
elements, which provide important opportunities for students to hone
critical thinking and clinical judgment skills in a safe and supportive
environment. Simulation scenarios may also provide a better variety
of clinical and practicum experiences than those available in a real
setting, and they also provide nursing faculty the opportunity to track
student progress and development against specific learning
objectives. Nurse educators can share simulation scenarios and
experiences and thus contribute to the body of nursing education
knowledge to improve education practice. Simulations; games;
virtual worlds; and the realities, AR and VR, have a great deal of
potential as educational tools for augmenting, supplementing, or
even replacing traditional methods of teaching as well as clinical
experiences. As educators become more skilled in the use of these
tools; designers share their creative works with others; and nurse
informaticists lead, collaborate, and support these efforts, we can
expect to see these tools blended, honed, integrated, and leveraged
more frequently in the coming decade.
THOUGHT-PROVOKING QUESTIONS
1. Consider your experience and learning regarding EHRs. If you were to design a
learning program centered on the use of EHRs, what would it look like? Consider
this from the viewpoint of an educator, a student, a clinician, and a healthcare
administrator.
2. Think about the clinical courses you have taken as a student. Which opportunities
and challenges exist regarding the use of an EHR as a major learning tool in
conjunction with, or perhaps even replacing, the required textbook?
3. If you were to design a simulation scenario incorporating the use of an EHR, which
informatics competencies would you focus on and why?
4. Games are supposed to be fun and voluntary. How can educators force a game on
a student and expect it to remain fun and engaging?5. It can take several hours of gameplay to learn the mechanics of some games and
even longer for the more complex games. If subject matter learning can occur only
after this initial game mechanics learning occurs, how can educators justify the
amount of time a learner must spend within the game just to get to the point where
learning begins?
6. If you were choosing between a latex-based and a virtual simulation, what would
you list as each of their advantages and disadvantages? Would PEDA elements be
present for both?
7. How do educators acquire the training needed not just to get by in these new
environments but to flourish, thrive, and mold the environments for their purposes?
8. What realities have you experienced? Describe your experience in detail. If you
have not experienced any realities, imagine how AR and VR could affect your
education and/or clinical practice setting.R E F E R E N C E S
Aebersold, M., & Tschannen, D. (2013). Simulation in nursing practice: The impact on
patient care. Online Journal of Issues in Nursing, 18(2).
https://doi.org/10.3912/OJIN.Vol18No02Man06
Aldrich, C. (2010, August). Virtual worlds, simulations and games for online educators.
Magna online seminar presented at Penn State University, University Park, PA.
Alessi, S. M. (1988). Fidelity in the design of instructional simulations. Journal of Computer￾Based Instruction, 15(2), 40–47.
American Academy of Nursing. (2003). Proceedings of the American Academy of Nursing
conference on using innovative technology to decrease nursing demand and enhance
patient care delivery. Nursing Outlook, 51(3), S1–S41.
American Association of Colleges of Nursing. (1999). A vision of baccalaureate and
graduate nursing education: The next decade [position statement]. Journal of
Professional Nursing, 15(1), 59–65. https://doi.org/10.1016/S8755-7223(99)80027-1
American Nurses Association. (2014). Nursing informatics: Scope and standards of practice
(2nd ed.). Nursebooks.org
Baker, J. (2009). Serious games and perioperative nursing. AORN Journal, 90(2), 173–175.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aorn.2009.07.002
Bauman, E. (2016). Games, virtual environments, mobile applications and a futurist’s crystal
ball. Clinical Simulation in Nursing, 12, 109–114.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecns.2016.02.002
Bligh, J., & Bleakley, A. (2006). Distributing menus to hungry learners: Can learning by
simulation become simulation of learning? Medical Teacher, 28(7), 606–613.
https://doi.org/10.1080/01421590601042335
Brody, J. (2019, April 29). Virtual reality as therapy for pain. New York Times.
www.nytimes.com/2019/04/29/well/live/virtual-reality-as-therapy-for-pain.html
Carty, R., & Ong, I. (2006). The nursing curriculum in the information age. In V. K. Saba & K.
A. McCormick (Eds.), Essentials of nursing informatics (4th ed., pp. 517–531). McGraw￾Hill.
Chen, Y. (2012). Evaluation of MTA learning achievement based on rule-space model and
relevance feedback with e-Learning. Journal of Computers, 23(1).
Choi, M., Park, J., & Lee, H. (2016). Assessment of the need to integrate academic
electronic medical records into the undergraduate clinical practicum. CIN: Computers,
Informatics, Nursing, 34(6), 259–265. https://doi.org/10.1097/CIN.0000000000000244
Clark, G. (2009). These horses can fly! and other lessons from Second Life: The view from
the virtual hacienda. In R. Oxford & J. Oxford (Eds.), Second language teaching and
learning in the Net Generation (pp. 153–172). National Foreign Language Resource
Center.
Cohen, D., Sevdalis, N., Taylor, D., Kerr, K., Heys, M., Willett, K., Batrick, N., & Darzi, A.
(2012). Emergency preparedness in the 21st century: Training and preparation modules
in virtual environments. Resuscitation, 84(1), 78–84.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resuscitation.2012.05.014Connors, H. R., Weaver, C., Warren, J., & Miller, K. L. (2002). An academic–business
partnership for advancing clinical informatics. Nursing Education Perspectives, 23(5),
228–233.
Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1990). Flow: The psychology of optimal experience. HarperCollins.
Darragh, A., Lavender, S., Polivka, B., Sommerich, C., Wills, C., Hittle, B., Chen, R., &
Stredney, D. (2016). Gaming simulation as health and safety training for home health
care workers. Clinical Simulation in Nursing, 12(8), 328–335.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecns.2016.03.006
Dyer-Witheford, N., & de Peuter, G. (2009). Games of empire: Global capitalism and video
games. University of Minnesota Press.
Fetter, M. (2009). Graduating nurses’ self-evaluation of information technology
competencies. Journal of Nursing Education, 48(2), 86–90.
https://doi.org/10.3928/01484834-20090201-05
Fisher, R. (2016). Designing the simulation learning environment: An active engagement
model. Journal of Nursing Education and Practice, 6(3), 6–14.
https://doi.org/10.5430/jnep.v6n3p6
Foldit. (2018, April 10). 1507: Malaria vaccine design. https://fold.it/portal/node/2005024
Gaba, D. (2004). The future vision of simulation in health care. BMJ Quality and Safety, 13,
i2–i10. http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/qshc.2004.009878
Gaba, D., & DeAnda, A. A. (1998). A comprehensive anesthesia simulation environment:
Recreating the operating room for research and training. Anesthesiology, 69(3), 387–
394. https://doi.org/10.1097/00000542-198809000-00017
Gassert, C. A. (1998). The challenge of meeting patients’ needs with a national nursing
informatics agenda. Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association, 5(3), 263–
268. https://doi.org/10.1136/jamia.1998.0050263
Gredler, M. E. (1996). Educational games and simulations: A technology in search of a
(research) paradigm. In D. H. Jonassen (Ed.), Handbook of research for educational
communications and technology (pp. 521–540). Lawrence Erlbaum.
Harris, J., Shoemaker, K., Johnson, K., Tompkins-Dobbs, K., & Domian, E. (2016).
Qualitative descriptive study of family nurse practitioner student experiences using high￾fidelity simulation. The Kansas Nurse, 91(2), 12–15.
Harris, S. (2020). Silicone skin trays: An innovative simulation approach to nurse
practitioner skills training. Clinical Simulation in Nursing, X, 1–4.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecns.2020.05.002
Hayden, J. K., Smiley, R. A., Alexander, M., Kardong-Edgren, S., & Jeffries, P. R. (2014).
The NCSBN National Simulation Study: A longitudinal, randomized, controlled study
replacing clinical hours with simulation in prelicensure nursing education. Journal of
Nursing Regulation, 5(Suppl. 2), S3–S40. https://doi.org/10.1016/S2155-8256(15)30062-
4
Heady, D. (2019, September 18). 3D virtual reality models help yield better surgical
outcomes. UCLA Newsroom. https://newsroom.ucla.edu/releases/3d-virtual-reality￾models-improve-surgical-outcomes
Healthcare Information and Management Systems Society. (n.d.). Technology informatics
guiding education reform (TIGER). www.himss.org/tiger-initiative-technology-and-health￾informatics-educationHertel, J. P., & Millis, B. J. (2002). Using simulations to promote learning in higher
education: An introduction. Stylus.
Hunter, K., McGonigle, D., & Hebda, T. (2013). TIGER-based measurement of nursing
informatics competencies: The development and implementation of an online tool for
self-assessment. Journal of Nursing Education and Practice, 3(12), 70–80.
https://doi.org/10.5430/jnep.v3n12p70
Institute of Medicine. (2000). To err is human: Building a safer system. National Academies
Press.
Jonassen, D. H. (1999). Designing constructivist learning environments. In C. M. Reigeluth
(Ed.), Instructional design theories and models: A new paradigm of instructional theory
(Vol. 2, pp. 215–239). Lawrence Erlbaum.
Kelley, D. (1988). The art of reasoning. W. W. Norton.
Kennedy, D., Pallikkathayil, L., & Warren, J. J. (2009). Using a modified electronic health
record to develop nursing process skills. Journal of Nursing Education, 48(2), 96–100.
https://doi.org/10.3928/01484834-20090201-07
Klopfer, E., & Squire, K. (2008). Environmental detectives: The development of an
augmented reality platform for environmental simulations. Education Technology
Research and Development, 56, 203–228. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11423-007-9037-6
Koster, R. (2004). A theory of fun for game design. Paraglyph Press.
Mahon, P. Y., Nickitas, D. M., & Nokes, K. M. (2010). Faculty perceptions of student
documentation skills during the transition from paper-based to electronic health records
systems. Journal of Nursing Education, 49(11), 615–621.
https://doi.org/10.3928/01484834-20100524-06.
Mastrian, K. G., McGonigle, D., Mahan, W. L., & Bixler, B. (2011). Integrating technology in
nursing education: Tools for the knowledge era. Jones & Bartlett Learning.
McGonigle, D., Hunter, K., Hebda, T., & Hill, T. (2013). Self-assessment of level 3 and level
4 NI competencies tool development.
https://sigma.nursingrepository.org/bitstream/handle/10755/623941/ToolAssessment.pdf
?sequence=1&isAllowed=y
Mungai, D., Jones, D., & Wong, L. (2002, August). Games to teach by. Paper presented at
the 18th Annual Conference on Distance Teaching and Learning, Madison, WI.
Murray, S. (2019, March 3). Moocs struggle to lift rock-bottom completion rates. Financial
Times. www.ft.com/content/60e90be2-1a77-11e9-b191-175523b59d1d
National League for Nursing. (2015, January). A vision for the changing faculty role:
Preparing students for the technological world of healthcare. www.nln.org/docs/default￾source/uploadedfiles/about/nln-vision-series-position-statements/a-vision-for-the￾changing-faculty-role-preparing-students-for-the-technological-world-of-health-care.pdf
Nemerow, L. G. (1996). Do classroom games improve motivation and learning? Teaching
and Change, 3(4), 356–366.
New Media Consortium. (2007). Massively multiplayer educational gaming. The Horizon
Report, 25–27. eric.ed.gov/?id=ED505099
Pew Health Professions Commission. (1998). Recreating health professional practice for a
new century: The fourth report of the Pew Health Professions Commission.
https://healthforce.ucsf.edu/sites/healthforce.ucsf.edu/files/publication￾pdf/3.1%20%28Report%29%201998-12_Recreating_Health_Professional_Practice_for_a_New_Century_The_Fourth_Report
_of_the_Pew_Health_Professions_Commission.pdf
Podolefsky, N. S., Moore, E. B., & Perkins, K. K. (2013). Implicit scaffolding in interactive
simulations: Design strategies to support multiple educational goals. arXiv.
https://arxiv.org/pdf/1306.6544.pdf%3B
Pratt, E. (2017, March 9). VR and chemotherapy for cancer patients. VR Fitness Insider.
www.vrfitnessinsider.com/vr-chemotherapy-cancer-patients
Prensky, M. (2001). Digital game-based learning. McGraw-Hill.
Rajalahti, E., Heinonen, J., & Saranto, K. (2014). Developing nurse educators’ computer
skills towards proficiency in nursing informatics. Informatics for Health and Social Care,
39(1), 47–66. https://doi.org/10.3109/17538157.2013.834344
Raths, D. (2020, May 22). Vanderbilt Center builds bridge between informatics researchers,
applied IT. Healthcare Innovation. www.hcinnovationgroup.com/clinical-it/electronic￾health-record-electronic-medical-record-ehr-emr/article/21139450/vanderbilt-clinical￾informatics-center-builds-bridge-between-academic-informatics-applied-it
Robinson-Reilly, M., Irwin, P., Coutts, R., & Slattery, N. (2020). Adding telehealth simulation
into NP programs. The Nurse Practitioner, 45(3), 44–49.
https://doi.org/10.1097/01.NPR.0000653956.29721.1a
Salen, K., & Zimmerman, E. (2003). Rules of play: Game design fundamentals. MIT Press.
Staggers, N., Gassert, C. A., & Curran, C. (2002). A Delphi study to determine informatics
competencies for nurses at four levels of practice. Nursing Research, 51(6), 383–390.
Stanford Medicine Children’s Health. (n.d.). Virtual reality and immersive technologies at
Stanford Children’s Health. www.stanfordchildrens.org/en/innovation/virtual-reality
Stuart, S. (2018, August 8). Here come the virtual humans. PCMag.
www.pcmag.com/news/here-come-the-virtual-humans
Tanner, C. (2006). Thinking like a nurse: A research-based model of clinical judgment in
nursing. Journal of Nursing Education, 45(6), 204–211.
http://dx.doi.org/10.3928/01484834-20060601-04
Woroch, R., Alvarez, D., Yingling, C., & Handrup, C. (2018). Family nurse
practitioner/psychiatric mental health nurse practitioner collaboration in drug-seeking
telephone triage simulation in an advanced practice registered nurse curriculum. Clinical
Simulation in Nursing, 18, 14–19. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecns.2018.01.002© nadla/E+/Getty ImagesChapter 21
Chapter 22
Chapter 23
SECTION VI
Research Applications of Nursing
Informatics
Nursing Research: Data Collection, Processing, and
Analysis
Informatics
Generating and Translating Evidence for Practice
Nursing informatics (NI) provides more tools and capabilities than
can at times be imagined. Just as NI has changed the way nursing is
administered and practiced, so too has it dramatically altered
research practices.
Nursing research has evolved with technology. In the era of
evidence-based practice, clinicians must continue to think critically
about their actions. What is the science behind interventions? Things
must no longer be done a certain way just because they have always
been done that way. Instead, one should research the problem, use
evidence-based resources, critically select electronic and
nonelectronic references, consolidate the research findings and
combine and compare the conclusions, present the findings, and
propose a solution. The nurse may be the first to ask why, thereby
becoming a key player in making change happen.
NI enhances and facilitates collaboration; improves access to
online libraries; provides research tool transparency for collection,
analysis, and dissemination of research knowledge; and facilitates
the development of a common data language. It provides
organizational and informational support to advance translational
research, helping to fill the gap between research findings and
practice implementation. Repeat studies are needed to provide
meaningful meta-analyses and systematic reviews of evidence toadvance practice. Technology advancement in the area of
incorporating evidence into clinical tools must continue. Removing
the barriers to knowledge-seeking behavior and providing access to
evidential resources promotes knowledge use and, in the end,
improves patient outcomes. In addition, NI provides support for
powerful research techniques, such as data mining, and research
involving biological processes and genomics, which holds the
promise of discovering new knowledge to improve clinical practices.
The material in this book is placed within the context of the
Foundation of Knowledge model (Figure VI-1). Nursing research is
conducted to generate knowledge that is used to meet the needs of
healthcare delivery systems, organizations, patients, and nurses. In
relation to the model, the nurse researcher is involved with every
aspect, from acquiring (i.e., collecting) and processing (i.e.,
analyzing) data and information to generating knowledge and
disseminating the results or findings (i.e., knowledge). Through this
work, the researcher generates knowledge for the nursing
profession, which is extremely important in the advancement of
nursing science.Designed by Alicia Mastrian
Figure VI-1 Foundation of Knowledge Model
DescriptionC H A P T E R 2 1
Nursing Research: Data
Collection, Processing, and
Analysis
OBJECTIVES
1. Describe nursing research in relation to the Foundation of Knowledge model.
2. Explore the acquisition of previous knowledge through internet and library holdings.
3. Explore information fair use and copyright restrictions.
4. Assess informatics tools for collecting data and storing information.
5. Compare tools for processing and analyzing quantitative and qualitative data.
KEY TERMS
American Library Association (ALA)
American Psychological Association (APA)
big data
Cochrane Library
copyright
Cumulative Index to Nursing and Allied Health Literature (CINAHL)
Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC)
fair use
Foundation of Knowledge model
handheld device
information literacy
knowledge network
MEDLINE
PsycArticlesPsycInfo
PubMedIntroduction: Nursing Research and the
Foundation of Knowledge Model
The Foundation of Knowledge model suggests that the most
important aspect of information discovery, retrieval, and delivery is
the ability to acquire, process, generate, and disseminate knowledge
in ways that help those managing the knowledge reevaluate and
rethink the way they understand and use what they know and have
learned. These goals closely reflect the Information Literacy
Competency Standards for Nursing, published by the American
Library Association (ALA) in 2013. These standards were derived
from the Information Literacy Standards for Higher Education
(Association of College and Research Libraries [ACRL], 2000).
Specific standards for nursing were developed because nursing
excellence depends on the judicious use of the best evidence and is
informed by translational research.
According to the ALA (2013), an information-literate nurse is able
to do the following:
Determine the nature and extent of the information needed
Access the needed information effectively and efficiently
Critically evaluate information and its sources and determine the
need for further information
Use information effectively to accomplish a specific purpose,
either individually or as a group member
Understand the economic, legal, and social issues surrounding
the use of information and access and use information ethically
and legally
In addition, new challenges arise for individuals seeking to
understand and evaluate information because information is
available through multiple forms of media (i.e., graphical, aural, and
textual). The sheer quantity of information does not by itself create aD
more informed citizenry without complementary abilities to use this
information effectively. More significantly, information literacy forms
the basis for lifelong learning, a commitment that is required for a
professional to maintain competency and navigate ever-changing
approaches to care.
CASE STUDY
uring rounds, Charles encounters a rare condition he has never personally seen
and only vaguely remembers hearing about in nursing school. He takes a few
moments to prepare himself by searching the internet for information. That
evening, he does even more research so that he can assess and treat the patient
safely. He searches clinical databases online and his own school textbooks. Most of the
information seems consistent, yet some factors vary. Charles wants to provide the
highest quality of patient care and safety. He wonders which resources are the most
trusted and which are the most accurate.Knowledge Generation Through Nursing
Research
Information literacy is an intellectual framework for finding,
understanding, evaluating, and using information (Figure 21-1).
These activities are accomplished in part through fluency with
information technology and sound investigative methods but, more
importantly, through critical reasoning and discernment.Figure 21-1 Information Literacy
Because nursing informatics (NI) combines all four nursing
practice areas (i.e., clinical, research, administration, and education),
the ability to recognize the need for a specific kind of information and
then locate, evaluate, and effectively use that information is
paramount. It is important that nurse educators prepare nursing
students for information-literate practice in technology-ladenhealthcare environments. Stephens-Lee et al. (2013) stressed that
“[n]ursing students require opportunities to help them develop NI
skills and abilities to prepare them for contemporary workplaces”
(para. 39). Nash (2014) stated that
[i]f we desire nurses who practice the art of nursing as well as the science of
nursing, we must make it a priority to address the issue of integrating those
interpersonal and critical thinking skills we value into an increasingly complex,
high-tech, fast-paced healthcare system that often works against us practicing at
our very best. (p. 13)
Nursing students today use technology in their personal lives, and
they know that
technology allows them to share photos (Flickr), exchange files and images, send
videos (YouTube, Snapchat), bookmark (Quorum or Diigo, Pinterest), micro-blogs
or short postings (Twitter, Tumblr, MySpace), blog (Blogger), socialize (Facebook,
Vimeo, Instagram), search (Google, Google+), and network professionally
(Altogether, LinkedIn, Yahoo Groups). (Merrill, 2015, p. 72)
Nursing faculties must be able to adapt their teaching in this new
technology era so that they engage their students and help them
assimilate technology as they prepare for their professional nursing
roles. Focusing on nurses’ providing direct patient care, Piscotty et
al. (2015) stated that “finding methods that can help nurses offer
safe and effective care using technology is an absolute necessity” (p.
287). As nurses enact their roles as administrators, researchers,
educators, and clinical staff members, integrating technology into the
current technology-laden information era is paramount.
We must also support the evolution of nursing and assist nurses
and nursing students in their quest for knowledge to improve patient
care and patient outcomes. They must be encouraged to question
how they practice and why they do what they do, recognize the
information needs necessary to enact change, and search the
literature for evidence. Once they locate appropriate literature, they
must be able to judiciously examine and analyze the findings.
Following their analysis, they must synthesize, apply, and implement
what they have learned from the literature to what they experience in
their practice. If they deem a change in practice is warranted, the
change should be instituted and its efficacy evaluated. For thisprocess to work, nurses and nursing students must know how to
access the literature, search for appropriate resources, and evaluate
specific findings.Acquiring Previously Gained Knowledge
Through Internet and Library Holdings
In an environment characterized by rapid technological change
coupled with an overwhelming proliferation of information sources,
nurses face an enormous number of options when choosing how
and from where to acquire information for their academic studies,
clinical situations, and research. Because information is available
through so many venues—libraries, special interest organizations,
media, community resources, and the internet—in increasingly
unfiltered formats, healthcare practitioners must inevitably question
the authenticity, validity, and reliability of information (ACRL, 2016).
Often, the retrieval of reliable research and information may seem
to be a daunting task in light of the seemingly ubiquitous amount of
information found on the web. Focusing on specific information
venues not only aids this search but also assists in negotiating the
endless maze of resources, which allows a nursing practitioner to
find the best and most accurate information efficiently.
Professional Online Databases
Professional databases represent a source of online information that
is generally invisible to all internet users except those with
professional or academic affiliations, such as faculty, staff, and
students. These databases, which range from specific to general, act
as collection points by aggregating information, such as abstracts
and articles from many journals. Two such databases include the
Cumulative Index to Nursing and Allied Health Literature
(CINAHL) and MEDLINE. CINAHL, for example, specifically includes
information from all aspects of allied health, nursing, alternative
medicine, and community medicine. The MEDLINE database
contains references to more than 22 million journal articles and is
maintained and produced by the National Library of Medicine.PubMed comprises more than 30 million citations for biomedical
literature from MEDLINE, life science journals, and online books.
The Cochrane Library is a collection of databases in medicine and
other healthcare specialties; its core is the collection of Cochrane
Reviews, which is a database of systematic reviews and meta￾analyses that summarize and interpret the results of medical
research. Other databases such as PsycInfo; PsycArticles, which
is a database of articles from journals published by the American
Psychological Association (APA); and the Educational
Resources Information Center (ERIC) database may also benefit
nursing. Many databases also offer full-text capabilities, meaning
that entire articles are available online. The articles and abstracts
contained within these databases have already withstood the rigors
of publication in professional journals and therefore are considered
viable and authentic peer-reviewed sources.
Libraries with subscriptions to databases often employ library
professionals who are able to help patrons sift through the vast
amounts of available electronic information; using the expert
research capabilities of a health science librarian at one’s local
university is the best way to learn how to conduct database searches
that yield the most efficient and useful results. Also useful are
websites that provide tutorials on best searching practices
specifically for medically oriented databases, such as the tutorials
provided by EBSCO (an acronym for the Elton B. Stephens
Company) to support searching the CINAHL database.
Search Engines
Search engines allow users to surf the web and find information on
nearly anything, although many researchers steer clear of search
engines because of the vast amounts of unsubstantiated information
they are likely to uncover. Because no legitimacy needs to be
provided for any information that appears on the web, an author can
make claims, substantiated or not, and still use the web as a
publishing venue. Despite the pitfalls associated with search enginesin general, they can yield a bounty of useful information when used
with discretion.
Each search engine will produce results different from those
produced by other search engines when used for the same research.
For example, one popular search engine ranks its results by the
number of hits that a page or site has received. Whereas the most
popular research results are likely to be relevant, the order in which
results appear does not indicate quality or viability of the source.
Web address (i.e., domain) suffixes (e.g., .com, .edu, .org, and
.gov) indicate who is responsible for creating the website. Although a
.edu site is hosted by an educational institution and for that reason
may seem legitimate, consider that it could also belong to a student
stating personal opinion, gossip, or guesswork. In contrast, .gov sites
are maintained by the government and nearly always have
professional contact information. Web hosts develop new domain
suffixes constantly; therefore, although looking at the suffix can be
useful, it should not be the sole deciding factor when choosing to
trust information.
Information found on a web page should never be blindly trusted.
When possible, check the date of the most recent update (How old is
the page?), contact information (Is a bibliography or list of sources
provided?), links to external sources (Do they seem relevant?), and
previous attained knowledge from other reputable sources (Is the
information too unbelievable?).
Fees and information retrieval charges should be approached with
skepticism. Private companies do offer information aggregation
services for a fee. In these cases, users pay a flat monthly fee for
access to collections of articles in a particular field. What users
(especially those affiliated with an academic institution) may not
realize is that they are likely to have free access to the same, if not
more complete, information through their institution’s library system.
Be sure to check with the medical librarian in a hospital system as
well as the academic librarian in an educational institution.
Some legitimate databases and traditional newspapers that
maintain a web presence do provide access for a small fee, but just
as many other providers simply ask users to register to see articlesfor free. Many nursing students and professionals affiliated with a
university may find that their university library has already purchased
access for the student body.
Electronic Library Catalogs
Nearly all higher education institutions have placed their library
catalogs online. Although this is an obvious convenience for many
students, some nursing professionals not used to working completely
online may be intimidated by an e-catalog. Library professionals at
the tiniest university and the busiest community college are available
to demonstrate how to navigate a basic search of their library’s
catalog. Asking for assistance in learning how to access the vast
assortment of journals, books, databases, and other resources
available at one’s college library is an excellent idea. Students in
nursing programs at larger universities will likely find free classes
that specifically teach users how to navigate and use the online
catalog. If smaller colleges and universities do not offer these
services, one should take advantage of the library’s online tutorials,
help pages, frequently asked questions pages, and online reference
service (if available). Local public libraries often have subscriptions
to popular databases and offer free classes on searching techniques
to patrons, providing yet another free access point to the best
information for one’s research needs. Making full use of available
library resources serves to strengthen information literacy skills,
which enables learners to master content and extend their
investigations, become more self-directed, and assume greater
control over their own learning (ACRL, 2016).Fair Use of Information and Sharing
Copyright laws in the world of technology are notoriously
misunderstood. The same copyright laws that cover physical books,
artwork, and other creative material apply in the digital world. Have
you ever given a friend a flash drive that contains a computer game
or some other type of software that you paid for and registered?
Have you ever downloaded a song from the internet without paying
for it? Have you ever copied a section of online content from a
reference site and used that content as if it were your own? Have
you ever copied a picture from the internet without asking permission
from the photographer who took the picture? Have you ever copied
and pasted information about a disease or drug from a website and
then printed out the information to give to a patient or family
member? All of these situations are examples of the type of
copyright infringements enabled by technology that occur almost
without thought.
The value of creative material—whether it is written content, a
song, a painting, or some other type of creative work—lies not in the
physical medium on which it is stored but rather in the intangibles of
creativity, skills, and labor that went into creating that item. The
person who created the material should be properly credited and
possibly reimbursed for the use of the material. How would
musicians be reimbursed for their music if everyone just downloaded
their songs illegally from the internet? Imagine that you created a
game to teach patients with type 1 diabetes how to manage their
diet, and other nurses copied and distributed that game without
getting your permission to do so. How would you feel?
Almost all software, music, and movies (either digital or in hard
copy [CDs or DVDs] form) come with restrictions on how and why
copies can be made. The license included with the software clarifies
exactly which restrictions are applicable. The most common type of
software license is a shrink wrap license, meaning that as soon asthe user removes the shrink wrap from the CD or DVD case, they
have agreed to the license restriction. Most computer software
developers allow for a backup copy of the software to be made
without restriction. If the hard drive on the user’s computer fails, the
software can usually be reinstalled through this backup copy. Some
software companies even allow the purchaser of a software package
to transfer it to a new user. In this case, typically, the software must
be uninstalled from the original owner’s computer before the new
owner is free to install the software on their computer. Most of these
restrictions depend on the honesty of the user in reading and
following the licensing agreement. As a result of widespread abuses,
however, the music and film industries commonly include hardware
security features in their products that block users from making a
working copy of a music CD or movie DVD.
The bottom line is that copyright laws also apply to the digital
world, and copyright violations can lead to prosecution. Advances in
technology have made the sharing of information easy and
extremely fast. A scanner can convert any document to digital form
instantly, and that document can then be shared with people
anywhere in the world. Nevertheless, the person who originally
created that document has the right to approve of the sharing of the
work. Carefully read the fine print of any software purchased, and be
sure to clarify any questions regarding how that software can be
copied. Avoid downloading music illegally from the internet, and do
not use information from the internet without permission to do so or
without citing the reference appropriately. Healthcare organizations
that allow access to the internet from a network computer should
ensure that users are well aware of and compliant with all copyright
and fair use principles.Informatics Tools for Collecting Data and
Storing Information
As knowledge workers, nurses are already intimately familiar with
data collection as they enter patient data in electronic health records
(EHRs). As early as 1991, Werley et al. advocated for use of
standardized data collection using the Nursing Minimum Data Set.
Although these standardized nursing data sets comprise gathered
information, such as healthcare definitions, classification systems,
and nursing information, they were primarily used to support patient
care and not for research.
Nurses have traditionally generated and recorded data from their
own observations or with the assistance of various devices. Free text
(i.e., informational data, such as drug dosages administered,
resources used, and problems diagnosed) is recorded electronically.
Free text is then interpreted and organized by some standardizing
principle, either manually or by computer. In this way, data (often
qualitative data that cannot be traditionally measured in a numeric
sense) can be organized and processed. A central issue to the
generation and analysis of free-text data is the lack of a generally
accepted set of terminology to capture nursing data.
Knowledge networks are rich and dynamic digital collections
affording high-quality knowledge support to their users for sharing,
developing, and evolving knowledge. Knowledge networks include
linked users of research collaborations. The nurses as users of the
knowledge network should assess the knowledge base and
determine the extent to which the network is generating new
knowledge or recycling current knowledge to facilitate new insights.
Database management systems consist of software designed to
collect, sort, organize, store, retrieve, select, and aggregate data.
Nursing and health data may be classified into four basic types: (1)
resource data (e.g., financial information), (2) patient and client
demographics, (3) activity data (i.e., clinical data), and (4) healthservice provider data. These primary data may be either recorded
manually or collected electronically, with manual collection providing
a greater opportunity for error. The process of electronically
recording data follows a programmed set of instructions built into the
software, thereby substantially cutting down on collection error. Of
paramount importance in the collection process are the data
collection form and the computer interface used for inputting the
data, both of which affect the completeness, consistency, and
accuracy of the resulting data (Brackett, 2015).
Quantitative data collection tools, or instruments, include
questionnaires, interviews, surveys, quizzes, assessments, email
interviews, and web-based surveys, all of which generate numerical
rather than text-based data. Questionnaires—one of the most
popular means of data collection—can be administered in hard copy
form or programmed into a website where individuals may answer
the questions electronically (Statistics Canada, 2016). Other
electronic data collection tools include handheld devices and on￾site laptops. A key benefit of using electronic data collection is the
ability to directly transmit data to another computer for compilation
and analysis, thereby cutting down on the risk of error (Kania￾Richmond et al., 2016; Teale et al., 2013).
Of course, one must always be cognizant of the need to protect
the privacy of participants by de-identifying data collected for
research and having tools in place to provide secure transmission
and storage of private information. Some researchers are finding rich
qualitative data on public and freely available patient support sites
and blogs. An important issue associated with such internet-based
data collection is whether participants actually are who they say they
are and whether they actually have the variable of interest or are just
pretending to be someone or something they are not. Remember
that the same rules for protecting human subjects apply no matter
where the data are accessed or collected, and all research involving
human subjects should be formally approved by the appropriate
institutional review board (IRB). Many IRBs have specific policies in
place that govern electronic data collection and storage to ensurethat the rights and privacy of research participants are protected
(Penn State Senior Vice President for Research, n.d.).
Harder-to-measure, nonnumerical qualitative data can be collected
electronically in the form of a narrative, or diary-like, entry. Much in
the way that free text is analyzed and sorted, this narrative dialogue
is assessed and then coded to look for patterns and themes that
represent the phenomenon under study. For example, a nurse
researcher may be interested in studying the lived experiences of
women recently diagnosed with breast cancer and therefore may ask
them to keep a diary of their thoughts, questions, and treatment
experiences.
The COVID-19 pandemic accelerated the commitment to
collecting healthcare data in a standardized way to facilitate data
sharing and treatment outcomes. As Eddy (2022) described, in
response to the pandemic, the National COVID Cohort Collaborative
(NC3) was formed, and biomedical researchers opted to use a
common data collection model, the Observational Medical Outcomes
Partnership (OMOP) Common Data Model (CDM). The
Observational Health Data Sciences and Informatics (OHDSI) (n.d.)
organization explains, “The Observational Medical Outcomes
Partnership (OMOP) Common Data Model (CDM) is an open
community data standard, designed to standardize the structure and
content of observational data and to enable efficient analyses that
can produce reliable evidence” (para. 1). The ability to easily share
standardized healthcare data promotes descriptive analyses,
research collaboration, public health surveillance, and predictive
modeling (OHDSI, n.d.).Tools for Processing Data and Data Analysis
Data analysis is the process by which data collected during the
course of a study are processed to identify trends and patterns of
relationships. Descriptive statistics allow the researcher to organize
information meaningfully, thereby facilitating insight by describing
what the data show. A range of tools exist to facilitate such analysis,
including specialized databases; word processing, spreadsheet, and
database applications; and statistical packages (Laitinen et al.,
2014).
Quantitative Data Analysis
Quantitative data focus on numbers and frequencies, with the goal of
describing a situation or looking for more robust relationships, such
as correlations, and specific variable contributions to an outcome.
This aim stands in contrast to qualitative analysis, which focuses on
experiences and meaning. Although the kind of data generated by
quantitative collection is fairly straightforward and easy to analyze
(i.e., responses to questionnaires, experiments, and psychometric
tests), quantitative data analysis has come under criticism.
Psychologists, for example, prefer to use a combination of
quantitative and qualitative data and to back up research
participants’ explanations with statistically reliable information
obtained by numerical measurement (Holah.co.uk, n.d.).
In quantitative studies, variables represented by data are collected
in numerical form. These values are then entered into specific fields
that have predetermined meanings or are coded. Various
quantitative data analyses can be applied to nursing research, such
as intervention research, quality improvement studies, and outcomes
research. One of the most popular statistical packages for this kind
of analysis is the Statistical Package for the Social Sciences (SPSS).
Depending on the research goal, the researcher may use different
types of analysis. Statistical goals may require hypothesis testing,model building, or descriptive and exploratory analyses. For
example, hypothesis testing is based on assumptions regarding the
relative truth of the hypothesis; therefore, a data analysis would
compare actual outcomes with purported hypotheses.
Qualitative Data Analysis
Extremely varied in nature, qualitative data can include nearly any
information that can be captured and is not numerical (Trochim, n.d.-
a). Qualitative data are more concerned with describing meaning
than with drawing statistical inferences; what is lost in reliability (e.g.,
faulty transcription or forgotten details) is gained in validity
(Holah.co.uk, n.d.). Although qualitative data rely on judgments, they
can still be manipulated numerically, much in the same way that
quantitative data can be open to judgment (Trochim, n.d.-b).
Some major types of qualitative data include in-depth interviews,
direct observation, and written documents. Interviews include
individual and focus group interviews and may be recorded.
Interviews differ from direct observation in their interactive nature.
Direct observation differs from case to case and often means that
the researcher does not make contact with the respondent. Written
documents might include a variety of written materials, including
memos, newspaper clippings, conversation transcripts, and books
(Trochim, n.d.-a).
Data analysis is facilitated by computers and specialized
programs, such as Excel, Access, or NVivo, in which a user can
categorize data and link categories with key words. Data can be
converted into information and knowledge by either inductive or
deductive reasoning. Most qualitative methods use an inductive
approach in which the researcher generates hypotheses (versus the
deductive approach typical of quantitative studies, in which
hypotheses are tested). Data analysis in quantitative studies may
allow the researcher to make inferences to a population beyond the
sample as long as the sample was representative of the population.
In contrast, generalizing to a larger population is not a goal of
qualitative research. Rather, in qualitative research the goals areexploration and deeper understanding of a phenomenon that has not
been widely studied (Figure 21-2).
Figure 21-2 Quantitative Versus Qualitative Research
Description
Two relatively new approaches to quantitative research are cohort
research and case control research. Cohort research is a type of
study in which two groups of people are identified, one with an
exposure of interest and another without the exposure. The two
groups are followed to determine whether the outcome of interest
occurs. Groups are defined based on whether they have had an
exposure to a particular risk factor. In contrast, case control research
is a type of study in which patients who have an outcome of interest
and patients who do not have the outcome are identified; theresearcher then looks back in time (typically, using health records) to
determine exposures and experiences that could have contributed to
the outcome occurring or not occurring (Brown, 2014).
The copious amount of data collected in health care is useless if it
cannot be analyzed to yield information and knowledge. Big data is
a field that deals with ways to examine, analyze, and systematically
extract data and information from data sets that are too large or
complex to be processed using conventional data-processing
application software. The big data revolution challenged healthcare
professionals to meaningfully assess the data sets using technical
advances to make it easier to collect and analyze information from
multiple sources. In health care, data are blended from many
sources, such as nurse-managed clinics, hospitals, payers,
laboratories, free-standing imaging centers, and physicians’ offices.
The ability to aggregate this data using advanced data analytics to
find better answers is changing the healthcare landscape and how
nurses care for their patients.The Future
The future of NI is growing as fast as technology itself. The more
nurses participate in the development process of healthcare
technology, the more efficient and effective NI may become. Nurses
are urged to take an active role in the profession by providing real￾world feedback during the design process and after implementation.
Such practical insights will provide valuable data for technology
evaluation and advancement in the field of NI.Summary
This chapter discussed the value of information literacy as an
essential research tool and its relationship to knowledge generation
and lifelong learning. The reader is now acquainted with informatics
tools useful for acquiring new knowledge and assessing previous
knowledge and tools useful for collecting, storing, and analyzing
information to generate knowledge. In an ideal world, information
literacy and informatics tools would be used as a critical skill set for
increasing healthcare efficiency, effectiveness, and safety in the 21st
century.
THOUGHT-PROVOKING QUESTIONS
1. How does information literacy affect NI in the 21st century?
2. Provide a detailed description of how NI facilitates both qualitative and quantitative
research.
3. Reflect on copyright law and why it is needed. Suppose you determine that
photographs or other images can be replicated based on your assessment of fair
use but your administrative assistant refuses to photocopy them because he feels
that it is copyright infringement and against company policy. Describe in detail how
you would handle this situation.
4. What is big data? How has NI affected data analytics in relation to large data sets?R E F E R E N C E S
American Library Association. (2013). Information literacy competency standards for
nursing. www.ala.org/acrl/standards/nursing
Association of College and Research Libraries. (2000, January). Information literacy
competency standards for higher education.
https://crln.acrl.org/index.php/crlnews/article/view/19242/22395
Association of College and Research Libraries. (2016, January 11). Framework for
information literacy for higher education. www.ala.org/acrl/standards/ilframework
Brackett, M. (2015). The data-information-knowledge cycle. DATAVERSITY.
www.dataversity.net/the-data-information-knowledge-cycle
Brown, S. (2014). Evidence-based nursing: The research-practice connection (3rd ed.).
Jones & Bartlett Learning.
Eddy, L. (2022). New tool transforms data collection for clinical research. Insight.
www.hopkinsmedicine.org/news/articles/new-tool-transforms-data-collection-for-clinical￾research
Holah.karoo.net. (n.d.). Quantitative and qualitative data.
www.holah.karoo.net/quantitativequalitative.htm
Kania-Richmond, A., Weeks, L., Scholten, J., & Reney, M. (2016). Evaluating the feasibility
of using online software to collect patient information in a chiropractic practice-based
research network. Journal of the Canadian Chiropractic Association, 60(1), 93–105.
www.chiropractic.ca/wp-content/uploads/2016/03/95301-1_Chiro_60_1m_Kania￾Richmond.pdf
Laitinen, H., Kaunonen, M., & Astedt-Kurki, P. (2014). Methodological tools for the collection
and analysis of participant observation data using grounded theory. Nurse Researcher,
22(2), 10–15. https://journals.rcni.com/doi/abs/10.7748/nr.22.2.10.e1284
Merrill, E. (2015). Integrating technology into nursing education. ABNF Journal, 26(4), 72–
73.
Nash, B. (2014). Maintaining the art of nursing in an age of technology. Ohio Nurses
Review, 89(6), 12–13.
Observational Health Data Sciences and Informatics. (n.d.). Standardized data: The OMOP
common data model. www.ohdsi.org/data-standardization
Penn State Senior Vice President for Research. (n.d.). IRB guideline X: Guidelines for
computer- and internet-based research involving human participants.
www.research.psu.edu/irb/policies/guideline10
Piscotty, R., Kalisch, B., & Gracey-Thomas, A. (2015). Impact of healthcare information
technology on nursing practice. Journal of Nursing Scholarship, 47(4), 287–293.
https://doi.org/10.1111/jnu.12138
Statistics Canada. (2016, September 30). Data collection and questionnaire.
http://web.archive.org/web/20211224063216/https://www.statcan.gc.ca/en/cs/questions￾3
Stephens-Lee, C., Lu, D., and Wilson, K. (2013). Preparing students for an electronic
workplace. Online Journal of Nursing Informatics, 17(3), 15–27. https://ojni.org/OJNI-V17-N3.pdf
Teale, E., Young, J., & Sleigh, I. (2013). A point of care electronic stroke data collection
system. British Journal of Healthcare Management, 19(1), 10–15.
https://doi.org/10.12968/bjhc.2013.19.1.10
Trochim, W. M. K. (n.d.-a). Research methods knowledge base: Qualitative data. Conjointly.
https://conjointly.com/kb/qualitative-data
Trochim, W. M. K. (n.d.-b). Research methods knowledge base: Types of data. Conjointly.
https://conjointly.com/kb/types-of-data
Werley, H. H., Devine, E. C., Zorn, C. R., Ryan, P., & Westra, B. L. (1991). The Nursing
Minimum Data Set: Abstraction tool for standardized, comparable, essential data.
American Journal of Public Health, 81(4), 421–426.
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1405031/pdf/amjph00204-0023.pdfC H A P T E R 2 2
Informatics-Based Research
Processes: Data Mining and
Artificial Intelligence
OBJECTIVES
1. Describe big data.
2. Appreciate the effect of artificial intelligence on knowledge discovery in clinical data.
3. Explore the contributions of data mining, computational biology, and bioinformatics.
4. Compare data analytics models.
KEY TERMS
algorithm
bagging
big data
bioinformatics
biomedical informatics
boosting
brushing
classification
classification and regression tree (CART)
computational biology
data mining
data set
decision tree
deep learning
digital phenotypingdrill down
exploratory data analysis (EDA)
machine learning
meta-learning
modeling
multidimensional database
neural network
online analytic processing (OLAP)
scoring
Six Sigma
stacking
unstructured dataIntroduction: Big Data, Data Mining, and
Knowledge Discovery
The digital revolution in health care brought on by the shift to
electronic health records (EHRs), interoperability initiatives, and
increasingly sophisticated technology tools has led to the generation
of large amounts of healthcare data. Although these data can seem
overwhelming at times, they afford the opportunity to leverage data
mining tools to convert them into actionable knowledge. Data mining
methods have been developed over time using research. As data
mining evolves, healthcare organizations have not only become able
to navigate their data in real time but also have progressed beyond
mere access to retrospective data to navigational improvements that
allow them to learn much from their data. Using data mining
techniques on data stored in an enterprise data warehouse,
administrators could, for example, answer the question, “What was
the most commonly diagnosed disease in our nine-hospital system
last April?” They could then drill down to one hospital. As big data
collection capabilities, data capture, data transmission, storage
capabilities, powerful computers, statistics, artificial intelligence (AI),
high-functioning relational database engines with data integration,
and advanced algorithms developed, the ability to data mine big data
to predict and deliver prospective and proactive information has
been realized. By answering a question such as “What is likely to be
the most commonly diagnosed disease next month and why?”
predictions can be made. These actionable insights might then be
used to inform professional recruitment or staffing strategies for the
healthcare system. Data mining includes tools for visualizing
relationships in the data and mechanizes the process of discovering
predictive information in massive databases.
Pattern discovery entails much more than simply retrieving data to
answer an end user’s query. Data mining tools scan databases and
identify previously hidden patterns. The predictive, proactiveinformation resulting from data mining analytics then assists with
development of business intelligence, especially in relation to how an
enterprise can be improved.
Building intelligence or knowledge is key; therefore, in 2013 the
National Institutes of Health (NIH) Big Data to Knowledge (BD2K)
initiative was launched to support the research and development of
innovative and transformative approaches and tools to maximize and
hasten the integration of big data and data science into biomedical
research. The BD2K initiative supports initial efforts toward making
data sets FAIR: findable, accessible, interoperable, and reusable.
Although the BD2K program has concluded, it was responsible for
advancing data sciences by individual training and the development
of data analytics education resources, software, and data indices
(NIH, 2021).
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the White House Office of
Science and Technology Policy (2020) requested the development of
an open-access machine-readable research data set. The COVID-19
Open Research Dataset (CORD-19)
is a collection of coronavirus literature formed as a result of the
efforts of several groups, including a commercial software vendor, a
university, an AI institute, the NIH, and the National Library of
Medicine. “The White House joins these institutions in issuing a call
to action to the Nation’s artificial intelligence experts to develop new
text and data mining techniques that can help the science
community answer high-priority scientific questions related to
COVID-19” (para. 3). This database provided a tremendous
opportunity for scientific researchers to mine this valuable data,
discover new insights, collaborate on strategies for addressing this
pandemic, and prepare for and predict future pandemics.
Much of our big data are unstructured data; unstructured big
data reside in text files, which represent more than 75% of an
organization’s data. Such data are not always contained in
databases and can easily be overlooked; moreover, trends and
patterns are difficult to discern in such data. Data mining is an
iterative process that explores and models big data to identify
patterns and provide meaningful insights. As the tools evolve withwhich data and information can be collected, accessed, and
processed, it is necessary to concomitantly evolve how the data and
information are analyzed and interpreted.
A website article (Taylor, 2023) described big data as a collection
of data that is huge in size and yet growing exponentially with time.
In short, such a collection of data is so large and complex that none
of the traditional data management tools are able to store it or
process it efficiently (para. 2). Big data are generated every day from
trades on the stock exchange; social media posts; graphics; videos;
photographs; digital X-rays; cell phones; and even jet engines, which
can generate millions of data points during each flight. Consider the
amount of data generated from patient information gathered in a
practice, all practices in any community, and all practices across any
country. It is hard to even imagine how much data are processed.
Data mining is the process of using software to sort through data
to discover patterns and ascertain relationships. This process may
help to discover previously unidentified relationships among the data
in a database with a focus on applications. This information can then
be used to increase profits or decrease costs or both. In health care,
data mining is being used to improve efficiency and quality, which
results in better healthcare practices and improved patient
outcomes.
As healthcare professionals’ analytical skills are honed, they will
be able to clarify and explain patterns in healthcare big data related
to improved patient responses to select treatments for optimal
patient outcomes. They can then drill down for each treatment to
examine the conditions patients presented with and the number of
visits they made. The data can then be explored to refine the output.
For example, it would be very important to know more about
patients, such as whether they had other conditions or diseases (i.e.,
comorbidities), as well as their age, gender, and educational level,
which could affect their outcomes. Zarrinpar et al. (2019) have
identified EHR big data research as comparative effectiveness
research used to explore the effectiveness of treatment approaches.
“The patient populations are very large and more representative of
actual practice; the comparators are active and variable; outcomemeasures are patient centered or global; follow-up time is long; cost
is low, especially per patient; and the speed is fast” (p. 602).
Data mining projects help organizations discover interesting
knowledge. These projects can be predictive, exploratory, or focused
on data reduction. Data mining focuses on producing a solution that
generates useful forecasting through a four-phase process: (1)
problem identification; (2) exploration of the data; (3) pattern
discovery; and (4) knowledge deployment, or application of
knowledge to new data to generate predictions. Data mining is an
analytical, logical process with the ultimate goal of forecasting. It
unearths concealed predictive information to help construct a picture
of the data that lends insight into future trends, actions, or behaviors.
This data exploration and resulting knowledge discovery foster
proactive, knowledge-driven decision-making. See Figure 22-1,
which illustrates how raw data are transformed into knowledge
through an iterative and interactive process.
Figure 22-1 Transforming Raw Data into Knowledge through an Iterative and Interactive
ProcessImage created by Dr. Dee McGonigle.
Description
The steps in the data mining process have been variously
described. We outline some of the key components of the process
here.
Problem identification is the initial phase of data mining. The
problem must be defined, and everyone involved must understand
the objectives and requirements of the data mining process they are
initiating.
Exploration begins with exploring and preparing the data for the
data mining process. This phase might include data access,
cleansing, sampling, and transformation; based on the problem to be
solved, data might need to be transformed into another format. To
assure meaningful data mining outcomes, the data must truly be
comprehended. The goal of this phase is to identify the relevant
variables and determine their nature.
Data are mined using models. According to Microsoft (2022),
mining models are generated when “an algorithm [is applied] to data,
but it is more than an algorithm or a metadata container: it is a set of
data, statistics, and patterns that can be applied to new data to
generate predictions and make inferences about relationships” (para.
1). It is important to consider the data mining structure and the model
as two discrete objects. The data mining model remains empty until
the data from the data mining structure have been processed and
examined. The data mining structure stores information that defines
the data source. The data mining model stores information that
results from the statistical processing of the data, such as patterns
arising from the examination or analysis. After a data mining model
has been processed, it will contain metadata; outcomes; and
bindings, or links back to the data mining structure.
Sometimes known as model building or pattern identification,
pattern discovery is a complex phase of data mining. In this phase,
different models are applied to the same data to choose the best
model for the data set being analyzed. It is imperative that the modelchosen should identify the patterns in the data that will support the
best predictions. The model must be tested, evaluated, and
interpreted. Therefore, this phase ends with a highly predictive,
consistent pattern-identifying model.
The final phase, knowledge deployment, takes the pattern and
model identified in the pattern discovery phase and applies them to
new data to test whether they can achieve the desired outcome. In
this phase, the model achieves insight by following the rules of a
decision tree to generate predictions or estimates of the expected
outcome. This deployment provides the organization with the
actionable information and knowledge necessary to make strategic
decisions in uncertain situations.
Data mining develops a model that uses an algorithm to act on
data sets for one situation where the organization knows the
outcome and then applies this same model to another situation
where the outcome is not known—an extension known as scoring.
Data mining is concerned with extracting what is needed. It applies
statistics so that organizations can gain an advantage by
manipulating information for practical applications. In the information￾overloaded healthcare world, all too often health practitioners find
themselves grasping for knowledge that is currently nonexistent or
fleeting. Data mining is a dynamic, iterative process that is adjusted
as new information surfaces. It is a robust, predictive, proactive
information and knowledge tool that, when used correctly, empowers
organizations to predict and react to specific characteristics of and
behaviors within their systems.
Data mining is also known as knowledge discovery and data
mining (KDD), knowledge discovery in data, and knowledge
discovery in databases. The term knowledge discovery is key
because data mining looks at data from different vantage points,
aspects, and perspectives and brings new insights to the data set.
This analysis sorts and categorizes the data and then summarizes
the relationships identified. In essence, data mining is the process of
finding correlations or patterns among the data.
Health care, as noted earlier, generates big data. In turn, data
mining tools are able to analyze enormous databases to determinepatterns and establish applications to new data. Healthcare
organizations clearly need to invest more in big data and data mining
analysis if they are to have an effect on clinical outcomes and
population health. Vennaro (2017) lamented the shortage of health
informaticists:
There are currently fewer than 15,000 formally trained medical informaticists in the
U.S., with demand increasing up to 70,000 in the next five years [2022]. This
creates a huge talent gap, where healthcare organizations lack the clinical
expertise required to make data effective. Without informaticists to bridge the
business and clinical aspects of data, it will be difficult for organizations to ask the
right questions, let alone getting to the right actions and conclusions. (para. 6)
The healthcare sector has discovered data mining through the
realization that knowledge discovery can help to improve healthcare
policy making and practices, disease prevention, detection of
disease outbreaks, prevention of sequelae, and prevention of in￾hospital deaths. On the business side, healthcare organizations use
data mining for the detection of fraudulent insurance claims.
According to Kumaraswamy et al. (2022),
Healthcare fraud is an expensive, white-collar crime in the United States, and it is
not a victimless crime. Costs associated with fraud are passed on to the population
in the form of increased premiums or serious harm to beneficiaries. There is an
intense need for digital healthcare fraud detection systems to evolve in combating
this societal threat. (para. 1)
If organizations are to develop a successful data mining process,
they must have specially trained data analysts (also called
biomedical informaticists) and access to the data needed to create
meaningful information. In general, there are three main types of
data analytics, each with a different objective: descriptive analytics to
gain information on what has occurred, predictive analytics to
suggest what might occur, and prescriptive analytics to suggest a
course of action (University of Pittsburgh, 2021).
In health care, the ability to analyze the data by making sure that
those data are comprehensive and complete, meeting current needs,
and cleansed and prepared for the data mining process is being
honed. Many facilities are using data warehouses to store data and
facilitate this pre–data mining process. In addition, healthcare
systems are increasingly sharing data to build robust databases andto share best practices. Nurses are learning to ask the right
questions during the data mining process to gain a thorough
understanding of their data. The following pages introduce the
concepts, techniques, and models used in data mining.Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining and
Research
Data mining for knowledge discovery is not new; it has been used for
several decades in research. Over the past several decades, the
KDD capability has improved as the analytical power of data mining
tools has increased, thereby facilitating the recognition of patterns
and relationships in big data. Berger and Berger (2004) have
suggested that nurse researchers are positioned to use data mining
technologies to transform the repositories of big data into
comprehensible knowledge that will be useful for guiding nursing
practice and facilitating interdisciplinary research.
Knowledge discovery capabilities continue to evolve because of
the availability of advanced analytical software that is designed to
facilitate data mining. Early examples of data mining in research
include Goodwin et al. (1997), who explored the relationship
between clinical data and adult respiratory distress syndrome
(ARDS) in critically ill patients. Madigan and Curet (2006) described
the classification and regression tree (CART) data mining method
for analyzing the outcomes and service use in home health care for
three conditions, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, heart
failure, and hip replacement. They found that four factors—patient
age, type of agency, type of payment, and ethnicity—influenced
discharge destination and length of stay. Trangenstein et al. (2007)
described how faculty members used data mining to analyze their
students’ clinical logs, which enabled them to make programmatic
decisions and revisions and rethink certain clinical placements.
Fernández-Llatas et al. (2011) described workflow mining technology
as a means to facilitate relearning in dementia processes. Lee et al.
(2011) discussed the application of data mining to identify critical
factors such as nursing interventions related to patient fall outcomes.
Lee et al. (2012) used data mining to determine risk factors related
to each stage of pressure ulcers and identified five predictive factors:I
hemoglobin level, weight, sex, height, and use of a repositioning
sheet. Based on the results of this data mining analysis, nurses can
better target their interventions to prevent pressure ulcers. Green et
al. (2013) identified differences in limb volume patterns in breast
cancer survivors; their results have the potential to influence clinical
guidelines for the assessment of latent and early-onset lymphedema.
More recent data mining research reports highlight the versatility
of clinical problem-solving afforded by data mining. Li et al. (2019)
explored factors that predict pressure injuries for patients at the end
of life; De Gagne et al. (2019) mined Twitter data to uncover
cyberincivility between nurses and students; Thorlton and Catlin
(2019) mined data to uncover adverse drug events; Härkänen et al.
(2020) studied staffing and medication errors; Jin (2022) used data
mining to predict risks in obstetric nursing; and Chen (2021)
described data mining techniques for optimizing a nursing
management system. Interprofessional collaboration and its effects
on patient outcomes is also receiving more attention in the research
literature. Conca et al. (2018) described a process mining approach
to examine collaborations within the care team in the treatment of
patients with type 2 diabetes.
As these research examples suggest, data mining is a powerful
tool with nearly endless possibilities for informing and supporting
clinical transformations using data-driven models of care and
examining interprofessional collaboration to reduce inefficiencies,
control costs, and improve quality.
CASE STUDY
n a large teaching hospital, patients with congestive heart failure (CHF) who are
being treated at the facility have a high rate of readmission. The chief nursing officer
(CNO) wants to know the cause of the readmissions because the rate at this facility
is almost twice that of competing healthcare entities in the area. The CNO works with
the nursing researchers at the university to address this situation.
The researchers begin to scour the EHRs of more than 15,000 CHF hospitalizations
in the past 4 years to determine the cause of the situation. As they begin to understand
this data set, they are able to build a data mining model using algorithms to discover
patterns and relationships in the data. Based on the old data, they determine that theO
key factor for readmission was the length of time it took to follow up at home with
discharged patients.
In response to this new knowledge, a program is developed in which nurses
telephone patients with CHF the day after their discharge, and a home visit is
scheduled for the second day post discharge to ensure a smooth transition to home or
an assisted living facility. The follow-up within the first 4 days of discharge has reduced
readmissions by 40%. The model that was used with the old data is being applied to
the new data.
CASE STUDY: 23ANDME
ne of the largest genetic studies of our time could be 23andMe. According to
Molteni (2018), “Since the launch of its DNA testing service in 2007, genomics
giant 23andMe has convinced more than 5 million people to fill a plastic tube
with half a teaspoon of saliva” (para. 1). So what do the customers receive? Molteni
stated that “[i]n return for all that spit (and some cash too), customers get insights into
their biological inheritance, from the superficial—do you have dry earwax or wet?—to
mutations associated with disease” (para. 1). “What 23andMe gets is an ever￾expanding supply of valuable behavioral, health, and genetic information from the 80
percent of its customers who consent to having their data used for research” (para. 1).
Therefore, this company captures and gains access to big data that it can mine. It can
also sell the mining rights: “[O]ne of the world’s biggest drugmakers, GlaxoSmithKline,
is gaining exclusive rights to mine 23andMe’s customer data for drug targets” (para. 1).
It will have “four years of exclusive rights to run analyses to discover new drug targets”
(para. 2). Reflecting on this information, what effect could businesses have on the
healthcare market if they can leverage big data from patients and consumers?
Molteni, M. (2018). 23andMe’s pharma deals have been the plan all along. Wired.
www.wired.com/story/23andme-glaxosmithkline-pharma-deal
Businesses have also gathered healthcare data. In some cases,
the big data that they garner is used to leverage more investments
into their companies. One example is 23andMe. Think about the
capture and sale of big data mining rights while you refer to the
23andMe case study.Data Mining Concepts
Bagging is the term that describes the use of voting and averaging
in predictive data mining to synthesize the predictions from many
models or methods or the use of the same type of model on different
data. This term can also refer to the unpredictability of results when
complex models are used to mine small data sets.
Boosting is what the term infers—a means of increasing the
power of the models generated by weighting the combinations of
predictions from those models into a predicted classification. This
iterative process uses voting or averaging to combine the different
classifiers.
Data reduction shrinks large data sets into manageable, smaller
data sets. One way to accomplish this is via aggregation of the data,
or clustering.
Typically, drill down analysis begins by identifying variables of
interest to drill down into the data. Nurses could identify a diagnosis
and then drill down, for example, to determine the ages of those
diagnosed or the number of males. They could then continue to drill
down and expose even more of the data.
Exploratory data analysis (EDA) is an approach that uses mainly
graphical techniques to gain insight into a data set. Its goal varies
based on the purpose of the analysis, but it can be applied to the
data set to extract variables, detect outliers, or identify patterns.
Feature selection reduces inputs to a manageable size for
processing and analysis whereby the model either chooses or
rejects an attribute based on its usefulness for analysis.
Machine learning is a subset of AI that permits computers to
learn either inductively or deductively. Inductive machine learning is
the process of reasoning and making generalizations or extracting
patterns and rules from huge data sets—that is, reasoning from a
large number of examples to a general rule. Deductive machinelearning moves from premises that are assumed true to conclusions
that must be true if the premises are true.
Meta-learning combines the predictions from several models. It is
helpful when several models are used in the same project. The
predictions from the different classifiers can be included as input into
the meta-learning. The goal is to synthesize these predicted
classifications to generate a final, best-predicted classification, which
is a process also referred to as stacking.
Predictive data mining identifies the data mining project as one
with the goal of identifying a model that can predict classifications.
Stacking or stacked generalization synthesizes the predictions
from several models.Data Mining Techniques
Many data mining projects are implemented as part of a team, with
each member bringing important skill sets to the mix. For example,
there may be a chief nursing informatics officer, a nurse informaticist,
a statistician, and an information technology specialist. It is also
important to identify the project goals and to choose the best
technique to get the most from the data mining. As Simpson (2019)
pointed out, “[o]ne of the most crucial skills for nursing’s big data
scientists will be the ability to frame questions specifically in order to
derive not just a high-value answer but the insights that go with it” (p.
378). Following is an overview of the commonly used techniques in
data mining neural networks, decision trees, rule induction,
algorithms, and the nearest neighbor method.
Neural networks represent nonlinear predictive models. These
models learn through training and resemble the structure of
biological neural networks; that is, they model the neural behavior of
the human brain. Computers are fast and can respond to instructions
repeatedly. Humans use their experiences to make generalizations
about the world around them. Neural networks are a way to bridge
the gap between computers and humans, and they go through a
learning process on existing data so that they can predict, recognize
patterns, or classify data.
A decision tree is so named because the sets of decisions form a
tree-shaped structure. The decisions generate rules for classifying a
data set. CART and chi-square automatic interaction detection
(CHAID) are two commonly used types of decision tree
methodologies. See Box 22-1 and Figure 22-2 for an overview of
decision tree analysis.Figure 22-2 Decision Tree Analysis Output
Description
BOX 22-1 DECISION TREE ANALYSIS
Steven L. Brewer Jr.
Decision trees are a statistical technique based on using numerous algorithms to
predict a dependent variable. These predictions are determined by the influence ofindependent variables. Decision trees help researchers understand the complex
interactions among variables generated from research data. The entire data set is split
into child nodes based on the effect of the independent predictors. The most influential
variable is situated at the top of the tree; the subsequent nodes are ranked by the
significance of the remaining independent predictors.
Graphically, decision trees produce a tree (as illustrated in Figure 22-2), which
consists of a root node and child nodes. The tree is an inverted, connected graphic.
The graphic representation of the decision tree helps general users, such as
practitioners, understand the complex interrelationships between the independent and
the dependent variables in a large data set.
Within the graphical display, there are three major components: the root node, the
child nodes, and the terminal node. The root node represents the dependent variable,
and the child nodes represent the independent variables. The root node is essentially
the base of the tree, or the top node. It contains the entire sample, whereas each child
node contains a subset of the sample within the node directly above it. In Figure 22-2,
the root node represents a sample of women who were either reassaulted or not
reassaulted in a domestic violence database. Data in the root node are then partitioned
and passed down the tree.
The number of child nodes will vary depending on the classification procedure that is
used to determine how the data are split. In Figure 22-2, the first child node is
“women’s perception of safety.” This node suggests that the most influential predictor in
domestic violence reassault for this sample is the women’s perception of safety. The
tree produces additional child nodes based on the responses to that variable. Node 1
represents the women who responded no when asked whether they felt safe in the
relationship. For this node, women had a 90% chance of being reassaulted. In contrast,
node 2 represents the women who responded yes when asked whether they felt safe in
the relationship. These women had only a 72% chance of being reassaulted.
The decision tree in Figure 22-2 splits the entire sample into subsamples, which in
turn allow for different predictions for different groups within the sample. For example,
women who felt safe in their relationship (node 2) and experienced controlling
behaviors (node 6) had an 80% chance of being reassaulted. In contrast, women who
did not feel safe (node 1) and were in a relationship characterized by controlling
behaviors (node 4) had a 97.3% chance of being reassaulted. The splitting of the data
continues until the data are no longer sufficient to predict the remaining variables or
there are no additional cases to be split.
Classification trees share commonalities with nonlinear traditional methods, such as
discriminant analysis, cluster analysis, nonparametric statistics, and nonlinear
estimation; however, the technique differs significantly from linear analyses. In general,
the decision tree technique does not rely on “multiplicative” or “additive” assumptions,
such as regression, to predict the outcome of y. The flexibility of classification trees is
one characteristic that makes them attractive to researchers. The trees are not limited
to examining all predictor variables simultaneously. Therefore, each predictor variable
can be examined as a singularity to produce univariate splits in the tree. In addition,
classification trees can handle a mixture of categorical and continuous variables when
univariate splits are used. Although this flexibility offers advantages over traditional
methods, classification trees are not limited to univariate splits.
Decision trees have become a popular alternative to methods such as regression
and discriminate analysis for data mining big data. Such trees use algorithms from oneof the numerous classification procedures to separate the data into different branches,
or child nodes, that predict y. The dependent variable (y) is represented by the root
node.
These algorithms have three main functions: (1) They explain how to separate or
partition the data at each split, (2) they decree when to stop or end the splitting of data,
and (3) they determine how to predict the value of y for each x in a split. The child
nodes are separated into homogeneous groups by the algorithms from different
classification procedures. This process of partitioning is the main purpose of
classification procedures. First, the procedure clusters and creates child nodes.
Second, it ranks them based on their predictive values of y. Hence, the most influential
variables will be located at the base of the tree. From this point, the classification
procedures further expand the child nodes by finding the next best factor. The tree is
expanded until the algorithm is unable to find a clearly distinguishable split within the
data.
Based on the results of the sample decision tree analysis presented in Figure 22-2,
practitioners would conclude that women should be attuned to their perception of safety
in a relationship because those who feel unsafe have a much higher chance of being
reassaulted.
Decision trees are a powerful tool that can be used to mine large data sets and
discover previously unknown relationships among the data. The predictive relationships
uncovered by the decision tree analysis may be useful in directing approaches to future
care interventions.
Rule induction is based on statistical significance. Rules are
extracted from the data using if-then statements, which become the
rules.
Typically, algorithms are computer-based methods with which data
mining models are developed. To create the model, the data set is
first analyzed by the algorithm to determine specific patterns and
trends. Based on the results of this analysis, the algorithm defines
the parameters of the data mining model. The identified parameters
are then applied to the entire data set to mine it for patterns and
statistics.
Nearest neighbor analysis classifies each record in a data set
based on a select number of its nearest neighbors. This technique is
also known as the k-nearest neighbor.
Text mining for text is equivalent to data mining for numerical data.
Because text is not always consistent in health care, owing to the
lack of a generally accepted terminology structure, it is more difficult
to analyze. Text documents are analyzed by extracting key words or
phrases.Online analytic processing (OLAP) generates different views of
the data in multidimensional databases. These perspectives range
from simplistic views, such as descriptive statistics, frequency tables,
or comparative summaries, to more complicated analyses that
require various forms of cleansing the data, such as removing
outliers. OLAP is also known as fast analysis of shared data.
Brushing is a technique in which the user manually chooses
specific data points or subsets of data on an interactive data display.
These selected data can be visualized in two- or three-dimensional
surfaces as scatterplots. Brushing is also known as graphical
exploratory data analysis.Data Mining Models
To generate predictions and infer relationships, the data set,
statistics, and patterns identified in existing data must be applied to
new data. A data mining model is developed by exercising more than
algorithms on data. Specifically, the data mining model consists of a
mining structure plus an algorithm. The data mining model remains
empty until it applies the algorithm or processes and analyzes the
data provided by the mining structure. This model stores the
information obtained from a statistical analysis of the data, identifies
patterns, and gains insights. It then contains metadata that specify
the name and definition of the model, the server location or other
place where it is stored, definitions of any filters applied when
processing the model, columns from the mining structure that were
used to build the model, and the algorithm used to analyze the data.
The columns and their data types, any filters, and the algorithm used
are choices that are made in the data mining process, and each of
these decisions can greatly influence the data mining results. The
same data can be used to create many models; one type of model
could organize the data into trees, for example, whereas another
type of model might cluster the data in groups based on the rules
applied. Different results can be achieved from the same mining
structure, even though it is used in many models, based on the
filtering method or analysis conducted. Therefore, each decision
made along the way is very important.
There are many models. In this chapter, the following models will
be reviewed: cross-industry standard process for data mining
(CRISP-DM), Six Sigma, and SEMMA (sample, explore, modify,
model, assess).
CRISP-DM
The CRISP-DM model follows a series of steps to develop a
business understanding by gaining an understanding of the businessdata collected and analyzed. The six steps are business
understanding, data understanding, data preparation, modeling,
evaluation, and deployment.
The CRISP-DM model begins with an understanding of the
business. The situation must be assessed to establish the data
mining goals and produce the project plan. The following questions
must be answered: What are the business objectives? What are the
requirements? Has the problem been specifically defined? The
answers to these questions help transform the business perspective
knowledge into a data mining problem definition and initial plan to
meet the objectives.
Data understanding begins with the preliminary data collection and
assimilation of the data. During this step, the data will be described
and explored to facilitate the user’s comprehension of the data. As
the user gains familiarity with the data, data quality issues are
identified, and the quality of the data is verified.
The data are cleansed and transformed during the data
preparation step. First, one must select the data, attributes, and
records to be used. These data are then cleansed, constructed,
integrated, and properly formatted. At this point, the final data set is
constructed from the data, and this data set will be processed by the
model.
Modeling involves selection of the modeling methods and their
application to the prepared data set. Parameters are calibrated, a
test design is generated, and the model is built and assessed. This
step might require that data preparation be revisited if the format of
the data does not meet the specific requirements of the methods.
During the evaluation step, the degree to which the objectives
were met is assessed from a business perspective. A key question
is, Were any important business issues not considered? The model
was built for high-quality data analysis. To see whether this goal has
been met, the process is reviewed, the results are evaluated, and
the model is interpreted. This is where the determination is made as
to whether the model should be implemented or more iterations must
occur before its deployment. The project may not be completed, or a
new data mining project might be initiated. If the project is deployed,this step is when the decision must be made as to how the results
from the data analysis will be used.
Deployment is the final step, in which the model is finally
implemented. The plan must be monitored and maintained and the
project reviewed. The six-step process should yield a reliable,
repeatable data mining process. The knowledgeable insights gained
from the implementation of the model must be organized and
presented in such a way that they can be used. The final project
report is generated to document the process and share this
enhanced knowledge of the data.
The CRISP-DM model employs a process that has been proven to
make data mining projects more rapid and effectual. Using this
model helps to avoid typical mistakes while assessing business
problems and detailing data mining techniques.
Six Sigma and Lean
Six Sigma and Lean are data-driven methods to eliminate defects,
avoid waste, or assess quality control issues. Although Six Sigma
and Lean are often considered in tandem, only Six Sigma will be
discussed here. Six Sigma aims to decrease discrepancies in
business and manufacturing processes through dedicated
improvements. It uses the DMAIC steps: define, measure, analyze,
improve, and control.
The first step defines the goals of the project or for improvement.
During this step, data mining techniques can be used to discover
prospective ideas for implementing the project.
In the measure step, exploratory and descriptive data analyses are
used on the existing system to enhance the understanding of the
data. Reliable, valid, and accurate metrics with which to measure
goal achievement in each of the steps are identified.
The analysis step should assess the system to identify
discrepancies between the current big data and the goal. Statistical
methods guide this analysis.
Improvements must be made to the current system to attain the
organizational goals. The use of project management skills facilitatesthe application of the new methodology and processes. Statistical
methods assess the improvements and any deficiencies that exist.
The final step of the model is control. Controlling the system is
important so that discrepancies are remedied before they cause a
disruption.
The Six Sigma model applies a different mentality to the same old
business model or way of thinking. Typically, the DMAIC steps that
are implemented result in success.
SEMMA
According to SAS (n.d.), “[t]he acronym SEMMA—sample, explore,
modify, model, assess—refers to the core process of conducting
data mining” (para. 1). This model is similar to Six Sigma but
emphasizes the technical activities typically involved in data mining.
The first step is to sample the data. Sampling is optional but
creates a more robust data mining effort. Using “[a] statistically
representative sample of your data, SEMMA makes it easy to apply
exploratory statistical and visualisation techniques, select and
transform the most significant predictive variables, model the
variables to predict outcomes, and confirm a model’s accuracy”
(SAS, n.d., para. 1). Creating a target data set shrinks the data to a
manageable size yet maintains the important information necessary
to mine.
The exploration of the data seeks to discover discrepancies,
trends, and relationships in the data. It is at this point that ideas
about the data should emerge to help the organization understand
the data and their implications for the organization’s business. In
health care, for example, it would be important to determine how
many people use the emergency department each year and how
many of those people are admitted and released and then return and
to identify any disparities in care and diagnoses. What was
discovered? What are the trends and relationships that emerge from
the data mining?
After exploring, the data should be modified based on the
information discovered. It might be important to modify the databased on groupings, such as “all people who are diagnosed with
congestive heart failure who present with shortness of breath” if the
trending and relationships indicate that this subgroup is significant.
Other variables can also be introduced at this time to help gain a
further understanding of the data.
The data are modeled to predict outcomes based on analytically
searching the data. Combinations of data must be identified to
predict desired outcomes.
During the assessment phase, the data, as well as the models, are
assessed not only for the reliability of the discoveries but also for the
usefulness of the data mining process. Assessment is key to
determine the success of the data mining approach.
SEMMA focuses on the tasks of modeling. This approach has
been praised for its ability to guide the implementation of data
mining. Conversely, it has been criticized for omitting the critical
features of the organization’s business. SEMMA is logical and can
be robust from sampling through assessment.
Based on the needs of the organization, a variety of models can
be used in combination. A coordinated, cooperative environment is
necessary for complicated data mining projects because they require
organizational commitment and cooperation among researchers to
ensure their success. As described in this section, models, such as
CRISP-DM, Six Sigma, and SEMMA, have been designed as
blueprints to deal with the dilemma of how to integrate data mining
techniques into an organization. They facilitate the gathering of data
and their analysis and conversion of the data into information and its
dissemination in a format that is easy to understand to inform
organizational decision-making. It is imperative that the results of the
data mining process be implemented and any resultant
improvements are monitored and evaluated.
The data mining field and processes are continuing to evolve.
Here are some recent examples of models and algorithms that have
been employed to mine complex healthcare data. Singh and Ghalib
(2021) described the development and use of a knowledge-based
mining and linear analysis model (KB-LA), Klochko et al. (2022)
described the use of machine learning with regression analysis intheir data mining project, and Nomura et al. (2021) described the use
of the Applied Healthcare Data Science Framework to develop a
predictive pain management framework. These authors believe that
we can expect these data mining models and algorithms to be
increasingly shared in a collaborative effort to improve health care.Benefits of Knowledge Discovery and Data
Mining
KDD can enhance the business aspects of healthcare delivery and
help to improve patient care. Examples of how KDD can be applied
effectively follow:
A durable medical equipment company analyzed its recent sales
and enhanced its targeting of hospitals and clinics that yielded
the highest return on investment.
Several plastic surgery suites were bought by the same group of
surgeons. They wanted to know how those organizations were
the same and how they were different. They ran analytics for
disparities and identified patterns and trends that led them to
develop standardized policies and modify treatment plans.
Analytic techniques were used in the clinical trials of a new oral
contraceptive to aid in monitoring trends and disparities.
Hidden patterns and relationships between death and disease in
selected populations can be uncovered.
Government spending on certain aspects of health care or
specific disease conditions can be analyzed to discover patterns
and relationships and distinguish between the real versus the
desired outcomes from the investment.
Patient data can be analyzed to identify effective treatments and
discover patterns or relationships in the data to predict inpatient
length of stay.
Data can be analyzed to help detect medical insurance fraud.
Even though KDD can be complex, it tends to yield a potent
knowledge representation. As analytics evolve, KDD will almost
certainly become easier to use and more efficient and effective in
facilitating data mining in health care.Data Mining and Electronic Health Records
As EHRs become more prevalent, the data contained therein can be
mined for many clinical and organizational purposes. It has already
been established that the use of data-driven decision-making in
patient care is supported by sophisticated EHR functions, such as
clinical decision support and clinical pathways. Looking beyond the
management of individual patient health care, however, it can be
seen that EHR data mining can help with managing population
health, informing administrative processes, providing metrics for
quality improvement, supporting value-based reimbursement, and
providing data for registry software that helps with population health
management.
Registries are also being used to identify care gaps in patient
populations in a physician’s practice or other healthcare
organization. An article on the Medical Economics (2015) website
explained that some EHRs have a built-in registry function, whereas
others interface with third-party registries. Registries are designed to
do the following:
Provide lists of subpopulations, such as patients with
hypertension and diabetes
Identify patients with care gaps, based on evidence-based
guidelines
Support outreach to patients who have care gaps
Provide feedback on how each physician is doing on particular
types of care, such as the percentage of their diabetic patients
who have their HbA1c levels or blood pressure under control
Generate quality reports for the practice (para. 17)
Another type of clinical data mining designed to improve patient
outcomes is a retrospective look at clinical data in an EHR, known as
temporal event analysis (Gotz et al., 2014). As Gotz et al. explained,[o]ur approach consists of three key components: a visual query module, a pattern￾mining module, and an interactive visualization module. We combine these three
technologies together within a single framework that enables ad hoc event
sequence analysis. With this capability, users are able to discover patterns of
clinical events (e.g., sequences of treatments or medications) that most impact
outcome. Moreover, our approach allows users to better understand how those
associations change as patients progress through an episode of interest. (p. 150)
In addition, data in an EHR can be used for administrative process
improvement. Rojas et al. (2016) conducted a literature review on
administrative process mining. Process mining is a relatively new
use of data generated in hospital information systems and is
dependent on event logs generated in the system.
Milinovich and Kattan (2018) described a process used by one
prominent midwestern hospital to create research-ready data tables
extracted from its EHR system. They used the Unified Medical
Language System (UMLS) identifiers to map disparate EHR
variables. “By mapping as many variables as possible to UMLS
identifiers, a simplified data structure can be implemented to store
and query the EHR data. Because the UMLS combines many
disparate medical vocabularies into succinct terms, queries become
simpler yet more robust with the UMLS’s inclusion of relationships,
hierarchies, and synonyms among the various terms” (para. 5). This
proactive approach to EHR data cleaning helps researchers move
almost seamlessly from problem identification to data analysis.
Shickel et al. (2018) conducted a review of the literature to
describe deep learning techniques (a specialized form of machine
learning) used for the analysis of EHR data. They suggested that
deep learning techniques yielded improved predictive models but
cautioned that the resultant models were difficult to interpret. “Since
correct clinical decision-making can be the difference between life
and death, many practitioners must be able to understand and trust
the predictions and recommendations made by deep learning
systems” (p. 1603). They predict that these deep learning models will
improve as research progresses.
It is clear that nurses have only begun to imagine how EHR data
mining can inform healthcare practices and support quality
improvement.Ethics of Data Mining
Data mining in health care is dependent on the use of private health
information (PHI). Practitioners engaging in data mining must ensure
that such data are de-identified and that confidentiality is maintained.
Because most data mining depends on the aggregation of data,
maintaining individual patient confidentiality should be relatively
straightforward. Changes and specific requirements for compliance
with the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA)
can be followed at this website: www.hhs.gov/hipaa/for￾professionals/special-topics/research/index.html.
A relatively new ethical issue has surfaced related to digital
phenotyping, which is the use of individual data collected by
wearable technologies to identify health issues and, more commonly,
mental health status. As Martinez-Martin et al. (2018) described,
“The novel ethical challenges posed by digital phenotyping arise
from the way that the technology can transform seemingly mundane
data into powerful indicators of mental function, with implications not
only for healthcare but potentially in a range of areas where a
measure of a change in cognitive performance or mood might have
broad implications” (p. 2). These data are not collected in the
healthcare context, and as such they are not subject to HIPAA.
However, as Martinez-Martin et al. argued, if these data are to be
interpreted as part of the health status, then there needs to be better
information provided to the wearers so that they can better control
how their data are used. Stay tuned because the informed consent
and ethical landscape related to use of personal data is sure to
evolve.Artificial Intelligence, Machine Learning, and
Deep Learning
The field of AI deals with the conception, development, and
implementation of informatics tools based on intelligent technologies.
By using machines, this field attempts to mimic the complex
processes of human thought and intelligence. Because of the vast
amounts of data generated every day, it was inevitable that health
care would enter the AI arena. Although it is not likely that AI and its
related components of machine learning and deep learning will
replace human thinking and the “art of health care,” they will certainly
augment healthcare practice. As Jiang et al. (2017) pointed out,
“[b]efore AI systems can be deployed in healthcare applications, they
need to be ‘trained’ through data that are generated from clinical
activities, such as screening, diagnosis, treatment assignment and
so on, so that they can learn similar groups of subjects, associations
between subject features and outcomes of interest” (p. 230).
Garbade (2018) offered a simple explanation of the differences
between AI, machine learning, and deep learning. He provided a
diagram of concentric circles (imagine a target) with AI in the
outermost ring, machine learning in the middle ring, and deep
learning in the central ring. As such, he classified machine learning
and deep learning as subsets of AI. If a machine completes a task as
a result of a defined set of instructions, also known as an algorithm,
“such an ‘intelligent’ behavior is what is called artificial intelligence”
(para. 13). Machine learning is when machines process large
amounts of data and improve their output on the basis of what was
learned via the processing. Deep learning utilizes a more
sophisticated type of algorithm, known as an artificial neural network.
Jiang et al. (2017) further described deep learning processing as the
ability to explore a complex neural network with many layers rather
than the typical linear processing common in simple neural networks.
This technique is particularly useful for analysis of images becauseof their complexity. Image analysis AI is commonly used in radiology,
particularly for analyzing chest X-rays, diagnosing cataracts and
retinopathies, and distinguishing between malignant and benign skin
lesions (Jiang et al., 2017).
Daley (2023) provided an overview of AI data processing uses in
health care. Following are some of the examples:
PathAI is developing machine learning technology to assist
pathologists in making more accurate diagnoses.
Buoy Health is an AI-based symptom and cure checker that uses
algorithms to diagnose and treat illness.
Enlitic develops deep learning medical tools to streamline
radiology diagnoses.
Freenome uses AI in screenings, diagnostic tests, and blood
work to test for cancer.
Zebra Medical Vision provides radiologists with an AI-enabled
assistant that receives imaging scans and automatically
analyzes them for various clinical findings it has studied.
BioXcel Therapeutics uses AI to identify and develop new
medicines in the fields of immuno-oncology and neuroscience.
Managing the COVID-19 pandemic also provided some great
examples of the use of AI in health care. Best (2020) described that
AI is being used to discover drugs already in use that might interfere
with the mechanism of infection in COVID-19, detect the outbreak
and predict both the spread of the disease and mortality, differentiate
COVID-19 lung lesions from other lung diseases in medical images,
and monitor the mental health of those experiencing a lockdown.
Rowe (2020a) described a conversational AI system that provides
automated answers to frequently asked questions to help field the
deluge of calls to healthcare systems related to COVID-19. MIT
enhanced the SEIR (i.e., susceptible, exposed, infected, recovered)
AI algorithm used to predict disease spread “by training a neural
network to capture the number of infected individuals who are under
quarantine, and therefore no longer spreading the infection to others”(Rowe, 2020b, para. 4). A new AI platform is currently being tested to
accelerate data processing in the long, tedious process of
developing drugs that may be useful as a treatment or even as a
vaccine for COVID-19 (Lennon, 2020). It is important to remember
that AI processing makes use of large amounts of data that are
aggregated to describe, predict, or prescribe healthcare actions.Bioinformatics, Biomedical Informatics, and
Computational Biology
We conclude our exploration of informatics-based research
processes by introducing three additional terms that you are likely to
encounter as data mining evolves. The use of supercomputing
techniques in each of these related fields is leading to ever￾increasing understanding of biological processes. When we are able
to glean insights from these complex analyses, we are able to apply
these insights to health care and begin to realize positive outcomes.
Bioinformatics can be viewed as a biological or a computer science.
Public Health Degrees (n.d.) defined bioinformatics as the
“application of computer technology and three-dimensional modeling
to large sets of biological data” (para. 8).
According to the website of the University of Texas at El Paso
(2020), “Bioinformatics is an interdisciplinary science with a focus on
data management and interpretation for complex biological
phenomena that are analyzed and visualized using mathematical
modeling and numerical methodologies with predictive algorithms”
(para. 1).
Biomedicine applies information derived from bioinformatics to
promote health. According to the website of the Ohio State University
College of Medicine (n.d.), “Biomedical Informatics is an
interdisciplinary field concerned with unlocking the potential of data
and information to solve problems, ultimately improving individual
health, health care, public health, and biomedical research” (para. 1).
The Vanderbilt University (n.d.) website suggested that
Biomedical Informatics is the interdisciplinary science of acquiring, structuring,
analyzing and providing access to biomedical data, information and knowledge. As
an academic discipline, biomedical informatics is grounded in the principles of
computer science, information science, cognitive science, social science, and
engineering, as well as the clinical and basic biological sciences. (para. 6)Oregon Health and Science University (n.d.) defined biomedical
informatics as “the field that is concerned with the optimal use of
information, often aided by the use of technology, to improve
individual health, health care, public health, and biomedical
research” (para. 1). Biomedical informatics is a growing field, with
significant applications and implications throughout the biomedical
and clinical worlds. These authors believe that biomedical
informatics is the application of bioinformatics to health care. Based
on these definitions, one gets a flavor for what bioinformatics entails.
It is clear that the definition of bioinformatics varies and that there is
no single definition that everyone agrees with at the present time.
Computational biology is the activity of analyzing, synthesizing,
and interpreting biological data to develop processes, algorithms, or
models in order to comprehend and appreciate biological systems
and their interrelationships. Computational biology focuses on
“theoretical models, computational simulations, and mathematical
models for statistical inference” (Carleton, 2021, para. 4). As
Carleton further clarifies, “Scientists choosing to study significantly
larger data sets or those that require multiple-server networks should
instead turn to bioinformatics, which offers resources better suited to
organizing and understanding big data” (para. 10).Summary
Big data is everywhere—data are collected and stored every second
of every day. The data in big clinical data sets can get lost, however,
which diminishes their value. Therefore, in health care, it is
imperative that KDD and AI be used to analyze these data sets to
discover meaningful information that will influence healthcare
practice. The existing data repositories are ripe for the picking; they
contain hidden patterns, trends, and undiscovered nuggets that must
be mined to continue to hone healthcare professionals’
understanding and improve health care.
Data management is essential so that this process can begin with
clean and accurate data. The decisions that are made when
conducting the analysis and developing the model and algorithms
enable healthcare professionals to predict and discover patterns and
trends in the data, thereby making them meaningful. Meaningful
information and knowledge must not only be able to be extracted but
also shared and disseminated about what is being learned and the
new knowledge being generated.
THOUGHT-PROVOKING QUESTIONS
1. Reflect on these terms: database, data warehouse, and data mining. What do they
have in common? How do they differ?
2. Describe an issue associated with healthcare data that impedes the construction of
meaningful databases and inhibits the data mining process. Which strategies would
you use to remedy this situation? Thoroughly describe one strategy and its
potential outcomes.
3. Suggest a data mining project for your practice. Which information would you like to
have about your practice area that could be extracted using data mining strategies?
4. Data mining is associated with numerous techniques and algorithms. How can you
make sure that you select and develop those that best fit your data?R E F E R E N C E S
Berger, A. M., & Berger, C. R. (2004). Data mining as a tool for research and knowledge
development in nursing. CIN: Computers, Informatics, Nursing, 22(3), 123–131.
https://doi.org/10.1097/00024665-200405000-00006
Best, J. (2020, April 9). AI and the coronavirus fight: How artificial intelligence is taking on
COVID-19. ZDNet. www.zdnet.com/article/ai-and-the-coronavirus-fight-how-artificial￾intelligence-is-taking-on-covid-19
Carleton, S. (2021, May 28). Computational biology vs. bioinformatics: What’s the
difference? Northeastern University Graduate Programs.
https://graduate.northeastern.edu/resources/computational-biology-vs-bioinformatics
Chen, Y. (2021). Optimization of clinical nursing management system based on data mining.
Complexity, 2021, 1–11. https://doi.org/10.1155/2021/2110154
Conca, T., Saint-Pierre, C., Herskovic, V., Sepúlveda, M., Capurro, D., Prieto, F., &
Fernandez-Llatas, C. (2018). Multidisciplinary collaboration in the treatment of patients
with type 2 diabetes in primary care: Analysis using process mining. Journal of Medical
Internet Research, 20(4), e127. https://doi.org/10.2196/jmir.8884
Daley, S. (2023, March 24). Artificial intelligence in healthcare: 39 examples improving the
future of medicine. Built In. https://builtin.com/artificial-intelligence/artificial-intelligence￾healthcare
De Gagne, J. C., Hall, K., Conklin, J. L., Yamane, S. S., Wyman Roth, N., Chang, J., & Kim,
S. S. (2019). Uncovering cyberincivility among nurses and nursing students on Twitter: A
data mining study. International Journal of Nursing Studies, 89, 24–31.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijnurstu.2018.09.009
Fernández-Llatas, C., Garcia-Gomez, J. M., Vicente, J., Naranjo, J. C., Robles, M., Benedi,
J. M., & Traver, V. (2011, August 30–September 3). Behaviour patterns detection for
persuasive design in nursing homes to help dementia patients. Annual International
Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine & Biology Society, 6413–6417.
https://doi.org/10.1109/IEMBS.2011.6091583
Garbade, M. (2018, September 14). Clearing the confusion: AI vs machine learning vs deep
learning differences. Towards Data Science. https://towardsdatascience.com/clearing￾the-confusion-ai-vs-machine-learning-vs-deep-learning-differences-fce69b21d5eb
Goodwin, L., Saville, J., Jasion, B., Turner, B., Prather, J., Dobousek, T., & Egger, S. (1997).
A collaborative international nursing informatics research project: Predicting ARDS risk
in critically ill patients. Studies in Health Technology Informatics, 46, 247–249.
Gotz, D., Wang, F., & Perer, A. (2014). A methodology for interactive mining and visual
analysis of clinical event patterns using electronic health record data. Journal of
Biomedical Informatics, 48, 148–159. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbi.2014.01.007
Green, J., Paladugu, S., Shuyu, X., Stewart, B., Shyu, C., & Armer, J. (2013). Using
temporal mining to examine the development of lymphedema in breast cancer survivors.
Nursing Research, 62(2), 122–129. https://doi.org/10.1097/NNR.0b013e318283da67
Härkänen, M., Vehviläinen-Julkunen, K., Murrells, T., Paananen, J., Franklin, B. D., &
Rafferty, A. M. (2020). The contribution of staffing to medication administration errors: Atext mining analysis of incident report data. Journal of Nursing Scholarship, 52(1), 113–
123. https://doi.org/10.1111/jnu.12531
Jiang, F., Jiang, Y., Zhi, H., Dong, Y., Li, H., Ma, S., Wang, Y., Dong, Q., Shen, H., & Wang,
Y. (2017). Artificial intelligence in healthcare: Past, present and future. Stroke and
Vascular Neurology, 2(4), 230–243. http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/svn-2017-000101
Jin, D. (2022). Risk prediction method of obstetric nursing based on data mining. Contrast
Media and Molecular Imaging, 2022, 5100860. https://doi.org/10.1155/2022/5100860
Klochko, O. V., Gurevych, R. S., Nagayev, V. M., Yu Dudorova, L., & Zuziak, T. P. (2022).
Data mining of the healthcare system based on the machine learning model developed
in the Microsoft Azure Machine Learning Studio. Journal of Physics: Conference Series,
2288(1), 12006. https://doi.org/10.1088/1742-6596/2288/1/012006
Kumaraswamy, N., Markey, M. K., Ekin, T., Barner, J. C., & Rascati, K. (2022). Healthcare
fraud data mining methods: A look back and look ahead. Perspectives in Health
Information Management, 19(1), 1–18.
Lee, T., Lin, K., Mills, M., & Kuo, Y. (2012). Factors related to the prevention and
management of pressure ulcers. CIN: Computers, Informatics, Nursing, 30(9), 489–495.
https://doi.org/10.1097/NXN.0b013e3182573aec
Lee, T., Liu, C., Kuo, Y., Mills, M., Fong, J., & Hung, C. (2011). Application of data mining to
the identification of critical factors in patient falls using a web-based reporting system.
International Journal of Medical Informatics, 80(2), 141–150.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2010.10.009
Lennon, A. (2020, April 30). Researchers use AI to accelerate COVID-19 drug development.
LabRoots. www.labroots.com/trending/drug-discovery-and￾development/17505/researchers-ai-accelerate-covid-19-drug-development
Li, H., Lin, S., & Hwang, Y. (2019). Using nursing information and data mining to explore the
factors that predict pressure injuries for patients at the end of life. CIN: Computers,
Informatics, Nursing, 37(3), 133–141. https://doi.org/10.1097/CIN.0000000000000489
Li, Y., & Beaubouef, T. (2010). Data mining: Concepts, background and methods of
integrating uncertainty in data mining. Southeastern Louisiana University.
www.ccsc.org/southcentral/E￾Journal/2010/Papers/Yihao%20final%20paper%20CCSC%20for%20submission.pdf
Madigan, E., & Curet, O. (2006). A data mining approach in home healthcare: Outcomes
and service use. BMC Health Services Research, 6, 18. https://doi.org/10.1186/1472-
6963-6-18
Martinez-Martin, N., Insel, T. R., Dagum, P., Greely, H. T., & Cho, M. K. (2018). Data mining
for health: Staking out the ethical territory of digital phenotyping. NPJ Digital Medicine, 1,
68. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41746-018-0075-8
Medical Economics. (2015, March 13). Mining EHR data for quality improvement.
www.medicaleconomics.com/view/mining-ehr-data-quality-improvement
Microsoft. (2022, December 9). Mining models. https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/analysis￾services/data-mining/mining-models-analysis-services-data-mining?view=asallproducts￾allversions
Milinovich, A., & Kattan, M. W. (2018). Extracting and utilizing electronic health data from
Epic for research. Annals of Translational Medicine, 6(3), 42.
https://doi.org/10.21037/atm.2018.01.13Molteni, M. (2018). 23andMe’s pharma deals have been the plan all along. Wired.
www.wired.com/story/23andme-glaxosmithkline-pharma-deal
National Institutes of Health. (2021). Big data to knowledge (BD2K).
https://commonfund.nih.gov/bd2k
Nomura, A. T. G., Almeida, M. D. A., Johnson, S., & Pruinelli, L. (2021). Pain information
model and its potential for predictive analytics: Applicability of a big data science
framework. Journal of Nursing Scholarship, 53(3), 315–322.
https://doi.org/10.1111/jnu.12648
Ohio State University College of Medicine. (n.d.). Informatics education.
https://medicine.osu.edu/departments/biomedical-informatics/education
Oregon Health and Science University. (n.d.). What is biomedical informatics.
www.ohsu.edu/school-of-medicine/medical-informatics-and-clinical-epidemiology/what￾biomedical-informatics
Public Health Degrees. (n.d.). Health informatics vs. bioinformatics.
www.publichealthdegrees.org/careers/health-informatics-vs-bioinformatics
Rojas, E., Munoz-Gama, J., Sepúlveda, M., & Capurro, D. (2016). Process mining in
healthcare: A literature review. Journal of Biomedical Informatics, 61, 224–236.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbi.2016.04.007
Rowe, J. (2020a, April 15). How conversational AI is plugging in to help with questions
about COVID-19. AI Powered Healthcare. www.healthcareitnews.com/ai-powered￾healthcare/how-conversational-ai-plugging-help-questions-about-covid-19
Rowe, J. (2020b, April 22). MIT algorithm gauges impact of quarantines on spread of
COVID-19. AI Powered Healthcare. www.healthcareitnews.com/ai-powered￾healthcare/mit-algorithm-gauges-impact-quarantines-spread-covid-19
SAS. (n.d.). SAS enterprise miner. www.sas.com/en_us/software/enterprise-miner.html
Shickel, B., Tighe, P. J., Bihorac, A., & Rashidi, P. (2018). Deep EHR: A survey of recent
advances in deep learning techniques for electronic health record (EHR) analysis. IEEE
Journal of Biomedical and Health Informatics, 22(5), 1589–1604.
https://doi.org/10.1109/JBHI.2017.2767063
Simpson, R. L. (2019). Big data fuels unstoppable change. Nursing Administration
Quarterly, 43(4), 378–380. https://doi.org/10.1097/NAQ.0000000000000373
Singh, A. K., & Ghalib, M. R. (2021). KM-LA: Knowledge-based mining for linear analysis of
inconsistent medical data for healthcare applications. Personal and Ubiquitous
Computing, 2021. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00779-020-01509-w
Taylor, D. (2023, September 21). What is big data? Introduction, types, characteristics,
examples. Guru99. www.guru99.com/what-is-big-data.html
Thorlton, J., & Catlin, A. C. (2019). Data mining for adverse drug events: Impact on six
learning styles. CIN: Computers, Informatics, Nursing, 37(5), 250–259.
https://doi.org/10.1097/CIN.0000000000000513
Trangenstein, P., Weiner, E., Gordon, J., & McNew, R. (2007). Data mining results from an
electronic clinical log for nurse practitioner students. Studies in Health Technology
Informatics, 129(Pt. 2), 1387–1391.
University of Pittsburgh. (2021, January 13). The role of data analytics in healthcare.
https://online.shrs.pitt.edu/blog/data-analytics-in-health-careUniversity of Texas at El Paso. (n.d.). College of Science: Bioinformatics.
http://bioinformatics.utep.edu
Vanderbilt University. (n.d.). Biomedical informatics: Research MS and PhD program.
https://medschool.vanderbilt.edu/biomedical-informatics/research-ms-and-phd-program
Vennaro, N. (2017, March 2). Buy (don’t build) healthcare data insights to improve data
investment ROI. MedCity News. https://medcitynews.com/2017/03/buy-dont-build￾healthcare-data-insights-improve-data-investment-roi
White House Office of Science and Technology Policy. (2020, March 16). Call to action to
the tech community on new machine readable COVID-19 dataset.
https://trumpwhitehouse.archives.gov/briefings-statements/call-action-tech-community￾new-machine-readable-covid-19-dataset
Zarrinpar, A., David Cheng, T., & Huo, Z. (2019). What can we learn about drug safety and
other effects in the era of electronic health records and big data that we would not be
able to learn from classic epidemiology? Journal of Surgical Research, 246, 599–604.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jss.2019.09.053C H A P T E R 2 3
Generating and Translating
Evidence for Practice
OBJECTIVES
1. Clarify the differences between evidence-based practice and translational research.
2. Explore the potential contributions of bioinformatics and computational biology to
evidence for practice.
3. Explore models for introducing research findings into practice.
4. Assess barriers to research utilization in practice.
KEY TERMS
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ)
clinical informatics
clinical research informatics
context of care
evidence
evidence-based practice (EBP)
implementation science
Iowa model
meta-analysis
Open Access Initiative
qualitative study
quantitative study
randomized controlled trial (RCT)
research utilization
research validity
translational bioinformaticstranslational informatics
translational researchIntroduction
Mr. James is an 87-year-old man with osteoarthritis in his knees. He
is frail and very thin and requires assistance getting out of bed. Mary,
a new registered nurse, is making her rounds with her team
members and nurse’s aide. Realizing Mr. James is at risk for skin
breakdown and falls, she reviews the agency policy manual
regarding pressure ulcer and fall prevention. Which other resources
could Mary consult if she wanted more information on preventing
these issues? If Mary wanted to know what the current research
suggests about preventing each of these conditions, how would she
obtain this information?
This chapter introduces the concept of translational research and
its role in evidence-based practice (EBP) with a specific emphasis on
nursing informatics and bioinformatics. Before pursuing the content
in this chapter, the reader should already understand nursing
research, the Foundation of Knowledge model, and knowledge
generation through nursing research. Next, key words and definitions
used in this chapter are briefly described. Classic sources (5 years
or older) are used to enhance the reference base and give the
reader a sense of the evolution of translational science and EBP.Clarification of Terms
Evidence-based practice, translational research, and research
utilization are terms that have been used to describe the application
of evidential knowledge to clinical practice. The following paragraphs
explore the definitions of each term. Although these terms are
related, they have slightly different meanings and applications.
Evidence-based practice (EBP), developed originally for its
application to medicine, was classically defined by Sackett et al.
(1996) as “[t]he conscientious, explicit and judicious use of current
best evidence in making decisions about the care of individual
patients” (p. 71). The “best evidence” in this context refers to more
than just research. Goode and Piedalue (1999) stated that EBP
should be combined with other knowledge sources and “involves the
synthesis of knowledge from research, retrospective or concurrent
chart review, quality improvement and risk data, international,
national, and local standards, infection control data, pathophysiology,
cost effectiveness analysis, benchmarking data, patient preferences,
and clinical expertise” (p. 15). EBP starts with a clinical question to
resolve a clinical problem (Figure 23-1). For example, published
research studies are used in healthcare quality initiatives as the
evidence behind the development of practice algorithms designed to
decrease practice variability, increase patient safety, improve patient
outcomes, and eliminate unnecessary costs. Use of EBP promotes
the use of clinical judgment and knowledge in relation to the patient’s
contextual situation and preferences, with procedures and protocols
being linked to scientific evidence rather than based on what is
customary practice or opinion. Weiss et al. (2018) suggested that
“the focus of EBP is the systematic process of review, critique, and
synthesis of research evidence and relevant sources of nonresearch
evidence to develop a best practice protocol incorporating logistical
considerations for implementation in the local context” (p. 427). Therelevant sources of nonresearch refer to organizational values, local
data, local context, and patient preferences.
Figure 23-1 Evidence-Based Practice
Research utilization is the use of findings from one or more
research studies in a practical application unrelated to the original
study (Polit & Beck, 2008, p. 29), resulting in the generation of new
knowledge. Stetler (2001) defined research utilization as the“process of transforming research knowledge into practice” (p. 274).
Research utilization can be self-limiting if research is inconsistent or
not enough research is available to develop a consensus regarding
the answer to the clinical question (Kirchhoff, 2004). Squires et al.
(2011) discussed four distinct types of research utilization: overall
use; conceptual use, where research prompted a change in thinking
but not necessarily practice; symbolic (persuasive) use, where
research was used to support a position or influence the position of
another; and the direct application of research findings in practice
(instrumental use).
Translational research refers to the methods used in translating
medical, biomedical, informatics, and nursing research into bedside
clinical interventions. As depicted in Figure 23-2, new things, new
ideas, new techniques, and new approaches must progress through
several stages before they are widely implemented in practice. Woolf
(2008) described translational research in two ways:
Figure 23-2 Translational Research Pathways
T1: The transfer of clinical research to its first testing on humans
T2: The transfer of clinical research to an everyday clinical
practice setting
The National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences
(NCATS, 2021) developed a translational science spectrum that
expands on Woolf’s original description of progress toward clinical
application. The NCATS spectrum includes basic research,
preclinical research, clinical research, clinical implementation, andpublic health. “At all stages of the spectrum, NCATS develops new
approaches, demonstrates their usefulness and disseminates the
findings. Patient involvement is a critical feature of all stages in
translation” (para. 1).
Difficulties in translating research to the clinical practice setting
exist when research applications do not fit well within the clinical
context or when practical considerations constrain the application in
a clinical setting. Translational research is complicated by the follow￾up analysis, practice, and policy changes that occur when adopting
research into practice; consequently, available healthcare EBPs
often are not fully incorporated into daily care (Titler, 2004, 2010). As
Aarden et al. (2021) pointed out in their examination of the
translational lag narrative, “basic science rapidly produces new
insights into the biological determinants of human health and
disease, but clinical innovation fails to deliver new tools to improve
patient care at a comparable pace” (p. 2). Organizational culture
influences the changes made to a clinical application and establishes
the groundwork and the support for change-making activities (Titler,
2004). The study of ways to promote the adoption of evidence in a
healthcare context is called translation science (Titler, 2010). NCATS
(2019) of the National Institutes of Health (NIH) provided this
definition of translation: “[t]he process of turning observations in the
laboratory, clinic and community into interventions that improve the
health of individuals and the public—from diagnostics and
therapeutics to medical procedures and behavioral changes” (para.
2). Access this center at https://ncats.nih.gov.
Translational bioinformatics is the “development of storage,
analytic, and interpretive methods to optimize the transformation of
increasingly voluminous biomedical data and genomic data, into
proactive, predictive, preventive, and participatory health” (American
Medical Informatics Association [AMIA], n.d.-c, para. 1). It integrates
biological and clinical data and the evolution of clinical informatics
methodology to include biological observations. “The end product of
translational bioinformatics is newly found knowledge from these
integrative efforts that can be disseminated to a variety ofstakeholders, including biomedical scientists, clinicians, and
patients” (AMIA, n.d.-c, para. 1).
Clinical informatics is the “application of informatics and
information technology to deliver healthcare services. It is also
referred to as applied clinical informatics and operational informatics”
(AMIA, n.d.-a, para. 1).
Clinical research informatics is defined by AMIA (n.d.-b) as
involving the use of informatics in the discovery and management of
new knowledge relating to health and disease. “It includes
management of information related to clinical trials and also involves
informatics related to secondary research use of clinical data.
Clinical research informatics and translational bioinformatics are the
primary domains related to informatics activities to support
translational research” (para. 1).History of Evidence-Based Practice
Research results are crucial to furthering EBP. The concept of using
randomized controlled trials (RCTs) and systematic reviews as the
gold standard against which one should evaluate the validity and
effectiveness of a clinical intervention was introduced in 1972 by
Archie Cochrane (1972), a scientist and physician. Cochrane’s
experiences as a prisoner of war and medical officer while interning
during World War II led to his belief that not all medical interventions
were needed and that some caused more harm than good.
Cochrane viewed the RCT as a means of validating clinical
interventions and limiting the interventions to those that were
scientifically based, effective, and necessary (Dickersin &
Manheimer, 1998). As explanatory information, an RCT involves
testing an intervention in a study with two randomly selected groups,
one receiving the intervention and the other serving as a control
group. A systematic review is a collection and analysis of research
on a particular topic (more on this later).
Cochrane’s colleague, Iain Chalmers, began compiling a
comprehensive clinical trials registry of 3,500 clinical trial results in
the field of perinatal medicine. In 1988, after being published in print
3 years earlier, the registry became available electronically.
Chalmers’s methods for compiling the trials database became a
model for future registry assembly. Eventually, the National Health
Service in the United Kingdom, recognizing the value of and need for
systemic reviews for all of health care, developed the Cochrane
Center. The Cochrane Collaboration was initiated in 1993 and
expanded internationally to maintain systematic reviews in all areas
of health care (Dickersin & Manheimer, 1998). Many universities
subscribe to the Cochrane Collaboration database, making this
information easily accessible to students, faculty, and nurses who
work for university hospital systems. Visit www.cochrane.org for the
latest Cochrane evidence. Cochrane announced in 2019 its intentionto establish a new Cochrane network across the United States.
Access the U.S. network here: http://US.cochrane.orgEvidence
The RCT is considered the most reliable source of evidence. Yet
RCTs are not always available; consequently, nurses must use
critical analysis using the best available evidence on which to base
their clinical decision-making (Baumann, 2010). The updated Stetler
(2001) model of research utilization identified internal and external
forms of evidence. External evidence originates from research and
national experts, whereas internal forms of evidence originate from
nontraditional sources, such as clinical experience and quality
improvement data.
Evidence includes standards of practice, codes of ethics,
philosophies of nursing, autobiographical stories, esthetic criticism,
works of art, qualitative studies, and patient and clinical knowledge
(Melnyk et al., 2000). French (2002) summarized evidence as “truth,
knowledge (including tacit, expert opinion and experiential), primary
research findings, meta-analyses and systematic reviews” (p. 254).
Brown (2013) provided this definition of evidence: “Objective
knowledge or information used as the basis for a clinical protocol,
clinical decision, or clinical action. Evidence sources include
research, agency data regarding system performance and patient
outcomes, large healthcare databases, and expert opinion” (p. 439).
Nurses may additionally draw on evidence from the context of care,
such as audit and performance data, the culture of the organization,
social and professional networks, discussion with stakeholders, and
local or national policy (Rycroft-Malone et al., 2004, p. 86).
Concern has been voiced by nurse theorists that nurses are being
influenced too much by the medical model in accepting the RCT as
the only true source of evidence, thereby “reverting to the medical
perspective” rather than incorporating “theory-guided evidence and
diverse ways of knowing” (Fawcett et al., 2001, p. 115). The context
change from medicine to nursing requires nurses to apply other
knowledge and nursing theory. The use of research results as thesole basis for clinical decision-making ignores other types of
evidence inherent in nursing practice (Scott-Findlay & Pollock,
2004).
To use evidence in practice, the weight of the research, also called
research validity, must be determined. Evidence hierarchies have
been defined to grade and assign value to the information source.
For example, a classic evidential hierarchy developed by Stetler et
al. (1998) prioritized evidence into six categories:
1. Meta-analysis
2. Individual experimental studies
3. Quasi-experimental studies
4. Nonexperimental studies
5. Program evaluations, such as quality improvement projects
6. Opinions of experts
The hierarchy identifies meta-analysis as the highest-quality
evidence because it uses multiple individual research studies to
reach a consensus. It is interesting to note that opinions of experts
are considered the least significant in this hierarchy, yet nurses most
often seek the opinion of a more experienced colleague or peer
when searching for information regarding patient care (Pravikoff et
al., 2005).
Qualitative research allows one to understand the way in which
the intervention is experienced by the researcher and the participant
and the value of the interventions to both parties (O’Neill et al.,
2007). Qualitative research is not always considered in EBP
because methods for synthesizing the evidence are more difficult to
accomplish and interpret. The Cochrane Qualitative Research
Methods Group has developed search, appraisal, and synthesis
methodologies for qualitative research (Joanna Briggs Institute, n.d.)
and provides a database of articles related to methodological
research (Cochrane Methods, n.d.).Bridging the Gap Between Research and
Practice
The time between research dissemination and clinical translation
may be significant, and this delay may adversely affect patient
outcomes. Bridging the gap between research and practice requires
an understanding of the key concepts and barriers, access to
research findings, access to clinical mentors for research
understanding, a reinforcing culture, and a desire on the part of the
clinician to implement best practices (Melnyk, 2005; Melnyk et al.,
2005). In the Iowa model of EBP, research and other evidential
sources are adopted directly in the practice setting with the goal of
developing a standard of care and team decision-making (Schaffer
et al., 2013; Titler, 2007). In addition, the groundwork required to
create a conceptual framework supportive of an EBP includes
workplace culture change and support of the change through
leadership (Stetler et al., 1998). Beliefs and attitudes, involvement in
research activities, information seeking, professional characteristics,
education, and other socioeconomic factors are potential
determinants of research utilization (Estabrooks et al., 2003);
however, meta-analysis points out that too much original research
and not enough repetition of previous studies fails to advance the
knowledge base.
Developing countries are often constrained economically from
accessing research sources. Organizations, such as the Cochrane
Collaboration, provide free reviews to fill this void. Even so,
knowledge dissemination strategies and education are required to
take advantage of these resources.
In the past decade, two new research approaches have emerged
that hold promise for bridging the gap between research and
practice: action research and implementation science. Unlike
traditional research, where the goal is to contribute to the body of
nursing knowledge, these two approaches focus on studying theprocess of evidence as it is implemented in the clinical setting. Think
of a quality improvement project with data collection and the goal of
knowledge dissemination after implementation.
The National Cancer Institute sponsors an online self-paced
training program titled Training Institute for Dissemination and
Implementation Research in Cancer. Access it at
https://cancercontrol.cancer.gov/IS/training￾education/tidirc/openaccess.html. The University of Washington also
sponsors the Implementation Science Resource Hub. Access it at
https://impsciuw.org.Barriers to and Facilitators of Evidence￾Based Practice
Tacia et al. (2015) concluded that there are six challenges or barriers
to the application of EBP: “institutional and/or cultural barriers, lack
of knowledge, lack of motivation, time management, physician and
patient factors, and limited access to up to date, user-friendly
technology and computer systems” (p. 93). Nurses may also see the
job of interpreting research as too complex or the organizational
culture as a barrier to implementation of EBP (Kieft et al., 2014;
McCaughan et al., 2002). Many believe that inpatient direct care
nurses lack basic knowledge of EBP and must have access to and
assistance with technical resources.
Yet Melnyk et al. (2009) noted that a number of factors also
facilitate the use of EBP. These driving forces include knowledge and
skills in EBP; having a conviction that there is a value to using
evidence in practices; and practicing in a supportive culture with
tools available to sustain evidence-based care, including access to
computers and databases, evidence-based content at the point of
care, and the presence of EBP mentors. Tacia et al. (2015) noted
that interprofessional collaboration, mentorship, and administrative
support were necessary for the adoption of EBP. It is imperative that
we remove the barriers and support nurses using EBP as well as
continue to mentor and work with those who are just beginning to
initiate EBP into their practice.
In a discussion of best practices related to the implementation of
the American Association of Critical-Care Nurses’ practice alert on
hemodynamic monitoring, Von Rueden (2020) identified strategies
for practice improvement, including a formal practice gap analysis,
education using simulation, nursing rounds, and journal clubs.
Interestingly, this discussion centered on a practice alert initiated in
2004 and revised in 2009 and 2016. We must find ways to be more
efficient in getting research results into practice.The Role of Informatics
Computers are used in all areas of research: (1) literature search
databases, such as CINAHL; (2) online literature reference lists,
such as RefWorks; (3) data capture, collection, and coding; (4) data
analysis; (5) data modeling; (6) meta-analysis; (7) qualitative
analysis; and (8) dissemination of results (Saba & McCormick,
2006). The context for nursing informatics has expanded to support
dramatic changes in the way science is accomplished. Information
need and the collaborative component of interdisciplinary research
rely heavily on technology and informatics. Technologies, such as
social networking, have also improved collaboration. The use of
technology and informatics in facilitating interdisciplinary and
translational research is a key architectural component of the NIH’s
(n.d.) reengineering of the clinical research enterprise as part of its
road map initiative for medical research. As technology continues to
advance, so do the informatics tools available to researchers. The
Institute of Translational Health Sciences (n.d.) at the University of
Washington is one among many university-based research groups
(at this writing in May 2020, 4,175 institutions in 147 countries) that
link to REDCap (n.d.), described here:
REDCap (Research Electronic Data Capture) is a secure, web-based software
platform designed to support data capture for research studies, providing 1) an
intuitive interface for validated data capture; 2) audit trails for tracking data
manipulation and export procedures; 3) automated export procedures for seamless
data downloads to common statistical packages; and 4) procedures for data
integration and interoperability with external sources. (para. 2)
This database is fully compliant with HIPAA (Health Insurance
Portability and Accountability Act) and institutional review boards and
supports the seamless design of online questionnaires.
Another initiative designed to support translational research and
the fast-tracking of research findings into clinical practice is the
National Center for Data to Health (CD2H, n.d.), part of NCATS. “By
increasing collaboration, the CD2H fosters a robust translationalscience informatics ecosystem that collectively develops solutions to
solve clinical problems faster, more efficiently, and more effectively”
(CD2H, n.d., para. 2). This center has also recently added the
National COVID Cohort Collaborative (N3C) in response to the
pandemic.
Clinical research informatics at the Oregon Clinical and
Translational Research Institute (n.d.) accelerates translational
research “by providing a full suite of informatics tools for bench-to￾bedside, clinical and health care systems research. Program
activities span the translational spectrum, from Translational
Bioinformatics to Clinical Research Informatics” (para. 1). Many
other universities are utilizing informatics tools, software, and
databases to engage in translational research. Translational
informatics refers to the application of research informatics to
translational research in order to close the gap from research to the
bedside to improve the health of patients and the community.
An informatics infrastructure is critical to EBP. As early as 2008,
Bakken et al. discussed expanding the context of informatics to
genomic health care, shifting research paradigms, and social web
technologies. Ensuring the global collaborative nature of nursing
research for 2010 through 2018 required an expansion of the nursing
research agenda to user information needs, data management,
information support for nurses and patients, practice-based
knowledge generation, and design evaluation methodologies. Giuse
et al. (2005) described the evolving role of the clinical informationist
(i.e., informaticist) as being a partner on the healthcare team who
provides timely clinical evidence for the clinical workflow. Although
not specific to nursing informatics, NCATS (2023) provides awards
under its Clinical and Translational Science Awards (CTSA) program
to accelerate the transfer of research to the clinical setting. The
Quality and Safety Education for Nurses (QSEN, 2022) cites key
competencies (i.e., knowledge, skills, and attitudes) in both EBP and
informatics. With the goal of promoting the use of research findings
and tool use based on these findings, the Agency for Healthcare
Research and Quality (AHRQ) became an active participant in
pushing evidence forward into practice. The AHRQ is a government-TABLE 23-1
sponsored organization with the mission of reducing patients’ risk of
harm, decreasing healthcare costs, and improving patient outcomes
through the promotion of research and technology applications
focused on EBP. In 1999, AHRQ (2022) implemented its Translating
Research into Practice (TRIP) initiative to generate knowledge about
evidence-based care. In the second TRIP (TRIP-II) initiative, the
focus shifted to improving health care for underserved populations
and using information technology to shape translational research
and health policy.
A growing number of printed and electronic resources are
available to assist in creating guidelines and offering information
about EBP. A selection of existing websites is shown in Table 23-1.
The Role of Informatics: Online Evidence-Based
Resources
Website Description
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality
www.ahrq.gov
The Agency for
Healthcare Research and
Quality contains a wealth
of information regarding
healthcare quality. There
is no charge for access
to the site or its
resources.
BMJ Best Practice
bestpractice.bmj.com/info/us
BMJ Best Practice takes
you quickly and
accurately to the latest
evidence-based
information, whenever
and wherever you need
it.
Its step-by-step guidance
on diagnosis, prognosis,
treatment, and
prevention is updated
daily using robustWebsite Description
evidence-based
methodology and expert
opinion.
Orelena Hawks Puckett Institute
www.puckett.org
The Orelena Hawks
Puckett Institute is a not￾for-profit organization
engaging in activities that
enhance and promote
healthy child, parent, and
family functioning. Its
goal is to foster adoption
of EBPs that build on the
capacities and strengths
of children, parents,
families, communities,
and public and private
organizations.
The Centre for Evidence-Based Medicine
www.cebm.net
The Centre for Evidence￾Based Medicine, located
in Oxford in the United
Kingdom, is devoted to
developing and
promoting evidence￾based resources for
healthcare professionals.
In addition to free
articles, the site also
provides free teaching
resources and
presentations.
CINAHL Complete
www.ebsco.com/products/research-databases/cinahl￾complete
CINAHL information
system offers a multitude
of online services, which
include website link
sources, CINAHL’s online
nursing and allied health
database, document
delivery, and search
services.
Cochrane Cochrane’s mission is to
promote evidence-Website Description
www.cochrane.org informed health decision￾making by producing
high-quality, relevant,
accessible systematic
reviews and other
synthesized research
evidence. Its work is
internationally recognized
as the benchmark for
high-quality information
about the effectiveness
of health care.
PubMed
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov
PubMed comprises more
than 30 million citations
for biomedical literature
from MEDLINE, life
science journals, and
online books. Citations
may include links to full￾text content from
PubMed Central and
publishers’ websites.
Joanna Briggs Institute
https://jbi.global
The Joanna Briggs
Institute was established
in 1996 as a resource for
best care practices.
Joanna Briggs was the
first matron of the
Adelaide Hospital in
Australia and is
recognized for her
financial and
organizational support.
The Joanna Briggs
Institute is a leader in
developing EBPs.
The Johns Hopkins University Evidence-Based Practice
Center
www.jhsph.edu/research/centers-and-institutes/johns￾hopkins-evidence-based-practice-center
The Johns Hopkins
University Evidence￾Based Practice Center
was established in 1997
and is one of 14 such
centers producingWebsite Description
comprehensive,
systematic reviews for
the AHRQ.
PubMed Central
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc
PubMed Central is a free
digital archive of science￾related articles managed
by the National Center
for Biotechnology
Information. BioMed
Central (an open source
online archive) may be
accessed here.
Trip Medical Database
www.tripdatabase.com
The Trip medical
database is a clinical
search tool that allows
clinicians to identify the
best evidence for clinical
practice.
Worldviews on Evidence-Based Nursing
https://sigmapubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/journal/17416787
This magazine,
sponsored by Sigma
Theta Tau International,
is dedicated exclusively
to evidence-based
nursing articles. The
magazine is also offered
online by subscription.TABLE 23-2
Developing Evidence-Based Practice
Guidelines
Several models have been developed to guide organizations into
translating research into practice. Brief descriptions of these models
are provided in Table 23-2. As an example, Titler (2007) identified
the steps in the Iowa model for translating research into practice as
(1) identifying the problem, issue, or topic in nursing practice; (2)
research and critique of related evidence; (3) adaptation of the
evidence to practice; (4) implementation of the EBP; and (5)
evaluation of patient outcomes and care practices. Careful analysis
and discussion of the research or other forms of evidence in this
scenario may reveal that, given the context, implementation may not
be practical. Following implementation, results must be monitored to
determine whether the application works for the context. Thoughtful
discussion of the findings will help the clinical team determine
whether further research or change is warranted. As a practical
application, evidence-based standards for care are developed by
hospitals to meet the American Nurses Association/American Nurses
Credentialing Center standards for achieving Magnet hospital
recognition.
Comparison of Model Approaches to Evidence￾Based Practice
Stetler Model
(2001)
ACE Star
Model
(Stevens, 2002)
Iowa Model of Evidence￾Based Practice to Promote
Quality Care (Titler et al.,
2001)
1. Preparation
2. Validation
1. Discovery 1. Select the trigger as impetus for
practice (knowledge- or practice￾focused) change.3. Cooperative
evaluation
4. Decision￾making
5. Translational
application
6. Evaluation
2. Evidence
summary
3. Translation
4. Integration
5. Evaluation
2. Determine whether the topic is worth
pursuing for the organization, and if
not, pursue a new trigger.
3. Determine whether there is a
significant research base. If so,
change; otherwise, conduct or seek
more research.
4. If change is appropriate for practice,
implement change.
5. Monitor results.
6. Disseminate results.
Information technology is important in synthesizing the research
regardless of the model. Bakken (2001) recommended (1)
standardized nomenclature required for the electronic health record
(standardized terminologies and structures); (2) digital sources of
evidence; (3) standards that facilitate healthcare data exchange
among heterogeneous systems; (4) informatics processes that
support the acquisition and application of evidence to a specific
clinical situation; and (5) informatics competencies (p. 1999).
Bakken’s recommendations encouraged the development of an
infrastructure that creates a database of experiential clinical
evidence.Meta-Analysis and Generation of Knowledge
Systematic reviews combine results from multiple primary
investigations to obtain consensus on a specific area of research.
Studies are discarded from the review if they are not considered
sound, thereby creating a reliable end result. The strength of the
systematic review is its ability to corroborate findings and reach
consensus. Systematic reviews show the need for more research by
revealing the areas where quantitative results may be lacking or
minimal. Bias may occur if the selected studies are inadequate, all
sources of evidence are not investigated, or the publications
selected are not adequately diverse (Lipp, 2005). The BMJ Clinical
Evidence Blog (https://blogs.bmj.com) has stressed the importance
of getting evidence into health service decision-making and being
cautious of evidence spin that adds bias to the reporting of the
evidence.
Meta-analysis, a form of systematic review, uses statistical
methods to combine the results of several studies (Cook et al.,
1997). Quantitative studies are typically used. According to Glass
(1976), “[M]eta-analysis is the statistical analysis of a large collection
of analysis results from individual studies for the purpose of
integrating the findings” (p. 3).
A typical documentation search strategy for meta-analysis begins
with the identification of studies through a search of bibliographic
databases, identification of meta-analysis articles that match the
search criteria, elimination of those articles that do not match the
search criteria, review of the reference lists in the meta-analysis for
other articles that may relate to the topic, and a review of each article
for quality and content. Additional sources should include
unpublished works, such as conferences and dissertation abstracts,
with the goal of obtaining as many relevant articles as possible.
Gregson et al. (2002) identified the steps of a meta-analysis as (1)
defining the problem, followed by protocol generation; (2)establishing study eligibility criteria, followed by a literature search;
(3) identifying the heterogeneity of results of studies; (4)
standardizing the data and statistically combining the results; and (5)
conducting sensitivity testing to determine whether the combined
results are the same. The often-cited criticism of meta-analysis is
that the emphasis is on quantitative studies, not qualitative studies.
In addition, the analysis is only as good as the studies used
(Gregson et al., 2002). Collection and dissemination of these meta￾analyses and systematic reviews are available in paper and on the
internet, although many such databases require a subscription.
The term open access refers to a worldwide movement to make a
library of knowledge available to anyone with internet access. The
Open Access Initiative came about in response to the tremendous
cost of research library access. Libraries pay large fees for journal
subscriptions, and the richness of library references is limited to what
the budget allows. The cost of keeping current with research has
caused library subscriptions to decline (Yiotis, 2005). Open access
adds to the controversy, with some journals charging authors for
publication of their work, which in itself may provide a financial
barrier to publication in this form.
According to Suber’s (2004) open access overview, open access
refers to digital literature that is available to anyone with internet
access free of charge. There are two vehicles for open access:
archives and journals. Open access journals are generally peer
reviewed and freely available. The publishers of open access
journals do not charge the reader but rather obtain funds for
publishing elsewhere. Open access journals may charge the author
or depend on other forms of funding, such as donations, grants, and
advertising, to publish. SPARC (Scholarly Publishing and Academic
Resources Coalition, n.d.) pointed out that most research is funded
by government agencies and conducted in academic research
centers; however, “[o]nce published, those that contributed to the
research (from taxpayers to the institutions that supported the
research itself) have to pay again to access the findings. Though
research is produced as a public good, it isn’t available to the publicwho paid for it” (para. 3). Open access promotes research
collaboration and fast-tracking of results into practice.Expanding Research Boundaries and Effects
on Clinical Translation
Thus far in this chapter, we have been focused on more traditional
research methods and concepts. However, the fields of biomedical
informatics and computational biology are making important
contributions to our understanding of the basis of disease and
allowing us to examine huge data sets searching for important
insights. When the human genome project was instituted, there was
a great deal of excitement in the scientific community because of the
potential for understanding human biological processes and
diseases. As with all research, there is still a considerable time lag
before clinical change.
The future of health care is based on genomics. Bioinformatics
and computational biology have provided the tools to make it
possible to analyze and interpret complex biological processes.
Through these developments, several projects have advanced
understanding of the human genome, haplotypes, and the genomic
changes related to disease. The complete sequencing of the human
genome has led to the systems biology referred to as omics and has
elevated scientists’ ability from studying one gene or protein to
studying fundamental biological processes (Box 23-1).
BOX 23-1 OMICS
Ome and omics are suffixes derived from the term genome. National Public Radio
(2010) credits botanist Hans Winkler with merging “the Greek words ‘genesis’ and
‘soma’ to describe a body of genes” (para. 1) in 1920. The term genome was born from
this combination, and genomics arose as the study of the genome.
Scientists describe a large-scale system or complex using the ome suffix to form
words such as
proteome, a collection of proteins in a cell or tissue;
metabolome, a collection of metabolites; or
transcriptome, a collection of RNA that has been transcribed from genes.High-throughput analysis is critical when dealing with a large subset of data at the
omic level: DNA sequences, gene expression levels, or proteins.
The goal of the International HapMap Project (National Human
Genome Research Institute [NHGRI], 2012) was to develop a
haplotype map of the human genome, the HapMap, which will
describe the common patterns of human DNA sequence variation.
The HapMap is expected to be a key resource for researchers to use
to find genes affecting health, disease, and responses to drugs and
environmental factors. The information produced by the Project will
be made freely available. (para. 1) This international partnership of
scientists has taken blood samples from clusters of related people,
such as parents and children, from different international regions.
Using these samples, the researchers have been able to catalog
some of the common variations in DNA and investigate inherited
alleles. As the name implies, a haplotype map identifies a set of
closely linked alleles on a chromosome, which tend to be inherited
together (Figure 23-3).
Figure 23-3 International HapMap Project Modified from: National Human Genome
Research Institute. (2012). International HapMap Project.www.genome.gov/10001688/international-hapmap-project.
The International HapMap Project states that
[m]ost common diseases, such as diabetes, cancer, stroke, heart disease,
depression, and asthma, are affected by many genes and environmental factors.
Although any two unrelated people are the same at about 99.9% of their DNA
sequences, the remaining 0.1% is important because it contains the genetic
variants that influence how people differ in their risk of disease or their response to
drugs. Discovering the DNA sequence variants that contribute to common disease
risk offers one of the best opportunities for understanding the complex causes of
disease in humans. (para. 3) In 2006, the Cancer Genome Atlas Program (National
Cancer Institute, n.d.) began. This pilot project cost $100 million to map the
genomic changes in brain, lung, and ovarian cancers to assess the feasibility of a
full-scale effort to systematically explore the entire spectrum of genomic changes
involved in every major type of human cancer. The goal of this project was to
develop a resource that will be used to develop new strategies for preventing,
diagnosing, and treating the disease.
A major contribution has been the Human Genome Project (HGP,
2019), which began in 1990 and was completed in 2003. The U.S.
Department of Energy and the NIH coordinated this program, which
had the following goals:
Identify all of the approximately 20,000–25,000 genes in human
DNA
Determine the sequences of the 3 billion chemical base pairs
that make up human DNA
Store this information in databases
Improve tools for data analysis
Transfer related technologies to the private sector
Address the ethical, legal, and social issues (ELSI) that may
arise from the project (para. 2)
According to NHGRI (2015), “One of the most important aspects of
bioinformatics is identifying genes within a long DNA sequence”
(para. 1). It was clear that the speed of DNA sequencing would have
to be realized sooner to decrease costs. The process was refined so
that the sequencing was improved. It took 4 years to sequence thefirst billion bases but just 4 months to sequence the second billion
bases.
During the month of January 2003, 1.5 billion bases were
sequenced. As the speed of DNA sequencing increased, the cost
decreased from $10 per base in 1990 to $0.10 per base at the
conclusion of the project in April 2003 (NHGRI, 2015).
One of the most important aspects of bioinformatics is identifying
genes within a long DNA sequence. Until the development of
bioinformatics, the only way to locate genes along the chromosome
was to study their function in the organism (in vivo) or to isolate the
DNA and study it in a test tube (in vitro). Bioinformatics allows
scientists to make educated guesses about where genes are located
simply by analyzing sequence data using a computer (in silico)
(NHGRI, 2015).
The other major concern brought out through the HGP was the
realization that ethical, social, and legal implications (ESLI) arise
from studying human genomes. The participants in the HGP set
aside a percentage of their annual budgets to research ESLI (HGP,
2008). Box 23-2 and Figure 23-4 identify some of the questions
raised regarding ESLI. In 1990, the NIH created a specific research
program targeting ESLI and addressing human diversity, including
communities and healthcare needs that may not have not been fairly
considered. In 2022, the 5th Annual ESLI Congress was titled
“Innovating for a Just and Equitable Future” (NHGRI, 2023).Figure 23-4 Ethical, Social, and Legal Implications (ESLI)
BOX 23-2 ESLI QUESTIONS RAISED BY THE HUMAN
GENOME PROJECT
Who should have access to personal genetic information, and how will it be used?
Who owns and controls genetic information?
How does personal genetic information affect an individual and society’s
perceptions of that individual?
How does genomic information affect members of minority communities?
Do healthcare personnel properly counsel parents about the risks and limitations of
genetic technology?How reliable and useful is fetal genetic testing?
What are the larger societal issues raised by new reproductive technologies?
How will genetic tests be evaluated and regulated for accuracy, reliability, and
utility? (Currently, there is little regulation at the federal level.)
How do we prepare healthcare professionals for the new genetics?
How do we prepare the public to make informed choices?
How do we as a society balance current scientific limitations and social risk with
long-term benefits?
Should testing be performed when no treatment is available?
Should parents have the right to have their minor children tested for adult-onset
diseases?
Are genetic tests reliable and interpretable by the medical community?
Do people’s genes make them behave in a particular way?
Can people always control their behavior?
What is considered acceptable diversity?
Where is the line between medical treatment and enhancement?
Are genetically modified foods and other products safe for humans and the
environment?
How will these technologies affect developing nations’ dependence on the West?
Who owns genes and other pieces of DNA?
Will patenting DNA sequences limit their accessibility and development into useful
products?
Data from: Human Genome Project. (2008). Human Genome Project information
archive, 1999–2003: Ethical, legal, and social issues.
www.ornl.gov/sci/techresources/Human_Genome/elsi/elsi.shtml.
Even though the HGP has ended, researchers continue to improve
DNA sequencing. Specifically, they continue to advance the
bioinformatics and computational biology tools that are used in
biomedical informatics. These three projects were pivotal in
genomics. The HGP focused on the DNA sequence from a single
individual, the HapMap Project focused on variation in the genome
and on human populations, and the Cancer Genome Atlas Project is
concerned with how cancer affects the genomes. As a result of these
seminal projects and a unique culture of data sharing previously
unknown among biological researchers, molecular data and
measurement tools are now publicly available. Two examples of
publicly available databases are the Gene Expression Omnibus,
which is maintained by the National Center for BiotechnologyInformation at the National Library of Medicine, and Array-Express,
which is maintained by the European Bioinformatics Institute (Butte,
2008). As new researchers with both biology and computational
expertise emerge, bioinformatics and computational biology projects
will contribute new insights into disease mechanisms and therapeutic
interventions, including drug repurposing. Drug repurposing means
identifying new uses for previously Food and Drug Administration–
approved drugs (Tang et al., 2022).
We have seen numerous advances ranging from possible
treatments for Parkinson’s disease and unprecedented detail of the
genetics of type 2 diabetes to the NIH creating an atlas of human
malformation syndromes in diverse populations, NIH researchers
identifying striking genomic signatures shared by five types of
cancer, and NIH scientists discovering the genetic cause of a rare
allergy to vibration (NIH, 2016). However, it will take many more
years of researching and applying bioinformatics and computational
biology before the information in the human genome is understood in
detail. Because these applications have the ability to allow one to
analyze and interpret complex biological processes, researchers are
on the path to understanding the etiology of disease and treatment
interventions at the molecular level. Jiang et al. (2022) described the
use of big data and AI processing “to facilitate biomedical
breakthroughs in cancer through cross-modality integration, cross￾cohort aggregation and data reuse” and urged the expansion of
cancer data sets “to allow better computational models to drive basic
research, cancer diagnostics and the development of new therapies”
(p. 636).
Consider a typical day on any clinical unit. The advanced practice
nurse who wants to prescribe a drug for a patient begins by
reviewing the patient’s genetic test results. The advanced practice
nurse knows that this information must be assessed before
prescribing so that a drug that will treat the patient’s illness
successfully without producing harmful side effects can be selected.
The patient will receive only the medication that they need and one
that is designed to interfere with or enhance the specific molecular
processes that are the signature for the patient’s particular healthchallenge. The advances that bioinformatics and biomedical
informatics promise will dramatically affect healthcare delivery as it is
known. As explained by Rajappa et al. (2004), [u]nderstanding
molecular mechanisms leads to better classification of disease and
better management. A drop of blood from a hypertensive patient
gives gene expression profile by cDNA microarray analysis. It may
reveal SNPs [single nucleotide polymorphisms] related to
hypertension and others which predispose a patient to diabetes
mellitus or myocardial infarction and the clinician can determine
which drugs are beneficial and which are harmful. This scenario has
a whale of difference from the current “trial and error” method of
matching a patient with antihypertensives. (p. 128) This vision from
2004 has become a reality, and the scope of treatments and
interventions continues to expand. Our expectations and hopes are
being met and surpassed.
Nurses can be involved in bioinformatics in many ways, including
as nurse researchers, helping to map molecular processes, and as
educators and advocates, helping patients and families to
understand these complex biological processes. For more
information about the roles of nurses in this exciting new field, visit
the website of the International Society of Nurses in Genetics
(www.isong.org).The Future
The future depends on a prepared workforce ready to meet the
challenges of tomorrow. A prepared workforce will require a focus on
informatics, bioinformatics, clinical research, translational research,
other research methods, and EBP. In this data-driven healthcare
delivery system in which nurses work, they must adopt data
standards. Given the vast amounts of data, Bakken et al. (2008)
identified areas of focus for nursing informatics in knowledge
representation, data management, analysis, and predictive modeling
in genomic health care and the need for policies and procedures to
protect data acquisition, dissemination, privacy, security, and
confidentiality as well as education in these areas. Informatics tools
support nursing practice, education of healthcare consumers, and
knowledge generation. The technology is available now to
incorporate evidence into reference links embedded in electronic
clinical care plans. Incorporation of personalized clinical desktops to
allow each clinician to have appropriate references (similar to
internet ad bot technology) provided to them may be possible. The
other challenge includes developing and maintaining
interprofessional collaborative environments that truly operate in a
cooperative and open manner. Time, research, and technology will
tell.Summary
These are amazing times. Technology has taken us faster and
further than we ever thought possible. Healthcare jobs have become
more technical and complicated. In some ways, technology has
increased the margin for error. Some healthcare practitioners will
continue to rely on little scraps of paper and nonsystematic methods
to keep themselves and their patients safe. Unfortunately, individuals
who become so tied to these things close their mind to new
innovations. The evolving quality culture and increased patient safety
concerns are dragging healthcare workers forward. For the benefit of
patients, health care must move forward.
The discipline of bioinformatics and its use in biomedical
informatics epitomize the integration of computer science,
information science, computational biology, and health care. These
new applications deal with the resources, devices, strategies, and
methods needed to optimize the acquisition, processing, storage,
retrieval, generation, and use of information in health and
biomedicine. Biomedicine and its applications of bioinformatics
support and manage all healthcare behaviors. They affect how
clinicians deliver health care to the infirm, prevent disease, promote
health, conduct research, and provide formal education for entry￾level practitioners and continuing education for those who are
currently practicing. The field of biomedical informatics, which is
bioinformatics capabilities coupled with health care, includes
informatics and computational biology algorithms and tools and
clinical guidelines. This knowledge can be applied to the areas of
nursing, pharmacy, laboratory, dentistry, medicine, and public health.
Those living the profession of nursing know that the practice of
nursing is intertwined with the management and processing of
information, including the new knowledge being generated by
biomedical informatics. On the biomedical side of informatics, one
must be cognizant of the fact that medical data typically areextracted from personal, confidential, and legally protected medical
records. The protection of human subjects must be paramount, and
all ESLI must be addressed.
Biomedical informatics provides knowledge about the effects of
DNA disparities among individuals. Being able to study human
genomes and biological processing at the molecular level will
revolutionize how conditions are diagnosed and care is provided.
The study of genomics is helping to prevent disease. If one can
better understand an organism’s biological processes and genetic
coding, one can better prevent or treat medical conditions. Clinical
care as it is known will change by becoming genomics based.
Collaboration, improved access to online libraries, research tool
transparency, a common data language, organizational and
informational support, and continued research are a short list of
items needed to advance translational research. Repeat studies are
needed to provide meaningful meta-analysis and systematic reviews.
Technology advancement in the area of incorporating evidence into
clinical tools must continue. Removing the barriers to knowledge￾seeking behavior and providing access to evidential resources will
promote knowledge and, in the end, improve patient outcomes.
THOUGHT-PROVOKING QUESTIONS
1. Twelve-hour shifts are problematic for patients’ and nurses’ safety, yet hospitals
continue to keep the 12-hour shift schedule. In 2004, the Institute of Medicine
(2004) published a report that referred to studies as early as 1988 that discussed
the negative effects of rotating shifts on intervention accuracy. Workers with 12-
hour shifts experienced more fatigue than workers on 8-hour shifts. In another
study done in Turkey by Ilhan et al. (2006), factors relating to increased risk for
injury were age of 24 years or younger, less than 4 years of nursing experience,
working in surgical intensive care units, and working for more than 8 hours. As a
clinician reading these studies, what would your next step be?
2. The use of heparin versus saline to maintain the patency of peripheral intravenous
catheters has been addressed in research for many years. The American Society of
Health System Pharmacists published a position paper in January 2006 advocating
its support of the use of 0.9% saline in the maintenance of peripheral catheters in
nonpregnant adults. It seems surprising that this position paper references articles
that advocate the use of saline over heparin dating from 1991. What do you believe
are some of the barriers that would have caused this delay in implementation?3. In the era of EBP, healthcare providers must continue to think critically about their
actions. What is the science behind their interventions? Healthcare workers must
no longer do things one way just because they have always been done that way.
Research the problem, use evidence-based resources, critically select electronic
and nonelectronic references, consolidate the research findings and combine and
compare the conclusions, present the findings, and propose a solution. The nurse
will be the first to ask why and may be a key player in making change happen.
4. After reading this chapter, you know that the study of genomics is helping clinicians
to understand better the interaction between genes and the environment. This new
information and knowledge will continue to help clinicians find ways to improve
health and prevent disease. How do you envision patient care will change based on
genomics in 10 years, 20 years, or 50 years into the future?
5. Review the ESLI raised by the HGP that are presented in Box 23-2. Prepare a
similar list of ESLI questions to apply to the public health databases being
developed for health information exchanges. Can you appreciate how these ESLI
questions are widely applicable to protecting information gathered from human
subjects?R E F E R E N C E S
Aarden, E., Marelli, L., & Blasimme, A. (2021). The translational lag narrative in policy
discourse in the United States and the European Union: A comparative study.
Humanities & Social Sciences Communications, 8, 107. https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-
021-00777-y
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. (2022). Agency for Healthcare Research and
Quality: A profile. www.ahrq.gov/cpi/about/profile/index.html
American Medical Informatics Association. (n.d.-a). Areas of practice: Clinical informatics.
www.amia.org/applications-informatics/clinical-informatics
American Medical Informatics Association. (n.d.-b). Areas of practice: Clinical research
informatics. www.amia.org/applications-informatics/clinical-research-informatics
American Medical Informatics Association. (n.d.-c). Areas of practice: Translational
bioinformatics. www.amia.org/applications-informatics/translational-bioinformatics
American Society of Health System Pharmacists. (2006). ASHSP therapeutic position
statement on the institutional use of 0.9% sodium chloride injection to maintain patency
of peripheral indwelling intermittent infusion devices. American Journal of Health System
Pharmacy, 63(13), 1273–1275. https://doi.org/10.2146/ajhp060094
Bakken, S. (2001). An informatics infrastructure is essential for evidence-based practice.
Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association, 8(3), 199–201.
https://doi.org/10.1136/jamia.2001.0080199
Bakken, S., Stone, P. W., & Larson, E. L. (2008). A nursing informatics research agenda for
2008–18: Contextual influences and key components. Nursing Outlook, 56(5), 206–214.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.outlook.2008.06.007
Baumann, S. (2010). The limitations of evidence-based practice. Nursing Science Quarterly,
23(3), 226–230. https://doi.org/10.1177/0894318410371833
Brown, S. (2013). Evidence-based nursing: The research-practice connection. Jones &
Bartlett Learning.
Butte, A. (2008). Translational bioinformatics: Coming of age. Journal of the American
Medical Informatics Association, 15(6), 709–714. https://doi.org/10.1197/jamia.M2824
Cochrane, A. L. (1972). Effectiveness and efficiency: Random reflections on health
services. Nuffield Provincial Hospitals Trust.
Cochrane Methods. (n.d.). Methodology register.
https://methods.cochrane.org/qi/methodology-register
Cook, D. J., Mulrow, C. D., & Haynes, R. B. (1997). Systematic reviews: Synthesis of best
evidence for clinical decisions. Annals of Internal Medicine, 126(5), 376–380.
https://doi.org/10.7326/0003-4819-126-5-199703010-00006
Dickersin, K., & Manheimer, E. (1998). The Cochrane Collaboration: Evaluation of health
care services using systematic reviews of the results and randomized controlled trials.
Clinical Obstetrics and Gynecology, 41(2), 315–331. https://doi.org/10.1097/00003081-
199806000-00012
Estabrooks, C. A., Floyd, J. A., Scott-Findlay, S., O’Leary, K. A., & Gushta, M. (2003).
Individual determinants of research utilization: A systematic review. Journal of AdvancedNursing, 43(5), 73–81. https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1365-2648.2003.02748.x
Fawcett, J., Watson, J., Walker, P. H., & Fitzpatrick, J. J. (2001). On nursing theories and
evidence. Journal of Nursing Scholarship, 33(2), 115–119. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1547-
5069.2001.00115.x
French, P. (2002). What is the evidence on evidence-based nursing? An epistemological
concern. Journal of Advanced Nursing, 37(3), 250–257. https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1365-
2648.2002.02065.x
Giuse, N. B., Koonce, T. Y., Jerome, R. N., Gahall, M., Sathe, N. A., & Williams, A. (2005).
Evolution of a mature clinical informationist model. Journal of the American Medical
Informatics Association, 12(3), 249–255. https://doi.org/10.1197/jamia.M1726
Glass, G. V. (1976). Primary, secondary, and meta-analysis of research. Educational
Research, 5(10), 3–8. https://doi.org/10.3102/0013189X005010003
Goode, C. J., & Piedalue, F. (1999). Evidence-based clinical practice. Journal of Nursing
Administration, 29(6), 15–21. https://doi.org/10.1097/00005110-199906000-00005
Gregson, P. R., Meal, A. G., & Avis, M. (2002). Meta-analysis: The glass eye of evidence￾based practice? Nursing Inquiry, 9(1), 24–30. https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1440-
1800.2002.00129.x
Human Genome Project. (2008). Human Genome Project information archive, 1990-2003:
Ethical, legal, and social issues.
www.ornl.gov/sci/techresources/Human_Genome/elsi/elsi.shtml
Human Genome Program. (2019). Human Genome Project information archive, 1990–
2003. http://web.ornl.gov/sci/techresources/Human_Genome
Ilhan, M. N., Durukan, E., Aras, E., Turkcuoglu, S., & Aygun, R. (2006). Long working hours
increase the risk of sharp and needlestick injury in nurses: A need for new policy
implication. Journal of Advanced Nursing, 56(5), 563–568. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-
2648.2006.04041.x
Institute of Medicine. (2004). Keeping patients safe. National Academies Press.
Institute of Translational Health Sciences. (n.d.). REDCap.
www.iths.org/investigators/services/bmi/redcap
Jiang, P., Sinha, S., Aldape, K., Hannenhalli, S., Sahinalp, C., & Ruppin, E. (2022). Big data
in basic and translational cancer research. Nature Reviews Cancer, 22(11), 625–639.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41568-022-00502-0
Joanna Briggs Institute. (n.d.). Home page. https://joannabriggs.org
Kieft, R., de Brouwer, B., Francke, A., & Delnoij, D. (2014). How nurses and their work
environment affect patient experiences of the quality of care: A qualitative study. BMC
Health Services Research, 14, 249. https://doi.org/10.1186/1472-6963-14-249
Kirchhoff, K. T. (2004). State of the science of translational research: From demonstration
projects to intervention testing. Worldviews on Evidence-Based Nursing, 1(S1), S6–S12.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1524-475X.2004.04039.x
Lipp, A. (2005). The systematic review as an evidence-based tool for the operating room.
AORN Journal, 81(6), 1279–1287. https://doi.org/10.1016/s0001-2092(06)60393-1
McCaughan, D., Thompson, C., Cullum, N., Sheldon, T. A., & Thompson, D. R. (2002).
Acute care nurses’ perceptions of barriers to using research information in clinical
decision-making. Journal of Advanced Nursing, 39(1), 46–60.
https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1365-2648.2002.02241.xMelnyk, B. M. (2005). Advancing evidence-based practice in clinical and academic settings.
Worldviews on Evidence-Based Nursing, 2(3), 161–165. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1741-
6787.2005.00027.x
Melnyk, B. M., Fineout-Overholt, E., Stetler, C., & Allen, J. (2005). Outcomes and
implementation strategies from the first U.S. evidence-based practice leadership
summit. Worldviews on Evidence-Based Nursing, 2(3), 113–121.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1741-6787.2005.00022.x
Melnyk, B. M., Fineout-Overholt, E., Stillwell, S., & Williamson, K. (2009). Igniting a spirit of
inquiry: An essential foundation for evidence-based practice. American Journal of
Nursing, 109(11), 49–52. https://doi.org/10.1097/01.NAJ.0000363354.53883.58
Melnyk, B. M., Fineout-Overholt, E., Stone, P., & Ackerman, M. (2000). Evidence-based
practice: The past, the present, and recommendations for the millennium. Pediatric
Nursing, 26(1), 77–80.
National Cancer Institute. (n.d.). The Cancer Genome Atlas program.
www.cancer.gov/about-nci/organization/ccg/research/structural-genomics/tcga
National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences. (2019). Transforming translational
science. https://ncats.nih.gov/files/NCATS_Factsheet_508.pdf
National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences. (2021). Translational science
spectrum. https://ncats.nih.gov/translation/spectrum
National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences. (2023). Clinical and Translational
Science Awards (CTSA) program. www.ncats.nih.gov/ctsa
National Center for Data to Health. (n.d.). CD2H: Harmonizing the informatics community.
https://cd2h.org
National Human Genome Research Institute. (2012). International HapMap Project.
www.genome.gov/10001688/international-hapmap-project
National Human Genome Research Institute. (2015). Bioinformatics: Finding genes.
www.genome.gov/25020001/online-education-kit-bioinformatics-finding-genes
National Human Genome Research Institute. (2023). Ethical, legal, and social implications
research program. www.genome.gov/Funded-Programs-Projects/ELSI-Research￾Program-ethical-legal-social-implications#areas
National Institutes of Health. (n.d.). The NIH roadmap: Re-engineering the clinical research
enterprise. commonfund.nih.gov/sites/default/files/rtrc_interimreport.pdf
National Institutes of Health. (2016, February 3). NIH scientists discover genetic cause of
rare allergy to vibration. www.nih.gov/news-events/news-releases/nih-scientists￾discover-genetic-cause-rare-allergy-vibration
National Public Radio. (2010, July 9). Where the word “genome” came from.
www.npr.org/templates/story/story.php?storyId=128410577
O’Neill, T., Jinks, C., & Ong, B. N. (2007). Decision-making regarding total knee
replacement surgery: A qualitative meta-synthesis. BMC Health Services Research,
7(52). https://doi.org/10.1186/1472-6963-7-52
Oregon Clinical and Translational Research Institute. (n.d.). Powering innovation with
OCTRI informatics. www.ohsu.edu/octri/powering-innovation-state-art-informatics
Polit, D. F., & Beck, T. C. (2008). Nursing research: Generating and assessing evidence for
nursing practice (8th ed.). Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.Pravikoff, D. S., Tanner, A. B., & Pierce, S. T. (2005). Readiness of U.S. nurses for
evidence-based practice. American Journal of Nursing, 105(9), 40–51.
https://doi.org/10.1097/00000446-200509000-00025
Quality and Safety Education for Nurses. (2022). Evidence-based practice (EBP).
www.qsen.org/post/evidence-based-practice
Rajappa, M., Sharma, A., & Saxena, A. (2004). Bioinformatics and its implications in clinical
medicine: A review. International Medical Journal, 11(2), 125–129.
REDCap. (n.d.). Citations. www.project-redcap.org/resources/citations
Rycroft-Malone, J., Seers, K., Titchen, A., Harvey, G., Kitson, A., & McCormack, B. (2004).
What counts as evidence in evidence-based practice? Journal of Advanced Nursing,
47(1), 81–90. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2648.2004.03068.x
Saba, V. K., & McCormick, K. A. (2006). Essentials of nursing informatics (4th ed.).
McGraw-Hill.
Sackett, D. I., Rosenberg, W. M., Gray, J. A., Haynes, R. B., & Richardson, W. S. (1996).
Evidence based medicine: What it is and what it isn’t. British Medical Journal, 312, 71–
72. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.312.7023.71
Schaffer, M., Sandau, K., & Diedrick, L. (2013). Evidence-based practice models for
organizational change: Overview and practical applications. Journal of Advanced
Nursing, 69(5), 1197–1209. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2648.2012.06122.x
Scholarly Publishing and Academic Resources Coalition. (n.d.). Open access.
https://sparcopen.org/open-access
Scott-Findlay, S., & Pollock, C. (2004). Evidence, research, knowledge: A call for conceptual
clarity. Worldviews on Evidence-Based Nursing, 1(2), 92–97.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1741-6787.2004.04021.x
Squires, J. E., Estabrooks, C. A., Gustavsson, P., & Wallin, L. (2011). Individual
determinants of research utilization by nurses: A systematic review update.
Implementation Science, 6(1). https://doi.org/10.1186/1748-5908-6-1
Stetler, C. B. (2001). Updating the Stetler model of research utilization to facilitate evidence￾based practice. Nursing Outlook, 49(6), 272–279.
https://doi.org/10.1067/mno.2001.120517
Stetler, C. B., Brunell, M., Giuliano, K. K., Morse, D., Prince, L., & Newell-Stokes, V. (1998).
Evidence-based practice and the role of nursing leadership. Journal of Nursing
Administration, 28(7/8), 45–53. https://doi.org/10.1097/00005110-199807000-00011
Stevens, K. R. (2002). ACE star model of the cycle of knowledge transformation.
http://sharonbsn.tripod.com/new_page_1.htm
Suber, P. (2004, December 29). A very brief introduction to open access.
http://legacy.earlham.edu/~peters/fos/brief.htm
Tacia, L., Biskupski, K., Pheley, A., & Lehto, R. (2015). Identifying barriers to evidence￾based practice adoption: A focus group study. Clinical Nursing Studies, 3(2), 90–96.
https://doi.org/10.5430/cns.v3n2p90
Tang, A. A., Woldemariam, S. S., Roger, J. J., & Sirota, M. M. (2022). Translational
bioinformatics to enable precision medicine for all: Elevating equity across molecular,
clinical, and digital realms. Yearbook of Medical Informatics, 31(1), 106–115.
https://doi.org/10.1055/s-0042-1742513Titler, M. G. (2004). Methods in translation science. Worldviews on Evidence-Based
Nursing, 1(1), 38–48. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1741-6787.2004.04008.x
Titler, M. G. (2007). Translating research into practice. American Journal of Nursing, 107(6),
26–33. https://doi.org/10.1097/01.NAJ.0000277823.51806.10
Titler, M. G. (2010). Translation science and context. Research and Theory for Nursing
Practice, 24(1), 35–55.
http://web.archive.org/web/20220709104946/https://connect.springerpub.com/content/sg
rrtnp/24/1/35
Titler, M. G., Kleiber, C., Steelman, V., Rakel, B., Budreu, G., Everett, L., Buckwalter, K. C.,
Tripp-Reimer, T., & Goode, T. (2001). The Iowa model of evidence-based practice to
promote quality care. Critical Care Nursing Clinics of North America, 13(4), 497–509.
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0899-5885(18)30017-0
Von Rueden, K. T. (2020). Bridging the gap between clinical practice and the AACN practice
alert on pulmonary artery/central venous pressure monitoring in adults. AACN Advanced
Critical Care, 31(1), 34–40. https://doi.org/10.4037/aacnacc2020888
Weiss, M. E., Bobay, K. L., Johantgen, M., & Shirey, M. R. (2018). Aligning evidence-based
practice with translational research. Journal of Nursing Administration, 48(9), 425–431.
https://doi.org/10.1097/NNA.0000000000000644
Woolf, S. H. (2008). The meaning of translational research and why it matters. Journal of
the American Medical Association, 299(2), 211–213.
https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2007.26
Yiotis, K. (2005). The Open Access Initiative: A new paradigm for scholarly communications.
Information Technology and Libraries, 24(4), 157–162.
https://doi.org/10.6017/ital.v24i4.3378© nadla/E+/Getty ImagesChapter 24
Chapter 25
SECTION VII
Imagining the Future of Nursing
Informatics
The Art of Caring in Technology-Laden Environments
Our Expanding Realities
You might wonder why we are including a chapter on caring as we
discuss the future of nursing informatics. We believe that nurses are
taught to care and hone their ability to care for patients as they
practice; however, considering technologies that can be disruptive,
the art of caring can become compromised or lost. We want to
refocus nurses on the art of caring while enhancing the science of
nursing using informatics tools.
We challenge you to reflect on what you know and what you are
learning and to think of where you are going in relation to your own
practice and nursing informatics knowledge. Just as our professional
and personal lives overlap at times, so do our social and
professional informatics and networking experiences. We cannot
assume that what we do or use in our personal lives is appropriate or
even useful in our professional practice. This section begins with
Chapter 24, The Art of Caring in Technology-Laden Environments,
which considers the heart of what nurses do—caring.
The section ends with Chapter 25, Our Expanding Realities and
the Metaverse. In this chapter, you will examine emerging
technologies that are evolving our sense of reality that will affect the
future of health care, nursing practice, nursing informatics, and
patient care. We want you to pause and reflect on nursing in the
context of informatics and, of course, reality. To help you consider
the disruptive forces affecting our realities, we have provided a
glimpse of patient experiences in future health care: Brad, a virtualassistive service robot; big data; three-dimensional printing; care
bots; cyborgs; the metaverse; and artificial intelligence. Do these
technologies truly become part of our reality and influence our
worldview? As we are informed through the use of nursing
informatics and expand our knowledge and technology-infused
practice, we affect our reality, the reality of the healthcare industry,
and the reality of our patients.
Once you finish reading the final chapter of this text, reconsider
the Foundation of Knowledge model (Figure VII-1). Reflect on reality
and how it relates to the four areas of the model: (1) knowledge
acquisition, (2) knowledge processing, (3) knowledge generation,
and (4) knowledge dissemination and feedback.
Figure VII-1 Foundation of Knowledge Model
DescriptionYou are challenged to ask, “How can I use my wisdom to help
create the nursing realities, the reality of the healthcare industry, and
the reality of our patients in the future?”C H A P T E R 2 4
The Art of Caring in
Technology-Laden
Environments
OBJECTIVES
1. Explore caring theories as they apply to the art of nursing.
2. Acknowledge the potential disruption of technology to the therapeutic nurse–patient
relationship.
3. Define presence and caring presence.
4. Formulate strategies to enhance caring presence.
KEY TERMS
active listening
art of nursing
caring
caritas process
centering
presenceIntroduction
Nursing is hard work. Depending on the site of practice, it can be
both physically and mentally taxing. Nurses are masters at
multitasking—that is, performing several caring functions
simultaneously during a patient encounter. Some nursing
interventions are readily apparent and easily described, such as
collecting vital signs data and changing dressings, whereas others
are less visible yet equally important, such as interpreting the vital
signs data, generating knowledge about the patient’s situation, and
then using that knowledge to inform practice. Equally invisible, yet
important to the therapeutic caring environment, are the little things
that nurses say, project, and do in the caring episode. In this chapter,
we pause to reflect on the art of caring. We emphasize the need to
preserve this central and unique function of nursing and suggest
ways that nurses can ensure that the caring functions do not become
a lost art as technologies are introduced into patient care
environments.
We derive a definition of nursing science from the American
Nurses Association’s definition of nursing. Nursing science is the
ethical application of knowledge acquired through education,
research, and practice to provide services and interventions to
patients to maintain, enhance, or restore their health and to acquire,
process, generate, and disseminate nursing knowledge to advance
the nursing profession. Caring functions, such as therapeutic
communication, listening, touch, and mindfulness, are an integral
part of nursing science because they also help patients to maintain,
enhance, or restore their health. Although the new technologies,
such as smart pumps, barcode medication administration systems,
electronic health records (EHRs), wearables, and smartphones,
being introduced into our practice environments are designed to
increase efficiency, promote safety, and streamline the work of
nursing, we need to ask, to what extent do these technologiesdisrupt the nurse–patient caring encounter? How can we continue to
care effectively for our patients and promote a healing environment
while incorporating the advantages and efficiencies that technologies
provide? Johnson and Carrington (2023) advocate for adding
technology as a fifth dimension of the original nursing metaparadigm
(i.e., human, health, nursing, and environment). “To synchronize
nursing practice with technology as part of what it means to be a
modern-day human is to modernize nursing” (p. 6).Caring Theories
Much of the work of defining caring and developing caring theories
has been done in nursing. The concepts of caring described by
nurse theorists are widely applicable to all professional–patient
encounters, and nurses can model caring behaviors for other
professionals as they provide services and interventions to patients
to maintain, enhance, or restore their health.
Anne Boykin and Savina Schoenhofer (2015) defined caring as
an “altruistic, active expression of love and . . . the intentional and
embodied recognition of value and connectedness” (p. 343). In their
framework, the theory of nursing as caring, caring is created from
each moment nurses are committed to nurturing the patient.
Regardless of the challenges presented to nurses, such as
technology, time restraints, staffing issues, or difficult patients, they
need to reach deeply inside themselves to recognize that knowing
the person is caring. Nurses must be able to enter into each nursing
situation with the intentional commitment to fully care for the patient.
Caring as a concept is also worth exploring in the seminal work of
Jean Watson. Dr. Watson (2015) described the following:
The Theory of Human Caring was developed between 1975 and 1979 while I was
teaching at the University of Colorado. I tried to make explicit that nursing’s values,
knowledge, and practices of human caring were geared toward subjective inner
healing processes and the life world of the experiencing person. This required
unique caring—healing arts and a framework called “carative factors,” which
complemented conventional medicine but stood in stark contrast to “curative
factors.” (p. 322)
It is important to remember that Watson developed her theory
during a time when the nursing profession was struggling to define
itself and identify the unique contributions of nursing to patient care.
In the theory of human caring, Watson defined caring as “healing
consciousness and intentionality to care and promote healing” and
caring consciousness as “energy within the human–environmental
field of a caring moment” (Watson, 2015, p. 323). Think about theuse of the word energy in these definitions, and pause to appreciate
the level of cognitive energy that nurses expend as they care for
patients. Nursing is hard work!
Watson further described the evolution of her theory from the
original 10 carative factors to what she now calls caritas processes.
As her work expanded, she recognized the need for “love and caring
to come together for a new form of deep transpersonal caring”
(Watson, 2015, p. 324). In the evolving theory, she has emphasized
that the “relationship between love and caring connotes inner healing
for self and others” (Watson, 2015, p. 324). The 10 caritas processes
enumerated by Watson are summarized here:
1. The practice of loving kindness and equanimity within the
context of caring consciousness
2. Being authentically present and enabling and sustaining the
deep belief system and subjective life world of self and one
being cared for
3. Cultivation of one’s own spiritual practices and transpersonal
self, going beyond ego self, opening to others with sensitivity
and compassion
4. Developing and sustaining a helping–trusting, authentic caring
relationship
5. Being present to, and supportive of, the expression of positive
and negative feelings as a connection with deeper spirit of self
and the one being cared for
6. Creative use of self and all ways of knowing as part of the caring
process; to engage in artistry of caring–healing practices
7. Engaging in genuine teaching–learning experience that attends
to unity of being and meaning, attempting to stay within others’
frames of reference
8. Creating a healing environment at all levels (a physical and
nonphysical, subtle environment of energy and consciousness,
whereby wholeness, beauty, comfort, dignity, and peace are
potentiated)9. Assisting with basic needs, with an intentional caring
consciousness, administering “human care essentials,” which
potentiate alignment of mind–body–spirit, wholeness, and unity
of being in all aspects of care, tending to both embodied spirit
and evolving spiritual emergence
10. Opening and attending to spiritual–mysterious and existential
dimensions of one’s own life–death; soul care for self and the
one being cared for (Watson, 2015, p. 325)
The Cycle of Caring described by Skovholt (2005) involves a
series of professional attachments and then appropriate separations.
Expert professionals are fully present for the person they are
attempting to help. The difficulty for professionals is finding a
balance between caring enough and caring too much, identified by
Skovholt as professional underattachment and overattachment.
Think about a recent patient encounter. Were you fully present in
the moment and conscious of the individual and their uniqueness?
Did you smile and greet the patient by name and acknowledge
visitors? Have you learned how to “smile with your eyes” while
wearing a mask? Did you place your tablet (or computer on wheels)
to the side, lean forward, adopt an open stance, and attentively listen
to the concerns of the patient and family and offer them the
opportunity to ask questions? Did you explain what you were doing
with and for the patient and why? (See Figure 24-1.) Conversely, did
you focus your attention on the tablet or computer, hide behind your
mask, and talk at the screen as you clicked on the drop-down menus
to document the patient encounter? Did the technology and the
personal protective equipment create a barrier between you and the
patient and their family? Did you depend solely on monitoring
technologies to create your interpretation of the patient’s
experience? Was your assessment of the patient’s current situation
influenced by the objective representation of the person that the
monitoring technologies present in the room created (O’Keefe￾McCarthy, 2009)? “The overwhelming presence of technology at the
clinical bedside has the power to become the strongest reference
point that nurses use to inform, direct, interpret, evaluate, andunderstand nursing care” (O’Keefe-McCarthy, 2009, p. 787). We
must remember that “[t]echnology, however, does not take into
consideration the specific symptom presentation unique to the
person experiencing the illness. Technology’s use is not meant to
replace the person-to-person interaction that is essential in any
nurse–patient encounter” (O’Keefe-McCarthy, 2009, p. 792).
© Monkey Business Images/Shutterstock
Figure 24-1 Active Listening
Patient-centered care is another way of describing the need for
practitioners to focus on the subjective experience of patients with
health challenges. Liberati et al. (2015) defined patient centeredness
as “a collective achievement that is negotiated between patients and
multiple health providers, comprising social practices and
relationships that are woven together through the material and
immaterial resources available in specific organizational contexts” (p.47). They suggested that a focus on patient-centered care may have
three outcomes:
Patients can provide their subjective experience as an input to
improve several, often undermined, aspects of healthcare
delivery.
Care providers might develop their capacity for reflexivity, which
could improve their understanding of the implications of their
actions.
Patients and practitioners can thus provide insights into the
overall health organization on how to innovate processes and
facilities to better respond to local needs.
We will examine reflection on practice in more detail later in the
chapter.
Central to the caritas processes described by Watson and the
discussion about technology-mediated care by O’Keefe-McCarthy is
the concept of a caring presence. Strategies for developing and
enhancing caring presence are discussed in the latter part of this
chapter.
The humanistic nursing theory developed by Paterson and Zderad
also offers some insight into the less visible aspects of nursing care
(Kleiman, 2010). These authors suggested that the basis of nursing
is the response to the call for help in solving health-related concerns.
This call, a foundational concept of humanistic nursing, can be heard where
nursing is offered, coming to our attention as a subtle murmur of pain, sorrow,
anxiety, desperation, joy, laughter, even silence, that expresses the state-of-being
of the protagonists in the drama of health-care delivery, our patients and ourselves.
(Kleiman, 2010, p. 338)
Nurses hear the call and respond with their entire being. Their
knowledge, experiences, ethics, and competencies shape the
interaction with the patient as they respond.
In humanistic nursing we say that each person is perceived as existing “all-at￾once.” In the process of interacting with patients, nurses interweave professional
identity, education, intuition, and experiences, with all their other life experiences,
creating their own tapestry which unfolds during their responses. (Kleiman, 2010,
pp. 341–342)Pause to reflect on how you create your own tapestry during
patient interactions.
Nursing care requires conscious awareness of self and the
uniqueness of each patient. It requires emotional energy expenditure
as nurses seek to find ways to meet the calls of their patients.
Nurses need to be aware of the potential for inadvertently
dehumanizing the patient experience in their technology-laden
practice environments. According to Kleiman (2010), “The context of
Humanistic Nursing Theory is humans. The basic question it asks of
nursing practice is: Is this particular intersubjective–transactional
nursing event humanizing or dehumanizing?” (p. 349).
Several recent articles have begun to question the false dichotomy
of technology and caring and have suggested that it is possible for
technology and caring to coexist in the nurse–patient encounter.
Martinez (2019) suggested that human connectedness can be
facilitated by technology because technology allows us to know what
is unknown about a person. “Technology when aimed at maintaining
human connectedness thru the process of knowing then becomes an
expression of caring” (p. 13). Locsin (2017) also discussed
technological knowing as part of a discussion of the theory of
technological competency as caring in nursing. “Knowing persons as
a practice process of nursing is revealed in knowledgeable
demonstration of intentional, deliberate, and authentic encounters
with persons in technologically demanding nursing practice settings,
particularly those in environments requiring specialized technological
expertise” (p. 162). Finally, Tanioka et al. (2019) discussed the
transactive relationship theory of nursing (TRETON) as it relates to
the disruptive effects of the introduction of artificial intelligence (AI)
into nursing and specifically the use of humanoid nurse robots to
perform routine care functions. Several Japanese companies, as
well as the universities of Louisville and Texas, are involved in
designing and testing care assistive robots (beyond supply delivery
or cleaning robots), which, if they become widely used, will indeed
disrupt the typical nurse–patient relationship and precipitate new
ways of thinking about the caring process. Review the information
about two of these robots at these websites:www.softbankrobotics.com/emea/en/pepper and
www.therobotreport.com/rudy-assistive-robot-helps-elderly-age-in￾place.
We must be fully present and self-aware in every patient
encounter, seeking to deliver exactly what is needed in every
situation. Yes, nursing is hard work, but when we are able to respond
with our whole being, we may find that our patients and families are
more satisfied with the care we provide and we also experience
personal satisfaction and find joy in our profession.Presence
Presence is the act of being there and being with our patients—fully
focusing on their needs. “Presence is an interpersonal process that
is characterized by sensitivity, holism, intimacy, vulnerability and
adaptation to unique circumstances” (Finfgeld-Connett, 2008, p.
528). Paterson and Zderad explained presence as establishing a
relationship by being fully available and open to the experiences of
another (Penque & Snyder, 2014). Penque and Snyder defined three
types of presence: physical presence, full presence, and
transcendent presence. A nurse who is physically present is largely
competent in carrying out care and efficient with interventions but
inattentive to communication and nonverbal cues projected by the
patient and family. When fully present, a nurse will greet the patient
by name, communicate appropriately with the patient, and pay
attention to what is being said and not said during the encounter.
When nurses practice transcendent presence, they will first center
themselves, clearing their mind of all potential distractions, and then
use the patient’s name and gentle touch to convey interest and
responsiveness while carrying out the necessary physical
interventions.
Paterson and Zderad felt that presence was a vital element of their
theory of humanistic nursing (Penque & Snyder, 2014). Presence
requires nurses to be open and responsive to the situations around
them. If they are fully present to the patient in front of them, they will
be able to notice the subtle changes that may not be evident if they
were present only physically. The connection loss may cause the
patient to feel that the nurse is detached from the situation. Penque
and Snyder (2014) gave an example of presence from the book
Tuesdays with Morrie by Mitch Albom: I believe in being fully present.
That means you should be with the person you’re with. When I’m
talking with you now, Mitch, I try to keep focused only on what isgoing on between us. I am not thinking about something we said last
week.
I am not thinking about what’s coming up this Friday. I am not thinking about doing
another Koppel show, or about medications I’m taking. I am talking to you; I am
thinking about you. (pp. 135–136)Strategies for Enhancing Caring Presence
Patients have complex problems and needs. They may be scared,
angry, resistant to change, or happily oblivious to the extent of their
health challenges. Nurses also have complex personal lives with
many competing roles and issues that consume their energies. The
workplace may be short staffed, resulting in care assignments that
stretch them to their maximum. They may be struggling to learn to
use the new technologies that are introduced nearly daily into their
practice environments. As a result, nurses may feel disorganized,
tired, angry, and emotionally spent.
Nurses need to take care of themselves first so that they can be
effective in their patient and family care. Caring for themselves
involves conscious attention to their health and health practices. In
addition, nurses have a “responsibility to model health behaviors”
(Leonard, 2014, p. 17). They should ask themselves whether they
eat a balanced diet, get appropriate exercise, and get enough sleep.
Do they have strategies to manage stress appropriately and
adequate social support? To what extent should health professionals
model healthy behaviors? Reflect upon what While (2015) asserted:
“The personal health behaviours of health professionals may
influence how patients view their credibility as a health promoter” (p.
113).
An approach to improve health is to set goals and keep track of
the progress. A website from the University of Minnesota (n.d.) gives
information on well-being and a self-assessment tool as well as tips
on setting goals. As part of a Concepts of Health course, students
are asked to develop a personal health plan and to journal
periodically during the semester about their ability to stick to the
plan. Here is an example of a simple plan: “I will increase my intake
of fruit and vegetables and walk outside for 30 minutes at least 3
times per week.” As the students reflect on their ability to stick to the
plan in the journal, caring for self is brought into consciousawareness. This simple self-reflective practice may be just the boost
that is needed for a nurse to commit to self-awareness and self-care
on a long-term basis (Figure 24-2).
Figure 24-2 Reminder: Take Care of Yourself
One additional strategy that the authors share with students is a
breathing meditative exercise from tai chi and qigong called the five￾element breathing sequence. This meditative exercise, which can be
performed in less than 10 minutes and can be very energizing and
stress reducing, is described in Box 24-1.
BOX 24-1 TAI CHI AND QIGONG FIVE-ELEMENT
BREATHING SEQUENCE
1. Stand with your feet shoulder-width apart. Relax your arms and shoulders.
2. Inhale slowly as you straighten and then move both arms slightly back and then up
with palms facing up (as though you are gathering a giant ball of energy). Stretch to
your full height as you inhale.3. Exhale slowly as you press both palms down in front of you with hands slightly
cupped and thumbs and index fingers nearly touching. Bend your knees slightly to
sink down as you exhale.
4. Turn your hands over (palms up) just below the waist, and inhale slowly as you
raise your hands in front of you, to chest height. Straighten your legs as you inhale.
(Imagine lifting a ball of energy.)
5. Exhale slowly and extend the arms directly in front of you, chest high, and fan your
hands open to release the energy in front of your chest. Bend the knees slightly to
sink down as you exhale.
6. Inhale slowly, with palms facing you, to gather the energy back toward your chest.
Straighten your legs as you inhale.
7. Press both arms straight out at shoulder height as you exhale. Pretend you are
pushing on walls located on either side of you. Continue the exhalation as you
bring your arms in front of you. Bend your knees slightly to sink down as you
exhale.
8. Inhale slowly as you gather the energy to your chest. Straighten your legs as you
inhale and stretch to your full height.
9. Exhale slowly as you raise your arms above your head to set the energy free. Bend
your knees slightly to sink down as you exhale.
10. Transition your hands to the beginning to repeat the sequence by inhaling as you
bring your hands halfway down and exhaling the rest of the way. (You can also end
here by bringing your palms together in closure, first inhaling and then exhaling as
you slowly move your hands down in front of you.)
Visit the following website for a demonstration of the five-element breathing
sequence: www.youtube.com/watch?v=KtVCCLlkcKg.
The simplest and perhaps most effective strategy nurses can use
to help them be fully present to their patients is to pause to take a
few deep breaths to calm themselves and clear the clutter from their
minds before they address each patient. Nurses’ repeating a
patient’s name silently a time or two before they enter the room also
helps. This practice, known as centering, enables nurses to “be
available with the whole self and be open to the personal and care
needs of the patient” (Penque & Snyder, 2014, p. 31). When nurses
are with a patient, they must be certain that their mind is fully
engaged in the interaction with this patient for the moment. They
must be fully attentive to the patient, be both physically and mentally
present, meet the patient where they are emotionally, listen actively
to what the patient is saying, focus on the nonverbal cues the patient
is projecting, touch the patient gently and reassuringly, and
demonstrate acceptance (Penque & Snyder, 2014; Zerwekh, 2006).Being present can be used in any situation where nurses are
addressing the wants and needs of the patient. It is important not to
force the encounter on the patient for the benefit of the nurses’
agenda (Penque & Snyder, 2014).
Nurses may feel that they do not have time to focus on caring
presence. Caring opportunities are replaced by the time it takes to
input all the information into the EHR and complete the measurable
outcomes that are expected of them. The elimination of face-to-face
interaction with the use of telephones, home monitoring, and other
forms of telemedicine makes utilizing a caring presence more
challenging. The theory of nursing as caring describes caring “as the
end, rather than the means, of nursing, and that caring is the
intention of nursing, rather than merely its instrument” (Boykin &
Schoenhofer, 2015, p. 342).
A related and similar concept for practicing presence—caring
between—is described in the nursing as caring theory (Boykin &
Schoenhofer, 2015). Consider, for example, that nurses experienced
in caring for elders with congestive heart failure will have
expectations and preconceived ideas about what they will find in a
patient situation. These expectations may not allow them to really
“see” the whole patient and their experience of the illness. Caring
between “is a loving relation into which nurse and nursed enter and
which they cocreate by living the intention to care” (Boykin &
Schoenhofer, 2015, p. 344). Nurses need to enter the situation
knowing the patient as a caring person. This knowledge will create
an acceptance confirming the patient as caring. The nurse’s
responsibility is not in determining what is wrong or needed in
another but rather to be present in the situation to know the patient
as caring and to foster a patient-specific caring environment. Nurses
need to come to know their patients both intuitively and scientifically.
Medical technologies provide an objective view of the patient, and
nurses synthesize this view with their own perspective (wisdom),
which is based on their experience, education, and intuition as
applied to the patient’s situation. Nurses must facilitate the caring
encounter by helping patients to find words for their experiences topromote mutuality (Holopainen et al., 2019). This is the essence of
caring.
One of the first skills nurses are taught in their basic nursing
education programs is active listening. They are taught to get down
to the same level of the patient, make eye contact, touch gently (if
culturally acceptable), listen attentively and nod appropriately,
restate and clarify what they heard, ask questions to seek additional
information, listen for feelings that are not being explicitly stated, and
use silence to encourage the patient to think and provide additional
information to them (Watanuki et al., 2014; Zerwekh, 2006). These
communication skills are fundamental to caring. Pause to reflect on
the words of Garagnon and Roth (1999), who described the great
limitation of language:
Between what I think,
What I want to say,
What I believe I’m saying,
What I say,
What you want to hear,
What you believe you understand,
What you want to understand,
And what you understand,
There are at least nine possibilities for misunderstanding. (p. 41)
Nurses should ask themselves when the last time was that they
sat on a chair at a patient’s bedside to get to the same level as the
patient. Even a brief sit at the bedside can communicate volumes
about their availability and willingness to listen, and getting off their
feet for a moment certainly feels good. Have they ever experienced
a patient who became emotional because they looked at the patient
instead of at the computer? Nurses need to think carefully about the
potential barriers to active listening that technology might present.
Considering telephone encounters and eHealth, nurses must truly
listen and be present to a patient whom they cannot see. What are
some of the ways that these caring presence skills could be adaptedfor use in a telehealth encounter? What are the challenges of
communicating at a distance yet being fully present for the patient?
The discussion of caring presence concludes with a definition of
the art of nursing provided by Finfgeld-Connett (2008):
The art of nursing is the expert use and adaptation of empirical and meta-physical
knowledge and values. It is relationship-centered and involves sensitively adapting
care to meet the needs of individual patients. In the face of uncertainty, creativity is
employed in a discretionary manner. Artful nursing promotes beneficent practice
and results in enhanced mental and physical well-being among patients. It also
results in professional satisfaction and personal growth among nurses. (p. 528)
All nurses must strive for beneficent practice that atones for the
potential disruptions to the therapeutic nurse–patient relationship
that their use of technology produces. More recently, caring
encounters have been described as communion-in-caring. “A
genuine sharing defines caring communion—as an intimate
connection in time and space, an absolute, lasting presence” (Tuppal
et al., 2022, p. 526). Overreliance on technology creates tension in
caring encounters, and nurses should strive for “a soul-felt, in-sync
connectedness” (p. 530). Nurses should strive to “contribute to
human flourishing, affirm self-growth, others’ growth and the
community transformation through communion-in-caring” (p. 532).Reflective Practice
As professionals, nurses should be constantly mindful of the need for
practice improvement. Zande et al. (2014) discussed ethical
sensitivity as a type of practical wisdom. Ethical sensitivity is integral
to high-quality care and clinical decision-making. They advocated for
reflection on practice: Taking daily practice of care as point of entry
for reflection is a way to discern both explicit moral knowledge and
tacit moral knowing. Nurses and other professionals can contribute
to improvement on quality of care by creating opportunities to reflect
on daily ethical concerns in an inter-professional team. (p. 75)
Liberati et al. (2015) also advocated for the use of reflection to help
professionals “observe their work from a different perspective. . . .
Such an exploration may help providers to generate insights on how
healthcare services, processes, and facilities could be modified to
better respond to patients’ needs” (p. 49).
One way for nurses to focus more specifically on their practice is
to engage in reflective journaling (Figure 24-3). In the Concepts of
Health course the authors teach, they ask students to complete a
reflective practice assignment over a 6-week period. Students are
directed to review concepts of caring presence and active listening
and to commit to consciously using a strategy for 6 weeks. At 3 and
6 weeks, they are asked to complete the following reflective journal
entry:Attributed to Peter Drucker (1909–2005).
Figure 24-3 Reflective Practice
(Attributed to Peter Drucker [1909–2005])
1. Write a brief description of the presence and therapeutic
communication approaches you tried in your practice for the
past 3 weeks. Provide specific examples of patient situations in
which you tried the approach.
2. Reflect on the following:What did you do well?
Which behaviors and skills do you need to improve?
How did you feel about the experience as it was happening?
Did you plan thoroughly?
Did you achieve your objectives?
Which aspects of planning do you need to improve?
How will this experience affect your future practice?
3. Which professional development needs have you identified after
reflecting on your performance? Which strategies will you use to
address these needs?
Students frequently report that they enjoy this experience and that
the exercise helps to remind them why they were originally attracted
to nursing. They describe experiences where they felt an authentic
connection to the patient. They also report that after 6 weeks of
consciously practicing the strategy, it becomes a part of their daily
practice. Centering is the most frequent strategy that the students
choose to practice. A recent exploratory study of reflection grounded
in caring theory reported three main themes: “Reflection provides an
understanding of caring by developing a language of caring,
reflection provides an understanding of seeing and meeting the
person behind the illness and reflection contributes to increased self￾understanding and awareness of oneself as a caring nurse” (Jaastad
et al., 2022, p. 4).Caring in the Future
Virtual reality, augmented reality, 3D printing, nanotechnology,
sensor technologies, AI, and robotics are but a few of the
technologies that will affect nursing practice in the future. Instead of
shuddering at the thought of these technologies, embrace the
wonderful and positive effects, efficiencies, convenience (for both
patients and nurses), and improvements in healthcare afforded by
them. What will nurses’ future practice look like? How will education
experiences change? What new nursing roles might emerge? To
what extent will patient roles, responsibilities, and behaviors
change?
The TRETON (Tanioka et al., 2019), mentioned earlier in the
chapter, may provide insight into the blending of technology and
caring and how nurses’ future might be shaped. As Tanioka et al.
described, this middle-range theory attempts to guide practice and
research when humanoid nurse robots (HNRs) or other disruptive
technologies are part of the care environment. Transactions will
occur between robots, between robots and patients, and between
nurses and robots, with nurses mediating the transactions. “Through
nursing, human engagements and technological engagements will
be coordinated in the encounters between the HNRs and the
persons being cared for” (p. 314).
The five key assumptions of the TRETON follow:
1. Nursing includes relationships between and among human
beings and intelligent machines such as HNRs.
2. Nurses adopt technologies that aid the practice of nursing.
3. Intelligent machines possess AI that can mimic human
interactions.
4. Human-to-intelligent machine relationships are technology
dependent.5. Transactive relationships are guided by ethics in nursing.
(Tanioka et al., 2019, p. 315)
In the study, a case example was presented where a nurse utilized
Nicki (an HNR) to monitor vital signs of a patient with congestive
obstructive pulmonary disease and asked the robot to provide
relaxation videos to the patient and to help the patient communicate
with his daughter at a distance. All interventions by the robot were
nurse directed. “The health care robot Nicki was programmed to be a
functional partner-in-caring to provide functional services that were
relevant to Mr. Thomas’s needs as identified by the nurse” (Tanioka
et al., 2019, p. 315). Medical technologies hold promise in
addressing future pressing healthcare needs as the population ages
and nursing shortages emerge. Can you think of a recent time￾intensive nursing situation where you could have been assisted by
an HNR?
Despite technological innovation allowing nurses to “know” their
patients and providing efficiencies in care by performing routine
tasks, nurses can and will continue to be central to health care by
virtue of their ethical, caring, and advocacy functions. Patients will be
empowered to be partners in their health care and will look to nurses
to help them manage that power.Summary
Nursing practice relies on information and communication
technologies that receive inputs from the nurses as well as all the
patient care technologies. Computers, handheld devices, monitors,
and other healthcare technologies are essential tools for nurses.
Therefore, the nurse must have the ability to implement, monitor, and
evaluate this equipment based on its inputs and outputs. The
increased demands on the nurse make it easy to lose sight of the
patient amid all these technologies. Nurses must look at monitors,
devices, and other gadgets to receive information; often, it is easy to
forget that the patient is at the core of their care. Nurses should
embrace these new technologies as assistants to help them fully
know their patients.
The authors hope that this brief overview of caring presence
prompts nurses to be more mindful of their practice and that they,
too, will commit to employing strategies that enhance their caring
presence in all patient encounters. Nurses do not want their patients
to feel that they are more focused on the machines that the patients
are connected to or the workstations that they bring with them to the
patient encounter than they are on them. Yes, technology is great,
and it does help nurses collect meaningful data and generate
knowledge about their patient situations. But equally important is the
need to collect the human-to-human data that become available only
when nurses step away from the technology and interact
authentically with their patients.
When you save a person’s life—they call you a hero.
When you blend science with caring—they call you an expert.
When you share your compassion—they call you a friend.
When you do all three—they call you a nurse.
—Author unknownTHOUGHT-PROVOKING QUESTIONS
1. Examine each of the 10 caritas processes developed by Watson. Describe an
example of a patient encounter that demonstrates the use of each caritas process.
2. Reflect on your personal health. Are you a role model for your patients? Which
aspects of your personal health do you need to improve? Which strategies will you
adopt to improve your health?
3. Choose a caring presence strategy to implement in your practice, and use the
reflective journal template provided in the chapter to reflect on your practice.
4. Describe a patient scenario where you could enlist the assistance of an HNR. How
would you introduce the robot to the patient? What duties or functions would you
delegate to the robot? What care functions would you continue to provide? How
would you convince skeptical colleagues of the value of the HNR?R E F E R E N C E S
Boykin, A., & Schoenhofer, S. O. (2015). Anne Boykin and Savina O. Schoenhofer’s nursing
as caring theory. In M. Smith & M. Parker (Eds.), Nursing theories and nursing practice
(4th ed., pp. 341–356). F. A. Davis.
Finfgeld-Connett, D. (2008). Qualitative convergence of three nursing concepts: Art of
nursing, presence and caring. Journal of Advanced Nursing, 63(5), 527–534.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2648.2008.04622.x
Garagnon, F., & Roth, K. (1999). Jade and the sacred mystery of life. Coffragants.
Holopainen, G., Nyström, L., & Kasén, A. (2019). The caring encounter in nursing. Nursing
Ethics, 26(1), 7–16. https://doi.org/10.1177/0969733016687161
Jaastad, T. A., Ueland, V., & Koskinen, C. (2022). The meaning of reflection for
understanding caring and becoming a caring nurse. Scandinavian Journal of Caring
Science, 36(4), 1180–1188. https://doi.org/10.1111/scs.13080
Johnson, E., & Carrington, J. M. (2023). Revisiting the nursing metaparadigm:
Acknowledging technology as foundational to progressing nursing knowledge. Nursing
Inquiry, 30(1), e12502. https://doi.org/10.1111/nin.12502
Kleiman, S. (2010). Josephine Paterson and Loretta Zderad’s humanistic nursing theory. In
M. Parker & M. Smith (Eds.), Nursing theories and nursing practice (3rd ed., pp. 337–
350). F. A. Davis.
Leonard, B. (2014). Complementary therapies: Nurse’s self-care. In M. Snyder, R. Lindquist,
& M. Tracy (Eds.), Complementary and alternative therapies in nursing (7th ed., pp. 17–
26). Springer.
Liberati, E. G., Gorli, M., Moja, L., Galuppo, L., Ripamonti, S., & Scaratti, G. (2015).
Exploring the practice of patient centered care: The role of ethnography and reflexivity.
Social Science & Medicine, 133, 45–52. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.socscimed.2015.03.050
Locsin, R. C. (2017). The co-existence of technology and caring in the theory of
technological competency as caring in nursing. Journal of Medical Investigation, 64(1.2),
160–164. https://doi.org/10.2152/jmi.64.160
Martinez, R. C. K. P. (2019). “Lost touch”: Situating human-connectedness in technology￾caring in the health sciences. Journal of Medical Investigation, 66(1.2), 12–14.
https://doi.org/10.2152/jmi.66.12
O’Keefe-McCarthy, S. (2009). Technologically-mediated nursing care: The impact on moral
agency. Nursing Ethics, 16(6), 786–796. https://doi.org/10.1177/0969733009343249
Penque, S., & Snyder, M. (2014). Presence. In M. Snyder, R. Lindquist, & M. Tracy (Eds.),
Complementary and alternative therapies in nursing (7th ed., pp. 27–37). Springer.
Skovholt, T. M. (2005). The cycle of caring: A model of expertise in the helping professions.
Journal of Mental Health Counseling, 27(1), 82–93.
https://doi.org/10.17744/mehc.27.1.mj5rcvy6c713tafw
Tanioka, T., Yasuhara, Y., Dino, M. J. S., Kai, Y., Locsin, R. C., & Schoenhofer, S. O. (2019).
Disruptive engagements with technologies, robotics, and caring: Advancing the
transactive relationship theory of nursing. Nursing Administration Quarterly, 43(4), 313–
321. https://doi.org/10.1097/NAQ.0000000000000365Tuppal, C. P., Vega, P. D., & Tuppal, S. M. P. (2022). Towards a theory of communion-in￾caring. Scandinavian Journal of Caring Science, 36, 524–535.
https://doi.org/10.1111/scs.13049
University of Minnesota. (n.d.). Enhance your wellbeing. www.takingcharge.csh.umn.edu
Watanuki, S., Tracy, M. F., & Lindquist, R. (2014). Therapeutic listening. In M. Snyder, R.
Lindquist, & M. Tracy (Eds.), Complementary and alternative therapies in nursing (7th
ed., pp. 39–53). Springer.
Watson, J. (2015). Jean Watson’s theory of human caring. In M. Smith & M. Parker (Eds.),
Nursing theories and nursing practice (4th ed., pp. 321–339). F. A. Davis.
While, A. E. (2015). Promoting healthy behaviours: Do we need to practice what we
preach? London Journal of Primary Care, 7(6), 112–114.
https://doi.org/10.1080/17571472.2015.1113716
Zande, M., Baart, A., & Vosman, F. (2014). Ethical sensitivity in practice: Finding tacit moral
knowing. Journal of Advanced Nursing, 70(1), 68–76. https://doi.org/10.1111/jan.12154
Zerwekh, J. (2006). Nursing care at the end of life: Palliative care for patients and families.
F. A. Davis.C H A P T E R 2 5
Our Expanding Realities and
the Metaverse
Craig McGonigle and Dee McGonigle
OBJECTIVES
1. Describe reality.
2. Differentiate between virtual reality, augmented reality, mixed reality, and extended
reality.
3. Assess how informatics supports and evolves the realities.
4. Explore various realities to contemplate and critically think about in relation to your
current reality and foreseeable realities while imagining your future realities.
5. Assess the relationship between Internet of Things (IoT), Intelligence of Things
(IoT), and Artificial Intelligence of Things (AIoT) and reality.
6. Explore the effect of big data, robotics, and smart devices on our professional reality
as well as on our patients’ realities.
7. Describe the concepts of AI and the metaverse in relation to reality.
8. Assess the effect of the metaverse on our personal and professional lives.
9. Contemplate the effect of the metaverse on our patients, their care, and the
healthcare delivery system.
10. Explore the concept of the metaverse and evaluate its future promise regarding
nursing and nursing informatics
KEY TERMS
3D printing
artificial intelligence (AI)
Artificial Intelligence of Things (AIoT)
augmented reality (AR)
cyborgdisruptive innovation
extended reality (XR)
fantasy
haptics
hologram
human intelligence (HI)
Intelligence of Things (IoT)
Internet of Everything (IoE)
Internet of Things (IoT)
metaverse
mixed reality (MR)
proprioception
reality
robot
smart device
somatosensory system
spatial audio
telemedicine
transforming
virtual reality (VR)
voice recognition
wearable device
wearable technologyIntroduction
We wrote this chapter to give you pause to think about nursing in the
context of informatics and, of course, reality. We designed it to
challenge your foundation of knowledge and your reality. As you read
this chapter, take the time to reflect on your own situational contexts,
both personally and professionally.
You have expanded your information and knowledge about
nursing informatics and how it affects practice and patient care. Now
please consider informatics in relation to your reality.
Reality refers to the world or the state of things as they actually
exist. When contemplating reality, is one person’s reality different
from another person’s reality? If so, in what ways? Do people’s
experiences and education affect how they view the world or
experience reality? If those questions do not pique your interest,
perhaps this one will. When people enter virtual reality (VR), does
that experience then become their reality, or do they suspend reality
to enter fantasy? Augmented reality (AR) is an enhancement of
people’s reality. Does AR become their reality, or do they distinguish
the changes as those that are added to their reality? If virtual,
augmented, and actual realities are combined, what is real to the
person?Overview: Informatics and the Realities
Being able to distill big data into patterns and predictive models,
along with the genome reality, has affected the way patients are
treated; true patient-centric treatments and individualized plans of
care can now be developed since the rise of personalized medicine.
Here are some of the advancements that have enhanced patient
care and transformed the healthcare reality:
Exploring the patient’s own anatomy using VR prior to surgery
Seeing through the skin to illuminate veins for blood draws
Using decision support technologies
Using artificial intelligence (AI) for making decisions and
interpreting diagnostic tests, analyses, and diagnoses
Planning treatments
Integrating smart devices
Distilling massive amounts of data and research into meaningful
doses
Prescribing
Assigning and revising adaptive learning modules based on the
individual’s learning cues
Connecting through global telehealth
Using robots
Providing VR distraction for painful procedures
Informatics will continue to support the need to apply the
information and technology garnered from experience to advancing
developments. As technology continues to evolve, nurses will see
different uses for that technology and its integration into mainstream
health care and the educational arena. Informatics, which shapes theubiquitous integration of technology, will continue to transform and
alter nurses’ reality.Nursing Informatics and the Realities
Nursing informatics has enhanced the current reality of providing
direct patient care while beginning to transect the realities of life
given the current technological capabilities. From implementing
voice recognition to improving the ability to interface with devices
to entering total VR environments, technology continues to affect the
nursing reality. In the healthcare arena, technology continues to push
the envelope and challenge paradigms and abilities. Those who
adopt and adapt the latest technologies available will continue to
transform health care and provide patients with the most advanced
care techniques.
The current technological changes pose tremendous challenges to
and place great expectations on those educating the future
healthcare workforce. Faculties must be early adopters and keep
their students abreast of the technological advances made in health
care and other sectors that will affect patient care. Future care
providers, researchers, administrators, informaticists, and educators
must be able to frame the use of technology. Practitioners must
constantly strive to stay current with an eye to the future so that they
are implementing the best technologies to improve patient care.
Lifelong learning must not only be a search for knowledge but also a
way to stay informed about new technologies and learn how to
implement them. Going one step further, practitioners must use their
new knowledge to better understand the technologies and, through
their ideas, extend the capabilities of the technologies.
Nursing informaticists are engaged in evaluating and choosing
technologies. They are responsible for tailoring functionality and
establishing end user conditions and requirements. In addition, they
are relied on to deploy the technologies and prepare users by
designing and delivering the necessary training. As nursing
informatics informs and expands nurses’ knowledge and technologyuse, their reality is being affected as well as the reality of the
healthcare industry and that of patients.Realities
The current definition of reality is crucial to understanding the new
realities and how they are transforming people’s personal and
professional lives. We will explore various realities to contemplate
and critically think about in relation to your current reality and
foreseeable realities while imagining your future realities. However,
we must remember that each new invention, innovation, novelty, and
advancement the future brings will cast everything we describe in a
different light. Every newly expressed idea, concept, or product will
continue to shape our reality.
The realities we will review are those that most people refer to,
such as AR, mixed reality (MR), extended reality (XR), and VR.
However, our commentary will go beyond the obvious to evolving
developments that continue to have a profound influence on our
realities, such as telemedicine; big data; and the Internet of Things
(IoT), Intelligence of Things (IoT), and Artificial Intelligence of
Things (AIoT), including AI, robotics, smart devices, and haptics.
These select technological enhancements are affecting our
professional reality and have changed and will forever change the
way we view the world of nursing and patient care.
Augmented Reality
Augmented reality (AR) is an interactive experience within a real￾world environment that enhances real-world objects using virtually
simulated or computer-generated perceptual information. It provides
stimulation or input for multiple senses: olfactory; visual; auditory;
haptic; and somatosensory, such as pressure, pain, and warmth. AR
comprises apps; wearable technologies, such as glasses; and
software that not only interacts with its users but also enhances their
senses with data, information, audio, and images. The AR overlays
are added to the users’ existing environment or reality to enhance
their virtual experiences.AR innovations provide instantaneous access to patient data and
information, which helps healthcare providers diagnose, create a
plan of care, and implement the treatment regimen for their patients.
As AR holograms infiltrate our reality, we can explore and
manipulate these holograms with colleagues, such as in a learning
space. AR holograms could be used to orient nurses and nursing
students to a new work or clinical setting, such as a hospital. This
orientation could be interactive and engaging by providing content
that requires the active involvement of the learner as it teaches
about equipment, patient rooms, and the physical layout of the
healthcare setting. AR can overlay a patient in an exam room so that
students can practice their patient engagement and interviewing
skills. It can provide an anatomy or physiology overlay to explore and
learn from as it brings objects to life right in front of students. AR can
create a shared view, with everyone interacting with the same object
at the same time. Even though a group may have a shared view, or
AR object, are its members’ realities the same?
Mixed Reality
Mixed reality (MR) is the blending of the physical world with the
virtual world to create new environments and visualizations along the
continuum from AR to VR. As students move from textbooks and
two-dimensional images to the realities, they can now view anatomy
from the inside out and explore it in three dimensions. Using MR
decreases and even eliminates the use of cadavers. Nurses can
practice complex procedures before they implement them with their
patients. Has this already become the reality for some people in
health care?
Extended Reality
Extended reality (XR) is an umbrella term where the X in XR can
represent any letter so that the term covers all the forms of digitally
altered realities that currently exist (i.e., AR, MR, and VR) and otherimmersive technologies yet to be developed. With XR, users can
experience augmentation through total immersion.
Virtual Reality
Virtual reality (VR) simulates reality in a digital medium. VR has
been used in health care for about 20 years. Schools of nursing are
exploring and implementing VR in the education of the future nursing
workforce. VR learning episodes provide opportunities for nursing
students to practice skills and interviewing techniques in a safe
environment and experience intimate and challenging conversations,
such as discussing death and dying with their patients while the
faculty member assesses their ability to empathize with and support
the patients. VR can be used to allow nursing students to become
patients and experience the patients’ reality based on their health
status. The patients could have visual impairments, schizophrenia,
Alzheimer’s disease, or other conditions that become the students’
reality. As the students cannot see well or slur their words or
experience hearing voices, they become immersed in the reality of
the patients they will be caring for. How does this VR immersion
affect the students’ reality when they interact with the actual
patients? VR can be used to provide nursing students with the
experience of patient care while interacting as a member of the
healthcare team. Think of a nursing skill and the reality of the
experience in VR versus the reality of performing the skill while
providing actual nursing care. Advances in VR technology have been
made that have enhanced medicine, such as surgeons’ using the
patients’ own anatomy to practice a VR surgery prior to the actual
operation. In this case, how is the surgeons’ reality affected, and
does the surgeons’ VR reality affect their physical reality when they
are performing the actual operation?
BOX 25-1 A GLIMPSE OF PATIENT EXPERIENCES IN
FUTURE HEALTH CAREAs we go bounding into the next decade, we must consider human–technology
interfacing as a confluence matrix where the human and the machine converge to
create new realities. The humans are creating the software and machines necessary to
enhance human capabilities. What does it mean to be human, and how are these lines
blurring as our machines become intelligent influencers in this tenuous balancing act of
a relationship? Because we are human, we tend to include the attributes of our
humanness as we develop technologies. When technologies replicate, do they create
images of themselves, and can they include human qualities? Must a machine behave
like a human for us to accept it? How do we technologically enhance our bodies and
minds without accepting the human–machine or human–technology integration? Is the
machine or technology humanoid (i.e., appearance or character resembling a human)?
Based on the number of enhancements, is there a point where we consider ourselves
less human and more technology or machine? In the Six Million Dollar Man (a TV
series that aired from 1973 to 1978), a man suffered severe damage during an accident
and became the “bionic man.” This bionic man was created by the melding of
machinery and software with human tissues while maintaining his intellectual
capabilities and humanness, or the quality of being human (i.e., human being or a
person). As technology invades our culture and healthcare delivery system, what are
the implications for future healthcare workers dealing with enhanced human patients or
enhanced treatment modalities based on technological advancements?
What can we expect as our healthcare reality in the 2030s? It is difficult to answer
this question given the rapid technological advances we are experiencing daily. We will
present their interpretation of what the advancements will bring to health care in the
next decade. In business, there are BHAGs, or big hairy audacious goals. For
informatics, we provide our BHAG, or big hairy audacious glimpse, into the future.
TEENAGER: 3D PRINTING AND PROSTHESES
Mari Jaynea is a 17-year-old female who lost her hand in an auto accident. She wears
a prosthesis that allows her to hold or grasp items, but because she is an active
teenager, she frequently breaks her “fake hand,” as she puts it. Her parents purchased
a 3D printing device that can make her prosthetic hand for less than $80 and print it
out in layers in about 5 hours. Once the prosthetic hand has been assembled, Mari
Jaynea and her mom test it to make sure that it fits well and that there are no areas of
irritation. Now Mari Jaynea can have a new prosthetic hand quickly and more cost
effectively compared to scheduling an appointment at the clinic and waiting for
technicians to create it.
Mari Jaynea and her mom have joined the e-NABLE Community
(http://enablingthefuture.org), which spans 100 countries. They now create prosthetic
hands for two children in need who are within one hour’s drive of their home. Mari
Jaynea wants to reach out and find additional children her family can help. Her mom
says that when she hears the printer turn on, she gets ready to assemble because she
knows that Mari Jaynea or one of these other children needs a new prosthetic hand.
Mari Jaynea has also joined an international innovative team created for the purpose of
enhancing the printable prostheses. She will be testing new ideas, from printing and
assembly to fitting and use. Mari Jaynea and her mother are excited to explore how
they can improve Mari Jaynea’s capabilities, comfort, and durability.AN ELDERLY WOMAN, A ROBOT*, AND A SMART HOME
Amy is a 75-year-old female whose family is concerned about her staying in her own
home alone. Based on her “forgetfulness,” as described by the family, she can no
longer drive because she went to the grocery store and forgot where her car was
parked and then could not remember how to get home. They purchased a self-driving
car for her that has all of her favorite spots, such as her church, grocery store, women’s
club, and YMCA, in its navigational system. It is also programmed for her nurse
practitioner, hospital, hospitalist, and imaging and diagnostic centers. This vehicle is
voice activated and equipped with emergency information for police, fire, and
ambulance. Amy has a radio-frequency identification (RFID) chip in her arm that is
recognized by the car and her virtual assistive service robot. This robot has a well￾developed sense of smell and borders on instinct in its ability to detect issues in its
human counterpart, in this case, Amy. Therefore, it easily replaces a service animal for
the elderly or for those who do not or cannot take on the responsibility of animal care
but who need the service. When Amy was introduced to her robot, it reminded her of a
“Brad,” so that is what she named it.
When Amy enters the garage, Brad accompanies her into the car. When Amy says
“clothes,” the car takes her to the clothing store. She will not order her clothes online
because she has always shopped for them in person. She is appreciative that the
clothing store has remained. Brad accompanies her into the store and carries
everything she purchases, and everything is charged as they walk through the
checkout station in the store. Brad contacts the vehicle to pick them up, and the car
moves to the exit. When it arrives and is within 3 feet of them, it opens the doors and
trunk. Brad makes sure that Amy gets in the car and then stows the purchases in the
trunk and enters the car. Amy hesitates, and the car asks her if she is ready to go
home. Amy says yes, and they return home.
Brad reminds Amy that it is time to monitor her heart, eat lunch, and take her
medication. Brad has Amy go to the bathroom and then relax. It then proceeds to
monitor her blood pressure and heart rate and checks all of her peripheral pulses; it
determines that everything is normal and that this information does not need to be sent
to her nurse practitioner. After lunch, Amy reads for a half hour and then Brad guides
her through her exercises. Amy had a knee replacement and was rehabilitated using
the orthopedic surgeon’s treatment plan that Brad implemented. She is now on an
exercise regimen that Brad initiates and monitors.
Amy told her daughter that Brad tells her the day, date, and news every morning and
then lists the activities they have scheduled; she sees the nurse practitioner tomorrow.
She states that she does not remember why they are going to see the nurse
practitioner tomorrow and asks Brad to explain. Brad states that they had a telehealth
appointment last month and the nurse practitioner requests a face-to-face meeting
when necessary and at least once every 2 months. Amy says that she remembers that
but asks why she has to go. Brad explains to Amy and her daughter Amy’s medical
condition and the results from this past weeks’ monitoring and compares these results
with the findings from the past year to show patterns and trends in Amy’s health status.
Brad explains Amy’s medication changes and most recent health status, within the past
month.
Amy wants to go for a walk with her daughter and asks Brad to stay home while they
go. Brad scans her RFID chip and activates her wearable monitoring system to receivefeedback about Amy on her walk so that it can intercede if necessary. Amy’s daughter
thanks Brad and says to Amy that she is well cared for by her virtual assistive service
robot. Brad interfaces with all the smart home internet-connected devices while Amy is
out of the house. Brad contemplates what is on the agenda for dinner today after
checking in with the smart refrigerator. Brad monitors all of Amy’s smart home devices
to check their status. These are the smart devices currently in Amy’s home:
A stove that turns off if she leaves the kitchen and it is unattended
A refrigerator that can create shopping lists, track expiration dates, and even create
recipes based on the ingredients on hand. This information is transferred to Brad,
which monitors grocery needs and meals in relation to Amy’s nutritional
requirements and meal and snack preferences.
A slow cooker
A coffee maker
A washer, dryer, and iron
All the locks on the exterior doors
A doorbell with full audio and video capabilities
The thermostat
All lighting throughout the home that sets the ambient lighting based on the
detection of Amy’s presence in each room
All outlets throughout the house
All blinds, shades, and curtains throughout the house, which respond to Amy’s
settings based on the time of day and her presence in the room or location
TVs that are voice controlled by Amy and Brad
The garage door opener
All security cameras, with audio- and video-capturing capabilities
A commode that opens and lights up when Amy approaches
Monitors that sense electric surges and turn off appliances or water issues, such as
freezing pipes, and turn off the water to avoid a ruptured pipe in the house and
flooding
Once Brad has checked the house, which it does twice a day, and scans Amy’s
monitors to make sure she is fine, it receives some downtime while waiting for Amy to
return from her walk. Brad does not get much downtime, though, because Amy pings it
to tell it to send the car because she is feeling tired. Brad provides her coordinates to
the car and climbs in to get on its way to her while remotely monitoring her vital signs.
Brad helps her into the car and scans her appearance while monitoring her vital signs
again. Amy tells Brad she’s just tired and to get her home. Her daughter gets in the car
and off they go.
Amy walks into her living room and the lights turn on; then she asks the TV to tune to
her favorite channel and sits in her recliner. The recliner moves to her programmed
setting and elevates her legs. Brad asks her how she is feeling while monitoring her
vital signs. Her vital signs remain normal, and Brad records the experience for their
appointment with the nurse practitioner. Amy falls asleep, and Brad walks her daughter
to her car. Brad enters the house, sets the doors to lock, and monitors Amy while she
sleeps.*Reflecting on future care robots, such as Amy’s virtual assistive service robot, Brad,
does the robot’s reality matter? What reality is programmed into the robot? If the robot
is enhanced with AI, does it learn on its own and create its own reality?Telemedicine
Telemedicine received a boost with the COVID-19 pandemic, which
found healthcare providers scrambling to provide safe access to
health care while maintaining quality and care continuity.
Telemedicine necessitated regulatory changes that affected
healthcare billing, and patients experienced a new reality using this
healthcare access pathway. There are long-term implications for
informatics, hospitals, providers, patients, and health technologies.
Many view this reactive surge of telemedicine as the path forward,
and it represents a paradigm shift in how care will be delivered
beyond the 2020 COVID-19 pandemic. Reflect on these changes
and the new realities generated from this evolution.Big Data
Big data is mined, analyzed, and synthesized by informaticists who
advance big data science. The informaticists must have access to
data sets that are significant and relevant in order to mine them.
Data mining occurs during the throughput in the middle of the data
processing cycle. The Big Health Data Life Cycle, which is depicted
in Figure 25-1, shows the path the data travel and how they are
processed or transformed, from locating and capturing the data to
interpreting and understanding the data to the reporting and ultimate
use or application they inform.
Figure 25-1 Big Health Data Life Cycle
Description
The nurse informaticist works with and often leads a team that
typically consists of statisticians and computer scientists. Their ability
to track and extract data and information in meaningful ways
advances nursing knowledge and, when coupled with innovative,
evolving technologies such as AI and machine learning, will have a
significant effect on nurses’ practice and the nursing profession.Harnessing the gems gleaned from big data with cutting-edge
technologies, models, and theories results in new knowledge and
improved patient care; big data is informing and sculpting healthcare
delivery. Patterns and trends can be identified in the data, patient
outcomes compared to those expected, and predictive analytics and
forecasting explored. As our skills and technologies advance, what
we can gather from big data will continue to expand and inform us.
Describe how big data changes our reality and that of our patients.Internet of Things (IoT), Intelligence of
Things (IoT), and Artificial Intelligence of
Things (AIoT)
Technological advancements in science, telecommunications,
robotics, and informatics capabilities in relation to technologies and
big data continue to transform health care. The latest trail that is
being blazed in the healthcare delivery system is from state-of-the￾art, up-to-the-minute devices and the high-tech communication
systems interfacing with and integrating them.
We know that the Internet of Things and AI are each self-sufficient
in their own right and are potent technologies. The Internet of Things
connects devices to the internet and to other interconnected devices
that collect useful data and information. AI uses machine learning
and intelligence to infer things and learn from its interfacing and
interactions. AIoT is the blending of AI and the infrastructure of the
Internet of Things to realize efficiencies and enhance human–
technology interfacing and interactions. Through this powerful
infusion, data management and analytics are improved. AIoT
processes and transforms the data from the Internet of Things into
meaningful information to inform decision-making. AIoT will be
leading the way to empower the billions of smart devices and meet
mainstream needs, including smart health care, smart monitoring,
smart homes, smart self-driving vehicles, and other smart
technologies that will contribute to society’s health and lifestyles.
AIoT will also assist with analyzing the data being processed. Our
reality is changing because of the Intelligence of Things and AIoT, or
applying AI to the Internet of Things, such as smart devices,
monitors, and sensors; they not only communicate with us but also
can interact with each other and even initiate actions based on data
and information they collect from the devices in their Internet of
Things, or interconnected network.These devices can be proactive for our patients, which changes
our reality. Typically, we react to patients who present with
symptomology, whereas monitoring devices can be proactive when
they detect subtle changes in the patient’s condition, such as alerting
patients to increase their intake of sugar or reaching out to the
patient’s healthcare providers in real time. Think of our reality in
relation to information overload with the amount of data and
information generated by humans now being augmented by AI￾generated data and information. The AIoT infrastructure will allow us
to realize efficiencies, enhance human–technology interfacing and
interactions, and improve data and information management and
analytics. We will consider AI, robotics, and smart devices because
these advances are changing our world and our reality forever.Artificial Intelligence (AI)
Artificial intelligence (AI) is a disruptive innovation that has
exploded onto the scene (refer to Chapter 19, Nursing Informatics
and Nursing Education, to learn more about AI’s educational effect).
AI-enhanced devices and agents are ushering in a new era of health
care that will radically inform and enrich patient care and improve
patient outcomes. AI’s effect is far-reaching and ranges from using AI
algorithms to monitor, diagnose, and treat a diabetic’s fluctuations in
blood glucose levels with insulin to providing real-time assistance for
healthcare providers with clinical interpretation. The potential of AI in
health care is being realized in its ability to interpret and diagnose.
Radiologists’ work will be greatly enhanced because AI can more
efficiently and accurately interpret scans and X-rays than radiologists
can. AI has been able to diagnose skin and breast cancers more
accurately. AI and machine learning can extend the healthcare
workforce. Human intelligence (HI) will coexist and fuse with AI as
both intelligences work together to overcome the other’s
weaknesses while enhancing strengths. Reflect on how you could
work with AI agents in your nursing role. How will this synergy
enhance patient care and your role? How are patients’ realities
changed when they are being treated by machines and not people,
as in the case of patients with diabetes whose blood glucose is being
monitored and assessed and whose treatment is initiated by their AI
agent? Healthcare providers who are struggling with patients’ cases
can seek assistance with interpreting the patients’ data and
diagnosing them. How can we illustrate an AI-enhanced reality?
BOX 25-2 CLOUD-BASED ECOSYSTEM
Meet Shandie, a woman with four children, a busy career, and an active lifestyle. She
developed gestational diabetes during her pregnancy with her third child, but it did not
resolve after the child was born and is worsening and difficult to manage.She works with Kevin, her nurse practitioner, to monitor her diabetes, but they have
not been able to manage it given her family, career, and active lifestyle. Kevin tells
Shandie that he has been trying to keep up with the medical data, which are constantly
being released, and often consults with her endocrinologist, but they cannot keep up.
He asks her whether she has purchased the smartwatch, which he prescribed, to
monitor her lifestyle, blood glucose, and insulin needs. Shandie says yes and that she
just sent information to him and her endocrinologist while she was waiting to see him.
He praises her for being able to do that and states that it will help add vital data and
information to assist them to help her. Kevin reviews the app that she is using and
informs her that it is an AI healthcare cloud app; this tool will allow her smartwatch to
provide them with data and information so that they can review all of her healthcare
encounters and the personal data that she inputs. Kevin stresses that this will provide
meaningful insights for him and her over time so that they can best manage her
diabetes and address issues as they come up in real time with the built-in glucose
monitoring.
Because the AI app functions in a cloud ecosystem, the environment is multifaceted
and brings in a wide range of data, information, and knowledge from doctors, nurses,
nurse practitioners, researchers, significant others (e.g., those people she trusts to
answer questions and help monitor some of the app’s output), insurers, pharmaceutical
companies, and support groups. As the AI cloud apps share de-identified data and
receive others’ de-identified data to analyze, the AI learns and shares that output with
everyone accessing that app. This information helps Kevin and Shandie compare her
diagnosis, treatment, and situational context with others. Blending powerful analytics
and insights, the AI app is able to make the best-informed recommendations for
Shandie’s care; as new studies and information or knowledge emerge, they are
analyzed and synthesized into the app’s AI, meaning that the AI is learning, expanding
its capabilities, and sharing the output.
As this app interacts with an individual’s data set, such as Shandie’s, it can continue
to learn about the situational context affecting Shandie’s care and how treatment
regimens have affected her health and ability to maintain her chosen lifestyle. As the
app matures and other apps are created in the system, the data, information, and
knowledge available continue to increase and be processed by the AI, as it can do
best, and the clinician oversight helps to leverage what the clinician or human can do
best to synthesize the AI’s findings, recommendations with Shandie’s needs, and
situational context. As apps evolve and enter the ecosystem, how will our patient care
reality change?
AI-POWERED HEALTH
Docus (2023) is an AI-powered health platform where you can “[t]alk to AI Health
Assistant, generate your health report, validate it with a Top Doctor from the US &
Europe” (para. 1). As more and more of these platforms become available to our
patients, we must consider how much specific information they are able to access. It is
one thing to seek information on the web about your condition or about general
symptoms, but now patients can receive specific information about their contextual
situation and about their own medical history, symptoms, and other factors that are
relevant to them. In addition, the patient can choose to receive a second opinion from
doctors from leading institutions from around the world. It is our responsibility to explorethese platforms and help our patients navigate this new individualized information￾seeking option.
AI GIVES PARALYZED WOMAN HER VOICE
A “[b]reakthrough brain implant and digital avatar allow stoke survivor to speak with
facial expressions for first time in 18 years” (Marks & Kurtzman, 2023, para. 1). This
patient is working with pioneers exploring AI algorithms to recognize unique brain
signals for speech. This is such a positive reality changer for patients who feel trapped
without the ability to communicate. The patient featured in this article described it as
“[l]ocked-in syndrome” where “you are locked inside a body where no muscles work”
(para. 9). This exciting research uses an avatar to add a face and personalized this
patient’s voice based on a recording she made prior to her injury. AI-enabled
communications for stroke patients and others who cannot communicate will be
extremely important evolutions to follow.
REFERENCE
Marks, R., & Kurtzman, L. (2023, August 23). How artificial intelligence gave a
paralyzed woman her voice back. University of California San Francisco.
www.ucsf.edu/news/2023/08/425986/how-artificial-intelligence-gave-paralyzed￾woman-her-voice-backRobots
Robots are automated and/or smart machines that are programmed
to complete the routine tasks typically done by a person. Robots are
permeating our healthcare delivery system. They assist with surgery;
care for patients in place of nurses; and assume recurring tasks for
nurses and doctors, such as getting supplies, to increase the time
doctors and nurses can spend with their patients. They can assist in
the pharmacy and deliver drugs and help the aged live more
independently, as in the example of Brad helping Amy. Brad and
robots that resemble pets can help with the psychosocial interaction
lonely people need without the maintenance requirements of a pet or
the risks of taking in a roommate. Brad helped prepare meals and
monitored Amy’s medications. What reality is programmed into the
robot? If it is enhanced with AI, does it create its own reality? Do you
foresee robots replacing nurses or augmenting and supplementing
care in a future reality?
BOX 25-3 HOW WILL PATIENTS RESPOND TO CARE
BOTS AND CYBORGS?
Chondon, a patient, enters the clinic, and a voice says, “Welcome to the Natural
Coastal Waters Clinic. Please take a seat, and a care bot, NCW1, which is a robot that
can assist with patient care, will be assigned to you during your visit today.” Once
seated, Chondon immediately sees NCW1 approaching him. It introduces itself as
NCW1, the care bot that will be caring for him today, and asks him to accompany it to
an exam room. On the way, NCW1 informs Chondon of his weight and height. They
then enter exam room NCW1, the number of which corresponds to the care bot
assigned to that room. NCW1 closes the door and turns to face Chondon; its chest
opens, and a screen appears.
It says, “Welcome to our Natural Coastal Waters Clinic. To get started, please place
the palm of your hand on the middle of the screen by placing it within the outline of the
hand. Next, look directly into the soft blue light on the screen above your hand. I have
your name as Chondon Smatty. Is it OK if I call you by your first name, Chondon?”
Chondon says yes and what the robot just did is amazing. NCW1 says, “Chondon, we
now have a retinal capture. Your weight and height have not changed since your last
visit, and I have obtained a set of your vital signs, which have already been transferredto your electronic health record and your smartwatch. All your vital signs are within
normal limits. I have also assessed your blood glucose level, and it is elevated. The top
of the normal range is 120, and your level is 140. I see that you are here to consult with
Nurse Practitioner Kavan. Do you have any questions at this time?”
Chondon says, “Since when have robots been used here at the clinic?” NCW1
messages Kavan that Chondon is in his exam room while answering Chondon.
“We were placed into service just last week. Our purpose is to help the patients and
nursing staff. How do you feel about the care I have provided thus far?”
Chondon says, “I’m not sure; it’s different interacting with a robot.”
NCW1 corrects him by saying, “Care bot.” Chondon smiles. Kavan enters the room
to find Chondon and NCW1 chuckling together.
Kavan asks what he missed, and Chondon says, “I called it a robot, and it corrected
me that it is a care bot. It’s weird interacting with it.”
This is when nurses must support their patients because their experience is different
from when they come in for a visit. As a member of the nursing staff in this clinic, how
would your and the patient’s reality change?
Now fast-forward into the future. Chondon goes to the Natural Coastal Waters Clinic
to meet with his cyborg nurse, CEN 1 (Figure 25-2). Chondon says, “You look human!”
to which CEN1 replies, “I am a bionic human, a cyborg-enhanced nurse, or CEN, and I
am the first one here at the clinic, hence my name CEN 1. Chondon asks what a
cyborg is, andFigure 25-2 CEN-1
CEN 1 responds, “It is a shortened term for a cybernetic organism, cyborg. I have
both biological (human) parts and technological or artificial parts that are electronic,
mechanical, or robotic.”
Chondon interrupts CEN 1: “Why did you choose to do this?”
CEN 1 smiles and answers, “It was not by choice; I was a nurse who was in a terrible
accident that left me without my right eye, left arm, and left leg. The doctors discussed
my options of just having prostheses or having the ability to use my new limbs fully
controllable by me. I jumped at the chance to have control and not have to remove and
attach body parts. That is why you see the metal skin where my arm and leg are
connected. They also had a smart eye that they could implant. My face has the partial
metal skin covering on my upper right cheek where there was too much tissue damage,
and I chose not to have multiple surgeries. My face looks the same other than the black
steel covering by my right eye. I have some mechanical organs and an artificially
intelligent pancreas.”
Chondon asks CEN 1 what its name was before the accident. CEN 1 states that
“once my appearance was changed and I was listed as a cyborg, I wanted people to
know I was a cyborg nurse, so my name is CEN 1; I feel as though I was given a new
life after a devastating accident. I am thankful that we have the technology and science
to do this. I can still practice as a nurse providing direct care to my patients. I know I
confuse humans and care bots alike.” CEN 1 laughs.
“There are other enhancements that I can share with you, but let’s discuss why you
are here and review your data strip.” Chondon says, “OK, but I’ll have more questions.”
As a member of the nursing staff in this clinic, how would your and the patient’s
reality change?Smart Devices
Smart devices (we would prefer another term, but “smart” is what is
recognized in this reality) continue to invade our reality. If you have a
smartphone or a smartwatch, how much do you rely on its
capabilities to help organize your life? How much do smart devices
communicate and share data with each other? Do you know how
many steps you have taken today? Do you monitor your sleep
habits, vital signs, and moods? Think back and reflect on your reality
before you had these devices. In what ways did your reality change
once you began using each device? Could you give up your smart
gadgets? Our patients also use smartwatches. We can capture data
from our patients’ wearable devices, such as smartwatches. The
data we collect and analyze from smart devices permit us to predict
health problems and personalize treatment to support personalized
medicine. We can treat patients before they even experience any
symptomology. Consider all the smart devices you can describe and
relate the types of data they can transmit to the healthcare provider.
If we treat someone by providing them with access to an app, how
does this reality affect our practice and change our and the patient’s
reality?Haptic Technology: Reach Out and Touch
Someone—Evaluating the Viability of Haptics
Haptics, the science of applying tactile sensation or touch to
human–computer interactions, are technologies that can replicate
and transmit the real-life sensations of touch in the virtual world
using, for example, proprioception (body position and movement),
force feedback, vibration, touch, temperature, and grasp.
Haptics work in much the same way as graphics and audio to
shape our reality in the virtual world. Our somatosensory system is
stimulated by haptics, which pass on context and other information
to our brains. We are all familiar with haptics found in our phones
and other electronic devices. The vibrate feature on phones uses
haptics to provide a tactile response, letting us know we have an
incoming call or a text without disrupting the people around us.
Telehealth employs haptics because touch is an absolute necessity
during patient assessment and diagnosis.
The future of haptics in nursing informatics looks bright not just for
learners but also for patients. Haptics can simulate the resistance of
the skin, blood vessels, and muscle tissue for giving injections, which
means the more the learner practices, the more muscle memory the
learner gains, resulting in better technique and confidence with much
less discomfort and pain for patients. Haptics help assess edema.
Strength tests, such as squeezing, can also be accomplished
through haptics. What will haptics enable learners to do in 2030?Transcending Reality—Exploring the
Promise of the Metaverse
The term metaverse has been defined in different ways based on the
definer’s perspective. McGonigle and McGonigle (2023) stated that
the metaverse is a concept and defined it as
the evolution of the latest frontier of the Internet that is a continuously accessible
and available trisecting AI, the realities (MR: AR through VR), and our
psychosocioeconomic digital and physical presence. The metaverse promises
hyperconnected blurred or blended reality experienced through seamless
immersive interactive exchanges on the devices we use from laptops to tablets to
smartphones. (para.7)
In simple terms, the metaverse is a virtual or digital place where
users and their family and friends can learn, work, play, shop, and
remain connected no matter where they are physically.
The promise of the metaverse as it is conceptualized is to provide
the digital space needed to conduct our lives; it is a virtual or digital
place where users and their family and friends can remain connected
no matter where they are physically to participate in education,
business, work/career, entertainment, socialization, mental and
physical health, and wealth perspectives and events. This promise
must be accomplished with a strong feeling of presence and being
interconnected in a welcoming space where each user can control
their own access and experiences. Users and businesses will be
able to take themselves as their identities, assets including monetary
assets, clothing, jewelry, furniture assets, and their experiences
wherever they want to, and the digital spaces will persist or remain
even when there is no one in them.
Refer to Box 25-4. What do you think of ChatGPT’s description of
the metaverse to a nursing student?
BOX 25-4 AI CHATGPT DESCRIBES THE CONCEPT OFTHE METAVERSE TO A NURSING STUDENT
Dr. McGonigle asked ChatGPT, “How would you describe the concept of the metaverse
to a nursing student?”
ChatGPT responded, “The concept of the metaverse can be described as a virtual
space or world where people can interact with each other in a digital environment. It is
a fully immersive, interactive, and interconnected virtual world where individuals can
engage in activities, socialize, and even conduct business. It is essentially an online
extension of the physical world where people can create and customize their own
avatars and explore a vast and diverse digital landscape.
“For a nursing student, the metaverse has the potential to be used as a tool for
healthcare education, research, and even patient care. In the metaverse, nursing
students can participate in virtual simulations to gain hands-on experience with
complex medical procedures, observe clinical scenarios, and learn from healthcare
professionals in a safe and controlled environment. It can also be used as a platform
for telemedicine, providing access to healthcare services to people in remote or
underserved areas. Overall, the metaverse presents an exciting opportunity for the
nursing profession to innovate and improve patient care through technology.”The Four Foundational Pillars of the
Metaverse
To understand the metaverse, one must begin with the four
foundational pillars of the metaverse: virtual environment, user
experience, economy, and technology. Each pillar represents the
fundamental elements or building blocks that make up the
metaverse. These pillars are the key components that enable the
creation and operation of the metaverse, and they play a critical role
in shaping the overall user experience and moving us toward
realizing the promise of the metaverse.
The first foundational pillar is the virtual environment that
encompasses virtual real estate, infrastructure and connectivity,
interoperability, continuity, persistence, and content creation and
distribution. Everything has to do with the virtual space that supports
open experiences. These environments can range from fully
immersive 3D worlds to simple chat rooms.
Pillar 2, the user experience in the metaverse, is highly immersive
and interactive and offers users a seamless and interconnected
virtual world. Users can impact and be impacted by the metaverse.
The user experience is engaging, encompassing avatar and object
personalization, social and community presence and belonging,
education or learning, health, wellness, and work experiences. Users
can interact with a vast array of digital or virtual content as well as
other avatars. AI will replace human-controlled actions and
interactions with computer-controlled automated actions and
interactions. AI avatars can learn gestures, body language, and
language-specific conversational exchanges. AI avatars and objects
can inform and assist people so that they can complete their tasks in
the metaverse. Content is the crucial component of the metaverse,
providing users with immersive and engaging experiences that can
be user generated. Content is important since it “contains story
reality, immersive experience, and conceptual completeness” (Ziaul,2022, para. 19). The content is what the users want to experience
and the reason they enter and interact within the metaverse. As
users generate the metaverse spaces, such as buildings, campuses,
cities, houses, hospitals, offices, meeting spaces, clinics, streets,
museums, or other assets, they choose the look and feel of the
areas, how they are organized, and what services will be supplied.
As people create their avatars with the look and characteristics they
want for their avatar’s appearance to represent them, the diversity of
perspectives and culture will shape the community of the metaverse.
Users or people as avatars are the subjects and the realities created
within the metaverse and are the means for linking and connecting
the avatars in the metaverse and the users in the real physical world.
Users can engage in various activities such as socializing with other
users, attending virtual events and concerts, playing games,
exploring virtual spaces, and conducting business transactions.
The third pillar is the economy or virtual economy and commerce.
Just as people can buy and sell goods and services in the physical
world, they can do so in the metaverse, including the creation and
sale of virtual goods such as clothing, furniture, paintings, and other
digital items. In addition, virtual currency could be used to facilitate
these transactions and potentially even be exchanged for physical
currency. Blockchain is a digital ledger or database shared across a
large network of nodes or computers. The nodes work together to
authenticate and verify the transactions that are then stored and
chained together in encrypted blocks of digital asset data. The more
nodes that are running the blockchain, the safer and more secure it
is since a hacker would have to hack more than half of the nodes to
be able to make changes. Therefore, the blockchain forms a
chronological verification for the data where the digital assets are
distributed but not copied or transferred. Blockchain can support the
decentralized infrastructure of the metaverse by providing extended
storage capacity, trusted powerful data processing and
authentication nodes, and interoperability across metaverse projects
through seamless interactions and the sharing of related data,
information, and resources. Commerce such as advertising and
marketing will increase as people spend more time in virtual spaces.This provides opportunities for companies to market and sell
products and services to the users. This could include targeted
advertising based on user behavior and interests as well as
sponsorships and product placements within virtual environments.
Pillar 4 represents technology, and it is constantly evolving and
improving. Technology is essential for creating a truly immersive and
engaging virtual environment. The technologies include crypto
wallets, point of sale, avatars, display technologies, digital assets,
digital twins, digital representations, blockchain, 3D reconstruction,
computer programs, VR and AR, AI and machine learning, cloud
computing, gaming and entertainment, IoT, and the Internet of
Everything (IoE). The metaverse acts as a 3D user interface to the
IoT devices, making possible personalized IoT user experiences
where the user can make data-driven decisions with minimal training
and expending minimal mental energy (Loth, 2022). The IoE is the
intelligent connection of people, processes, data, and things where
objects have sensors to detect, measure, and assess their status.
The IoE affixes intelligence to the IoT and extends its
communications from machine to machine and machine to people or
users. Computer programs are those needed for the operation of the
metaverse but also those that recognize and generate sights,
scenes, and objects; recognize and synthesize sounds and speech;
and output and render motions. The term 3D reconstruction refers to
the technology that supports the creation of photorealistic objects
capable of capturing the realism for virtual spaces. Using 3D
reconstruction, a company could create a virtual showroom for its
cars where users can explore and even test-drive a vehicle.
These technologies will continue to play a crucial role in the
development and growth of the metaverse.
These four pillars are the foundation supporting the move toward
realizing the concept of the metaverse where users will be able to
seamlessly move from one virtual world to another within an
interconnected metaverse. It is not possible yet, as we currently
have individual metaverses.TABLE 25-1
Use Cases: How the Metaverse Is Affecting
and Will Affect Health Care
Individual users, as well as organizations, will have a profound effect
on shaping the metaverse as they enter, explore, and demand more
capabilities. To attract the users, the metaverse must be compatible
with the user’s social values, providing social meaning and the
situational context for them. A metaverse might not be the real world
but can elicit tangible emotions and feelings. For the metaverse to
approximate the real world, the interactions must be seamless and
concurrent within an environment with presence. Those born from
the mid- to late 1990s through early 2010s are the upcoming
generation, Gen Z, and their social values indicate that they want to
move through the realities of their lives with their online and offline
persona or presence being the same.
The following use case examples (Table 25-1) demonstrate how
educational, healthcare, and insurance-based organizations are
entering and pushing the limits of the metaverse technologies to
provide innovative, immersive, and engaging educational, clinical,
financial, and recreational experiences in a secure environment that
maintains privacy. Time will tell how far the metaverse can go under
the influence of the enterprises and their constituents.
Metaverse Use Cases
Education/Learning Practice/Care
Nursing and
other
healthcare
professional
students
The future healthcare workforce
must be exposed to the latest
technologies in their educational
journey. The use of immersive
simulations representing different
settings, patient populations, and
technologies must be used to
Immersive simulations not
only allow practice time prior
to entering the actual clinical
arena with real patients but
can also expose students to
infrequent patient
presentations and events thatprepare a career-ready graduate
entering the future healthcare
workforce.
These same immersive settings can
be used for telehealth experiences
with actual patients.
Students will learn how to interact
with, navigate, and harness the
power of the metaverse.
Use cutting-edge MR and AI
disruptive technologies to prepare
practice-ready graduate nurses for
the technology-laden clinical settings
and for high-stakes, real-world
scenarios.
Create digital twins of actual campus
settings or hospitals to help students
become familiar with their learning
settings.
cannot be done in the physical
world such as disaster
preparation.
Provide clinical experiences
using immersive learning
simulations. Just as we seek
clinical placements for our
learners, we can create
immersive environments that
mimic our clinical settings to
provide the necessary learning
experiences.
1. Provide patient interactions
through immersive VR
settings to prepare students
to interview and care for
their actual patients.
2. Integrate competency￾based experiences and
assessments using VR and
AI to evaluate competence
and practice readiness,
from clinical judgment and
decision-making through
performing select
procedures in a safe
environment without risk or
harm to patients (American
Nurses Foundation, n.d.).
3. Immersive experiences
directed at the affective
domain to teach sensitivity
and empathy where
learners become the patient
to really experience their
situational context (Brown,
2022).
4. Use AI-enhanced avatars
as standardized patients.
5. Develop infrequently seen
patient presentations using
VR and AI for practicing
nurses so that they can
remain competent toprovide setting-specific
care.
Healthcare
professionals
Immersive simulations can be used
to maintain professional competency
in the healthcare workforce not only
in their clinical knowledge and skills
but also in their knowledge and skill
in the use of emerging technologies.
Enhanced patient safety.
Immersive learning episodes
can virtually simulate patient
care encounters, allowing
professionals to practice and
hone their skills so that errors
are reduced and time to
treatment is expedited.
In the surgical suite, surgeons
can do the following:
1. Explore the patient’s own
mapped anatomy using VR
and practice the surgery
prior to operating on the
actual patient.
2. Meet with other specialists
in a virtual operating suite
to collaborate and practice
an upcoming surgery or
during the actual procedure.
Nurses can do the following:
1. Facilitate pain reduction
through the use of VR
technology instead of using
medication.
2. Distract patients during long
and/or painful procedures to
enhance patient comfort.
3. Provide patient care by
introducing apps such as
those that help patients
remember when to take
their medications.
4. Provide immersive learning
experiences for caregivers
to prepare them to care for
their significant others after
discharge.
5. Introduce patients and their
significant others to AI￾powered agents that canhelp them monitor and
improve their health status.
Patients They can experience immersive
learning episodes in consultation
with their healthcare providers.
They can acquire and use apps and
AI agents.
Seek care via telehealth visits
and consultations with
healthcare providers they
would normally interact with as
well as top nursing and
medical experts from around
the world as the metaverse
restructures, redesigns, and
reimagines the provider–
patient relationship and
experience.
Opportunities for wellness
include diet; stress relief;
fitness initiatives; and cues for
treatment compliance,
including medication dosage
and time reminders.
Healthcare
settings
Metaverse hospital systems could
provide virtual offerings that mirror
brick-and-mortar facilities for
patients and healthcare providers.
Metaverse hospital systems
could offer the following
programs using MR:
1. Telehealth
2. Wellness
3. Educational episodes that
not only foster patient–
provider relationship
building but also provide
just-in-time learning for both
healthcare professionals
and patients
4. Collaborative opportunities
that enhance the healthcare
team as well as the
provider–patient dyads
involvement
Financial Cryptocurrencies will be established
by
1. hospitals for patient fees when
accessing virtual and/or physical
care; and
Insurance companies must
1. determine how they will
track, manage contracts,
manage claims, and
reimburse for metaverse or
virtual healthcare visits in2. learning organizations for student
fees and faculty/staff salaries.
relation to how this is done
for physical care episodes;
2. establish specific coding for
the metaverse virtual
sessions; and
3. use their own avatars to
serve their customers by
a. approaching those
insured and companies
in the metaverse; and
b. providing immersive
experiences such as
procedure options and
hospitalizations.
Learning organizations must
do the following:
1. Develop cryptocurrency
processes for collecting
student fees and paying
faculty and staff salaries.
2. Petition financial aid to
consider and support
metaverse offerings for their
students.
Privacy and
security
Blockchain will be used to protect
records and data.
Both healthcare and
educational organizations will
use blockchain and other
technologies such as facial
recognition to protect, secure,
and manage the sharing and
exchange of patient data with
healthcare providers and third￾party payers and student data.
Encrypted AI algorithms can
recognize the patient and/or
student.TABLE 25-2
Challenges Facing the Realization of the
Metaverse
As we enact use cases and strive to realize the promise of the
metaverse; persistent accessible hyperconnected
psychosocioeconomic digital and physical presence; or where we
can learn, work, play, and shop no matter where we are physically,
there are challenges that we must recognize and be able to
overcome. This brief discussion will begin with the challenges facing
everyone using the metaverse, including nurses, and will include
nursing role–specific considerations (Table 25-2).
Nursing Role–Specific Challenges
Nursing
Role
Challenges
Nurse
educator
Nurse educators must learn about the metaverse and its disruptive
capabilities in order to have input and shape this new frontier by
analyzing and synthesizing the evidence surrounding the metaverse
pedagogy. They must identify and intentionally incorporate the best
educational practices; immersive learning experiences; and significant,
meaningful interactions to advance and develop an educational or
learning metaverse.
These educators must be able to help their administrators and other
educators gain the expertise necessary to drive and harness the
metaverse’s teaching and learning potential.
To accommodate learners with disabilities, they must find ways to
address disparity with technological enhancements. If they provide a
VR experience that some of the students cannot access and complete,
how do they develop an alternative assignment that is comparable to
the immersive and engaging VR episode? They must keep in mind that
the learning must be equitable and of high quality but that it does not
have to be equal.Nursing
Role
Challenges
Nurse in
clinical
practice
Nurses in clinical practice must develop the expertise necessary to
1. develop metaverse solutions that not only improve patient outcomes
but also enrich the nursing profession;
2. assist other healthcare professionals with patient-care strategies for
the metaverse; and
3. help their patients understand and be able to navigate the metaverse
to receive all three levels of prevention: primary, secondary, and
tertiary.
Nurse
researcher
Nurse researchers must find ways to engage with and study patients as
they experience the metaverse. How can researchers truly track
patients as they move about the metaverse? How will patients seek
care? Will they experience the levels of prevention from different
entities in the metaverse? Will they want or demand care in the
metaverse versus physical care?
Will there be separate institutional review boards (IRBs) for the virtual
metaverse side of the institution versus the actual institution? Can one
IRB approval be accepted by more than one virtual institution in the
metaverse or between the real and virtual institutions?
Nurse
informaticist
It is imperative that nurse informaticists protect the security of patient
data and information in the metaverse. As they rely on technologies and
seamless transitions in the metaverse, they must remain vigilant in
finding solutions that maintain their patients’ privacy.
It is important for them to
1. find ways to streamline digital procedures;
2. constantly inform policymakers on the updates necessary to keep
pace with the evolution of the metaverse;
3. prepare others for accessing, entering, and using the metaverse to
enrich their personal and professional lives, especially nurses and
other healthcare professionals providing patient care and supporting
metaverse-based care initiatives;
4. realize that hardware plays a key role in the immersive experience
and can be an obstacle to reaching the full potential of the metaverse
as well as collaborate with hardware vendors to advance their
products to meet the needs of the evolving metaverse in relation to
patient care and healthcare professionals, compentency;
5. collaborate with software vendors to develop software programs that
are needed to interface with hardware and advance the metaverse
frontier; andNursing
Role
Challenges
6. actively participate in the efforts necessary to realize the promise of
the metaverse for themselves, other healthcare professionals, and
patients and their significant others.
Nurse
executive
Nurse executives must
1. learn everything they can about the metaverse and how it will impact
their practice settings;
2. afford professional development to the nurses under their
supervision;
3. create collaborative interdisciplinary teams to address the needs of
their practice settings, especially as they relate to interoperability and
the ability to securely share data and information;
4. advocate for the commerce of the metaverse with their administrative
peers; and
5. advocate and prepare for the commerce of the metaverse with the
integration of blockchain technology and cryptocurrency to secure
monetary exchanges from patients and third-party payers.
The relationship between the IoT and the metaverse is becoming
evident since one of the greatest challenges for the metaverse lies in
its ability to access, correlate, and map data and information from
the real world and meld it into the digital or virtual reality. This data
and information must have meaning and be secured, accurate,
organized, and available synchronously, in real time. Since the IoT
has been around and in use for several years, there are hundreds of
devices, including cameras, wearables, and sensors, that are
available and ready to be used and incorporated into the metaverse.
All nurses must assist policymakers in expanding their policies to
handle the rapid evolution of technologies and capabilities that are
and will be afforded as the metaverse develops. Policies typically do
not keep pace with technological evolution and capabilities, and the
evolution of the metaverse is no exception. For example, the Health
Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) guidelines have
tried to keep up with the expansion of telehealth and mobile
computing; however, the metaverse has now entered the patientcare arena, and lawmakers will need a wide variety of expert input,
including from nurses, to help them understand and modernize the
necessary guidelines based on the abundance of data and
information in the metaverse. In addition, governance of the
metaverse will be essential, which requires the establishment of a
set of unified rules. Copyright and ownership issues must be
addressed legally. Software and hardware vendors need help in
understanding the metaverse frontier to create the products,
programs, and devices that will meet the users’ current needs and
current state of the metaverse with an eye to the future. As with any
digital platform, malicious activity and attacks that breach security
will be an ever-present threat that could cause ethical issues, loss of
data and information, invasion of privacy, harassment, and
intentional human rights infringements, to name a few. With the
metaverse capabilities, users might suffer risks of physical harm
from the prolonged use of wearable technologies, especially the
HMDs or headsets, during their immersive activities. As with any
socially interactive space, there are risks of emotional and
psychosocial harm, whether intentional or unintentional. When
dealing with a new frontier, everyone must be vigilant to maintain
access and equity. Since the metaverse is presenting us with an
enormous evolution of the internet, issues with interoperability and
scalability must be recognized and addressed. For the metaverse to
be viable, we must have the ability to exchange, use, and share data
and information on a grand scale and to handle the expanding
volume and workload. AI agents will need to be enhanced to improve
and personalize the user experience by providing meaningful just-in￾time assistance or information. Infrastructure improvements must be
made to ensure reliable and persistent availability. There must be a
secure system in place to be able to make payments for services or
products in the metaverse. Blockchain and cryptocurrency (i.e., a
method of digital payment using blockchain technology) must be
implemented in which blockchain is a digital ledger that overcomes
the weaknesses of centralized data storage by providing a secure
means to create, own, and monetize decentralized digital assets.The weaknesses and threats in the metaverse become challenges
that must be eliminated, such as confidentiality issues,
interoperability problems, privacy invasion, security breaches, faulty
navigation, and seamless transitioning between the real world and
the virtual or digital world as needed. There are many challenges to
address as the metaverse evolves. It is important to keep an eye to
the future while being grounded in the present as we strive to have
the metaverse approach real-world exchanges, the seamless and
concurrent interactions gained through presence, interfaces, and
connections. As the metaverse mimics the real world, it can elicit or
cause real emotions and feelings as people are immersed and
present in their digital experiences. As more nurses and nurse
informaticists learn about, research, and experience the metaverse,
they must realize the effect they can have in shaping this new
frontier for improving patient outcomes, enhancing their professional
development, and advancing the nursing profession. Nurses and
nurse informaticists must educate other nurses, patients, and the
healthcare team as to how to leverage the benefits of the metaverse.
Nurse informaticists must assess the effect of this new frontier on
their own practice setting while helping other nurses and healthcare
team members understand the technologies, functionality, and
capabilities of the metaverse so that they can enhance their
practices and support their patients. It is imperative that we
determine how the nursing informatics specialty will influence and be
affected by the metaverse. As we push the metaverse envelope and
continue to create the cutting edge of this frontier, we must always
be vigilant against security and privacy issues, access and entry
equity, and persistence. It is every professional’s responsibility to
access, enter, and navigate this new evolution of the internet so that
they can harness its potential for the benefit of the patients under
their care. Nurse informaticists and nurses must recognize and
address the challenges as they arise during the evolution of the
metaverse frontier.
In conclusion, the idea of the metaverse is not new, but
technological advancements have brought about changes in our
capabilities, enabling more realistic virtual worlds moving towardrealizing the promise of the metaverse. Second Life, largely
regarded as the first metaverse, was launched in 2003. Its features
are too robust to cover here. However, it built the foundation from
which the new metaverses are constructed since they employ much
of the same features, from spatial audio to interactions with others.
Spatial audio is the capability to direct how the user experiences
sound to mimic the real world. Educators, business owners, and
everyday people enjoyed the Second Life metaverse to work, make
money, or relax from real-life stressors. Rumors on the internet
suggest an update is coming for this older platform, enabling the use
of VR along with today’s advancements.
Metaverses are designed to extend the users’ reality; they can
replicate reality in a virtual environment that it is as close to the real
world as possible, thus allowing users to interact as they do in the
real world while providing a safe environment. As our capabilities are
enhanced, will we see more genuine actions, such as the use of
haptics for handshaking and other greetings, incorporated into the
metaverse to enhance realism? What other experiences can we
expect to see in the next 3 months, 6 months, 1 year, and 2 years?Summary
Throughout this text, you have explored the field of nursing
informatics and its effect, influence, and transformative powers in the
healthcare arena, patient care innovations, and the nursing
profession. As we are informed through the use of nursing
informatics and expand our knowledge and technology-infused
practice, we affect our reality, the reality of the healthcare industry,
and the reality of our patients.
Through the application of knowledge, technologies, and nursing
informatics, disruptive forces transform reality and disrupt the
healthcare industry. We must make sense of and meet the challenge
of this disruption. Personalized learning is disrupting how we
conceptualize nursing curriculums and learning episodes. Forces
beyond our control, such as the COVID-19 pandemic, disrupted our
reality with governments mandating social distancing, quarantining,
and isolation. In addition, disruptive innovation has changed the
healthcare landscape.
Our reality is described and experienced through our own
perceptual screen. We now have tools that provide us with different
realities that we experience to the extent that we engage with them.
Our reality related to health care and nursing will continue to be
shaped by advancing knowledge and technologies.
The metaverse is not just a new trend or an improvement in
existing technology. It is a paradigm shift in content consumption,
which nurses and nurse informaticists must lead. The metaverse is
emerging as an immersive technology with enormous potential for
optimizing patient care across the entire healthcare continuum. We
encourage everyone to join as participants in new paradigms that will
disrupt and influence the future of health care and our professional
and personal lives. We must participate so that our practice settings,
patients, and profession have a place at the table. The metaverse is
composed of many different elements in which the users’ input andcreativity are essential. It is believed that the future does not depend
on the developers as much as the users, who can actually shape
every facet of this new internet frontier. There will be ongoing
challenges and issues that we must address since there will be
many new, shifting dimensions of the metaverse. By anticipating and
preparing to mitigate potential pitfalls and creating a patient-centered
collaborative setting, healthcare providers in the metaverse will
generate better expectations for this immersive and unparalleled
frontier as they engage their constituents and colleagues to improve
healthcare delivery. Of course, we have only scratched the surface,
but we wanted to give you a glimpse of how our professional and
personal lives will change with the innovative disruption in our
healthcare arena that is challenging our paradigms and rapidly
creating new ones—new ways of thinking, working, and learning.
Is reality as simple as how we as humans interact and make
sense of different phenomena? If the phenomena include
technology, how do these phenomena change our frame of
reference and affect our reality? Do we see the technologies as
mere tools we use and then return to the reality before their use, or
do they truly become part of our reality and influence our worldview?
Just as the concept of the metaverse has risen to the forefront and
AI exploded onto our digital landscape, what will disrupt our reality
next?
We would like you to contemplate the following notions:
What will our reality be as a
healthcare professional,
patient,
layperson,
learner preparing for entry into the workforce, or
lifelong learner practitioner?
Can we share our realities?
How will we share our realities?
Can we experience a shared reality?Will each setting have its own reality composed of the
collaborative realities of the healthcare providers and the
patients and the knowledge and technologies they use? Will
each person have their own reality created by this interaction?
What are the commonalities? What causes the differences?
How will informatics influence, create, support, evaluate, and
revise the realities of the future?
What will you do to influence, create, support, evaluate, and
revise the realities of the future?
Just as we are concerned about access to health care, what
about access to the realities?
Will there be levels of reality and immersive depths?
How will we prepare for these realities?
In our personal lives, how will our realities be defined? Will they
be perceived, constructed, created, crafted, designed,
interpreted, rethought, or shared?
Do we have multiple realities? Can there be multiple realities
throughout a day, such as the reality of work and the reality of
transportation home, and then, when we return home, the reality
of being a parent, roommate, daughter, son, and so on? Do we
move in and out of realities, or are all of these realities our total
reality? What about when you don your headset?
Will AI create our reality for us?
Will we realize the promise of the metaverse?
How do the individual realities of nurses transform the reality for
nursing?
How do nurses realize a transformed reality for health care?
THOUGHT-PROVOKING QUESTIONS
1. What is your current reality? Describe reality from your perspective and how your
reality affects your patient care.2. What will your nursing reality look like in 1 year, 5 years, and 10 years? Provide a
detailed description of how your reality will change.
3. What will the reality be for our patients entering the healthcare system in 1 year, 5
years, and 10 years? Provide a detailed description of how their reality will change.
4. Just as we have disruptive innovation, do we have disruptive reality? If so, describe
it in detail.
5. Reflect on AI and its effect on reality. Can and will AI craft our realities for us? Is AI
part of our realities? Explain your answers in detail.
6. Assess the concept of the metaverse. What is the reality of the metaverse, and how
can we realize its promise?R E F E R E N C E S
American Nurses Foundation. (n.d.). Disrupting nursing education with XR, AI and ML.
www.nursingworld.org/foundation/rninitiative/practice-ready-nurse-graduates/disrupting￾nursing-education-with-xr-ai-and-ml
Brown, S. (2022, November 14). Want to improve healthcare? Step into the metaverse.
Accenture. www.accenture.com/us-en/blogs/insight-driven-health/healthcare-in-the￾metaverse
AI-Powered Health Platform. Docus. (2023). https://docus.ai/
Loth, J. (2022, February 24). The relation between metaverse and IoT. RPMAnetworks.
https://rpmanetworks.com/blog/the-relation-between-metaverse-and-iot
Marks, R., & Kurtzman, L. (2023, August 23). How artificial intelligence gave a paralyzed
woman her voice back. University of California San Francisco.
www.ucsf.edu/news/2023/08/425986/how-artificial-intelligence-gave-paralyzed-woman￾her-voice-back
McGonigle, C., & McGonigle, D. (2023). Metaverse: Healthcare’s next frontier. Online
Journal of Nursing Informatics (OJNI), 26(3). www.himss.org/resources/metaverse￾healthcares-next-frontier
Ziaul. (2022, March 25). 3 essential components of the metaverse. Metaverse Troop.
https://metaversetroop.com/essential-components-of-the-metaverseAbbreviations
3D three dimensional
ABC alternative billing codes
ACLS advanced cardiac life support ADT admission, discharge, and transfer system AEMR
academic electronic medical record AHRQ Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality
AI artificial intelligence
AIoT Artificial Intelligence of Things ALA American Library Association Alt alternate key on
the computer keyboard ALU arithmetic logic unit
AMIA American Medical Informatics Association AMOLED active-matrix organic light￾emitting diode ANA American Nurses Association
ANIA American Nursing Informatics Association ANSI American National Standards
Institute APA American Psychological Association API application programming interface
APM Alternative Payment Model
app application
AR augmented reality
ARG augmented-reality game
ARRA American Recovery and Reinvestment Act ATSDR Agency for Toxic Substances and
Disease Registry b bit
B byte
BCMA barcode medication administration BD2K big data to knowledge
BI bioinformatics
BIOS basic input/output system
BMP bitmap image
bps bits per second
BRFSS Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System BTC Bitcoin
CAI computer-assisted instruction CART classification and regression tree CASE
computer-aided software engineering CBIS computer-based information system CCC
clinical care classification CCL cardiac catheter labCD compact disk
CDI clinical documentation improvement CD-R compact disk-recordable
CD-ROM compact disk read-only memory CD-RW compact disk-rewritable
CDC Centers for Disease Control and Prevention CDS/CDSS clinical decision
support/clinical decision support system CE continuing education
CHESS Comprehensive Health Enhancement Support System CHF congestive heart failure
CHI consolidated health informatics CHIP Children’s Health Insurance Program CI cognitive
informatics
CINAHL Cumulative Index to Nursing and Allied Health Literature CIO chief information
officer
CIS clinical information system
CMIS case management information system CMP civil monetary penalties
CMS course management system; content management system; Centers for Medicare and
Medicaid Services CNPII Committee for Nursing Practice Information Infrastructure
COPD chronic obstructive pulmonary disease CPG clinical practice guideline
CPOE computerized provider order entry CPU central processing unit
CRA community risk assessment
CRT cathode ray tube
CRYPTO cryptocurrency
CSP cloud service provider
CSS cascading style sheets
CTA cognitive task analysis
CTO chief technical officer; chief technology officer Ctrl control key on the computer
keyboard CWA cognitive work analysis
DaaS device as a service, device as a managed service, or desktop as a service DBMS
database management system
DDR SDRAM double data rate synchronous dynamic random-access memory DHIS
Division of Health Informatics and Surveillance DHR digital health record
DLP data loss prevention
DLT distributed ledger technology DPI dots per inch
DRAM dynamic random-access memory DSDM dynamic system development method DSL
digital subscriber line
DSS decision support system
DVD digital versatile disk; digital video disk DVD-R digital video disk-recordable DVD-RW
digital video disk-rewritable DW data warehouse
EB exabyte
EBP evidence-based practice
EDA exploratory data analysis
EDI electronic data interchangeEEPROM electronically erasable programmable read-only memory EHI electronic health
information EHR electronic health record
EID ecological interface design
EIS executive information system ELSI ethical, legal, and social implications eMAR
electronic medication administration record EMR electronic medical record
ePHI electronic protected health information EPA Environmental Protection Agency ERD
entity relationship diagram
ERIC Educational Resources Information Center ERP enterprise resource planning ESC
escape key on the computer keyboard ESLI ethical, social, and legal implications F key
function key on the computer keyboard FLOSS free/libre open source software F/OSS or
FOSS free/open source software FHIE Federal Health Information Exchange FMEA
failure modes and effects analysis FPROM field programmable read-only memory FPU
floating-point unit
GAO Government Accountability Office GB gigabyte
GDC Genomic Data Commons
Gen Z Generation Z
GHz gigahertz
GIS geographic information system GLBA Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act
GUI graphical user interface
HAI healthcare-associated infection HCI human–computer interaction
HCT human–computer technology
HDMI High-Definition Multimedia Interface HET human enhancement technology HGP
Human Genome Project
HHA home health agency
HI human intelligence
HIE health information exchange
HIPAA Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act HIS hospital information system
HIT health information technology HITECH Health Information Technology for Economic
and Clinical Health Act HL7 Health Level 7 International HMD head-mounted display
HMIS health management information system HMO health maintenance organization HTI
human–technology interaction HTML Hypertext Markup Language
IaaS infrastructure as a service I/O input/output
IoE Internet of Everything
ICNP International Classification of Nursing Practice IDE integrated drive electronics IEEE
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers IHI Institute for Healthcare Improvement
IHIE Indiana Health Information Exchange IM instant message
IN informatics nurse
INS informatics nurse specialist iOS iPhone operating system
IoT Intelligence of Things; Internet of Things IP Internet Protocol
IPS LCD in-plane switching liquid-crystal display IS information system
ISO International Organization for Standardization IT information technologyKB kilobyte
KDP knowledge domain process model KMS knowledge management system
KPI key performance indicator
KWS knowledge work system
LAN local area network
LCD liquid-crystal display
LMS learning management system
LOINC Logical Observation Identifiers Names and Codes LOS length of stay
LTC long-term care
MACRA Medicare Access and CHIP Reauthorization Act MAN metropolitan area network
MB megabyte
MCIS managed care information system MDS minimum data set
MERLOT Multimedia Educational Resource for Learning and Online Teaching MHDC
Massachusetts Health Data Consortium mHealth mobile health
MHz megahertz
MIPS Merit-based Incentive Payment System; millions of instructions per second MIS
management information system ML machine learning
MMIS Medicaid management information system MMORPG massive multiplayer online
role-playing game (sometimes shortened to MMO) modem modulator–demodulator
MOO object-oriented multiuser dungeon MOOC massive open online course
Moodle modular object-oriented dynamic learning environment MoSCoW must have,
should have, could have, and would have MP3 MPEG-1 Audio Layer-3
MP4 MPEG-4 Audio Layer-4
MPEG Moving Picture Experts Group MPI master patient index
MRI magnetic resonance imaging
MU meaningful use
MUD multiuser dungeon
MUSH multiuser shared hack, habitat, holodeck, or hallucination NAM National Academy of
Medicine NANDA-I NANDA International, Inc.
NCATS National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences NCPHI National Center for
Public Health Informatics NFC near-field communication
NFCIP-1 Near Field Communications Interface and Protocol NFCMA near-field
communication–enabled medication administration NFT non-fungible token
NGC National Guideline Clearinghouse NGI Next Generation Internet
NHANES National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey NHII National Health
Information Infrastructure NHIN Nationwide Health Information Network NHQR National
Healthcare Quality Report NI nursing informatics
NIC Nursing Intervention Classification; network interface card NIDSEC Nursing Information
and Data Set Evaluation Center NIS nursing information system
NIST National Institute of Standards and Technology NLP natural language processingNLS national language support
NMDS Nursing Minimum Data Set
NMMDS Nursing Management Minimum Data Set NNDSS National Notifiable Diseases
Surveillance System NOC nursing outcome classification NPC nonplayer character
NPI national provider identifier NSSP National Syndromic Surveillance Program OASIS
Outcomes and Assessment Information Set OCR Office for Civil Rights
OLAP online analytic processing
ONC Office of the National Coordinator for Health Information Technology OOSD object￾oriented systems
OS operating system
OSI open systems interconnection OSS open source software
OWL web ontology language
PaaS platform as a service
PACS picture archiving and communication system PADS planned accelerated discharge
protocols PB petabyte
PBL problem-based learning
PC personal computer
PCA patient-controlled analgesia PCI peripheral component interconnection PCIS patient
care information system PDA personal data assistant; personal digital assistant PEDA
prebrief, enactment, debrief, and assessment PERS personal emergency response
system PHI protected health information; public health informatics PHIN Public Health
Information Network PHR personal health record
PNDS Perioperative Nursing Data Set POSIX Portable Operating System Interface for
UNIX
PPE personal protective equipment PPS prospective payment system
PRN Patient Room ‘Next’
PROM programmable read-only memory PrtSc or Prnt Scrn print screen key on the
computer keyboard PS/2 Personal System/2
PT/INR prothrombin time/international normalized ratio QA quality assurance
QCDR Qualified Clinical Data Registry QPP Quality Payment Program
QRPH quality, research, and public health RAD rapid application development RAM
random-access memory
RATS readiness assessment tests
RCT randomized controlled trial
RDBMS relational database management system RDF resource description framework RFI
radio-frequency identifier
RFID radio-frequency identification RHIO regional health information organization RIS
radiology information system RLO reusable learning object
ROM read-only memory
RSS really simple syndication RSVP Rapid Syndromic Validation Project RU research
utilizationSaaS software as a service
SCSI Small Computer System Interface SDLC systems development life cycle SDO
standards developing organization SDOH social determinants of health SDRAM
synchronous dynamic random-access memory SGML Standard Generalized Markup
Language SNOMED CT Systematic Nomenclature of Medical Clinical Terms SOX
Sarbanes-Oxley Act
SPRC Suicide Prevention Resource Center SQL Structured Query Language
STEM science, technology, engineering, and math TB terabyte
TCO total cost of ownership
TCP Transmission Control Protocol TELOS technical, economic, legal, operational, and
schedule TPO treatment/payment/operations TPS transaction processing system UC
unified communications
UI user interface
URL uniform resource locator
USB universal serial bus
UX user experience
VDI virtual desktop infrastructure or virtual desktop interface VNA Visiting Nurse Association
VPN virtual private network
VoIP Voice-over-Internet Protocol VR virtual reality
W3C World Wide Web Consortium
WAN wide area network
WMC web-based medical chart
WWW World Wide Web
XaaS anything as a service
XML Extensible Markup Language
XR extended reality
YB yottabyte
YRBSS Youth Risk Behavior Surveillance System ZB zettabyteGlossary
21st Century Cures Act
See Cures Act.
3D printing
The action or process where material is deposited, joined, or
solidified, based on the specifications that are stored and
displayed as a digital model to build a three-dimensional object,
typically layer by layer with material being combined and fused
together (such as liquid molecules or powders; also known as
additive manufacturing).
academic electronic medical record (AEMR)
An electronic medical record (EMR) simulation that is used in an
academic setting to teach students, such as nursing students,
how to use the EMR and simulate how they would document the
care they provided to their assigned patients.
access
To obtain or retrieve data in order to process it.
accessibilityEase of accessing the information and knowledge needed to
deliver care or manage a health service; the extent to which a
system is usable by as many users as possible.
acquisition
The act of acquiring; to locate and hold. We acquire data and
information.
active listening
A therapeutic communication technique in which the nurse
employs conscious attention to what a patient is saying, reflects
back feelings and phrases, and asks questions to clarify
meaning.
active-matrix organic light-emitting diode (AMOLED)
Smartphone display with individual pixels being lit separately
(active matrix); the next-generation super AMOLED type
includes touch sensors. The active matrix provides crisp, vivid
colors and darker blacks.
acuity system
The methods and processes that calculate the nursing care
requirements for individual patients based on severity of illness,
specialized equipment and technology needed, and intensity of
nursing interventions and determine the amount of daily nursing
care needed for each patient in a nursing unit.
administrative process
Used to administer the business functions of a healthcare￾providing organization, such as the electronic scheduling, billing,
and claims management systems, including electronic
scheduling for inpatient and outpatient visits and procedures,electronic insurance eligibility validation, claims authorization
and prior approval, identification of possible research study
participants, and drug recall support.
admission, discharge, and transfer (ADT) system
Provides the backbone structure for the other types of clinical
and business systems; it contains the groundwork for the other
types of healthcare information systems because it includes the
patient’s name; medical record number; visit or account number;
and demographic information, such as age, sex, home address,
and contact information. It is the central source for collecting this
type of patient information and communicating it to the other
types of healthcare information systems, including clinical and
business systems.
adverse event
Any undesirable experience or outcome in a patient related to
the use of a medical treatment or product.
advocate
Someone who represents another person’s interests. To act in
patients’ best interests; to act and/or speak on patients’ behalf;
to make the healthcare delivery system responsive to patients’
needs.
advocate/policy developer
A nurse informatics specialist who is key to developing the
infrastructure of health policy. Policy development on the local,
national, and international levels is an integral part of this role.
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ)
An agency within the U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services that supports health services research initiatives.Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR)
A federal agency that acts as a repository for research and data
regarding hazardous materials and serves the public by using
the best science, taking responsive public health actions, and
providing trusted health information to prevent harmful
exposures and diseases related to toxic substances.
agile
A software development methodology that merges iterative and
incremental process models. The agile method breaks the
product into small incremental builds where the teams work in
short bursts, such as 2- to 4-week intervals, to accomplish their
tasks. This approach lends itself well to smaller projects. Failure
is considered positive if you fail fast and fail often to get to your
goal. This method realizes rapid delivery of functional software
to the customer.
alarm fatigue
That which results from multiple false alarms by smart
technology that cause workers to ignore or respond slowly to
them.
alert
Warning or additional information provided to clinicians to help
with decision-making; the action of the clinician or system
triggers the generation of an alert. For example, an alert could
be generated if the patient’s serum potassium level is high and
they are on potassium chloride; the system would alert the
nurse on the screen (soft copy alert) with or without audio and/or
by a printed (hard copy alert) warning. Also known as a trigger.
algorithmStep-by-step procedure for problem-solving or calculating; set of
rules for problem-solving. In data mining, an algorithm defines
the parameters of the data mining model; it is the method with
which the data mining model is developed.
alternative
Choice between two or more options.
Alternative Payment Model (APM)
The Reauthorization Act of 2015 (MACRA) reformed Medicare
payments by making changes that created a Quality Payment
Program (QPP) to replace the hodgepodge system of Medicare
reporting programs. The MACRA QPP has two paths—Merit￾based Payment System (MIPS) or Alternative Payment Model
(APM)—which will be in effect through 2021 and beyond. The
APM is not just an incentive but rather a fundamental change in
how health care is paid for in the United States. These models,
particularly those dealing with total cost of care, have the
potential to fundamentally alter the value we receive from health
care.
American Library Association (ALA)
A U.S.-based organization that promotes libraries and library
education internationally.
American National Standards Institute (ANSI)
An organization dedicated to promoting consensus on norms
and guidelines related to the assessment of health agencies.
American Psychological Association (APA)
A scientific and professional organization that represents
psychologists in the United States and that also provides a style
guide for publishing and citing sources.American Recovery and Reinvestment Act (ARRA)
An economic stimulus package enacted in February 2009 that
was intended to create jobs and promote investment and
consumer spending during the recession. This act has also
been referred to as the Stimulus or Recovery Act. There was a
push for widespread adoption of health information technology,
and Title XIII of ARRA was given a subtitle, Health Information
Technology for Economic and Clinical Health (HITECH) Act.
Through this act, healthcare organizations can qualify for
financial incentives, based on the level of meaningful use
achieved; the HITECH Act specifically incentivizes health
organizations and providers to become meaningful users.
analysis
Separating a whole into its component parts; examination of a
concept or phenomenon and its elements and their relations.
antiprinciplism
Theory that emerged with the expansive technological changes
in recent years and the tremendous rise in ethical dilemmas
accompanying these changes. Opponents of principlism include
those who claim that its principles do not represent a theoretical
approach and those who claim that its principles are too far
removed from the concrete particularities of everyday human
existence because they are too conceptual, intangible, or
abstract or they disregard a person’s psychological factors;
personality; life history; sexual orientation; or religious, ethnic,
and cultural background.
antivirus softwareA computer program that is designed to recognize and
neutralize computer viruses, which are malicious codes that
replicate over and over and eventually take over the computer’s
memory and interfere with its normal functioning.
application (app)
The implementation software of a computer system that allows
users to complete tasks, such as word processing, presentation
development, and data management.
application programming interface (API)
An interface or communication protocol between a server and a
client. A computing interface to a software component or a
system that defines how other components or systems can use
it; the interface can be entirely customized, specific to a
component of the system, or designed based on an industry
standard to assure interoperability, which is key.
arithmetic logic unit (ALU)
An essential building block of the processor of a computer that
digitally performs arithmetic and logical functions.
artificial intelligence (AI)
The field that deals with the conception, development, and
implementation of informatics tools based on intelligent
technologies. This field attempts to capture the complex
processes of human thought and intelligence.
Artificial Intelligence of Things (AIoT)
The blending of artificial intelligence (AI) and the Internet of
Things (IoT) infrastructure to attain more efficient and effective
operations, enhance human–technology interfacing andinteractions, and improve data and information management
and analytics.
art of nursing
The relationship-centered aspects of nursing care in which the
focus is on communicating caring and providing emotional
support and comfort to the patient.
assessment
The simulation stage in which student performance is rated or
graded. Students should be provided with a detailed explanation
of how they will be assessed and graded that relates to the goal;
educational outcomes; and, if applicable, course or program
outcomes. Detailed rubrics are recommended.
asynchronous
That which is not synchronous; not in real time or does not
occur or exist at the same time, not having the same period or
time frame. Learning anywhere and at any time using internet
and World Wide Web software tools (e.g., course management
systems, email, electronic bulletin boards, web pages) as the
principal delivery mechanisms for instruction.
attribute
Quality or characteristic; field or element of an entity in a
database.
audiopod
Traditional, audio-based podcast or utility to download podcasts.
augmented intelligence
The use of artificial intelligence (AI) tools to enhance but not
replace decision-making with human intelligence.
augmented reality (AR)An interactive experience within a real-world environment that
enhances real-world objects using virtually simulated, or
computer-generated, perceptual information. It provides
stimulation for multiple senses, including olfactory, visual,
auditory, haptic, and somatosensory (e.g., pressure, pain, or
warmth). It comprises apps; wearable technologies, such as
glasses; and software that not only interacts with users but also
enhances their senses with data, information, audio, and
images.
augmented-reality game (ARG)
A game in which a device, such as a smartphone, is used to
overlay on the real world and bring people together physically
and virtually to solve a series of challenges.
authentication
A process that serves to prove who is accessing the system.
autonomy
The right of individuals to choose for themselves.
avatar
Image on the internet that represents the user in virtual
communities or other interactions on the internet; two- or three￾dimensional image representing one user on the internet.
bagging
The use of voting and averaging in predictive data mining to
synthesize the predictions from many models or methods or for
using the same type of model on different data; it deals with the
unpredictability of results when complex models are used to
data mine small data sets.
baitingTricking a user to load an infected physical device onto their
computer by leaving it in a public area, such as a copy room.
The user loads the device to try to identify its owner.
bandwidth
The measurement in bits, bytes, kilobytes, megabytes, and
gigabytes of the data that can be transferred from or to a
computer.
barcode medication administration (BCMA)
A system using barcode technology affixed to the medication,
the patient ID bracelet, and the nurse ID badge to support the
five rights of medication administration.
basic input/output system (BIOS)
Binary input/output system, basic integrated operating system,
or built-in operating system; a system that resides, or is
embedded, on a chip that recognizes and controls a computer’s
devices.
Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System (BRFSS)
An assessment system initially designed to collect information
on the movement of mentally impaired persons from state￾operated facilities into community settings. The assessments
have since been expanded to include other populations and are
designed to determine the effectiveness of programs in meeting
the healthcare needs of at-risk populations.
beneficence
Actions performed that contribute to the welfare of others.
big data
Voluminous amounts of data sets that are difficult to process
using typical data processing; huge amounts of semistructuredand unstructured data that are unwieldy to manage within
relational databases. Unstructured big data residing in text files
represents more than 75% of an organization’s data.
binary system
A system used by computers; a numeric system that uses two
symbols, 0 and 1.
bioethics
The study and formulation of healthcare ethics. Bioethics takes
on relevant ethical problems experienced by healthcare
providers in the provision of care to individuals and groups.
bioinformatics (BI)
The application of computer science, information science, and
cognitive science principles to biological systems, especially in
the human genome field of study; an interdisciplinary science
that applies computer and information sciences to solve
biological problems.
biomedical informatics
Interdisciplinary science of acquiring, structuring, analyzing, and
providing access to biomedical data, information, and
knowledge to improve the detection, prevention, and treatment
of disease.
biometrics
Study of processes or means to uniquely recognize individual
users (humans), based on one or more intrinsic physical or
behavioral attributes or characteristics. Authentication devices
that recognize thumbprints, retinal patterns, or facial patterns
are available. Depending on the level of security needed,organizations will commonly use a combination of these types of
authentication.
bioterrorism
The use of pathogens or other potentially harmful biological
agents to sicken or kill members of a targeted population.
Informatics database applications are used to track strategic
indicators that may indicate an outbreak that can be attributed to
bioterrorism, such as emergency room visits, disease case
reports, frequency and type of lab testing ordered by physicians
and/or nurse practitioners, missed work, and over-the-counter
medication purchases.
bit
Unit of measurement that holds one binary digit, 0 or 1. The
smallest possible chunk of data memory used in computer
processing that makes up the binary system of the computer.
blended
An approach to education that combines traditional face-to-face
instruction with technology-based (i.e., online) instruction. See
also hybrid.
Blockcerts
An open infrastructure for generating, distributing, examining,
and verifying blockchain-based certificates.
blockchain
A digital database containing information or a record of
transactions maintained across several computers that are
linked in a network that can be simultaneously used and shared
within a large dispersed or decentralized, publicly accessible
network; transactions are logged publicly in chronological order.The database displays an ever-increasing list of ordered blocks;
each of the blocks is time stamped and connected to the block
that came before it, thereby establishing a blockchain. The
technology used to craft such a database.
blog
Interactive, online weblog. Typically, a combination of what is
happening on the web as well as what is happening in the
blogger’s or creator’s life. A blog is as unique as the blogger or
person creating it. Thought of as a diary and guide.
boosting
Increasing the power of models by weighting the combinations
of predictions from those models to create a predicted
classification; an iterative process using voting or averaging to
combine the different classifiers.
borrowed theory
A theory borrowed or made use of from other disciplines. As
nursing began to evolve, theories from other disciplines (e.g.,
psychology and sociology) were adopted to try to empirically
describe, explain, or predict nursing phenomena. As nursing
theories continue to be developed, nurses are now questioning
whether these borrowed theories were sufficient in their relation
to the nursing phenomena they were used to describe, explain,
or predict.
brain
The central information-processing unit of humans. An organ
that controls the central nervous system that is responsible for
cognition and the interpretation and processing of and reaction
to sensory input.broadband
A wide band or range of frequencies; it is the minimum speed at
which a connection to the internet will transfer information.
brushing
A technique whereby the user manually chooses specific data
points, observations, or subsets of data on an interactive data
display; these data can be visualized in two- or three￾dimensional surfaces as scatterplots. Also known as graphical
exploratory data analysis.
brute force attack
A technique whereby software creates many possible
combinations of characters in an attempt to guess passwords to
gain access to a network or a computer.
building block
Basic element or part of nursing informatics, such as information
science, computer science, cognitive science, or nursing
science.
byte
Unit of memory equal to 8 bits, or 8 informational storage units,
which represent one keystroke (e.g., pressing any key on a
keyboard, such as the space bar or a lowercase a or an
uppercase T). The byte is considered the best unit for indicating
computer memory or storage capacity.
cache memory
Memory storage used by a computer’s processor to store copies
of frequently used data in the main memory that is becoming
smaller and faster.
call centerRegistered nurse–staffed facility at which nurses typically act as
case managers for callers or perform patient triage.
care ethics
An ethical approach to solving moral dilemmas encountered in
health care that is based on relationships and a caring attitude
toward others.
care plan
A set of guidelines that outline the course of treatment and the
recommended interventions that will achieve optimal results.
caring
The nontechnical aspects of nursing interventions that
communicate acceptance and concern for a patient.
caritas process
Nursing intervention that communicates loving concern for the
unique humanity of every patient.
case management information system
Computer programs and information management tools that
interact to support and facilitate the practice of case managers.
case scenario
A simulated real-world situation or problem using authentic
constraints and parameters designed to challenge the learner to
test possible outcomes.
casuist approach
An approach to ethical decision-making that grew out of the
concern for more concrete methods of examining ethical
dilemmas. Casuistry is a case-based ethical reasoning method
that analyzes the facts of a case in a sound, logical, and orderedmanner. The facts are compared to the decisions arising out of
consensus in previous paradigmatic, or model, cases.
centering
The act of taking a moment to clear one’s mind of clutter and to
focus one’s attention exclusively on a patient prior to engaging
in a therapeutic encounter.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)
An agency of the U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services that works to protect public health and safety related to
disease control and prevention.
central processing unit (CPU)
An old term for processors and microprocessors that execute
computer programs, thought of as the brain controlling the
functioning of the computer; the computer component that
actually executes, calculates, and processes the binary
computer code instigated by the operating system and other
applications on the computer. It serves as the command center
that directs the actions of all other components of the computer
and manages both incoming and outgoing data.
central station
Multifunctional telehealthcare platform for receiving, retrieving,
and displaying patients’ vital signs and other information
transmitted from telecommunications-ready medical devices.
certificate
A credential awarded by an education program to indicate that a
learner has met course or program objectives.
certificationSystem for validating that a nurse possesses certain skills and
knowledge or is competent to complete a task. Competence and
skill level are determined by or based on an external review,
assessment, examination, or education.
certified EHR technology
An electronic health record (EHR) that meets specific
governmental standards for the type of record involved, either
an ambulatory EHR used by office-based healthcare
practitioners or an inpatient EHR used by hospitals. The specific
standards to be met are set forth in federal regulations.
chief information officer (CIO)
A person involved with the information technology infrastructure
of an organization. This role is sometimes called chief
knowledge officer.
chief technical officer (CTO)
A person focused on organizationally based scientific and
technical issues and responsible for technological research and
development as part of the organization’s products and
services.
chief technology officer (CTO)
Another name for a chief technical officer.
Chromebook
A laptop or tablet used to perform a variety of tasks using the
Google Chrome browser, with the majority of applications and
data residing in the cloud instead of on the device itself.
chronic disease
A long-term disease, such as congestive heart failure, diabetes,
and respiratory ailments.civil monetary penalty (CMP)
Fine laid out by the Social Security Act, which the Secretary of
Health and Human Services can assess for many types of
noncompliant conduct.
classification
The technique of dividing a data set into mutually exclusive
groups.
classification and regression tree (CART)
A decision tree method that is used for sorting or classifying a
data set. A set of rules that can be applied to a new data set that
has not been classified; the set of rules is designed to predict
which records will have a specified outcome.
clinical database
A collection of related patient records stored in a computer
system using software that permits a person or program to
query the data to extract needed patient information.
clinical decision support (CDS)
A computer-based program designed to assist clinicians in
making clinical decisions by filtering or integrating vast amounts
of information and providing suggestions for clinical intervention.
May also be called a clinical decision support system (CDSS).
clinical documentation improvement (CDI)
The process of reviewing medical records or clinical
documentation for accuracy and completeness looking for gaps
or what data and information are missing from the record in
relation to the disease process, diagnostics, and coding.
clinical documentation systemArray or collection of applications and functionality;
amalgamation of systems, medical equipment, and technologies
working together that are committed or dedicated to collecting,
storing, and manipulating healthcare data and information and
providing secure access to interdisciplinary clinicians navigating
the continuum of client care. Designed to collect patient data in
real time and enhance care by putting data at the clinician’s
fingertips and enabling decision-making where it needs to occur
—at the bedside. Also known as a clinical information system
(CIS).
clinical informatics
Application of informatics and information technology to deliver
healthcare services. It is also referred to as applied clinical
informatics or operational informatics.
clinical information system (CIS)
Array or collection of applications and functionality;
amalgamation of systems, medical equipment, and technologies
working together that are committed or dedicated to collecting,
storing, and manipulating healthcare data and information and
providing secure access to interdisciplinary clinicians navigating
the continuum of client care. Designed to collect patient data in
real time and enhance care by putting data at the clinician’s
fingertips and enabling decision-making where it needs to occur
—at the bedside. Also known as a clinical documentation
system.
clinical practice guideline (CPG)
An informal or formal rule or guiding principle that a healthcare
provider uses when determining diagnostic tests and treatmentstrategies for individual patients. In the electronic health record,
it is included in a variety of ways, such as prompts, pop-ups,
and text messages.
clinical research informatics
The use of informatics in the discovery and management of new
knowledge relating to health and disease. It includes
management of information related to clinical trials and also
involves informatics related to secondary research use of clinical
data. Clinical research informatics and translational
bioinformatics are the primary domains related to informatics
activities to support translational research.
clinical transformation
The complete alteration of the clinical environment; widespread
change accompanies transformational activities, and clinical
transformation implies that the manner in which work is carried
out and the outcomes achieved are completely different from the
prior state, which is not always true in the case of simply
implementing technology. Technology can be used to launch or
in conjunction with a clinical transformation initiative; however,
the implementation of technology alone is not justifiably a
transformational ability. Therefore, this term should be used
cautiously to describe redesign efforts.
cloud computing
Web browser–based logon-accessible data, software, and
hardware; could link systems together and reduce costs.
cloud storage
Data storage provided by networked online servers that are
typically outside of the institution whose data are being housed.Cochrane Library
A compendium of high-quality evidence designed to inform
healthcare professionals’ decision-making.
cognitive informatics (CI)
Field of study made up of the disciplines of neuroscience,
linguistics, artificial intelligence, and psychology. This
multidisciplinary study of cognition and information sciences
investigates human information-processing mechanisms and
processes and their engineering applications in computing.
cognitive science
Interdisciplinary field that studies the mind, intelligence, and
behavior from an information￾processing perspective.
cognitive task analysis
Examination of the nature of a task by breaking it down into its
component parts and identifying the performer’s thought
processes.
cognitive walkthrough
A technique used to evaluate a computer interface or a software
program by breaking down and explaining the steps that a user
will take to accomplish a task.
cognitive work analysis (CWA)
A multifaceted analytical procedure developed specifically for
the analysis of complex, high-technology work domains.
collaboration
The sharing of ideas and experiences for the purposes of
mutual understanding and learning.
columnField or attribute of an entity in a database.
communication science
Area of concentration or discipline that studies human
communication.
communication software
Technology programs used to transmit messages via email,
telephone, paging, broadcast (e.g., MP3), and internet (e.g.,
instant messaging, Voice over Internet Protocol, or LISTSERV).
communication system
Collection of individual communications networks and
transmission systems. In health care, it includes call light
systems, wireless phones, pagers, email, instant messaging,
and any other devices or networks that clinicians use to
communicate with patients, families, other professionals, and
internal and external resources.
community risk assessment (CRA)
A comprehensive examination of a community to identify factors
that potentially affect the health of the members of that
community. Often used in public health program planning.
compact disk read-only memory (CD-ROM)
Disk that can hold approximately 700 megabytes of data
accessible by a computer.
compact disk-recordable (CD-R)
Compact disk that can be used once for recording.
compact disk-rewritable (CD-RW)
Compact disk that can be recorded onto many times.
compatibilityThe ability to work with each other or other devices or systems
—for example, software that works with a computer.
compliance
Conforming or performing in an acceptable manner; correctly
following the rules.
computational biology
The action complement of bioinformatics and therefore
biomedicine; it is the actual process of analyzing and
interpreting data.
computer
A machine that stores and executes programs; a machine with
peripheral hardware and software to carry out selected
programming.
computer-aided software engineering (CASE)
Systematic application of computer software tools and
techniques to facilitate engineering practice.
computer based
That which uses the computer to interact; the computer is the
base tool.
computer-based information system (CBIS)
Combinations of hardware, software, and telecommunications
networks that people build and use to collect, create, and
distribute useful data, typically in organizational settings.
computerized provider order entry (CPOE)
An electronic process or system that automates the way that
orders have traditionally been initiated for patients. It allows a
healthcare provider to enter orders electronically and manage
the results of those orders.computer science
Branch of engineering (application of science) that studies the
theoretical foundations of information and computation and their
implementation and application in computer systems. The study
of storage/memory, conversion and transformation, and transfer
or transmission of information in machines (i.e., computers)
through both algorithms and practical implementation problems.
Algorithms are detailed, unambiguous action sequences in the
design, efficiency, and application of computer systems,
whereas practical implementation problems deal with the
software and hardware.
conceptual framework
A framework used in research to chart feasible courses of action
or to present a desired approach to a study or analysis; built
from a set of concepts that are related to a proposed or existing
system of methods, behaviors, functions, relationships, and
objects. A relational model. A formal way of thinking or
conceptualizing about a phenomenon, process, or system under
study.
conferencing software
Electronic communications system or software that supports
and facilitates two or more people meeting for discussion. High￾end systems offer telepresence (a lifelike experience allowing
people to feel as if they are present in person [it would be as
though the nurse were physically there with the patient] so that
people can work, learn, and play in person over the internet or
have an effect at a remote location).
confidentialityThe mandate that all personal information be safeguarded by
ensuring that access is limited to only those who are authorized
to view that information.
connected health
A model for healthcare delivery and management that integrates
technology to provide remote services and leverages healthcare
resources to maximize access for consumers to engage with
clinicians and facilitate the self-management of their care.
connectionism
A component of cognitive science that uses computer modeling
through artificial neural networks to try to explain human
intellectual abilities.
connectivity
Ability to hook up to the electronic resources necessary to meet
the user’s needs. The ability to use computer networks to link to
people and resources. The unbiased transmission or transport
of Internet Protocol packets between two end points.
consequence
An outcome or product resulting from one’s choices.
Consolidated Health Informatics (CHI)
A collaborative effort to adopt health information interoperability
standards, particularly health vocabulary and messaging
standards, for implementation in federal government systems.
consultant
A person hired to provide expert advice, opinions, and
recommendations based on their area of expertise.
context of careThe setting, services, patient, environment, and professional
and social interactions surrounding the delivery of patient
interventions.
continuing education (CE)
Coursework or training completed after achievement of a
baccalaureate degree, often for the purpose of recertification.
copyright
A legal term used by many governments around the world that
gives the inventor or designer of an original product exclusive
rights to that product for a limited time; the same laws that cover
physical books, artwork, and other creative material are still
applicable in the digital world.
core business system
A system that enhances administrative tasks within healthcare
organizations. Unlike a clinical information system, whose aim is
to provide direct patient care, this system supports the
management of health care within an organization. It provides
the framework for reimbursement, support of best practices,
quality control, and resource allocation. There are four common
types of core business systems: (1) admission, discharge, and
transfer (ADT); (2) financial; (3) acuity; and (4) scheduling.
courage
The strength to face difficulty.
covered entity
A healthcare provider that conducts certain transactions in
electronic form (a covered healthcare provider), a healthcare
clearinghouse, or a health plan that electronically transmits any
health information in connection with transactions (billing andpayment for services or insurance coverage) for which the U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services has adopted
standards; identified in the HIPAA Administrative Simplification
Regulations.
creativity software
A program that supports and facilitates innovation and creativity
(an intellectual process relating to the creation or generation of
new ideas, concepts, or relationships between currently existing
ideas or concepts); it allows users to focus more on creating
new things in today’s digital age and less on the mechanics or
workings of how it is created or developed.
crowdsourcing
Information generated by individuals on social media.
Cumulative Index to Nursing and Allied Health Literature
(CINAHL)
A comprehensive nursing and allied health literature database.
Cures Act
The 21st Century Cures Act, known as the Cures Act, was
signed into law on December 13, 2016. The Cures Act is
designed to help hasten medical product development and bring
innovations and advances to patients who need them sooner
and more efficiently. It also contains provisions related to
electronic health information (EHI). The Office of the National
Coordinator for Health Information Technology (ONC) is
responsible for implementing key provisions of the 21st Century
Cures Act focused on advanced interoperability and the access,
exchange, and use of EHI as well as information blocking.
cyborgThe shortened term for a cybernetic organism. It has both
biological and technological parts that are electronic,
mechanical, or robotic.
data
Raw facts that lack meaning.
database
A collection of related records stored in a computer system
using software that permits a person or program to query the
data to extract needed information; it may consist of one or
more related data files or tables.
database management system (DBMS)
Software programs and the hardware used to create and
manage data.
data dictionary
Software that contains a listing of tables and their details,
including field names, validation settings, and data types.
data file
A collection of related records.
data gatherer
One involved in the direct procurement of raw facts (data).
data loss prevention (DLP)
A strategy or approach for making sure that end users do not
send sensitive or critical information outside the institution’s
network. The term also refers to software products that help the
network manager or administrator control what data end users
can transfer.
data martCollection of data focusing on a specific topic or organizational
unit or department created to facilitate management personnel
making strategic business decisions. Could be as small as one
database or larger, such as a compilation of databases;
generally smaller than a data warehouse.
data mining
A process of utilizing software to sort through data to discover
patterns and ascertain or establish relationships. This process
may help to discover previously unidentified relationships
among the data in a database.
data set
A collection of interrelated data.
data warehouse (DW)
An extremely large database, or repository, that stores all of an
organization’s or institution’s data and makes this data available
for data mining. A combination of an institution’s many different
databases that provides management personnel flexible access
to the data.
debrief
The simulation stage comprising a student￾centered discussion during which the participants and observers
reflect on performance during the scenario and make
recommendations for future practice.
decision-making
Output of cognition; outcome of our intellectual processing.
decision support
Recommendations for interventions based on computerized
care protocols. The decision-support recommendations may include such items as additional
screenings, medication interactions, or drug and dosage
monitoring.
decision-support/outcomes manager
The person charged with reviewing the effects of interventions
suggested by the computerized decision-support system.
decision tree
A set of decisions represented in a tree￾shaped pattern; the decisions produce the rules for the
classification of a data set.
deep learning
A subset of machine learning using a specialized algorithm
known as an artificial neural network. Deep learning algorithms
are able to explore many layers of a neural network
simultaneously (e.g., in processing images for radiology) rather
than the linear processing typical of less sophisticated
algorithms.
desktop
A computer’s interface that resembles the top of a desk, where
the user keeps things they want to access quickly, such as
paper clips, pens, and paper. On the computer’s desktop, the
user can customize the look and feel to have easy access to the
programs, folders, and files on the hard drive that the individual
uses the most.
desktop publishing
Using a desktop computer to generate printed documents, such
as marketing materials, reports, and an organization’s
newsletters.digital divide
The gap between those who have and those who do not have
access to online information.
digital phenotyping
The processing of individual data collected by wearable
technologies to suggest that an individual has health issues,
especially issues related to individual mental health status.
digital video disk-recordable (DVD-R)
Disk on which a user can record once.
digital video disk-rewritable (DVD-RW)
Disk on which a user can record many times.
disruptive innovation
A new development that radically changes or disrupts the way a
structure or industry functions. It is the introduction of a product
or service into a well-known or established industry that
outperforms (is more efficient and at a lower price point),
thereby obtaining a competitive advantage, capturing the market
share, and altering and transforming that industry.
dissemination
A thoughtful, intentional, goal-oriented communication of
specific, useful information or knowledge.
distance education
Learning provided from a remote location.
distributed ledger technology (DLT)
A technological infrastructure with protocols that use separate,
independent computers, also known as nodes, to
simultaneously access, validate, record, share, coordinate, andsynchronize transactions in their electronic ledgers across a
network that spans numerous entities or locations.
distributed network
A network that consists of shared programming and data spread
across more than one computer.
Division of Health Informatics and Surveillance (DHIS)
A division of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC) that manages two comprehensive public health
surveillance systems, the National Notifiable Diseases
Surveillance System (NNDSS) and the National Syndromic
Surveillance Program (NSSP), and a data hub for research, the
CDC Data Hub. It also develops information systems to support
data collection exchange and processing.
document
Represents information that can be printed, saved, or emailed or
otherwise shared or displayed.
domain name
A series of alphanumeric characters that forms part of the
internet address, or URL (e.g., psu.edu denotes Pennsylvania
State University’s address).
double data rate synchronous dynamic random-access memory
(DDR SDRAM)
A chip that allows for greater bandwidth and twice the transfers
per the unit of time of the computer’s internal clock; one of the
transfers occurs at the start of the new unit of time, and the
other transfer occurs at the end of the unit of time.
drill downA means of viewing data warehouse information by going down
to lower levels of the database to focus on information that is
pertinent to the user’s needs at the moment.
duty
One’s feeling of being bound or obligated to carry out specific
tasks or roles based on one’s rank or position.
dynamic random-access memory (DRAM)
Type of RAM chip requiring less space to store the same
amount of data as on a similar static RAM (SRAM) chip;
however, DRAM requires more power than SRAM because
DRAM needs to keep its charge by constantly refreshing.
dynamic system development method (DSDM)
An agile software development strategy based on the rapid
application development model, which is iterative and used in
the system development life cycle and project management.
dynamic web page shell
Web page that can be custom scripted to provide realistic case
scenarios during a simulation experience.
earcon
An auditory tone that represents relationships among data
elements, such as the relationship of systolic blood pressure to
diastolic blood pressure.
ecological interface design (EID)
An approach to interface design that was introduced explicitly
for multifaceted, complex, sociotechnical, real-time, and
dynamic systems; it has been applied in many fields, including
health care. This approach supports knowledge workers inhealth care as they manage and adapt to change, innovation,
and novelty.
Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC)
A comprehensive educational resources database. An
international database of educational literature.
educator
A sage, leader, and/or guide who assists in the process or
practice of learning.
edutainment
Learning while having fun; an activity in which learners are
engaged and entertained while they learn; a combination of
education and entertainment.
eHealth
Healthcare initiatives and practice supported by electronic or
digital media. The most typical use is for patient and family
education whereby information is communicated electronically.
eHealth Initiative
An initiative that was developed to address the growing need for
managing health information and promoting technology as a
means of improving health information exchange, health literacy,
and healthcare delivery.
e-learning
Electronic learning, or learning that is facilitated by electronic
means, such as computers and the internet. E-learning, online,
and web-based education has caused a significant shift in
student–teacher relationships in nursing education.
electronically erasable programmable read-only memory
(EEPROM)A nonvolatile storage chip used in computers and other devices
to store small amounts of volatile data (e.g., calibration tables or
device configuration).
electronic communication
Any exchange of information that is transmitted electronically.
electronic health information (EHI)
Refers to patient data that are stored in electronic form, which
are collected and shared for healthcare delivery and public
health. The primary use of EHI is for direct patient-care services,
and its secondary use relates to public health objectives
research, such as for treatment-related studies, licensure, and
payment.
electronic health record (EHR)
Computer-based data warehouse or repository of information
regarding the health status of a client, which is replacing the
former paper-based medical record; it is the systematic
documentation of a client’s health status and health care in a
secured digital format, meaning that it can be processed, stored,
transmitted, and accessed by authorized interdisciplinary
professionals for the purpose of supporting efficient, high-quality
health care across the client’s healthcare continuum. Also
known as an electronic medical record (EMR).
electronic mailing list
Automatic mailing list server, such as LISTSERV, that
automatically sends an email addressed to everyone who has
subscribed to the list. Similar to an electronic bulletin board or a
news forum.
electronic medication administration record (eMAR)A system that uses barcoding technology to submit and fill
prescriptions. Typically, handheld scanners read barcodes and
transmit them to the pharmacy.
electronic protected health information (ePHI)
Any protected health information (PHI) that is used in any
electronic format.
email
Electronic mail. To compose, send, receive, and store messages
in electronic communication systems.
empowerment
Promotion of self-actualization; achievement of power or control
over one’s own life.
enactment
The simulation stage in which a student enacts an assigned role
during the established time frame in a prepared simulation area.
encryption
A method of scrambling data so that readable text becomes
unintelligible or incomprehensible so that only those authorized
to see the text or information can understand it.
end user
Target user or consumer of software and computer technology.
Software or computing applications should be designed for the
end user, the person who will ultimately be using them.
engage
To capture the attention of students and motivate or energize
them to actively participate in an educational activity.
enterprise integrationElectronically linking healthcare providers, health plans,
government, and other interested parties to facilitate electronic
exchange and use of health information among all stakeholders.
enterprise resource planning (ERP)
A process used to manage and integrate the essential parts of a
business to facilitate resource planning since all of the
processes needed to run the enterprise or company are
contained within a single system.
entity
See covered entity.
entity relationship diagram (ERD)
Specifies the relationships among the entities in a database.
Sometimes the implied relationships are apparent based on the
entities’ definitions; however, all relationships should be
specified as to how items relate to one another. There are
typically three relationships: one to one, one to many, and many
to many.
entrepreneur
A person who assumes the risks of beginning an enterprise or a
business and accepts responsibility for organizing and
managing the organization.
enumerative approach
Nursing terminology in which words or phrases are presented in
a list or a simple hierarchy; gives an explicit and exhaustive
listing of all the objects that fall under the concept or term in
question.
epistemologyStudy of the nature and origin of knowledge; what it means to
know.
ergonomics
In the United States, this term is used to describe the physical
characteristics of equipment—for example, the optimal fit of a
scissors to a human hand. In Europe, it is synonymous with
human factors—that is, the interaction of humans with physical
attributes of equipment or the interaction of humans and the
arrangement of equipment in the work environment.
ethical decision-making
The process of making informed choices about ethical dilemmas
based on a set of standards that differentiate right from wrong.
The decision-making reflects an understanding of the principles
and standards of ethical decision-making as well as the
philosophical approaches to ethical decision-making. It requires
a systematic framework for addressing the complex and often
controversial moral questions.
ethical dilemma
A difficult choice or issue that requires the application of
standards or principles to solve. Issues that challenge us
ethically.
ethical, social, and legal implications (ESLI)
Consideration and understanding of the ethical, social, or legal
connections or aspects of an issue that relate to a moral
question of right and wrong.
ethicist
An expert in the arbitrary, ambiguous, and ungrounded
judgments of other people. Ethicists know that they make thebest decision they can based on the situation and stakeholders
at hand.
ethics
A process of systematically examining varying viewpoints
related to moral questions of right and wrong.
eudaemonistic
Describes a system of ethical evaluation that involves
consideration of which actions lead to being an excellent and
happy person.
event
An occurrence that might be significant to other objects in a
system or to external agents; for example, creating a laboratory
request is an example of a healthcare event in a laboratory
application. An event is defined as and could be a triggering
event for the task or workflow; a task or workflow can have
several triggering events.
evidence
Artifacts, productions, attestations, or other examples that
demonstrate an individual’s knowledge, skills, or valued
attributes.
evidence-based practice (EBP)
Nursing practice that is informed by research-generated
evidence of best practices.
exabyte (EB)
A unit of measure for computer memory equal to one quintillion
bytes of computer memory.
execute
To carry out the instructions of a program or software.expert system
A decision-support system that implements the knowledge of
one or more human experts.
exploratory data analysis (EDA)
Approach that uses mainly graphical techniques to gain insight
into a data set. It identifies the most important variables.
Conducted during the exploratory phase, EDA provides
guidance into the complexity or general nature of the various
models that should be considered for implementation during
pattern discovery.
extended reality (XR)
The umbrella term in which the X can represent any letter so
that the term covers all of the forms of digitally altered realities
that currently exist and other immersive technologies to be
developed.
extensibility
A system design feature that allows for future expansion without
the need for changing the basic infrastructure.
face-to-face
Most widely used teaching method among nurse educators
where the teacher and learners meet together in one location at
the same time.
failure modes and effects analysis (FMEA)
A systematic evaluation of a process to determine how and why
it failed to produce the desired results.
fair use
Doctrine that permits the limited use of original works without
the copyright holder’s permission—for example, quoting or citingan author in a scholarly manuscript.
fantasy
The activity of imagining things; hypothetical fiction set in an
imaginary world or universe.
far-field communication
A region of the electromagnetic field around an object that
extends beyond the near-field communication (NFC) region.
Federal Health Information Exchange (FHIE)
A federal information technology healthcare initiative that
enables the secure electronic one-way exchange of patient
medical information from the Department of Defense’s legacy
health information system, the Composite Health Care System,
for all separated service members to VISTA, the Veterans
Health Information Systems and Technology Architecture. The
point of care in veterans’ affairs.
feedback
Input in the form of opinions about or reactions to something,
such as shared knowledge. In an information system, feedback
refers to information from the system that is used to make
modifications in the input, processing action, or output.
fidelity
The extent to which a simulation mimics the processes of a real
environment; in the context of ethics, the right to what has been
promised.
field
A column, or attribute, of an entity in a database.
field studyA study in which end users evaluate a prototype in the actual
work setting prior to its general release. Also called a field test,
an alpha test, or a beta test.
financial system
A system used to manage the expenses and revenues accrued
while providing health care. The finance, auditing, and
accounting departments within an organization most commonly
use a financial system. This system determines the direction for
maintenance and growth for a given facility. A financial system
often interfaces to share information with materials
management, staffing, and billing systems to balance the
financial effect of these resources within an organization. A
financial system reports the fiscal outcomes so that they can be
tracked against the organizational goals of an institution. This
system is one of the major decision￾making factors as healthcare institutions prepare their fiscal
budgets. It often plays a pivotal role in determining the strategic
direction for an organization.
firewall
A tool commonly used by organizations to protect their corporate
networks when they are connected to the internet. A firewall can
be hardware or software or a combination of the two. It
examines all incoming messages or traffic to the network. The
firewall can be set up to allow only messages from known
senders into the corporate network; it can also be set up to look
at outgoing information from the corporate network.
firmwareHardware and software programs or data written onto read-only
memory (ROM), programmable read-only memory (PROM), and
erasable programmable read-only memory (EPROM).
flash drive
Small, removable storage device.
flash memory
Special type of electronically erasable programmable read-only
memory (EEPROM) that can be erased and reprogrammed in
blocks instead of one byte at a time. Many modern personal
computers have their basic input/output system (BIOS) stored
on a flash memory chip so that it can easily be updated if
necessary.
Foundation of Knowledge model
A model that proposes that humans are organic information
systems who constantly acquire, process, generate, and
disseminate information or knowledge in both their professional
and their personal lives. The organizing framework of this text.
free/libre open source software (FLOSS)
A designation that refers to freedom and not cost, offering the
following freedoms: to be able to run the program, to study the
source code, to be able to change the program in source code
form, and to be able to distribute modified versions of the
program.
free/open source software (F/OSS or FOSS)
A designation that is ambiguous since it fails to clearly explain
that the word free in its title refers to freedom. It offers the
following freedoms: to be able to run the program, to study the
source code, to be able to change the program in source codeform, and to be able to distribute modified versions of the
program.
game
A structured activity undertaken for enjoyment.
game mechanics
The rules, instructions, directions, and constructs that players
interact with while playing the game. It is imperative that the
rules be clearly stated in the instructions or directions so that the
players know what is expected of them, and the game itself has
rules that it, too, must obey. The mechanics determine how the
players interact with the rules, and the game responds to the
players’ moves or behaviors within the game, thus connecting
the players’ actions to the purpose of the game.
gameplay
How players interact with, or play, a game.
Generation Z (Gen Z)
The generation of Americans born between 1997 and 2012 who
are considered digital natives since they were born into an
innovative technology world with ubiquitous social media and
immediately accessible data and information.
gigabyte (GB)
A unit of measure used to express bytes of data storage and
capability in computer systems; 1 GB equals 1,000 megabytes.
gigahertz (GHz)
A unit of measure used to express speed and power of some
components, such as the microprocessor; 1 GHz equals 1,000
megahertz.
GlassA wearable computer from Google that can take pictures, play
video, and display text messages without anyone else knowing.
Currently, it costs approximately $1,500.
good
Favorable outcome in ethics.
Government Accountability Office (GAO)
The highest audit institution of the federal government that
provides auditing, evaluation, and investigative services for the
U.S. Congress.
Graphical user interface (GUI [pronounced “gooey”])
Software that provides a user-friendly desktop metaphor
interface that is made up of the input and output devices as well
as icons that represent files, programs, actions, and processes.
graphics card
A board that plugs into a personal computer to give it display
capabilities.
gray gap
A term used to reflect the age disparities in computer
connectivity; there are fewer persons older than age 65 who use
computer technology than members of younger age groups.
gulf of evaluation
The gap between knowing one’s intention (goal) and knowing
the effects of one’s actions.
gulf of execution
The gap between knowing what one wants to have happen (the
goal) and knowing what to do to bring it about (the means to
achieve the goal).
hackerComputer-savvy individual most commonly thought of as a
malicious person who hacks, or breaks through, security to steal
or alter data and information; can also be any member of a
group of computer aficionados who band together in clubs and
organizations or who use their skills as a hobby.
handheld device
A computer that is small enough to be used while holding in
one’s hand or easily carried in a pocket; synonymous with a
personal digital assistant (PDA).
haptics
The science of applying tactile sensation or touch to human–
computer interactions, which allows users to use special
input/output devices, such as joysticks, data gloves, and
sensors, to feel and manipulate a virtual three-dimensional
object’s attributes of texture, shape, surface, temperature,
and/or weight.
hard disk
Magnetic disk that stores electronic data.
hard drive
Permanent data storage area that holds the data, information,
documents, and programs saved on the computer, even when
the computer is off. The actual physical body of the computer
and its components.
hardware
Physical or tangible parts of the computer. Computer parts that
one can touch and are involved in the performance or function
of the computer, such as the keyboard and monitor.
harmPhysical or mental injury or damage. Unfavorable outcome in
ethics.
head-mounted display (HMD)
A display device worn on the head with optics placed in front of
the eye/eyes; used in virtual reality scenarios and for gaming.
healthcare-associated infection (HAI)
An infection that patients acquire while being treated in a
healthcare facility.
health disparity
A health status difference between different groups of people,
especially minorities and nonminorities; the gaps between the
health status of minorities and nonminorities in the United States
are ongoing even with the advances in technology and
healthcare practices.
health information
Healthcare providers collect information to identify a patient and
formulate a plan of care; this information consists of
demographic information, diagnostic tests, insurance
information, and any other data and information necessary that
are collected about a patient.
health information exchange (HIE)
Organization that prepares and organizes people and resources
to manage healthcare information electronically across
organizations within a community or region.
health information technology (HIT)
Hardware, software, integrated technologies or related licenses,
intellectual property, upgrades, or packaged solutions sold as
services that are designed for or support the use by healthcareentities or patients for the electronic creation, maintenance,
access, or exchange of health information.
Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical
Health (HITECH) Act
Title XIII of the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act, which
was enacted in February 2009. Under this act, healthcare
organizations can qualify for financial incentives based on the
level of meaningful use achieved; the HITECH Act specifically
incentivizes health organizations and providers to become
meaningful users.
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA)
Law signed by President Bill Clinton in 1996 addressing the
need for standards to regulate and safeguard health information
and making provisions for health insurance coverage for
employed persons who change jobs.
Health Level Seven International (HL7)
An accredited standards-developing organization that is
committed to developing standard terminologies for information
technology that support interoperability of healthcare information
management systems.
health literacy
The acquisition of knowledge that promotes the ability to
understand and manage one’s health.
health management information system (HMIS)
An information system that is specially intended to support and
help with the planning, resource allocation, and management of
health programming to make health care more effective andefficient; an information system that plans and manages health
programs rather than the actual delivery of health care.
Health New England
An example of an implementation model for building regional
health information organizations that are functional, sustainable,
and growing while reducing administrative costs.
heuristic evaluation
An evaluation in which a small number of evaluators (often
experts in relevant fields, such as human factors or cognitive
engineering) evaluate the degree to which an interface design
complies with recognized usability principles (the heuristics).
high-hazard drug
A drug known to cause significant adverse side effects when
administered inappropriately; a drug subject to frequent
administration errors.
hologram
A physical structure that diffracts light into a three-dimensional
image projection that can be seen without the use of a
specialized camera, headset, or glasses.
home health care
An alternative site for healthcare services that typically focuses
on post–hospital discharge patient needs.
home telehealth care
Home healthcare clinical and educational services provided via
telecommunications-ready tools.
HONcode
One of the two most common symbols that internet users look
for to identify trusted health sites.hospital information system (HIS)
An information system intended to manage the clinical, financial,
and administrative needs of the hospital; refers to the paper￾based, as well as computer-based, information processing that
manages the functional aspects (i.e., administrative, financial,
and clinical) of a hospital.
human–computer interaction (HCI)
How people use and interact with computers; the study of how
people use computers and software applications and the ways
that computers influence people.
human enhancement technology (HET)
Biomedical and other technology that augments a person using
human–machine integration, such as the use of artificial limbs or
other prosthetics; it can make a healthy person healthier or
stronger or a smart person even smarter using human genetic
engineering.
human factor
Any characteristic of a person that may influence how they
interact with technology.
human factors engineering
Recognizing the limitations of human performance and
developing products to overcome those limitations.
human intelligence (HI)
Human intelligence is the capacity and aptitude of humans to
obtain, capture, harness, and apply knowledge and wisdom
through complex and multifaceted cognitive, affective, and
intellectual acts generated through motivation, innovation,
creativity, and mindfulness or self-awareness.human mental workload (MWL)
Mental processing or cognitive demands placed on a person
when they are interacting with technology.
human–technology interaction (HTI)
How users interact with technology. The study of that interaction.
human–technology interface
The hardware and software through which the user interacts
with any technology (e.g., computers, patient monitors, or
telephones).
hybrid
A descriptor for individual courses in which instruction is
delivered using multiple formats, such as online, face-to-face,
print based, or audio- or videoconferencing.
hypertext
Clickable words that allow users to access another document at
a remote location.
immersive experience
A 3D environment that engages you and makes you suspend
reality because it feels like you are there, surrounded by the
environment.
implementation science
Studies that focus specifically on implementation processes to
identify barriers to the implementation of new practices based
on evidence.
Indiana Health Information Exchange (IHIE)
A collaborative effort among institutions in Indiana to provide
high-quality patient care and enhance the safety and efficiency
of health care.informatics innovator
One who makes enhancements or improvements and creative,
novel, and inventive solutions in the informatics specialty.
informatics nurse specialist (INS)
A registered nurse with graduate-level education in the field of
informatics or a related field who is considered a specialist in the
field of nursing informatics.
information
Data that are interpreted, organized, or structured. Data
processed using knowledge or data made functional through the
application of knowledge.
Information Age
Period at the end of the 20th century, when information was
easily accessible using computers, networks, and the internet.
information literacy
Recognizing when information is needed and having the ability
to locate, evaluate, and effectively use the needed information.
An intellectual framework for finding, understanding, evaluating,
and using information.
information science
The science of information, studying the application and usage
of information and knowledge in organizations and the
interfacing or interaction between people, organizations, and
information systems. An extensive, interdisciplinary science that
integrates features from cognitive science, communication
science, computer science, library science, and social science.
information system (IS)The manual and/or automated components of a system of users
or people, recorded data, and actions used to process the data
into information for a user, a group of users, or an organization.
information technology (IT)
Use of hardware, software, services, and supporting
infrastructure to manage and deliver information using voice,
data, and video, or the use of technology from computing,
electronics, and telecommunications to process and distribute
information in digital and other forms; anything related to
computing technology, such as networking, hardware, software,
the internet, or the people who work with these technologies.
Many hospitals have IT departments for managing the
computers, networks, and other technical areas of the
healthcare industry.
information user
The person who accesses and makes use of information made
available to them.
infrastructure as a service (IaaS)
Cloud-based services that provide a rentable backbone to
companies to provide the scalable, on-demand infrastructure
they need to support their dynamic workloads; users pay for
only what they use, and they do not have to invest in hardware,
including networks, storage, and data center space.
in-plane switching liquid-crystal display (IPS LCD)
Smartphone display using polarized light that passes through a
color filter, with all the pixels backlit. The liquid crystals control
the brightness and which pixels are on or off. The active matrix
provides crisp, vivid colors and darker blacks.input
Data and information entered into a computer system.
instant message (IM)
A form of real-time communication between two or more people
based on typed text that is conveyed via computers that are
connected over a network.
integration
Assimilating or combining to make whole; in computer
terminology, the process through which different technologies—
software and hardware components—are synchronized and
combined to make a functional and structural system.
integrity
Quality and accuracy. Employees need to have confidence that
the information they are provided is true. To accomplish this,
organizations need clear policies to clarify how data are actually
input, determine who has the authorization to change such data,
and track how and when data are changed.
intelligence
Mental ability to think logically, reason, prepare, ideate, assess
alternative solutions to problems, problem solve by choosing a
proposed solution, think abstractly, comprehend and grasp
ideas, understand and use language, and learn.
Intelligence of Things (IoT)
Consists of intelligent or smart devices and sensors that can
communicate, interact with each other, and take actions based
on information collected from various things or devices.
interaction
Interfacing with users commonly using tasks or notifications.interactive technology
A technology that promotes or supports user communication
with other persons (e.g., email) or that depends on a user’s
response (e.g., games).
interdisciplinary collaboration
A cooperative relationship among actively engaged
professionals whereby healthcare decision-making is shared
effectively to combine their collective knowledge and skills to
provide care.
interface
A mechanism or system used by separate things to interact. For
example, if one wants to change a CD in a CD player, one could
use a remote; the human user is not related to the CD player but
can interact with it using the remote control. Therefore, the
remote control becomes the interface that enables that person
to tell the CD player which CD to play.
International Classification of Nursing Practice (ICNP)
An agreed-upon designated set of terms that are used to record
nursing care globally, including observations and interventions
made by the nurse. This framework provides a means to share
and compare nursing care across practice settings.
International Organization for Standardization (ISO)
An international network supporting collaboration among the
standards-developing agencies of numerous countries for the
development of consistent standards in a multitude of industries
to support a global economy. ISO is best known in the
technology industries for the ISO 9000 standards. See
International Standards Organization.Internet2
A nonprofit consortium that develops and deploys advanced
network applications and technologies for education and high￾speed data transfer purposes. Led by 212 universities, it is also
known as University Corporation for Advanced Internet
Development.
internet browser
Software used to locate and display web pages. Also known as
a web browser or just a browser.
Internet of Everything (IoE)
The connections among people, data, processes, and electronic
devices.
Internet of Things (IoT)
Electronic devices that connect with each other to provide real￾time data and interpretation of data without human intervention.
interoperability
Ability of various systems and organizations to work together to
exchange information.
interprofessional collaboration
When two or more professionals from different disciplines work
jointly together, such as when nurses and physicians collaborate
to formulate and evaluate a plan of care for a patient.
interprofessional team
A collection of professionals (e.g., physicians, nurses,
pharmacists, physical therapists, and nutritionists) who work
together to deliver patient care and improve outcomes.
intrusion detection deviceBoth hardware and software that allow an organization to
monitor who is using its network and which files that user has
accessed.
intrusion detection system
Method of security that uses both hardware and software
detection devices as a system that can be set up to monitor a
single computer or an entire network. Corporations must
diligently monitor for unauthorized access of their networks.
intuition
A way of acquiring knowledge that cannot be obtained by
inference, deduction, observation, reason, analysis, or
experience.
Iowa model
A model that facilitates the translation of research evidence into
clinical practice. Also known as the Iowa model of evidence￾based practice.
iPod
The name given to a family of portable MP3 players from Apple.
iteration
Replication and refinement of a method until it meets a goal or
provides the desired result; each repetition is referred to as an
iteration.
jump drive
Small, removable storage device.
just culture
An atmosphere of trust. In a just culture, everyone understands
what is acceptable and unacceptable behavior and is urged and
rewarded for supplying vital safety-related information.justice
Fairness. Treatment of everyone in the same way.
keyboard
Set of keys resembling an actual typewriter that permits the user
to input data into a computer.
key field
Within each database record, one of the fields identified as the
primary key. It contains a code, name, number, or other bit of
information that acts as a unique identifier for that record. In a
healthcare system, for example, a patient is assigned a patient
number, or ID, that is unique for that patient.
kinesthesia
See proprioception
knowledge
The awareness and understanding of a set of information and
ways that information can be made useful to support a specific
task or arrive at a decision; abounds with others’ thoughts and
information. Information that is synthesized so that relationships
are identified and formalized. Understanding that comes through
a process of interaction or experience with the world around us.
Information that has judgment applied to it or meaning extracted
from it. Processed information that helps to clarify or explain
some portion of our environment or world that we can use as a
basis for action or upon which we can act. Internal process of
thinking or cognition. External process of testing, senses,
observation, and interacting.
knowledge acquisition
The act of getting knowledge.knowledge builder
A person who examines, interprets, and compares clinical data
and trends with an eye toward improving clinical practice based
on the available evidence.
knowledge dissemination
Distribution and sharing of knowledge.
knowledge domain process (KDP) model
A model that represents knowledge construction and
dissemination in an organization.
knowledge exchange
The product of collaboration when sharing an understanding of
information promotes learning to make better decisions in the
future.
knowledge generation
The creation of new knowledge by changing and evolving
knowledge based on one’s experience, education, and input
from others.
knowledge management system (KMS)
Repository of information that contains the latest collective
expertise based on experience and research. The knowledge is
typically stored in a computerized system that promotes easy
access for use.
knowledge network
A digital collection that provides high-quality knowledge support
to its users.
knowledge processing
The process of gathering, perceiving, analyzing, synthesizing,
storing, manipulating, conveying, and transmitting knowledge.knowledge user
An individual or a group that benefits from valuable, viable
knowledge.
knowledge worker
A person who works with information and generates information
and knowledge as a product.
laboratory information system
A system that reports on blood, body fluid, and tissue samples
along with biological specimens that are collected at the bedside
and received in a central laboratory. This system provides
clinicians with reference ranges for tests indicating high, low, or
normal values so that they can make care decisions. Often, the
laboratory system provides result information directing clinicians
toward the next course of action within a treatment regimen.
laptop
Portable, battery-powered computer that the user can take with
them. Also known as a notebook.
latex-based simulation
A simulation using mannequins or other training devices made
of latex.
Lean
A managerial team-based approach to enhance performance
and remove waste and defects in workflow processes.
learning management system (LMS)
A software application that provides institutions with a
framework for all aspects of the learning process that generally
use AI and other smart technologies.
levels of preventionThe three levels of prevention are primary, secondary, and
tertiary. Primary is preventing pathophysiologic changes.
Secondary is early detection and intervention. Tertiary is chronic
with the aim of minimizing the deficits and maximizing the
potential.
liberty
The independence from controlling influences.
library science
An interdisciplinary science that integrates law, applied science,
and the humanities to study issues and topics related to libraries
(i.e., collection, organization, preservation, archiving, and
dissemination of information resources).
local area network (LAN)
Organizationally based network that is joined together locally.
logic
A system of thinking that uses principles of inference and
reasoned ideas to govern action.
machine learning (ML)
A subset of artificial intelligence that permits computers to learn
either inductively or deductively. Inductive machine learning is
the process of reasoning and making generalizations or
extracting patterns and rules from huge data sets—that is,
reasoning from a large number of examples to a general rule.
Deductive machine learning moves from premises that are
assumed true to conclusions that must be true if the premises
are true.
main memory
A computer’s internal memory.malicious code
Software that includes spyware, viruses, worms, and Trojan
horses.
malicious insider
A person inside or an employee of an organization who
sabotages or adds malicious code or hacks into systems to
cause damage or steal data and information.
malware
Malicious software; an evil, malicious program that infects a
device and is intended to steal information or take control of,
irritate, damage, or destroy data, information, or the device.
managed care information system (MCIS)
An information system that crosses organizational boundaries
so that data can be obtained at any and all of the patient areas;
this system makes it possible for nurses and physicians to make
clinical decisions while being mindful of their financial
ramifications.
mapping
How environmental facts (e.g., the order of light switches or
variables in a physiological monitoring display) are accurately
depicted by the information presentation.
mask
A method that a proxy server uses to protect the identity of a
corporation’s employees while they are surfing the World Wide
Web. The proxy server keeps track of which employees are
using which masks and directs the traffic appropriately.
Massachusetts Health Data Consortium (MHDC)A consortium of regional healthcare organizations that collects
data, publishes comparative information, supports and promotes
electronic standards, educates, and researches.
massive multiplayer online role-playing game (MMORPG)
A game using the internet to provide a shared, simultaneous
experience for dozens or even hundreds of players.
massive open online course (MOOC)
A virtual or an online course with unlimited participation and
open access via the web. Typically, a MOOC provides
interactive opportunities using social media or other means to
support community interactions among learners and teachers.
meaningful use (MU)
The American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 specifies
three components of meaningful use: (1) the use of a certified
electronic health record (EHR) in a meaningful manner, such as
e-prescribing; (2) the use of certified EHR technology for
electronic exchange of health information to improve quality of
health care; and (3) the use of certified EHR technology to
submit clinical quality and other measures. The criteria for
meaningful use was staged in three steps. Stage 1 (2011–2012)
set the baseline for electronic data capture and information
sharing. Stage 2 (2013) and Stage 3 (2015) continued to
expand on this baseline and were developed through future
rulemaking.
medical home model
A model to provide complete, comprehensive, and uninterrupted
health care that is led by the healthcare provider. This model
uses a team-based approach to healthcare delivery to achieveoptimal health outcomes; it is also known as the patient￾centered medical home.
medical informatics
A specialty that integrates medical science, computer science,
cognitive science, and information science to manage and
communicate data, information, knowledge, and wisdom in
medical practice.
Medicare Access and CHIP Reauthorization Act of 2015
(MACRA)
An act that reformed Medicare payments by making changes
that created a Quality Payment Program (QPP) to replace the
hodgepodge system of Medicare reporting programs.
medication management device
A telecommunications￾ready medication device used to remind or otherwise alert
patients to medication compliance needs.
MEDLINE
A database that contains more than 22 million records,
maintained and produced by the National Library of Medicine.
megabyte (MB)
A unit of measure used to express the amount of data storage
and capability in computer systems; 1 MB equals 1,000
kilobytes.
memory
Data stored in digital format; generally refers to random-access
memory (RAM).
Merit-based Incentive Payment System (MIPS)The Reauthorization Act of 2015 (MACRA) reformed Medicare
payments by making changes that created a Quality Payment
Program (QPP) to replace the hodgepodge system of Medicare
reporting programs. The MACRA QPP has two paths—Merit￾based Incentive Payment System (MIPS) or Alternative
Payment Model (APM)—which will be in effect through 2021
and beyond. As a consolidation and refinement of various
incentive programs, MIPS is an important program, but it neither
aspires to nor will drive change in the value of health care at
anywhere near the levels of change that the retirement of the
baby boomer generation will force upon Medicare and society.
meta-analysis
A form of systematic review that uses statistical methods to
combine the results of several research studies.
meta-learning
Learning that combines the predictions from several data mining
models with the goal of synthesizing these predicted
classifications to generate a final best predicted classification,
also known as stacking.
metaverse
The evolution of the latest frontier of the internet that is
continuously accessible and available, trisecting artificial
intelligence (AI), the realities (mixed reality [MR]: augmented
reality [AR] through virtual reality [VR]), and our
psychosocioeconomic digital and physical presence. The
metaverse promises hyperconnected blurred or blended reality
experienced through seamless immersive interactive exchanges
on the devices we use, from laptops to tablets to smartphones.metrics
Measurements or sets of measurements to quantify
performance; they provide understanding about the
performance of a process or function. Typically, within clinical
technology projects, one identifies and collects specific metrics
about the performance of the technology or metrics that capture
the level of participation or adoption. Equally important is the
need for process performance metrics. Process metrics are
collected at the initial stage of a project or problem identification.
Current-state metrics are then benchmarked against internal
indicators. When there are no internal indicators to benchmark
against, a suitable course of action is to benchmark against an
external source, such as a similar business practice within a
different industry.
microblog
A social media site where the users make frequent, short posts;
a type of blog where users post small texts or pieces of digital
content, such as pictures, images, video, or audio on the
internet. These posts are called microposts, and they are
immediately available to view.
microblogging
Refers to making frequent, short posts to a microblog.
micropost
A brief post to a personal blog on a microblogging social media
site, such as Twitter; could be a series of brief posts.
microprocessor
A chip that integrates the processor onto one circuit,
incorporating the functions of the computer’s central processingunit. Microprocessors continue to evolve in terms of their
processing capacity.
milestone
Predetermined planned occurrence that indicates the
completion or achievement of a deliverable.
millions of instructions per second (MIPS)
The number of machine instructions that a computer can
execute in one second—in this case, millions per second.
mind
The brain’s conscious processing; encompasses thought
processes, memory, imagination and creativity, emotions,
perceptions, and inner drive or will.
mixed reality (MR)
The blending of the physical world with the digital world to
create new environments and visualizations along the
continuum from augmented reality (AR) to virtual reality (VR).
mobile
Refers to our ability to move freely without compromising our
professional and personal connectivity and relates to laptops,
smartphones, and tablets (among others) that support our ability
to work, play, and socialize from anywhere.
mobile app
Software program that operates or runs on smartphones and
other mobile communication devices. It can also be an
accessory that attaches or connects to a smartphone or other
mobile communication device or a combination of accessory
and software.
mobile computingA technology that allows human–
computer interaction wherever a person is, which transports the
capability of transmitting data, voice, and video with them.
mobile device
A handheld computer, such as a smartphone or tablet.
mobile health (mHealth)
Health-related uses of mobile technology, including mobile
phones (and increasingly, internet-enabled, wireless-connected
smartphones), personal digital assistants, tablet computers and
subnotebook microcomputers, remote diagnostic and monitoring
devices, and global positioning system (GPS)/geographic
information system (GIS) mapping equipment; set of apps,
devices, and connections supported by mobile devices for
medical and public health use.
modeling
Refers to creating a representation or model, such as making
3D models.
modem (modulator–demodulator)
Hardware that allows a user to send and receive information
over the phone or cable lines—for example, with a computer. It
enables internet connectivity via a telephone line or cable
connection through network adaptors situated within the
computer apparatus.
monitor
Computer display that allows the user to view text and graphic
images.
moralA social convention about right and wrong human conduct that
is socially constructed and tacitly agreed upon as good or right.
moral dilemma
A situation for which there is no clear evidence that one of
several alternatives is morally right or wrong.
moral right
An ethical privilege.
MoSCoW
Must have, should have, could have, and would have; an
approach in which a team works with stakeholders to develop a
prioritized requirements list and a development plan.
motherboard
A key foundational computer component. All other components
are connected to it in some way (by local sockets or cables or
attached directly to it). The essential structures of the
motherboard include the major chipset, super input/output (I/O)
chip, basic input/output system (BIOS), read-only memory
(ROM), bus communications pathways, and a variety of sockets
that allow components to plug into it.
mouse
A small device that one can roll along or scroll to control the
movement of the pointer or cursor on a display and click to
search for and/or execute features.
MP3 aggregator
A program that can facilitate the process of finding, subscribing
to, and downloading podcasts. A commonly known aggregator is
Apple’s iTunes, which is a free program available as a download
from apple.com. Using a program such as iTunes gives the userthe ability to search for podcasts based on many criteria,
including category, author, or title. iTunes provides access to
audio downloads, which may be either songs or podcasts.
MP4
A digital multimedia file format capable of storing video and
audio.
MPEG-1 Audio Layer-3 (MP3)
Digital or electronic audio programming format.
multidimensional database
A database that combines data from numerous data sources
and is optimized for online analytical processing applications; it
uses multidimensional structures to organize the data, and each
data attribute is considered as a separate dimension.
multimedia
A computer-based technology that incorporates traditional forms
of communication to create a seamless and interactive learning
environment.
Multimedia Educational Resource for Learning and Online
Teaching (MERLOT)
A web-based open resource that provides access to curated
online learning and support materials and content creation tools
led by an international community of educators, learners, and
researchers.
multiuser dungeon (MUD)
A computer program, usually running over the internet, that
allows multiple users to participate in virtual-reality role-playing
games.
National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES)A survey sponsored by the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention that combines both questionnaires and physical
examinations to collect data on the health and nutritional status
of adults and children in the United States.
National Health Information Infrastructure (NHII)
An initiative intended to improve the effectiveness, efficiency,
and overall quality of health and health care in the United
States. A comprehensive knowledge-based network of
interoperable systems of clinical, public health, and personal
health information that would improve decision-making by
making health information available when and where it is
needed. The set of technology, standards, applications,
systems, values, and laws that support all facets of individual
health, health care, and public health. The NHII is voluntary and
not a centralized database of medical records or a government
regulation.
Nationwide Health Information Network (NHIN)
An agency of the U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services charged with the development of a safe, secure,
interoperable health information infrastructure. This network is
sponsored by the Office of the National Coordinator for Health
Information Technology (ONC), which began NHIN development
in 2004, and consists of a set of standards, policies, and
services that enable secure health information exchange (HIE)
over the internet.
natural language processing (NLP)
A discipline of computer science concerning the relationship
between computers and human language that requires machinelearning skills from the disciplines of artificial intelligence and
computational linguistics. It is the process of using computer
algorithms to identify key elements in everyday language and
extract meaning from unstructured spoken or written input. The
computer is able to understand, analyze, manipulate, and
generate natural language.
near-field communication (NFC)
A short-range region of the electromagnetic field around an
object that transitions to far field, which has an extended range;
a wireless and contactless communication technology that
makes a device even smarter because it streamlines information
transmissions and is the ultimate in connectivity. It allows the
user to wave the smartphone over an NFC- compatible device
to send information without having to touch the devices together
or complete multiple steps to set up the connection.
near-field communication–enabled medication administration
(NFCMA)
A system that takes advantage of a mobile device equipped with
a reader for near-field communication (NFC), a wireless
communication protocol allowing a secure exchange of small
amounts of data by proximity or touch.
Near Field Communication Interface and Protocol (NFCIP-1)
A standard targeted at secure means of making two devices
communicate. The NFCIP-1 wireless devices’ interfaces
configure them to link up where you can bring them together or
make them touch in a peer-to-peer network. Using near-field
communication (NFC), once the configuration data are
exchanged, the devices can then establish and continuecommunicating for longer-range and quicker protocols such as
Wi-Fi or Bluetooth.
negligence
A departure from the standard of due care (i.e., prudent and
reasonable care) toward others, including intentionally posing
risks that are unreasonable as well as unintentionally but
carelessly imposing risks.
negligent insider
A well-meaning but careless employee who unintentionally
exposes a network to security vulnerabilities by ignoring or
forgetting about proper security procedures.
Net Generation
Students accustomed to surfing the web and interacting online.
network
Computers linked together in a small area scope (i.e., locally
and/or organizationally) using a local area network; in a wider
area scope (e.g., a city or district) using a metropolitan area
network; or over an even greater distance (e.g., a whole country
or continent or the internet in general) using a wide area
network.
network accessibility
The ability of the network to be accessed by the right user to
obtain what that person needs when they need it.
network availability
The state in which network information is accessible when
needed.
network securityThe specific precautions taken to ensure that the integrity of a
network is safe from unauthorized entry and that the data and
information stored on the network are accessible only by
authorized users.
neural network
A nonlinear predictive model. Such a model learns by training
and resembling the structure of a biological neural network. A
neural network models the neural behavior of the human brain
and is a way to bridge the gap between computers and humans.
neuroscience
The study of the nervous system.
never event
An occurrence that should never happen, such as wrong-site
surgeries and retained surgical objects. Although rare, over
4,000 patients per year have the wrong site operated on or
retained surgical objects.
Next Generation Internet (NGI)
A government project to develop new and faster technology to
enhance research and communication.
Nicomachean ethics
An approach to ethical thinking based on the work of Aristotle.
nonmaleficence
Doing no harm.
nonplayer character (NPC)
An individual in a simulation, virtual world, or game that is
controlled by the program, not another person.
nursing informatics (NI)Traditional definition: A specialty that integrates nursing science,
computer science, and information science to manage and
communicate data, information, knowledge, and wisdom in
nursing practice. Our definition: The synthesis of nursing
science, information science, computer science, and cognitive
science for the purpose of managing, disseminating, and
enhancing healthcare data, information, knowledge, and wisdom
to improve collaboration and decision-making; provide high￾quality patient care; and advance the profession of nursing. NI is
the specialty that integrates nursing science with multiple
information management and analytical sciences to identify,
define, manage, and communicate data, information,
knowledge, and wisdom in nursing practice. NI supports nurses,
consumers, patients, the interprofessional healthcare team, and
other stakeholders in their decision-making in all roles and
settings to achieve desired outcomes. This support is
accomplished through the use of information structures,
information processes, and information technology.
nursing informatics competencies
A set of essential skills related to informatics that are deemed
appropriate for various levels of nursing practice.
nursing science
The ethical application of knowledge acquired through
education, research, and practice to provide services and
interventions to patients to maintain, enhance, or restore their
health; to advocate for health; and to acquire, process,
generate, and disseminate nursing knowledge to advance the
nursing profession.nursing theory
Concepts, propositions, and definitions that represent a
methodical viewpoint and provide a framework for organizing
and standardizing nursing actions.
object-oriented multiuser dungeon (MOO)
Similar to a multiuser dungeon, it is a computer program, usually
running over the internet, that allows multiple users to
participate in virtual reality role-playing games but with more
advanced programming features.
object-oriented systems development (OOSD)
Occurs when objects (small chunks of programs) are used alone
or in combination with other objects to create an application that
is made up of smaller pieces or objects.
Office for Civil Rights (OCR)
Part of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services and
responsible for enforcing the Health Insurance Portability and
Accountability Act (HIPAA). It provides significant information
and guidance to clinicians who must comply with the Privacy
and Security Rules. It has been tracking complaints and
investigating violations since 2003.
Office of the National Coordinator for Health Information
Technology (ONC)
An office within the U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services that was established through the HITECH Act. The
ONC is headed by the national coordinator, who is responsible
for overseeing the development of a nationwide health
information technology infrastructure that supports the use and
exchange of information.office suite
Software that is generally distributed together with a consistent
user interface that is designed for knowledge workers and
clerical personnel. These software packages can interact with
each other to enhance productivity and ease of use.
online analytic processing (OLAP)
A fast analysis of shared data stored in a multidimensional
database that allows the user to easily and selectively extract
and view data from different points of view. OLAP and data
mining complement each other, even though they are quite
different.
online chat
A synchronous interaction with another person facilitated by an
internet connection technology.
ontological approach
Theory that considers ontology development (domain analysis)
and its mapping to object models (specification of
infrastructure). Based on enumerating all concepts used in a
domain and in providing their formal definitions according to
suitable formalisms (usually logic based).
Open Access Initiative
A worldwide movement to make a library of knowledge available
to anyone with internet access.
open source
Computer software for which the source code is made available
for use and/or modification without charge. The developers
share code in the hopes that the software will evolve as others
modify and improve upon the base.open source software (OSS)
Software that enables users to freely copy and reuse or
repurpose the software by providing access to the source code;
free and open use of software source code.
operating system (OS)
The most important software on any computer. It is the very first
program to load on computer start-up and is fundamental for the
operation of all other software and the computer’s hardware.
order entry management
A program that allows a clinician to enter medication and other
care orders directly into a computer, including orders for
laboratory, microbiology, pathology, radiology, nursing, and
medicine; supply orders; ancillary services; and consults.
order entry system
A system that automates the way that orders are initiated for
patients. Clinicians place orders within this system, instead of
using traditional handwritten transcription onto paper. Such a
system provides major safeguards by ensuring that physician
orders are legible and complete, thereby providing a level of
patient safety that was historically missing with paper-based
orders. It also provides decision support and automated alert
functionality, which were previously unavailable with paper￾based orders.
outcome
Changes, results, and/or effects from inputting and processing.
output
Changes that exit a system and can activate or modify
processing.password
A code established by the user to identify themselves when they
enter the system. Most organizations today enforce a strong
password policy. Strong password policies include using
combinations of letters, numbers, and special characters, such
as plus (+) signs and ampersands (&). Policies typically include
the enforcement of changing passwords every 30 or 60 days.
patient care information system (PCIS)
Patient-centered information system focused on collecting data
and disseminating information related to direct care. Several of
these systems have become mainstream types of systems used
in health care. The four types of systems most commonly found
in healthcare organizations are (1) clinical documentation
systems, (2) pharmacy information systems, (3) laboratory
information systems, and (4) radiology information systems.
patient care support system
A system of components that make up each of the specialty
disciplines within health care and their associated patient-care
information systems. The four types of systems most commonly
found in healthcare organizations are (1) clinical documentation
systems, (2) pharmacy information systems, (3) laboratory
information systems, and (4) radiology information systems.
patient centered
Focused on the patient rather than on the illness or healthcare
professional, with the patient becoming an active participant in
their own healthcare initiatives. Patients as active participants
receive services designed to meet their individual needs and
preferences, under the guidance and counsel of their healthcareprofessionals. Data, observations, interventions, and outcomes
focused on direct patient care.
patient-centered care
Care that is responsive to and cognizant of patient preferences,
values, and needs.
patient engagement
Refers to the patient wanting to and being able to actively
participate by cooperating and collaborating with their
healthcare provider to have their unique perspective included in
their own care regimen and to optimize their outcomes and their
experience during their healthcare process.
patient informed consent
A document that a patient signs to agree to treatment. A
document that a home healthcare patient signs to agree to
receive telehealthcare services in addition to conventional home
health care.
Patient Room ‘Next’ (PRN)
An approach to provide high￾quality healthcare to patients wherever they are; it is an agile,
integrated framework to improve the quality of health care no
matter where care is provided.
patient support
The total array of tools and software that can be used to provide
information and assistance to help meet the healthcare needs of
consumers.
perception
The process of acquiring knowledge about the environment or
situation by obtaining, interpreting, selecting, and organizingsensory information from seeing, hearing, touching, tasting, and
smelling. Sensory experience foundational to formulating
knowledge.
peripheral biometric (medical) device
A telecommunications￾ready measurement device, such as a blood pressure cuff or
blood glucose meter, that typically uses a household telephone
jack to transmit patient data to a central server location.
peripheral component interconnection (PCI)
Mechanism for attaching peripheral devices to a motherboard
via computer bus, expansion slots, or integrated circuits.
personal computer (PC)
Computer made for individual use or directly used by an end
user.
personal emergency response system (PERS)
A signaling device that enables patients to access emergency
and other care needs.
petabyte (PB)
A unit of information or computer storage equal to 1 quadrillion
bytes, or 1,000 terabytes.
pharmacy information system
An information system that facilitates the ordering, managing,
and dispensing of medications for a facility. It also commonly
incorporates allergy and height and weight information for
effective medication management; it streamlines the order entry,
dispensing, verification, and authorization process for
medication administration while often interfacing with clinical
documentation and an order entry system so that clinicians canorder and document the administration of medications and
prescriptions to patients while having the benefits of decision￾support alerting and interaction checking.
phishing
An attempt to steal information by manipulating the recipient of
an email or phone call to provide passwords or other private
information.
picture archiving and communication system (PACS)
A system that is designed to collect, store, and distribute
medical images, such as computed tomography scans,
magnetic resonance images, and X-rays; it replaces traditional
hard copy films with digital media that are easy to store, retrieve,
and present to clinicians. This system may be a stand-alone
system, separate from the main radiology system, or it can be
integrated with a radiology information system and a computer
information system. The benefit of a PACS is its ability to assist
in diagnosis and store vital patient care support data.
platform as a service (PaaS)
Cloud computing service that provides everything needed to
support the cloud application’s building and delivering life cycle,
which enables users to develop and launch custom web
applications rapidly to the cloud.
plug and play
The ability to easily add new devices to a computer without
having to manually install and reconfigure the computer to
accept the device.
podcastA digital media file or collection of related files that are
distributed over the internet using syndication or a subscription
feed for playback on portable media players, such as MP3
players, laptops, and personal computers; the subscription relies
on RSS (really simple syndication) feeds. Online media delivery.
Enhanced podcasts contain slides and pictures; vodcasts
contain videos.
policy
A basic principle that guides behavior and performance and is
enforced. For example, in a corporation, corporate policy would
be enforced by corporate administration; the U.S. government
enforces public policy.
population health management
A term adopted by healthcare management companies to
express their goal of achieving optimal health outcomes at a
reasonable cost. The management process involves data
collection and trend analyses that are used to predict clinical
outcomes in a group of people.
portability
Ability to be transported easily. For example, users can easily
take handheld computers wherever they go.
portal
A tool for organizing information from web pages into simple
menus on a desktop computer. Also, a multifunctional
telehealthcare platform for receiving, retrieving, and displaying
patients’ vital signs and other information transmitted from
telecommunications-ready medical devices.
portfolioA collection of evidence used to demonstrate knowledge and
skill achievement. A nursing portfolio provides the opportunity for
a student to document a variety of sometimes unquantifiable
skills, such as creativity, communication, and critical thinking.
power supply
A device that supplies electrical energy, or power; the device
that provides the electrical energy, or power, to the computer. A
battery can be a source of energy, or power.
prebrief
The simulation stage in which the student receives the
simulation information: goal, educational outcomes, and related
course or program outcomes. The simulation is explained and
focused for students. They should know how to prepare for the
activity and be told what is expected of them, provided with the
background necessary to be able to fully enact their role in the
activity, and given specifics about how they will be assessed.
Students must also be provided with the time frame within which
the simulation must be completed.
prebrief, enactment, debrief, and assessment (PEDA)
The process used to run a simulation scenario.
presence
The act of being fully there with patients; exclusively focusing on
patients and their unique needs.
presentation
Act of presenting or showing; typically uses presentation
software in a slide show format. The most commonly used
presentation software in the United States is Microsoft
PowerPoint.prevention informatics
Harnessing real-time social data and aggregating and
representing these data in a meaningful way so that an
appropriate healthcare prevention initiative can be mounted
proactively.
primary key
A field within a record (also known as the key field) that contains
a code, name, number, or other bit of information that acts as a
unique identifier for that record. In a healthcare system, for
example, a patient is assigned a patient number, or ID, that is
unique for that patient.
principlism
A foundation for ethical decision-making. Principles are
expansive enough to be shared by all rational individuals,
regardless of their backgrounds and individual beliefs.
privacy
An important issue related to personal information about the
owner of the information or about other individuals that focuses
on sharing this information with others electronically and the
mechanisms that restrict access to this personal information.
problem based
Typically, refers to a type of student￾centered instructional strategy whereby students collaboratively
solve problems and reflect on their experiences.
problem-solving
Cognitive process of critically thinking through a problem or
issue to determine a course of action.
process analysisBreaking down the work process into a sequential series of
steps that can be examined and assessed to improve
effectiveness and efficiency; explains how work takes place or
gets done or how it can be done.
processing
Acting on something by taking it through established procedures
to convert it from one form to another. Examples include the
processing of information into data and the processing of a
credit application to get a loan.
process map
A visual depiction of the output of a workflow analysis process.
processor
Newer term for central processing unit (CPU); the component
that executes computer programs, which is thought of as the
brain controlling the functioning of the computer; the computer
component that actually executes, calculates, and processes
the binary computer code instigated by the operating system
and other applications on the computer. It serves as the
command center that directs the actions of all other components
of the computer and manages both incoming and outgoing data.
process owner
One of several persons who directly engage in the workflow to
be analyzed and redesigned and have the ultimate responsibility
for the performance of the process. These individuals can speak
about the intricacy of the process, including process variations
from the normal. When constructing a team, it is important to
include individuals who are able to contribute information aboutthe exact current-state workflow and offer suggestions for
future-state improvements.
product developer
One who designs, creates, and builds a product, such as a
computer program, network, and/or system. One who employs
productivity software to create a product.
productivity software
Programs or software that helps us compose, create, or
develop. An example is the Microsoft Office suite of productivity
tools, which offers word processing, spreadsheet, database,
presentation, and web tools to help us complete both
professional and personal tasks.
professional development
Acquisition of skills required for maintaining a specific career
path or general skills offered through continuing education,
including the more general skills area of personal development.
It can be seen as training to keep current with changing
technology and practices in a profession or as part of the
concept of lifelong learning.
professional networking
Connecting with other professionals in a field with a
predetermined and focused purpose as well as an identified
target audience in mind.
programmable read-only memory (PROM)
Form of digital memory whereby the setting of each bit is locked
on a chip by a fuse or an antifuse. PROM is used to store
programs permanently, so it is useful in applications for which
the programming needs to be permanent. The device cannot beerased, so it must be replaced if changes are deemed
necessary in the system.
project manager
The person responsible for the success of a project who
manages the planning and enactment of the project.
proprioception
The perception or sense of the relative position of body
segments in relation to other parts of the body; the awareness of
the position and movement of the body or the ability of the body
to sense where it is, its location, and its movements and actions;
also known as kinesthesia.
protected health information (PHI)
Any and all information about a person’s health that is tied to
any type of personal identification.
prototype
Original mock-up or first model; original form that is studied,
tested, and processed before duplication.
proxy server
Hardware security tool to help protect an organization against
security breaches.
pseudo AI
Using humans to complete the tasks assigned to artificial
intelligence (AI). Companies that cannot navigate the
complexities of AI employ human impostors who fake AI by
pretending to be the machines assigned to do the work of
humans.
PsycArticlesA database that provides complete access to approximately 80
journals in behavioral science and nursing, among other fields.
psychology
The field that studies the mind and behavior.
PsycInfo
A comprehensive database in the field of education and
psychology.
public health
The science of protecting the well-being of communities and the
population through education, research, intervention, and
prevention.
public health informatics (PHI)
An aspect of informatics focused on the promotion of health and
disease prevention in populations and communities.
Public Health Information Network (PHIN)
A division of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
that promotes semantic interoperability and secure data
exchange among public health information systems.
public health intervention
An action taken to promote and secure the well-being of a
population or a community.
PubMed
A free full-text searchable archive of biomedical sciences journal
literature at the U.S. National Institutes of Health’s National
Library of Medicine (NIH/NLM).
Qualified Clinical Data Registry (QCDR)
Introduced for the Physician Quality Reporting System (PQRS)
beginning in 2014, a QCDR will complete the collection andsubmission of PQRS quality measures data on behalf of
individual eligible professionals (EPs) and PQRS group
practices. As of 2016, a QCDR is a Centers for Medicare and
Medicaid Services–approved entity that collects medical and/or
clinical data for the purpose of patient and disease tracking to
foster improvement in the quality of care provided to patients.
qualified electronic health record
An electronic record containing health-related information on an
individual, which consists of the individual’s demographic and
clinical health information, including medical history and a list of
health problems, and supports entry of physician orders. A
qualified electronic health record can capture and query
information relevant to healthcare quality and exchange
electronic health information with and assimilate such
information from other sources to provide support for clinical
decision-making.
qualitative study
A type of research design that focuses on the human experience
of a phenomenon using words, concepts, language, and
meanings, rather than numbers, to capture the essence of the
subject under study. Subjective study.
quality
A level or grade of excellence; relative merit; a distinct or
essential characteristic, attribute, or property.
quality improvement (QI)
A systematic process using data metrics and outcome measures
to enact a change to an organization’s process or workflow with
the goal of enhancing the quality of the process or the outcome.Quality Payment Program (QPP)
This program rewards value and outcomes through the Merit￾based Incentive Payment System (MIPS) and advanced
alternative payment models (APMs).
quality, research, and public health (QRPH)
This health information exchange (HIE) domain was formed in
2007 to address use cases related to repurposing clinical data
for secondary uses through information exchange and electronic
health record (EHR) standards to allow information to be shared
that is relevant to quality improvement in patient care, clinical
research, and public health monitoring.
quantitative study
Research that looks at the what, where, and when to provide
understanding of phenomena based on quantifying data and
using statistical measures; depending on the research, it may
ascertain cause-and-effect relationships. Objective study.
quantum bit (qubit)
Three-dimensional array of atoms in a quantum state.
quantum computing
Using a quantum computer.
query
A form of questioning. A request for information—for example, a
database query.
QWERTY
Name given to the typical computer keyboard layout, derived
from the six letters in the first row below the number row.
radio-frequency identification (RFID)Uses radio waves to identify objects or people with encoded
microchips.
radiology information system (RIS)
Information system designed to schedule, report, and store
information as it relates to diagnostic radiology procedures. One
common feature found in most radiology systems is a picture
archiving and communication system (PACS). The benefit of
RISs and PACSs is their ability to assist in diagnosing complex
cases and storing vital patient care support data.
random-access memory (RAM)
Volatile, temporary storage system that allows a computer’s
processor to access program codes and data while working on a
task. RAM is lost once the system is rebooted or shut off or
loses power.
randomized controlled trial (RCT)
A study design that randomly assigns participants into an
experimental group or a control group. As the study is
conducted, the only expected difference between the control
and the experimental groups in an RCT is the outcome variable
being studied.
ransomware
A specific type of malware or malicious code that cripples the
computer network until a ransom is paid by the organization
whose network was compromised.
rapid application development (RAD)
A method using prototyping and reiteration to develop products
faster and of superior quality.
rapid prototypingA group of techniques and processes that allow for the quick
development of scale models to be built and evaluated.
Rapid Syndromic Validation Project (RSVP)
A system for local healthcare professionals to report cases, such
as influenza. Data are analyzed centrally, and the resulting
information is shared with appropriate local authorities to try to
identify outbreaks early and prevent the spread of contagious
diseases.
read-only memory (ROM)
Essential permanent or semipermanent, nonvolatile memory
that stores saved data and is critical in the working of the
computer’s operating system and other activities. ROM is
primarily stored in the motherboard but may also be available
through the graphics card, other expansion cards, and
peripherals.
reality
Real life; the world or the state of things as they actually exist;
the state of being actual or real.
really simple syndication (RSS)
A form of web feed used to publish frequently updated content in
podcasts, blog entries, or news headlines. Subscribers receive
update notices whenever new content is added or a site is
updated. Also known as RDF site summary (RSS 1.0 and RSS
0.90) and rich site summary (RSS 0.91).
real time
Human time; occurs live, with users or learners interacting at the
same time.
real-time telehealthLive interactions between two or more clinicians or a clinician
and a patient, usually performed with videoconferencing
equipment.
reasoning
Way of thinking, calculating, interpreting, or introspectively
rethinking or critically thinking through an issue; reflective
thought to analyze or think through one’s ideas and alternatives.
record
A row in a relational database that represents, for example,
individual patients; also called a tuple. Groups of related fields in
a database. As a verb, record means to capture audio and video
using specific devices.
reflective commentary
Narrative comments that focus on why individuals think specific
evidence is important, the ways in which they value what they
have learned, or why they think the evidence is important for
their profession.
regional health information exchange
See regional health information organization.
regional health information organization (RHIO)
A regional network of healthcare organizations and providers
who exchange information related to the health of the
population. The goal is to work together without duplication to
provide cost-effective health care and promote community well￾being.
relational database
A database that can store and retrieve data very rapidly.
Relational refers to how the data are stored in the database andhow they are organized.
relational database management system (RDBMS)
A system that manages data using the relational model. A
relational database could link a patient’s table to a treatment
table, for example, by a common field, such as the patient ID
number field.
report
Document that contains data or information, based on a query
or an investigation, designed to yield customized content in
relation to a situation and a user, a group of users, or an
organization. Designed to inform, reports may include
recommendations or suggestions based on programming and
other embedded parameters.
reporting
The act of using documents or information system outputs to
convey information to stakeholders.
repository
Central place where data are collected, stored, and maintained.
Central location for multiple databases or files that can be
distributed over a network or are directly accessible to the user.
Location for files and databases so that the data can be reused,
analyzed, explored, or repurposed.
researcher
A person who performs systematic inquiries of a topic to develop
knowledge on that topic; a person who does research.
research utilization (RU)
The process of moving new understandings generated in
research into practice.research validity
A conclusion that can be drawn about the conduct of research
based on an analysis of the research design and methods (i.e.,
internal validity) and the applicability of the findings to the
general population (i.e., external validity).
resource description framework (RDF)
A structure of consistent semantics adopted by the World Wide
Web Consortium (W3C) to promote encoding, exchange, and
reuse of metadata.
results management
An approach to evaluating the outcomes of a process to
determine whether that process was useful or valuable.
reusability
The extent to which software or other work￾related artifacts can be used in more than one computing
program or software system.
reusable learning object (RLO)
An approach to content development that consists of
independent, self-contained, multimedia e-learning resources
that breaks the content into chunks where each object can be
swapped, interchanged, substituted, and exchanged as needed
based on the characteristics of the learners and their specific
learning needs.
right
A privilege; includes the right to privacy, confidentiality, and so
on.
risk assessmentDetermination of risk or danger, such as assessing for risk
factors related to heart disease.
robot
A machine that looks like a living being in the fact that it
resembles and behaves as a living being or part of a being and
is capable of self-sufficient movement, such as pivoting,
walking, or rolling with wheels; it automatically performs difficult
or complicated actions, like a robotic hand that can grasp and
move objects. An automated machine that is programmed to
complete the routine tasks of a human being.
role-playing
A situation that allows students to try on real￾life scenarios by filling either prescripted or ad-libbed roles (e.g.,
doctor, nurse, patient, or clinician) without the fear or pressure of
putting another’s life at risk while trying to determine the best
course of action or find a solution to a fictitious patient’s health
issue.
root-cause analysis
Similar to failure modes and events analysis; analysis to
discover why a process is faulty or produces an undesired
result.
row
A record in a database; also known as a tuple.
safety culture
An organizational commitment to patient safety and the
prevention of medical errors.
scaffoldingAdding initial support for a task and then gradually removing that
support over time.
scareware
An email designed to scare the user into believing that their
computer has been infected. The hacker seeks to gain remote
access to the computer to “fix” it.
scheduling system
A system designed to track resources within a facility while
managing the frequency and distribution of those resources. For
example, a resource scheduling system provides information
about operating room utilization or availability of intensive care
unit beds and regular nursing unit beds.
scoring
The data mining process of applying a model to new data.
Scrum
An agile software development strategy that emphasizes
collaboration, team autonomy or self-management, and
flexibility to adapt to emerging business realities. This strategy
organizes software developers into a team called a Scrum team
to reach a common goal of creating market-ready products and
services using iterative development cycles. The Scrum master
is the agile servant–leader project manager who facilitates the
Scrum team.
Scrum master
The agile servant–leader project manager who facilitates the
work performed by the Scrum team; this leader is responsible
for removing barriers and obstacles so that tasks may be
completed in order for the team to achieve its goals. The Scrummaster must support the Scrum team and facilitate its ability to
self-manage and self-organize. Since this is a highly
collaborative process, the Scrum master must also establish
and ensure a positive culture that is open to discussion and
sharing of ideas. In addition, the Scrum master must assess and
monitor the team’s interactions with people external to the team
to determine which exchanges with the Scrum team are
beneficial and which are not in order to maximize the value
generated by the Scrum team, which shields the Scrum team
from distractions and work interruptions.
Scrum team
A team of software developers organized to reach a common
goal of creating market-ready products and services.
Second Life (SL)
A proprietary virtual-reality tool that allows users to create virtual
communities.
secure information
Information that is protected from error, unauthorized access,
and other threats that can compromise its integrity and safety.
security
Protection from danger or loss. In informatics, one must protect
against unauthorized access, malicious damage, and incidental
and accidental damage; enforce secure behavior; and maintain
security of computing, data, applications, information, and
networks.
security breach
Any security violation.
self-controlSelf-discipline. Strength of will.
sensor and activity-monitoring system
A system for tracking the activities of daily living of seniors and
other at-risk individuals in their places of residence. For
example, applications use sensors to detect anomalies or
problems, such as faucets and stoves left turned on.
sentinel event
A term used by the Joint Commission to describe a patient
safety incident that results in death, permanent harm, or serious
temporary harm requiring intervention.
serious game
A game that has as its main purpose something other than
entertainment—for example, an educational game designed for
learning that is a subset of both education and fun.
server
A computer or a group of computers that link computers
together or provide services to a group of computers.
shoulder surfing
Watching over someone’s back as they are working on a
computer. This is still a major way that confidentiality is
compromised.
simulated documentation
A replicated documentation system that nursing students can
use to learn how to access electronic health records and
document nursing care.
simulation
An imitation of real-life events or circumstances; in nursing
education, a replication of clinical scenarios developed toprovide an opportunity for practice in a mock situation. A
simulation can be web based, latex based, or virtual in a virtual
world.
simulation scenario
A case or situation developed in a simulation setting to mimic an
actual practice situation.
simulator
A mechanical or electronic device that provides an environment
in which a simulation can occur. Some simulators can be quite
large.
situational awareness
The ability to detect, integrate, and understand critical
information that leads to an overall understanding of a problem
or situation.
Six Sigma
Business management tactic that seeks to improve the quality of
process outputs by identifying and removing the causes of
imperfections (errors) and reducing inconsistency and variability
in processes; Lean and Six Sigma are a complementary
combination of activities that focus on doing the right steps and
actions (Lean) and doing them right the first time (Six Sigma).
Small Computer System Interface (SCSI)
Set of standards for physically connecting and transferring data
between computers and peripheral devices. The SCSI
standards define commands, protocols, and electrical and
optical interfaces. Standardization among commercial products
helps to ensure that devices will interface with many different
systems.smart device
Interactive electronic tool that is generally connected to other
devices or networks using wireless protocols; able to
understand simple user commands to help with the activities of
daily living.
smartphone
A mobile device that combines cellular and mobile computing
functions into one unit.
smart pump
Machine used to infuse medication that includes dose-checking
technology and safeguards designed to help avert medication
errors.
smart room
Patient room that is equipped with technologies to increase
patient safety and improve patient care.
social determinants of health (SDOH)
The economic and social conditions in relation to their diffusion
and distribution among the population that actually influence
individual and group differences and disparities in health status.
The conditions in the environment where we are born, play,
grow, learn, live, work, and age that affect a wide range of
health, functioning, and quality of life outcomes and risks. They
have an effect on our life expectancy, morbidity, and mortality.
Social Determinants of Learning (SDOL)
An actionable model developed by Chamberlain University to
address learning disparities and thus increase learning
opportunities to support nursing student diversity, equity, and
inclusion.social engineering
The manipulation of a relationship based on one’s position in an
organization. For example, someone attempting to access a
network may pretend to be an employee from the corporate
information technology office who then simply asks for an
employee’s digital ID and password. Another example of social
engineering is a hacker impersonating a federal government
agent. After talking an employee into revealing network
information, the hacker basically has an open door to enter the
corporate network.
social media
Communication tools, such as X (Twitter) and Facebook, that
promote real-time information exchange.
social science
Collection of academic/scientific fields or disciplines concerned
with the study of the human aspects of our world/environment.
software
A collection of data or computer instructions that tell a computer
how to work. Software is divided into two types: system software
(includes the operating system and other software necessary for
the computer to function) and application software (allows users
to complete specific tasks, such as word processors,
spreadsheets, presentations, database managers, and media
players).
software as a service (SaaS)
Cloud-based applications with the following benefits: the ability
to quickly start using innovative or specific business apps that
are scalable to individual needs, any connected computer canaccess the apps and data, and data are not lost if the hard drive
crashes because the data are stored in the cloud.
somatosensory system
The network of neural structures that includes receptors and
neurons in the body and brain that produce and convey
information about the perception of touch or haptic perception,
temperature, proprioception (body position), movement, and
pain.
sound card
A computer expansion card that facilitates the input and output
of audio signals to and from a computer under the control of
computer programs. Also known as an audio card.
spatial audio
A 360 degree audio format that creates sound as though it is
surrounding a person or an audience.
spear phishing
A targeted phishing scheme that takes advantage of specific
information provided in an organization’s directory, thus allowing
for a personalized scam email.
spreadsheet
Text and numbers located in cells on a grid and the software
necessary to process formulas and other computations, such as
creating graphs and charts.
spyware
A program that may contain malicious code that may attack or
attempt to “take over” a computer. Spyware may also be
nonmalicious in intent and simply monitor the user’s behavior inan attempt to gain information about the user for targeted
advertising.
stacking
The process of synthesizing the predictions from several
models.
stakeholder
An individual or a group with the responsibility for completing a
project and influencing the overall design and is the most
affected by the success or failure of the system implementation.
standard
A benchmark, criterion, rule, norm, or principle.
standardized nursing terminology
Terms used in nursing that are in some way approved by an
appropriate authority or general consent.
standardized plan of care
A plan that presents clinicians with treatment protocols to
maximize their outcomes and support best practices.
static medium
Something that cannot be updated; for example, a print-based
brochure may be outdated almost as soon as it is printed.
store-and-forward telehealth transmission
An application of telehealth care in which images and other
clinical data are captured and transmitted to specialist clinicians.
Structured Query Language (SQL [pronounced “sequel”])
A database querying language rather than a programming
language. SQL is a standard language for accessing and
manipulating databases. It simplifies the process of retrievinginformation from a database in a functional or usable form while
facilitating the reorganization of data within the database.
Suicide Prevention Community Assessment Tool
Risk assessment method that addresses general community
information, prevention networks, and the demographics of the
target population as well as community assets and risk factors.
summary
A condensed version of a document that is designed to highlight
its major points.
surveillance
The act of watching for trends in health￾related data for early detection of health threats.
surveillance data system
A networked computer system designed to use health-related
data trends to predict the probability of an outbreak of a
contagious or infectious disease or to detect morbidity and
mortality trends in a geographic area as a precursor to public
health planning or response.
synchronous dynamic random-access memory (SDRAM)
The most common type of dynamic random-access memory
found in personal computers.
syndromic surveillance
A specialized system of data collection that seeks to detect
trends in the incidence and severity of a specific disease or
health-related syndrome and plan the public health response.
synthesis
Combining parts of existing material or ideas into a new entity or
concept.systems development life cycle (SDLC)
Stages involved in the life of a system, typically an information
system; a model used in the project management of a system’s
development effort, spanning from feasibility to its demise.
systems engineering
An approach where technology manufacturers partner with
organizations to identify risks to patient safety and promote safe
technology integration.
table
A collection of related records in a database.
task
An action that is value added and necessary. For example,
some tasks come about because of work-arounds or for other
unsubstantiated reasons. Tasks that are considered non–value
added and are not necessary for the purpose of compliance or
regulatory reasons should be eliminated from the future-state
process.
task analysis
Analytical technique that focuses on how a task must be
accomplished, including detailed descriptions of task-related
activities, task characteristics and complexity, and the
environmental conditions required for a person to perform that
task.
technology
Method by which people use knowledge and tools. Knowledge
used to solve problems, control and adapt to the environment,
and extend human potential. Generally, people use technology
to refer to machines or devices, such as computers, and theinfrastructure that supports them. For example, cell phones and
planes are tangible technology; one can see and touch them but
cannot see and touch the vast infrastructures supporting them,
such as the wireless communications between the device (cell
phone) and the cell towers and the electronic guidance used by
the device (plane) to navigate the skies.
telecommunications
Broadcasting or transmitting signals over a distance from one
person to another or from one location to another for the
purpose of communication.
telehealth
Telecommunication technologies used to deliver health-related
services or to connect patients and healthcare providers to
maximize patients’ health status. A relatively new term in the
medical and nursing vocabulary that refers to a wide range of
health services that are delivered by telecommunications-ready
tools, such as a telephone, videophone, and computer.
telehealth care
Health services delivered by telecommunications-ready tools
and usually supervised by a nurse or other clinician.
telemedicine
Health services delivered by telecommunications-ready tools
and supervised or directed by a physician.
telemonitoring
Remote measurement of patients’ vital signs and other
necessary data.
telenursingHealth services delivered by telecommunications￾ready tools and supervised or directed by a nurse.
telepathology
Use of telecommunications technology to facilitate the
transmission and transfer of pathology data for the purposes of
diagnosis, education, and research. Transmission and exchange
of image-rich pathology data between remote locations.
telephony
Telephone monitoring of patients at their residences by off-site
telenurses.
teleradiology
Use of telecommunications technology to electronically transmit
and exchange radiographic patient images with the consultative
text or radiologist reports from one location to another.
TELOS
An approach that provides a clear picture of the feasibility of a
project; TELOS stands for technical, economic, legal,
operational, and schedule.
terabyte (TB)
A unit of measurement for data storage capacity. One terabyte
equals 1,024 gigabytes.
terminology
Vocabulary of technical terms used in a particular field, subject,
science, or art; concerned with the collection, description,
processing, and presentation of terms belonging to specialized
areas of usage of one or more languages; nomenclature.
three dimensional (3D)A geometric model of the physical universe in which we live;
typically, the three dimensions are length, width, and depth (or
height), although any three directions can be chosen as long as
they do not lie in the same plane.
throughput
The amount of work a computer can do in a given time period; a
measure of computer performance that can be used for system
comparison.
thumb drive
Small, removable storage device.
tiering
The process of storing data in layers according to how
frequently they are used in a database.
TIGER initiative
The work of the Technology Informatics Guiding Education
Reform team. This team of nursing leaders developed a vision
for utilizing information technology to transform nursing practice.
total cost of ownership (TCO)
A comprehensive assessment of IT and related costs of a
software solution, including hardware, software, maintenance,
sustainability, management, communications, support, training,
opportunity costs due to downtime, and productivity losses.
touch pad
An alternative to using a mouse. A device that senses the
pressure of the user’s finger along with the movement of the
finger on the touch pad to control input positioning.
touch screenA display used as an input device for interacting with or relating
to the display’s materials or content. The user can touch or
press on the designated display area to respond, execute, or
request information or output.
transforming
The act of changing the nature, character, function, state, or
condition of something.
translational bioinformatics
The development of storage, analytic, and interpretive methods
to optimize the transformation of increasingly voluminous
biomedical and genomic data into proactive, predictive,
preventive, and participatory information.
translational informatics
The application of research informatics to translational research
in order to close the gap from research to the bedside to
improve the health of patients and the community.
translational research
Research that is conducted with a vision toward transforming
clinical nursing practice (i.e., translating the results into
practice).
transparent wisdom
Applying knowledge in a practical way or translating knowledge
into actions without conscious thought.
treatment/payment/operations (TPO)
The treatment of patients, the payment for services, or the
operations of the entity. Providers and other covered entities
were not originally required to include in the accounting any
disclosures that were made to facilitate the treatment ofpatients, the payment for services, or the operations of the entity
(i.e., the TPO exception); this exception ended in January 2011
for providers that recently implemented electronic health record
(EHR) systems. For those providers with EHR systems that
were implemented before passage of the Health Information
Technology for Economic and Clinical Health (HITECH) Act, the
TPO exception ended in January 2014. It is easy to understand
why this exception ended; because all providers must
implement comprehensive EHR systems, it would be very easy
to generate an electronic record with an accounting of anyone
who accesses a patient’s record.
triage
The process of assessing patients who are ill or injured and
determining the need for intervention based on the severity of
the health issue. Some software programs used in telehealth
monitoring systems provide this function by comparing actual
data with a preset standard and then alerting clinicians that an
intervention is necessary.
Trojan horse
Malicious code, capable of replicating within a computer, that is
hidden in data or a program that appears to be safe.
TRUSTe
One of the two most common symbols that internet users look
for to identify trusted health sites.
truth
Fact; certainty; or sincere action, character, and fidelity.
tuple
A record in a database; also known as a row.tutorial
Learning materials available to the learner, who must then be
self-directed to study the specific topical area presented.
über-connected world
Using social media tools, such as wikis, blogs, and other social
networks, to connect employees and people globally.
Companies are finding that über-connected workplaces are not
only about applying a new set of tools but also about adopting a
cultural paradigm shift to establish an open environment where
employees are supported and encouraged to collaborate, share,
transform, and innovate virtually.
ubiquity
State of being everywhere at once (or seeming to be
everywhere at once). Presence in many places, especially
simultaneously. With changing models of healthcare delivery,
information and knowledge should be available anywhere.
uncertainty
Ambiguity, insecurity, or vagueness.
unified communications (UC)
A communication solution, framework, or standard that refers to
a wide range of products and services or diverse communication
tools that are integrated to enhance communication with the
goal of increasing productivity and enhancing the user
experience (UX) while facilitating an excellent means for digital
collaboration and teamwork to support a shared approach to
patient care; an interface that incorporates enterprise
communication tools, software, and hardware components into
a single or unified streamlined interface where people can usedifferent communication tools in a single or unified application
extending the way communication devices and data and
information can be exchanged.
universal serial bus (USB)
A means of connecting a myriad of plug-in devices, such as
portable flash drives, digital cameras, MP3 players, graphics
tablets, and light pens, using a plug-and-play connection,
without rebooting the computer.
unstructured data
Data that are not contained in a database; data residing in text
files, which can represent more than 75% of an organization’s
data; data that are not organized or that lack structure.
usability
The ease with which people can use an interface to achieve a
particular goal; issues of human performance during computer
interactions for specific tasks within a particular context.
USB flash drive
A portable memory device that uses electronically erasable,
programmable ROM to provide fast, permanent memory. A USB
flash drive is typically a removable and rewritable device that
includes flash memory and an integrated universal serial bus
(USB) interface. Because of its small size, it is portable, durable,
and dependable and obtains its power from the device it is
connected to via a USB port.
use case
The description of a distinct situation in which a specific product
or service could possibly be used.
user experience (UX)The user’s experience from interacting with an object, a product,
or a service. It is connected to the term usability and refers to
the design of products and services with the user in mind in
order to meet the user’s needs.
user friendly
Describes programs and peripherals that make it easy to
interact with or use computers or other technologies. Design of
a program to enhance the ease with which the user can utilize
and maximize the productivity from computer programs.
user interface (UI)
A mechanism or system that users utilize to interact with
programs.
values
Basic or fundamental beliefs that guide actions.
veracity
Right to truth.
video adapter card
A board or card that is inserted or plugged into a computer to
provide display capabilities.
videopod
A podcast that provides video in addition to audio functionality;
self-contained system with a video transmitter.
virtual desktop interface (VDI)
The process of running a user desktop inside a virtual machine
on a centralized server in a data center. VDI is a variation on the
client-server computing model, sometimes referred to as server￾based computing. It enables fully personalized desktops for
each individual user with all the security and simplicity resultingfrom centralized management. Also known as virtual desktop
infrastructure.
virtual memory
The use of hard disk space on a temporary basis when the user
is running many programs simultaneously. This temporary use
frees up RAM to allow programs to run simultaneously and
seamlessly.
virtual private network (VPN)
An encrypted connection service that protects privacy and
anonymity when a device is connected to the Internet.
virtual reality (VR)
Technology that simulates reality in a virtual medium.
virtual simulation
A simulation using a three-dimensional virtual world or
environment that resembles the real-world setting and activities
being simulated.
virtual world
A world that exists in cyberspace where people can establish
avatars, purchase land, and interact with others. Emerging
virtual worlds, such as Second Life, are changing the meaning
of social networking. It is a live, online, interactive three￾dimensional environment in which users interact using speech
or text via a personalized avatar. Access requires a modern
computer and an internet connection.
virtue
An ideal toward which we should strive that provides for the full
development of our humanity. Attitude or character trait that
enables us to be and to act in ways that develop our highestpotential—for example, honesty, courage, compassion,
generosity, fidelity, integrity, fairness, self-control, and prudence.
Like habits, virtues become characteristics of a person. The
virtuous person is the ethical person.
virtue ethics
Theory that suggests that individuals use power to bring about
human benefit. One must consider the needs of others and the
responsibility to meet those needs.
virus
Malicious code that attaches to an existing program and
executes its harmful script when opened.
voice recognition
A type of software that allows the user to input data or navigate
the web using voice commands. Voice interactivity should help
to reduce the disparity associated with those who have limited
keyboard or mousing skills.
waterfall model
An early systems development life cycle model that is linear in
nature; when one phase ends, the next phase begins, unlike in
its modern counterparts that stress iterative development.
wearable device
A device that a person can don or put on like other articles of
clothing, watches, jewelry, and other accessories that provide
remote monitoring of physiological parameters in care settings,
including the patient’s own home.
wearable technology
The study or practice of inventing, designing, building, or using
miniature body-borne computational and sensory devices.Wearable computers may be worn under, over, or in clothing or
may actually be the clothes themselves.
web based
Originating from the World Wide Web.
webcast
Media distributed over the internet as a broadcast, which relies
on streaming media technology to facilitate downloading and
participation. Such broadcasts could be distributed in real time
or live or recorded for asynchronous interaction.
web enhanced
That which uses the World Wide Web to enhance or promote
functions or tasks, such as effective learning and skill
acquisition.
webinar
Web-based seminar. Web conferencing that allows presenters
to share their computer screen or files and collaborate with the
audience; attendance is controlled by an access code.
weblog
A website that contains the contributions of single or multiple
users about a particular topic or issue. Similar in nature to a
threaded discussion board or a personal diary, weblogs (also
known as blogs) can provide insight into the perceptions of the
contributors about the topic.
web publishing
The design and development of web pages that include links to
digital files that are uploaded to web servers, thereby making
these files accessible to others via web browsers.
web questA search of the World Wide Web for information.
web server
Multifunctional telehealthcare platform for receiving, retrieving,
and/or displaying patients’ vital signs and other information
transmitted from telecommunications￾ready medical devices.
wide area network (WAN)
A system of connected local area networks (LANs).
Wi-Fi
A wireless technology, owned by Wi-Fi Alliance, that is used to
improve the interoperability of wireless networking devices.
Wi-Fi hotspot
A resource or wireless access point that is usually provided in a
public location, such as cafés, libraries, hotels, airports, and
even grocery stores.
wiki
Server software that allows users to create, edit, and link web
page content from any web browser. Server software that
supports hyperlinks. The simplest online database, used to
develop collaborative websites.
wireless
A way to transmit signals without using wires or cables, such as
through radio or microwaves.
wireless mobile computing
Mobile computing without the need for wires or cables to
connect to a network.
wisdomKnowledge applied in a practical way or translated into actions;
the use of knowledge and experience to heighten common
sense and insight to exercise sound judgment in practical
matters. Sometimes thought of as the highest form of common
sense, resulting from accumulated knowledge or erudition (i.e.,
deep, thorough learning) or enlightenment (i.e., education that
results in understanding and the dissemination of knowledge).
Wisdom is the ability to apply valuable and viable knowledge,
experience, understanding, and insight while being prudent and
sensible. It is focused on our own minds and is the synthesis of
our experience, insight, understanding, and knowledge. Wisdom
is the appropriate use of knowledge to solve human problems. It
is knowing when and how to apply knowledge.
word processing
Creating documents using a word
processing software package, such as Microsoft Word.
work-around
A way invented by users to bypass the system to accomplish a
task; usually indicates a poor fit of the system or technology to
the workflow or user. Devised method to beat a system that
does not function appropriately or is not suited to the task it was
developed to assist with. For example, a nurse might remove
the armband from a patient and attach it to the bed if the
barcode reader fails to interpret barcodes when the bracelet
curves tightly around a small arm.
workflow
A progression of steps (tasks, events, and interactions) that
constitute a work process, involve two or more persons, andcreate or add value to the organization’s activities. In a
sequential workflow, each step depends on the occurrence of
the previous step; in a parallel workflow, two or more steps can
occur concurrently. Sometimes the term workflow is used
interchangeably with process or process flow, particularly in the
context of implementations. A sequence of connected steps in
the work of a person or team of people—that is, the process or
flow of work within an organization; a virtual illustration of the
“real” work or steps (flow) that workers enact to complete their
tasks (work). The purpose of examining and redesigning
workflow is to streamline the work process by removing any
unnecessary steps that do not add value or might even hinder
the flow of work.
workflow analysis
Not an optional part of clinical implementations but rather a
necessity for safe patient care fostered by technology. The
ultimate goal of workflow analysis is to create a future-state
solution that maximizes the use of technology and eliminates
non–value-added activities. Although many tools and methods
can be used to accomplish workflow redesign (e.g., Six Sigma
and Lean), the best method is the one that complements the
organization and supports the work of clinicians.
work process
See workflow.
World Wide Web (WWW)
An international network of computers and servers that offers
access to stored documents written in HTML code and access
to graphics, audio, and video files.worm
A form of malicious code. A self-replicating computer program
that uses a network to send multiple copies of itself to other
computers, subsequently tying up bandwidth and incapacitating
networks.
yottabyte (YB)
A unit of information or computer storage equal to 1 septillion
bytes.
Youth Risk Behavior Surveillance System (YRBSS)
An epidemiological survey conducted by the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention to identify and track the most
common health risk behaviors that lead to illnesses and
mortality among youth.
zero day attack
A technique whereby a hacker searches for and exploits
software vulnerabilities before the vendor is able to release a
patch or a fix.
zettabyte (ZB)
A unit of information or computer storage equal to 1 sextillion
bytes.Index
Note: Page numbers followed by b, f, and t indicate material in boxes, figures, and tables
respectively.
A
academic electronic medical records (AEMRs), 477
access, 154
accessibility, 121b
acquisition, 26, 37
active listening, 589
active-matrix organic light-emitting diode (AMOLED), 49
acuity system, 206–207
adaptive learning, 478
administrative information systems, 199–218
aggregating patient and organizational data, 210–216, 211f
case management, 202–204
communication system, 203–204
core business system, 205–207
department collaboration, 216–217
healthcare organization, types of, 202–204
knowledge exchange, 216
order entry system, 207–208
patient care support system, 208–210
principles of interoperability, 200–201
administrative process, 301
admission, discharge, and transfer (ADT) system, 205
adverse event, 324
advocate/policy developer, 139
advocates, 460
AEMRs. See Academic electronic medical records
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ), 158, 324, 325, 560
Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR), 387agile strategy, 192–193
AHIC. See AMIA Health Informatics Certification
AHIMA. See American Health Information Management Association
AHRQ. See Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality
AI. See artificial intelligence
AIoT. See Artificial Intelligence of Things
ALA. See American Library Association
alarm fatigue, 329
alert, 31
algorithms, 546
Allied Health Literature (CINAHL), 518
Alternative Payment Model (APM), 273
alternatives, 93b
American Health Information Management Association (AHIMA), 142
American Library Association (ALA), 515
American Medical Informatics Association, 111
American National Standards Institute (ANSI), 214b
American Nurses Association (ANA), 111
American Nursing Informatics Association (ANIA), 146
American Psychological Association (APA), 518
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act (ARRA), 156, 273, 296
AMIA Health Informatics Certification (AHIC), 142
AMOLED. See active-matrix organic light-emitting diode
ANA. See American Nurses Association
analysis, of data, 30
ANIA. See American Nursing Informatics Association
ANSI. See American National Standards Institute
antiprinciplism, 78
antivirus software, 260
APA. See American Psychological Association
API. See application programming interface
APM. See Alternative Payment Model
application programming interface (API), 230–231b
applications (apps), 41t, 79, 337
AR. See augmented reality
ARGs. See augmented reality games
arithmetic logic unit, 41t
ARRA. See American Recovery and Reinvestment Act
art of nursing, 590
artificial intelligence (AI), 33, 65, 72–74, 316b, 358, 460, 545–547, 606–608
in future, 73–74
for patient engagement strategy, 358–360b
replace doctors with machines using, 90
virtual patient encounter scenario, 359–360
Artificial Intelligence of Things (AIoT), 33, 599, 605
asynchronous, 439
ATSDR. See Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry
attribute, 212baugmented intelligence, 73
augmented reality (AR), 79, 494–495, 599
augmented reality games (ARGs), 500
authentication, 253, 253f
autonomy, 86
avatar, 488
B
bagging, 535
baiting, 260
bandwidth, 53
barcode medication administration (BCMA), 272, 334
basic input/output system (BIOS), 41t
BCMA. See barcode medication administration
Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System, 384
beneficence, 86
big data, 525, 529–533, 604–605, 604f
Big Data to Knowledge (BD2K), 530
binary system, 40
bioethics, 79–80
bioinformatics, 91, 547
biomedical informatics, 547–548
biometrics, 255
BIOS. See basic input/output system
bioterrorism, 384
bit, 40
blockcerts, 440
blockchain, 257, 316b, 440
in health care, 256b
use case, 256
blog, 367, 449
boosting, 536
borrowed theory, 8
brain, 65
broadband, 53
brushing, 540
brute force attack, 257
building blocks, of NI, 7, 8f
Bump app, 357b
bus, 42
byte, 40
C
cache memory, 41t
CAHIMS. See Certified Associate in Healthcare Information and Management Systems
call centers, 412capacitive touch screen, 230b
care ethics, 88
care plan, 202
caring theories, 582–586, 584f
caritas processes, 582
CART. See classification and regression tree
case management information system, 202–204
case study
23ANDME, 535
data mining, 535
Foundation of Knowledge model, 515–516
home telemonitoring of multiple illnesses, 422
knowledge discovery, 535
nursing research, 516–518
research, 535
casuist approach, 87
CDC. See Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
CDS. See clinical decision support
CE. See continuing education
centering, 588
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), 378
central processing unit (CPU), 41
certificate, 140
certification, 140
Certified Associate in Healthcare Information and Management Systems (CAHIMS), 140
certified EHR technology, 157
Certified Professional in Healthcare Information and Management Systems (CPHIMS), 140
challenges and opportunities, nursing education, 487
change management plan, 283, 283f
CHI. See Consolidated Health Informatics
chief information officer (CIO), 30, 184
chief technical officer (CTO), 30
chief technology officer, 30
Chromebook, 55
chronic diseases and conditions, 405
CI. See cognitive informatics
CINAHL. See Allied Health Literature
CIO. See chief information officer
civil monetary penalties (CMPs), 168
clarification of terms, 553–556, 554–555f
classification and regression tree (CART), 534
clinical database, 9
clinical decision support (CDS), 334
clinical documentation system, 208
clinical informatics, 556
clinical information system (CIS), 205, 29t. See also clinical documentation system clinical
practice guideline, 9
clinical research informatics, 556clinical transformation, 276
cloud computing, 33, 54–56, 54f, 264
cloud storage, 55
cloudy EHR, 313b
Cochrane Library, 518
cognitive informatics (CI), 65, 69–71, 70f
and nursing practice, 71–72
cognitive science, 26, 65–68
cognitive task analysis, 234
cognitive walkthrough, 239
cognitive work analysis (CWA), 235
collaboration, 216, 439
column, 212b
commercial software, 45t
communication science, 26
communication software, 46t, 49t
communication system, 203–204
community risk assessment (CRA), 384
compact disk read-only memory (CD-ROM), 42t
compact disk-recordable (CD-R), 42t
compact disk-rewritable (CD-RW), 42t
compatibility, 45
compliance, 164
computational biology, 548
computer, 38
components, 43f
for generating knowledge, 38–40
hardware, 41t
basic input/output system, 41t
bit, 40
byte, 40
central processing unit, 41t
connection ports, 42t
DVD/CD drive, 42t
flash/USB flash drive, 42t
graphics card, 42t
hard disk, 41t
modem, 42t
motherboard, 41t
peripheral component interconnection, 42t
power supply, 41t
random-access memory, 41t
read-only memory, 41t
Small Computer System Interface, 42t
sound card, 42t
storage capacity, 43–44b
video adapter card, 42t
virtual memory, 42tinput components, 44–47
keyboard, 50t
mouse, 50t
touch pad, 50t
touch screen, 50t
for managing information, 38–40
output components, 49–50
printer, 49–50
speaker, 50
software, 42–44
commercial, 45t
communication, 46t, 49t
creativity, 46t
office suite, 46t
open source, 45t, 46f
operating system, 45–46t
productivity, 46
support collaboration, and information exchange, 51–52
throughput/processing components, 47–49
computer-aided software engineering (CASE) tools, 193–194
computer-based information system, 30
computer-based technology, 457
computer science, 26, 37, 65
and Foundation of Knowledge model, 37–62
relationship with knowledge, 50–51
computerized physician (or provider) order entry system, 207
computerized provider order entry (CPOE), 272, 334
conceptual framework, 7
conferencing software, 46t
confidentiality, 77, 156, 252
connected health, 355
connectionism, 56–57, 67f
connectivity, 301
consequence, 88, 153
Consolidated Health Informatics (CHI), 21
consultant, 138
consumer demand, for information, 356–362
context of care, 557
continuing education (CE), 467
copyright, 520
restrictions, 468–469
core business system, 205–207
courage, 88
covered entity, 162
COVID-19 pandemic, 530, 546
CPHIMS. See Certified Professional in Healthcare Information and Management Systems
CPOE. See computerized provider order entry
CPU. See central processing unitCRA. See community risk assessment
creativity software, 46t
CRISP-DM, 540–541
crowdsourcing, 391
CTO. See chief technical officer
Cumulative Index to Nursing and Allied Health Literature (CINAHL), 518
CWA. See cognitive work analysis
cyborg, 609
D
data, 8, 22, 114, 136
types of, 22–23
data dictionary, 213b
data file, 212b
data gatherer, 116
data integrity, 23, 23f
threats to, 24f
data loss prevention (DLP), 265
data mart, 212
data mining, 17, 212, 534–535, 543
benefits of, 543
bioinformatics, biomedical informatics, and computational biology, 547–548
concepts of, 535–536
ethics of, 545
models of
CRISP-DM, 540–541
SEMMA, 542–543
Six Sigma and Lean, 541–542
techniques of, 536–540, 537–538b, 539f
data warehouse, 212
database, 46, 211–212, 484
construction, 212–213b
entity relationship diagram, 213f
Structured Query Language, 214–215b
database management system, 213b
DDR SDRAM. See double data rate synchronous dynamic random-access memory
decision-making, 69, 78
knowledge in, 69
wisdom in, 69
decision support system (DSS), 29t
decision support/outcomes manager, 89, 139, 202, 300–301
decision tree, 537
deep learning, 545–547
delivery modalities, 437–443, 442f
competency-based learning, 442–443
face-to-face delivery, 438
hybrid or blended delivery, 441–442online delivery, 439–440, 442f
demographics, 403–404
desktop, 56
desktop publishing, 47t
DHIS. See Division of Health Informatics and Surveillance digital divide, 361
digital phenotyping, 545
digital video disk (DVD), 42t
digital video disk-recordable (DVD-R), 42t
digital video disk-rewritable (DVD-RW), 42t
DIKW paradigm, 113–119, 115f
disruptive innovation, 606
dissemination, 32
distance education, 441
distributed ledger technology (DLT), 256, 440
distributed network, 52
Division of Health Informatics and Surveillance (DHIS), 385
DLP. See data loss prevention
DLT. See distributed ledger technology
documents, 32
domain name, 367
double data rate synchronous dynamic random-access memory (DDR SDRAM), 41t
DRAM. See dynamic random-access memory
drill down, 214, 536
DSDM. See dynamic system development method
DSS. See decision support system
duty, 84
DVD. See digital video disk
dynamic random-access memory (DRAM), 41t
dynamic system development method (DSDM), 190–192, 191f
dynamic web page shells, 484
E
e-learning education, 439
e-portfolio process, 447–449
in higher education, 446–447
privacy and security, 449
for professional development, 447
earcon, 237
EB. See exabyte
EBP. See evidence-based practice
ecological interface design (EID), 231
economics, 405–406, 406f
EDA. See exploratory data analysis
educated consumers, 405
education, virtual worlds in, 492–493
Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC), 518
educator, 138edutainment, 476
EEPROM. See electronically erasable programmable read-only memory
eHealth Initiative, 363
EHI. See electronic health information
EHR. See electronic health record
EID. See ecological interface design
EIS. See executive information system
electronic communication, 301
electronic health information (EHI), 21
electronic health record (EHR), 21, 157, 208, 272, 295–317, 544–545
accountable care organizations and, 314, 315f
advantages of, 303–308, 317
certification criteria, 298–299b, 298–300b
as clinical information system, 304–307b
components of, 297–303
administrative process, 301
connectivity, 301
decision support, 300–301
electronic communication, 301
health information, 300
order entry management, 300
patient support, 301
population health management, 301–303
reporting, 301–303
results management, 300
enhancing, 316b
flexibility and expandability, 313–314, 313b
future of, 314–317
leveraging, 302f
ownership of, 310–313
setting stage, 296
standardized terminology, 309–310, 310b
electronic library catalogs, 520
electronic mailing lists, 454
electronic medication administration system (eMAR), 338
electronic protected health information (ePHI), 263
electronic security, 251–267
authentication of users, 253–255, 253f
blockchain, 255
in health care, 256b
use case, 256
portable devices, off-site use of, 263–266
securing network information, 252–253
threats, 257–262
tools, 262–263
electronically erasable programmable read-only memory (EEPROM), 41t
email, 47t, 436
eMAR. See electronic medication administration systemempowerment, 373
encryption, 51
end user, 190
engage, 482
enhancing caring presence, 587–590, 587f, 588b
enterprise integration, 157
entity, 212b
entity relationship diagram, 212b
entrepreneur, 139
enumerative approach, 122b
ePHI. See electronic protected health information
epistemology, 68–69
ergonomics, 231
ERIC. See Educational Resources Information Center
ethernet, 41t
ethical decision-making, 83–84
ethical model for, 93b
ethical dilemma, 83
ethical issues
new frontiers in, 98–99
and social media, 80–83
ethical model applying, 93–95b
case analysis demonstration, 92–98, 97t
for ethical decision-making, 93b
ethical, social, and legal implications, 92
ethicist, 78
ethics
and consumer engagement, in nursing, 85
defined, 78–79
to informatics, applying, 88–92
eudaemonistic, 88
event, 275
evidence, 14, 445, 557–558
evidence-based practice (EBP), 554f, 556
barriers/facilitators of, 559
guidelines, 562–563, 563t
Iowa model of, 558
evolving telehealth models, 425–426
exabyte (EB), 44b
execute, 41t
executive information system (EIS), 29t
executive support system, 29t
expert system, 119
exploratory data analysis (EDA), 536
extended reality (XR), 600
extensibility, 45F
failure modes and effects analysis (FMEA), 326
fair use, 468–469, 520–521
fantasy, 597
far-field communication, 53
Federal Health Information Exchange (FHIE), 21
feedback, 9, 32, 390–392, 477
FHIE. See Federal Health Information Exchange
fidelity, 87, 487
field study, 239
fields, 212b
financial system, 206
firewall, 262
firmware, 41t
fit between individuals, tasks, and technology (FITT) model, 240–241
FITT model. See fit between individuals, tasks, and technology model
flash drive, 258
flash memory, 41t
FMEA. See failure modes and effects analysis
focus groups, 238
formal usability tests, 239
Foundation of Knowledge model/home telehealth, 7, 10–14, 10f, 13f, 400–402, 435, 515–
516
central stations, web servers, and portals, 416–417
computer science and, 37–62
knowledge acquisition, 401
knowledge dissemination, 401–402
knowledge generation, 401
knowledge processing, 401
medication management devices, 419
peripheral biometric (medical) devices, 417
personal emergency response systems, 418
sensor and activity-monitoring systems, 418
special needs telecommunications-ready devices, 419, 420f
telephones, 417
video cameras and videophones, 417–418
free/libre open source software (FLOSS), 194–195
free/open source software (FOSS), 194–195
future, parting thoughts for, 426
G
game/simulation technology, 58, 476
game mechanics, 476
educational/serious, games, 490–491
virtual world simulation for, 488–490
gameplay, 476GAO. See Government Accountability Office
gap between research and practice, bridging, 558
GB. See gigabyte
geographic information system (GIS), 29t
gesture recognition, 230b
gigabyte (GB), 40
gigahertz, 41t
GIS. See geographic information system
glass, 79
Government Accountability Office (GAO), 332
graduate-level informatics KSAs, 129t
graphical user interface (GUI), 45
graphics card, 42t
gray gap, 364
GUI. See graphical user interface
gulf of evaluation, 236
gulf of execution, 236
H
hacker, 258
HAI. See healthcare-associated infection
handheld devices, 522
haptic technology, 611
haptics, 39, 39–40b
hard disk, 41t
hard drive, 41t
hardware, computer components, 41–42t
basic input/output system, 41t
bit, 40
byte, 40
central processing unit, 41t
connection ports, 42t
DVD/CD drive, 42t
flash/USB flash drive, 42t
graphics card, 42t
hard disk, 41t
modem, 42t
motherboard, 41t
peripheral component interconnection, 42t
power supply, 41t
random-access memory, 41t
read-only memory, 41t
Small Computer System Interface, 42t
sound card, 42t
storage capacity, 43–44b
video adapter card, 42t
virtual memory, 42tharm, 86
HCOs. See healthcare organizations
head-mounted displays, 58
health disaster, planning and preparation, 387–388
health informatics regulations, 154f
health information, 300
health information exchange (HIE), 21, 119, 287
health information technology, 153, 273
Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health (HITECH) Act, 153, 156–
161, 296
definitions, 157–158
enhanced HIPAA protections, 164–168, 165–166b, 167f
purposes, 158–161
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA), 153–156, 545, 618
privacy and security rules, 162–164
Health Level Seven International (HL7), 21
health literacy, 362–363, 363f
in school-age children, promoting, 366–367
health management information system, 184
Health New England, 21
healthcare-associated infection (HAI), 159
healthcare ethics, theoretical approaches to, 84–88
healthcare informatics, nursing contributions, 135
Healthcare Information and Management Systems Society (HIMSS), 140, 145
healthcare organization information systems, types of, 202–204
healthcare organizations (HCOs), 364–366
HET. See human enhancement technology
heuristic evaluation, 239
HIE. See health information exchange (HIE)
high-hazard drug, 324
HIMSS. See Healthcare Information and Management Systems Society
HIPAA. See Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act
HIS. See hospital information system
HITECH Act. See Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health Act
home health care, 412
home telehealth practice and protocols, 421–423
home telehealth software, 420–421
communications, 421
data access and information sharing, 421
trending, 420–421
triage, 421
HONcode, 367
hospital information system (HIS), 29t, 185
human enhancement technology (HET), 90
human factor, 224
human factors engineering, 328
Human Genome Project, 567b
human information processing, tasks associated with, 116human mental workload (MWL), 70f, 71
human–computer interaction, 234
human–technology interaction, 228
human–technology interface, 223–244
application programming interface (API), 230–231b
applications, 229–231b
capacitive touch screen, 230b
Near Field Communication Interface and Protocol, 230b
framework for evaluation, 240–241
future of, 241–243, 242f
gesture recognition, 230b
improving, 231–240, 232f, 238f
natural language user interfaces, 229b
problem, 227–229
touch display, 230b
hypertext, 444
I
IaaS. See infrastructure as a service
ICNP. See International Classification of Nursing Practice
IHIE. See Indiana Health Information Exchange
IM. See instant message
immersive, 493
in-plane switching liquid-crystal display (IPS LCD), 49
Indiana Health Information Exchange (IHIE), 21
informatics
as change agent, 283–284, 283f
community health risk assessment, 382–384, 383f
health disaster, planning and preparation, 387–388
information processing, 384–387
knowledge processing, 384–387
public health essential services, 380
public health informatics, 380–382, 381f
tools to support communication, and dissemination, 388–390
informatics innovator, 142
informatics, learning, 477
informatics nurse specialist (INS), 135
information, 8, 22–25, 37, 114, 136
processing of, 26–27
Information Age, 38
information, consumer demand for, 356–362
information literacy, 435, 516, 517f
information processing, 384–387
information science, 26–27
foundation of knowledge, 28
information systems (ISs), 21, 199, 271
examples of, 29tinformation technology (IT), 22, 184, 201
information user, 116
infrastructure as a service (IaaS), 55, 55f
input, 25
input components, in computer, 44–47
keyboard, 50t
mouse, 50t
touch pad, 50t
touch screen, 50t
INS. See informatics nurse specialist
instant message (IM), 46
integration, 188
integrity, 253
intelligence, 65
Intelligence of Things (IoT), 599, 605
interaction, 275
interactive technology, 367
interdisciplinary collaboration, 346–347
interface, 23
International Classification of Nursing Practice (ICNP), 119
International HapMap Project, 565, 566f
International Organization for Standardization (ISO), 214b
internet-based tools, 451–457
audiopods, 456
chats and online discussions (blogs), 453–454
digital books (eBooks), 451–452
electronic mailing lists, 454
instant messaging, 453
multimedia, 457, 458b
podcasts, 454, 455–456b
portals, 454
searching, 452–453
videopods, 456
webcasts and webinars, 452
internet browser, 49t
Internet of Everything (IoE), 614
Internet of Things (IoT), 33, 605
Internet2, 21
interoperability, 195–196, 195f, 297
principles of, 200–201
interprofessional collaboration, 346
interprofessional team, 148
intrusion detection device, 260
intrusion detection system, 263
intuition, 68
IoT. See Intelligence of Things; Internet of Things
IPS LCD. See in-plane switching liquid-crystal display
ISs. See information systemsISO. See International Organization for Standardization
IT. See information technology
iteration, 185
J
jump drive, 258
just culture, 326
justice, 87
K
KardiaMobile, 357
KDP model. See knowledge domain process model
key field, 212b
keyboard, 50t
KMS. See knowledge management system
knowledge, 8, 25, 38, 65, 114, 136
meta-analysis and generation of, 563–564
nature of, 14–15, 68–69
sources of, 68
transforming raw data, 531f
and wisdom, 27
knowledge acquisition, 10, 26
and sharing, 435–436, 436f
knowledge builder, 116
knowledge discovery, 534–535
benefits of, 543
knowledge dissemination, 10, 26
and sharing, 462–467
continuing education and recertification, 467
networking, 465–466
presenting and publishing, 466–467
knowledge domain process (KDP) model, 11
knowledge exchange, 216
knowledge generation, 10, 26
knowledge management life cycle, 13f
knowledge management system (KMS), 15
knowledge model, foundation of, 7, 10–14, 10f, 13f
knowledge networks, 521
knowledge processing, 10, 26, 384–387
knowledge user, 116
knowledge work system (KWS), 29t
knowledge worker, 12, 15, 21, 116, 148
characteristics of, 15–16
nurse as, 15–16
KWS. See knowledge work systemL
laboratory information system, 209
LAN. See local area network
laptop, 50
latex-based simulation, 476f
Lean, 272
learning environment, incorporating EHRs, 483–487, 484f
learning management system (LMS), 436–437
legal, ethical, and regulatory issues, 423–424
liberty, 86
library science, 26
local area network (LAN), 51
logic, 68
M
machine learning (ML), 73, 536, 545–547
MACRA. See Medicare Access and CHIP Reauthorization Act of 2015
main memory, 41t
malicious code, 252
malicious insider, 260
malware, 264
managed care information system, 210
management information system (MIS), 29t
mapping, 236
mask, 263
Massachusetts Health Data Consortium (MHDC), 21
massive multiplayer online role-playing games, 491
massive open online course (MOOC), 477
MB. See megabyte
meaningful use, 157, 162, 273, 311
medical home model, 287
medical informatics, 149
medical technology hazards, 335
Medicare Access and CHIP Reauthorization Act of 2015 (MACRA), 273, 273f
medisafe, 357
MEDLINE, 518
megabyte (MB), 40
memory, 39, 66
Merit-based Incentive Payment System (MIPS), 273
MERLOT. See Multimedia Educational Resource for Learning and Online Teaching
meta-analysis, 563
meta-learning, 536
metaverse, 58
affecting and will affect health care, 614, 615–616t
challenges facing realization of, 617–620, 617–618t
four foundational pillars of, 612–614metrics, 284
examples of, 285t
MHDC. See Massachusetts Health Data Consortium
mHealth. See mobile health
microblog/microblogging, 81
micropost, 81
microprocessor, 41t
milestone, 184
millions of instructions per second (MIPS), 57
mind, 65
MIPS. See Merit-based Incentive Payment System
MIS. See management information system
mixed reality (MR), 599–600
mobile, 52
mobile app, 356b
mobile broadband vs. wireless broadband, 53
mobile computing, 52–53
mobile devices, 58–59
mobile health (mHealth), 58–59, 407
modeling, 541
modem, 42t
monitor, 48–49
MOOC. See massive open online course
moral, defined, 83
moral dilemma, 83
moral rights, 96
MoSCoW, 190–191
motherboard, 41t
mouse, 50t
MP4 player, 454
MPEG-1 Audio Layer-3 (MP3), 45
MR. See mixed reality
multidimensional databases, 540
Multimedia Educational Resource for Learning and Online Teaching (MERLOT), 478
multiuser dungeon, 493
MWL. See human mental workload
N
NANDA. See North American Nursing Diagnosis Association
National Center for Cognitive Informatics and Decision Making in Healthcare (NCCD), 70
National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey, 384
National Health Information Infrastructure (NHII), 21
national health information network, 391
National Institutes of Health (NIH), 530
National League for Nursing (NLN), 126
Nationwide Health Information Network (NHIN), 21
natural language processing (NLP), 73, 229bNCCD. See National Center for Cognitive Informatics and Decision Making in Healthcare
near-field communication (NFC), 53
near-field communication-enabled medication administration (NFCMA), 230b
Near Field Communication Interface and Protocol (NFCIP-1), 230b
negligence, 86
negligent insider, 257
Net Generation, 443
network, 51, 252–253
network accessibility, 266
network availability, 266
network information, securing, 252–253
network security, 252
neural networks, 536–537
neuroscience, 66
never event, 325
Next Generation Internet (NGI), 21
NFC. See near-field communication
NFCMA. See near-field communication-enabled medication administration
NGI. See Next Generation Internet
NHII. See National Health Information Infrastructure
NHIN. See Nationwide Health Information Network
NI. See nursing informatics
Nicomachean ethics, 88
NIH. See National Institutes of Health
NLN. See National League for Nursing
NLP. See natural language processing
NMDS. See Nursing Minimum Data Set
NMMDS. See Nursing Management Minimum Data Set
nonclinical uses of telehealth technologies, 410
nonmaleficence, 86
nonplayer character (NPC), 489
North American Nursing Diagnosis Association (NANDA), 122b
NPC. See nonplayer character
nurse informaticist, role of, 344–345
nurse–patient interaction framework, 238f
nurses, use of social networks by, 170b
nursing
capturing and codifying work of, 119–126
contributions to healthcare informatics, 135
ethics and consumer engagement in, 85
informatics and healthcare technologies, 127
standardized terminologies, 122b
ANA-recognized, 124b
Clinical Care Classification (CCC) System, 124b
evolution of, 121b
terminology, approaches to, 122–123b
nursing and healthcare worker shortages, 404–405
nursing education challenges and opportunities, 487education, virtual worlds in, 492–493
game mechanics and educational/serious, games, 490–491
game mechanics and virtual world simulation for, 488–490
learning environment, incorporating EHRs, 483–487, 484f
nursing informatics competencies, 479–480
nursing informatics education, 476–477, 480–483, 483f, 487–488
simulations, serious games, and virtual worlds
augmented reality, 494–495
realities, 494
virtual reality, 495–500
simulations, serious games, virtual worlds/realities, 500–505
nursing informatics (NI), 7, 135, 153
building blocks of, 22f, 38f, 66f
competencies, 142–144, 143t
definition of, 112–113
DIKW paradigm, 113–119, 115f
education, 126–127
future landscape, 130
future of, 146–149
implications for, 169–172
legislative aspects of, 153–174
developing national health IT infrastructure, 161–162
Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health Act, 153, 156–161
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act, 153–156
HITECH Act changed HIPAA, 162–168
recent laws and regulations, 172–174
organizations and journals, 145–146, 147b
Quality and Safety Education for Nurses, 128, 128–129t
roles, 137–139, 138f
scope and standards, 136–137, 137b
specialty, evolution of, 110–112
as specialty
education and certification, 139–142, 141b
nursing informatics and nursing education
delivery modalities, 437–443, 442f
competency-based learning, 442–443
face-to-face delivery, 438
hybrid or blended delivery, 441–442
online delivery, 439–440, 442f
fair use and copyright restrictions, 468–469
Foundation of Knowledge model, 435
in future, 469
internet-based tools, 451–457
audiopods, 456
chats and online discussions (blogs), 453–454
digital books (eBooks), 451–452
electronic mailing lists, 454
instant messaging, 453multimedia, 457, 458b
podcasts, 454, 455–456b
portals, 454
searching, 452–453
videopods, 456
webcasts and webinars, 452
knowledge acquisition and sharing, 435–436, 436f
knowledge dissemination and sharing, 462–467
continuing education and recertification, 467
networking, 465–466
presenting and publishing, 466–467
learning management system, 436–437
promoting active and collaborative learning, 457–462
realities, 598
technology tools supporting education, 443–451
case scenarios, 444–445
portfolios, 445–450, 445–450b
simulations, 450
tutorials, 443–444
virtual reality, 450–451
nursing informatics competencies, 149, 479–480
nursing informatics education, 476–477, 480–483, 483f, 487–488
Nursing Management Minimum Data Set (NMMDS), 122b
Nursing Minimum Data Set (NMDS), 122b
nursing practice, implications for, 169–172
nursing research
collecting data and storing information, informatics tools for, 521–523
in future, 525
information and sharing, fair use of, 520–521
internet and library holdings
electronic library catalogs, 520
professional online databases, 518–519
search engines, 519
knowledge generation, 516–518
processing data and data analysis, tools for, 524f
qualitative data analysis, 523–525, 524f
quantitative data analysis, 523–525
nursing role-specific challenges, 617–618t
nursing science, 7–10
Foundation of Knowledge model, 7, 10–14, 10f, 13f
knowledge, 8
nature of, 14–15
worker, nurse as, 15–16
wisdom, getting to, 16–18
nursing theory, 8
Oobject-oriented multiuser dungeon, 493
object-oriented systems development (OOSD), 189–190
OCR. See Office for Civil Rights
Office for Civil Rights (OCR), 163
Office of the National Coordinator for Health Information Technology (ONC), 21, 157
office suite, 46
OLAP. See online analytic processing
omics, 565b
ONC. See Office of the National Coordinator for Health Information Technology
online analytic processing (OLAP), 540
online chats, 435
ontological approach, 122b
OOSD. See object-oriented systems development
Open Access Initiative, 564
open source software (OSS), 45t, 46f, 194–195
operating system (OS), 45–46t, 45t
order entry management, 300
order entry system, 207–208
OS. See operating system
OSS. See open source software
our expanding realities
artificial intelligence (AI), 606–608
Artificial Intelligence of Things (AIoT), 605
augmented reality, 599
big data, 604–605, 604f
extended reality, 600
haptic technology, 611
Intelligence of Things (IoT), 605
Internet of Things (IoT), 605
metaverse
affecting and will affect health care, 614, 615–616t
challenges facing realization of, 617–620, 617–618t
four foundational pillars of, 612–614
mixed reality, 599–600
nursing informatics/realities, 598
overview of, 597–598
robots, 608–610
smart devices, 610
telemedicine, 604
transcending reality, 611–612
virtual reality, 600–603
outcome, 31
output device, 32
OWL. See Web Ontology Language
P
PaaS. See platform as a servicePACS. See picture archiving and communication system
password
creating and managing, 254–255b
patient care information system, 208
patient care support system, 208–210
patient-centered care, 158, 202
patient education
clinician’s view on, 370–371b
considerations for, 368–369b
patient engagement, 316b, 355
artificial intelligence, 358–360b
future directions for, 371–373
health initiatives, 362–363
health literacy, 362–363, 363f
healthcare organization approaches, 364–366
mobile apps, 356b
use of internet, 367–371
patient safety
case scenario, 331–332
human factors and systems engineering, 328–332, 330f
informatics technologies for, 334–344
additional, 340–344
medication administration cycle, 335–340
interdisciplinary collaboration, 346–347
nurse informaticist, role of, 344–345
patient support, 301
PB. See petabyte
PC. See personal computer
PCI. See peripheral component interconnection
PEDA. See prebrief, enactment, debrief, and assessment
perception, 68
peripheral component interconnection (PCI), 42t
personal computer (PC), 45t
petabyte (PB), 44b
pharmacy information system, 208–209
PHI. See protected health information; public health informatics
PHIN. See Public Health Information Network
phishing, 260
identifying scams, 261b
PHRAT. See Public Health Risk Assessment Tool
picture archiving and communication system (PACS), 209
platform as a service (PaaS), 55, 55f
plug-and-play computer add-ons, 45
policy, 155
population health management, 301–303
portability, 45
portable devices, off-site use of, 263–266
portfolio creation process, 447power supply, 41t
prebrief, enactment, debrief, and assessment (PEDA), 480, 481t
prelicensure informatics KSAs, 128t
presence, 586
presentation, 47t
prevention informatics, 391
primary key, 212b
principlism, 78
printer, 49–50
privacy, 77, 153
private health information, vulnerability of, 166–167, 167f
problem-based learning, 438
problem-solving, 65
process analysis, 278
process map, 275
process owner, 279
processing
of data, 31
of input data, 47
processor, 41t
product developer, 139
productivity software, 46
professional development, 38
professional networking, 447
professional online databases, 518–519
programmable read-only memory (PROM), 41t
project manager, 138
PROM. See programmable read-only memory
promoting active and collaborative learning, 457–462
proprioception, 611
protected health information (PHI), 154, 155f
prototype, 185
proxy server, 262
pseudo AI, 90
PsycArticles, 518
psychology, 66
PsycInfo, 518
public health, 380
public health essential services, 380
public health informatics (PHI), 380–382, 381f
Public Health Information Network (PHIN), 385
public health intervention, 387
Public Health Risk Assessment Tool (PHRAT), 382
PubMed, 518
Q
QCDR. See Qualified Clinical Data RegistriesQI. See quality improvement
QRPH. See quality, research, and public health
QSEN. See Quality and Safety Education for Nurses
Qualified Clinical Data Registries (QCDR), 273
qualified electronic health record, 158
qualitative data analysis, 523–525, 524f
qualitative studies, 557
quality, 272
Quality and Safety Education for Nurses (QSEN), 128, 128–129t
quality improvement (QI), 285–286
Quality Payment Program, 273
quality, research, and public health (QRPH), 382
quantitative data analysis, 523
quantitative studies, 563
quantum bit (qubit), 57
quantum computing, 57
qubit. See quantum bit
query, 214
QWERTY, 50t
R
RAD. See rapid application development
radio-frequency identification (RFID), 53, 91, 255, 335, 337–338
radiology information system (RIS), 209
RAM. See random-access memory
random-access memory (RAM), 41t
randomized controlled trial (RCT), 556
ransomware, 259
rapid application development (RAD), 188–189, 189f
rapid prototyping. See rapid application development
Rapid Syndromic Validation Project (RSVP), 21
RCT. See randomized controlled trial
RDF. See resource description framework
RDMS. See relational database management system
read-only memory (ROM), 41t
real time, 453
real-time telehealth, 408, 409f
reality/realities, 494, 597
really simple syndication (RSS), 454
reasoning, 65
record, 212b
redesign team, workflow, 279–281
reflective commentary, 447
reflective practice, 590–592, 591f
regional health information exchange, 391
Registered Health Information Administrator (RHIA), 140, 142
relational database, 17relational database management system (RDMS), 213b
remote monitoring, 408–409
removable storage device, 258, 258f
report, 32
reporting, 301–303
repository, 193, 212
research, 534–535
research utilization, 554–555
research validity, 557
researcher, 138
resource description framework (RDF), 454
results management, 300
reusability, 121b
reusable learning object (RLO), 478
RFID. See radio-frequency identification
RHIA. See Registered Health Information Administrator
right, 154
RIS. See radiology information system
risk assessment, 382–384, 383f
RLO. See reusable learning object
robotics technology, 343–344
robots, 608–610
role of informatics, 559–561, 561–562t
role-playing learning, 438
ROM. See read-only memory
root-cause analysis, 325–326
row, 212b
RSS. See really simple syndication
RSVP. See Rapid Syndromic Validation Project
S
SaaS. See software as a service
safety culture, 326–328
key features of, 325
strategies for achieving, 326–328
scaffolding, 482
scareware, 260
scheduling systems, 207
science fiction–reality factor, 365b
scoring, 532
Scrum, 193
Scrum master, 193
Scrum team, 193
SCSI. See Small Computer System Interface
SDLC. See systems development life cycle
SDOH. See social determinants of health
SDRAM. See synchronous dynamic random-access memorysearch engines, 519
Second Life, 493
secure information, 263
security, 53, 95, 153
security breach, 257
security threats, 257–262
self-control, 88
SEMMA, 542–543
sentinel event, 324
serious games, nursing education, 500–505
server, 484
shoulder surfing, 252
simulated documentation, 476
simulation scenario, 476
simulations, nursing education, 500–505
simulator, 475
situational awareness, 237
Six Sigma/Lean, 272, 541–542
Small Computer System Interface (SCSI), 42t
smart devices, 610
smart pump, 334
smart room, 342
smartphone, 79, 457
social communication software, 52
social determinants of health (SDOH), 307
social engineering, 260
social media, 80, 389
ethical issues and, 80–83
social networks, by nurses, use of, 170b
social science, 26
software, 42–44
commercial, 45t
communication, 46t, 49t
creativity, 46t
office suite, 46t
open source, 45t, 46f
operating system, 45–46t
productivity, 46
software as a service (SaaS), 55, 55f
somatosensory system, 611
sound card, 42t
spatial audio, 620
speaker, 50
spear phishing, 260
spreadsheet, 46t
spyware, 259
SQL. See Structured Query Language
stacking, 536stakeholder, 26, 201
standard, 77, 153
standardized nursing terminology, 122b
standardized plan of care, 202
static dynamic RAM. See synchronous dynamic random-access memory
static medium, 364
“Stimulus” law. See American Recovery and Reinvestment Act
storage capacity, 43–44b
store-and-forward telehealth, 408
Structured Query Language (SQL), 214, 214–215b
Suicide Prevention Community Assessment Tool, 384
summary, 32
surveillance, 378
surveillance data system, 387
surveys of potential, 238
swim-lane technique, 280, 280f
synchronous dynamic random-access memory (SDRAM), 41
syndromic surveillance system, 378, 379f
synthesis, of data, 30
systems development life cycle (SDLC), 183
agile strategy, 192–193
case scenario, 184–186
computer-aided software engineering tools, 193–194
dynamic system development method, 190–192, 191f
interoperability, 195–196
object-oriented systems development, 189–190
open source software, 194–195
rapid application development, 188–189, 189f
rapid prototyping, 188–189, 189f
waterfall model, 186–188, 187f
systems engineering, 328
T
table, 212b
task analysis, 234
tasks, 275
TB. See terabyte
technology, 38
Technology Informatics Guiding Education Reform (TIGER) Initiative, 126, 142
technology-laden environments
caring theories, 582–586, 584f
enhancing caring presence, 587–590, 587f, 588b
future, caring in, 592–593
presence, 586
reflective practice, 590–592, 591f
technology tools supporting education, 443–451
case scenarios, 444–445portfolios, 445–450, 445–450b
simulations, 450
tutorials, 443–444
virtual reality, 450–451
telecommunications, 30
telehealth
driving forces for, 403–406
history of, 402–403
nursing aspects of, 402
patient’s role, 424
telehealth care, 406–410
clinical uses of, 407
telehealth patient populations, 413–421
assisted living and subacute patients, 415–416
at-risk populations, 413–414
concerned patients and families, 415
emergency response situations, 415
employers and wellness programs, 416
hospitalized patients, 415
incarcerated patients, 414
isolated patients, 414
patients with chronic diseases, 413
telehealth research, 424
telehealth transmission formats and their clinical applications, 407–410
telemedicine, 403, 604
telemonitoring, 409
telenursing and remote access telehealth
applications of telenursing in home care, 411–413
clinical uses of, 407
evolving telehealth models, 425–426
Foundation of Knowledge model/home telehealth, 400–402
central stations, web servers, and portals, 416–417
knowledge acquisition, 401
knowledge dissemination, 401–402
knowledge generation, 401
knowledge processing, 401
medication management devices, 419
peripheral biometric (medical) devices, 417
personal emergency response systems, 418
sensor and activity-monitoring systems, 418
special needs telecommunications-ready devices, 419, 420f
telephones, 417
video cameras and videophones, 417–418
future, parting thoughts for, 426
home telehealth practice and protocols, 421–423
home telehealth software, 420–421
communications, 421
data access and information sharing, 421trending, 420–421
triage, 421
legal, ethical, and regulatory issues, 423–424
mHealth, 410
nonclinical uses of telehealth technologies, 410
real-time telehealth, 408, 409f
remote monitoring, 408–409
store-and-forward telehealth, 408
telehealth patient populations, 413–421
assisted living and subacute patients, 415–416
at-risk populations, 413–414
concerned patients and families, 415
emergency response situations, 415
employers and wellness programs, 416
hospitalized patients, 415
incarcerated patients, 414
isolated patients, 414
patients with chronic diseases, 413
telehealth research, 424
telehealth transmission formats and their clinical applications, 407–410
telehealth
driving forces for, 403–406
history of, 402–403
nursing aspects of, 402
patient’s role, 424
telenursing, 410–413
applications of telenursing in home care, 411–413
telephony, 409
telepathology, 403
telephony, 409
teleradiology, 403
TELOS strategy, 186
terabyte (TB), 40
terminology, 122b
theoretical approaches, to healthcare ethics, 84–88
3D printing, 601
three-dimensional (3D), 488
throughput, 47
thumb drive, 258
tiering, 211
TIGER Initiative. See Technology Informatics Guiding Education Reform Initiative
total cost of ownership (TCO), 194
touch display, 230b
touch pad, 50t
touch screen, 50t
TPO. See treatment/payment/operations
TPS. See transaction processing system
transaction processing system (TPS), 29ttranscending reality, 611–612
transforming, 599
translational bioinformatics, 556
translational informatics, 560
translational research, 555
clarification of terms, 553–556, 554–555f
evidence, 557–558
evidence-based practice, 556
barriers/facilitators of, 559
guidelines, 562–563, 563t
expanding research boundaries and effects on clinical translation, 564–569, 566f, 568f
in future, 569–570
gap between research and practice, bridging, 558
knowledge, meta-analysis and generation of, 563–564
role of informatics, 559–561, 561–562t
transparent wisdom, 8
treatment/payment/operations (TPO), 168
triage, 211
Trojan horse, 258
Truste, 367
truth, 96
tuple, 215b
21st Century Cures Act (Cures Act), 21
U
über-connected world, 80
ubiquity, 121b
UI. See user interface
uncertainty, 83
unified communications (UC), 204
universal serial bus (USB), 41t
flash drive, 42t
unstructured data, 530
usability, 238
USB. See universal serial bus
use case, 256
user-centered design, 234–235
user experience (UX), 224
user-friendly, 39
user interface (UI), 45t, 224
user–technology–patient safety scheme, 330f
UX. See user experience
V
value, 77
VDI. See virtual desktop interfaceveracity, 80
video adapter card, 42t
virtual desktop interface (VDI), 265
virtual memory, 42t
virtual reality (VR), 58, 450, 495–500, 600–603
virtual simulation, 475
virtual social networks, 51–52
virtual worlds/realities, 500–505
virtue, 80
virtue ethics, 87
virus, 252
voice-activated communicators, 58
voice recognition, 371–372, 598
VR. See virtual reality
W
WAN. See wide area network
waterfall model, 186–188, 187f
wearable devices, 610
wearable technology, 56, 241–242, 343, 599
web, consumer perceptions of health information on, 85
web-based courses, 436f, 439
web-enhanced courses, 435
Web Ontology Language (OWL), 123b
web publishing, 445
web quests, 355
webcasts, 452
webinars, 452
weblog, 367
Wi-Fi, 52
Wi-Fi hotspot, 52
wide area network (WAN), 51
wiki, 452
wireless, 50t
wireless broadband vs. mobile broadband, 53
wireless mobile computing, 52
wireless mobile devices, impact of, 265b
wisdom, 38, 88, 114–116
defined, 69
getting to, 16–18
knowledge and, 27
word processing, 47t
work process, 275
workaround, 223, 338
workflow analysis, 275
change management plan, 283, 283f
future directions, 286–287and informatics practice, 278–283
future state, 282–283
redesign team, 279–281
value added vs. non–value added activities, 281
variation, 281–282
waste activities, 281
measuring results, 284–285, 285t
purpose of, 271–275
quality improvement, 285–286
and technology, 275–278
World Wide Web (WWW), 46t
World Wide Web Consortium (W3C), 123b
worm, 258
WWW. See World Wide Web
X
XR. See extended reality
Y
YB. See yottabyte
yottabyte (YB), 44b
Youth Risk Behavior Surveillance System, 384
Z
ZB. See zettabyte
zero day attack, 257
zettabyte (ZB), 44bThe model features a three-dimensional illustration of three
entwined, inverted cones labeled K A, K G, and K D. The
three labeled cones converge to create a new cone labeled K
P. Encircling these cones is a feedback loop. The entire
composition is situated on a platform featuring repeated
words such as information, data, bytes, and bits. K A
indicates knowledge acquisition; K D indicates knowledge
dissemination; K G indicates knowledge generation; and K P
denotes knowledge processing.
Back to Figure
The stages are as follows. 1. Knowledge acquisition involves
orientation and continuing education. 2. Knowledge surfacing
encompassing explicit and tacit knowledge includes
reflection on practice and mentoring. 3. Knowledge sharing
and dissemination includes utilizing social media, intranet,
and email. 4. Knowledge development involves activities like
data mining, information mapping, and information retrieval.
5. Knowledge processing encompasses data analysis and
report generation. 6. Outcomes evaluation involves providing
feedback for knowledge use and generating new knowledge.
The cycle then returns to the initial stage of knowledge
acquisition.
Back to Figure
The threats are as follows. Human errors like incorrect data
entry and spelling errors; malware such as viruses, worms,spam, and ransomware; transmission errors involving
connectivity issues, data corruption, and lost data; and
machine errors including hardware failures and software
crashes.
Back to Figure
The primary components are arranged around a central
motherboard, each illustrated with accompanying photos. 1.
Motherboard: Comprising the power supply, heat sink, C P U
or processor, RAM, and memory with a hard drive. 2. Input
peripherals: Encompassing the keyboard, mouse,
microphone, and other input devices like U S B drives and
touch pens. 3. Output peripherals: Including the monitor,
printer, speakers, and other output devices such as
projectors. The sequential flow of data through the computer
components follows this process. Input peripheral: Inputs or
enters and edits data. Processing and memory: The C P U or
processor processes the data, and the RAM retains data and
information while the computer is on. Output peripheral:
Displays the processed data and information.
Back to Figure
Benefits include transparency, as users are encouraged to
modify or enhance existing versions or create new ones
through collaborative efforts. The collaborative efforts
emphasize that publicly accessible source code is shared
with users and developers. Stumbling blocks include a lackof interoperability and limited awareness or familiarity of
people with open source concepts.
Back to Figure
The advantages include the following. Agile deployment;
Increased productivity; Pay as you go as needed;
Sustainable; Reliable; Situational and context-driven;
Enhanced collaboration; Scalable with dynamic ramp-up or
dynamic ramp-down; Resources are shared and distributed;
Flexible; Less capital expenditures; User-distinct encounters
and experiences; and Market adaptability.
Back to Figure
The illustration features three nested clouds pouring five
water droplets. Clouds represent service models such as: 1.
S a a S, software as a service; 2. P a a S, platform as a
service; 3. I a a S, infrastructure as a service. Droplets
represent key cloud computing characteristics, including on￾demand self-service, resource pooling, broad network
access, rapid elasticity, and measured services.
Back to Figure
The sequence from cognitive informatics to usable systems
unfolds in the following manner. 1. Cognitive informatics:
Focuses on studying the brain and human information
processing. 2. Informs system design: Involves modeling
cognitive processes and considering human mentalworkload. 3. Usable systems: Result in designs that are easy
and intuitive, supporting nursing practice and decision￾making.
Back to Figure
The progression from bottom to top includes: Harvesting
external data, which is processed to become useful or
meaningful external information; Synthesizing data and
information in an iterative continuum; Transforming this into
knowledge, application of knowledge, and finally, wisdom as
internal outcomes leading to actions and decisions.
Back to Figure
The key roles include Informatics Nurse Specialist, I N S,
functioning as a project manager, consultant, educator,
researcher, product developer, decision support, outcomes
manager, advocate, policy developer, clinical analyst, and
entrepreneur. Expertise needed spans users, modifiers, and
innovators. Competencies needed encompass technical,
utility, and leadership skills.
Back to Figure
The P H I vulnerabilities are as follows. Unintentional
breaches: Unsecured terminals; Loss of devices; Unsecured
passwords. Outside attacks: Hackers; Worms, viruses,
spam; Theft. Intentional breaches: Malicious insiders; Socialmedia use; Unauthorized access. Network issues:
Unencrypted transmissions; Firewall failure.
Back to Figure
The phases of D S D M include: 1. Feasibility. 2. Business
studies. 3. Functional model iteration involving creating a
functional prototype, agreeing on a plan, identifying the
prototype, and reviewing it. 4. Design and build iteration
involving agreeing on a plan, identifying design prototypes,
reviewing the design prototype, and creating design
prototype. 5. Implementation involving reviewing the
business, implementing, training users, obtaining user
approval, and establishing user guidelines.
Back to Figure
The siloed data includes laboratory, X-ray, pharmacy data;
clinical E H R data; and demographic information. When
combined, these data sources create integrated data,
providing a comprehensive 360-degree holistic view of the
patient.
Back to Figure
The flow begins with the identification of the advanced
practice nurse, including their name and I D number.
Subsequently, a patient, identified by name and I D number,
visits the advanced practice nurse. The flow also indicatesthe assignment of the patient to the nurse, with the nurse’s
name and I D number included in this process.
Back to Figure
The illustration features a man seated at a computer on a
swivel chair with a footrest, positioned next to a window.
Labeled elements include soft incoming light through the
window, thighs parallel to the floor, an adjustable seat, feet
flat on the floor or footrest, keyboard at elbow height, and
display at eye level or slightly below of about 18 to 28 inches.
Back to Figure
A central circle is labeled perceive, task, act, with an up
arrow on the left and a down arrow on the right. A divided box
covering the central circle includes a computer interface on
the left and computer characteristics on the right. Two circles
above the box represent clinician processes and clinician
characteristics, while two circles below the box represent
patient data and patient status. A larger circle covering the
entire illustration includes information on the left, exchange
on the right, and context on the top.
Back to Figure
The flow begins with user ability and task demands,
converging into the context of technology. The technology
then branches into two paths: 1. User ability and, or human￾technology interface less than task demands, leading tosuccess. 2. Task demands surpassing user ability and, or
human-technology interface, resulting in failure.
Back to Figure
The diagram consists of four lanes representing Patient,
Physician, Pharmacy, and Nurse. Steps include the following.
1. Patient: Presents to emergency department; Admitted to
the hospital. 2. Physician: Admits the patient; Gathers
information about all medications taken at home; Orders
medications in C P O E. 3. Pharmacy: Reviews patients
admitted to the hospital; Selects the patient and reviews
medications ordered by the physician; Reviews medications
using multiple sources, including previous E H R information
on the patient, to verify typical dose and whether a generic or
brand name; Reconciles any discrepancies or questions they
have by contacting the physician or nurse. 4. Nurse: During
admission process gathers information about all the
medications they are taking at home, including over the
counter, O T C, and supplements; Documents in the E H R
and reviews medications ordered for the patient.
Back to Figure
The patient portal, National Health Information Exchange,
and patient outreach home care converge to form Hospital X
Y Z. Hospital X Y Z features reporting and analytics, data
mining, performance metrics involving financial, healthcare,
census, staffing, and personnel, informative exchange,satellite clinics, doctors’ offices, other hospitals, and care
facilities. Hospital X Y Z further leads to patient registration,
including outpatient and patient admission. E H R
components within the system include clinical
documentation, computerized physician order entry, clinical
decision support, social determinants of health, physical
therapy, diagnostic testing, laboratory, radiology, social
services, and financial services.
Back to Figure
The ways include the following. Store data electronically for
exchange and reporting; Put accountability into nursing care;
Standardize care through use of shared protocols; Improve
ease of care coordination; Provide decision support to
encourage evidence-based practices; Automate clinical
processes; Measure clinical risks; Provide decision support;
Enhance evidence-based practice; Improve practice
workflows; Retain patient data and information, building a
more complete picture of the patient for all care providers to
access; Reduce errors; and Leveraged for clinical analysis.
Back to Figure
In the first section, three circles overlap to represent the user,
encompassing patient or guardian or caregiver, healthcare
provider, and ancillary personnel. The second part focuses
on health information technology, H I T, with four overlapping
circles indicating developer, user or healthcare provider,researcher, and I T personnel. These components lead to a
flow diagram of patient safety, emphasizing criteria such as
the absence of data entry errors, timely data delivery, intact
and complete data with no missing data, appropriate use of
default values, exclusive electronic system utilization for
patient care, integrity of patient data, that is, data associated
with the correct patient, and capturing the latest information
for reporting.
Back to Figure
The rain symbolizes health problems and risks. The umbrella
encompasses key elements, including building relationships
with values and preferences, and respect; ensuring
understanding through plain language, clear dialogue, follow￾up, technology, and easy navigation; and partnering with
peer support, resources, and education. Underneath the
umbrella, the concept is associated with achieving better
health.
Back to Figure
The process begins with patients seeking care, their data
sent to hospitals and healthcare providers. From there, it
reaches a Health Information Organization, continuing
through data to a Cloud environment involving data sharing
and events and outbreaks monitoring. The Cloud
environment, through data generated from various sources
like retail sales, Google searches, E H R, Health InformationExchange, and C D C, leads to analytical tools and report
generation. The final stages involve the dissemination of
reports to Health Departments for analysis and reporting.
Back to Figure
In the first part, three nested circles outline key goals: Thrive,
including E-health, reducing health disparities, prevention
and wellness promotion, monitoring and improving
population health; for individuals, families, populations, and
communities; emphasizing the principles of provide, partner,
protect, and prevention comprising primary, secondary, and
tertiary. The second part features a cyclic diagram including
data acquisition and representation, analysis of data,
integration of information, knowledge management, and
change management in public health informatics.
Back to Figure
The stages are as follows. 1. Hazard identification: What
health problems are caused by the pollutant? 2. Dose￾response assessment: What are the health problems at
different exposures? 3. Exposure assessment: How much of
the pollutant are people exposed to during a specific time
period? How many people are exposed? 4. Risk
characterization: What is the extra risk of health problems in
the exposed population?
Back to FigureThe horizontal axis spans from 2005 to 2025 in increments of
5. Two trend lines are plotted. A decreasing trend for
healthcare workers and an increasing trend for population
costs. Both lines intersect at 2015. The area to the right of
the intersection reads, Technology fills the gap with
telenursing and nurse help desks to handle many patients
due to the shortage. Text alongside the graph reads as
follows. 1.7 trillion dollars in healthcare costs; 34 million
population greater than 65 years old. 4.2 trillion dollars in
healthcare costs; 78 million population greater than 65 years
old. R N population: Expected to grow from 2.71 million in
2012 to 3.4 million in 2022. Year 2022: Nursing shortage of
1.05 million. Even if the nursing graduate statistics remain
the same, there will be a need for an additional 260,000 R Ns
by the year 2025. Nearly 700,000 nurses are projected to
retire or leave the labor force by 2024.
Back to Figure
The flow diagram includes the following path. 1. Review:
Mining data for healthcare solution. 2. Analysis: Who would
benefit from your review. 3. Referral: Establish process and
advocate for those patients. 4. Provide: Equipment and
monitor. 5. Intervene: Telenurses respond using standardized
protocols. 6. Aggregate data: Create data warehouse. 7.
Evaluation: Determine patient support and care needed to
remain in their home. 8. Maintenance: Reassess patient and
equipment functionality and needs. The three photos feature
the following. 1. A healthcare professional interacts with anelderly couple. Accompanying text reads, Typical patients:
Chronically ill, Frail elderly, Mentally ill, and Acute episodic
events. 2. Telenurses: Two nurses interact with a healthcare
professional through a computer. 3. Two healthcare
professionals have an interaction in a computer server room.
Accompanying text reads, Ancillary support personnel:
Deliver and maintain equipment; Update and maintain
information systems and user interfaces.
Back to Figure
The interactions are as follows. Learner to content:
Flashcards; R S S feeds; YouTube videos; F A Q forums.
Learner to instructor: Lessons; Quizzes and tests; Video
conferences; Emails; Projects. Learner to learner: Chat;
Discussion forums; Blogs; Wikis. Learner to interface:
Computer-assisted instruction; Learning management
system; Simulations; Virtual reality.
Back to Figure
The illustration features a table with an upward arrow on
either side. The table is titled Commitment to effective social
media use takes time. The row entries are as follows. Row 1.
Build community: Facebook; LinkedIn; X, Twitter; Ning. More
than 5 to 10 hours per week. Row 2. Publish: Blogger;
WordPress; Typepad; Flickr; YouTube. More than 3 to 5
hours per week. Row 3. Participate: Facebook; LinkedIn; X,
Twitter; Hootsuite; Seesmic; TweetDec. More than 30minutes per day. Row 4. Promote: Digg; X, Twitter; BizSugar;
HelloTxt; Ping.fm; ShareThis; AddThis; dlvr.it. More than 20
minutes per day. Row 5. Listen: Google Alerts; Social
Mention; Attensity 360; Scout Lab; Radian. More than 15
minutes per day. Row 6. Read: Google Alerts. More than 15
minutes per day.
Back to Figure
The two research subjects are as follows. Quantitative:
Focus on numbers and numeric values; Who, what, where,
when; Match with outcomes about knowledge and
comprehension, define, classify, recall, recognize; Allows for
measurement of variables; Uses statistical data analysis;
May be generalized to greater population with larger
samples; Easily replicated. Qualitative: Focus on text and
narrative from respondents; Why, how; Match with outcomes
about application, analysis, synthesis, evaluate; Seeks to
explain and understand; Ability to capture, elusive, evidence
of student learning and development. The two methods
converge to form mixed methods, including experimental
research and translational research.
Back to Figure
During the data pre-processing stage, the raw data,
portrayed as a diamond, goes through a conversion process
into target data, symbolized by three smaller diamonds. This
transformation culminates in pre-processed data. In thepattern recognition phase, the transformed data exposes
emerging patterns, represented by a series of ascending
bars. Ultimately, this progression results in the acquisition of
knowledge, as depicted by an illustration of the brain.
Back to Figure
The flowchart comprises four levels, from top to bottom.
Level 1 comprises Node 0. Node 0 displays three columns:
Category, percentage, and n. The row entries are as follows.
No reassault: 22.1; 132. Reassault: 77.9; 464. Total: 100.0;
596. Level 2 consists of Node 1 and Node 2 branching from
Node 0. Women’s perception of safety: Adjusted P-value
equals 0.000, Chi-square equals 25.580, degrees of freedom
equals 1. Node 1 displays three columns: Category,
percentage, and n. The row entries are as follows. No
reassault: 9.5; 18. Reassault: 90.5; 171. Total: 31.7; 189.
Node 2 displays three columns: Category, percentage, and n.
The row entries are as follows. No reassault: 28.0; 114.
Reassault: 72.0; 293. Total: 68.3; 407. Level 3 consists of
Node 3 and Node 4 branching from Node 1; and Node 5 and
Node 6 branching from Node 2. Node 3 and 4 are obtained
from controlling behaviors: Adjusted P-value equals 0.037,
Chi-square equals 6.785, degrees of freedom equals 1. Node
5 and 6 are obtained from controlling behaviors: Adjusted P￾value equals 0.024, Chi-square equals 5.100, degrees of
freedom equals 1. Node 3 displays three columns: Category,
percentage, and n. The row entries are as follows. No
reassault: 14.0; 16. Reassault: 86.0; 98. Total: 19.1; 114.Node 4 displays three columns: Category, percentage, and n.
The row entries are as follows. No reassault: 2.7; 2.
Reassault: 97.3; 73. Total: 12.6; 75. Node 5 displays three
columns: Category, percentage, and n. The row entries are
as follows. No reassault: 31.2; 91. Reassault: 68.8; 201.
Total: 49.0; 292. Node 6 displays three columns: Category,
percentage, and n. The row entries are as follows. No
reassault: 20.0; 23. Reassault: 80.0; 92. Total: 19.3; 115.
Level 4 consists of Node 7 and Node 8 branching from Node
6. Node 7 and 8 are obtained from non-domestic violence
arrest: Adjusted P-value equals 0.020, Chi-square equals
5.445, degrees of freedom equals 1. Node 7 displays three
columns: Category, percentage, and n. The row entries are
as follows. No reassault: 10.9; 6. Reassault: 89.1; 49. Total:
9.2; 55. Node 8 displays three columns: Category,
percentage, and n. The row entries are as follows. No
reassault: 28.3; 17. Reassault: 71.7; 43. Total: 10.1; 60.
Back to Figure
The trio of triangles, symbolizing input, throughput, and
output, collectively represents the concept of storage. Each
triangle indicates the following. 1. Input: Ingesting big data
involves constructing the dataset through the following steps:
locating the data, capturing the data, cleaning the data,
normalizing the data, and aggregating the data. 2.
Throughput: Explore, track, and extract data through
processes such as data mining, which includes querying or
modeling. Further processing involves interpreting the data,understanding the data, and evaluating the data, that is,
refining the query or model as needed. 3. Output: Apply or
use the data and report the output data.
Back to Figure
Under the head Example of a Phishing Scam Email, the text
reads as follows. Check suspicious emails for grammar and
spelling errors, generic greetings, for example, User, Dear, or
Dearest, or requests for immediate action or personal
information, for example, passwords or bank account
numbers. Some phishing emails may appear to come from
your bank or another trusted organization. Think carefully
about why a seemingly legitimate organization might be
asking for information it should already have or why it might
need to know what it is asking for. Be aware of your
organization’s procedures for reporting phishing scams, and
do so immediately. Source line reads, Data from:
Pennsylvania State University, Office of Information Security.
No date. What is phishing? h t t p colon double forward slash
phishing dot p s u dot e d u forward slash what hyphen is
hyphen phishing.
Back to Figure
The text continues as follows. The database example
provided here reflects the faculty listing for a school of
nursing. The table that contains the data is identified by the
name, Faculty. The faculty members are categorized by thefollowing fields, columns: Last Name, First Name,
Department Affiliation, Office Phone Number, Office Location,
and User I D. Each faculty member’s information is a record,
tuple, or row. Using the S Q L command SELECT, all the
records in the, Faculty, table can be selected: SELECT,
asterisk FROM Faculty This command would SELECT all,
asterisk, of the records FROM the table known as FACULTY.
The asterisk, asterisk, is used to select all the columns.
Back to Figure
The model features a three-dimensional illustration of three
entwined, inverted cones labeled K A, K G, and K D. The
three labeled cones converge to create a new cone labeled K
P. Encircling these cones is a feedback loop. The entire
composition is situated on a platform featuring repeated
words such as information, data, bytes, and bits. K A
indicates knowledge acquisition; K D indicates knowledge
dissemination; K G indicates knowledge generation; and K P
denotes knowledge processing.
Back to Figure
The model features a three-dimensional illustration of three
entwined, inverted cones labeled K A, K G, and K D. The
three labeled cones converge to create a new cone labeled K
P. Encircling these cones is a feedback loop. The entire
composition is situated on a platform featuring repeated
words such as information, data, bytes, and bits. K Aindicates knowledge acquisition; K D indicates knowledge
dissemination; K G indicates knowledge generation; and K P
denotes knowledge processing.
Back to Figure
The model features a three-dimensional illustration of three
entwined, inverted cones labeled K A, K G, and K D. The
three labeled cones converge to create a new cone labeled K
P. Encircling these cones is a feedback loop. The entire
composition is situated on a platform featuring repeated
words such as information, data, bytes, and bits. K A
indicates knowledge acquisition; K D indicates knowledge
dissemination; K G indicates knowledge generation; and K P
denotes knowledge processing.
Back to Figure
The model features a three-dimensional illustration of three
entwined, inverted cones labeled K A, K G, and K D. The
three labeled cones converge to create a new cone labeled K
P. Encircling these cones is a feedback loop. The entire
composition is situated on a platform featuring repeated
words such as information, data, bytes, and bits. K A
indicates knowledge acquisition; K D indicates knowledge
dissemination; K G indicates knowledge generation; and K P
denotes knowledge processing.
Back to FigureThe model features a three-dimensional illustration of three
entwined, inverted cones labeled K A, K G, and K D. The
three labeled cones converge to create a new cone labeled K
P. Encircling these cones is a feedback loop. The entire
composition is situated on a platform featuring repeated
words such as information, data, bytes, and bits. K A
indicates knowledge acquisition; K D indicates knowledge
dissemination; K G indicates knowledge generation; and K P
denotes knowledge processing.
Back to Figure
The model features a three-dimensional illustration of three
entwined, inverted cones labeled K A, K G, and K D. The
three labeled cones converge to create a new cone labeled K
P. Encircling these cones is a feedback loop. The entire
composition is situated on a platform featuring repeated
words such as information, data, bytes, and bits. K A
indicates knowledge acquisition; K D indicates knowledge
dissemination; K G indicates knowledge generation; and K P
denotes knowledge processing.
Back to Figure
The model features a three-dimensional illustration of three
entwined, inverted cones labeled K A, K G, and K D. The
three labeled cones converge to create a new cone labeled K
P. Encircling these cones is a feedback loop. The entire
composition is situated on a platform featuring repeatedwords such as information, data, bytes, and bits. K A
indicates knowledge acquisition; K D indicates knowledge
dissemination; K G indicates knowledge generation; and K P
denotes knowledge processing.
Back to Figure
The table consists of six columns: Alternative, Good
Consequences, Bad Consequences, Do Any Rules Nullify,
Expected Outcome, and Potential Benefit more than Harm.
The row entries are as follows. Row 1. 1. Wait until the crisis
is resolved. No policy violation; Patient rights safeguarded.
Not the best use of the professor’s time. No. Best: Crisis will
require a short time; Worst: Crisis may take a long time.
Patient rights protected; Collegial relationship jeopardized;
Patient rights may take precedence. Row 2. 2. Delegate to
another staff member. No policy violation. Other staff may be
equally busy or might not be as familiar with all patients. No.
Best: Assignments will be completed; Worst: May not have
benefit of expert advice. Confidentiality of records is assured;
May compromise student learning; Patient rights may take
precedence. Row 3. 3. Log on to the system for the
professor. Professor can begin making assignments. May still
be a violation of policy regarding system access. Rules
regarding access to medical records. Best: Assignments can
be completed; Worst: Abuse of access to information.
Potential compromise of records; Patient in crisis is cared for.
Back to Table
