Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 1 04/03/2024 16:06
OBSTETRICS 
by Ten Teachers 
First published in 1917 as ‘Midwifery’, Obstetrics by Ten Teachers is well established as a concise, yet compre￾hensive, guide within its f eld. The 21st Edition has been thoroughly updated by its latest team of ‘teachers’, 
integrating clinical material with the latest scientifc developments that underpin patient care. 
Each chapter is highly structured, with learning objectives, defnitions, aetiology, clinical features, investiga￾tions, treatments and key point summaries and additional reading where appropriate. A key theme for this 
edition is ‘professionalism’ and information specifc to this is threaded throughout the text. 
Along with its companion Gynaecology by Ten Teachers, 21st Edition, the books continue to provide an acces￾sible ‘one stop shop’ in obstetrics and gynaecology for a new generation of doctors. 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 3 04/03/2024 16:06
21st EDITION 
OBSTETRICS 
by Ten Teachers 
Edited by 
Louise C Kenny 
Professor and Executive Pro-Vice Chancellor 
Faculty of Health and Life Sciences 
University of Liverpool, UK 
Fergus McCarthy 
Senior Lecturer 
University College Cork 
Consultant Obstetrician & Gynaecologist and 
Maternal Fetal Medicine Subspecialist 
Cork University Maternity Hospital 
Cork, Ireland 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 4 04/03/2024 16:06
Designed cover image: From FatCamera via Getty Images 
Twenty-frst edition published 2024 
by CRC Press 
2385 NW Executive Center Drive, Suite 320, Boca Raton FL 33431 
and by CRC Press 
4 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon, OX14 4RN 
CRC Press is an imprint of Taylor & Francis Group, LLC 
© 2024 Louise C Kenny and Fergus McCarthy 
This book contains information obtained from authentic and highly regarded sources. While all reasonable efforts have been 
made to publish reliable data and information, neither the author[s] nor the publisher can accept any legal responsibility or 
liability for any errors or omissions that may be made. The publishers wish to make clear that any views or opinions expressed 
in this book by individual editors, authors or contributors are personal to them and do not necessarily refect the views/opinions 
of the publishers. The information or guidance contained in this book is intended for use by medical, scientifc or health-care 
professionals and is provided strictly as a supplement to the medical or other professional’s own judgement, their knowledge 
of the patient’s medical history, relevant manufacturer’s instructions and the appropriate best practice guidelines. Because of 
the rapid advances in medical science, any information or advice on dosages, procedures or diagnoses should be independently 
verifed. The reader is strongly urged to consult the relevant national drug formulary and the drug companies’ and device or 
material manufacturers’ printed instructions, and their websites, before administering or utilizing any of the drugs, devices 
or materials mentioned in this book. This book does not indicate whether a particular treatment is appropriate or suitable for 
a particular individual. Ultimately it is the sole responsibility of the medical professional to make his or her own professional 
judgements, so as to advise and treat patients appropriately. The authors and publishers have also attempted to trace the 
copyright holders of all material reproduced in this publication and apologize to copyright holders if permission to publish in 
this form has not been obtained. If any copyright material has not been acknowledged please write and let us know so we may 
rectify in any future reprint. 
Within these twenty-frst editions of Obstetrics by Ten Teachers terms such as woman/women, maternal, father, paternal, 
breastfeed, breastfeeding, breast fed and breast milk have been used throughout, but we wish to respectfully acknowledge that 
not all people who parent, are pregnant, give birth, need obstetric or gynaecological care, or are assigned biologically female or 
biologically male at birth, identify with these genders. 
Except as permitted under U.S. Copyright Law, no part of this book may be reprinted, reproduced, transmitted, or utilized 
in any form by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including photocopying, 
microflming, and recording, or in any information storage or retrieval system, without written permission from the publishers. 
For permission to photocopy or use material electronically from this work, access www.copyright.com or contact the Copyright 
Clearance Center, Inc. (CCC), 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, 978-750-8400. For works that are not available on CCC 
please contact mpkbookspermissions@tandf.co.uk 
Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks and are used only for identifcation 
and explanation without intent to infringe. 
ISBN: 978-1-032-05120-8 (hbk) 
ISBN: 978-1-032-05116-1 (pbk) 
ISBN: 978-1-003-19611-2 (ebk) 
DOI: 10.1201/9781003196112 
Typeset in Palatino LT Std 
by Evolution Design & Digital Ltd (Kent) 
Access the Instructor and Student Resources: www.routledge.com/cw/mccarthy Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 5 04/03/2024 16:06
Dedication 
This book is dedicated to Elaine, Vivienne, Alannah, Matthew and Evan (FMC) 
And to my Mum (LCK) 
v 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 7 04/03/2024 16:06
Contents 
Preface ix 
Contributors xi 
Abbreviations xiii
 1 Obstetric history and examination 1 
Philippa J Marsden
 2 Antenatal care 15 
Fergus McCarthy
 3 Normal fetal development and growth 29 
Anna L David
 4 Assessment of fetal well-being 45 
Anna L David
 5 Prenatal diagnosis 63 
Anna L David
 6 Antenatal obstetric complications 77 
Surabhi Nanda
 7 Multiple pregnancy 103 
Asma Khalil
 8 Preterm labour 117 
David Lissauer
 9 Hypertensive disorders of pregnancy 131 
Louise C Kenny
 10 Medical complications of pregnancy 145 
Philippa J Marsden
 11 Perinatal infections 173 
David Lissauer
 12 Labour: Normal and abnormal 193 
Deirdre J Murphy
 13 Operative delivery 231 
Deirdre J Murphy
 14 Obstetric emergencies 251 
Fergus McCarthy
 15 Puerperium 269 
Andrew D Weeks
 16 Neonates 293 
Eugene Dempsey 
Index 317 
vii 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 8 04/03/2024 16:06
Additional resources for students and lecturers to accompany this textbook are available online. 
Visit www.routledge.com/cw/mccarthy for interactive SBAs and EMQs, videos and fgure slides. Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 9 04/03/2024 16:06
 
 
Preface 
Obstetrics by Ten Teachers, frst published in 1917, is 
now in its 21st Edition. An iconic text, it remains the 
oldest and one of the most respected and popular 
English-language texts in the discipline. 
The 21st Edition builds on the solid foundations of 
over a century of previous editions but refects recent 
advances in the feld as well as the evolution of medi￾cal education. It contains new material, extensive 
online resources and additional tools for self-assess￾ment, written by a new generation of ‘Ten Teachers’. 
They are all leading clinicians, renowned in their 
felds, and all are intimately involved in the delivery 
of both undergraduate and postgraduate training in 
the UK and Ireland, allowing the book to refect the 
current undergraduate curriculum. This volume has 
been carefully edited to ensure consistency of struc￾ture, style and content in common with its sister text, 
Gynaecology by Ten Teachers. The books can therefore 
be used together or independently as required. 
It has been an honour and a privilege to edit a 
textbook that we once read as students and we fully 
appreciate the responsibility of revisiting a much￾loved classic, particularly at this critical juncture for 
women’s health. After almost a century of improve￾ment, maternal mortality rates in some high￾resource settings are increasing, largely driven by 
inequalities and disadvantage. Moreover, condi￾tions that affect women more than men garner less 
research funding. Women have, for example, been 
historically under-represented in clinical trials 
and, despite work to rectify this bias, women are 
not necessarily included in proportions that match 
the prevalence or burden of disease. Consequently, 
effective cures for diseases that have been known 
about since the time of Hippocrates, such as pre￾eclampsia, remain elusive. We therefore hope 
that the latest edition of Obstetrics by Ten Teachers 
inspires the next generation of doctors to follow 
the authors and editors into this discipline. There 
remains much to be done to make pregnancy and 
childbirth safe, fulflling and equitable, everywhere 
and for everyone. 
ix 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 11 04/03/2024 16:06
Contributors 
Anna L David 
Professor and Consultant 
Obstetrics and Maternal Fetal Medicine 
University College London Hospital 
Director 
Elizabeth Garrett Anderson Institute for Women’s 
Health 
University College London 
Eugene Dempsey 
Professor and Horgan Chair in Neonatology 
Department of Paediatrics and Child Health 
Infant Research Centre 
University College Cork 
Louise C Kenny 
Professor and Executive Pro-Vice Chancellor 
Faculty of Health and Life Sciences 
University of Liverpool 
Asma Khalil 
Fetal Medicine Unit 
St George’s Hospital 
St George’s University of London 
Fetal Medicine Unit 
Liverpool Women’s Hospital 
University of Liverpool 
David Lissauer 
NIHR Professor 
Global Maternal and Fetal Health 
Women’s & Children’s Health 
University of Liverpool 
Queen Elizabeth Central Hospital 
Blantyre, Malawi 
Philippa J Marsden 
Consultant in Obstetrics and Maternal Medicine 
Head of Obstetrics 
Honorary Reader in Medical Education 
Royal Victoria Infrmary, Newcastle upon Tyne 
Fergus McCarthy 
Senior Lecturer 
University College Cork 
Consultant Obstetrician & Gynaecologist and 
Maternal Fetal Medicine Subspecialist 
Cork University Maternity Hospital 
Deirdre J Murphy 
Chair of Obstetrics 
Professor and Consultant Obstetrician 
Trinity College Dublin 
Coombe Hospital Dublin 
Surabhi Nanda 
Consultant in Maternal Fetal Medicine 
Liverpool Women’s NHS Foundation Trust 
Andrew D Weeks 
Consultant Obstetrician 
Professor of International Maternal Health 
Department of Women’s and Children’s Health 
University of Liverpool 
Liverpool Women’s Hospital 
xi 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 13 04/03/2024 16:06
 
 
 
 
 
Abbreviations 
2D two-dimensional 
3D three-dimensional 
4D four-dimensional
 AA arterioarterial
 AC abdominal circumference
 ACE angiotensin-converting enzyme
 A:Cr albumin to creatinine 
AED anti-epileptic drug
 AFI amniotic fuid index
 AFP alpha-fetoprotein
 AIDS acquired immunodefciency syndrome 
ALARA as low as reasonably achievable
 AP anterior–posterior
 APH antepartum haemorrhage
 APS antiphospholipid syndrome
 ARM artifcial rupture of membranes
 ART antiretroviral therapy
 AS aortic stenosis
 AV arteriovenous
 BAPM British Association of Perinatal Medicine
 BMI body mass index
 BNF British National Formulary 
BPD biparietal diameter/bronchopulmonary dysplasia
 bpm beats per minute
 BPP biophysical profle
 CF cystic fbrosis 
cffDNA cell-free fetal deoxyribonucleic acid
 CI confdence interval
 CMA chromosomal microarray analysis 
CMV cytomegalovirus
 CNS central nervous system
 COVID-19 coronavirus disease 2019
 CPAP continuous positive airway pressure
 CPD cephalopelvic disproportion
 CPR cardiopulmonary resuscitation
 CRL crown–rump length
 CRM clinical risk management
 CT computed tomography
 CTG cardiotocograph(y)
 CVS chorionic villus sampling 
xiii 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 14 04/03/2024 16:06
 
 
 
 
 
 
Abbreviations 
 DDH developmental dysplasia of the hip
 DMD Duchenne muscular dystrophy
 DNA deoxyribonucleic acid 
DOHaD Developmental Origins of Health and Disease 
DV ductus venosus
 DVT deep vein thrombosis
 DWI diffusion weighted imaging 
ECG electrocardiogram
 ECV external cephalic version
 EDD estimated date of delivery
 (a)EEG (amplitude integrated) electroencephalography
 EFM electronic fetal monitoring
 EFW estimated fetal weight
 EIA enzyme immunoassay
 EMQ extended matching question
 ERCS elective repeat caesarean section
 ESBL extended spectrum ˜-lactamase
 FBC full blood count
 FBM fetal breathing movement
 FEV1 forced expiratory volume in 1 second
 fFN fetal fbronectin
 FGF(R) fbroblast growth factor (receptor)
 FGM female genital mutilation
 FGR fetal growth restriction
 FHR fetal heart rate
 FL femur length
 FOQ family origin questionnaire
 FVS fetal varicella syndrome
 GBS group B Streptococcus
 GCS Glasgow Coma Score
 GDM gestational diabetes mellitus
 GP general practitioner
 GUM genitourinary medicine
 Hb haemoglobin
 HbA adult haemoglobin 
HbAC haemoglobin C trait 
HbAS sickle cell trait 
HbA1c glycated haemoglobin
 HBcAb hepatitis B core antibody
 HbF fetal haemoglobin
 HBsAb hepatitis B surface antibody
 HBsAg hepatitis B surface antigen 
HbSC sickle cell/haemoglobin C disease 
HbSS sickle cell disease
 HBV hepatitis B virus
 HC head circumference
 (˜)hCG (beta-)human chorionic gonadotrophin 
xiv Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 15 04/03/2024 16:06
 
 
 
Abbreviations 
HCV hepatitis C virus 
HDFN haemolytic disease of the fetus and newborn 
HELLP haemolysis, elevated liver enzymes and low platelets 
HG hyperemesis gravidarum 
HIE hypoxic-ischaemic encephalopathy 
HIV human immunodefciency virus 
HMO human milk oligosaccharide 
HSV herpes simplex virus 
IBD infammatory bowel disease 
Ig immunoglobulin 
IM intramuscular 
iNO inhaled nitric oxide 
IOL induction of labour 
IQ intelligence quotient 
ISUOG International Society of Ultrasound in Obstetrics and Gynecology 
IUT intrauterine transfusion 
IV intravenous 
IVF in vitro fertilization 
IVH intraventricular haemorrhage 
LLETZ large loop excision of the transformation zone 
LMP last menstrual period 
LMWH low-molecular-weight heparin 
MBRRACE-UK Mothers and Babies, Reducing Risk through Audits and Confdential Enquiries across 
the UK 
MCA middle cerebral artery 
MCMA monochorionic monoamniotic 
M, C & S microscopy, culture and sensitivity 
MDT multidisciplinary team 
MEOWS Modifed Early Obstetric Warning System 
MI myocardial infarction 
MMR mumps, measles, rubella 
MoM multiples of median 
MRI magnetic resonance imaging 
MRSA methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus 
MS multiple sclerosis 
MSAF meconium staining of amniotic fuid 
MSU midstream urine specimen 
NEC necrotizing enterocolitis 
NICE National Institute for Health and Care Excellence 
NICU neonatal intensive care unit 
NIPT non-invasive prenatal testing 
NLS Newborn Life Support 
NRP Newborn Resuscitation Program 
NSAID non-steroidal anti-infammatory drug 
NT nuchal translucency 
OA occipito-anterior 
OASI obstetric anal sphincter injury 
xv 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 16 04/03/2024 16:06
 
Abbreviations 
OGTT oral glucose tolerance test 
OP occipito-posterior 
OR odds ratio 
OT occipito-transverse 
OT(R)(-A) oxytocin (receptor) (antagonist) 
PAPP-A pregnancy-associated plasma protein-A 
PCR polymerase chain reaction 
P:Cr protein to creatinine ratio 
PDA patent ductus arteriosus 
PE pulmonary embolism 
PG prostaglandin 
PH pulmonary hypertension 
PlGF placental growth factor 
PPH postpartum haemorrhage 
PPHN persistent pulmonary hypertension of the newborn 
PPROM pre-labour/prolonged premature rupture of membranes 
PROM preterm rupture of membranes 
PSV peak systolic velocity 
PTL preterm labour 
RA rheumatoid arthritis 
RCM Royal College of Midwives 
RCOG Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists 
RDS respiratory distress syndrome 
REM rapid eye movement 
RhD rhesus factor D 
RNA ribonucleic acid 
ROP retinopathy of prematurity 
RR relative risk 
SBA single best answer 
SCBU special care baby unit 
SCD sickle cell disease 
SFH symphysis–fundal height 
sFlt-1 soluble fms-like tyrosine kinase 
SGA small for gestational age 
SLE systemic lupus erythematosus 
SROM spontaneous rupture of the membranes 
SSRI selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor 
SUDEP sudden unexpected death in epilepsy 
(f)T3 (free) triiodothyronine 
(f)T4 (free) thyroxine 
TAPS twin anaemia–polycythaemia sequence 
TENS transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation 
TH therapeutic hypothermia 
TRAP twin reversed arterial perfusion 
TSH thyroid-stimulating hormone 
TTTS twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome 
uE3 unconjugated oestriol 
xvi Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 17 04/03/2024 16:06
Abbreviations 
UKOSS UK Obstetric Surveillance Survey 
UTI urinary tract infection 
VBAC vaginal birth after caesarean 
VDRL venereal diseases research laboratory 
VEGF vascular endothelial growth factor 
VTE venous thromboembolism 
VWF von Willebrand factor 
VZIG varicella zoster immunoglobulin 
VZV varicella zoster virus 
WHO World Health Organization 
xvii 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 1 04/03/2024 16:06
1 
Obstetric history and 
examination 
PHILIPPA J MARSDEN 
Introduction 1 Obstetric examination 7 
Preconceptual counselling 1 Presentation skills 11 
Obstetric history 2 Further reading 13 
 Learning Objectives 
• Understand the concept of preconceptual counselling and the opportunity that it provides. 
• Understand the principles of taking an obstetric history. 
• Understand the key components of an obstetric examination. 
• Be able to perform an appropriate obstetric examination. 
INTRODUCTION 
Taking an obstetric history and performing an 
obstetric examination differs from a history and 
examination in other specialities in that the patient 
is often healthy and simply undergoing a normal life 
event. Antenatal care is designed to support the nor￾mal physiological process and to detect early signs of 
complications. For patients with a more complicated 
history, a detailed history and risk assessment offers 
a personalised approach with the opportunity to 
plan antenatal care carefully. The types of questions 
asked during the history change with gestation, as 
does the purpose and nature of the examination, and 
questioning and examination must always be under￾taken with care and sensitivity. 
PRECONCEPTUAL COUNSELLING 
Pregnancy is increasingly being achieved in those of 
an advanced age, who frequently have one or more 
pre-existing medical conditions. As more patients 
with chronic illness look to conceive, who often have 
high levels of insight into their conditions, obste￾tricians are increasingly having the opportunity to 
meet with patients prior to conception to discuss 
their medical conditions and provide advice on 
optimizing their pregnancy and maximizing their 
chances of a healthy uncomplicated pregnancy. This 
often occurs via a preconceptual clinic. 
The main purposes of preconceptual counselling 
are as follows: 
• optimize maternal health before embarking on 
a pregnancy 
• recognise issues 
• amend lifestyle 
• address social issues 
• reduce maternal and perinatal morbidity and 
mortality 
• address chronic medical conditions 
• address medications used (are they pregnancy 
friendly?) 
• discuss the impact of the disease process on 
pregnancy versus the impact of pregnancy on 
the disease process 
10.1201/9781003196112-1
1 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 2 04/03/2024 16:06
Obstetric history and examination 
• address challenges to falling pregnant – fertility 
issues 
• plan antenatal follow-up and any screening 
needed for when pregnancy occurs 
• discuss mode of delivery 
• address breastfeeding – which medications are 
suitable 
• plan postnatal follow-up and contraception 
OBSTETRIC HISTORY
 INTRODUCTION 
When meeting a patient for the ÿrst time, introduce 
yourself and tell the patient why you have come to 
see them. Make sure that the patient is seated com￾fortably. Some patients may want another person 
to be present and this wish should be respected. A 
qualiÿed interpreter (or interpreting service) should 
be used if appropriate. 
The questions asked must be tailored to the 
purpose of the visit. At the booking visit, the his￾tory must be thorough and meticulously recorded. 
Once this baseline information is established, there 
is no need to go over this information at every visit. 
Everyone should attend for routine antenatal visits, 
usually performed by the midwife, and occasionally 
some attend for a speciÿc reason or because a com￾plication has developed. 
Some areas of the obstetric history cover subjects 
that are intensely private. It is vital to maintain conÿ￾dentiality and to be aware of and be sensitive to each 
individual situation. 
DATING THE PREGNANCY 
Pregnancy was historically dated from the last men￾strual period (LMP), because the LMP was consid￾ered more reliable than the date of conception. The 
median duration from the ÿrst day of the LMP to 
birth is 40 weeks, and this can be used to work out 
the estimated date of delivery (EDD). This explains 
why, although a human pregnancy is approximately 
38 weeks, we refer to the length of pregnancy as 40 
weeks in duration. However, the National Institute 
for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) guideline 
on antenatal care recommends that pregnancy 
dates are set by ultrasound using the crown–rump 
Figure 1.1 Gestation calendar wheel. 
measurement between 11 weeks and 2 days and 14 
weeks and 1 day. Almost everyone undergoing ante￾natal care in the UK will have an ultrasound scan late 
in the ÿrst trimester or early in the second trimester, 
and the EDD is determined at this point. Accurate 
dating early in pregnancy is important for assessing 
fetal growth in later pregnancy and reduces the risk 
of premature planned deliveries, such as induction of 
labour for postmature pregnancies (>41 weeks’ ges￾tation) and elective caesarean sections. 
In the ÿrst trimester, there are pregnancy calcu￾lators (wheels) (Figure 1.1) available and pregnancy 
calculator apps for smartphones that can work out 
the EDD for you (Figure 1.2), which are useful before 
the dating scan. 
 Figure 1.2 Gestation calendar app on a smartphone. 
(Courtesy of Dr Andrew Yu, Yale University.) 2 Obstetric history
 3
SOCIAL HISTORY
T he social history is an important 
ric history, as social circumstanc
matic infl uence on pregnancy outc
considerable sensitivity. Moth
Reducing Risk through Audits
Women who are experiencing domestic abuse 
are at higher risk of abuse during pregnancy and of 
part of the obstet- adverse pregnancy outcomes; because they may be 
es can have a dra- prevented from attending antenatal appointments, 
ome, and requires they may be concerned that disclosure of their abuse 
ers and Babies, may worsen their situation and they may be anxious 
 and Confi dential about the reaction of health professionals. One-third 
Enquiries across the UK (MBRRACE-UK) has con- of those who experience domestic abuse do so for the 
sistently reported that maternal mortality is highest fi rst time while pregnant, and pregnancy and the 
among those who are older and those living in the post-partum period is a risk factor for domestic abuse 
most deprived areas. Recent reports highlighted that leading to homicide, with one in seven maternal 
a quarter of those who died, whose birthplace was deaths occurring in those who have told their health 
known, were born outside the UK and almost 1 in professional they are in an abusive relationship. This 
10 had severe and multiple disadvantages including is why it is important to ask about domestic abuse in 
substance misuse, domestic abuse and mental health every pregnancy.
issues. Of those that died, 20% were known to social Enquiring about domestic abuse is diffi cult. It is 
services and to child protection services. recommended that everyone who is pregnant is seen 
Women from Black, Asian and minority ethnic on their own at least once during their pregnancy, so 
groups have a much higher chance of dying during that they can discuss this, if needed, away from an 
pregnancy or after birth and, although they have more abusive partner. If you happen to be the person with 
health problems and are more affected by social and whom this information is shared, you must ensure 
economic problems, systemic racism and racial bias that it is passed on to the relevant team, as this may be 
may also affect their care. This is extremely important the only opportunity that the patient has to disclose 
to remember when taking a history at any point in it. It is a good idea to practise with your peers ask￾pregnancy, as there is evidence from Black, Asian and ing about domestic abuse sensitively, demonstrating 
minority ethnic groups that they are treated differ- empathy and compassion and signposting to support. 
ently, receive less empathy from health professionals, S moking, alcohol and drug intake also form part 
are not listened to, are not taken seriously and are less of the social history. Smoking causes placental dys￾likely to disclose worries (Figure 1.3). function and thus increases the risk of miscarriage, 
Figure 1.3 Maternal mortality rates from 2009 to 2017 among people from different ethnic groups in the UK. 
40
35
30
25
Rate per 100,000 maternities 20
15
10
5
0
2010 2011 2012
Mid-year for each three-year period
2013 2014 2015 2016
White
Black
Asian
Chinese/other
Mixed
Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 3 04/03/2024 16:06
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 4 04/03/2024 16:06
 
 
 
 
Obstetric history and examination 
stillbirth and neonatal death. There are interventions 
that can be offered to those who are still smoking in 
pregnancy (see Chapters 3 and 6). 
Complete abstinence from alcohol is advised, as 
the safety of alcohol is not proven. However, alcohol 
is probably not harmful in small amounts (less than 
one drink per day). Binge drinking is particularly 
harmful and can lead to a constellation of features 
in the baby known as fetal alcohol syndrome (see 
Chapters 3 and 6). 
Enquiring about recreational drug taking is more 
difÿcult. Approximately 0.5–1% of women continue 
to take recreational drugs during pregnancy. Be 
careful not to make assumptions. During the book￾ing visit, the midwife should enquire directly about 
drug taking. If it is seen as part of the long list of 
routine questions asked at this visit, it is perceived 
as less threatening. However, sometimes this infor￾mation comes to light at other times. Cocaine and 
crack cocaine are the most harmful of the recre￾ational drugs taken, but all have some effects on the 
pregnancy, and all have ÿnancial implications (see 
Chapter 6). 
The following are important aspects of the social 
history: 
• whether the patient is single or in a relationship 
and what support they have at home 
• what sort of housing the patient lives in (e.g. 
a °at with lots of stairs and no lift may be 
problematic) 
• whether the patient works and, if so, for how 
long they are planning to work during the 
pregnancy 
• whether the patient smokes/drinks or uses 
recreational drugs 
PREVIOUS OBSTETRIC HISTORY 
Past obstetric history is one of the most important 
areas for establishing risk in the current pregnancy. 
It is helpful to list the pregnancies in date order and 
to discover what the outcome was in each pregnancy. 
The features that are likely to have impact on 
future pregnancies include: 
• preterm delivery (increased risk of preterm birth) 
• pre-eclampsia (increased risk of pre-eclampsia/ 
fetal growth restriction) 
• abruption (increased risk of recurrence) 
• congenital abnormality (recurrence risk 
depends on type of abnormality) 
• macrosomic baby (may be related to gestational 
diabetes) 
• fetal growth restriction (increased recurrence) 
• unexplained stillbirth (increased risk of 
gestational diabetes) 
The method of delivery for any previous births 
must be recorded, as this can have implications for 
planning in the current pregnancy, particularly if 
there has been a previous caesarean section, difÿcult 
vaginal birth, postpartum haemorrhage or signiÿ￾cant perineal trauma. 
The shorthand for describing the number of pre￾vious pregnancies can be confusing: 
• gravidity is the total number of pregnancies, 
regardless of how they ended 
• parity is the number of live births or stillbirths, 
after 24 weeks. Note that miscarriages are 
denoted as a + (see below) and twins count as 2 
Therefore, someone who has had six miscarriages 
with only one live baby born at 32 weeks and is preg￾nant again will be gravida 8, para 1 + 6. 
In practice, when presenting a history, it is much 
easier to describe exactly what has happened; for 
example, ‘JA is in their eighth pregnancy. They have 
had six miscarriages at gestations of 8–12 weeks and 
one spontaneous delivery of a live baby boy at 32 
weeks. Baby Tom is now 2 years old and healthy.’ 
PAST GYNAECOLOGICAL HISTORY 
EARLY PREGNANCY 
In the ÿrst trimester, taking a detailed gynaecologi￾cal history is important, particularly if scanning is 
not available and the LMP is being used to date the 
pregnancy. People with polycystic ovary syndrome 
can have very long menstrual cycles and may have 
ovulated much later in the cycle. Contraceptive his￾tory can also be relevant if conception has occurred 
soon after stopping the combined oral contraceptive 
pill or depot progesterone preparations, as, again, 
this makes dating by LMP more difÿcult. Also, some 
people will conceive with an intrauterine device still 
in situ. This carries an increased risk of miscarriage. 4 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 5 04/03/2024 16:06
 
Obstetric history 
Previous episodes of pelvic in°ammatory disease 
increase the risk of ectopic pregnancy. This is only of 
relevance in early pregnancy. However, it is impor￾tant to establish that any infections have been ade￾quately treated and that the partner was also treated. 
Chlamydia infection is common in teenagers and 
can cause problems if the baby if untreated. 
Previous ectopic pregnancy increases the risk of 
recurrence from 1 in 100 pregnancies to 18 in 100. 
Those who have had an ectopic pregnancy should be 
offered an early ultrasound scan to establish the site 
of any future pregnancies. 
RISK FACTORS FOR LATER 
PREGNANCY 
The date of the last cervical smear should be noted. 
Every year, a small number of people are diagnosed 
as having cervical cancer in pregnancy. It is important 
that smears are not deferred in anyone at increased 
risk of cervical disease (e.g. previous cervical smear 
abnormality or very overdue smear). Gently taking 
a smear in the ÿrst trimester does not cause mis￾carriage and expectant parents should be reassured 
about this. If there has been irregular bleeding, the 
cervix should at least be examined to ensure that 
there are no obvious lesions present. 
If someone has undergone treatment for cervical 
changes, this should be noted. Treatment to the cer￾vix by knife cone biopsy or large loop excision of the 
transformation zone (LLETZ) can be associated with 
an increased risk of preterm birth, and depending on 
the depth of biopsy, measuring the cervical length in 
the second trimester may be recommended. 
Recurrent miscarriage may be associated with 
a number of problems. Antiphospholipid syn￾drome increases the risk of further pregnancy loss, 
fetal growth restriction, pre-eclampsia and venous 
thromboembolism and patients need a great deal of 
support during pregnancy if they have experienced 
recurrent pregnancy losses. 
Termination of pregnancy is a sensitive sub￾ject and, as ÿrst trimester terminations of preg￾nancy are not usually relevant to the pregnancy, 
information about such terminations must be sen￾sitively requested and recorded. Some people do 
not wish this to be recorded in their hand-held 
notes. However, second-trimester terminations and 
terminations for congenital abnormalities may be 
relevant, and a sensitive way to ask is ‘Have you had 
any other pregnancies?’ allowing for disclosure of 
previous pregnancies. 
Previous gynaecological surgery should be 
asked about, especially if it involved the uterus, 
and the presence of pelvic masses such as ovarian 
cysts and ÿbroids should also be noted, as both of 
these issues may also pose problems during preg￾nancy and may have an impact on delivery. A his￾tory of endometriosis is also important to be aware 
of, because of the adhesions and scarring associated 
with that disease, which can make a caesarean sec￾tion complicated. 
Having a history of subfertility and fertility treat￾ment may increase anxiety about pregnancy and 
birth and therefore should be noted if the couple 
wish. However, legally, you should only write down 
in notes that a pregnancy is conceived by in vitro 
fertilization (IVF) or donor egg or sperm if you have 
written permission from the parent. Generally, if the 
patient has told you themselves that the pregnancy 
was an assisted conception, it is reasonable to state 
that in your presentation. 
MEDICAL AND SURGICAL HISTORY 
All pre-existing medical disease should be carefully 
noted and any associated drug history also recorded. 
The major pre-existing diseases that have an impact 
on pregnancy and their potential effects are covered 
in Chapter 10. 
Previous surgery should be noted. Occasionally, 
surgery has been performed for conditions that may 
continue to be a problem during pregnancy and at 
delivery, such as Crohn disease. 
A history of mental health illness is important to 
record. These enquiries should be made in a sensitive 
way at the antenatal booking visit and should include 
the severity of the illness and whether they received 
consultant care. If someone has had children before, 
it is important to ask whether they had problems 
with depression or ‘the blues’ after the births of any 
of them. People with signiÿcant mental illness in 
pregnancy should be cared for by a multidisciplinary 
perinatal mental health team, including the midwife, 
general practitioner, hospital consultant and psychi￾atric team. 
5 
ALGrawanyObstetric history and examination
 6
 DRUG HISTORY
I t is vital to establish what drugs have been taken, for 
which condition and for what duration during preg￾nancy. This includes over-the-counter medication 
and homeopathic/herbal remedies.
Pre-pregnancy counselling is advised for those 
with signifi cant medical conditions and those who 
are taking potentially harmful drugs. In some cases, 
medication needs to be changed before pregnancy, 
if that is possible (e.g. anyone taking sodium valpro￾ate for epilepsy should be seen by a neurologist and 
counselled about changing to an alternative). Some 
people also need to know that they must continue 
their medication if they fi nd out they are pregnant; 
for example, people with epilepsy often reduce 
or stop their medication for fear of potential fetal 
effects, with detriment to their own health. There 
are many instances in which there needs to be a dis￾cussion as to the pros and cons of taking medication 
in pregnancy; for example, someone with signifi cant 
mental illness may be advised to continue medica￾tion, whereas someone with milder mental health 
issues may choose to stop medication pre-pregnancy 
after careful counselling.
The most important aspect here is that, once you 
have ascertained the drug history, you should give 
advice about the medication only if you have the 
knowledge and expertise to do so. The British National 
Formulary (BNF) does not give enough information to 
allow people to make an informed choice about the 
medication they take, but there are national organiza￾tions and websites that have much more information 
Table 1.1 Organizations that offer advice on medicines 
during pregnancy and when breastfeeding
or are happy to be contacted for queries about medi￾cation in pregnancy and when breastfeeding. No one 
must ever be told to stop medication or not breastfeed 
without checking the full facts. Table 1.1 sets out 
organizations that offer advice on medicines during 
pregnancy and when breastfeeding.
F AMILY HISTORY
 Family history is important if it can have:
. an impact on the health of the parent in 
pregnancy or afterwards
. implications for the fetus or baby
 A family history of certain conditions is particu￾larly signifi cant, namely a maternal history of a fi rst￾degree relative (sibling or parent) with:
. d iabetes (increased risk of gestational diabetes)
. t hromboembolic disease (increased risk of 
thrombophilia, thrombosis)
. pre-eclampsia (increased risk of pre-eclampsia)
. serious mental health illness (increased risk of 
puerperal psychosis)
 For both parents, it is important to know about 
any family history of babies with congenital abnor￾mality and any potential genetic problems, such as 
haemoglobinopathies.
 Finally, any known allergies should be recorded. 
If someone gives a history of allergy, it is important 
Type of information Organization(s)
Evidence-based UK Teratology Information 
safety information Service (UKTIS): https://uktis.
about medication, org/
v accines, and Best Use of Medicines in 
chemical and Pregnancy (BUMPS): https://
radiological www.medicinesinpregnancy.
exposures in org/
pregnancy
Information about UK Drugs in Lactation 
drugs/products and Advisory Service: http://www.
breastfeeding midlandsmedicines.nhs.uk/
content.asp?section=6&subs
ection=17&pageIdx=1
BOX 1.1: Major pre-existing diseases 
that have an impact on pregnancy
. Diabetes mellitus
. Hypertension
. Cardiac disease
. Epilepsy
. Renal disease
. Connective tissue diseases (e.g. systemic lupus 
erythematosus)
. Venous thromboembolic disease: increased risk 
during pregnancy
. Human immunodefi ciency virus (HIV) infection 
Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 6 04/03/2024 16:06Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 7 04/03/2024 16:06
 
 
Obstetric examination 
to ask about how this was diagnosed and what sort 
of problems it causes. 
OBSTETRIC EXAMINATION 
In any clinical setting, attention to infection control 
is paramount. Arms should be bare from the elbow 
down and hands should always be washed or gel 
should be used before and after any patient contact. 
Before moving on to examine the patient, it is impor￾tant to be aware of the clinical context. The examina￾tion should be directed at the presenting problem, if 
any, and the gestation. For instance, it is generally 
unnecessary to spend time deÿning the presentation 
at 24 weeks’ gestation unless the presenting problem 
is threatened preterm labour. 
MATERNAL WEIGHT AND HEIGHT 
The measurement of weight and height at the initial 
examination is important, to identify people who 
are signiÿcantly underweight or overweight. Those 
with a body mass index (BMI: weight [kg]/height 
[m2]) of <20 are at higher risk of fetal growth restric￾tion and increased perinatal mortality. In the obese 
(BMI >30), the risks of gestational diabetes, venous 
thromboembolism and pre-eclampsia are increased. 
Additionally, fetal assessment, by both palpation and 
ultrasound, is more difÿcult. Obesity is also associ￾ated with increased birthweight and a higher perina￾tal mortality rate. Those with morbid obesity require 
referral to specialized clinics, which include antena￾tal anaesthetic assessments to plan the possible use 
of regional anaesthesia. 
In those of normal weight at booking and in 
whom nutrition is of no concern, there is no need to 
repeat weight measurement in pregnancy. 
BLOOD PRESSURE MEASUREMENT 
Blood pressure measurement is an important aspect 
of antenatal care. The ÿrst recording of blood pressure 
should be made as early as possible in pregnancy and 
thereafter it should be performed at every visit. 
Hypertension diagnosed for the ÿrst time in early 
pregnancy (blood pressure >140/90 mmHg on two 
separate occasions at least 4 hours apart) should 
prompt a search for underlying causes (e.g. renal or 
endocrine). Although 90% of cases will be due to 
chronic hypertension, this is a diagnosis of exclusion 
and can be conÿdently made only when other sec￾ondary causes have been excluded (see Chapter 9). 
BOX 1.2: How to measure blood 
pressure in pregnancy 
˜ Measure the blood pressure in a seated or semi￾recumbent position. 
˜ Use an appropriately sized cuff. Using one too 
small will overestimate blood pressure. 
˜ If using an automated device, check it has been 
validated for use in pregnancy. 
˜ Ensure that manual devices have been recently 
calibrated. 
˜ Convention is to use Korotkoff V (i.e. 
disappearance of sounds), as this is more 
reproducible than Korotkoff IV. 
˜ De°ate the cuff slowly so that you can record the 
blood pressure to the nearest 2˛mmHg. 
˜ Do not round up or down. 
URINARY EXAMINATION 
Early in pregnancy, all patients should be offered 
routine screening for asymptomatic bacteriuria by 
midstream urine culture. Identiÿcation and treat￾ment of asymptomatic bacteriuria reduces the risk 
of pyelonephritis. The risk of ascending urinary tract 
infection in pregnancy is much higher than in the 
non-pregnant state. Acute pyelonephritis increases 
the risk of pregnancy loss/premature labour and is 
associated with considerable maternal morbidity. 
At repeat visits, urinalysis using automated reagent 
strip readers should be performed. If there is protein￾uria after 20 weeks, a thorough evaluation with regard 
to a diagnosis of pre-eclampsia should be undertaken. 
GENERAL MEDICAL EXAMINATION 
In those who are ÿt and healthy presenting for a rou￾tine visit, there is little beneÿt in a full formal physi￾cal examination. However, if a patient presents with 
a problem or is in certain at-risk groups, there may be 
a need to undertake a much more thorough physical 
examination. 
7 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 8 04/03/2024 16:06
 
 
Obstetric history and examination 
CARDIOVASCULAR EXAMINATION 
Routine auscultation for maternal heart sounds in 
those who are asymptomatic with no cardiac history 
is unnecessary. However, if someone has previously 
lived in an area where rheumatic heart disease is 
prevalent and/or has a known history of heart mur￾mur or heart disease, a cardiovascular examination 
during pregnancy is indicated. 
BREAST EXAMINATION 
Formal breast examination is not necessary. Everyone 
should, however, be encouraged to perform self￾examination at regular intervals. 
EXAMINATION OF THE PREGNANT 
ABDOMEN 
Always have a chaperone with you to perform this 
examination and, before starting, ask about pain and 
areas of tenderness. 
In pregnancy, the abdomen should be examined 
in a semi-recumbent position to avoid aortocaval 
compression. The abdomen should be exposed from 
just below the breasts to the symphysis fundus.
 Inspection 
• Assess the shape of the uterus and note any 
asymmetry. 
• Look for fetal movements. 
• Note any signs of pregnancy such as striae 
gravidarum (stretch marks) or linea nigra (the 
faint brown line running from the umbilicus to 
the symphysis pubis). 
• Look for scars. The common areas to ÿnd scars 
are: 
• suprapubic (caesarean section, laparotomy 
for ectopic pregnancy or ovarian masses) 
• sub-umbilical (laparoscopy) 
• right iliac fossa (appendicectomy) 
• right upper quadrant (cholecystectomy)
 Palpation 
The purpose of palpating the pregnant abdomen is 
to assess: 
• the number of babies 
• the size of the baby 
• the lie of the baby 
• the presentation of the baby 
• whether the baby presenting part is engaged 
Symphysis–fundal height measurement 
Symphysis–fundal height (SFH) should be measured 
and recorded at each antenatal appointment from 24 
weeks’ gestation. Most UK hospitals now use cus￾tomized SFH charts, which are generated at the ÿrst 
antenatal visit and are customized to each individ￾ual, taking into account the height, weight, ethnicity 
and parity (Figure 1.4). Using two standard devia￾tions of the mean, it is possible to deÿne the 10th and 
90th centile values and these are normally marked 
on the chart. 
Feel carefully for the top of the fundus and for 
the upper border of the symphysis pubis. The recom￾mended method is using a tape measure with the cen￾timetre marks face down, to place the tape measure at 
the top of the fundus and measure to the symphysis 
pubis (i.e. from the variable point to the ÿxed point). 
Turn the tape measure over and read the measure￾ment. The fundal height approximates with the ges￾tation so that, at 36 weeks, the fundal height should 
be approximately 36 cm ± 3 cm. However, custom￾ized growth charts are more sensitive and speciÿc 
and serial measurements are of greater value in 
detecting growth trends than one-off measurements. 
It is therefore recommended that the measurement is 
plotted on a customized growth chart. 
A large SFH raises the possibility of: 
• a multiple pregnancy 
• macrosomia 
• polyhydramnios 
A small SFH raises the possibility of: 
• fetal growth restriction 
• oligohydramnios 
Fetal lie, presentation and engagement 
After measuring the SFH, next palpate to count the 
number of fetal poles (Figure 1.5). A pole is a head or 
a bottom. If you can feel one or two, it is likely to be 
a singleton pregnancy. If you can feel three or four, 
a twin pregnancy is likely. Sometimes, large ÿbroids 
can mimic a fetal pole; remember this if there is a 
history of ÿbroids. 8 Obstetric examination
Determination of the fetal lie and presentation is If there is a pole over the pelvis, the lie is longi￾of most importance in late pregnancy, as the likeli- tudinal regardless of whether the other pole is lying 
hood of labour increases (i.e. after 36 weeks in an more to the left or right. An oblique lie is where the 
uncomplicated pregnancy). In addition, it is at this leading pole does not lie over the pelvis, but just 
point in pregnancy that it is important to diagnose a to one side; a transverse lie is where the fetus lies 
breech presentation. directly across the abdomen. 
Presentation can be either cephalic or breech. 
Using a two-handed approach and watching the 
face for pain or discomfort, gently feel for the pre￾senting part. The head is generally much fi rmer 
than the bottom, although even in experienced 
hands it can sometimes be very diffi cult to tell. At 
the same time as feeling for the presenting part, 
assess whether it is engaged or not. If the whole 
head is palpable and it is easily movable, the head 
is likely to be ‘free’. This equates to fi ve-fi fths pal￾pable and is recorded as 5/5. As the head descends 
into the pelvis, less can be felt. When the head is no 
longer movable, it has ‘engaged’ and only one- or 
Figure 1.5 Palpation of the gravid abdomen. two-fi fths will be palpable (Figure 1.6). You will see 
 9
44
42
40
38
36
34
32
30
28
26
24
5000
4500
3500
3000
2000
1500
1000
500
0
2500
4000
Tuesday... Gestation (wks) EDD
12
Apr
16
19
Apr
16
26
Apr
16
03
May
16
10
May
16
17
May
16
24
May
16
07
Jun
16
14
Jun
16
21
Jun
16
28
Jun
16
05
Jul
16
12
Jul
16
19
Jul
16
26
Jul
16
02
Aug
16
09
Aug
16
16
Aug
16
31
May
16
42414039383736353433323130292827262524
Fundal height (cm) Weight based on scan (g)
Centile lines
90th
50th
10th
Figure 1.4 A customized symphysis–fundal height chart illustrating the 10th, 50th 
and 90th centiles and normal fetal growth. (Courtesy of Perinatal Institute.) 
Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 9 04/03/2024 16:06
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 10 04/03/2024 16:06
 
Obstetric history and examination 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 fifths 
palpable 
1 
2 
3 
4 
3 
2 
1 
2 
1 
1 
Figure 1.6 Palpation of the fetal head to assess engagement. 
different methods from midwives and obstetricians 
of palpating the baby’s head. There is no evidence 
that one technique is better or more uncomfortable 
than another and the most important aspect is to be 
considerate and watch for pain or discomfort while 
you are palpating. 
Gentle palpation of the abdomen may reveal 
where the baby’s back is (i.e. the side that feels fuller 
and smoother), as this will make auscultating the 
fetal heart beat easier, but don’t worry if you can’t. It 
takes a lot of experience. 
Auscultation 
If the fetus has been active during your examination 
and the mother reports that the baby is active, it is 
not necessary to auscultate the fetal heart. However, 
parents often like to hear their baby’s heartbeat and 
nowadays most midwives and obstetricians use a 
hand-held Doppler device, which allows them to 
hear their baby’s heartbeat. However, you may also 
see a Pinard stethoscope being used, particularly by 
community midwives. With both, place the device 
over where the fetal shoulder is likely to be (i.e. 
in a cephalic presentation, that would be halfway 
between the umbilicus and the anterior superior 
ischial spine on the side of the back). Hearing the 
heart sounds with a Pinard takes a lot of practise. 
If you cannot hear the fetal heart, never say that 
you cannot detect a heartbeat; instead, ask for help. 
With twins, it is likely that a Doppler on a cardioto￾cograph (CTG) machine is necessary to be conÿdent 
that both fetal hearts have been heard. 
PELVIC EXAMINATION 
Routine pelvic examination during antenatal visits is 
not necessary. However, there are circumstances in 
which a vaginal examination is necessary (in most 
cases, a speculum examination is all that is needed). 
These include: 
• excessive or offensive discharge
• vaginal bleeding (in the known absence of a
placenta praevia)
• to perform a cervical smear
• to conÿrm potential rupture of membranes
• to conÿrm and assess the extent of female
genital mutilation (FGM) in those who have
been subjected to this
Before commencing the examination, consent 
must be sought and a chaperone (nurse, midwife, 
etc.; never a relative) must be present (regardless of 
the gender of the examiner). 
Assemble everything you will need (swabs, etc.) 
and ensure the light source works. Position the 
patient semi-recumbent with knees drawn up and 
ankles together. Ensure that the patient is adequately 
covered. If performing a speculum examination, a 10 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 11 04/03/2024 16:06
 
Presentation skills 
Figure 1.7 A Cusco speculum. 
Cusco speculum is usually used (Figure 1.7). Select 
an appropriate size. Proceed as follows: 
1. Wash your hands and put on a pair of gloves. 
2. Use a plastic speculum. 
 3. Apply sterile lubricating gel or cream to the 
blades of the speculum. Do not use antiseptic 
cream if taking swabs for bacteriology. 
 4. Gently part the labia. 
 5. Introduce the speculum with the blades in the 
vertical plane.
 6. As the speculum is gently introduced, aiming 
towards the sacral promontory (i.e. slightly 
downwards), rotate the speculum so that it 
comes to lie in the horizontal plane with the 
ratchet uppermost.
 7. The blades can then slowly be opened until 
the cervix is visualized. Sometimes minor 
adjustments need to be made at this stage. 
 8. Assess the cervix and take any necessary 
samples.
 9. Gently close the blades and remove the 
speculum, reversing the manoeuvres needed 
to insert it. Take care not to catch the vaginal 
epithelium when removing the speculum. 
A digital examination may be performed when an 
assessment of the cervix is required. This can provide 
information about the consistency and effacement of 
the cervix that is not obtainable from a speculum 
examination. 
The contraindications to digital examination are: 
• known placenta praevia or vaginal bleeding 
when the placental site is unknown and the 
presenting part unengaged 
• pre-labour rupture of the membranes 
(increased risk of ascending infection) 
The patient should be positioned as before. 
Examining from the patient’s right, two ÿngers of 
the gloved right hand are gently introduced into the 
vagina and advanced until the cervix is palpated. 
Prior to induction of labour, a full assessment of the 
Bishop’s score can be made (see Chapter 12). 
OTHER ASPECTS OF 
THE˜EXAMINATION 
In anyone with suspected pre-eclampsia, the re°exes 
should be assessed. These are most easily checked at 
the ankle. The presence of more than three beats of 
clonus is pathological (see Chapter 9). 
Oedema of the extremities affects 80% of term 
pregnancies and is not a good indicator for pre￾eclampsia as it is so common. However, the presence 
of non-dependent oedema such as facial oedema 
should be noted. 
KEY LEARNING POINTS 
˜ Always introduce yourself and say who you are. 
˜ Make sure you are wearing your identity badge. 
˜ Wash your hands or use alcohol gel. 
˜ Be courteous and gentle. 
˜ Always ensure the patient is comfortable and 
warm. 
˜ Always have a chaperone present when you 
examine patients. 
˜ Explain what you are going to do and as you go 
along. 
˜ Ask the patient to let you know if there is any 
discomfort. 
˜ Tailor your history and examination to ÿnd the 
key information you need. 
˜ Adapt to new ÿndings as you go along. 
˜ Present in a clear way. 
˜ Be aware of giving sensitive information in a 
public setting. 
PRESENTATION SKILLS 
Part of the art of taking a history and performing 
an examination is being able to pass this informa￾tion on to others in a clear and concise format. It is 
not necessary to give a full list of negative ÿndings; 11 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 12 04/03/2024 16:06
Obstetric history and examination 
it is enough to summarize negatives, such as there 
is no important medical, surgical or family his￾tory of note. Adapt your style of presentation to 
meet the situation. A very concise presentation is 
needed for a busy ward round. In an examination, 
a full and thorough presentation may be required. 
Be very aware of giving sensitive information in a 
ward setting where other patients may be within 
hearing distance. The following template will prove 
useful for ensuring that you capture all the relevant 
history. 
HISTORY TEMPLATE 
DEMOGRAPHIC DETAILS 
• Name 
• Age 
• Occupation 
• Make a note of ethnic background 
PREGNANCY SUMMARY 
• Gestation and dates as calculated from 
ultrasound 
• Gravidity/parity 
• Whether singleton/multiple 
• Presenting complaint or reason for attending 
PRESENTING COMPLAINT 
• Details of the presenting problem (if any) or 
reason for attendance (such as problems in a 
previous pregnancy). 
• What action has been taken? 
• Is there a plan for the rest of the pregnancy? 
• What are the plans for birth, mode of birth and 
timing? 
• What are the patient’s main concerns? 
CURRENT PREGNANCY 
• Any other problems so far? 
• Are they under consultant care? Ask why? 
• Have they had additional tests? 
• Have they been admitted to hospital for 
anything? 
ULTRASOUND 
• What scans have been performed? Were any 
problems identiÿed? 
PAST OBSTETRIC HISTORY 
• List the previous pregnancies and their 
outcomes in order, including date, timing and 
mode of birth, and any complications for mum 
or baby 
GYNAECOLOGICAL HISTORY 
• Any gynaecological problems in the past? 
• When was the last cervical smear? Was it 
normal? Have there ever been any that were 
abnormal? If yes, what treatment has been 
undertaken? 
• Previous gynaecological surgery 
PAST MEDICAL AND SURGICAL 
HISTORY 
• Relevant medical problems 
• Any previous operations: type of anaesthetic 
used, any complications 
PSYCHIATRIC HISTORY 
• Post-partum blues or depression 
• Depression unrelated to pregnancy 
• Major psychiatric illness 
FAMILY HISTORY 
• Diabetes, hypertension, genetic problems, 
psychiatric problems, etc. 
SOCIAL HISTORY 
• Smoking/alcohol/drugs 
• Marital status 
• Occupation, partner’s occupation 
• Who is available to help at home? 
• Are there any housing problems? 
12 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 13 04/03/2024 16:06
 
Self-assessment 
DRUGS 
• All medication including over-the-counter 
medication 
• Folate supplementation 
ALLERGIES 
• To what? 
• What problems do they cause? 
FURTHER READING 
NICE (2012) . Antenatal Care. Quality standard 
[QS22]. Last updated 14 February 2023. http:// 
www.nice.org.uk/guidance/qs22 . 
MBRRACE-UK. Saving Lives, Improving Mothers’ Care 
and Lessons Learned to Inform Maternity Care from 
the UK and Ireland. https://www.npeu.ox.ac.uk/ 
mbrrace-uk/reports. 
SELF-ASSESSMENT 
For interactive SBAs and EMQs relating to this chapter, visit www.routledge.com/cw/mccarthy. 
CASE HISTORY 1 
Preconceptual counselling is an increasingly important 
part of obstetric care, as it provides obstetricians an 
opportunity to review patients prior to getting pregnant 
and provide advice on maximizing the chance of a suc￾cessful pregnancy outcome. 
Mrs Singh is originally from Pakistan and attends your 
preconceptual clinic, as she intends to conceive. She 
gives her history with the following key points: 
A 10-year history of systemic lupus erythematosus
 B previously on mycophenolate mofetil and 
cyclophosphamide 
C last lupus °are was 1 month ago 
D switched to azathioprine 1 month ago
 E on an angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor
 F creatinine 246 µmol/L, protein creatinine ratio 174 
mg/mmol 
G not using any contraceptives 
Address each of these points by identifying the key risk 
and what in°uence this may have on pregnancy. Suggest 
an action point to potentially improve the outcome or 
address the issue. 
ANSWERS
 A Systemic lupus erythematosus is an autoimmune 
condition associated with increased risks of 
adverse pregnancy outcome including miscarriage, 
pre-eclampsia, growth restriction and stillbirth. 
The patient should be counselled regarding this. 
Pregnancy increases the risk of °are-ups by 
40–60%.
 B Mycophenolate mofetil and cyclophosphamide are 
teratogenic and are contraindicated in pregnancy. 
If they have been used recently, appropriate time 
should be given to allow ‘wash out’. 
C The best chance of a good pregnancy outcome is 
related to stable/quiescent disease. Ideally, medical 
conditions should be stable for 6 months prior to 
conception with no changes to medications in this 
period. 
D Azathioprine is safe to use in pregnancy, as the fetal 
liver lacks the enzyme that converts azathioprine to 
its active metabolites.
 E Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor is 
contraindicated in pregnancy and an alternative 
agent must be used. Consultation with a renal 
physician should occur.
 F These levels indicate signiÿcant renal impairment, 
which increases the possibility of an adverse 
pregnancy outcome. Consultation with a renal 
physician should occur and optimization of medicine 
and renal function should occur prior to conception. 
G Until optimal control of the systemic lupus 
erythematosus occurs, the patient should be 
advised not to become pregnant. All efforts should 
focus on making the systemic lupus erythematosus 
as stable as possible and improving the patient’s 
renal function. This will maximize their chances of 
having as healthy a pregnancy as possible with 
minimal risks to their baby. 
13 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 14 04/03/2024 16:06
 
Obstetric history and examination 
CASE HISTORY 2 
Mrs O’Shea, a 41-year-old single woman from Ireland, 
attends your clinic for a booking visit. This is her second 
pregnancy and her ÿrst child is in foster care. She gives 
a history of alcohol and drug use and smokes 30 ciga￾rettes daily. She also reports having an abusive partner. 
Identify the key issues raised and prepare a plan for 
management during the pregnancy. 
ANSWER 
Mrs O’Shea is a very high-risk pregnancy with signiÿcant 
concerns for both herself and her baby’s health. Firstly, 
a social work review should occur with the inclusion of 
child protection services. This should also address Mrs 
O’Shea’s own safety due to her abusive partner. She 
should be counselled regarding drug and smoking cessa￾tion and offered support to assist her with this. She should 
be managed within a perinatal medicine high-risk clinic 
with a multidisciplinary input. 
14 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 15 04/03/2024 16:06
2 
Antenatal care 
FERGUS M cCARTHY 
Introduction 15 Governance of maternity care 26 
Development of antenatal care 15 Further reading 27 
Overview of antenatal care 17 Self-assessment 27 
Identiÿcation of high-risk pregnancies 25 
 Learning Objectives 
• Understand the principles of routine antenatal care. 
• Be aware of the rationale for, and purpose of, clinical investigations during each trimester. 
• Differentiate normal pregnancy symptoms from potential underlying pathology. 
INTRODUCTION 
Every year in England and Wales, approximately 
700,000 babies are delivered. The majority of preg￾nancies occur in those who are healthy and low risk 
with no pre-existing medical problems and result in 
spontaneous vaginal deliveries. A minority will have 
pre-existing medical conditions that may be affected 
by pregnancy or may affect the course of pregnancy 
and require specialist input. The purpose of antena￾tal care is to optimize pregnancy outcomes by pro￾viding support and reassurance to those who are low 
risk and, by stratifying care, allowing those at high 
risk of adverse pregnancy events to receive special￾ized care in a timely manner. 
This chapter provides information on best prac￾tice for baseline care of all pregnancies and com￾prehensive information on the antenatal care in the 
case of the uncomplicated singleton pregnancy. It 
provides evidence-based information on baseline 
investigations that are performed and indications 
for referral to specialist care. 
DEVELOPMENT OF 
ANTENATAL CARE 
Modern maternity care has evolved over more than 
100 years. Many of the changes have been driven by 
political and consumer pressure and a recognition 
of the need to align appropriate care to optimal out￾comes. Antenatal care continues to evolve with the 
ongoing publication of good-quality research aimed 
at optimizing perinatal outcomes, but the scope 
and delivery of antenatal care varies widely across 
the globe, with maternal mortality rates varying 
substantially between low- and high-income coun￾tries. According to the World Health Organization 
(WHO), in 2020, globally there were approximately 
800 maternal deaths a day from preventable causes 
15 
10.1201/9781003196112-2 ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 16 04/03/2024 16:06
 
Antenatal care 
related to pregnancy and childbirth, meaning that 
someone dies as a result of pregnancy around every 
2 minutes; 99% of all these maternal deaths occur in 
low-income countries. 
HISTORY OF MATERNITY CARE 
IN˜THE UK 
In 1929, the government in the UK released a docu￾ment that set out a minimum standard for antenatal 
care that was so prescriptive in its recommendations 
that, until very recently, it was practised in many 
regions, despite the lack of research to demonstrate its 
effectiveness. The National Health Service Act 1946 
came into effect on 5 July 1948 and created the NHS 
in England and Wales. The introduction of the NHS 
allowed maternity services to be available to all with￾out cost. As part of these arrangements, a speciÿed fee 
was paid to the general practitioner (GP) depending 
on whether they were on the obstetric list (undertak￾ing pregnancy care). This encouraged a large number 
of GPs to take an interest in maternity care, reversing 
the previous trend to leave this work to midwives. 
Antenatal care became perceived as beneÿcial, 
acceptable and available for all. This was reinforced 
by the ÿnding that the perinatal death rate seemed to 
be inversely proportional to the number of antena￾tal visits. In 1963, the ÿrst perinatal mortality study 
showed that the perinatal mortality rate was lowest 
for those who attended between 10 and 24 times in 
pregnancy. This failed to take into account prema￾turity and poor education as reasons for decreased 
visits and increased mortality. However, antenatal 
care became established, and with increased profes￾sional contact came the drive to continue to improve 
outcomes, with an emphasis on decreasing maternal 
and perinatal mortality. 
The development and introduction of ultrasound 
to antenatal care late in the 1960s had a considerable 
in°uence on antenatal care, initially limited to con￾ÿrming multifetal pregnancies, but later being used 
increasingly for the detection of fetal anomalies. This 
new intervention became quickly established, but 
limited evidence exists supporting its routine regular 
use. The move towards hospital deliveries began in 
the early 1950s. At this time, with limited hospital 
maternity facilities, one in three were planned home 
deliveries. The Cranbrook Report in 1959 recom￾mended that there be sufÿcient hospital maternity 
beds for 70% of all deliveries to take place in hospital, 
and the subsequent Peel Report (1970) recommended 
that a bed should be available for every woman to 
deliver in hospital if she so wished. 
Obstetricians were not alone in the movement 
towards hospital deliveries. Parents themselves were 
pushing to at least be allowed the choice to deliver 
in hospital. By 1972, only 1 in 10 deliveries were 
planned for home, and the publication of the Short 
Report (1980) from the Social Services Committee 
led to further centralization of hospital delivery. It 
made a number of recommendations. Among these 
were the following: 
• An increasing number of births should occur 
in large units; assessment of pregnancy should 
be improved for smaller consultant units and 
isolated GP units and home deliveries should 
be phased out further. 
• It should be mandatory that all those who are 
pregnant should be seen at least twice by a 
consultant obstetrician – preferably as soon as 
possible after the ÿrst visit to the GP in early 
pregnancy and again in late pregnancy. 
This and subsequent reports – including UK gov￾ernment reports in 1982, 1984 and 1985, Birth to Five 
(Department of Health, 2005) and the 2012/13 Choice 
Framework (Department of Health, 2012) – led to a 
policy of increasing centralization of units for deliv￾ery and, consequently, maternity care. 
The gradual decline in maternal and perinatal 
mortality was thought to be due in greater part to 
hospital deliveries, although proof of this was lack￾ing. Indeed, the decline in perinatal mortality was 
least in those years when hospitalization increased 
the most. As other new interventions became avail￾able and were increasingly used, such as continuous 
fetal monitoring and induction of labour, a change 
in practice began to establish these as the norm for 
most births, without robust evaluation of their impact 
through randomized controlled trials or other high￾quality research methodology. In England and Wales 
between 1966 and 1974, the induction rate rose from 
12.7% to 38.9%. During the 1980s, with increasing 
consumer awareness, the unquestioning acceptance 
16 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 17 04/03/2024 16:06
Overview of antenatal care 
of unproven technologies was challenged. Groups 
such as the National Childbirth Trust began to ques￾tion not only the need for any intervention but also 
the need to come to the hospital at all. The profes￾sional bodies also began to question the effective￾ness of antenatal care. 
The government set up an expert committee to 
review policy on maternity care and to make recom￾mendations. This committee published the report 
Changing Childbirth (Department of Health, Report 
of the Expert Maternity Group, 1993), which pro￾vided purchasers and providers with a number of 
action points aiming to improve choice, information 
and continuity of care for everyone during preg￾nancy. It outlined a number of indicators of success 
to be achieved within 5 years: 
• the carriage of hand-held notes in pregnancy 
• midwifery-led care in 30% of pregnancies 
• a known midwife at delivery in 75% of cases 
• a reduction in the number of antenatal visits for 
those with low-risk pregnancies 
This landmark report provided a new impetus to 
examine the provision of maternity care in the UK 
and enshrined choice as a concept in maternity care. 
More recently, government publications on mater￾nity care such as Maternity Matters (2007) have aimed 
to address inequalities in maternity care provision 
and uptake; this publication enables commissioners 
to assess maternity care in their area and to ensure 
that safe and effective care is available to all pregnant 
women. Antenatal and postnatal care now centres 
on increased choice and empowerment of couples, 
including birth at home or in a stand-alone midwifery 
unit. The most recent National Maternity Review 
report (2016) led to the introduction of the Maternity 
Transformation Programme, which emphasizes the 
following principles: 
• personalized woman-centred care 
• continuity of carer 
• better postnatal and perinatal mental health care 
• a fairer payment system for different types of 
care 
• safer care, with multi-professional working and 
training, and measurement of performance 
using routinely collected data 
Despite the call for safer, personalized care, 
in 2017 the discovery of a large series of adverse 
outcomes at one NHS Trust in England led to 
bereaved parents to call for a public inquiry. The 
ÿnal report of the Ockenden review, commissioned 
by the Secretary of State of Health, was published 
in 2022. One of the main ÿndings was that patient 
safety was often overlooked in the pursuit of a vagi￾nal birth and that the affected hospital failed to 
learn from repeated adverse outcomes. The report 
also included wide-ranging recommendations for 
maternity services across England, including stan￾dards around workforce planning, stafÿng, mul￾tidisciplinary training and learning from adverse 
outcomes. 
OVERVIEW OF ANTENATAL CARE 
The aims of antenatal care are to: 
• optimize pregnancy outcomes for parents and 
babies 
• prevent, detect and manage those factors that 
adversely affect the health of the pregnant 
woman and baby 
• provide advice, reassurance, education and 
support for the pregnant woman and their 
family 
• deal with the ‘minor ailments’ of pregnancy 
• provide general health screening 
Antenatal care aims to make the pregnant 
woman the focus. They should be treated with kind￾ness and dignity at all times, and due respect given 
to personal, cultural and religious beliefs. Services 
should be readily accessible and there should be con￾tinuity of care. There is a need for high-quality, cul￾turally appropriate, verbal and written information 
on which women can base their choices through a 
truly informed decision-making process that is led 
by them. 
In the UK and many countries worldwide, mater￾nity care is provided by a community-based team 
of midwives and family practitioners (such as GPs), 
a hospital consultant team or a combination of the 
two. In the case of a complex pregnancy, a hospital￾based obstetric team leads the antenatal care and 
17 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 18 04/03/2024 16:06
 
 
Antenatal care 
this is known as consultant care. Those with low￾risk pregnancies with no overtly complicating factors 
usually have community-based care and are said to 
be under midwifery care. A further group have risk 
factors identiÿed at booking, for example previous 
caesarean section, which mandate clinical input by 
obstetricians, but the majority of routine care can 
still be provided by the community team. This is 
referred to as shared care. 
ADVICE, REASSURANCE AND 
EDUCATION 
Pregnancy is a time of great uncertainty and stress 
and this is compounded by the many physical changes 
experienced during pregnancy. Common symptoms 
include nausea, heartburn, constipation, shortness of 
breath, dizziness, swelling, backache, abdominal dis￾comfort and headaches. Generally, these re°ect physi￾ological adaptations to pregnancy but may become 
extremely debilitating. Occasionally they will repre￾sent the ÿrst presentation of a more serious problem. 
Information regarding smoking, alcohol con￾sumption and the use of drugs (both legal and illegal) 
during pregnancy is extremely important. In some 
populations, almost one-third of pregnant women 
smoke during pregnancy, despite its association with 
fetal growth restriction, preterm labour, placen￾tal abruption and intrauterine fetal death. A major 
role of antenatal care is to help limit these harmful 
behaviours during pregnancy, for example by inclu￾sion in smoking cessation programmes. Alcohol or 
illegal substance misuse may require more special￾ized skills from support services, including perinatal 
mental health teams. The information given should 
be of high quality and evidence based. It should be 
provided in a culturally appropriate manner and in 
different formats (e.g. written information) where 
appropriate and possible. 
Parentcraft education is the term often used to 
describe formal group discussion of issues relating 
to pregnancy, labour and delivery, and care of the 
newborn. These sessions offer an opportunity for 
couples to meet others in the same situation and help 
to establish a network of social contacts that may be 
useful after the delivery. They may include a tour 
of the maternity department, the aim of which is to 
lessen anxiety and increase the sense of maternal 
control surrounding delivery. 
FIRST TRIMESTER 
When someone becomes pregnant, one of the ÿrst 
interactions with the health services is known as 
the booking visit. At this point, or shortly after￾wards, a midwife will take a detailed history and, 
with consent, perform an examination and a series of 
routine investigations so that appropriate care can be 
offered. If risk factors are identiÿed that may poten￾tially have an impact on the pregnancy outcome, 
the midwife will access specialized services on 
behalf of the pregnant individual. This may mean 
referral to a hospital consultant obstetric clinic or 
other specialist services as appropriate. Medical or 
psychosocial issues raised at the booking visit may 
need to be explored in some depth. 
BODY MASS INDEX AND WEIGHT 
ASSESSMENT 
Height and weight should be measured at the book￾ing visit and body mass index (BMI) calculated and 
assessed. If the BMI is more than 35 kg/m2, review is 
recommended by an obstetric consultant or another 
healthcare professional who can provide appropriate 
advice on the increased pregnancy risks (Table 2.1) 
and interventions to minimize excessive gestational 
weight gain. The Institute of Medicine has guidelines 
on recommended weight increase in pregnancy. For 
those of normal weight (BMI 18.5–24.9 kg/m2), the 
recommended total weight gain in pregnancy is 
11–16 kg (25–35 lb); for those who are overweight 
(BMI 25–29.9 kg/m2), it is 7–11 kg (15–25 lb); and, for 
those who enter pregnancy in the obese range (BMI 
˛30 kg/m2), it is 5–9 kg (11–20 lb). 
Anyone with raised BMI should be counselled 
regarding appropriate weight in pregnancy and the 
risks. In general, the risks increase as BMI rises. 
GENERAL PREGNANCY 
DIETARY ADVICE 
The Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists 
(RCOG) provides the following dietary advice for 
optimal weight control in pregnancy: 
18 Overview of antenatal care
• Do not eat for two; maintain your normal • Dieting in pregnancy is not recommended 
portion size and try and avoid snacks. but controlling weight gain in pregnancy is 
• Eat fi bre-rich foods such as oats, beans, lentils, advocated.
grains, seeds, fruit and vegetables as well as It may be diffi cult to make these dietary changes wholegrain bread, brown rice and wholewheat for the fi rst time during pregnancy, and further work pasta. is needed to determine how best to facilitate adher- • Base your meals on starchy foods such as ence to this guidance. potatoes, bread, rice and pasta, choosing 
wholegrain options where possible.
• R estrict intake of fried food, drinks and items GENERAL EXERCISE ADVICE
of confectionery that are high in added sugars, 
and other foods high in fat and sugar. Aerobic and strength conditioning exercise in preg-
• Eat at least fi ve portions of a variety of fruit and nancy is considered safe and benefi cial. It may 
vegetables each day. help recovery following delivery, reduce back and 
 Table 2.1 Maternal and neonatal complications associated with high BMI in pregnancy
Maternal Fetal
Antenatal
Diffi culty accurately assessing growth 
and anatomy of fetus
Increased congenital malformations; if BMI is >40 kg/m2, risk of neural 
tube defects is three times that if BMI is <30 kg/m2. If BMI is >30 kg/m2, 
high-dose folic acid (5 mg once daily) is recommended pre-pregnancy 
and for the fi rst 12 weeks’ gestation
Increased risk of GDM: three times more 
likely to develop GDM than those with 
BMI <30 kg/m2
Macrosomia and associated complications
Hypertensive disorders of pregnancy: 
increased risk of chronic hypertension, 
gestational hypertension and 
pre-eclampsia
Fetal growth restriction and associated complications
Increased risk of VTE Miscarriage; overall miscarriage risk is 20%, which increases to 1 in 4 
(25%) if BMI is >30 kg/m2
Stillbirth: doubling of stillbirth risk from 0.5% to 1 in 100 (1%)
Intrapartum
Diffi culty with analgesia (epidurals and 
spinal) and general anaesthesia if 
needed
Macrosomia and shoulder dystocia: risk of macrosomia (neonatal 
weight >4 kg) increases from 7% to 14% compared with those with a 
BMI of between 20 and 30 kg/m2
Diffi culty with monitoring in labour
Increased instrumental delivery rate
Increased caesarean section rate
Postnatal
VTE risk Increased risk of childhood obesity and diabetes in later life
Wound breakdown and infection
Postnatal depression
BMI, body mass index; GDM, gestational diabetes mellitus; VTE, venous thromboembolism.
 19
Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 19 04/03/2024 16:06
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 20 04/03/2024 16:06
 
Antenatal care 
pelvic pain during pregnancy and contribute to 
overall wellness. The aim of exercise during preg￾nancy is to stay ÿt, rather than to reach peak ÿtness. 
Contact sports should be avoided and a more tai￾lored exercise programme may be needed for those 
with pre-existing medical conditions. However, 
there are very few people for whom some exer￾cise is not appropriate and healthcare profession￾als can encourage walking, swimming and other 
forms of non-contact exercise in pregnancy. Pelvic 
°oor exercises during pregnancy and immediately 
after birth may reduce the risk of urinary and faecal 
incontinence in the future. Following delivery, it is 
generally safe to resume exercise gradually as soon 
the individual feels ready. 
The RCOG provides modiÿed heart rate tar￾get zones for exercise in pregnancy. These are age 
dependent and are as follows: 
• <20 years of age: target range 140–155 beats per 
minute (bpm) 
• 20–29 years of age: 135–150 bpm 
• 30–39 years of age: 130–145 bpm 
• >40 years of age: 125–140 bpm 
BREASTFEEDING EDUCATION 
Breastfeeding protects against diarrhoea and com￾mon childhood illnesses such as pneumonia and may 
also have longer term health beneÿts for the breast￾feeding parent and child, such as reducing the risk 
of obesity later in life. Breastfeeding has also been 
associated with a higher intelligence quotient (IQ) 
in children, although it is not clear whether this is a 
result of confounding. The WHO recommends initia￾tion of breastfeeding within an hour of birth, exclusive 
breastfeeding for the ÿrst 6 months of life and contin￾ued breastfeeding beyond 6 months and at least up to 
2 years of age. Although evidence for interventions to 
promote breastfeeding are limited, a recent system￾atic review demonstrated that the greatest improve￾ments in initiation and continuation of breastfeeding 
were seen when education was provided concurrently 
across the various settings including in the home, 
the community and the health system. Baby-friendly 
hospital support in the health system was the most 
effective intervention to improve rates of any breast￾feeding. As a result, early education in pregnancy 
about breastfeeding is advocated to improve uptake 
and engage pregnant parents with breastfeeding ser￾vices to allow them to be fully prepared. 
OPTIONS FOR PREGNANCY CARE 
Provided that there are no contraindications to mid￾wifery-led care (such as medical comorbidities or 
previous obstetric complications that may warrant 
consultant-led care), the options available for deliv￾ery include the following: 
• Home birth: according to the Birthplace Study 
published in 2011, in England and Wales 
approximately 2% of pregnant women opt to 
deliver at home, cared for by a midwife. The 
advantages of home birth include familiar 
surroundings, no interruption of labour to go 
to hospital, no separation from other children 
or the birth partner during or after birth, 
continuity of care and reduced interventions. 
The disadvantages are that 45–50% of ÿrst 
pregnancies (and 10–12% of second and 
subsequent pregnancies) planned for home 
birth are transferred to hospital and there is a 
poor perinatal outcome in approximately twice 
as many ÿrst-time home births than in those 
occurring in hospital (9.3 versus 5.3 adverse 
perinatal events per 1,000 births, respectively; 
adjusted odds ratio 1.75, 95% conÿdence 
interval 1.07–2.86). Other disadvantages 
include limited analgesic options (e.g. no 
epidurals are available). 
• Midwifery units or birth centres: these may be 
stand-alone units located on a separate site 
to hospital birth centres or may be adjacent to 
hospitals (‘co-located’) with access to obstetric, 
neonatal and anaesthetic care. Advantages 
of midwifery units may include continuity of 
care, fewer interventions and convenience of 
location. Disadvantages include transfer out 
to a hospital birth centre (40% of ÿrst births 
and 10% of second and subsequent births) and 
limited access to certain analgesic options. 
No difference was found in the risk of adverse 
perinatal outcomes between midwifery units 
and hospital units (4.5 adverse perinatal 
events/1,000 births in free-standing midwifery 20 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 21 04/03/2024 16:06
 
 
Overview of antenatal care 
units; 4.7 events/1,000 births in alongside 
midwifery units; and 5.3 events/1,000 births in 
obstetric units). 
• Hospital birth centre: in hospital birth 
centres, midwives continue to provide care 
during labour but doctors are available 
should the need arise. There is direct 
access to obstetricians, anaesthetists and 
neonatologists. Disadvantages include a lack 
of continuity of care and a greater likelihood 
of intervention (compared with midwifery 
units and home births). 
ANTENATAL URINE TESTS 
Asymptomatic bacteriuria is associated with increased 
risk of preterm delivery and the development of pyelo￾nephritis during pregnancy. A mid-stream specimen 
of urine (MSU) should be sent for culture and sensi￾tivity at the booking visit to screen for asymptomatic 
bacteriuria. Urinalysis is performed every antenatal 
visit. Urine is screened for protein (to detect renal 
disease or pre-eclampsia), persistent glycosuria (to 
detect pre-existing diabetes or gestational diabe￾tes mellitus [GDM]) and nitrites (to detect urinary 
tract infections). If nitrites are detected on urine dip￾stick testing, an MSU is sent for microscopy, culture 
and sensitivity to detect asymptomatic bacteria and 
appropriate treatment initiated if a positive culture 
is identiÿed. 
BLOOD PRESSURE ASSESSMENT 
Blood pressure falls by a small amount (a few 
mmHg) in the ÿrst trimester and increases to pre￾pregnancy levels by the end of the second trimes￾ter. First-trimester blood pressure assessment also 
allows the detection of previously unrecognized 
chronic hypertension; this enables early initiation 
of treatment including antihypertensive agents (to 
reduce episodes of severe hypertension) and low￾dose aspirin (which reduces the risk of pre-eclampsia 
and decreases perinatal mortality). 
BOOKING TESTS IN PREGNANCY 
Table 2.2 lists the booking tests often performed at 
the booking visit. 
Table 2.2 Summary of booking investigations 
Investigation Indication
 FBC Haemoglobin, platelet count, 
mean cell volume
 MSU Asymptomatic bacteriuria 
Blood group and 
antibody screen 
Rhesus status and atypical 
antibodies
 cffDNA Fetal rhesus status in rhesus￾negative pregnancies
 Haemoglobinopathy 
screening 
Screening is based on the FOQ 
and blood test results
 Infection screen Hepatitis B, syphilis, HIV (and 
rubella status) 
Dating scan and 
ÿ rst-trimester 
screening 
Accurate pregnancy dating with 
provision of risk assessment 
for trisomy 21, 18 and 13 and 
identiÿcation of major 
congenital anomalies 
cffDNA, cell-free fetal deoxyribonucleic acid; FBC, full 
blood count; FOQ, family origin questionnaire; HIV, human 
immunodeÿciency virus; MSU, mid-stream specimen of urine. 
FULL BLOOD COUNT 
Full blood count (FBC) measurement allows iden￾tiÿcation of anaemia, to allow early initiation of 
treatment. Anaemia in pregnancy is deÿned as a 
haemoglobin (Hb) level of <110 g/L in the ÿrst tri￾mester, <105 g/L in the second and third trimesters 
and <100 g/L in the post-partum period. The detec￾tion of anaemia should prompt examination of the 
mean cell volume to identify likely iron deÿciency 
anaemia (microcytic anaemia) or folate or vitamin 
B12 deÿciency (macrocytic anaemia). Further inves￾tigations may include B12, folate or iron (ferritin) 
studies. Appropriate treatment should be initiated. 
In accordance with the recommendations of 
the British Society for Haematology, a trial of oral 
iron should be considered as the ÿrst-line manage￾ment option for anaemia in pregnancy, with an 
increment demonstrated at 2 weeks conÿrming 
a positive response. Those with known haemoglo￾binopathy should have serum ferritin checked and 
should be offered oral supplements if their ferritin 
level is <30 ˝g/L. 
An FBC also allows the identiÿcation of low plate￾lets, which may rarely represent de novo immune 21 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 22 04/03/2024 16:06
 
 
 
Antenatal care 
thrombocytopaenic purpura. Gestational thrombocy￾topaenia (a fall in platelet count in pregnancy) rarely 
presents in the ÿrst trimester and is more commonly 
detected beyond 28 weeks’ gestation. Therefore, a 
low platelet count in the ÿrst trimester warrants fur￾ther investigation and haematological input; in many 
settings, the threshold for referral is <100 × 109/l, but 
individual maternity units may set their own cri￾teria. A baseline platelet count is also useful later in 
pregnancy if there are concerns regarding conditions 
such as pre-eclampsia or haemolysis, elevated liver 
enzymes and low platelets (HELLP) syndrome, which 
may present with thrombocytopaenia. 
BLOOD GROUP 
Blood group is checked at booking to identify those 
who are rhesus D-negative so that they may be 
informed of the risks of rhesus isoimmunization and 
sensitization from a rhesus D-positive fetus. Anti-D 
is administered to rhesus D-negative pregnant 
women in instances of potential sensitizing events 
such as post-chorionic villus sampling, amniocente￾sis or trauma to the abdomen. 
The British Committee for Standards in 
Haematology recommends that following potentially 
sensitizing events, anti-D immunoglobulin should 
be administered as soon as possible and always 
within 72 hours of the event. In pregnancies less 
than 12 weeks’ gestation, anti-D immunoglobulin 
prophylaxis is indicated only following ectopic preg￾nancy, molar pregnancy and therapeutic termination 
of pregnancy and in cases of uterine bleeding where 
this is repeated, heavy or associated with abdominal 
pain. The minimum dose of anti-D should be 250 
IU and a test for feto-maternal haemorrhage is not 
required. For potentially sensitizing events between 
12 and 20 weeks’ gestation, a minimum dose of 250 
IU should be administered within 72 hours of the 
event and a test for feto-maternal haemorrhage is not 
required. Pregnant women who are rhesus D-negative 
are now offered prophylactic anti-D administration 
at 28 weeks’ gestation. Antenatal anti-D immuno￾globulin prophylaxis using either a single large dose 
at 28 weeks’ gestation or two doses given at 28 and 
34 weeks’ gestation achieves a signiÿcant reduction 
in the incidence of sensitization to rhesus D due to 
occult sensitizing events. Following birth, rhesus 
D-negative individuals also receive anti-D post￾partum once a baby is conÿrmed as being rhesus 
D-positive on testing of a cord blood sample. 
Assessment of blood group in all pregnant 
women at 28 weeks’ gestation also identiÿes those 
with other atypical antibodies so that appropriate 
monitoring can be put in place. 
Newer techniques such as non-invasive prena￾tal testing of maternal blood for fetal rhesus status 
(determined by analysis of cell-free fetal deoxyribo￾nucleic acid [cffDNA]) may limit the need for anti-D 
prophylaxis in pregnancies where the fetus is known 
to be rhesus D-positive, and this is widely used in 
many countries and is >99% sensitive and speciÿc 
for the prediction of fetal rhesus status. Knowing the 
fetal rhesus status allows for targeted anti-D admin￾istration only in pregnancies with rhesus-positive 
babies. For further details, see Chapter 6. 
GESTATIONAL DIABETES 
Pregnant women who have had previous GDM 
should be offered a glucose tolerance test or random 
blood glucose in the ÿrst trimester, with the aim of 
detecting pre-existing diabetes that may have devel￾oped since a preceding pregnancy. 
THALASSAEMIA 
Thalassaemia is a group of inherited blood disorders 
in which the Hb is abnormal as a result of muta￾tions in genes that code Hb. They are inherited in 
an autosomal recessive pattern. Although the thal￾assaemias can occur worldwide, the carrier rate 
is particularly common in people from Southeast 
Asia, and also affects those of Mediterranean, North 
African, Middle Eastern, Indian and Asian origin. A 
mutation that affects the alpha chain causes alpha￾thalassaemia, while beta-thalassaemia occurs as 
a result of a mutation in the beta chain. The alpha 
chains are produced by four genes, two on each 
chromosome 16, inherited as pairs. The severity of 
the condition depends on how many of those genes 
have been altered. If one gene is mutated, individuals 
are asymptomatic. If someone carries two mutations 
(alpha-thalassaemia trait) they may have mild anae￾mia. Haemoglobin H disease occurs when an indi￾vidual carries three mutated genes, and this leads to 22 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 23 04/03/2024 16:06
Overview of antenatal care 
chronic anaemia that requires regular blood transfu￾sion. Alpha-thalassaemia major occurs when all four 
genes are mutated and is almost uniformly fatal in 
utero without intervention. 
There are only two beta genes, one each on chro￾mosome 11. The beta-thalassaemia phenotype can 
range from moderate to severe. Beta-thalassaemia 
major occurs when both beta genes are affected, and 
affected individuals will require blood transfusions for 
the rest of their lives. Beta-thalassaemia intermedia is 
the milder form of the condition and is non-transfu￾sion dependent. Screening for thalassaemia in the UK 
is offered to all pregnant women at the booking visit 
using the family origin questionnaire (FOQ) and/or 
FBC results; those at high risk of having an affected 
fetus should then be referred to a fetal medicine unit 
to discuss the option of invasive conÿrmatory testing. 
SICKLE CELL SCREEN 
Similar to the other haemoglobinopathies, certain 
ethnic groups are at a higher risk of carrying sickle 
cell trait. The carrier rate for sickle cell trait (HbAS) is 
approximately 1 in 10 among Afro-Caribbean people, 
but as high as 1 in 4 in people from West Africa. The 
carrier frequency for haemoglobin C trait (HbAC) is 
approximately 1 in 30, but up to 1 in 6 in some groups 
(e.g. Ghanaians). Homozygous sickle cell disease 
(HbSS) is the most serious form of the disease and 
these individuals have chronic haemolytic anaemia 
and suffer from sickle cell crisis, which may be pre￾cipitated by infection. It is also possible to have a com￾bination of HbS (sickle haemoglobin) and another 
beta-globin variant such as sickle cell/haemoglobin 
C disease (HbSC). These individuals have slightly 
milder features than seen in HbSS but are still at risk 
of sickle cell crises. Partners of pregnant women with 
sickle cell disease or trait are offered screening early 
in pregnancy, with the option of invasive testing to 
detect an affected fetus if both parents are carriers. 
FIRST-TRIMESTER INFECTION 
SCREEN 
Rubella 
For many years, immunity to rubella has been tested 
at booking visits in most countries. Public Health 
England has recently stopped routine testing for 
rubella (from April 2016) on the grounds that rubella 
infection levels in the UK are so low that they are 
deÿned as eliminated by the WHO. Rubella infection 
in pregnancy is now very rare; the mumps, measles, 
rubella (MMR) immunization programme has dem￾onstrated that over 90% of children aged up to 2 years 
had received at least one mumps, measles and rubella 
vaccination. As the screening test used can potentially 
give inaccurate results and cause unnecessary stress, 
the screening programme has been stopped. 
The majority of pregnant women are rubella 
immune and no further action is required. When an 
individual is found not to be immune in pregnancy, 
they are advised to avoid contact with individuals 
known to be currently infected and are offered the 
combined MMR vaccination following delivery (see 
Chapter 11).
 Syphilis 
Syphilis is a sexually transmitted disease caused by 
transmission of Treponema pallidum, a spirochaete 
bacterium. In pregnancy, it may cause miscarriage 
or stillbirth and can cause active disease in newborn 
infants if contracted antenatally. Between 2011 and 
2012, there were 2,978 cases of syphilis diagnosed 
in the UK. Although diagnosis is rare in pregnancy, 
due to the increasing incidence of the disease and 
the fact that it may be safely treated with penicillin 
in pregnancy, screening for syphilis in pregnancy is 
still routinely performed (see Chapter 11).
 Hepatitis B 
Hepatitis screening is performed in pregnancy to 
reduce infant infection. Without preventative mea￾sures, 90% of babies born to pregnant women with 
hepatitis B will contract the virus and develop 
chronic infection, which is associated with liver fail￾ure, cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma. A baby 
born following a pregnancy known to be affected by 
active hepatitis B should receive hepatitis B vaccine 
and one dose of hepatitis B immune globulin within 
the ÿrst 12 hours of life. This confers over 95% pro￾tection against chronic hepatitis B infection. The 
infant will need additional doses of hepatitis B vac￾cine at 1 and 6 months of age. The test for screening 
for hepatitis B involves detection of hepatitis B sur￾face antibody (HBsAb or anti-HBs). Detection of the 
antibody implies immunity to hepatitis B. Hepatitis 23 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 24 04/03/2024 16:06
Antenatal care 
B surface antigen (HBsAg) indicates the presence 
of hepatitis B in the blood. Hepatitis B core anti￾body (HBcAb or anti-HBc) indicates that a person 
may have been exposed to the hepatitis B virus (see 
Chapter 11).
 Hepatitis C 
The National Institute for Health and Care Excellence 
(NICE) currently recommends that pregnant women 
should not be offered routine screening for hepatitis 
C virus because there is insufÿcient evidence to sup￾port its clinical and cost-effectiveness. Screening for 
hepatitis C may be offered to those individuals con￾sidered to be at high risk, including those with cur￾rent or previous intravenous drug use and hepatitis B 
and/or human immunodeÿciency virus (HIV) infec￾tion. The risk of vertical transmission in pregnancy 
is approximately 5%, but this increases signiÿcantly 
to 36% if there is coinfection with HIV. Screening is 
performed by examining for hepatitis C virus immu￾noglobulin (Ig) G antibodies (see Chapter 11). 
Human immunodeÿciency virus 
The estimated HIV prevalence among pregnant 
women in the UK is 2 per 1,000. With appropriate 
interventions, the risk of transmission to the neonate 
is as low as 0.1%. Interventions to minimize verti￾cal transmission include initiation of antiretroviral 
therapy (ART) by 24 weeks’ gestation if naive to ART, 
planned elective caesarean section for those with a 
viral load ˛400 HIV ribonucleic acid (RNA) copies/ 
mL at 36 weeks’ gestation and exclusive formula 
feeding from birth regardless of viral load and ART 
use. It is recommended that pregnant women who 
decline initial screening should be offered screening 
again at 28 weeks’ gestation. 
ULTRASOUND FOR FIRST￾TRIMESTER DATING AND 
SCREENING 
Accurate dating through ÿrst-trimester ultrasound 
is key to avoiding issues later in pregnancy, such as 
incorrect identiÿcation of growth restriction and inad￾vertent induction of labour for post-term pregnancy. 
First-trimester ultrasound also enables early identiÿca￾tion of multifetal pregnancies, screening for trisomies 
and examination of the fetus for gross anomalies 
such as anencephaly and cystic hygromas. The dating 
scan and ÿrst trimester screening is best performed 
between 11 + 3 and 13 + 6 weeks’ gestation, when the 
crown–rump length (CRL) measures between 45 and 
84 mm. From 14 and 20 weeks’ gestation, the head cir￾cumference is used to date the pregnancy. 
Beyond 20 weeks’ gestation, the impact of genes 
and environmental factors can cause variability in 
fetal size. Dating a pregnancy by ultrasound scan 
therefore becomes progressively less accurate as the 
gestation advances. This is just one of the potential 
problems of ‘late booking’. 
First-trimester screening currently involves: 
• Measurement of nuchal translucency (NT). The 
median and 95th centile for NT is 1.2 mm and 
2.1 mm with a CRL of 45 mm, and 1.9 mm and 
2.7 mm for a CRL of 84 mm. 
• Measurement of maternal free beta-human 
chorionic gonadotrophin (˜hCG) and 
pregnancy-associated plasma protein-A 
(PAPP-A). In trisomy 21 pregnancies, 
the concentration of free ˜hCG is higher 
(around two multiples of median [MoM]) 
and the concentration of PAPP-A is lower 
(approximately 0.5 MoM). 
• The pregnant woman’s age. 
Using an algorithm based on the above criteria, 
the detection rate for trisomy 21 is approximately 
90%. The false-positive rate can be reduced to 3% 
by additionally examining the nasal bone, ductus 
venosus °ow and tricuspid °ow, and this gives a 
detection rate of approximately 95%. Screening may 
also be performed in the second trimester between 
14 and 20 weeks’ gestation and consists exclusively 
of risk prediction using maternal biomarkers. The 
quadruple test measures maternal alpha-fetopro￾tein (AFP), hCG, unconjugated oestriol (uE3) and 
inhibin A and has an 80% detection rate with a 
5% false-positive rate. Newer technologies includ￾ing non-invasive prenatal testing are now available 
with reported sensitivities for detection of Down 
syndrome of more than 99% with a screen-positive 
rate of <0.2%. These are being used increasingly 
throughout the UK and Europe and are discussed 
further in Chapter 5. 
24 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 25 04/03/2024 16:06
Identiÿcation of high-risk pregnancies 
IDENTIFICATION OF HIGH-RISK 
PREGNANCIES 
PREGNANCIES AT HIGH RISK OF 
DEVELOPING PRE-ECLAMPSIA 
NICE currently recommends that pregnant women 
who are considered to be at high risk of pre-eclamp￾sia should have low-dose aspirin (75–150 mg) treat￾ment initiated early in pregnancy until delivery. 
Individuals considered to be at high risk include 
those with: 
• hypertensive disease during a previous 
pregnancy 
• chronic kidney disease 
• autoimmune disease such as systemic lupus 
erythematosus or antiphospholipid syndrome 
• type 1 or type 2 diabetes 
• chronic hypertension 
Furthermore, pregnant women with two or more 
moderate risk factors for pre-eclampsia are also rec￾ommended to commence aspirin early in pregnancy 
until delivery. Moderate risk factors for the develop￾ment of pre-eclampsia include: 
• primiparity 
• advanced age (>40 years) 
• pregnancy interval of more than 10 years 
• BMI ˛35 kg/m2 at booking visit 
• family history of pre-eclampsia 
• multifetal pregnancy 
All pregnant women should be screened at every 
antenatal visit for pre-eclampsia by measurement of 
blood pressure and urinalysis for protein. 
PREGNANCIES AT HIGH RISK OF 
PRETERM BIRTH 
Pregnant women considered to be at high risk of pre￾term birth include those with previous preterm birth, 
late miscarriage, multifetal pregnancies and cervical 
surgery such as previous cone biopsy. These individ￾uals may be offered serial cervical length screening 
with or without the use of fetal ÿbronectin to detect 
increased risk of preterm birth. 
FETAL GROWTH RESTRICTION 
NICE guidelines recommend that symphysis–fundal 
height (SFH) measurements should be performed at 
every antenatal appointment from 24 weeks’ gesta￾tion. Concerns that fetal growth may be slow, or has 
stopped altogether, should prompt ultrasound scan￾ning. There is no consensus on the recommended 
‘routine’ use of ultrasound in pregnancy. The major￾ity of units offer dating scans (at end of ÿrst trimes￾ter) and anomaly scans (at around 20–22 weeks’ 
gestation) but no further growth assessment unless 
clinically indicated. Some units offer an additional 
third-trimester growth scan but this is still being 
evaluated in research studies. 
VITAMIN D DEFICIENCY 
The RCOG advises that there are no data to support 
routine screening for vitamin D deÿciency in preg￾nancy in terms of health beneÿts or cost-effective￾ness. Individuals thought to be at increased risk of 
vitamin D deÿciency on the basis of skin colour or 
coverage, obesity, risk of pre-eclampsia or gastroen￾terological conditions limiting fat absorption may be 
screened, but this testing is expensive. Daily vitamin 
D supplementation with oral cholecalciferol or ergo￾calciferol is safe in pregnancy. NICE guidance states 
that all pregnant and breastfeeding women should 
be advised to take 10 ˝g of vitamin D supplements 
daily. Severe vitamin D deÿciency in pregnancy 
results in increased risk of neonatal rickets. 
SECOND-TRIMESTER CARE 
ANOMALY SCAN 
Between 20 and 22 weeks’ gestation, it is recom￾mended that fetal anatomy be assessed. This is a 
detailed structural scan aimed at detecting condi￾tions such as spina biÿda, major congenital anom￾alies, diaphragmatic hernia and renal agenesis. 
Prenatal diagnosis is covered in detail in Chapter 5. 
GESTATIONAL DIABETES MELLITUS 
Universal screening for GDM is available in some 
countries, including the USA and Australia. However, 
25 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 26 04/03/2024 16:06
Antenatal care 
NICE advocates risk-based screening in the UK. 
GDM is diagnosed if the fasting plasma glucose level 
is 5.6 mmol/L or above, or a 2-hour plasma glucose 
level is 7.8 mmol/L or above. 
Risk factors for the development of GDM include 
previous gestational diabetes, previous macrosomia 
(˛4.5 kg), raised BMI (˛30 kg/m2), a ÿrst-degree rela￾tive with diabetes or being of Asian, black Caribbean 
or Middle Eastern origin. If risk factors are present, 
2-hour 75 g oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) should 
be offered at 24–28 weeks’ gestation. Pregnant 
women with a previous history of GDM should have 
an OGTT at 16–18 weeks’ gestation. The test should 
be repeated at 24–28 weeks of pregnancy. 
GOVERNANCE OF MATERNITY 
CARE 
Many clinical, political and consumer bodies now 
contribute to optimizing care in pregnancy. These 
include the following. 
NATIONAL INSTITUTE FOR HEALTH 
AND CARE EXCELLENCE 
NICE has evaluated maternity care in great detail 
and continues to publish many important guidelines 
relating to different aspects of pregnancy, covering 
antenatal, intrapartum and postnatal care. These 
provide the benchmark by which NHS Trusts are 
judged on their ability to provide care. The process 
of guideline development is rigorous, and stakehold￾ers are consulted at each stage of development. The 
guidelines are available through the NICE website 
(www.nice.org.uk) and provide the framework for 
standards of care within England and Wales. 
NATIONAL SCREENING COMMITTEE 
Screening has formed a part of antenatal care since 
its inception. The National Screening Committee 
is responsible for developing standards and strate￾gies for the implementation of these. The National 
Screening Committee has uniÿed and progressed 
standards for all aspects of antenatal screening across 
the UK. The provision of national standards means 
that new tests are critically evaluated before being 
offered to populations. Conditions for which screen￾ing is currently not recommended, such as group 
B streptococcus carriage, are regularly reviewed 
against current evidence. The National Screening 
Committee recently recommended the cessation of 
testing for rubella immunity. 
ROYAL COLLEGE OF 
OBSTETRICIANS AND 
GYNAECOLOGISTS 
The RCOG has many roles. These include develop￾ing national guidelines (not covered by the previ￾ously mentioned bodies), setting standards for the 
provision of care, training and revalidation, audit 
and research. The RCOG publishes a large number 
of guidelines pertinent to pregnancy, with patient 
information lea°ets to accompany many of these. 
These guidelines are reviewed 3-yearly and are 
accessible to all on the RCOG website (www.rcog. 
org.uk). The RCOG works in partnership with other 
colleges such as the Royal College of Midwives 
(RCM) to set standards for maternity care. These 
standards provide important drivers to organiza￾tions, such as the Clinical Negligence Scheme for 
Trusts, in setting standards for levels of care and 
performance by hospitals. 
CONSUMER GROUPS 
As well as providing support and advice for preg￾nant women, often at times of great need, consumer 
KEY LEARNING POINTS 
˜ Antenatal care improves pregnancy outcomes, 
and a variety of models exist. 
˜ There are key visits during the pregnancy when 
essential investigations or decisions are taken 
regarding antenatal care and delivery. 
˜ Antenatal care should be seen as an opportunity 
for education, reassurance and screening for 
potential problems. 
˜ Continued efforts should be made to improve 
access to antenatal care for disadvantaged and 
minority groups. 
26 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 27 04/03/2024 16:06
 
 
 
 
 
Self-assessment 
groups allow them to have a louder voice in the 
planning and provision of maternity care. National 
consumer groups such as the National Childbirth 
Trust have representatives on many in°uential pan￾els, such as the National Screening Committee and 
RCOG working groups. At local level, each hospital 
should have a maternity services liaison committee. 
When these committees work well, they can pro￾vide essential consumer input into service delivery 
at local level. 
FURTHER READING 
Qureshi H, Massey E, Kirwan D, Davies T, Robson S, 
White J, Jones J, Allard S (2014). BCSH guideline 
for the use of anti-D immunoglobulin for the 
prevention of haemolytic disease of the fetus and 
newborn. Transfusion Medicine, 24(1): 8–20. 
British HIV Association (2014). British HIV 
Association guidelines for the management of 
HIV infection. HIV Medicine, 15(Suppl. 4): 1–77. 
https://www.bhiva.org/ÿ le/FCUcXrfVgWsYl/ 
BHIVA-Pregnancy-guidelines-update-2014.pdf . 
NHS England (2023). Fetal anomaly screening 
programme handbook: Guidance – Overview. 
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/ 
fetal-anomaly-screening-programme-handbook/ 
overview. 
Public Health England (2015). Infectious Diseases in 
Pregnancy Screening (IDPS). https://assets.pub￾lishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/ 
uploads/attachment_data/ÿ le/439996/Infectious_ 
Disease_in_Pregnancy_Screening__IDPS_.pdf.
 NICE (2012). Antenatal Care. Quality standard 
[QS22]. Last updated: 14 February 2023. http:// 
www.nice.org.uk/guidance/qs22.
 RCOG guidance: https://www.rcog.org.uk/guidelines. 
SELF-ASSESSMENT 
For interactive SBAs and EMQs relating to this chapter, visit www.routledge.com/cw/mccarthy. 
CASE HISTORY 1 
Mrs Singh, a 39-year-old woman originally from Pakistan, 
is approximately 8 weeks’ gestation and attends a book￾ing visit with her community midwife, who ÿlls out her 
client-held records. This is Mrs Singh’s fourth pregnancy, 
having had two normal deliveries and then a caesarean 
section for a transverse lie. The previous babies’ weights 
were 2.30 kg, 2.40 kg and 2.35 kg, all born at 39 weeks’ 
gestation. Mrs Singh’s booking blood pressure is 140/95 
mmHg and her BMI is 37. 
Identify the key issues raised and prepare a plan for 
management during the pregnancy.
 ANSWER 
Mrs Singh is originally from Pakistan, although she has 
been a UK citizen for many years. This makes a language 
problem less likely. However, there is no record that a 
thalassaemia screen has ever been performed. This is 
important because thalassaemia trait (carrier status) might 
contribute to maternal anaemia. Furthermore, if the father 
of this baby is also a carrier, the child will have a one in four 
chance of having thalassaemia. It is reassuring that all the 
children are ÿt and well, but this does not exclude the pos￾sibility that they are both carriers. 
Mrs Singh is 39 years old. This slightly increases the 
risks of pregnancy complications including pre-eclampsia, 
but, more signiÿcantly, it is associated with an increase 
in the risk of certain fetal chromosomal abnormalities, 
principally Down syndrome. The decision to undergo 
screening and invasive testing is a personal one, often 
in°uenced by cultural and religious beliefs, but an offer of 
screening should be made to all pregnant women. 
Mrs Singh likely has chronic hypertension (possibly 
related to her body weight) but is not currently on medi￾cation. Mrs Singh should be commenced on 75–150 mg 
aspirin once daily to reduce the risk of pre-eclampsia. 
She should also be assessed further for consideration of 
starting an antihypertensive agent. 
Mrs Singh’s children have all been of low birthweight. 
It is difÿcult to determine whether they were constitu￾tionally (genetically) small but healthy or whether they 
were pathologically small (i.e. growth restricted). Serial 
ultrasound scans should be performed as surveillance 
for fetal growth restriction. 
(Contd.) 
27 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 28 04/03/2024 16:06
 
Antenatal care 
CASE HISTORY 2 
Mrs Murphy, a 43-year-old woman from Ireland, attends 
your clinic for a booking visit. This is her second preg￾nancy. The ÿrst resulted in severe preterm pre-eclampsia 
resulting in emergency caesarean section at 27 weeks’ 
gestation of a baby boy, John, weighing 550 g. John is 
3˛ years old and has signiÿcant developmental issues. 
This is an egg donation pregnancy. Her blood pressure 
is 150/100 mmHg and her BMI is 45. 
Identify the key issues raised and prepare a plan for 
management during the pregnancy. 
ANSWER 
Mrs Murphy is at very high risk of recurrence of preterm 
pre-eclampsia. She is obese and likely has underlying 
chronic hypertension that is poorly controlled. She is 
of advanced maternal age and this is an egg donation 
pregnancy, both of which are additional risk factors for 
pre-eclampsia. Mrs Murphy requires treatment with an 
appropriate antihypertensive agent such as labetolol with 
the aim of getting her blood pressure to <135/85 mmHg, 
commencement of aspirin 75–150 mg aspirin once daily 
until 36 weeks’ gestation and referral to a dietician and 
to a high-risk perinatal medicine clinic. Mrs Murphy will 
require serial growth scans and regularly (likely fortnightly) 
assessment for monitoring of blood pressure and signs 
and symptoms of pre-eclampsia. 
(Contd.) 
Mrs Singh has a raised BMI; this increases her risks of 
anaesthetic complications (such as failure to intubate or 
successfully site a spinal anaesthetic) and also her risks 
of developing GDM. An OGTT will be recommended at 
24–28 weeks’ gestation to screen for this. 
Finally, the mode of delivery after a previous caesar￾ean section requires discussion. The transverse lie was 
probably secondary to uterine laxity, but this would need 
to be conÿrmed by obtaining the previous pregnancy 
notes. The options for mode of delivery (vaginal birth 
after caesarean versus elective repeat caesarean sec￾tion) will need to be discussed. Malpresentation at term 
may occur again. 
In conclusion, Mrs Singh has a number of factors that 
increase the risk of complications in this pregnancy. 
Shared care under a hospital consultant would be the 
appropriate form of antenatal care. 
28 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 29 04/03/2024 16:06
3 
Normal fetal development and 
growth 
ANNA L DAVID 
 
Introduction 29 Amniotic ° uid 40 
Fetal growth 29 Further reading 41 
Fetal development 32 Self-assessment 41 
 Learning Objectives 
• Understand that fetal growth and birthweight are important determinants of immediate neonatal 
health and long-term adult health. 
• Appreciate the fetal, maternal and placental factors that affect fetal growth and development. 
• Be familiar with fetal circulation and the speciÿc shunts that prioritize delivery of oxygenated blood 
from the placenta to the fetal brain, and appreciate how fetal circulation transitions at birth to adult 
circulation. 
• Be aware of normal fetal organ development during pregnancy, how fetal structural abnormalities 
arise and how they can affect the fetus and neonate. 
• Recognize the importance of normal amniotic °uid physiology to fetal growth and development. 
INTRODUCTION FETAL GROWTH 
Knowledge of normal development, growth and 
maturation is important for understanding the 
complications that may arise in pregnancy and for 
the neonate. For example, an understanding of nor￾mal lung development will explain why preterm 
infants are at higher risk of respiratory distress syn￾drome than term infants, and why bowel protrud￾ing into the umbilical cord at 10 weeks’ gestation 
is normal and is not diagnosed as an omphalocele 
(exomphalos). 
This chapter provides an overview of the devel￾opment, growth and maturation of the main body 
organs and systems in the human fetus and the 
implications of disordered growth. 
Fetal growth and the eventual weight of the fetus at 
birth are important, not only for the immediate health 
of the neonate but also for long-term adult health and 
even into the next generation. The Developmental 
Origins of Health and Disease (DOHaD) hypothesis 
describes that reduced fetal growth is strongly asso￾ciated with a number of chronic conditions later in 
life. This increased susceptibility results from adap￾tations made by the fetus in an environment with 
limited nutrient supply. These chronic conditions 
include coronary heart disease, stroke, diabetes and 
hypertension. 
Fetal size can be assessed antenatally in two ways. 
The symphysis–fundal height (SFH) measurement is 
29 
10.1201/9781003196112-3 ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 30 04/03/2024 16:06
Normal fetal development and growth 
taken externally by using a tape measure to assess 
the uterine size from the superior edge of the pubic 
symphysis to the uterine fundus. Second, ultrasound 
can be used to measure the dimensions of speciÿc 
fetal parts, and the estimated fetal weight (EFW) 
is then calculated using equations such as those 
described by Hadlock (see Chapter 4). Fetal size is 
described in terms of the fetus’s size for gestational 
age and is presented on centile charts. Centile charts 
can be designed for a population or can be personal￾ized based on maternal factors.
 Figure 3.1 shows the EFW centile chart for two 
fetuses. Fetus A has an EFW that is growing nor￾mally along the 75th centile. Fetus B is small and 
has suboptimal fetal growth; the EFW starts below 
the 5th centile and moves progressively further away 
from the normal centiles as gestation advances. 
Customized centile charts (Figure 1.2, Chapter˜1) 
take into consideration factors that are known to 
affect fetal growth such as maternal height, weight, 
parity, ethnicity and fetal sex. 
A fetus that is less than the 10th centile is 
described as being small for gestational age (SGA) 
(Figure 3.1, Fetus B). This is a statistical concept 
g 6,000
5,000
4,000
3,000
2,000
1,000
0
designed to categorize on size but not necessarily on 
neonatal outcome. An SGA fetus may be constitu￾tionally small; in other words, their growth potential 
was reached and they were destined to be that small. 
Many fetuses that are SGA, however, have failed to 
reach their full growth potential, a condition called 
fetal growth restriction (FGR). FGR is associated 
with a signiÿcant increased risk of perinatal mor￾bidity and mortality. Growth-restricted fetuses are 
more likely to suffer intrauterine hypoxia/asphyxia 
and, as a consequence, be stillborn or demonstrate 
signs and symptoms of hypoxic-ischaemic encepha￾lopathy, including seizures and multi-organ damage 
or failure in the neonatal period. Other complica￾tions to which these growth-restricted babies are 
more prone include neonatal hypothermia, hypo￾glycaemia, infection and necrotizing enterocolitis. 
In the medium term, cerebral palsy is more preva￾lent. It is now recognized from large epidemiologi￾cal studies that low birthweight infants (deÿned as 
EFW <2,500 g) and SGA babies are more likely to 
develop hypertension, cardiovascular disease (isch￾aemic heart disease and stroke) and diabetes in adult 
life, indicating that the impact of FGR is long lasting. 
A
B
22 26 30 34 38 42
Weeks
Figure 3.1 Population centile chart for estimated fetal weight by ultrasound 
measurements. Fetus A has normal growth (green crosses); fetus B has 
suboptimal growth (red crosses). 
30 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 31 04/03/2024 16:06
 
 
 
Fetal growth 
Recognizing the small fetus and distinguishing the 
‘small but healthy’ SGA baby from those that are 
‘small and unhealthy’ is a major obstetric challenge. 
Interventions such as the induction of labour or cae￾sarean section to deliver the growth-restricted SGA 
fetus early from the intrauterine environment may 
improve outcome. Not all growth-restricted fetuses, 
however, are SGA: although a baby’s birthweight 
is within the normal range for gestation (above the 
10th centile), they may have failed to reach their full 
growth potential. Detecting these fetuses is even 
more difÿcult than identifying the small growth￾restricted fetus. 
DETERMINANTS OF FETAL 
GROWTH AND BIRTHWEIGHT 
Determinants of fetal growth and birthweight are 
multifactorial. They include the in°uence of the nat￾ural growth potential of the fetus, which is dictated 
largely by the fetal genome and epigenome, but 
also the intrauterine environment, which is in°u￾enced by both maternal and placental factors. The 
birthweight is therefore the result of the interaction 
between the fetus and the maternal uterine environ￾ment. Fetal growth is dependent on adequate deliv￾ery to, and transfer of nutrients and oxygen across, 
the placenta, which relies on appropriate maternal 
nutrition and placental perfusion. Factors affecting 
these are discussed here and in Chapter 9. Other 
factors are important in determining fetal growth 
and include fetal hormones that affect the metabolic 
rate, the growth of tissues and the maturation of 
individual organs. In particular, insulin-like growth 
factors coordinate a precise and orderly increase in 
growth throughout late gestation. Insulin and thy￾roxine (T4) are required through late gestation to 
ensure appropriate growth in normal and adverse 
nutritional circumstances. Fetal hyperinsulinaemia, 
which occurs in association with maternal diabetes 
mellitus when maternal glycaemic control is subop￾timal, results in fetal macrosomia with, in particular, 
excessive fat deposition. This leads to complications 
such as late stillbirth, shoulder dystocia and neo￾natal hypoglycaemia. Other factors related to fetal, 
maternal and placental in°uences are discussed in 
Chapter 9. 
FETAL INFLUENCES 
GENETIC 
The fetal genome plays a signiÿcant role in deter￾mining fetal size. Early-onset and sometimes severe 
FGR is seen in fetuses with chromosomal defects 
such as the trisomies, particularly of chromosomes 
13 (Patau syndrome) and 18 (Edwards syndrome), 
as well as triploidy. FGR is also common in trisomy 
21 (Down syndrome). The other genetic in°uence is 
fetal sex, with slightly greater birthweights in males. 
EPIGENETIC 
Epigenetic changes play a role in determining fetal 
size. Epigenetic changes are modiÿcations of deoxyri￾bonucleic acid (DNA), which occur without any altera￾tion in the underlying DNA sequence, and can control 
whether a gene is turned on or off and how much of 
a particular message is made. In genomic imprint￾ing, the epigenetic process silences one parental allele, 
resulting in monoallelic expression. Genes that are 
paternally expressed tend to promote fetal growth, 
whereas maternally expressed genes suppress growth. 
INFECTION 
Although relatively uncommon in the UK, infection 
has been implicated in FGR, particularly rubella, cyto￾megalovirus, Toxoplasma and syphilis (discussed in 
further detail in Chapter 11). When a fetus is found to 
be very small on ultrasound measurement (for exam￾ple EFW less than the 5th centile for gestational age), 
it is common to test the maternal blood for antibodies 
(immunoglobulin (Ig)G and IgM) to these infections. 
The results are then compared with samples taken at 
booking (see Chapter 2) to determine if the mother 
has evidence of seroconversion during pregnancy, 
which would suggest an acute infection. 
MATERNAL INFLUENCES 
PHYSIOLOGICAL INFLUENCES 
In normal pregnancy, maternal physiological in°u￾ences on birthweight include height, pre-pregnancy 
weight, age and ethnic group. Heavier and taller 
31 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 32 04/03/2024 16:06
 
 
 
 
Normal fetal development and growth 
mothers tend to have bigger babies, and certain 
ethnic groups have lighter babies (e.g. South Asian 
and Afro-Caribbean ethnicities). Parity also has 
an in°uence, with increasing parity being associ￾ated with increased birthweight. Age in°uences 
are related to the association of age with parity (i.e. 
older mothers are more likely to be parous). In older 
pregnant women, however, there is an increased 
risk of chromosomal abnormalities and acquired 
maternal disease, for example hypertension, which 
lead to lower birthweights. Teenage pregnancy is 
also associated with FGR. 
BEHAVIOURAL INFLUENCES 
Maternal behavioural in°uences are also important, 
with smoking, alcohol and recreational drug use all 
associated with reduced fetal growth and birthweight. 
Mothers who smoke during pregnancy deliver babies 
up to 300 g lighter than non-smoking mothers. This 
effect may be through toxins, for example carbon 
monoxide, or vascular effects on uteroplacental cir￾culation. Stopping smoking, even part way through 
pregnancy, is associated with higher birthweight. 
Alcohol crosses the placenta, and a dose-related 
effect has been noted, with up to a 500 g reduction 
in birthweight, along with other anomalies such as 
developmental delay occurring in those individuals 
who drink heavily (two drinks per day). Recreational 
drug use is often associated with smoking and alco￾hol use. Heroin use is independently associated with 
a reduction in birthweight. Cocaine use is associated 
with spontaneous preterm birth, low birthweight 
and small head circumference. Placental abruption 
is associated with cigarette smoking and the use of 
recreational drugs such as cocaine. 
CHRONIC DISEASE 
Chronic maternal disease may restrict fetal growth. 
Such diseases are largely those that affect placental 
function or result in maternal hypoxia, and include 
hypertension (essential or secondary to renal dis￾ease) and lung or cardiac conditions (cystic ÿbrosis, 
cyanotic heart disease). Hypertension can lead to 
placental infarction that impairs placental function. 
Maternal thrombophilia can also result in placental 
thrombosis and infarction. 
PLACENTAL INFLUENCES 
Normal placental development and function from 
early pregnancy is key to ensuring that the fetus 
receives adequate oxygen and nutrients from the 
mother. Placental insufÿciency occurs when there is 
inadequate transfer of nutrients and oxygen across 
the placenta to the fetus. It can be due to poor mater￾nal uterine artery blood °ow, a thicker placental 
trophoblast barrier and/or abnormal fetus villous 
development. Placental infarction secondary to the 
maternal chronic conditions discussed previously or 
acute premature separation like in placental abrup￾tion can impair nutrient and oxygen transfer and 
hence reduce fetal growth. Recurrent bleeding from 
the placenta (antepartum haemorrhage) can, over 
time, compromise placental function, leading to poor 
fetal growth in the latter part of pregnancy. FGR is 
discussed further in Chapter 9. 
FETAL DEVELOPMENT 
CARDIOVASCULAR SYSTEM AND 
FETAL CIRCULATION 
Fetal circulation is quite different from that of an 
adult (Figure 3.2). Fetal circulation is characterized 
by four shunts that ensure that the oxygenated blood 
from the placenta is prioritized for delivery to the 
fetal brain. These shunts are the: 
• umbilical circulation 
• ductus venosus 
• foramen ovale 
• ductus arteriosus 
The umbilical circulation carries fetal blood to 
and from the placenta for gas and nutrient exchange. 
The umbilical arteries arise from the caudal end 
of the dorsal fetal aorta and carry deoxygenated 
blood from the fetus to the placenta. Normally, two 
umbilical arteries are present, but a single umbili￾cal artery is relatively common (approximately 0.5% 
of fetuses) and can be associated with reduced fetal 
growth velocity and some congenital anomalies. 
Oxygenated blood is returned to the fetus via the 
umbilical vein to the fetal liver. A small proportion 
of blood oxygenates the liver, but the bulk passes 32 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 33 04/03/2024 16:06
Fetal development 
Superior 
vena cava 
Right 
atrium 
Inferior 
vena cava 
Ductus 
venosus 
Umbilical 
vein 
Placenta 
through the ductus venosus, bypassing the liver, 
and joins the inferior vena cava as it enters the right 
atrium. The ductus venosus is a narrow vessel, and 
high blood velocities are generated within it. This 
streaming of the ductus venosus blood, together 
with a membranous valve in the right atrium (the 
crista dividens), prevents mixing of the well-oxy￾genated blood from the ductus venosus with the 
desaturated blood of the inferior vena cava. The duc￾tus venosus stream passes across the right atrium 
through a physiological defect in the atrial septum 
called the foramen ovale to the left atrium. From 
here, the blood passes through the mitral valve to 
the left ventricle and hence to the aorta. About 50% 
of the blood goes to the head and upper extremities, 
providing high levels of oxygen to supply the fetal 
heart, upper thorax and brain; the remainder passes 
down the aorta to mix with blood of reduced oxygen 
saturation from the right ventricle. Deoxygenated 
blood returning from the fetal head and lower body 
°ows through the right atrium and ventricle and 
into the pulmonary artery, after which it bypasses 
Medium 
Low 
High 
aorta 
artery
Umbilical 
arteries
 Figure 3.2 Diagrammatic representation of fetal circulation. (Adapted from Harrington K, 
Campbell S (1995). A Colour Atlas of Doppler Ultrasonography in Obstetrics. Arnold.) 
Pulmonary 
Descending 
Proportional oxygen content of blood 
the lungs to enter the descending aorta via the duc￾tus arteriosus that connects the two vessels. Only a 
small portion of blood from the right ventricle passes 
to the fetal lungs, as they are not functional before 
birth. By this means, the desaturated blood from the 
right ventricle passes down the aorta to enter the 
umbilical arterial circulation where it is returned to 
the placenta for reoxygenation. 
Prior to birth, the ductus arteriosus remains 
patent due to the production of prostaglandin E2 
and prostacyclin, which act as local vasodilators. 
Premature closure of the ductus arteriosus has been 
reported with maternal administration of cyclooxy￾genase inhibitors before birth. At birth, the cessa￾tion of umbilical blood °ow causes cessation of °ow 
in the ductus venosus, a fall in pressure in the right 
atrium and closure of the foramen ovale. Ventilation 
of the lungs opens the pulmonary circulation, with 
a rapid fall in pulmonary vascular resistance, which 
dramatically increases the pulmonary circulation. 
The ductus arteriosus closes functionally within a 
few days of birth. 33 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 34 04/03/2024 16:06
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Normal fetal development and growth 
Occasionally, this transition from fetal to adult 
circulation is delayed, usually because the pulmo￾nary vascular resistance fails to fall despite ade￾quate breathing. This delay, termed persistent fetal 
circulation, results in left-to-right shunting of blood 
from the aorta through the ductus arteriosus to the 
lungs. The baby remains cyanosed and can suffer 
from life-threatening hypoxia. This delay in closure 
of the ductus arteriosus is most commonly seen 
in infants born preterm (<37 weeks’ gestation). It 
results in congestion in the pulmonary circulation 
and a reduction in blood °ow to the gastrointestinal 
tract and brain, and is implicated in the pathogen￾esis of necrotizing enterocolitis and intraventricu￾lar haemorrhage, both of which are complications 
associated with preterm birth. 
CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM 
Neural development is one of the earliest systems 
to begin and one of the last to be completed during 
pregnancy, generating the most complex structure 
within the fetus. The early central nervous system 
begins as a simple neural plate that folds to form a 
groove, then a tube, open initially at each end. Failure 
of these openings to close contributes to a major class 
of neural abnormalities called neural tube defects 
(see Chapter 5). Later development of the fetal brain 
involves elaborate folding of the neurocortex, which 
occurs in the second half of pregnancy. There is a 
rapid increase in total grey matter in the last trimes￾ter, which is mainly due to a fourfold increase in cor￾tical grey matter. 
RESPIRATORY SYSTEM 
The lung ÿrst appears as an outgrowth from the 
primitive foregut at about 3–4 weeks post-concep￾tion and, by 4–7 weeks, epithelial tube branches and 
vascular connections are forming. By 20 weeks, the 
conductive airway tree and parallel vascular tree is 
well developed. By 26 weeks, with further devel￾opment of the airway and vascular tree, type I and 
II epithelial cells are beginning to differentiate. 
Pulmonary surfactant, a complex mixture of phos￾pholipids and proteins that reduces surface tension 
at the air–liquid interface of the alveolus, is produced 
by the type II cells starting from about 30 weeks. 
Dilatation of the gas-exchanging airspaces, alveolar 
formation and maturation of the surfactant system 
continues between this time and delivery at term. 
The fetal lungs are ÿlled with °uid, the production of 
which starts in early gestation and ends in the early 
stages of labour. At birth, the production of this °uid 
ceases and the °uid present is absorbed. Adrenaline, 
to which the pulmonary epithelium becomes increas￾ingly sensitive towards term, appears to play a major 
role in this process. With the clearance of the °uid and 
with the onset of breathing, the resistance in the vas￾cular bed falls and results in an increase in pulmonary 
blood °ow. A consequent increased pressure in the 
left atrium leads to closure of the foramen ovale. 
Pulmonary surfactant prevents the collapse of 
small alveoli during expiration by lowering surface 
tension. The predominant phospholipid in sur￾factant (80% of the total) is phosphatidylcholine 
(lecithin), the production of which is enhanced by 
cortisol, growth restriction and prolonged rup￾ture of the membranes, and is delayed in maternal 
diabetes mellitus. Inadequate amounts of surfac￾tant result in poor lung expansion and poor gas 
exchange. In infants delivering preterm, prior to 
the maturation of the surfactant system, this results 
in a condition known as respiratory distress syn￾drome (RDS). It typically presents within the ÿrst 
few hours of life with signs of respiratory distress, 
including tachypnoea and cyanosis. It occurs in 
more than 80% of infants born between 23 and 27 
weeks, falling to 10% of infants born between 34 
and 36 weeks. Acute complications include hypoxia 
and asphyxia, intraventricular haemorrhage and 
necrotizing enterocolitis. The incidence and sever￾ity of RDS can be reduced by administering steroids 
antenatally to mothers 12–24 hours before they 
deliver preterm. The steroids cross the placenta and 
stimulate the premature release of stored fetal pul￾monary surfactant in the fetal alveoli. 
Numerous, but intermittent, fetal breathing 
movements (FBMs) occur in utero, especially dur￾ing rapid eye movement (REM) sleep. By opposing 
lung recoil, FBM helps to maintain the high level of 
lung expansion that is essential for normal growth 
and structural maturation of the fetal lungs. During 
‘apnoeic’ periods between successive episodes of 
FBM, active laryngeal constriction has the effect of 
opposing lung recoil by resisting the escape of lung 34 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 35 04/03/2024 16:06
 
Fetal development 
RIGHT 
HEART LUNG 
STOMACH 
LEFT 
LIVER? 
Figure 3.3 Ultrasound images of a fetus with a severe 
left-sided congenital diaphragmatic hernia. There is a 
herniated fetal liver, stomach and bowel in the left side of 
the thorax, compressing the heart to the right side of the 
thorax (right-sided mediastinal shift). 
liquid via the trachea. The prolonged absence or 
impairment of FBM is likely to result in a reduced 
mean level of lung expansion that can lead to hypo￾plasia of the lungs. An adequate amniotic °uid vol￾ume is also necessary for normal lung maturation. 
Oligohydramnios (reduced amniotic °uid volume), 
decreased intrathoracic space (e.g. congenital dia￾phragmatic hernia) or chest wall deformities can 
result in pulmonary hypoplasia, which leads to pro￾gressive respiratory failure from birth. 
BOX 3.1: Causes of pulmonary 
hypoplasia 
Reduced or absent FBMs 
˜ Inherited neuromuscular disorders (e.g. myotonic 
dystrophy) 
Reduced (oligohydramnios) or absent 
(anhydramnios) amniotic ˜uid 
˜ Preterm prelabour rupture of the membranes 
<24 weeks’ gestation 
˜ Bilateral congenital renal agenesis (Potter 
syndrome) 
˜ Lower urinary tract obstruction 
Decreased intrathoracic space 
˜ Congenital diaphragmatic hernia 
˜ Congenital cystic adenomatoid malformation of 
the lung 
˜ Skeletal dysplasia (e.g. thanatophoric dysplasia) 
ALIMENTARY SYSTEM 
The primitive gut is present by the end of the 
fourth week, having been formed by folding of the 
embryo in both craniocaudal and lateral directions, 
with the resulting inclusion of the dorsal aspect of 
the yolk sac into the intraembryonic coelom. The 
primitive gut consists of three parts – the foregut, 
midgut and hindgut – and is suspended by a mes￾entery through which the blood supply, lymphatics 
and nerves reach the gut parenchyma. The foregut 
endoderm gives rise to the oesophagus, stomach, 
proximal half of the duodenum, liver and pancreas. 
The midgut endoderm gives rise to the distal half of 
the duodenum, jejunum, ileum, caecum, appendix, 
ascending colon and transverse colon. The hindgut 
endoderm develops into the descending colon, sig￾moid colon and rectum. 
Between 5 and 6 weeks, probably due to the lack 
of space in the abdominal cavity as a consequence 
of the rapidly enlarging liver and elongation of the 
intestine, the midgut is extruded into the umbilical 
cord as a physiological hernia. The gut undergoes a 
270° anticlockwise rotation prior to re-entering the 
abdominal cavity by 12 weeks’ gestation. Failure of 
the gut to re-enter the abdominal cavity results in the 
development of an omphalocele (otherwise called an 
exomphalos) and this condition is associated with 
chromosomal anomalies (Figure 3.4). 
Other malformations include those that result 
from failure of the normal rotation of the gut, ÿstu￾lae and atresias. Malrotation anomalies can result in 
Stomach 
Abdominal 
wall 
Midgut loop 
Figure 3.4 Midgut herniation. 
Hindgut 
35 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 36 04/03/2024 16:06
 
 
 
Normal fetal development and growth 
volvulus and bowel obstruction. Atresias exist when 
there is a segment of bowel in which the lumen is not 
patent and most commonly occur in the upper gas￾trointestinal tract (i.e. the oesophagus or duodenum). 
As the fetus continually swallows amniotic °uid, any 
obstruction that prevents fetal swallowing or passage 
of amniotic °uid along the gut will result in the devel￾opment of polyhydramnios (excess amniotic °uid). 
Gastrointestinal ÿstulae can also occur, the most com￾mon being a tracheo-oesophageal ÿstula (Figure 3.5), 
in which a connection exists between the distal end 
of the oesophagus and the trachea. Without surgical 
intervention, the neonate can develop complications 
after birth, as breathing causes air to pass from the 
trachea to the oesophagus and stomach, and feeding 
results in swallowed milk and stomach acid passing 
into the lungs. Some babies with tracheo-oesophageal 
ÿstula also have other congenital anomalies. This is 
known as VACTERL (vertebral, anal, cardiac, tra￾cheal, (o)esophageal, renal and limb anomalies). 
Peristalsis in the intestine occurs from the second 
trimester. The large bowel is ÿlled with meconium 
at term. Defaecation in utero, and hence meconium 
in the amniotic °uid, is associated with post-term 
Upper atretic 
pouch of 
oesophagus 
Fistula 
Figure 3.5 Tracheo-oesophageal ÿstula. 
pregnancies and fetal hypoxia. Aspiration of meco￾nium-stained liquor by the fetus at birth can result 
in meconium aspiration syndrome and respiratory 
distress. 
In the last trimester of pregnancy, while body 
water content gradually diminishes, glycogen and 
fat stores increase about ÿvefold. Preterm infants 
have a reduced ability to withstand starvation and 
are at risk of hypoglycaemia, as they have virtually 
no fat. This is aggravated by an incompletely devel￾oped alimentary system and may manifest in a poor 
and unsustained suck, uncoordinated swallow￾ing mechanism, delayed gastric emptying and poor 
absorption of carbohydrates, fat and other nutrients. 
Growth-restricted fetuses also have reduced glycogen 
stores and are therefore more prone to hypoglycaemia 
within the early neonatal period. 
LIVER, PANCREAS AND GALL 
BLADDER 
The pancreas, liver and epithelial lining of the biliary 
tree derive from the endoderm of the foregut. The 
liver and biliary tree appear late in the third week or 
early in the fourth week as the hepatic diverticulum, 
which is an outgrowth of the ventral wall of the dis￾tal foregut. The larger portion of this diverticulum 
gives rise to the parenchymal cells (hepatocytes) and 
the hepatic ducts, while the smaller portion gives rise 
to the gall bladder. By the sixth week, the fetal liver 
performs haematopoiesis. This peaks at 12–16 weeks 
and continues until approximately 36 weeks. 
In utero, the normal metabolic functions of the 
liver are performed by the placenta. For example, 
unconjugated bilirubin from haemoglobin break￾down is actively transported from the fetus to the 
mother, with only a small proportion being conju￾gated in the liver and secreted in the bile (the mech￾anism after birth). The fetal liver also differs from 
the adult organ in many processes; for example, the 
fetal liver has a reduced ability to conjugate biliru￾bin because of relative deÿciencies in the necessary 
enzymes such as glucuronyl transferase. After birth, 
the loss of the placental route of excretion of uncon￾jugated bilirubin, in the presence of reduced conjuga￾tion, particularly in the premature infant, may result 
in transient unconjugated hyperbilirubinaemia or 
physiological jaundice of the newborn. 36 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 37 04/03/2024 16:06
 
Fetal development 
A B 
C D 
Glycogen is stored within the liver in small quan￾tities from the ÿrst trimester, but storage is maximal 
in the third trimester, with abundant stores being 
present at term. Growth-restricted and premature 
infants have deÿcient glycogen stores; this renders 
them prone to neonatal hypoglycaemia. 
KIDNEY AND URINARY TRACT 
The kidney, recognized in its permanent ÿnal form 
(metanephric kidney), is preceded by the devel￾opment and subsequent regression of two primi￾tive forms: the pronephros and the mesonephros. 
The pronephros originates at about 3 weeks in a 
ridge that forms on either side of the midline in the 
embryo, known as the nephrogenic ridge. In this 
region, epithelial cells arrange themselves in a series 
of tubules and join laterally with the pronephric 
duct. The pronephros is non-functional in mammals. 
Each pronephric duct grows towards the tail of the 
embryo. As it does so, it induces intermediate meso￾derm in the thoracolumbar area to become epithelial 
tubules called mesonephric tubules. The pronephros 
degenerates while the mesonephric (Wolfÿan) duct 
Figure 3.6 Normal kidneys in coronal view (A) and transverse view (B). The kidneys 
are outlined with blue dots and the renal pelvis in each kidney is outlined in green dots. 
(C) A duplex kidney with two separate dilated renal pelvises (green dots). (D) A pelvic 
kidney with a normal size renal pelvis (green dots outline the renal pelvis; blue dots 
outline the renal cortex). 
extends towards the most caudal end of the embryo, 
ultimately attaching to the cloaca. 
During the ÿfth week of gestation, the ureteric 
bud develops as an out-pouching from the Wolfÿan 
duct. This bud grows towards the head of the 
embryo and into the intermediate mesoderm and, 
as it does so, it branches to form the collecting duct 
system (ureter, pelvis, calyces and collecting ducts) 
of the kidney and induces the formation of the renal 
secretory system (glomeruli, convoluted tubes, 
loops of Henle). Subsequently, the lower portions of 
the nephric duct will migrate caudally (downwards) 
and connect with the bladder, thereby forming the 
ureters. As the fetus develops, the torso elongates 
and the kidneys rotate and migrate upwards within 
the abdomen, which causes the length of the ure￾ters to increase. 
Failure of the normal migration of the kid￾ney upwards can result in a pelvic kidney, where it 
remains in the pelvic area (Figure 3.6). Abnormal 
development of the collecting duct system can result 
in duplications such as duplex kidneys (Figure 3.6). 
The most common sites of congenital urinary 
tract obstructive uropathies are at the pyeloureteric 
37 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 38 04/03/2024 16:06
 
Normal fetal development and growth 
Chest
K
B
A B
Figure 3.7 Posterior urethral valves. (A) The typical ‘keyhole’ sign in the fetal bladder 
(labelled ‘B’), where the dilated upper posterior urethra is indicated (white arrow). 
(B)˛Dilatation of the collecting system of the fetal kidney (labelled ‘K’). 
junction, at the vesicoureteric junction or as a con￾sequence of posterior urethral valves, an obstruct￾ing membrane in the posterior male urethra (Figure 
3.7). Severe obstruction in utero can lead to hydrone￾phrosis and renal interstitial ÿbrosis, with postnatal 
renal failure. 
In humans, all of the branches of the ureteric bud 
and the nephronic units have been formed by 32–36 
weeks’ gestation. However, these structures are not 
yet mature, and the maturation of the excretory and 
concentrating ability of the fetal kidneys is gradual 
and continues after birth. In the preterm infant, this 
may lead to abnormal water, glucose, sodium or acid– 
base homeostasis. 
As fetal urine forms much of the amniotic °uid, 
renal agenesis will result in a severe reduction in (oli￾gohydramnios) or the absence of amniotic °uid (anhy￾dramios). Babies born with bilateral renal agenesis 
(Potter syndrome), which is associated with other fea￾tures such as widely spaced eyes, small jaw and low set 
ears (results that are secondary to oligohydramnios), 
do not pass urine and usually die as a consequence of 
either ‘renal failure’ or pulmonary hypoplasia, again 
secondary to severe oligohydramnios. 
SKIN AND HOMEOSTASIS 
Fetal skin protects and facilitates homeostasis. The 
skin and its appendages (nails, hair) develop from 
the ectodermal and mesodermal germ layers. The 
epidermis develops from the surface ectoderm; 
the dermis and the hypodermis (the latter attaches 
the dermis of the skin to underlying tissues) both 
develop from mesenchymal cells in the mesoderm. 
By the fourth week following conception, a sin￾gle-cell layer of ectoderm surrounds the embryo. At 
about 6 weeks, this ectodermal layer differentiates 
into an outer periderm and an inner basal layer. The 
periderm eventually sloughs as the vernix, a creamy 
protective coat that covers the skin of the fetus. The 
basal layer produces the epidermis and the glands, 
nails and hair follicles. 
Over the ensuing weeks, the epithelium becomes 
stratiÿed and, by 16–20 weeks, all layers of the epi￾dermis are developed and each layer assumes a 
structure characteristic of the adult. Preterm babies 
have no vernix and have thin skin; this allows a pro￾portionately large amount of insensible water loss. 
Thermal control in cool, ambient temperatures is 
limited by a large surface-to-body weight ratio and 
poor thermal insulation. Heat may be conserved by 
peripheral vasoconstriction and can be generated by 
brown fat catabolism, but this is deÿcient in preterm 
or growth-restricted babies because of the small 
amount of subcutaneous fat and the immaturity of 
vascular tone regulation in the former. The response 
to warm ambient temperatures is also poor and can 
result in overheating of the infant. 
Hair follicles begin to develop as hair buds 
between 12 and 16 weeks from the basal layer of the 
epidermis. By 24 weeks, the hair follicles produce 
delicate fetal hair called lanugo, ÿrst on the head and 
then on other parts of the body. This lanugo is usu￾ally shed before birth. 
38 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 39 04/03/2024 16:06
Fetal development 
BLOOD AND IMMUNE SYSTEM 
Red blood cells and immune effector cells are derived 
from pluripotent haematopoietic cells, ÿrst noted in 
the blood islands of the yolk sac. By 8 weeks, the yolk 
sac is replaced by the liver as the source of these cells 
and, by 20 weeks, almost all of these cells are pro￾duced by the bone marrow. 
The development of the thymus and the second￾ary lymphoid organs is a highly ordered process 
that undergoes a rapid expansion in the ÿrst tri￾mester of pregnancy and appears to be largely ÿn￾ished by the time of birth. T-cell precursors transit 
to the thymus by 9 weeks’ gestation, and mature, 
naive and memory °˜ T-cells are readily found by 
12–14 weeks in spleen and lymph nodes; circulat￾ing mature T-cells are present by 16 weeks of gesta￾tion. In the second trimester, the fetal tissues have 
an increased frequency of regulatory T-cells, more 
than at any other time in fetal, neonatal or adult 
development, and this is important for the induc￾tion of speciÿc tolerance. Complement proteins are 
present by the middle of the second trimester and 
reach 50% of adult levels at term. Lymphoid precur￾sor cells develop into B-lymphocytes, detected in 
the fetal liver at 8 weeks of gestation, and appear 
in fetal blood circulation by 12 weeks of gestation. 
They undergo subsequent functional maturation in 
secondary lymphoid tissue (e.g. lymph nodes and 
spleen). Ig somatic hypermutation and class switch 
recombination already occur during intrauterine 
life, although much of the IgG in the fetus origi￾nates from the maternal circulation and crosses the 
placenta to provide passive immunity to the fetus 
and neonate. The fetus normally produces only 
small amounts of IgM and IgA, which do not cross 
the placenta. Detection of IgM/IgA in the newborn, 
without IgG, is indicative of fetal infection. 
Most haemoglobin in the fetus is fetal haemoglo￾bin (HbF), which has two gamma-chains (alpha-2, 
gamma-2). This differs from the adult haemoglo￾bins HbA and HbA2, which have two beta-chains 
(alpha-2, beta-2) and two delta-chains (alpha-2, 
delta-2), respectively. Ninety percent of haemoglobin 
in the fetus is HbF between 10 and 28 weeks of ges￾tation. From 28 to 34 weeks, a switch to HbA occurs 
and, at term, the ratio of HbF to HbA is 80:20; by 
6 months of age, only 1% of haemoglobin is HbF. 
A key feature of HbF is a higher afÿnity for oxygen 
than HbA. This, in association with a higher hae￾moglobin concentration (at birth, the mean capil￾lary haemoglobin is 18 g/dL), enhances transfer of 
oxygen across the placenta. 
Abnormal haemoglobin production results in 
thalassaemia. The thalassaemias are a group of 
genetic haematological disorders characterized by 
reduced or absent production of one or more of the 
globin chains of haemoglobin. Beta-thalassaemia 
results from reduced or absent production of the 
beta-globin chains. As the switch from HbF to HbA 
occurs, the absent or insufÿcient beta-globin chains 
shorten red cell survival, with destruction of these 
cells within the bone marrow and spleen. Beta￾thalassaemia major results from the inheritance of 
two abnormal beta genes; without treatment, this 
leads to severe anaemia, FGR, poor musculoskeletal 
development and skin pigmentation due to increased 
iron absorption. In the severest form of alpha￾thalassaemia, in which no alpha-globin chains are 
produced, severe fetal anaemia occurs with car￾diac failure, hepatosplenomegaly and generalized 
oedema. Abnormal °uid present in more than one 
cavity (for example fetal ascites, or pleural or pericar￾dial effusion) is called fetal hydrops. The infants are 
stillborn or die shortly after birth. 
ENDOCRINE SYSTEM 
Major components of the hypothalamic–pituitary axis 
are in place by 12 weeks’ gestation. Thyrotrophin￾releasing hormone and gonadotrophin-releasing 
hormone have been identiÿed in the fetal hypothal￾amus by the end of the ÿrst trimester. Testosterone 
produced by the interstitial cells of the testis is also 
synthesized in the ÿrst trimester of pregnancy and 
increases until 17–21 weeks, which mirrors the dif￾ferentiation of the male urogenital tract. Growth 
hormone is similarly present from early pregnancy 
and is detectable in the circulation from 12 weeks. 
The thyroid gland produces T4 from 10 to 12 weeks. 
Growth-restricted fetuses exist in a state of rela￾tive hypothyroidism, which may be a compensa￾tory measure to decrease metabolic rate and oxygen 
consumption. 
39 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 40 04/03/2024 16:06
Normal fetal development and growth 
BEHAVIOURAL STATES 
From conception, the fetus follows a developmental 
path, with milestones that continue into childhood. 
The ÿrst activity is the beating of the fetal heart, 
followed by fetal movements at 7–8 weeks. These 
start as just discernible movements and graduate 
through startles to movements of arms and legs, 
breathing movements and, by 12 weeks, yawn￾ing, sucking and swallowing. This means that, in 
the ÿrst trimester of pregnancy, the fetus exhibits 
movements that are observed after birth. Further 
maturation does not add new movements but results 
in a change in terms of combinations of movements 
and activity that re°ect fetal behavioural states. 
In the second trimester, for example, cycles of the 
absence or presence of movements change, mean￾ing that periods over which body movements are 
absent increase. 
Four fetal behavioural states have been described, 
annotated 1F–4F. 1F is quiescence, 2F is character￾ized by frequent and periodic gross body move￾ments with eye movements, 3F is characterized 
by no gross body movements but eye movements 
and 4F is vigorous continual activity again with eye 
movements. 1F is similar to quiet or non-REM sleep 
in the neonate, 2F is REM sleep, 3F is quiet wakeful￾ness and 4F is active wakefulness. An understand￾ing of fetal behaviour can assist in assessing fetal 
condition and well-being. 
AMNIOTIC FLUID 
By 12 weeks’ gestation, the amnion comes into con￾tact with the inner surface of the chorion and the two 
membranes become adherent, but never intimately 
fuse. Neither the amnion nor the chorion contains ves￾sels or nerves, but both do contain a signiÿcant quan￾tity of phospholipids, as well as enzymes involved in 
phospholipid hydrolysis. Choriodecidual function is 
thought to play a pivotal role in the initiation of labour 
through the production of prostaglandins E2 and F2a. 
The amniotic °uid is initially secreted by the 
amnion, but by the 10th week it is mainly a transu￾date of the fetal serum via the skin and umbilical cord. 
From 16 weeks’ gestation, the fetal skin becomes 
impermeable to water and the net increase in amni￾otic °uid is through a small imbalance between the 
contributions of °uid through the kidneys and lung 
°uids and removal by fetal swallowing. The amniotic 
°uid contains growth factors and multipotent stem 
cells, the function of which at present is unknown. 
Amniotic °uid volume increases progressively (10 
weeks, 30 mL; 20 weeks, 300 mL; 30 weeks, 600 mL; 
38 weeks, 1,000 mL), but from term there is a rapid fall 
in volume (40 weeks, 800 mL; 42 weeks, 350 mL). The 
reason for the late reduction has not been explained. 
The amniotic °uid index is calculated as the total 
measurement of the deepest pool in the four quad￾rants of the uterus (Figure 3.8). 
Figure 3.8 Amniotic °uid measurement and normal ranges. 40 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 41 04/03/2024 16:06
 
 
 
Further reading 
KEY LEARNING POINTS 
˜ Determinants of birthweight are multifactorial 
and include the in°uence of the natural growth 
potential of the fetus and the intrauterine 
environment. 
˜ Fetal circulation is quite different from that of the 
adult. Its distinctive features are as follows: 
– Oxygenation occurs in the placenta, not the 
lungs. 
– The right and left ventricles work in parallel 
rather than in series. 
– The heart, brain and upper body receive 
blood from the left ventricle, while the 
placenta and lower body receive blood from 
both the right and the left ventricles. 
˜ Surfactant prevents collapse of small alveoli in 
the newborn lung during expiration by lowering 
surface tension. Its production is maximal after 
28 weeks. 
˜ RDS is common in babies born prematurely and 
is associated with surfactant deÿciency. 
˜ The fetus requires an effective immune system 
to resist intrauterine and perinatal infections. 
Lymphocytes appear from 8 weeks and, by the 
middle of the second trimester, all phagocytic 
cells, T- and B-cells and complement are 
available to mount a response. 
˜ Fetal skin protects and facilitates homeostasis. 
˜ In utero, the normal metabolic functions of the 
liver are performed by the placenta. The loss of 
the placental route of excretion of unconjugated 
bilirubin, in the face of conjugating enzyme 
deÿciencies, particularly in the premature 
infant, may result in transient unconjugated 
hyperbilirubinaemia or physiological jaundice of 
the newborn. 
˜ Growth-restricted and premature infants have 
deÿcient glycogen stores; this renders them 
prone to neonatal hypoglycaemia. 
˜ The function of the amniotic °uid is to: 
– protect the fetus from mechanical injury 
– permit movement of the fetus while 
preventing limb contracture 
– prevent adhesions between the fetus and 
amnion 
– permit fetal lung development in which 
there is two-way movement of °uid into the 
fetal bronchioles; absence of amniotic °uid 
in the second trimester is associated with 
pulmonary hypoplasia. 
The function of the amniotic °uid is to: 
• protect the fetus from mechanical injury 
• permit movement of the fetus while preventing 
limb contracture 
• prevent adhesions between the fetus and amnion 
• permit fetal lung development in which there 
is two-way movement of °uid into the fetal 
bronchioles; absence of amniotic °uid in the 
second trimester is associated with pulmonary 
hypoplasia 
Major alterations in amniotic °uid volume occur 
when there is reduced contribution of °uid into the 
amniotic sac in conditions such as renal agenesis, 
cystic kidneys or FGR; oligohydramnios results. 
Reduced removal of °uid in conditions such as con￾genital neuromuscular disorders, anencephaly and 
oesophageal/duodenal atresia, which prevent fetal 
swallowing, is associated with polyhydramnios. 
FURTHER READING 
Moore KL, Persaud TVN , Torchia MG (2015). The 
Developing Human: Clinically Oriented Embryology, 
10th edn. Saunders. 
41 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 42 04/03/2024 16:06
 
 
 
 
 
Normal fetal development and growth 
SELF-ASSESSMENT 
For interactive SBAs and EMQs relating to this chapter, visit www.routledge.com/cw/mccarthy. 
CASE HISTORY 1 
A 26 year old is admitted to the labour ward at 28 weeks’ 
gestation. She gives a history suggestive of preterm 
prelabour rupture of the membranes and is experiencing 
uterine contractions. The mother receives an injection of 
dexamethasone corticosteroids to mature the fetal lungs 
and an infusion of magnesium sulphate is begun for fetal 
neuroprotection. On abdominal examination, the fetus is 
in cephalic presentation. On vaginal examination, there 
is clear liquor draining, the cervix is found to be 8 cm 
dilated and she rapidly goes on to have an uncomplicated 
vaginal delivery of a male infant weighing 1,250 g within 
an hour of presenting to hospital. At birth, he is intubated 
because of poor respiratory effort and is transferred to 
the neonatal intensive care unit. 
As a premature infant, from which complications is he 
particularly at risk? 
ANSWERS 
Fetal growth 
Deÿcient glycogen stores in the liver increase the risk of 
hypoglycaemia. This is compounded by the increased 
glucose requirements of premature infants. 
Cardiovascular system 
Patent ductus arteriosus may result in pulmonary conges￾tion, worsening lung disease and decreased blood °ow 
to the gastrointestinal tract and brain. The duct can be 
closed by administering prostaglandin synthetase inhibi￾tors, for example indomethacin, or by surgical ligation. 
Respiratory system 
RDS and apnoea of prematurity may lead to hypoxia. 
The administration of antenatal steroids to the mother 
reduces the risk and severity of RDS. For maximal bene￾ÿt to be gained, steroids need to be administered at least 
24 hours before delivery. In this case, delivery occurred 
too rapidly for steroids to be administered. The severity 
of RDS can also be reduced by giving surfactant via the 
endotracheal tube used to ventilate the baby. 
Fetal blood 
Anaemia of prematurity is common because of low iron 
stores and red cell mass at birth, reduced erythropoiesis 
and decreased survival of red blood cells. Treatment is 
by blood transfusion, iron supplementation or, in some 
cases, the use of erythropoietin. 
Immune system 
Preterm babies have an increased susceptibility to infec￾tion due to impaired cell-mediated immunity and reduced 
levels of immunoglobulin. Suspected infection should be 
treated early with antibiotics because deterioration in 
these premature small infants can be rapid. 
Skin and homeostasis 
Hypothermia is common in preterm infants secondary to a 
relatively large body surface area, thin skin, a lack of sub￾cutaneous fat and a lack of a keratinized epidermal layer of 
skin. High insensible water losses due to skin immaturity 
may aggravate dehydration and electrolyte problems sec￾ondary to immaturity in renal function (see the following 
section ‘Kidney and urinary tract’). The environment can 
be controlled by nursing this type of infant in an incubator. 
Alimentary system 
Necrotizing enterocolitis is an in°ammatory condition 
of the bowel leading to necrosis and is thought to be 
secondary to alterations in gut blood °ow, hypotension, 
hypoxia, infection and feeding practices. Feeding prob￾lems are common in preterm infants because they have 
immature suck and swallowing re°exes and gut motility. 
Parenteral nutrition is usually required in these very pre￾mature infants, with gradually increasing volumes of milk 
given by nasogastric tube. 
Liver and gall bladder 
Jaundice (hyperbilirubinaemia) secondary to liver imma￾turity and a shorter half-life of red blood cells is com￾mon in premature infants. Treatment with phototherapy 
is required because premature infants are at greater risk 
of bilirubin encephalopathy. 
Kidney and urinary tract 
Immaturity of the kidneys can lead to a poor ability to 
concentrate or dilute urine. This can result in dehydration 
and electrolyte disturbances: hypernatraemia and hypo￾natraemia, hyperkalaemia and metabolic acidosis. 
Central nervous system 
Periventricular and intraventricular haemorrhages result 
from bleeding from the immature rich capillary bed of 
the germinal matrix lining the ventricles. Such haemor￾rhages are more likely in the presence of hypoxia. Major 
degrees of haemorrhage can result in hydrocephalus 
and neurological abnormalities such as cerebral palsy. 
Periventricular leukomalacia is ischaemic necrosis in the 
white matter surrounding the lateral ventricles and com￾monly leads to cerebral palsy. The administration of peri￾partum magnesium sulphate reduces the risk of cerebral 
palsy and is recommended for pregnant women between 
24+0 and 29+6 weeks of pregnancy who are in estab￾lished preterm labour or having a planned preterm birth. 
42 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 43 04/03/2024 16:06
 
 
 
 
Self-assessment 
CASE HISTORY 2 
A 24-year-old nulliparous woman had a detailed fetal 
anomaly ultrasound scan at 20 weeks’ gestation. This 
showed reduced amniotic °uid index (2 cm), an enlarged, 
thick-walled bladder and a dilated urethra with a ‘keyhole’ 
sign, bilateral hydroureteronephrosis (dilated ureter and 
renal pelvis) and bilateral echogenic kidneys. The fetus 
was a male. There were no other fetal structural abnor￾malities. The ÿndings at the dating scan at 12 weeks had 
been apparently normal. She had no family or personal 
history of renal problems. 
What is the likely diagnosis and what is the prognosis? 
ANSWER 
The likely diagnosis is posterior urethral valves, which is 
the most common congenital cause of bladder out°ow 
obstruction in male neonates (sometimes called lower 
urinary tract obstruction). This occurs in 1 in 5,000 live 
male births and is caused by an obstructing membrane 
in the posterior male urethra as a result of abnormal in 
utero development. The differential diagnosis includes 
urethral atresia and bilateral vesicoureteric re°ux. The 
majority of cases are suspected prenatally and referred 
to specialist centres at birth. 
Early prenatal diagnosis (before 24 weeks’ gestation), 
ultrasound evidence of echogenic renal parenchyma and 
reduced amniotic °uid volume have been identiÿed as 
predictors of a poor prognosis, as in this case. Prenatal 
interventions such as percutaneous ultrasound-guided 
vesicocentesis (drainage of the bladder) can be used to 
relieve the obstruction temporarily. Ultrasound-guided 
placement of a vesicoamniotic shunt (between the blad￾der and the amniotic cavity) seems to improve perinatal 
survival. Whether this treatment or conservative man￾agement is used, however, the surviving children have a 
high rate of end-stage renal failure requiring dialysis and 
transplantation. The condition accounts for 25–30% of 
paediatric renal transplantations in the UK. 
CASE HISTORY 3 
A 30-year-old multiparous woman is referred to the fetal 
medicine unit because the midwife is concerned about 
the size of the uterus during a routine antenatal check 
at 30 weeks’ gestation. The SFH measures 38 cm. 
Down syndrome screening by the combined test gave 
a low risk (1 in 20,000). On ultrasound examination, the 
fetal measurements are on the 80th centile. There is 
increased amniotic °uid with a single deepest pool of 10 
cm (normal range <8 cm) and an amniotic °uid index of 
35 cm (normal range <25 cm). Fetal movements and fetal 
umbilical artery and middle cerebral artery Doppler mea￾surements are normal. In the transverse fetal abdominal 
views, there was a double bubble seen on the left side 
of the abdomen (Figure 3.9). There were no other abnor￾malities detectable; in particular, the fetal face was nor￾mal. The placenta was anterior high and had a normal 
structural appearance. 
What is the most likely diagnosis and what are the dif￾ferential diagnoses? What is the optimum management 
for the rest of the pregnancy and at birth? 
ANSWER 
Polyhydramnios occurs in approximately 1–1.5% of preg￾nancies. This is a case of mild polyhydramnios (single 
deepest pool of liquor 8–11 cm). An underlying disease is 
only found in 17% of cases in mild polyhydramnios. In con￾trast, an underlying disease is detected in 91% of cases in 
moderate (12–15 cm) to severe polyhydramnios (>15 cm). 
The most likely diagnosis is duodenal atresia, namely the 
congenital absence or complete closure of a portion of the 
lumen of the duodenum, which occurs in 1:2,500–5,000 
live births. In 25–40% of cases, there is associated trisomy 
21 (Down syndrome). The differential diagnosis includes:
 • an obstructive structural malformation that 
prevents fetal swallowing (e.g. facial cleft or 
congenital high airways obstruction syndrome 
[CHAOS]) or prevents passage of amniotic °uid 
along the gut (e.g. oesophageal atresia) 
Fetal spine Stomach bubbles 
Umbilical vein 
Deepest pool of 
amniotic fluid 
Figure 3.9 Ultrasound image showing the 
‘double bubble’ appearance and polyhydramnios 
associated with duodenal atresia. 
(Contd.) 
43 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 44 04/03/2024 16:06
 
Normal fetal development and growth 
(Contd.)
 • congenital problems that prevent normal In this case, the patient declined amniocentesis. She 
swallowing function (e.g. neurological structural was seen antenatally by the paediatric surgeons to dis￾problems such as anencephaly or neuromuscular cuss surgical management postnatally. She was coun￾disorders such as myotonic dystrophy) selled about the risk of spontaneous preterm labour, 
• fetal anaemia (e.g. due to rhesus incompatibility or preterm prelabour rupture of the membranes, abnormal 
virus infection such as with parvovirus B19); usually fetal presentation and cord prolapse in labour. She was 
there are other associated ÿndings such as pleural monitored by scan every 2 weeks; the amniotic °uid 
effusion or ascites index remained the same and she had only mild uterine 
• multiple pregnancies, particularly those with a activity. She did not require amnioreduction (amniocen￾monochorionic placenta tesis to drain off excessive °uid). She presented in labour 
at 36 weeks’ gestation with the fetus in cephalic presen￾tation and had a normal vaginal delivery. The neonate 
Management of a case of polyhydramnios includes a weighing 3.7 kg was born with good Apgar scores and 
detailed fetal anomaly scan to observe fetal movements he was transferred to the neonatal intensive care unit for 
and structures, counselling about the risk of trisomy 21 
• maternal diabetes 
monitoring. At 1 day of age, he underwent laparoscopic 
and an offer of fetal karyotyping by amniocentesis, a glu- duodenostomy for duodenal atresia and had a good 
cose tolerance test for maternal diabetes and a maternal recovery. His karyotype performed postnatally was nor￾antibody blood test for virus infections. mal euploid. 
44 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 45 04/03/2024 16:06
4 
Assessment of fetal well-being 
ANNA L DAVID 
Introduction 45 Ultrasound and invasive procedures 59 
Diagnostic ultrasound in obstetric practice 45 Three- and four-dimensional ultrasound 59 
Ultrasound schedule in clinical practice 52 Magnetic resonance imaging 60 
Ultrasound in the assessment of fetal Further reading 60 
well-being 52 Self-assessment 60 
 Learning Objectives 
• Understand the principles of imaging in obstetrics and its safety and beneÿts for examining the fetus 
during gestation. 
• Know how ultrasound is used in pregnancy to conÿrm gestational age, to detect fetal structural 
abnormalities, to monitor fetal growth and development, to study the placenta and to assess fetal 
well-being. 
• Recognize the value of antenatal cardiotocography to assess fetal well-being and to screen for fetal 
hypoxia. 
• Be aware of the role of Doppler ultrasound to monitor and guide the management of pregnancies at 
risk of adverse outcomes. 
INTRODUCTION 
Ultrasound is the principal imaging modality used 
in obstetrics. Indeed, diagnostic ultrasound is used 
to screen all pregnancies in most high- and middle￾income countries. Ultrasound is used to date preg￾nancies, to monitor growth of the fetus and to identify 
congenital abnormalities. Colour and spectral Doppler 
are used to interrogate the uterine, placental and fetal 
blood vessels, providing information on uteroplacen￾tal function, fetal well-being and the fetal circulatory 
response to hypoxia and anaemia, for example. 
Antenatal tests of fetal well-being are now prin￾cipally based on ultrasound techniques and are 
designed to identify fetuses that are in the early 
or late stages of fetal hypoxia. Continuous wave 
Doppler ultrasound is employed in cardiotocography 
to provide continuous tracings of the fetal heart rate, 
the patterns of which alter when the fetus is hypoxic. 
Three-dimensional (3D) ultrasound and increas￾ingly magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) are used to 
provide further information when a fetal abnormality 
is suspected. 
DIAGNOSTIC ULTRASOUND IN 
OBSTETRIC PRACTICE 
In 1959, Professor Ian Donald, the Regius Chair of 
Midwifery at Glasgow University, noted that clear 
echoes could be obtained from the fetal head using 45 
10.1201/9781003196112-4 ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 46 04/03/2024 16:06
 
Assessment of fetal well-being 
ultrasound. Since the reporting of this initial discov￾ery, the technique of ultrasound has developed into 
one that now plays an essential role in the care of 
pregnant women. 
The ultrasound technique uses very high-fre￾quency sound waves of between 3.5 and 7.0˜ MHz 
emitted from a transducer. Transducers can be 
placed and moved across the abdomen (transabdom￾inal, Figure 4.1) or mounted on a probe that can be 
inserted into the vagina (transvaginal, Figure 4.2). 
Transvaginal ultrasonography is useful in early 
pregnancy, for examining the cervix later in pregnancy 
and for identifying the lower edge of the placenta (to 
assess for placenta praevia). It is also useful in early 
pregnancy in individuals with signiÿcant amounts of 
abdominal adipose tissue through which abdominal 
ultrasound waves would need to travel, and hence 
be attenuated prior to reaching the uterus and its 
Figure 4.1 Ultrasound probe: abdominal. 
Figure 4.2 Ultrasound probe: transvaginal. 
contents, making visualization difÿcult. In general, 
however, after 12 weeks’ gestation, an abdominal 
transducer, which is a ˛at or curvilinear probe with a 
much wider array, is used. Crystals within the trans￾ducer emit a focused ultrasound beam in a series of 
pulses and then receive the re˛ected signals from 
within the uterus between the pulses. The strength 
of the re˛ected sound wave depends on the difference 
in ‘acoustic impedance’ between adjacent structures. 
The acoustic impedance of a tissue is related to its den￾sity; the greater the difference in acoustic impedance 
between two adjacent tissues the more re˛ective will 
be their boundary. The returning signals are trans￾formed into visual signals and generate a continuous 
picture of the moving fetus. Movements such as fetal 
heartbeat and structures in the fetus can be assessed 
and measurements can be made accurately on the 
images displayed on the screen. Such measurements 
enable the assessment of gestational age, size and 
growth in the fetus. Ultrasound images obtained can 
also be processed with computer software to produce 
3D images and even four-dimensional (4D, moving 
3D images), which provide more detail on fetal ana￾tomical structure and the identiÿcation of anomalies. 
The use of Doppler ultrasound allows the assess￾ment of the velocity of blood within fetal and pla￾cental vessels and provides indirect assessment of 
the fetal and placental condition. Doppler ultrasound 
makes use of the phenomenon of the Doppler fre￾quency shift, that is, the re˛ected wave will be at a 
different frequency from the transmitted one if it 
interacts with moving structures, such as red blood 
cells ˛owing along a blood vessel, with the change 
in frequency being proportional to the velocity of the 
blood cells. If the red blood cells are moving towards 
the beam, the re˛ected signal will be at a higher fre￾quency than the transmitted one and conversely the 
re˛ected beam will be at a lower signal if the ˛ow is 
away from the beam. In this modality, signals from 
a particular vessel can be isolated and displayed in 
graphic form, with the velocity plotted against time. 
The signiÿcance of changes observed in waveform 
patterns obtained from placental and fetal vessels, 
and how these observations can be used in clinical 
practice, will be discussed in the section ‘Doppler 
investigation’ later in the chapter. 
Ultrasound scanning is currently considered to 
be a safe, non-invasive, accurate and cost-effective 46 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 47 04/03/2024 16:06
 
 
Diagnostic ultrasound in obstetric practice 
investigation in the fetus. There are guidelines 
that cover the safe use of ultrasound in pregnancy. 
These include the as low as reasonably achievable 
(ALARA) principle, a practice mandate adhering to 
the principle of keeping radiation doses to patients 
and personnel as low as possible. Examination times 
are kept as short as is necessary to produce a use￾ful diagnostic result, particularly before 10 weeks’ 
gestation when the embryo may be more sensitive 
to the effects of thermal and mechanical injury. This 
chapter will consider the diagnostic use of these 
techniques in more detail. 
The main uses of ultrasonography in pregnancy 
are in the areas discussed in the following sections. 
DIAGNOSIS AND CONFIRMATION OF 
VIABILITY IN EARLY PREGNANCY 
The gestational sac can be visualized from as early 
as 4–5 weeks’ gestation and the yolk sac at about 
5 weeks (Figure 4.3). The embryo can be observed 
and measured at 5–6 weeks’ gestation. Beating of the 
fetal heart can be visualized by about 6 weeks. 
Transvaginal ultrasound plays a key role in the 
diagnosis of disorders of early pregnancy, such as 
incomplete or missed miscarriage (anembryonic 
pregnancy or ‘blighted ovum’), where no fetus is 
present (Figure 4.4) and ectopic pregnancy. In a 
missed miscarriage, for example, the fetus can be 
identiÿed, but with an absent fetal heartbeat. In an 
anembryonic pregnancy, there is a gestation sac 
present but it is empty because the fetus has failed to 
develop. An ectopic pregnancy is suspected if, in the 
presence of a positive pregnancy test, an ultrasound 
Figure 4.4 Ultrasound image showing an empty 
gestation sac (arrowheads) in a case of an anembryonic 
pregnancy. 
scan does not identify a gestation sac within the 
uterus, there is an adnexal mass with or without a 
fetal pole or there is ˛uid in the pouch of Douglas. 
DETERMINATION OF GESTATIONAL 
AGE AND ASSESSMENT OF FETAL 
SIZE AND GROWTH 
Up to approximately 20 weeks’ gestation, the range 
of values around the mean for measurements of fetal 
length, head size and long bone length is narrow and 
hence assessment of gestation based on these mea￾sures is accurate. The crown–rump length (CRL) is 
used up to 13 weeks + 6 days (see Figure 5.3) and the 
head circumference (HC) is used from 14 to 20 weeks’ 
gestation. The biparietal diameter (BPD) (Figure 4.5) 
YS
VD
E
Figure 4.3 Ultrasound sac showing the yolk sac (YS) 
and embryo (E) with the vitelline duct (VD). 
Figure 4.5 Biparietal diameter (BPD). (1, anterior 
ventricle; 2, posterior ventricle; 3, cerebral hemisphere. 
OFD, occipitofrontal diameter.) 47 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 48 04/03/2024 16:06
 
 
 
Assessment of fetal well-being 
Figure 4.6 Femur length. 
S
U
 Figure 4.7 Abdominal circumference 
measurement demonstrating the correct section 
showing the stomach (S) and the umbilical vein (U). 
and femur length (FL) (Figure 4.6) can also be used 
to determine gestational age. Essentially, the earlier 
the measurement is made, the more accurate the pre￾diction, and measurements made from an early CRL 
(accuracy of prediction 6 ± 5 days) will be preferred to 
a BPD at 20 weeks (accuracy of prediction 6 ± 7˜days). 
In the latter part of pregnancy, measuring fetal 
abdominal circumference (AC) (Figure 4.7) and HC 
will allow assessment of the size and growth of the 
fetus and will assist in the diagnosis and manage￾ment of fetal growth restriction (FGR). In addition to 
AC and HC, BPD and FL, when combined in an equa￾tion, provide a more accurate estimate of fetal weight 
(EFW) than any of the parameters taken singly. 
In pregnancies at high risk of FGR, serial mea￾surements are plotted on the normal reference range. 
Growth patterns are helpful in distinguishing between 
different types of growth restriction (symmetrical and 
asymmetrical). Asymmetry between head measures 
(BPD, HC) and AC can be identiÿed in FGR, where 
a brain-sparing effect will result in a relatively large 
HC compared with the AC (Figure 4.8). The opposite 
would occur in a diabetic pregnancy, where the abdo￾men is disproportionately large due to the effects of 
insulin on the fetal liver and fat stores. Cessation of 
growth is an ominous sign of placental failure. 
Gestational age cannot be accurately calculated 
by ultrasound after 20 weeks’ gestation because 
of the wider range of normal values of AC and HC 
around the mean. 
MULTIPLE PREGNANCY 
Ultrasound is now the most common way in which 
multiple pregnancies are identiÿed (Figure 4.9). In 
addition to identifying the presence of more than one 
fetus, it is used to determine the chorionicity of the 
pregnancy, which is important in stratifying the risk 
of particular pregnancy complications that occur in 
monochorionic multiple pregnancies. 
Monochorionic twin pregnancies (i.e. those who 
‘share’ a placenta) are associated with an increased 
risk of pregnancy complications such as twin-to￾twin transfusion syndrome and a higher perinatal 
mortality rate than dichorionic twin pregnancies. It 
is therefore clinically useful to be able to determine 
chorionicity early in pregnancy (see Chapter 7). 
The dividing membrane between monochori￾onic twins is formed by two layers of amnion and in 
dichorionic twins the dividing membrane consists of 
two layers of chorion and two of amnion. Dichorionic 
twin pregnancies therefore have a thicker dividing 
membrane than monochorionic twin pregnancies 
and this can be perceived qualitatively on ultrasound. 
Sonographically, dichorionic twin pregnancies in the 
ÿrst trimester of pregnancy have a thick inter-twin 
separating membrane (septum), ˛anked on either side 
by a very thin amnion. This is in contrast to a mono￾chorionic twin pregnancy, which on two-dimensional 
(2D) ultrasound has a very thin inter-twin septum. 
Another method of determining chorionicity in 
the ÿrst trimester uses the appearance of the sep￾tum at its origin from the placenta. On ultrasound, 
a tongue of placental tissue is seen within the base 
of dichorionic membranes and has been termed the 
48 Diagnostic ultrasound in obstetric practice
 DIAGNOSIS OF FETAL 
ABNORMALITY
M ajor fetal structural abnormalities occur in 2–3% of 
pregnancies and many can be diagnosed by an ultra￾sound scan at around or before 20 weeks’ gestation. 
Increasingly, as ultrasound technology improves, these 
abnormalities are being detected at the fi rst trimester 
‘dating’ scan. Common examples include spina bifi da 
and hydrocephalus (ventriculomegaly), skeletal abnor￾malities such as achondroplasia, abdominal wall defects 
such as exomphalos and gastroschisis, cleft lip/palate 
and congenital cardiac abnormalities (see Chapter 3). 
 49
450
400
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
16 20 24 28 32 36 40 16 20 24 28 32 36 40
mm mm
450
400
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
mm
Weeks
16 20 24 28 32 36 40
Weeks Weeks
Weeks
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
6,000
5,000
4,000
3,000
2,000
1,000
0
24 28 32 36 40 
g
95%
5%
95%
5%
95%
5%
95%
5%
Head circumference Abdominal circumference
Femur length Estimated fetal weight
 Figure 4.8 Ultrasound plots on reference range for head circumference, abdominal circumference, 
femur length and estimated fetal weight in a case of early-onset fetal growth restriction. Note that head 
circumference remains above the 5th centile, while the abdominal circumference falls below the 5th 
centile. This is a case of asymmetric fetal growth restriction with head sparing.
‘twin peak’ or ‘lambda’ sign (s ee Figure 4.9). The U ltrasound is also invaluable in the management 
optimal gestation at which to perform such ultra- of twin pregnancy in terms of confi rming fetal pre￾sonic chorionicity determination is 9–10 weeks. sentations, which may be diffi cult on abdominal pal￾Dichorionicity may also be confi rmed by the iden- pation, evidence of growth restriction, fetal anomaly 
tifi cation of two placental masses and later in preg- and the presence of placenta praevia, all of which are 
nancy by the presence of different-sex fetuses. more common in this type of pregnancy, and any 
suggestion of twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome.
 Figure 4.9 Early twin dichorionic pregnancy 
(arrows); note the ‘peaked’ inter-twin membrane.
Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 49 04/03/2024 16:06
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 50 04/03/2024 16:06
Assessment of fetal well-being 
Figure 4.10 Ultrasound images of the fetal heart views used to screen for cardiac anomalies. (A) Four-chamber view. 
(B) Three-vessel trachea view. (Ao, aorta; IVS, interventricular septum; L, left; LA, left atrium; LV, left ventricle; MV, mitral 
valve; PA, pulmonary artery; PV, pulmonary veins; R, right; RA, right atrium; RV, right ventricle; Sp, spine; SVC, superior 
vena cava; T, trachea; TV, tricuspid valve.) 
When a fetal structural abnormality is detected, a refer￾ral is normally made to a fetal medicine specialist for 
further advice about prognosis and management. 
Detection rates of between 40% and 90% have 
been reported at the 20-week ‘anomaly’ scan. 
Through developments in ultrasound machine reso￾lution and the application of speciÿc fetal imaging 
views, for example the four-chamber view and the 
three-vessel trachea view (Figure 4.10), there have 
been improvements in the detection rates of cardiac 
anomalies in particular. 
Parents, however, do need to be aware that a ‘nor￾mal scan’ is not a guarantee of a normal baby. A num￾ber of factors can in˛uence the success of detecting 
an abnormality. Some are very difÿcult to visualize 
or to be absolutely certain about. Some conditions, 
for example hydrocephalus (ventriculomegaly), may 
not have been obvious at the time of early scans or 
even at the mid-pregnancy anomaly scan. Neuronal 
migration disorders that affect cerebral development 
may not manifest until the third trimester. Pregnant 
women should be informed of the limitations of rou￾tine ultrasound screening and that detection rates 
vary by the type of fetal anomaly, body mass index 
and the position of the unborn baby at the time of 
the scan. The position of the baby in the uterus will 
in˛uence visualization of organs such as the heart, 
face and spine. Repeat scans are sometimes required 
if visualization is a problem in anticipation that the 
fetus will be in a more accessible position. 
A B 
Some obstetric ultrasound ÿndings are consid￾ered variants of normal but are noteworthy because 
they also increase the risk for underlying fetal aneu￾ploidy such as Down syndrome. These ÿndings are 
known as ‘soft markers’ and are considered distinct 
from fetal structural malformations. Detection of 
ÿrst trimester ultrasonic ‘soft’ markers for chro￾mosomal abnormalities, such as an increased fetal 
nuchal translucency (NT) (the area at the back of the 
neck), are now in common use to enable detection 
of fetuses at risk of chromosomal anomalies such 
as Down syndrome (see Chapter 5). On the routine 
anomaly scan, detection of an increased nuchal fold 
(>6 mm), for example, should prompt referral to a 
fetal medicine specialist for advice. 
PLACENTAL LOCALIZATION 
Placenta praevia, a placenta that is inserted wholly 
or in part into the lower segment of the uterus, can 
cause life-threatening haemorrhage in pregnancy. 
Ultrasonography has become indispensable to local￾ize the site of the placenta. Ultrasonographic identi￾ÿcation of the lower edge of the placenta to exclude 
or conÿrm placenta praevia as a cause for antepar￾tum haemorrhage is now a part of routine clinical 
practice. The transvaginal approach, undertaken 
with caution, can be helpful in clearly identifying the 
lower placental edge if it is not seen clearly with an 
abdominal probe. 
50 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 51 04/03/2024 16:06
 
 
Diagnostic ultrasound in obstetric practice 
Figure 4.11 2D ultrasound images of placenta accreta spectrum illustrating the use of colour 
Doppler to improve the assessment of vascular perfusion in the right-hand image. The maternal 
bladder is kept full to better visualize the interface between the placenta and the bladder wall. (BV, 
bridging vessels; BWI, bladder wall interruption; FV, feeder vessels; L, large and irregular lacunae 
adjacent to the myometrium; M, myometrium indistinguishable from placenta.) 
At the 20-week scan, it is customary to identify Doppler ultrasound can be used to assess placental 
those pregnancies with a low-lying placenta. At this function and identify evidence of blood ˛ow redistri￾stage, the lower uterine segment has not yet formed bution in the fetus, which is a sign of hypoxia. These 
and most low-lying placentas will appear to ‘migrate’ aspects of ultrasound use will be discussed in the 
upwards as the lower segment stretches in the late section ‘Doppler investigation’ later in the chapter. 
second and third trimesters. About 15–20% of preg￾nancies are complicated by a low-lying placenta at 20 MEASUREMENT OF CERVICAL weeks, and only 10% of this group will eventually be LENGTH shown to have a placenta praevia (for management, 
see Chapter 14). Evidence suggests that approximately 50% of preg- Ultrasound is also used to identify whether there nancies that result in birth before 34 weeks’ ges- is placenta accreta spectrum, a disorder in which tation will be found to have a short cervix at the 
the placenta is abnormally attached to the myome- midtrimester of pregnancy. Cervical length is best trium (accreta) and may even attach to other pelvic measured using a transvaginal probe that allows organs such as the bladder, bowel and pelvic vessels accurate identiÿcation of the internal and external 
(percreta). If undiagnosed, this can lead to cata- os (see Chapter 8). Current National Institute for 
strophic acute haemorrhage and maternal death. Health and Care Excellence (NICE) guidance (NICE Sonographic markers include loss of the clear zone, guideline [NG25]: Preterm Labour and Birth, 2015) a hypoechoic plane in the myometrium underneath recommends serial cervical length assessment from the placental bed, placental bulge into surrounding 16 weeks’ gestation in anyone with a history of spon- organs such as the bladder on 2D ultrasound and taneous preterm birth or midtrimester loss. placental hypervascularity using colour Doppler Ultrasonography is also of value in other obstetric (Figure 4.11). conditions such as: 
ASSESSMENT OF FETAL • conÿrmation of intrauterine death 
WELL-BEING • conÿrmation of fetal presentation in uncertain 
cases 
Ultrasound can be used to assess fetal well-being • diagnosis of uterine and pelvic abnormalities 
by evaluating the amniotic ˛uid, fetal movements, during pregnancy, for example ÿbromyomata 
tone and breathing in the biophysical proÿle (BPP). and ovarian cysts 51 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 52 04/03/2024 16:06
 
Assessment of fetal well-being 
ULTRASOUND SCHEDULE IN 
CLINICAL PRACTICE 
NICE recommends that all pregnant women be 
offered scans at between 10 and 14 weeks’ and 18 
and 21 weeks’ gestation (Clinical guideline [CG62]: 
Antenatal Care for Uncomplicated Pregnancies, 2015). 
The ÿrst trimester scan is principally to determine 
gestational age, to detect multiple pregnancies and 
to determine NT as part of screening for Down syn￾drome. The 18–21-week scan primarily screens for 
structural anomalies, giving couples reproductive 
choice (e.g. termination of pregnancy versus con￾tinuing with the pregnancy) and allowing antenatal 
care and delivery to be planned, including intrauter￾ine therapy if available. Evidence suggests that rou￾tine ultrasound in early pregnancy appears to enable 
better gestational age assessment, earlier detection 
of multiple pregnancies and earlier detection of clini￾cally unsuspected fetal malformation at a time when 
termination of pregnancy is possible. In uncompli￾cated pregnancies, scans are performed only after 
this stage in pregnancy if there is a clinical indica￾tion, such as concern about fetal growth or well￾being, discussed in the section ‘Ultrasound in the 
assessment of fetal well-being’ later in the chapter. 
Additional ultrasound examinations, particularly for 
fetal growth and well-being, are offered to pregnant 
women who are identiÿed as needing additional 
antenatal care (NICE guideline [NG201]: Antenatal 
Care, 2021), for example those who had problems 
during a previous pregnancy or who have pre-exist￾ing medical complications. 
ULTRASOUND IN THE 
ASSESSMENT OF FETAL 
WELL-BEING 
AMNIOTIC FLUID ASSESSMENT 
Ultrasound can be used to identify both increased 
and decreased amniotic ˛uid volumes. The fetus has 
a role in the control of the volume of amniotic ˛uid. 
It swallows amniotic ˛uid, absorbs it in the gut and 
later excretes urine into the amniotic sac. Congenital 
abnormalities that either structurally or functionally 
impair the fetus’s ability to swallow, for example 
oesophageal atresia or anencephaly, will result in an 
increase in amniotic ˛uid. Congenital abnormalities 
that result in a failure of urine production or passage, 
for example renal agenesis and posterior urethral 
valves, will result in reduced or absent amniotic ˛uid 
(Chapter 3). 
The amount of amniotic ˛uid in the uterus is a 
guide to fetal well-being in the third trimester. A 
reduction in amniotic ˛uid volume is referred to as 
oligohydramnios and an excess is referred to as poly￾hydramnios. Deÿnitions of oligohydramnios and 
polyhydramnios are based on sonographic criteria. 
Two ultrasound measurement approaches give an 
indication of amniotic ˛uid volume: the maximum 
vertical pool and the amniotic ˛uid index. 
The maximum vertical pool is measured 
after a general survey of the uterine contents. 
Measurements of less than 2 cm suggest oligohy￾dramnios, and measurements of greater than 8 cm 
suggest polyhydramnios. 
The amniotic ˛uid index is measured by divid￾ing the uterus into four ‘ultrasound’ quadrants (see 
Figure 3.8). A vertical measurement is taken of the 
deepest pool of ˛uid that is free of umbilical cord in 
each quadrant and the results are summated. The 
amniotic ˛uid index alters throughout gestation, but 
in the third trimester it should be between 10 and 25 
cm; values below 10 cm indicate a reduced volume 
and those below 5 cm indicate oligohydramnios, 
while values above 25 cm indicate polyhydramnios. 
Amniotic ˛uid volume is decreased in FGR as a 
consequence of redistribution of fetal blood away 
from the kidneys to vital structures such as the brain 
and heart, with a consequent reduction in renal per￾fusion and urine output. 
CARDIOTOCOGRAPHY 
A cardiotocograph (CTG) is a continuous tracing of 
the fetal heart rate used to assess fetal well-being, 
together with an assessment of uterine activity. 
Cardiotocography is sometimes called electronic 
fetal monitoring. The CTG recording is obtained with 
the patient positioned comfortably in a left lateral or 
semi-recumbent position to avoid compression of the 
maternal vena cava. Two external transducers are 
placed on the abdomen, each attached with a belt. 52 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 53 04/03/2024 16:06
 
Ultrasound in the assessment of fetal well-being 
One transducer is a pressure-sensitive contraction 
tocodynometer (stretch gauge) that measures the 
pressure required to ˛atten a section of the abdomi￾nal wall. This correlates with the internal uterine 
pressure and indicates if there is any uterine activ￾ity (contractions). The second transducer uses ultra￾sound and the Doppler effect to detect motion of the 
fetal heart and measures the interval between suc￾cessive beats, thereby allowing a continuous assess￾ment of fetal heart rate. Recordings are then made 
for at least 30 minutes, with the output from the CTG 
machine producing two ‘lines’ traced onto a running 
piece of paper, one a tracing of fetal heart rate and 
a second a tracing of uterine activity. The pregnant 
woman may be given a button to press to record any 
fetal movements that they have felt. In addition, the 
CTG machine may record fetal movements detected 
via the tocodynometer. 
IMPORTANT CARDIOTOCOGRAPH 
FEATURES 
Fetal cardiac behaviour is regulated through 
the autonomic nervous system and by vasomo￾tor, chemoceptor and baroreceptor mechanisms. 
Pathological events, such as fetal hypoxia, modify 
these signals and hence cardiac response, includ￾ing variation in heart rate patterns, which can be 
detected and recorded in the CTG. Features that are 
reported from a CTG to deÿne normality and iden￾tify abnormality and potential concern for fetal well￾being include the: 
• baseline rate 
• baseline variability 
• accelerations 
• decelerations 
Each of these is discussed in the following sec￾tions. Interpretation of the CTG must be in the con￾text of any risk factors, for example suspected FGR or 
fetal anaemia, and all features must be considered in 
order to make a judgement about the likelihood of 
fetal compromise. 
Baseline fetal heart rate 
The normal fetal heart rate at term is 110–150 beats 
per minute (bpm). Higher rates are deÿned as fetal 
tachycardia and lower rates are deÿned as fetal 
bradycardia. The baseline fetal heart rate falls with 
advancing gestational age as a result of maturing fetal 
parasympathetic tone and, prior to term, 160 bpm is 
taken as the upper limit of normal. The baseline rate is 
best determined over a period of 5–10 minutes. Fetal 
tachycardias can be associated with maternal or fetal 
infection, acute fetal hypoxia, fetal anaemia and drugs 
such as adrenoceptor agonists, for example ritodrine.
 Baseline variability 
Under normal physiological conditions, the interval 
between successive fetal heartbeats (beat-to-beat) var￾ies. This is called short-term variability and increases 
with increasing gestational age. It is not visible on a 
standard CTG but can be measured with computer￾assisted analysis (see the section ‘Computerized car￾diotocograph’ later in this chapter). In addition to these 
beat-to-beat variations in heart rate, there are longer 
term ˛uctuations in heart rate occurring between two 
and six times per minute. This is known as ‘baseline 
variability’. Normal baseline variability re˛ects a nor￾mal fetal autonomic nervous system. A normal CTG is 
shown in Figure 4.12. 
Baseline variability is considered abnormal when 
it is variability of 5 bpm or less (Figure 4.13). As well 
as gestational age, baseline variability is modiÿed by 
fetal sleep states and activity, and also by hypoxia, 
fetal infection and drugs suppressing the fetal central 
nervous system, such as opioids, and hypnotics (all of 
which reduce baseline variability). As fetuses display 
deep sleep cycles of 20–30 minutes at a time, baseline 
variability may be normally reduced for this length of 
time, but should be preceded and followed by a period 
of normal baseline variability on the CTG trace. 
Fetal heart rate accelerations 
Accelerations are increases in the baseline fetal heart 
rate of at least 15 bpm, lasting for at least 15 sec￾onds. The presence of two or more accelerations on a 
20–30-minute antepartum fetal CTG deÿnes a reac￾tive trace and is indicative of a non-hypoxic fetus (i.e. 
they are a positive sign of fetal health). 
Fetal heart rate decelerations 
Decelerations are transient reductions in fetal heart 
rate of 15 bpm or more, lasting for more than 15 sec￾onds. Decelerations can be indicative of fetal hypoxia 
or umbilical cord compression. There is a higher 53 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 54 04/03/2024 16:06
Assessment of fetal well-being 
bpm
a a a
v
Figure 4.12 A normal fetal cardiotocograph showing a normal rate, normal 
variability (v) and the presence of several accelerations (a). 
160
140
120
100
rv
Figure 4.13 A fetal cardiotocograph showing a baseline of 150 bpm but with 
reduced variability (rv). 
chance of fetal hypoxia being present if there are 
additional abnormal features such as reduced vari￾ability or baseline tachycardia (Figure 4.14). 
From the preceding descriptions, a normal ante￾partum fetal CTG can therefore be deÿned as a 
baseline of 110–150 bpm, with baseline variability 
exceeding 10 bpm and with more than one accelera￾tion being seen in a 20–30-minute tracing. Reduced 
baseline variability, an absence of accelerations and 
the presence of decelerations are all suspicious fea￾tures. A suspicious CTG must be interpreted within 
the clinical context. If many antenatal risk factors 
have already been identiÿed, a suspicious CTG may 
bpm
180
160
140
120
warrant delivery of the baby, although when no risk 
factors exist, a repeated investigation later in the day 
may be more appropriate. 
COMPUTERIZED CARDIOTOCOGRAPH 
Standard CTG interpretation has high intra- and 
interobserver variability, as it is based on pattern rec￾ognition, and this leads to differences in interpreta￾tion among different clinicians. Computerized CTG 
interpretation is objective and more consistent than 
standard CTG interpretation, with normal ranges for 
computerized CTG parameters available throughout 54 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 55 04/03/2024 16:06
 
Ultrasound in the assessment of fetal well-being 
bpm
160
140
120
gestation. Compared with standard CTG, a Cochrane 
review found that the use of computerized CTG was 
associated with a reduction in perinatal mortality. 
Antenatal (pre-labour) computerized CTG uses 
Dawes Redman criteria, which take into account the 
standard features of visual assessment such as accel￾erations, decelerations and basal heart rate, as well 
as parameters that are difÿcult or impossible to mea￾sure visually, such as short-term variation, sinusoidal 
rhythm and the number of minutes of high variation. 
ULT1 
d d
d
d
Figure 4.14 An admission cardiotocograph from a term pregnancy. Although the 
baseline fetal heart rate is normal, there is reduced variability, an absence of fetal 
heart rate accelerations and multiple decelerations (d). The decelerations were 
occurring after uterine tightening and are therefore termed ‘late’. 
Fetal heart rate variation is the most useful predictor 
of fetal well-being in small-for-gestational-age (SGA) 
fetuses, and a short-term variation of ˝3 ms (within 24 
hours of delivery) has been associated with a higher 
rate of metabolic acidaemia and early neonatal death. 
The computer software assesses these parameters 
and can report a ÿrst normal result within 10 minutes 
(Figure 4.15). If the CTG is clearly abnormal or if crite￾ria are not met by 60 minutes, further senior obstetric 
assessment of fetal well-being is recommended. 
Figure 4.15 Computerized antenatal cardiotocograph showing Dawes Redman criteria have been met, indicating a 
normal fetus. 
Criteria Met
TOCO Zeroed 
TOCO Zeroed
TOCO Zeroed
1cm/min TOCO MSpO2 
MSpO2 
Dawes-Redman 
Result for 
Started at 
Results at 
Dawes-Redman Met at 16 minutes 
1.0.0.8 
FHR1 
14.08 
14.24 (16 mins) 
Signal loss
Fetal Movements per hour
Basal Heart Rate (bpm)
Accelerations 
Significant Decelerations > 20 lost beats
High Episodes (Min)
Low Episodes (Min)
Long Term variation (ms)
Short Term Variation (ms) 
0.0% 
56.6 
151 
5 
0 
13 
0 
43.9 (19.2 bpm)
6.3 (2.8) 
200 
180 
160 
140 
120 
100 
80 
60 
100% 
75 
50 
25 
0 
55 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 56 04/03/2024 16:06
 
Assessment of fetal well-being 
BIOPHYSICAL PROFILE 
When the fetus is hypoxic, there may be reduced or 
absent fetal breathing movements (FBMs, move￾ments of the fetal chest) and gross body movements, 
less ˛exor tone and fewer accelerations in fetal heart 
rate. The BPP (Figure 4.16) includes fetal variables: 
FBMs, fetal gross body movement, fetal tone, and 
CTG and amniotic ˛uid volume, assigning a score 
from 0 to 2 for each, with a total score out of 10. Low 
overall scores (0–4) are considered abnormal and 
indicate signiÿcant fetal compromise. A score of 6 is 
equivocal and requires a repeat proÿle within a rea￾sonable timescale (hours) to exclude a period of fetal 
sleep as a cause. 
A systematic review of the effectiveness of BPP 
as a surveillance tool in high-risk pregnancies (ÿve 
studies, testing 2,974 fetuses) found that the use of 
BPP was not associated with a reduction in perina￾tal deaths or Apgar scores of <7 at 5 minutes. There 
are a number of problems with the BPP that limit 
its utility. BPPs can be time consuming. Fetuses 
spend approximately 30% of their time asleep, dur￾ing which they are not very active and do not exhibit 
FBMs. It is therefore necessary to scan for at least 30 
minutes to exclude this physiological cause of a poor 
score. Ultimately, however, by the time a fetus devel￾ops an abnormal BPP score prompting delivery, it is 
likely to already be severely hypoxic. While delivery 
may reduce the perinatal death rate (death in utero or 
within the ÿrst week of life), it may not increase long￾term survival and, in particular, survival without 
signiÿcant mental and physical impairment. There 
is currently insufÿcient evidence from randomized 
trials to support the use of BPP as a test of fetal well￾being in high-risk pregnancies. 
DOPPLER INVESTIGATION 
The principles of Doppler have already been dis￾cussed. Waveforms can be obtained from the umbili￾cal and fetal vessels and the maternal uterine artery. 
Data obtained from the umbilical artery provide indi￾rect information about placenta function, whereas 
data from the fetal vessels provide information on 
the fetal response to hypoxia. Doppler insonation of 
the uterine artery can be used to assess the degree of 
placental insufÿciency (see Chapter 3). 
UMBILICAL ARTERY 
Waveforms obtained from the umbilical artery pro￾vide information on placental resistance to blood ˛ow 
and hence, indirectly, placenta ‘health’ and function. 
An infarcted placenta secondary to maternal hyper￾tension, for example, will have increased resistance to 
˛ow. A normal umbilical arterial waveform is shown 
in Figure 4.17. The plot is obtained using Doppler 
ultrasound of velocity of blood ˛ow against time and 
demonstrates forward ˛ow of blood throughout the 
whole cardiac cycle (i.e. both systole and diastole). A 
useful analogy to understand the concept of umbili￾cal Doppler and placental resistance is to consider 
Parameter Score 2 Score 0 
Non-stress 
cardiotocograph Reactive 
Fewer than two 
accelerations in 
40 minutes 
Fewer than 
Fetal breathing °30 movements 30 seconds of fetal 
movements in 30 minutes breathing in 30 
minutes 
Fetal body 
movements 
Three or more 
movements 
in 30 minutes 
Two or fewer gross 
body movements in 
30 minutes 
Fetal tone One episode of 
limb ˜exion 
No evidence of 
fetal movement 
or ˜exion 
Amniotic ˜uid 
volume 
Large cord￾free pocket of 
˜uid over 1 cm 
Less than 1 cm 
pocket of ˜uid 
Figure 4.16 Biophysical proÿle scoring system. Figure 4.17 Normal umbilical arterial Doppler waveform. 56 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 57 04/03/2024 16:06
 
Ultrasound in the assessment of fetal well-being 
Figure 4.18 Reduced end-diastolic °ow in umbilical 
artery compared with the normal waveform in Figure 4.17. 
the umbilical artery as a hose carrying water towards 
a placenta, which in a healthy pregnancy will act 
like a sponge and in an infarcted placenta will act 
more like a brick wall. So, with a normal pregnancy, 
blood will ˛ow through the placenta without difÿ￾culty like water from a hose directed at the sponge 
and will pass straight through the sponge. In a dis￾eased placenta, the blood will re˛ect back from the 
high-resistance placenta like water from a hose being 
bounced back from the wall at which it is directed. In 
the normal pregnancy, the normal constant forward 
˛ow of blood in diastole will be seen, but, in the dis￾eased placenta, ˛ow during diastole may be reduced, 
absent or even reversed (Figure 4.18). Reversed end￾diastolic ˛ow effectively means that, during diastole, 
there is ˛ow of fetal blood away from the placenta 
and back to the fetus. 
Most studies investigating the value of using 
this technique in clinical practice have looked at 
resistance to ˛ow, which is indicated by the dia￾stolic component. A reduced amount of diastolic 
˛ow implies high resistance downstream to the 
vessel being studied and implies low perfusion (see 
Figure 4.18). An increased diastolic ˛ow indicates 
low resistance downstream and implies high perfu￾sion. Doppler indices such as the pulsatility index or 
the resistance index are useful, as they calculate the 
variability of blood velocity in a vessel, comparing 
the amount of diastolic ˛ow relative to systolic ˛ow. 
When these indices are high, there is high resistance 
to blood ˛ow; when these indices are low, resistance 
to blood ˛ow is low. Normally, diastolic ˛ow in the 
Figure 4.19 Reverse end-diastolic °ow in the umbilical 
artery. 
umbilical artery increases (i.e. placental resistance 
falls) throughout gestation. Absent or reversed end￾diastolic ˛ow in the umbilical artery is a particularly 
serious development with a strong correlation with 
fetal hypoxia and ultimately intrauterine death if the 
fetus is not delivered (Figure 4.19). 
An analysis of randomized controlled trials of 
the use of umbilical Doppler in over 10,000 high-risk 
pregnancies found that, compared with no Doppler 
ultrasound, the use of Doppler ultrasound in high￾risk pregnancy (especially those complicated by 
hypertension, SGA or FGR) was associated with 
a reduction in perinatal deaths from 1.7% to 1.2%. 
There were also fewer inductions of labour and fewer 
admissions to hospital without reports of adverse 
effects. The use of Doppler ultrasound in high-risk 
pregnancies therefore improves a number of obstet￾ric care outcomes and reduces perinatal deaths. 
FETAL VESSELS 
Falling oxygen levels in the fetus lead to a redistribu￾tion of blood ˛ow to ‘essential’ organs (such as the 
brain, heart and adrenal glands) from ‘non-essential’ 
organs (such as the kidneys, gastrointestinal tract and 
long bones) where there is vasoconstriction. Several 
fetal vessels have been studied and re˛ect this ‘cen￾tralization’ of ˛ow, often called cerebral redistribu￾tion. As hypoxia increases, the pulsatility index in the 
middle cerebral artery falls, indicating increasing dia￾stolic ˛ow as the cerebral circulation opens up (Figure 
4.20). At the same time, there is increased resistance in 57 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 58 04/03/2024 16:06
 
 
Assessment of fetal well-being 
Figure 4.20 Middle cerebral artery Doppler showing 
increased diastolic °ow with possible redistribution to 
brain in hypoxia. 
Figure 4.21 Normal ductus venosus Doppler waveform. 
the fetal aorta re˛ecting compensatory vasoconstric￾tion in the fetal body. Absent diastolic ˛ow in the fetal 
aorta implies fetal acidaemia. Perhaps the most sensi￾tive index of fetal acidaemia and incipient heart failure 
is demonstrated by increasing pulsatility in the central 
veins supplying the heart, such as the ductus venosus 
(DV) and inferior vena cava (IVC). The DV shunts a 
portion of the umbilical vein blood ˛ow directly to the 
IVC and thence to the right atrium, allowing oxygen￾ated blood from the placenta to bypass the fetal liver. 
The DV Doppler ˛ow velocity therefore re˛ects atrial 
pressure–volume changes during the cardiac cycle. As 
FGR worsens, there is a direct effect of hypoxia and 
acidaemia on cardiac function, leading to increased 
afterload and preload. This leads to a reduced veloc￾ity in the DV a-wave owing to increased end-diastolic 
pressure. A retrograde or ‘reversed’ DV a-wave signi￾ÿes the onset of overt cardiac compromise (Figures 
4.21 and 4.22), and delivery should be considered, as 
fetal death is imminent. 
Measurement of the velocity of blood ˛ow in the 
middle cerebral artery also gives an indicator of the 
presence of fetal anaemia. When the fetus is anae￾mic, the peak systolic blood ˛ow velocity increases. 
This technique is particularly useful to assess the 
severity of rhesus isoimmunization disease and in 
twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome that results in 
anaemia in the donor twin. Doppler assessment of 
fetal anaemia has now superseded invasive tech￾niques such as amniocentesis or cordocentesis. 
Figure 4.22 Reverse °ow in ductus venosus 
UTERINE ARTERY 
Doppler studies of the uterine artery during the ÿrst 
and early second trimester may be used to predict 
pregnancies at risk of adverse outcome, particularly 
pre-eclampsia. The proposed pathogenic model of 
pre-eclampsia is one of incomplete physiological 
invasion of the spiral arteries by the trophoblast, with 
a resultant increase in uteroplacental vascular resis￾tance (see Chapter 9). This is re˛ected in the Doppler 
waveforms obtained from the maternal uterine artery 
circulation. Doppler ultrasound studies of the uter￾ine arteries may demonstrate markers of increased 
resistance to ˛ow including the diastolic ‘notch’ in the 
waveform (Figure 4.23) in early diastole, thought to 
result from increased vascular resistance in the utero￾placental vascular bed. High-resistance waveform 
58 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 59 04/03/2024 16:06
 
Three- and four-dimensional ultrasound 
A B 
Figure 4.23 (A) Uterine artery waveform with diastolic notch. (B) Pulsatility index (PI) above the 
97th centile. 
patterns are associated with adverse outcomes, admission rate to neonatal intensive care units than 
including pre-eclampsia, FGR and placental abrup- fetuses with a normal ratio. In fetuses with early￾tion. Among pregnancies at 20–24 weeks’ gestation onset SGA (<34 weeks’ gestation), an abnormal 
with bilateral notched uterine arteries, 60–70% will ratio is associated with a lower birthweight and an 
subsequently develop one or more of these compli- increased rate of adverse neonatal outcome and peri￾cations. Consequently, such pregnancies will require natal death when compared with a normal ratio. 
close monitoring of fetal growth rate and increased 
surveillance for the possible development of maternal 
hypertension and proteinuria. 
Uterine artery Doppler evaluation at 20–24 weeks’ 
gestation can be used to stratify pregnant women 
with risk factors for an SGA baby, for example smok- Ultrasound is used to guide invasive diagnostic 
ing, chronic hypertension, diabetes and vascular dis- procedures such as amniocentesis, chorion villus 
ease, previous SGA baby or stillbirth. Those with a sampling and cordocentesis, as well as therapeu￾normal uterine artery pulsatility index and normal tic procedures such as the insertion of fetal bladder 
waveform may be reassured that there is a low prob- shunts or chest drains. If fetoscopy is performed, the 
ability of an SGA birth. Serial ultrasound to assess endoscope is inserted under ultrasound guidance. 
fetal growth and umbilical artery Doppler for fetal This use of ultrasound has greatly reduced the pos￾well-being is recommended if the uterine artery sibility of fetal trauma, as the needle or scope is visu￾Doppler assessment is abnormal. alized throughout the procedure and guided with 
ULTRASOUND AND INVASIVE 
PROCEDURES 
precision to the appropriate place. 
CEREBROPLACENTAL RATIO 
The cerebroplacental Doppler ratio is a ratio of the 
pulsatility indices of the middle cerebral artery and 
the umbilical artery. It is emerging as an important 
predictor of adverse pregnancy outcome. Fetuses Both 3D and 4D ultrasound are mainly used as an 
with an abnormal ratio that are appropriately grown adjunct to 2D ultrasound, either to interrogate fetal 
for gestational age or have late-onset SGA (>34 structures that may be difÿcult to visualize, such as 
weeks’ gestation) have a higher incidence of abnor- the corpus callosum or fetal spine, or to demonstrate 
mal intrapartum CTG requiring emergency cae- fetal structural abnormalities to the parents, for 
sarean delivery, a lower cord pH and an increased example cleft lip and palate. 
THREE- AND FOUR-DIMENSIONAL 
ULTRASOUND 
59 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 60 04/03/2024 16:06
 
 
 
 
 
Assessment of fetal well-being 
KEY LEARNING POINTS 
The aims of obstetric ultrasound include: 
˜ the early pregnancy scan (11–14 weeks), namely 
to: 
– conÿrm fetal viability 
– provide an accurate estimation of gestational 
age 
– diagnose multiple gestation, and in particular 
determine chorionicity 
– identify markers that would indicate 
an increased risk of fetal chromosome 
abnormality such as Down syndrome 
– identify fetuses with gross structural 
abnormalities. 
˜ the 20-week scan (18–22 weeks), namely to: 
– provide an accurate estimation of gestational 
age if an early scan has not been performed 
– carry out a detailed fetal anatomical survey 
to detect any fetal structural abnormalities or 
markers for chromosome abnormality 
– locate the placenta and identify pregnancies 
with a low-lying placenta for a repeat scan at 
34 weeks to exclude placenta praevia 
– estimate the amniotic °uid volume 
– perform Doppler ultrasound examination 
of maternal uterine arteries to screen for 
adverse pregnancy outcome, for example 
SGA 
– measure cervical length to assess the risk of 
preterm delivery where there are risk factors 
for spontaneous preterm birth. 
˜ ultrasound in the third trimester, namely to: 
– assess fetal growth 
– assess fetal well-being. 
MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING 
MRI utilizes the effect of powerful magnetic forces 
on spinning hydrogen protons, which, when 
knocked off their axis by pulsed radio waves, 
produce radio frequency signals as they return 
to their basal state. The signals re˛ect the com￾position of tissue (i.e. the amount and distribu￾tion of hydrogen protons) and thus the images 
provide signiÿcant improvement over ultrasound 
in tissue characterization. Ultrafast MRI tech￾niques enable images to be acquired in less than 
1 second to reduce the detrimental effect of fetal 
motion on image quality. Such technology has led 
to increased usage of fetal MRI, which provides 
multiplanar views, better characterization of ana￾tomic details of, for example, the fetal brain and 
information for planning the mode of delivery and 
airway management at birth. Fetal MRI is also 
being used to detect cerebral lesions after fetal 
interventions. For example, fetal brain MRI may 
be performed a few weeks after laser fetoscopic 
coagulation of placental anastomoses in twin-to￾twin transfusion syndrome, to examine for acute 
cerebral ischaemic lesions. MRI is also being used 
to image placenta accreta spectrum to better deÿne 
the degree of placental attachment to pelvic organs 
and for surgical planning. 
FURTHER READING 
Alÿrevic Z, Neilson JP ( 1996). Doppler ultrasound for 
fetal assessment in high risk pregnancies. Cochrane 
Database of Systematic Reviews, 4: CD000073.
 Lalor JG, Fawole B, Alÿrevic Z, Devane D ( 2008). 
Biophysical proÿle for fetal assessment in high 
risk pregnancies. Cochrane Database of Systematic 
Reviews, 1: CD000038. 
60 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 61 04/03/2024 16:06
 
 
Self-assessment 
SELF-ASSESSMENT 
For interactive SBAs and EMQs relating to this chapter, visit www.routledge.com/cw/mccarthy. 
CASE HISTORY 1 
An 18 year old in her ÿrst pregnancy attends for review 
at the antenatal clinic at 34 weeks’ gestation. Her dates 
were conÿrmed by ultrasound at booking (12 weeks). She 
is a smoker. The midwife measures her fundal height at 
30 cm. An ultrasound scan is performed because of the 
midwife’s concern that the fetus is SGA, and the mea￾surements are plotted in Figure 4.24.
 A Do the ultrasound ÿndings support the clinical 
diagnosis of SGA?
 B What additional features/measures on ultrasound 
assessment could give an indication of fetal 
well-being?
 ANSWERS
 A Yes, because the fetal AC is below the 5th centile for 
gestation. This ÿnding does not give an indication 
of the well-being of the fetus and is compatible 
with FGR secondary to placental insufÿciency or a 
healthy, constitutionally small baby.
 B The additional features/measures are as follows.
 Liquor volume 
Amniotic °uid volume is decreased in FGR associated 
with fetal hypoxia where there may be redistribution of 
fetal blood °ow away from the kidneys to vital structures 
such as the brain and heart, with a consequent reduction 
in renal perfusion and urine output.
 Doppler ultrasound
 Umbilical artery 
Waveforms from the umbilical artery provide information 
on fetoplacental blood °ow and placental resistance. 
Diastolic °ow in the umbilical artery increases (i.e. pla￾cental resistance falls) throughout gestation. If the resis￾tance index in the umbilical artery rises above the 95th 
centile of the normal graph, this implies poor perfusion of 
the placenta, which may eventually result in fetal hypoxia. 
Absent or reversed end-diastolic °ow in the umbilical 
artery is a particularly serious development, with a strong 
correlation with fetal hypoxia and intrauterine death.
 Fetal vessels 
Falling oxygen levels in the fetus may lead to cerebral 
redistribution, diverting blood from the fetal body to the 
brain, heart, adrenals and spleen. The middle cerebral 
artery will show increasing diastolic °ow as hypoxia 
increases, while a rising resistance in the fetal aorta 
re°ects compensatory vasoconstriction in the fetal body. 
When diastolic °ow is absent in the fetal aorta, this 
implies fetal acidaemia. Increasing pulsatility in the cen￾tral veins supplying the heart, such as the DV and IVC, 
is an indicator of fetal acidaemia and impending heart 
failure; when late diastolic °ow is absent in the ductus 
venosus, fetal death is imminent.
 Cardiotocography 
Fetal tachycardia, reduced variability in heart rate, 
absence of accelerations and presence of decelerations 
identiÿed on a CTG are associated with fetal hypoxia. 
450 
400 
350 
300 
250 
200 
150 
100 
50 
0 
16 20 
Weeks Weeks 
24 28 32 36 40 16 20 24 28 32 36 40 
mm 450 
400 
350 
300 
250 
200 
150 
100 
50 
0 
mm 
95% 
5% 
95% 
5% 
Head circumference Abdominal circumference 
Figure 4.24 Plot of fetal head circumference and fetal abdominal circumference. 
61 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 62 04/03/2024 16:06
Assessment of fetal well-being 
CASE HISTORY 2 
A 16 year old is admitted to the labour ward at 38 weeks’ 
gestation. She gives a history suggestive of rupture of 
membranes with meconium staining and is experienc￾ing uterine contractions. She was seen at 10 weeks’ 
gestation for consideration of termination of pregnancy 
and had a scan at that time that conÿrmed her gesta￾tional age. She opted to continue with the pregnancy 
but did not attend for antenatal care. She admitted to 
smoking 20 cigarettes per day. Abdominal examination 
shows the fetus is in cephalic presentation. The sym￾physis–fundal height measurement is 30 cm. Vaginal 
examination conÿrms that the cervix is 8 cm dilated. 
A CTG demonstrates a baseline fetal heart rate of 170 
bpm with persistent variable decelerations for more 
than 30 minutes, and fetal scalp pH is 7.14 with a base 
deÿcit of 12 mmol/L. A category 1 emergency caesar￾ean section is performed and a male infant weighing 
1,900 g is delivered within 20 minutes of the decision. 
Apgar scores are 3 at 1 minute and 8 at 5 minutes. The 
placental histology conÿrms patchy hypoplasia of the 
distal villous tree and a number of villous infarcts sug￾gesting chronic placental pathology. 
From which complications are such severely growth￾restricted infants particularly at risk? 
ANSWER 
Reduced oxygen supply in utero can result in the fetus 
being stillborn or suffering damage from acute asphyxia. 
In the latter case, the neonate may demonstrate features 
of hypoxic ischaemic encephalopathy (HIE), which may 
lead to death from multi-organ failure. If the infant sur￾vives, neurological damage and cerebral palsy may result. 
Chronic hypoxia in utero can also result in neurological 
damage without the acute manifestations of HIE. Other 
consequences of reduced oxygen supply in utero include 
increased haemopoiesis and cardiac failure. Increased 
haemopoiesis can in turn result in coagulopathy, poly￾cythaemia and jaundice in the newborn. Neonatal hypo￾thermia and hypoglycaemia are also more common in this 
type of infant and result from reduced body fat and glyco￾gen stores. Both of these conditions, if untreated, can lead 
to increased mortality and neurological damage. 
Reduced supply of amino acids in utero can impair 
immune function, increasing the risk of infection in the 
newborn. 
Growth-restricted babies are also at increased risk of 
chronic diseases such as coronary heart disease, stroke, 
hypertension and non-insulin-dependent diabetes in 
adulthood. This is thought to be because the fetal adap￾tation to undernutrition in utero results in the permanent 
resetting of homeostatic mechanisms, and this leads to 
later disease. 
62 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 63 04/03/2024 16:06
5 
Prenatal diagnosis 
ANNA L DAVID 
Introduction 63 Non-invasive prenatal testing 70 
Why is prenatal diagnostic testing New developments in prenatal diagnosis 70 
performed? 63 Further reading 72 
Classiÿ cation 64 Self-assessment 72 
Invasive testing 64 
 Learning Objectives 
• Understand why prenatal diagnosis is performed and what conditions can be tested for in the fetus. 
• Appreciate the risks and beneÿts of the invasive prenatal diagnostic tests that can be performed, 
and realise how to appropriately counsel a pregnant woman and her partner who are considering 
having such a test. 
• Know the various screening tests that are used to predict the risk of having a pregnancy affected by 
Down syndrome and other aneuploidies. 
• Learn about newer, non-invasive methods of prenatal screening and diagnosis based on measure￾ment of cell-free fetal deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) in the maternal circulation. 
INTRODUCTION 
Prenatal diagnosis is the identiÿcation of a disease 
in the fetus prior to birth. For some of these con￾ditions, treatment before birth improves neonatal 
outcome. This chapter will discuss why prenatal 
diagnostic tests may be performed and the types of 
non-invasive and invasive tests that are available. It 
will discuss factors that should be taken into con￾sideration prior to offering testing, and it empha￾sizes the importance of good communication with 
pregnant women and their partners/families, as 
well as multidisciplinary working. 
WHY IS PRENATAL DIAGNOSTIC 
TESTING PERFORMED? 
Prenatal diagnosis is usually performed because 
something leads to the suspicion of disease being 
present in the fetus. For example: 
• family history – genetic disease with a known 
recurrence risk 
• past obstetric history – rhesus factor D (RhD) 
alloimmunization 
• serum screening tests – trisomy 21 
• ultrasound screening – 12-week dating or 
20-week anomaly scan 
63 
10.1201/9781003196112-5 ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 64 04/03/2024 16:06
 
Prenatal diagnosis 
Prenatal diagnosis frequently follows a prenatal 
screening test, whether this is simply the history tak￾ing at the booking visit or a more formal screening 
test such as those offered for Down syndrome, hae￾moglobinopathies or ultrasound screening. 
The attributes of a screening test are as follows: 
• Relevance – the condition screened for must be 
relevant and important. 
• Effect on management – alternative management 
options must be available, for example planning 
therapy or offering termination of an affected 
pregnancy. 
• Sensitivity – the test must have a high detection 
rate for the condition. 
• Speciÿcity – the test must exclude the vast 
majority who do not have the condition. 
• Predictive value – the test must predict accurately 
who does and who does not have the condition. 
• Affordability – the test should be cheap enough 
to be cost-effective. 
• Equity – the test should be available to all. 
CLASSIFICATION 
Prenatal diagnostic tests can be divided into non￾invasive tests and invasive tests. The main non-inva￾sive test is the use of ultrasound scanning to screen 
for structural fetal abnormalities, such as neural tube 
defects, gastroschisis, cystic adenomatoid malforma￾tion of the lung and renal abnormalities (Table 5.1). 
Maternal blood can be tested for exposure to 
viruses (viral serology). If a pregnant woman has no 
immunoglobulin (Ig)G or IgM for a particular virus 
early in pregnancy, but then develops IgM and IgG 
later in pregnancy, it suggests that they have had a 
clinical or subclinical infection with that virus ear￾lier during pregnancy. Maternal blood is usually 
only tested if features on ultrasound are suggestive 
of infection having occurred, for example hydrops or 
ventriculomegaly, or if there is a history of exposure 
to a particular virus, for example parvovirus. 
Cell-free fetal deoxyribonucleic acid (cffDNA) 
can be extracted from maternal blood to determine 
fetal blood group in cases of RhD alloimmuniza￾tion, to determine the sex of the fetus in X-linked 
disorders or to diagnose skeletal dysplasias such 
as achondroplasia. There is much interest in using 
Table 5.1 Examples of conditions and their method of 
diagnosis 
 Diagnostic test Condition
 Ultrasound 
diagnosis 
Neural tube defect
 Gastroschisis 
Cystic adenomatoid malformation 
of the lung 
Twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome
 Invasive test 
– CVS or 
amniocentesis
 Down syndrome 
Spina biÿ da 
Thalassaemia
 Invasive test 
– cordocentesis
 Alloimmune thrombocytopaenia
 Ultrasound then 
invasive test 
Congenital diaphragmatic hernia
 Exomphalos
 Ventriculomegaly
 Duodenal atresia 
CVS, chorion villus sampling. 
next-generation sequencing analysis of cffDNA in 
maternal blood for non-invasive prenatal diagnosis 
of aneuploidy and of monogenic disorders such as 
the haemoglobinopathies. 
Amniocentesis and chorion (or chorionic) villus 
sampling (CVS) are the two most common invasive 
tests and are used to check the karyotype of the fetus 
or to diagnose single-gene disorders. These tests 
carry a small risk of miscarriage; therefore, the risk of 
being affected by the condition and the seriousness 
of the condition should be severe enough to warrant 
taking the risk. Rarely, cordocentesis is used as an 
invasive diagnostic test. 
Frequently, non-invasive tests and invasive tests 
are used together. The ultrasound scan may diag￾nose a structural problem in the fetus such as a con￾genital diaphragmatic hernia, but since congenital 
diaphragmatic hernias are associated with underly￾ing chromosomal abnormalities, an invasive prenatal 
diagnostic test would then be offered. 
INVASIVE TESTING
 PRETEST COUNSELLING 
Invasive tests are most frequently performed to 
diagnose aneuploidy, for example Down syndrome, 
or genetic conditions such as sickle cell disease or 64 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 65 04/03/2024 16:06
 
Invasive testing 
thalassaemia. Pregnant women can choose to have, 
or not to have, invasive testing. This is an important 
decision that may have lifelong consequences and 
therefore must be a decision that is fully informed. 
For a clinician to discuss the option of invasive 
testing in a meaningful way, the clinician needs to 
know important information about the condition to 
be tested for, the type of test and what the results 
might indicate. 
BOX 5.1: Considerations for pretest 
counselling for prenatal diagnosis 
˜ The condition suspected and its severity so that 
the pregnant woman can assess the effect that 
having a child with this disorder would have on 
her and her family. 
˜ That the history is correct – involvement of 
colleagues from the clinical genetics department 
is often invaluable. 
˜ An accurate assessment of the risk of an 
affected fetus – again involvement of colleagues 
from the clinical genetics department may be 
helpful. 
˜ That a diagnostic test is available – sometimes 
the mutation has not been identiÿed yet. 
˜ What sample is needed and how it should be 
processed. 
˜ The accuracy and limitations of the particular 
laboratory test being performed, including 
culture failure rates and reporting times. 
˜ Acceptability – some pregnant women feel that 
they cannot accept the small risk of miscarriage. 
˜ Whether it is ethical – some genetic mutations 
may not carry a signiÿcant risk of serious 
disability for an individual, and yet it is possible 
to offer prenatal diagnosis for them, for example 
sickle cell disease. 
Prior to the test, the clinician should also discuss 
with the pregnant woman what options would be 
available to her if the test result showed that the fetus 
was affected with the condition. This is an impor￾tant part of the decision-making process and often 
the partner is included in these discussions. There 
may be little point doing an invasive test if it will not 
be of beneÿt to the pregnant woman or the baby, 
especially if it might increase the risk of pregnancy 
complications. 
The three options available are usually to:
 1. continue – the information from the test may 
facilitate plans for care around the time of 
delivery, or may help the pregnant woman and 
her family prepare for the birth of a baby with a 
serious condition 
2. in°uence the decision to terminate the 
pregnancy
 3. terminate, but provide information that may 
prove useful when counselling about recurrence 
risks in future pregnancies 
Some pregnant women decline invasive testing, as 
they feel that it would not provide them with useful 
information and it would put them at an unaccept￾able risk of miscarriage or preterm birth. To ensure 
informed consent, the clinician needs to be certain 
that the pregnant woman understands the procedure, 
why it is being offered and the risks, limitations and 
subsequent management options. The clinician also 
needs to be sure that there is no evidence of duress 
from others such as family members, the commu￾nity or religious groups. Informed written consent is 
advised prior to the procedure as a formal record that 
the discussion has taken place. This should be in line 
with existing consent advice from the General Medical 
Council and the Royal College of Obstetricians and 
Gynaecologists (RCOG) recommendations. 
Invasive prenatal procedures should not be car￾ried out without reviewing available blood-borne 
virus screening tests such as human immunodeÿ￾ciency virus (HIV) and hepatitis. If these are declined 
or unavailable, the pregnant woman should be coun￾selled about the potential risk of vertical transmission 
of infection to the fetus. 
CHORION VILLUS SAMPLING 
(ALSO KNOWN AS CHORION 
VILLUS BIOPSY) 
Fetal trophoblast cells in the mesenchyme of the villi 
divide rapidly in the ÿrst trimester. A CVS procedure 
aims to take a sample of these rapidly dividing cells 
from the developing placenta. This is done either by 
passing a needle under ultrasound guidance through 65 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 66 04/03/2024 16:06
 
 
Prenatal diagnosis 
Probe 
Womb 
(uterus) 
Placenta 
A
Probe 
Womb 
(uterus) 
Placenta 
B
the abdominal wall and myometrium into the pla￾centa (Figure 5.1A) or by passing a ÿne catheter (or 
biopsy forceps) through the cervix into the placenta 
(Figure 5.1B). 
An ultrasound scan is performed to: 
• conÿrm that the pregnancy is viable prior to the 
procedure 
• ensure that it is a singleton pregnancy (prenatal 
diagnosis in multiple pregnancy is more 
complex) 
• conÿrm gestational age (CVS should not be 
performed before 10 weeks’ gestation) 
• localize the placenta and determine whether 
a transabdominal or transcervical approach is 
more appropriate
 Transabdominal procedures are performed more 
commonly, but they may not be feasible if the uterus 
is retroverted or the placenta is low on the posterior 
wall of the uterus. 
Needle 
Bladder 
Vagina 
Entrance of 
womb (cervix) 
Rectum 
Fine forceps 
or catheter 
Entrance of 
womb (cervix) 
The additional overall risk of miscarriage fol￾lowing CVS performed by an appropriately trained 
operator is likely to be below 0.5%. This is in addi￾tion to the background (natural) risk of miscarriage 
for a ÿrst trimester pregnancy. To reduce the risk of 
technical challenges, CVS should be performed from 
11+0 weeks of gestation where possible. CVS can 
be performed in multiple pregnancies; commonly, a 
double entry technique is used to reduce the chance 
of cross-contamination (see Chapter 7). The addi￾tional risk of miscarriage following CVS in twin 
pregnancies performed by an appropriately trained 
operator is likely to be around 1%. 
Many laboratories can provide a rapid result for 
common aneuploidies (T21, 18, 13, X and Y) within 
48 hours for a CVS sample. Full culture results to 
provide a karyotype takes approximately 7–10 days 
and results for genetic disorders can take varying 
amounts of time. Many genetics laboratories are 
moving towards performing microarray analysis 
Figure 5.1 Chorionic villus sampling via (A) the transabdominal 
approach and (B) the transvaginal approach. (Adapted from the 
RCOG information lea°et of both approaches.) 
Vagina 
Rectum 
Bladder 
Speculum 
66 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 67 04/03/2024 16:06
 
 
 
Invasive testing 
on CVS samples to make a diagnosis of aneuploidy, 
rather than culturing fetal cells for the traditional 
karyotype. Chromosomal microarray analysis 
(CMA) is a relatively new technique that identiÿes 
submicroscopic abnormalities that are too small to 
be detected by conventional karyotyping. Like con￾ventional fetal karyotyping, prenatal CMA requires 
direct testing of fetal tissue and thus can be offered 
only with CVS, amniocentesis or cordocentesis. 
There is the potential for complex results and detec￾tion of clinically uncertain ÿndings that can result in 
substantial patient anxiety. Comprehensive pretest 
counselling is therefore recommended. 
Placental mosaicism is sometimes found. This 
is the occurrence of two different cell types in the 
same sample; usually, one cell line is normal and 
one cell line is abnormal. It occurs in <2% of CVS 
procedures. The mosaic pattern may be present in 
the placenta and may not occur in the fetus (con￾ÿned placental mosaicism). Mosaic results should 
be discussed with the clinical genetics department 
to get accurate information on the impact this may 
have on the fetus. If necessary, another fetal tis￾sue (e.g. amniotic °uid) may need to be sampled to 
make a deÿnitive diagnosis. 
AMNIOCENTESIS 
Amniotic °uid contains amniocytes and ÿbroblasts 
shed from fetal membranes, skin and the fetal geni￾tourinary tract. An amniocentesis procedure takes 
a sample (15–20 mL) of amniotic °uid that contains 
these cells. This is done by passing a needle under 
continuous direct ultrasound control through the 
abdominal wall and myometrium into the amniotic 
cavity and aspirating the °uid (Figure 5.2). 
An initial ultrasound is performed prior to the 
procedure. The additional overall risk of miscarriage 
following amniocentesis performed by an appropri￾ately trained operator is likely to be below 0.5% for 
a procedure performed from 15 weeks of gestation 
under ultrasound guidance. 
Many laboratories can provide a rapid result for 
common aneuploidies (T21, 18, 13, X and Y) within 
48 hours for an amniocentesis sample. Full culture 
results take approximately 7–10 days and results 
for genetic disorders take varying amounts of time. 
CMA is also increasingly being used instead of tra￾ditional karyotyping and is becoming available in a 
similar way to CVS. 
Amniotic °uid may be used to check for fetal viral 
infections, for example cytomegalovirus. In the past, 
it was also used for biochemical tests, for example 
alpha-fetoprotein for spina biÿda and spectrophoto￾metric tests for RhD haemolytic disease. These have 
been superseded by ultrasound imaging. 
COMPARISON OF CHORION VILLUS 
SAMPLING AND AMNIOCENTESIS 
Figure 5.2 Amniocentesis. (Adapted from the RCOG information lea°et.) 
Entrance of 
womb (cervix) 
Vagina 
Rectum 
Bladder 
Probe 
Placenta 
Womb 
(uterus) 
The advantage of CVS over amniocentesis is that 
it can be performed earlier in pregnancy, at a stage 
when surgical termination is possible in the event 
of a ‘bad result’, and at a stage in pregnancy before 
Needle 
67 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 68 04/03/2024 16:06
Prenatal diagnosis 
Table 5.2 Other risks associated with CVS and 
amniocentesis 
Risk CVS Amniocentesis 
Second sampling/ 
repeat procedure 
Up to 6% Up to 6% 
Blood stained 
sample 
Not applicable Up to 0.8% 
Conÿ ned 
placental 
mosaicism 
<2% Not applicable 
Maternal cell 
contamination 
1–2% 1–2% 
Rapid test failure 2% 2% 
Failed cell culture 0.5–1% 0.5–1% 
Source: Adapted from RCOG Green-top Guideline No 8: 
Amniocentesis and chorionic villus sampling. 
CVS, chorion villus sampling. 
there is a need to disclose the pregnancy to fam￾ily, friends and employers. For some genetic disor￾ders, for example haemoglobinopathies, CVS may 
be preferred over amniocentesis because it provides 
a larger sample of DNA for rapid polymerase chain 
reaction (PCR) analysis. Severe infection, maternal 
visceral injury and fetal injury are rare risks. Other 
risks are listed in Table 5.2. 
CORDOCENTESIS 
Cordocentesis is performed when fetal blood is 
needed, or when a rapid full culture for karyotype 
is needed. The most common reason for performing 
a cordocentesis is for suspected severe fetal anaemia 
or thrombocytopaenia, with availability of immedi￾ate transfusion if conÿrmed. 
A needle is passed under ultrasound guidance 
through the abdominal wall and myometrium and, 
most commonly, into the umbilical cord at the point 
where it inserts into the placenta. This point is chosen 
because the umbilical cord is ÿxed and does not move. 
Cordocentesis can be performed from about 20 weeks’ 
gestation. The risk of miscarriage varies with indica￾tion and position of the placenta (Table 5.3). 
Table 5.3 Comparison of invasive tests 
 Test CVS Amniocentesis Cordocentesis
 Gestation 11 15 weeks Around 20 
from which weeks weeks
test can be 
performed
 Miscarriage 
risk
 <0.5%* <0.5%* 2–5% 
* Performed by an appropriately trained operator. 
CVS, chorion villus sampling. 
BOX 5.2: Care after any invasive test 
Following any invasive procedure, the following should 
take place: 
˜ The sample should be accurately labelled and 
checked with the patient. 
˜ The sample should be transported promptly and 
securely to the appropriate laboratory. 
˜ The procedure and any complications should be 
documented in the medical notes. 
˜ There should be communication with the 
referring clinician. 
˜ The pregnant woman should avoid strenuous 
exercise for the next 24 hours. 
˜ The pregnant woman should be advised 
that, while she may experience some mild 
abdominal pain, it should be relieved by 
paracetamol. 
˜ The pregnant woman should be advised that, 
if she has any fever, bleeding, pain not relieved 
by paracetamol or leakage of °uid vaginally, she 
should seek medical advice, and she should be 
told how to access this. 
˜ The pregnant woman should be given 
appropriate contact numbers. 
˜ A process for giving results should be agreed, 
including who will give the results, how they will 
be given and when the results are likely to be 
available. 
˜ If the pregnant woman is RhD negative, 
an appropriate dose of anti-D should be 
administered (with a Kleihauer test if more than 
20 weeks’ gestation). 
˜ A plan of ongoing care should be discussed 
once the results are available. 
68 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 69 04/03/2024 16:06
Invasive testing 
DOWN SYNDROME AND OTHER 
ANEUPLOIDIES 
In the UK, prenatal diagnosis of Down syndrome 
is the most common reason for performing inva￾sive prenatal diagnostic testing. Current Down syn￾drome screening tests can also indicate an increased 
risk of a fetus having other aneuploidies such as tri￾somy 13 (Patau syndrome) and trisomy 18 (Edwards 
syndrome). The NHS Fetal Anomaly Screening 
Programme in the UK deÿnes the standards that 
hospitals should adhere to in their screening pro￾grammes for aneuploidies (for trisomy 21, 18 and 13). 
Hospitals are required to regularly report their data 
on the number of those who are eligible, those who 
are tested and those who decline screening, as well 
as the results of the invasive tests and pregnancy 
outcomes. 
Most prenatal diagnostic tests arise following a 
‘high-risk’ screening test. In the UK, the National 
Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) has 
recommended that all pregnant women should be 
offered screening for Down syndrome as part of their 
routine antenatal care. 
Several different screening tests are available, but 
the UK National Screening Committee recommends 
combined screening in the ÿrst trimester. This test 
involves the combination of an ultrasound scan 
to measure the nuchal translucency (NT) and the 
crown–rump length (CRL) from 11+2–14+1 weeks’ 
gestation, and a blood test between 10+0–14+1 
weeks’ gestation to measure the levels of human 
chorionic gonadotrophin (hCG) and pregnancy 
associated plasma protein-A (PAPP-A) in maternal 
blood. The eligibility criteria for the combined test 
is when the CRL is between 45.0 mm and 84.0 mm 
(Figure 5.3). 
The NT measurement is the thickness of a col￾lection of °uid under the skin in the nuchal (neck) 
region of the fetus. Fetuses with Down syndrome 
tend to have a thicker NT, hence a thick NT mea￾surement increases the risk of the fetus having Down 
syndrome (Figure 5.3). 
The risk of Down syndrome increases with mater￾nal age. For each pregnancy, the individual risk can 
be calculated by taking the age-related risk and then 
adjusting this risk up or down based on the measure￾ments obtained for the NT, hCG and PAPP-A. Based 
on their individual screening result, the pregnant 
woman can then choose whether to have an invasive 
test or not. 
The UK National Screening Committee recom￾mends the quadruple test (hCG, alpha-fetoprotein, 
unconjugated oestriol and inhibin A) as the screen￾ing strategy of choice in the second trimester for those 
individuals booking later in pregnancy or when it is 
not possible to measure the NT. The test can be per￾formed between 14+2 and 20+0 weeks’ gestation. 
Prior to performing the screening test, the preg￾nant woman should be encouraged to consider what 
action she would take and how she would feel if she 
screened positive. It is also important to explain to 
Figure 5.3 Ultrasound images demonstrating the measurement of crown–rump length (left-hand image) and nuchal 
translucency (arrow, right-hand image). 69 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 70 04/03/2024 16:06
 
Prenatal diagnosis 
pregnant women that this initial test is simply a 
screening test and not a diagnostic test. A low-risk 
result does not rule out the possibility of Down syn￾drome completely (even if the result shows a very low 
risk of 1:10,000, the patient could be the 1 person in 
10,000 who has an affected fetus). With a high-risk 
result of 1:10, 9 out of 10 or 90% of fetuses would 
be normal. The diagnostic tests available should be 
explained. 
The accuracy of the screening test for Down syn￾drome can be reÿned by adding further markers such 
as measuring the length of the nasal bone, the fron￾tomaxillary nasal angle and looking for the presence 
of tricuspid regurgitation and at the ductus venosus 
wave form. These increase the sensitivity of the test 
and reduce the false-positive rate. However, they are 
resource intensive and not currently used in the UK 
Fetal Anomaly Screening Programme. A prenatal 
diagnostic test such as CVS or amniocentesis must 
still be performed to reach a deÿnitive diagnosis. 
NON-INVASIVE PRENATAL 
TESTING 
.ngi testÿ cinancy-spec 
Maternal blood contains a mixture of maternal DNA 
(90%) and placental DNA (10%). In most cases, the 
placental DNA will be the same as the fetal DNA. 
The contribution of DNA from the placenta is called 
cffDNA. This can be detected in the maternal blood 
as early as 5 weeks of pregnancy. The concentration 
of cffDNA increases with gestation from around 10% 
at 10 weeks of gestation. After delivery, the level of 
cffDNA drops rapidly and is usually undetectable by 
the ÿrst day after birth, making it suitable for preg￾The use of cffDNA to screen for Down syndrome 
and other aneuploidies has now been implemented 
within the UK NHS Fetal Anomaly Screening 
Programme and is undergoing evaluation. It is cur￾rently being offered on the NHS to all pregnant 
women who receive a higher chance result (between 
1 in 2 and 1 in 150) from either the combined or the 
quadruple test in both singleton and twin pregnan￾cies. Individuals with a high-risk result can choose to 
have non-invasive prenatal testing (NIPT) rather than 
immediately undergo an invasive diagnostic test such 
as CVS or amniocentesis. Current studies suggest that 
NIPT using cffDNA detects around 98% of all babies 
with Down, Patau and Edwards syndrome. NIPT is 
not diagnostic, however, and an invasive prenatal 
diagnostic test is recommended to conÿrm the result. 
NEW DEVELOPMENTS IN 
PRENATAL DIAGNOSIS 
Non-invasive prenatal diagnosis (NIPD) is now 
becoming available for certain congenital disorders 
by amplifying the cffDNA using PCR to conÿrm the 
fetal genotype. Care must be taken to ensure that 
there is a sufÿcient concentration of cffDNA in the 
maternal blood (the ‘fetal fraction’) for the test to 
be accurate. This may mean that the mother’s blood 
needs to be retested later in pregnancy when the 
fetal fraction of cffDNA is higher. Maternal obe￾sity is associated with a larger blood volume and 
this may make a conclusive result impossible. Two 
recent examples of such non-invasive diagnostic 
tests are for single-gene disorders and to check the 
fetal blood group. 
FETAL SINGLE-GENE DISORDERS 
Certain autosomal dominant single-gene disorders 
can now be diagnosed using cffDNA. The test can be 
offered when the father is known to be affected by the 
condition, when there is a risk of recurrence or when 
the condition is suspected on ultrasound scan. For 
example, NIPD for the autosomal dominant severe 
skeletal dysplasias such as achondroplasia and than￾atophoric dysplasia that are caused by a mutation in 
the ÿbroblast growth factor 3 receptor gene (FGFR3) 
are now offered for routine clinical use in the UK 
National Genomic Test Directory. Ultrasound ÿnd￾ings such as short long bones (<3rd centile), a small 
narrow chest with normal head and abdominal 
measurements can indicate an affected fetus. If the 
mother is unaffected, she will have a normal FGFR3 
gene. When a PCR test on the cffDNA in the moth￾er’s blood identiÿes a mutation in the FGFR3 gene, 
this must have come from the fetus indicating that 
the fetus is affected. If the PCR test is negative for the 
FGFR3 mutation, the fetus is unaffected. An invasive 
prenatal diagnostic test is not necessary to make the 
diagnosis, and it can be avoided. 70 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 71 04/03/2024 16:06
New developments in prenatal diagnosis 
FETAL BLOOD GROUP 
Similarly, if RhD-positive DNA is ampliÿed from 
the blood of an RhD-negative pregnant woman, this 
must have come from the fetus (as the pregnant indi￾vidual has no RhD-positive DNA of their own), and 
the test therefore shows that the fetus is RhD posi￾tive. In RhD-negative pregnant women with anti-D 
antibodies, this test is used to determine the blood 
group of the fetus, as an RhD-positive fetus is at 
risk of alloimmune haemolytic disease, whereas an 
RhD-negative fetus is not at risk. Intensive surveil￾lance can be instituted for a pregnancy with an RhD￾positive fetus, and the parents of the RhD-negative 
fetus can be reassured that problems will not occur. 
This type of NIPD avoids the need for invasive 
prenatal diagnostic testing, which of itself might 
increase exposure to sensitizing RhD antigens. Fetal 
blood group can be determined from samples taken 
in the ÿrst trimester and testing for the common 
blood group antigens, including rhesus and Kell, can 
be performed (see the section ‘Rhesus isoimmuniza￾tion’ in Chapter 6). 
NON-INVASIVE PRENATAL 
DIAGNOSIS FOR ANEUPLOIDY 
There is much promising work on NIPD for Down 
syndrome using cffDNA in the maternal blood. 
Single-molecule counting methods such as digital 
PCR are based on the detection of the extra copy of 
chromosome 21 to distinguish normal cases from 
trisomy 21 cases. Detecting the different DNA meth￾ylation patterns between the maternal and fetal cir￾culating DNA molecules has been proposed as an 
alternative strategy for the identiÿcation of cffDNA 
sequences. This is based on the ratio of a subset of 
fetal-speciÿc methylated regions located on chromo￾some 21 compared with normal cases. These tests 
have the potential to replace invasive prenatal diag￾nostic testing for Down syndrome. 
WHOLE EXOME SEQUENCING 
Gene sequencing is increasingly being applied for 
prenatal diagnosis. Whole genome sequencing has 
been studied but is costly and requires large amounts 
of fetal DNA. The alternative is whole exome 
sequencing, which focuses on the exons or protein￾coding regions of the genome only. Exons account for 
around 1.5% of the DNA in the genome, comprising 
approximately 22,000 genes. Importantly, most iden￾tiÿed genes implicated in Mendelian disease involve 
the exons. Studies suggest that prenatal whole exome 
sequencing may increase the frequency of identiÿ￾cation of genetic causes of structural anomalies in 
fetuses compared with karyotyping or CMA alone. 
It may be particularly useful in selected fetuses that 
have multisystem or severe abnormalities such as 
cardiac or skeletal disorders. 
FETAL IMAGING 
Fetal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is an 
increasingly used imaging tool in pregnancy and 
can improve the analysis of central nervous system 
abnormalities in the fetus, particularly in the differ￾ential diagnosis of ventriculomegaly, where ultra￾sound may not always provide sufÿcient soft tissue 
resolution. Fetal MRI is used to conÿrm eligibility 
for fetal surgery, such as in fetuses with open spina 
biÿda, when hindbrain herniation (‘Chiari II’ mal￾formation) is easily detected using MRI. It may also 
be used to image the fetal brain after laser for twin￾to-twin transfusion syndrome in monochorionic 
multiple pregnancies to detect neurological damage 
secondary to hypoxia or hypoperfusion (see Chapter 
7). For abnormalities in the fetal body, MRI is helpful 
due to the superior soft tissue resolution. Examples 
include fetal neck masses to aid detection of an intact 
fetal airway, cloacal abnormalities and congenital 
diaphragmatic hernia. 
Currently, there are some limitations to fetal MRI, 
as it is sensitive to fetal motion, although fast imag￾ing techniques have overcome this to some extent. 
In addition, manipulation of images using comput￾erized reconstruction techniques can ‘stitch’ images 
together in a three-dimensional (3D) approach to 
improve resolution. It is hoped that MRI may also 
provide a better assessment of placental function and 
oxygenation, which ultrasound is currently unable to 
provide. 
3D and four-dimensional (4D) ultrasound has so 
far played a limited role as a diagnostic tool. Surface 
rendering can help in the visualization of cleft lip 
and palate for parents. Volume rendering allows the 71 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 72 04/03/2024 16:06
 
 
 
Prenatal diagnosis 
KEY LEARNING POINTS 
˜ Detailed counselling prior to embarking on 
any screening or diagnostic tests is extremely 
important. The pregnant woman must understand 
the potential outcomes and the choices available 
to her and should be encouraged to consider how 
the outcome of the test would affect the decisions 
made during her pregnancy. 
˜ If a fetal abnormality is diagnosed antenatally, 
multidisciplinary management is important. This 
will help to provide the pregnant woman with 
the best information about the likely outcome 
for the baby, facilitate her decision-making and 
provide appropriate support from experienced 
professionals at a difÿcult time. 
volume of an organ, such as the lung for example, 
to be calculated. 3D ultrasound can also be used in 
the presence of ventriculomegaly to detect the intact 
corpus callosum, a structure that is often difÿcult to 
visualize with ultrasound. 
FURTHER READING 
Fetal anomaly screening programme. https:// 
www.gov.uk/government/publications/ 
fetal-anomaly-screening-programme-handbook.
 NICE (2008). Antenatal Care for Uncomplicated 
Pregnancies. Clinical guideline [CG62]. Last 
updated: 4 February 2019. https://www.nice.org. 
uk/guidance/cg62. 
SELF-ASSESSMENT 
For interactive SBAs and EMQs relating to this chapter, visit www.routledge.com/cw/mccarthy. 
CASE HISTORY 1 
Ms N is a 22-year-old woman living in the North West of 
England. She found herself unexpectedly pregnant and 
had not been taking peri-conceptual folic acid. When 
she ÿrst attended the antenatal clinic, an ultrasound scan 
showed her to be 19 weeks’ pregnant. The fetus was 
noted to have an abnormal head shape, the cerebellum 
was described as banana shaped and a myelomeningo￾coele was identiÿed in the lumbar region. The fetus had 
bilateral talipes.
 Figure 5.4 shows normal intracranial anatomy imaged 
in the plane of the thalami to visualize the ventricles (Figure 
5.4A) and the transcerebellar plane (Figure 5.4B). Note 
Figure 5.4 Normal cranial anatomy in (A) the plane of the thalami to 
visualize the ventricles and (B) the transcerebellar plane. Note the ovoid head 
shape and the dumb bell-shaped cerebellum. BPD, biparietal diameter; CB, 
cerebellum; OFD occipitofrontal diameter. 
CB
A B
OFD
BPD
Head
72 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 73 04/03/2024 16:06
 
Self-assessment 
A
P
P
A
Figure 5.5 Abnormal cranial anatomy in a fetus with a neural tube defect in 
(A) the plane of the thalami to visualize the ventricles marked with asterisks, 
which are dilated (ventriculomegaly), and (B) the transcerebellar plane: note 
the scalloped head shape anteriorly (lemon shaped) marked by the white 
arrows and the banana-shaped cerebellum (red arrow). (A, anterior; P, 
posterior.) 
the ovoid head shape and the dumb bell-shaped cere￾bellum (indicated by white arrow). Figure 5.5 is a similar 
plane in Ms N, whose fetus has a neural tube defect.
 A How should this patient be managed?
 B What is the outlook for the baby/child? 
C What options does Ms N have? 
D What is the risk of it happening again in a future 
pregnancy?
 E What advice would you give about future 
pregnancies?
 ANSWERS
 A A prenatal diagnosis of a neural tube defect has 
been made on ultrasound scan. Ultrasound scan will 
detect at least 90% of all neural tube defects. Ms N 
should be seen by the consultant and the ultrasound 
ÿndings should be explained to her. She should 
have the opportunity to discuss the prognosis with 
a neurosurgeon, and this may be best organized by 
referring her to a tertiary fetal medicine unit. 
B For pregnant women to make decisions about 
whether to continue with their pregnancy or not, 
they need an honest and realistic view of the likely 
outcome for their baby/child. It is always difÿcult 
to predict the outlook for the baby/child but lower 
lesions generally have a better prognosis. The main 
problems encountered are: 
• problems with mobility – individuals with a neural 
tube defect tend to become wheelchair bound as 
they get older 
• continence and voiding – both bladder and bowel 
• low intelligence quotient (IQ) 
• repeated surgery – shunts, bladder and bowel, 
orthopaedic 
• difÿculty forming normal relationships and living 
independently 
C Ms N may choose to continue with the pregnancy 
with support from healthcare professionals both 
before and after delivery. Parents who choose 
to continue with a pregnancy may beneÿt from 
contacting a parent support group such as SHINE. 
Postnatal surgery has until recently been the 
only option. Fetal surgery is now being offered 
in the UK and many other countries to repair the 
myelomeningocoele defect during pregnancy. 
MRI should be performed to conÿrm the hindbrain 
herniation (Chiari II malformation) and to exclude 
other structural anomalies. Invasive prenatal testing 
to conÿrm a normal karyotype is also required. 
Fetal surgery involves extensive maternal surgery 
with an associated risk of spontaneous preterm 
birth. However, there is now outcome data up to 
20 years to show beneÿt for the affected neonate/ 
child of improved mobility and continence. 
Alternatively, the mother may opt for termination of 
the pregnancy. 
D The risk of recurrence of a neural tube defect is 
5% after one affected pregnancy (12% after two 
affected pregnancies and 20% after three affected 
pregnancies). Neural tube defects are more common 
in some geographical areas (e.g. Ireland, Scotland 
and North West England), if the mother has diabetes 
or epilepsy, if the mother is taking anti-epileptic 
medication and in the pregnant population who are 
obese. Folic acid (400 ˛g) taken pre-conceptually 
and for the ÿrst trimester reduces the risk of neural 
tube defects.
 E By taking folic acid for at least 3 months pre￾conceptually, the risk of recurrence can be reduced. 
Ms N should take a higher dose of pre-conceptual 
folic acid (5 mg instead of the usual 400 ˛g). She 
should also ensure that she eats healthily and that 
her weight is normal. Any medication she is taking 
should be reviewed. 
73 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 74 04/03/2024 16:06
 
 
 
 
Prenatal diagnosis 
CASE HISTORY 2 
Ms G is an 18-year-old woman who had her ÿrst scan 
at 16 weeks’ gestation. When the fetal abdomen was 
scanned, an irregular mass was seen to project from 
the anterior abdominal wall at the level of the umbilicus, 
to the right side of the umbilical cord insertion. Figure 
5.6 shows the herniated bowel (indicated by a white 
arrow) in the amniotic °uid. No other fetal abnormalities 
were noted.
 A How should this patient be managed?
 B What should the consultant tell her about the 
outlook for her baby? 
C What plans would you make for delivery?
 ANSWERS
 A A prenatal diagnosis of a gastroschisis has been 
made on ultrasound scan. Ultrasound scan will 
detect at least 90% of all gastroschisis defects. 
Ms G should be seen by the consultant and the 
ultrasound ÿndings should be explained to her. 
She requires referral to a tertiary unit for ongoing 
management and planning of delivery. Involvement 
of a multidisciplinary team would be important.
 B The consultant should stress that the majority of 
babies born with gastroschisis will do well in the 
long term and lead normal lives. Gastroschisis 
is not usually associated with any other physical 
problems or with learning problems (Table 5.4). It 
should be explained that the fetus will need to be 
monitored regularly during the pregnancy, as fetuses 
with gastroschisis are often small and may have 
oligohydramnios. In later pregnancy, the fetal bowel 
may dilate, which can be associated with bowel 
ischaemia and bowel atresia. This can make the 
postnatal surgery more difÿcult. 
Following delivery, the baby would require an 
operation to repair the defect. Surgical repair ranges 
from reduction of bowel and suturing of defect under 
anaesthetic to the need for a silo. This is a covering 
placed over the abdominal organs on the outside 
of the baby. Gradually, the organs are squeezed by 
hand through the silo into the opening and returned 
to the body. This method can take up to a week 
to return the abdominal organs to the body cavity. 
Severe cases may require bowel resection for 
atresias or volvulus. Survival rates of up to 97% are 
found for simple cases and the majority of babies 
are on full oral feeds by 4 weeks of age. For more 
complex, severe cases, there is a lower rate of 
survival with longer hospitalization. 
Ms G should be given the opportunity to meet 
the paediatric surgeons during the pregnancy and 
visit the paediatric surgical unit. After delivery, she 
Figure 5.6 Ultrasound image of gastroschisis (arrow). 
AF, amniotic °uid; S, fetal stomach; Sp, fetal spine. 
AF
Placenta
S
Sp
Table 5.4 Key differences between abdominal wall 
defects
 Exomphalos Gastroschisis
 Membrane covered 
herniation of abdominal 
contents – smooth outline
 Not membrane 
covered 
Free °oating bowel 
loops – irregular 
outline 
Umbilical cord inserts into 
apex of sac
 Herniation lateral 
(usually to the right) 
of the cord insertion 
Very high incidence of 
associated abnormalities 
and genetic syndromes
 Relatively low 
incidence of other 
abnormalities 
High incidence of 
chromosomal 
abnormalities – 
karyotyping should be 
offered 
No increase in 
incidence of 
chromosomal 
abnormalities 
May contain stomach, liver, 
spleen 
Usually only small 
bowel 
extra-abdominally
 Associated with 
polyhydramnios
 Associated with 
oligohydramnios 
74 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 75 04/03/2024 16:06
 
Self-assessment 
CASE HISTORY 3 
Ms E is a 37-year-old woman who attended for her ÿrst 
scan at 18 weeks’ gestation. On ultrasound scan, a 
smooth protrusion could be seen on the anterior abdom￾inal wall of the fetus. It appeared to be covered by a 
membrane and the umbilical cord inserted into the apex 
of the protrusion. The sonographer described this as an 
exomphalos in her report. Figure 5.7 shows an ultra￾sound image of an exomphalos with the sac containing 
the herniated bowel.
 A How should this patient be managed?
 B What options are available to Ms E?
 ANSWERS
 A A prenatal diagnosis of an exomphalos has been 
made on ultrasound scan. Ultrasound scan will 
detect at least 90% of all exomphalos defects, but 
this diagnosis cannot be made until after 12 weeks’ 
gestation. Prior to 12 weeks, there is developmental 
physiological herniation of abdominal contents into 
the base of the umbilical cord. Ms E should be seen 
by the consultant and the ultrasound ÿndings should 
be explained to her. As there is a high incidence of 
associated abnormalities (in 70–80% of fetuses), 
she should be referred to a tertiary unit for detailed 
ultrasound. The consultant should also explain that 
there is a high chance of chromosomal abnormality 
(approximately one-third of fetuses) and discuss the 
option of invasive testing (see Table 5.3).
 B Ms E’s options include: 
• do nothing 
• terminate the pregnancy 
• CVS now and continue if the chromosomes are nor￾mal – it is possible that other abnormalities may still 
be detected on ultrasound later in pregnancy; if the 
chromosomes are abnormal, she would still have 
the option of a surgical termination of pregnancy up 
to 14 weeks’ gestation in some hospitals 
• wait until after 15 weeks’ gestation, then have an 
amniocentesis with a lower risk of miscarriage – 
even if the chromosomes are normal, it is still pos￾sible that other abnormalities may be detected on 
ultrasound later in pregnancy 
Ms E chose to have a CVS that showed that the 
fetus had trisomy 18. She then chose to terminate 
her pregnancy, as she knew that most fetuses with 
trisomy 18 either were stillborn or did not live beyond 
the ÿrst few months. 
AF
S
Placenta
Sp
Figure 5.7 Ultrasound image of exomphalos, showing 
the sac containing the herniated bowel (white arrow). AF, 
amniotic °uid; S, fetal stomach; Sp, fetal spine. 
should be encouraged to express breast milk to 
feed to her baby. 
C Induction around 37 weeks’ gestation enables 
delivery to be planned in a unit with appropriate 
paediatric surgical facilities and may reduce the 
incidence of stillbirth late in pregnancy. There does 
not appear to be any beneÿt of delivery by caesarean 
section for babies with gastroschisis. If other organs 
such as the liver are also herniated, caesarean 
delivery may be indicated. A normal delivery makes it 
easier to visit her baby on the paediatric surgical unit 
in the ÿrst few days after birth. 
75 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 76 04/03/2024 16:06
 
 
Prenatal diagnosis 
CASE HISTORY 4 
Mrs D has a brother with Duchenne muscular dystrophy 
(DMD). He has been under the care of the clinical geneti￾cists and Mrs D has been tested and found to be a carrier 
of the gene. She contacts her general practitioner (GP) 
when she is 7 weeks’ pregnant, as she wishes to have 
testing to see whether the fetus is affected by DMD.
 A What are the chances of Mrs D having an affected 
fetus?
 B How should Mrs D be managed?
 ANSWERS
 A There is a 1:4 chance of an affected fetus. DMD 
is an X-linked recessive condition. There is a 1:2 
chance that any baby will be a girl and a 1:2 chance 
that it will be a boy. If the fetus is male, there is a 1:2 
chance that it has inherited a normal X chromosome 
from Mrs D (unaffected) and a 1:2 chance that it has 
inherited the X chromosome carrying the abnormal 
gene, in which case the boy would be affected. If 
the fetus is female, there is a 1:2 chance that it will 
have inherited a normal X chromosome from Mrs D 
and therefore not be a carrier, and a 1:2 chance that 
it will have inherited the X chromosome carrying the 
abnormal gene and therefore be a carrier. A female 
fetus would not be affected, as this is an X-linked 
recessive condition and a female fetus would have 
inherited a normal X chromosome from the father.
 B The GP should arrange an urgent referral to the 
antenatal clinic and also contact the clinical genetics 
department. Mrs D requires an initial ultrasound 
scan to conÿrm that the fetus is viable, to conÿrm 
the gestation and to conÿrm that it is a singleton 
pregnancy. Testing would be much more complex if 
this were a twin pregnancy. 
Initially, a blood test can be performed on Mrs D 
to ascertain the sex of the fetus. All fetuses shed 
small quantities of DNA into the maternal circulation. 
This can be ampliÿed by a PCR technique. By 
testing the maternal serum for cffDNA from 
the Y chromosome, the sex of the fetus can be 
ascertained. If Y chromosome DNA is found in the 
maternal serum, it must have come from a male 
fetus. If no Y chromosome DNA is found, then it 
is likely that it is a female fetus. However, there is 
also a small possibility that the test has not worked 
because there is insufÿcient cffDNA level in the 
maternal plasma. It is currently recommended that, 
before 9 weeks of gestation, two samples should 
be collected, 1 week apart, to ensure that there is 
sufÿcient cffDNA to make a diagnosis. 
Mrs D had a blood test at 8 weeks’ gestation 
and a second blood test at 10 weeks that showed 
that she was carrying a female fetus. As this meant 
that she would not have an affected baby, she did 
not need to have any further invasive testing. If the 
blood test had shown that she was carrying a male 
fetus, she would then have had a CVS to determine 
whether this was an affected or unaffected male. 
By having the blood test, she was able to avoid 
invasive testing. 
76 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 77 04/03/2024 16:06
6 
Antenatal obstetric 
complications 
SURABHI NANDA 
 
Introduction 77 Venous thromboembolism 83 
Minor problems of pregnancy 78 Substance abuse in pregnancy 86 
Problems due to abnormalities of the Oligohydramnios and polyhydramnios 88 
pelvic organs 80 Fetal malpresentation at term 89 
Urinary tract infection 82 Further reading 101 
Abdominal pain in pregnancy 83 Self-assessment 101 
 Learning Objectives 
• Appreciate the causes and management of minor complications of pregnancy. 
• Be able to provide a differential diagnosis and a management plan for abdominal pain in 
pregnancy. 
• Understand the risk factors, presentation and management of venous thromboembolic disease in 
pregnancy. 
• Understand the complications of drug abuse in pregnancy. 
• Understand the causes, complications and management of oligohydramnios and polyhydramnios. 
• Understand the causes and management of malpresentation in late pregnancy. 
• Understand the complications and management of post-term pregnancy. 
• Understand the causes, prevention and treatment of haemolytic disease of the fetus and 
newborn. 
INTRODUCTION 
There are a variety of complications that can arise 
during pregnancy. Some of these ‘minor’ conditions 
arise because the physiological changes of pregnancy 
exacerbate many ‘irritating’ symptoms that in the 
normal, non-pregnant state would not require speciÿc 
treatment. While these problems are not dangerous to 
the pregnant woman, they can be extremely trouble￾some and incapacitating, and sometimes may mimic 
symptoms of exacerbation of some pre-existing medi￾cal problems, and therefore need to be appropriately 
differentiated. Some of the more major complications 
are discussed in detail in other chapters. Here we dis￾cuss common complications, including malpresenta￾tion, rhesus disease and abnormalities of amniotic 
°uid production. 
77 
10.1201/9781003196112-6 ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 78 04/03/2024 16:06
Antenatal obstetric complications 
MINOR PROBLEMS OF 
PREGNANCY
 MUSCULOSKELETAL PROBLEMS 
BACKACHE 
Backache is extremely common in pregnancy and is 
caused by: 
• hormone-induced laxity of spinal ligaments 
• a shifting in the centre of gravity as the uterus 
grows 
additional weight gain 
These cause an exaggerated lumbar lordosis. 
egnancy can exacerbate the symptoms of a pro￾sed intervertebral disc, occasionally leading to 
•
Pr
lap
complete immobility. Occasionally, there may be an 
additional impingement of the sciatic nerve, leading 
to referred pain along the leg and hip and a further 
change in posture and gait. Advice should include 
maintenance of correct posture, avoiding lifting 
heavy objects (including children), avoiding high 
heels, regular physiotherapy (including hydrother￾apy and Pilates), swimming and simple analgesia 
(paracetamol or paracetamol–codeine combinations). 
As these symptoms are usually more pronounced in 
the third trimester, non-steroidal anti-in°ammatory 
drugs (such as ibuprofen), are not recommended due 
to the risk of premature closure of ductus arteriosus 
and oligohydramnios. 
SYMPHYSIS PUBIS DYSFUNCTION/ 
PELVIC GIRDLE PAIN 
This is an excruciatingly painful condition most com￾mon in the third trimester, although it can occur at any 
time during pregnancy, especially in multiple/higher 
order multiple pregnancies. The symphysis pubis joint 
becomes ‘loose’, causing the two halves of the pelvis 
to rub on one another when walking or moving. The 
condition improves after delivery and the manage￾ment revolves around simple analgesia. Under a phys￾iotherapist’s direction, a low stability belt may be worn. 
CARPAL TUNNEL SYNDROME 
Compression neuropathies occur in pregnancy due to 
increased soft-tissue swelling. The most common of 
these is carpal tunnel syndrome. The median nerve, 
where it passes through the ÿbrous canal at the wrist 
before entering the hand, is most susceptible to com￾pression. The symptoms include numbness, tingling 
and weakness of the thumb and foreÿnger, as well 
as often quite severe pain at night. Simple analge￾sia and splinting of the affected hand usually help, 
although there is no realistic prospect of cure until 
after delivery. Surgical decompression is very rarely 
performed in pregnancy. Some medical conditions 
such as multiple sclerosis relapse may present with 
similar symptoms (usually on one side). Early symp￾toms of pre-eclampsia may also cause swelling of 
hands and present with carpal tunnel syndrome. 
GASTROINTESTINAL SYMPTOMS 
CONSTIPATION 
Constipation is common in pregnancy and usually 
results from a combination of hormonal and mechan￾ical factors that slow gut motility. Concomitantly 
administered iron tablets may exacerbate the condi￾tion. Pregnant women should be given clear explana￾tions, reassurance and advice regarding the adoption 
of a high-ÿbre diet. Medications are best avoided 
but, if necessary, mild (non-stimulant) laxatives such 
as lactulose may be suggested. Prolonged constipa￾tion or symptoms not responding to diet or laxatives 
should raise suspicion of an underlying pathology, 
including bowel obstruction. 
HYPEREMESIS GRAVIDARUM 
Nausea and vomiting in pregnancy are extremely 
common; 70–80% of pregnant women experi￾ence these symptoms early in their pregnancy and 
approximately 35% of all pregnant women are absent 
from work on at least one occasion through nausea 
and vomiting. Although the symptoms are often 
most pronounced in the ÿrst trimester, they are by 
no means conÿned to it. Similarly, despite com￾mon usage of the term ‘morning sickness’, in only a 
minority of cases are the symptoms solely conÿned 
to the morning. Nausea and vomiting in pregnancy 
tends to be mild and self-limited and is not associ￾ated with adverse pregnancy outcomes. 
Hyperemesis gravidarum (HG), however, is a 
severe, intractable form of nausea and vomiting that 78 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 79 04/03/2024 16:06
Minor problems of pregnancy 
affects 0.3–2.0% of pregnancies. It causes imbal￾ances of °uid and electrolytes, disturbs nutritional 
intake and metabolism, causes physical and psycho￾logical debilitation and is associated with adverse 
pregnancy outcomes, including an increased risk of 
preterm birth and low birthweight babies. A recent 
nationwide survey of over 5,000 participants on HG 
in the UK showed that nearly 5% of participants ter￾minated a pregnancy and around 50% considered ter￾mination owing to HG. Over 25% reported suicidal 
ideation. The aetiology is unknown and various puta￾tive mechanisms have been proposed, including an 
association with high levels of serum human chori￾onic gonadotrophin (hCG), oestrogen and thyroxine. 
The likely cause is multifactorial, although studies are 
underway to identify biomarkers and gene linkage in 
HG. Severe cases of HG cause malnutrition and vita￾min deÿciencies, including Wernicke encephalopathy, 
and intractable retching predisposes to oesophageal 
trauma and Mallory–Weiss tears. Treatment includes 
dietary and lifestyle changes, as well as alternative 
therapies such as ginger, acupressure, °uid replace￾ment and thiamine supplementation. Antiemetics 
such as phenothiazines and metoclopramide are safe 
and are commonly prescribed. Oral corticosteroids 
are reserved for severe cases that have not responded 
to standard therapy. The National Institute for Health 
and Care Excellence (NICE, 2019) has recommended 
doxylamine/pyridoxine (Xonvea˛) for pregnant 
women with symptoms that have not responded to 
standard conservative management. 
GASTRO-OESOPHAGEAL REFLUX 
This is very common. Altered structure and func￾tion of the normal physiological barriers to re°ux, 
namely the weight effect of the pregnant uterus and 
hormonally induced relaxation of the oesophageal 
sphincter, explain the extremely high incidence in 
the pregnant population. For the majority of patients, 
lifestyle modiÿcations such as smoking cessation, 
frequent light meals, earlier evening meals and lying 
with the head propped up at night are helpful. When 
these prove insufÿcient to control symptoms, medi￾cations can be added in a stepwise fashion, starting 
with simple antacids. Histamine-2 receptor antago￾nists and proton pump inhibitors have a good safety 
record in pregnancy and can be used. 
HAEMORRHOIDS 
Several factors conspire to render haemorrhoids 
more common during pregnancy, including the 
effects of circulating progesterone on the vascu￾lature, pressure on the superior rectal veins by the 
gravid uterus and increased circulating volume. A 
conservative approach is usually advocated, includ￾ing local anaesthetic/anti-irritant creams and a high￾ÿbre diet. Never overlook the ‘warning’ symptoms of 
tenesmus, mucus, blood mixed with stool and back 
passage discomfort that may suggest rectal carci￾noma; a rectal digital examination should be carried 
out if these symptoms are suggested. 
OBSTETRIC CHOLESTASIS 
Obstetric cholestasis (also intrahepatic cholestasis of 
pregnancy) affects 0.7% of pregnancies with some 
ethnic variation. It normally presents in the sec￾ond half of pregnancy with pruritus and abnormal 
liver function tests, including bile acids (liver func￾tion tests), neither of which has an alternative cause 
and both of which resolve after birth. The clinical 
importance of obstetric cholestasis lies in the poten￾tial fetal risks (with serum bile acids >40 µmol/L), 
which may include spontaneous preterm birth, iatro￾genic preterm birth and fetal death (serum bile acids 
>100 µmol/L). There can also be morbidity relating 
to intense pruritus and consequent sleep depriva￾tion. It is normally treated with ursodeoxycholic 
acid, which improves pruritus and liver function but 
has not been proven to improve fetal and neonatal 
outcomes. Pregnant women with obstetric cholesta￾sis are therefore normally offered delivery after 37 
weeks’ gestation, depending on their symptoms and 
the rise in their bile acids. 
VARICOSE VEINS 
Varicose veins may appear for the ÿrst time in preg￾nancy or pre-existing veins may become worse. 
They are thought to be due to the relaxant effect of 
progesterone on vascular smooth muscle and the 
dependent venous stasis caused by the weight of the 
pregnant uterus on the inferior vena cava. 
Varicose veins of the legs may be symptomati￾cally improved with support stockings, avoidance of 79 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 80 04/03/2024 16:06
Antenatal obstetric complications 
standing for prolonged periods and simple analge￾sia. Thrombophlebitis may occur in a large varicose 
vein, more commonly after delivery. A large superÿ￾cial varicose vein may bleed profusely if traumatized; 
the leg must be elevated and direct pressure applied. 
Vulval and vaginal varicosities are uncommon but 
symptomatically troublesome; trauma at the time 
of delivery (episiotomy, tear, instrumental deliv￾ery) may also cause considerable bleeding. Above￾knee varicose veins are a contributory risk factor for 
venous thromboembolism. 
OEDEMA 
This is common, occurring to some degree in 
approximately 80% of all pregnancies. There is gen￾eralized soft-tissue swelling and increased capillary 
permeability, which allows intravascular °uid to leak 
into the extravascular compartment. The ÿngers, 
toes and ankles are usually worst affected and the 
symptoms are aggravated by hot weather. Oedema 
is best dealt with by frequent periods of rest with 
leg elevation; occasionally, support stockings are 
indicated. Excessively swollen ÿngers may necessi￾tate removal of rings and jewellery before they get 
stuck. It is important to remember that generalized 
(rather than lower limb) oedema may be a feature 
of pre-eclampsia, so remember to check the blood 
pressure and urine for protein. More rarely, severe 
oedema may suggest underlying cardiac impairment 
or nephrotic syndrome. 
BOX 6.1: Other common ‘minor’ 
disorders 
˜ Itching 
˜ Urinary incontinence 
˜ Nosebleeds 
˜ Thrush (vaginal candidiasis) 
˜ Headache 
˜ Fainting 
˜ Visual ˜ oaters 
˜ Breast tenderness 
˜ Tiredness 
˜ Altered taste sensation or changes in appetite 
˜ Insomnia 
˜ Leg cramps 
˜ Striae gravidarum and chloasma 
PROBLEMS DUE TO 
ABNORMALITIES OF THE 
PELVIC˜ORGANS 
FIBROIDS (LEIOMYOMATA) 
Fibroids are compact masses of smooth muscle that 
lie in the cavity of the uterus (submucous), within the 
uterine muscle (intramural) or on the outside surface 
of the uterus (subserous). They may enlarge in preg￾nancy and, in so doing, present problems later on in 
pregnancy or at delivery (Figure 6.1). A large ÿbroid 
at the cervix or in the lower uterine segment may 
prevent descent of the presenting part and obstruct 
vaginal delivery. 
Red degeneration is one of the most common 
complications of ÿbroids in pregnancy. As it grows, 
the ÿbroid may become ischaemic, which usually 
presents as acute pain, tenderness over the ÿbroid 
and frequent vomiting. If these symptoms are severe, 
it may precipitate uterine contractions, causing mis￾carriage or preterm labour. The symptoms usu￾ally settle within a few days, but occasionally may 
require pain relief with simple analgesia including 
codeine-based compounds and hydration (oral or 
A
B
Figure 6.1 Fibroids complicating pregnancy. The tumour 
in the anterior wall of the uterus (A) has been drawn up 
and out of the pelvis as the lower segment formed, but 
the ÿbroid (B) arising from the cervix remains in the pelvis 
and will obstruct labour. 80 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 81 04/03/2024 16:06
 
 
 
Problems due to abnormalities of the pelvic˜organs 
rarely intravenous). The differential diagnosis of red 
degeneration includes acute appendicitis, pyelone￾phritis/urinary tract infection, ovarian cyst accident 
and placental abruption. 
A subserous pedunculated ÿbroid may tort in 
the same way that a large ovarian cyst can. When 
this happens, acute abdominal pain and tenderness 
may make the two difÿcult to distinguish from one 
another. In this scenario, a pertinent history fol￾lowed by ultrasound scan (transvaginal in the ÿrst 
trimester, transabdominal in the second and third) 
will help aid the diagnosis. 
RETROVERSION OF THE UTERUS 
In around 15% of the population, the uterus is retro￾verted. In pregnancy, the uterus grows and a retro￾verted uterus will normally ‘°ip’ out of the pelvis and 
begin to ÿll the abdominal cavity, as an anteverted 
uterus would. In a small proportion of cases, the 
uterus remains in retroversion and eventually ÿlls 
up the entire pelvic cavity; as it does so, the base of 
the bladder and the urethra are stretched. Retention 
of urine may occur, classically at 12–14 weeks, and 
this not only is very painful but may also cause long￾term bladder damage if the bladder becomes overdis￾tended. In this situation, catheterization is essential 
until the position of the uterus has changed. 
CONGENITAL UTERINE ANOMALIES 
The shape of the uterus is embryologically deter￾mined by the fusion of the Müllerian ducts. 
Abnormalities of fusion may give rise to anything 
from a sub-septate uterus through to a bicornuate 
uterus and very rarely to a double uterus with two 
cervices. These ÿndings are often discovered inci￾dentally at the time of a pelvic operation, such as 
a laparoscopy, or an ultrasound scan. Conÿrmatory 
diagnosis of a uterine anomaly in pregnancy can be 
tricky. 
The usual problems associated with bicornuate 
uterus are: 
• miscarriage 
• preterm labour 
• preterm premature rupture of membranes 
(PPROM) 
• abnormalities of lie and presentation, and 
occasionally fetal growth problems 
• higher caesarean section rate 
Such pregnancies need surveillance in a preterm 
clinic, with serial cervical length measurements 
and ultrasound scan in the third trimester to assess 
growth trajectory, lie and presentation. 
OVARIAN CYSTS IN PREGNANCY 
Ovarian cysts are common in pregnancy; fortu￾nately, the incidence of malignancy is uncommon in 
those of childbearing age. The most common types 
of pathological ovarian cyst are serous cysts and 
benign teratomas. Physiological cysts of the corpus 
luteum may grow to several centimetres but rarely 
require treatment. Asymptomatic cysts may be fol￾lowed up by clinical and ultrasound examination, but 
large cysts (for example dermoid cysts) may require 
surgery in pregnancy. 
Surgery is usually postponed until the second or 
early third trimester, when there is the potential that, 
if the baby were delivered, it would be able to survive. 
The major problems are large (>6 cm) ovarian cysts 
in pregnancy, which may undergo torsion, haemor￾rhage or rupture, causing acute abdominal pain. The 
resulting pain and in°ammation may lead to a mis￾carriage or preterm labour. Symptomatic cysts, most 
commonly due to torsion, will require an emergency 
laparotomy and ovarian cystectomy or even oopho￾rectomy, if the cyst is torted. A full assessment must 
include a family history of ovarian or breast malig￾nancy, tumour markers (although these are of limited 
value in pregnancy) and detailed ultrasound inves￾tigation of both ovaries. Surgery in late second and 
third trimester of pregnancy is normally performed 
through a midline or paramedian incision, under a 
regional or sometimes a general anaesthetic; a low 
transverse suprapubic incision would not allow access 
to the ovary, as it is drawn upwards in later pregnancy. 
CERVICAL AND BREAST CANCERS 
IN PREGNANCY 
Cervical abnormalities are much more difÿcult to 
deal with in pregnancy, partly because the cervix 
itself is more difÿcult to visualize at colposcopy and 81 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 82 04/03/2024 16:06
 
 
Antenatal obstetric complications 
also because biopsy may cause considerable bleed￾ing. Cervical carcinoma most commonly arises in 
poor attenders for cervical screening. The disease 
is commonly asymptomatic in early stages, but 
later-stage presentation includes vaginal bleeding 
(especially post-coital). Examination may reveal a 
friable or ulcerated lesion with bleeding and puru￾lent discharge. The prospect of cervical carcinoma 
in pregnancy leads to complex ethical and moral 
dilemmas concerning whether the pregnancy 
must be terminated (depending on the stage it has 
reached) to facilitate either surgical treatment (radi￾cal hysterectomy) or chemoradiotherapy. Cervical 
cancer is discussed in greater detail in Chapter 16 
of Gynaecology by Ten Teachers, 21st Edition. 
Breast cancer is the most common malignancy 
complicating pregnancy (accounting for 40% of 
cases); the current incidence rate is estimated to be 
1 in 1,000 pregnancies, with numbers rising due to 
increasing background incidence of the disease and 
rising age in the pregnant population. Presentation 
may be delayed, leading to more advanced clinical 
staging at diagnosis. Management represents a chal￾lenging situation, in which healthcare professionals 
attempt to maximize the curative approach (surgery, 
chemotherapy and radiotherapy earlier in gestation) 
for the patient while minimizing adverse effects 
on the fetus (growth restriction, fetal anomaly or 
demise, and preterm delivery). 
URINARY TRACT INFECTION 
Urinary tract infections (UTIs) are common in 
pregnancy. Eight per cent of pregnancies have 
asymptomatic bacteriuria; if this is untreated, it 
may progress to UTI or even pyelonephritis, with 
the attendant associations of low birthweight and 
preterm delivery. 
The predisposing factors are: 
• history of recurrent cystitis 
• renal tract abnormalities: duplex system, 
scarred kidneys, ureteric damage and stones 
• diabetes 
• bladder-emptying problems (e.g. multiple 
sclerosis) 
The symptoms of UTI may be different in preg￾nancy; it occasionally presents as low back pain and 
general malaise with °u-like symptoms. The classic 
presentation of frequency, dysuria and haematu￾ria is not often seen. On examination, tachycardia, 
pyrexia, dehydration and loin tenderness may be 
present. Investigations should include a full blood 
count and midstream specimen of urine (MSU) 
sent for urgent microscopy, culture and sensitivities. 
If there is a strong clinical suspicion of UTI, treat￾ment with antibiotics should start straightaway. The 
pregnant woman should be advised to drink plenty 
of clear °uids and take a simple analgesic such as 
paracetamol. 
The most common organism for UTI is Escherichia 
coli; less commonly implicated are streptococci, 
Proteus, Pseudomonas and Klebsiella spp. Many labo￾ratories deÿne a UTI as the presence of >105 colony￾forming units (cfu)/mL. The commonly reported 
‘heavy mixed growth’ is often associated with UTI 
symptoms and may be treated or the MSU may be 
repeated after a week, depending on the clinical sce￾nario. The ÿrst-line antibiotic for UTI is amoxycil￾lin or oral cephalosporins. If there are two or more 
proven UTIs in pregnancy, or in individuals with 
pre-existing medical problems such as multiple scle￾rosis following one proven UTI, low-dose preventa￾tive antibiotic prophylaxis is usually recommended. 
Pyelonephritis is characterized by dehydration, 
a very high temperature (>38.5°C), systemic distur￾bance and occasionally shock. This requires urgent 
and aggressive treatment including intravenous 
°uids, opiate analgesia and intravenous antibiotics 
(such as cephalosporins or gentamicin). In addi￾tion, renal function should be determined, with at 
least baseline urea and electrolytes, and the baby 
must be monitored with cardiotocography (CTG). 
Recurrent UTIs in pregnancy require MSUs to be 
sent to the microbiology laboratory at each ante￾natal visit, and low-dose prophylactic oral antibi￾otics may be prescribed. Investigation should take 
place after delivery, unless frank haematuria or 
other symptoms suggest that an urgent diagnosis 
is essential. Investigations might include a renal 
ultrasound scan, renal dimercapto succinic acid 
(DMSA) function scan, creatinine clearance, intra￾venous urogram and cystoscopy. 
 82 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 83 04/03/2024 16:06
Venous thromboembolism 
ABDOMINAL PAIN IN PREGNANCY 
Abdominal pain is one of the most common minor 
disorders of pregnancy; the problem is in distin￾guishing pathological from ‘physiological’ pain. 
There are many possibilities to exclude and, in addi￾tion, the anatomical and physiological changes of 
pregnancy may alter ‘classical’ presenting symptoms 
and signs, making clinical diagnosis challenging. 
The causes listed in Box 6.2, ‘Causes of abdominal 
pain in pregnancy’, are not exhaustive, but cover 
most possible diagnoses. The crucial point to make 
is that certain conditions are potentially so danger￾ous or debilitating (e.g. acute appendicitis), and may 
be masked by the altered anatomy and physiology 
of pregnancy, that clinicians may need to perform 
investigations (X-rays, computed tomography (CT) 
or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans) and 
arrange invasive assessments to make a diagnosis. 
Avoiding these investigations (mostly for the fear 
of an adverse impact on pregnancy), and therefore 
risking not making an early diagnosis, means that 
treatment for a serious and life-threatening condi￾tion may be delayed. 
VENOUS THROMBOEMBOLISM 
Venous thromboembolism (VTE) is the most com￾mon cause of direct maternal death in the UK. In the 
most recent Conÿdential Enquiries into Maternal 
Deaths and Morbidity report (2017–2019), there were 
32 fatalities, giving a maternal mortality rate of 0.89 
per 100,000, more than twice that of the next most 
common cause (genital tract sepsis). 
Pregnancy is a hypercoagulable state because of 
an alteration in the thrombotic and ÿbrinolytic sys￾tems. There is an increase in clotting factors VIII, 
IX and X and ÿbrinogen levels, and a reduction in 
protein S and antithrombin III concentrations. The 
net result of these changes is thought to be an evolu￾tionary response to reduce the likelihood of haemor￾rhage following delivery. 
The physiological changes predispose pregnant 
women to thromboembolism and this is further 
exacerbated by venous stasis in the lower limbs due 
to the weight of the gravid uterus placing pressure on 
BOX 6.2: Causes of abdominal pain in 
pregnancy 
Obstetric conditions 
Early pregnancy (<24 weeks) 
˜ Ligament stretching 
˜ Miscarriage 
˜ Ectopic pregnancy 
˜ Acute urinary retention due to retroverted gravid 
uterus 
˜ Ovarian hyperstimulation 
Later pregnancy (>24 weeks) 
˜ Labour 
˜ Placental abruption 
˜ Severe pre-eclampsia and/or haemolysis, 
elevated liver enzymes and low platelets (HELLP) 
syndrome 
˜ Uterine rupture 
˜ Chorioamnioitis 
Pregnancy-unrelated conditions 
Uterine/ovarian causes 
˜ Torsion or degeneration of ÿbroid 
˜ Ovarian cyst accident 
Urinary tract disorders 
˜ Urinary tract infection (acute cystitis and acute 
pyelonephritis) 
˜ Renal colic 
Gastrointestinal disorders 
˜ Medical gastric/duodenal ulcer 
˜ Acute appendicitis, pancreatitis, gastroenteritis, 
cholecystitis 
˜ Intestinal obstruction or perforation 
Medical causes 
˜ Sickle cell disease (abdominal crisis) 
˜ Diabetic ketoacidosis 
˜ Acute intermittent porphyria 
˜ Pneumonia (especially lower lobe) 
˜ Pulmonary embolus 
˜ Malaria 
the inferior vena cava in late pregnancy and immo￾bility, particularly in the puerperium. 
Pregnancy is associated with a 6–10-fold increase 
in the risk of VTE compared with the non-pregnant 
situation. Without thromboprophylaxis, the inci￾dence of non-fatal pulmonary embolism (PE) and 
83 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 84 04/03/2024 16:06
 
Antenatal obstetric complications 
deep vein thrombosis (DVT) in pregnancy is about 
0.1% in developed countries; this increases following 
delivery to around 1–2% and is further increased fol￾lowing emergency caesarean section. 
THROMBOPHILIA 
Some individuals are predisposed to thrombosis 
through changes in the coagulation/ÿbrinolytic sys￾tem that may be inherited or acquired (see Box 6.3, 
‘Risk factors for thromboembolic disease’). There is 
growing evidence that both heritable and acquired 
thrombophilias are associated with a range of 
adverse pregnancy outcomes, particularly recurrent 
fetal loss. The major hereditary forms of thrombo￾philia currently recognized include deÿciencies of 
the endogenous anticoagulants protein C, protein S 
and antithrombin III, and abnormalities of procoag￾ulant factors, factor V Leiden (caused by a mutation 
in the factor V gene) and the prothrombin mutation 
G20210A. It seems probable that there are still some 
thrombophilias not yet discovered or described. 
Heritable thrombophilias are present in at least 15% 
of Western populations. 
Acquired thrombophilia is most commonly 
associated with antiphospholipid syndrome. 
Antiphospholipid syndrome is the combination of 
lupus anticoagulant with or without anticardiolipin 
antibodies, with a history of recurrent miscarriage 
and/or thrombosis. It may (or, more commonly, may 
not) be associated with other autoantibody disorders 
such as systemic lupus erythematosus. 
If thrombophilic disorders are taken together, 
more than 50% of cases of pregnancy-related VTE 
are associated with a thrombophilia. It is therefore 
vital that individuals with a history of thrombotic 
events are screened for thrombophilia. The pres￾ence of thrombophilia, with a history of thrombotic 
episode(s), means that prophylaxis should be consid￾ered for pregnancy. 
BOX 6.3: Risk factors for 
thromboembolic disease 
Pre-existing 
˜ Age (>35 years) 
˜ Thrombophilia 
˜ Obesity (body mass index ˛30 kg/m2) either pre￾pregnancy or early pregnancy 
˜ Previous thromboembolism 
˜ Severe varicose veins 
˜ Smoking 
˜ Paraplegia 
˜ Medical comorbidities (e.g. cancer, heart 
failure, active systemic lupus erythematosus, 
in˜ammatory bowel disease or polyarthropathy, 
nephrotic syndrome, type I diabetes mellitus with 
nephropathy, sickle cell disease, intravenous 
drug use) 
Speciÿc to pregnancy 
˜ Multiple gestation 
˜ Current pre-eclampsia 
˜ Parity ˛3 (an individual becomes para 3 after 
their third delivery) 
˜ Caesarean section, especially if emergency 
˜ Prolonged labour (>24 hours) 
˜ Midcavity forceps or rotational operative delivery 
˜ Damage to the pelvic veins 
˜ Sepsis 
˜ Prolonged bed rest 
˜ Stillbirth 
˜ Preterm birth 
˜ Post-partum haemorrhage (>1 L/requiring 
transfusion) 
New onset/transient 
˜ Any surgical procedure in pregnancy or 
puerperium except immediate repair of the 
perineum (e.g. appendicectomy, post-partum 
sterilization) 
˜ Bone fracture 
˜ Hyperemesis 
˜ Ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome (ÿrst 
trimester only) 
˜ In vitro fertilisation (IVF) 
˜ Admission or immobility (˛3 days’ bed rest) 
˜ Current systemic infection (requiring intravenous 
antibiotics or admission to hospital, e.g. 
pneumonia, pyelonephritis, post-partum wound 
infection) 
˜ Long-distance travel (>4 hours) 
84 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 85 04/03/2024 16:06
 
Venous thromboembolism 
DIAGNOSIS OF ACUTE VENOUS 
THROMBOEMBOLISM 
Clinical diagnosis of VTE is unreliable. Therefore, 
anyone suspected of having a DVT or PE should be 
investigated promptly. 
DEEP VEIN THROMBOSIS 
The most common symptoms are pain in the calf 
with varying degrees of redness or swelling. While 
legs are often swollen during pregnancy, unilateral 
symptoms should ring alarm bells. The signs are few, 
except that often the calf is tender to gentle touch. It 
is mandatory to ask about symptoms of PE (see the 
next section, ‘Pulmonary embolus’), as an individual 
with PE might present initially with a DVT. 
Compression ultrasound has a high sensitivity 
and speciÿcity in diagnosing proximal thrombosis in 
the non-pregnant population and should be the ÿrst 
investigation used in a suspected DVT. Calf veins are 
often poorly visualized; however, it is known that a 
thrombus conÿned purely to the calf veins with no 
extension is very unlikely to give rise to a PE. 
Venography is invasive, requiring the injection 
of contrast medium and the use of X-rays. It does, 
however, allow excellent visualization of veins both 
below and above the knee. 
PULMONARY EMBOLUS 
It is crucial to recognize PE, as missing the diagno￾sis could have fatal implications. The most common 
presentation is of mild breathlessness or inspiratory 
chest pain in a pregnant woman who is not cyanosed 
but may be slightly tachycardic (>90 beats per minute 
[bpm]) with a mild pyrexia (37.5°C). Rarely, massive 
PE may present with sudden cardiorespiratory col￾lapse (see Chapter 14). 
If PE is suspected, initial electrocardiogram, chest 
X-ray and arterial blood gases should be performed to 
exclude other respiratory diagnoses. However, these 
investigations are insufÿcient on their own to exclude 
or diagnose PE and it may be sensible to investigate 
the lower limbs for evidence of DVT by ultrasound, 
and if positive treat with a presumptive diagnosis of 
PE. If all the tests are normal but a high clinical sus￾picion of PE remains, a ventilation–perfusion (VQ) 
scan or CT pulmonary angiogram should be per￾formed. In both cases, the radiation to the fetus is 
below the threshold considered potentially danger￾ous to the fetus. 
A low-level D-dimer, commonly used as a screen￾ing test for thromboembolic disease in the non-preg￾nant population, suggests the absence of a DVT or 
PE, and no further objective tests are necessary. An 
increased level of D-dimer suggests that thrombosis 
may be present and an objective diagnostic test for 
DVT and/or PE should be performed. In pregnancy, 
however, D-dimer can be elevated due to the physi￾ological changes in the coagulation system, limiting 
its clinical usefulness as a screening test in this situ￾ation. To some extent, D-dimer retains its negative 
predictive value in the pregnant and non-pregnant 
population but is not a reliable diagnostic test of 
acute PE in pregnancy. 
TREATMENT OF VENOUS 
THROMBOEMBOLISM 
Management of acute VTE should involve a multi￾disciplinary team including senior physicians, obste￾tricians and radiologists. Low-molecular-weight 
heparins (LMWHs) are the treatment of choice. They 
do not cross the placenta and have been shown to be 
at least as safe and effective as unfractionated hepa￾rin in the treatment of VTE, but with lower and fewer 
haemorrhagic complications in the initial treatment 
of non-pregnant subjects on unfractionated heparin. 
In addition, LMWH is safe and easy to administer. 
Affected individuals are taught to inject themselves 
and can continue on this treatment for the duration 
of their pregnancy. Warfarin is given orally and pro￾longs the prothrombin time, and is rarely recom￾mended for use in pregnancy (exceptions include 
individuals with mechanical heart valves), as it 
crosses the placenta and can cause limb and facial 
defects in the ÿrst trimester and fetal intracerebral 
haemorrhage in the second and third trimesters. 
However, following delivery, people can choose to 
convert to warfarin (with the need for stabilization of 
the doses initially and frequent checks of the inter￾national normalized ratio) or remain on LMWH. 
Both warfarin and LMWH are safe in breastfeeding. 
Newer anticoagulants such as fondaparinux (a direct 
factor Xa inhibitor) and lepirudin (a direct thrombin 85 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 86 04/03/2024 16:06
 
Antenatal obstetric complications 
inhibitor) are not licensed for use in pregnancy or 
breastfeeding. Graduated elastic stockings should be 
used for the initial treatment of DVT and should be 
worn for 2 years following a DVT to prevent post￾thrombotic syndrome. Pregnant women with severe 
acute PE should be managed on an individual basis 
regarding the use of intravenous unfractionated 
heparin, thrombolytic therapy or thoracotomy and 
surgical embolectomy. 
PREVENTION OF VENOUS 
THROMBOEMBOLISM IN 
PREGNANCY AND POST-PARTUM 
The Royal College of Obstetricians and 
Gynaecologists (RCOG) has recently released 
updated guidelines on the prevention of thrombo￾sis and embolism in pregnancy and the puerperium 
(Green-top Guideline No 37a, 2015) and these are 
summarized in Figure 6.2. 
KEY LEARNING POINTS 
˜ Screening for thrombophilias should be carried 
out in those with a strong family or personal 
history of VTE. 
˜ Rapid treatment of suspected VTE in pregnancy 
should be commenced while awaiting diagnosis. 
˜ LMWHs are the treatment of choice. 
˜ Graduated compression stockings should 
be ÿtted and worn for 2 years to reduce the 
incidence of post-thrombotic syndrome. 
˜ Individuals with previous VTE should be offered 
pre-pregnancy counselling. 
SUBSTANCE ABUSE IN 
PREGNANCY 
Approximately one-third of adults who access 
drug services are of reproductive age. There are 
approximately 6,000 births to problem drug users 
in the UK each year (about 1% of all deliveries). 
Multidisciplinary care is often necessary to opti￾mize outcomes because the ÿnancial, psychological, 
social and domestic problems associated with drug 
BOX 6.4: Problems frequently 
encountered among drug addicts 
˜ Social problems: housing, crime, children in care 
or abused. 
˜ Coexistent addictions: alcohol and smoking. 
˜ Malnutrition: especially iron and vitamins B and 
C. 
˜ Risk of viral infections (e.g. human 
immunodeÿciency virus (HIV), hepatitis B/C or 
other common sexually transmitted infections). 
˜ Speciÿc fetal and neonatal risks. 
misuse are often greater than the physical and medi￾cal concerns. 
Opioids, especially heroin, remain the most com￾monly used drugs in the UK, although many drug 
users take combinations of drugs that often include 
cocaine or crack cocaine. Amphetamines, benzodi￾azepines and cannabis are also common. 
Most problem drug users smoke tobacco and are 
heavy users of alcohol and cannabis. Taking drugs 
in combination greatly increases the unpredictability 
of their effect on the user. Intravenous injection of 
drugs also puts drug users at greater risk of infec￾tion with blood-borne viruses (hepatitis B and C and 
HIV). Many drug users live in disadvantaged com￾munities in conditions of poverty and social exclu￾sion. Many have had poor parenting experiences, 
poor education and signiÿcant mental health prob￾lems. The aims of management are to stabilize the 
mother’s drug-taking habits and ensure contact with 
social/care workers and psychiatric/drug liaison ser￾vices as appropriate. 
It is important not to try to reduce the opiate dose 
too rapidly in pregnancy. Sudden detoxiÿcation (‘cold 
turkey’) can be dangerous for the baby, especially 
in the third trimester when even mild withdrawal is 
associated with fetal stress, fetal distress and still￾birth; the principle is to administer the lowest effec￾tive dose of methadone liquid in three divided doses 
every day. 
Screening for infections such as hepatitis B and 
HIV is routinely offered in the UK. In many cases, 
multidisciplinary case conferences should be held to 
make arrangements and decisions for when the baby 
is delivered. 
86 Substance abuse in pregnancy
2 .e 6rugiF ) .a7o 3e Nnilediup Got-neer, G)5102G (OCm Rord fetpadA(. tnemeganad mnt anemssessk asis rixalyhporpobmorhc tirtetsbO
 87
Antenatal assessment and management (to be assessed at
booking and repeated if admitted) 
Any previous VTE except a single event
related to major surgery
Hospital admission
Single previous VTE related to major surgery
High-risk thrombophilia + no VTE
Medical comorbidities (e.g. cancer, heart failure,
active SLE, IBD or inflammatory polyarthro￾pathy, nephrotic syndrome, type I DM with
nephropathy, sickle cell disease, current IVDU)
Any surgical procedure (e.g. appendicectomy)
OHSS (first trimester only)
Obesity (BMI >30 kg/m2
)
Age >35 years
Parity ≥3
Smoker
Gross varicose veins
Current pre-eclampsia
Immobility (e.g. paraplegia, PGP)
Family history of unprovoked or oestrogen
provoked VTE in first-degree relative
Low-risk thrombophilia
Multiple pregnancy
IVF/ART 
Transient risk factors:
Dehydration/hyperemesis; current systemic
infection; long-distance travel 
APL, antiphospholipid antibodies (lupus anticoagulant, anticardiolipin antibodies,
b2
-glycoprotein 1 antibodies); ART, assisted reproductive technology; BMI based on booking weight;
DM, diabetes mellitus; FHx, family history; gross varicose veins, symptomatic, above knee or associated
with phlebitis/oedema/skin changes; high-risk thrombophilia, antithrombin deficiency, protein
C or S deficiency, compound or homozygous for low-risk thrombophilias; IBD, inflammatory bowel
disease; immobility, ≥ 3 days; IVDU, intravenous drug user; IVF, in vitro fertilisation; LMWH, low-molecular￾weight heparin; long-distance travel, >4 hours; low-risk thrombophilia, heterozygous for factor V Leiden
or prothrombin G20210A mutations; OHSS, ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome; PGP, pelvic girdle pain
with reduced mobility; PPH, postpartum haemorrhage; thrombophilia, inherited or acquired;
VTE, venous thromboembolism.
INTERMEDIATE RISK
Consider antenatal prophylaxis 
with LMWH
Four or more risk factors: 
prophylaxis from first trimester
Three risk factors: 
prophylaxis from 28 weeks
Postnatal assessment and management (to be assessed
on delivery suite) 
Any previous VTE
Anyone requiring antenatal LMWH
High-risk thrombophilia
Low-risk thrombophilia + FHx
Caesarean section in labour
BMI ≥40 kg/m2
Readmission or prolonged admission
(≥3 days) in the puerperium
Any surgical procedure in the puerperium except
immediate repair of the perineum
Medical comorbidities (e.g. cancer, heart failure,
active SLE, IBD or inflammatory polyarthropathy;
nephrotic syndrome, type I DM with nephropathy,
sickle cell disease, current IVDU) 
Age >35 years
Obesity (BMI >30 kg/m2
)
Parity ≥3
Smoker
Elective caesarean section
Family history of VTE
Low-risk thrombophilia
Gross varicose veins
Current systemic infection
Immobility (e.g. paraplegia, PGP,
long-distance travel)
Current pre-eclampsia
Multiple pregnancy
Preterm delivery in this pregnancy (<37 weeks)
Stillbirth in this pregnancy
Midcavity rotational or operative delivery
Prolonged labour (>24 hours)
PPH >1 litre or blood transfusion 
INTERMEDIATE RISK
At least 10 days’ 
postnatal prophylactic LMWH
NB If persisting or >3 risk factors 
consider extending 
thromboprophylaxis with LMWH
Two or 
more risk 
factors
Fewer than 
two risk 
factors
Weight <50 kg = 20 mg enoxaparin/2,500 units dalteparin/3,500 units tinzaparin daily
Weight 50–90 kg = 40 mg enoxaparin/5,000 units dalteparin/4,500 units tinzaparin daily
Weight 91–130 kg = 60 mg enoxaparin/7,500 units dalteparin/7,000 units tinzaparin daily
Weight 131–170 kg = 80 mg enoxaparin/10,000 units dalteparin/9,000 units tinzaparin daily
Weight >170 kg = 0.6 mg/kg/day enoxaparin/75 u/kg/day dalteparin/75 u/kg/day tinzaparin 
Antenatal and postnatal prophylactic dose of LMWH
Fewer than
three risk
factors
HIGH RISK
Requires antenatal prophylaxis
with LMWH
Refer to trust-nominated thrombosis
in pregnancy expert/team 
LOWER RISK
Mobilization and 
avoidance of dehydration
HIGH RISK
At least 6 weeks’ 
postnatal prophylactic LMWH
LOWER RISK
Early mobilization and 
avoidance of dehydration
Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 87 04/03/2024 16:06
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 88 04/03/2024 16:06
Antenatal obstetric complications 
ALCOHOL 
There is much debate about what a ‘safe’ dose of 
alcohol is during pregnancy. What is likely is that 
an intake of less than 100 g per week (approximately 
two drinks per day; for example, two medium glasses 
of wine or one pint of beer) is not associated with any 
adverse effects. Doses greater than this have been 
related to fetal growth restriction (FGR). Massive 
doses, in excess of 2 g/kg of body weight (17 drinks 
per day), have been associated with fetal alcohol syn￾drome. However, the syndrome is not seen consis￾tently in infants born to heavy consumers of alcohol 
and occurs only in approximately 30–33% of children 
born to those who drink about 2 g/kg of body weight 
per day (equivalent to approximately 18 units of alco￾holic drink per day). The differing susceptibility of 
fetuses to the syndrome is thought to be multifacto￾rial and re°ects the interplay of genetic factors, social 
deprivation, nutritional deÿciencies and tobacco and 
other drug abuse, along with alcohol consumption. 
If alcohol abuse is suspected, it may be neces￾sary to involve social workers and arrange for formal 
psychiatric/addiction assessment. It is extremely dif￾ÿcult to ‘test’ for alcohol abuse, as even markers such 
as mean corpuscular volume and gamma-glutamyl 
transpeptidase (GGT) are not reliable in pregnancy. 
Malnutrition is very likely in heavy alcohol abuse and 
requires B vitamin supplements and iron. A common 
problem is that many of those who abuse alcohol and 
other drugs not only do not take their medicines but 
also default antenatal appointments. 
SMOKING AND PREGNANCY 
Smoking acutely reduces placental perfusion. Overall 
perinatal mortality is increased, babies are smaller 
at delivery and there is a higher risk of placental 
abruption in smokers than in non-smokers. It is 
estimated that a baby will weigh less than its tar￾get weight by a multiple of 15 g times the average 
number of cigarettes smoked per day; smoking fewer 
than ÿve cigarettes per day has a barely discernible 
obstetric effect and quitting by 15 weeks’ gestation 
reduces the risk as much as quitting before preg￾nancy. In the UK, it is now a recommended practice 
to offer and test carbon monoxide levels in addition 
to offering smoking cessation at booking and each 
subsequent visit, as a part of the Saving Babies Lives 
Care Bundle for maternity care. 
OLIGOHYDRAMNIOS AND 
POLYHYDRAMNIOS 
Amniotic °uid is produced almost exclusively from 
fetal urine from the second trimester onwards. It 
serves a vital function in protecting the developing 
baby from pressure or trauma, allowing limb move￾ment (and hence normal postural development) and 
permitting the fetal lungs to expand and develop 
through breathing. 
OLIGOHYDRAMNIOS 
Too little amniotic °uid (oligohydramnios) is com￾monly deÿned as an amniotic °uid index (AFI) less 
than the 5th centile for gestation. The AFI is an ultra￾sound estimation of amniotic °uid derived by adding 
together the deepest vertical pool in four quadrants 
of the abdomen. The AFI (in cm) is therefore associ￾ated with some degree of error. In general, however, 
it is possible to differentiate subjectively on ultra￾sound between ‘too much’, ‘too little’ and ‘normal 
looking’. Another objective assessment is to measure 
the deepest vertical pool and, if below the 5th centile, 
to then measure the AFI. Causes of oligohydramnios 
and anhydramnios are summarised in Table 6.1. 
Oligohydramnios may be suspected antenatally 
following a history of clear °uid leaking from the 
vagina; this may represent PPROM (see Chapter 8). 
Clinically, on abdominal palpation, the fetal poles 
may be very obviously felt and ‘hard’, with a small￾for-gestational age uterus. 
The fetal prognosis depends on the cause of oli￾gohydramnios, but both pulmonary hypoplasia and 
limb deformities (contractures, talipes) are common 
to severe early-onset (<24 weeks’ gestation) oligohy￾dramnnios. Renal agenesis and bilateral multicystic 
kidneys carry a lethal prognosis, as life after birth is 
impossible without functioning kidneys. In this situ￾ation, the fetal lungs would probably be hypoplastic; 
this may also be true of severe urinary tract obstruc￾tion. Oligohydramnios due to FGR/uteroplacental 
insufÿciency is usually of a less severe degree and 
less commonly causes limb and lung problems. 88 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 89 04/03/2024 16:06
 
 
 
Fetal malpresentation at˜term 
Table 6.1 Possible causes of oligohydramnios and 
anhydramnio s 
 Too little 
production Diagnosed by
 Renal agenesis Ultrasound: no renal tissue, no 
bladder
 Multicystic 
kidneys 
Ultrasound: enlarged kidneys 
with multiple cysts, no visible 
bladder
 Urinary tract 
abnormality/ 
obstruction 
Ultrasound: kidneys may be 
present, but urinary tract 
dilatation 
FGR and placental 
insufÿ ciency 
Clinical: reduced SFH, reduced 
fetal movements, possibly 
abnormal CTG 
Ultrasound: FGR, abnormal fetal 
Doppler wave forms 
Drugs (e.g. 
NSAIDs) 
Withholding NSAIDs may allow 
amniotic ˛uid to reaccumulate
 Congenital 
infections 
Ultrasound: other structural 
defects
 Post-term 
pregnancy 
Clinical: reduced SFH, reduced 
fetal movements, possibly 
abnormal CTG 
Ultrasound: possibly FGR, 
abnormal fetal Doppler wave 
forms, reduced liquor
 PPROM Speculum examination: pool of 
amniotic ˛uid on posterior blade 
CTG, cardiotocography; FGR, fetal growth restriction; NSAID, 
non-steroidal anti-in˜ammatory drug; PPROM, preterm premature 
rupture of membranes; SFH, symphysis–fundal height. 
POLYHYDRAMNIOS 
Polyhydramnios is the term given to an excess of 
amniotic °uid (i.e. AFI >95th centile for gestation 
on ultrasound estimation). It may present as severe 
abdominal swelling and discomfort. On examina￾tion, the abdomen will appear distended out of pro￾portion to the gestation (increased symphysis–fundal 
height [SFH]). Furthermore, the abdomen may be 
tense and tender and the fetal poles will be hard to 
palpate. The condition may be caused by maternal, 
placental or fetal conditions, and if severe or increas￾ing polyhydramnios, may precipitate preterm labour. 
BOX 6.5: Causes of polyhydramnios 
Maternal 
˜ Diabetes 
˜ Placental (e.g. chorioangioma) 
˜ Arteriovenous ÿstula 
Fetal 
˜ Multiple gestation (in monochorionic twins, it 
may be twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome) 
˜ Idiopathic 
˜ Oesophageal atresia/tracheo-oesophageal 
ÿ stula 
˜ Duodenal atresia 
˜ Neuromuscular fetal condition (preventing 
swallowing) 
˜ Anencephaly 
˜ Fetal congenital infections or chromosomal 
abnormalities/genetic syndromes 
The management of polyhydramnios is directed 
towards establishing the cause (and hence deter￾mining fetal prognosis), relieving the discomfort 
of the mother (if necessary by amniodrainage) and 
assessing the risk of preterm labour due to uterine 
overdistension. 
Polyhydramnios due to diabetes needs urgent 
investigation, as it often suggests high blood glucose 
levels. In this context, polyhydramnios should cor￾rect itself when glycaemic control is optimized. 
Twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome is a rare 
cause of acute polyhydramnios in the recipient sac 
of monochorionic twins. It is associated with oligo￾hydramnios and a small baby in the other sac. The 
condition may be rapidly fatal for both twins; amnio￾drainage and removal by fetoscopic laser ablation of 
the placental vascular connections are two therapeutic 
modalities employed in dealing with this condition. 
This is discussed further in Chapter 7. 
FETAL MALPRESENTATION 
AT˜TERM 
Malpresentation is a presentation that is not cephalic. 
Breech presentation is the most commonly encoun￾tered malpresentation and occurs in 3–4% of term 
pregnancies, but is more common at earlier gestations. 89 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 90 04/03/2024 16:06
Antenatal obstetric complications 
Similarly, oblique and transverse positions are not 
uncommon antenatally. They become a problem only 
if the baby (or ÿ rst presenting baby in a multiple gesta￾tion) is not cephalic by 37 weeks’ gestation.
BREECH PRESENTATION
 There are three types of breech: the most common is 
extended (frank) breech (Figure 6.3A), less common 
is a ° exed (complete) breech (Figure 6.3B) and least 
common is footling breech, in which a foot presents 
at the cervix (Figure 6.3C). Cord and foot prolapse 
are risks in this situation.
ANTENATAL MANAGEMENT OF 
BREECH PRESENTATION
If a breech presentation is clinically suspected at or 
after 36 weeks, this should be conÿ rmed by ultra￾sound scan. The scan should document fetal biom￾etry, amniotic ° uid volume, the placental site and the 
position of the fetal legs, and look for any anomalies 
previously undetected. 
BOX 6.6: Predisposing factors for 
breech presentation
Maternal 
˜ Fibroids 
˜ Congenital uterine abnormalities (e.g. bicornuate 
uterus) 
˜ Uterine surgery
Fetal/placental 
˜ Multiple gestation 
˜ Prematurity 
˜ Placenta praevia 
˜ Abnormality (e.g. anencephaly or hydrocephalus) 
˜ Fetal neuromuscular condition 
˜ Oligohydramnios 
˜ Polyhydramnios
The three management options available at this 
point should be discussed with the pregnant woman. 
These are external cephalic version (ECV), vaginal 
breech delivery and elective caesarean section. A pre￾vious large multicentre randomized controlled trial 
suggested that planned vaginal delivery of a breech 
A B C
D E
Figure 6.3 (A) Frank breech (also known as extended breech) presentation with 
extension of the legs. (B) Breech presentation with ˜ exion of the legs. ( C) Footling breech 
presentation. ( D)˝Transverse lie. ( E) Oblique lie. 90 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 91 04/03/2024 16:07
Fetal malpresentation at˜term 
presentation is associated with a 3% increased risk 
of death or serious morbidity to the baby. Although 
this trial did not evaluate long-term outcomes, it has 
led to the recommendation that the best method of 
delivering a term breech singleton is by planned cae￾sarean section. Despite this, either by choice or as 
a result of precipitous labour, a small proportion of 
pregnant women with breech presentations will opt 
to deliver vaginally. It therefore remains important 
that clinicians and hospitals are prepared for vaginal 
breech delivery. 
EXTERNAL CEPHALIC VERSION 
ECV is a relatively straightforward and safe tech￾nique for singleton breech pregnancies and has 
been shown to reduce the number of caesarean 
sections due to breech presentations. Success rates 
vary according to the experience of the operator 
but, in most units, are around 50% (and are higher 
in the multiparous population who tend to have lax 
abdominal musculature). 
The procedure is performed at or after 37 com￾pleted weeks’ gestation by an experienced obste￾trician at or near delivery facilities. ECV should 
be performed with a tocolytic (e.g. nifedipine) to 
improve the success rate. The pregnant woman is 
laid °at with a left lateral tilt, having ensured that 
she has emptied her bladder and is comfortable. With 
ultrasound guidance, the breech is elevated from 
the pelvis and one hand is used to manipulate this 
upwards in the direction of a forwards roll while the 
other hand applies gentle pressure to °ex the fetal 
head and bring it down to the pelvis (Figure 6.4).
 The procedure can be mildly uncomfortable for 
the patient and should last no more than 10 minutes. 
If the procedure fails, or becomes difÿcult, it is aban￾doned. A fetal heart rate trace must be performed 
before and after the procedure and it is important to 
administer anti-D if the patient is rhesus negative. 
A B
C D
A B 
C D 
Figure 6.4 External cephalic version. (A) The breech is disengaged from the pelvic 
inlet. (B) Version is usually performed in the direction that increases ˜exion of the 
fetus and makes it do a forwards somersault. (C) On completion of version, the head 
is often not engaged for a time. (D) The fetal heart rate should be checked after the 
external version has been completed. 91 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 92 04/03/2024 16:07
 
Antenatal obstetric complications 
BOX 6.7: Contraindications to ECV 
˜ Fetal abnormality (e.g. hydrocephalus) 
˜ Placenta praevia 
˜ Oligohydramnios or polyhydramnios 
˜ History of antepartum haemorrhage 
˜ Previous caesarean or myomectomy scar on the 
uterus 
˜ Multiple gestation 
˜ Pre-eclampsia or hypertension 
˜ Plan to deliver by caesarean section anyway 
BOX 6.8: Risks of ECV 
˜ Placental abruption 
˜ Premature rupture of the membranes 
˜ Cord accident 
˜ Transplacental haemorrhage (remember anti-D 
administration to rhesus-negative individuals) 
˜ Fetal bradycardia 
˜ Emergency caesarean section 
MODE OF DELIVERY 
If ECV fails, or is contraindicated, and caesarean 
section is not indicated for other reasons, then preg￾nant women should be counselled regarding elec￾tive caesarean section and planned vaginal delivery. 
Although evidence suggests that it is probably safer 
for breech babies to be delivered by caesarean sec￾tion, there is still a place for a vaginal breech delivery 
in certain circumstances. Individual choice and the 
failure to detect breech presentation until very late in 
labour mean that obstetricians need to be expert in 
the skills of breech vaginal delivery and aware of the 
potential complications. 
PRE-REQUISITES FOR VAGINAL 
BREECH DELIVERY 
Feto-maternal 
• The presentation should be either extended 
(hips °exed, knees extended) or °exed (hips 
°exed, knees °exed but feet not below the fetal 
buttocks). 
• There should be no evidence of feto-pelvic 
disproportion with a pelvis clinically thought 
to be adequate and an estimated fetal 
weight of <3,500 g (ultrasound or clinical 
measurement). 
• There should be no evidence of hyperextension 
of the fetal head, and fetal abnormalities that 
would preclude safe vaginal delivery (e.g. 
severe hydrocephalus) should be excluded. 
Management of labour 
• Fetal well-being and progress of labour should 
be carefully monitored. 
• An epidural analgesia is not essential but may 
be advantageous; it can prevent pushing before 
full dilatation. 
• Fetal blood sampling from the buttocks may 
be considered but used with caution. FBS may 
provide an accurate assessment of the acid–base 
status (when the fetal heart rate trace is suspect). 
• There should be an operator experienced 
in delivering breech babies available in the 
hospital. 
Although much emphasis is placed on adequate 
case selection prior to labour, a survey of outcomes 
of undiagnosed breech presentations in labour man￾aged by experienced medical staff showed that safe 
vaginal delivery can be achieved.
 Technique 
A vaginal breech delivery should be characterized by 
‘masterly inactivity’ (hands-off). Problems are more 
likely to arise when the obstetrician tries to speed up 
the process by pulling on the baby, and this should 
be avoided. 
Delivery of the buttocks 
In most circumstances, full dilatation and descent of 
the breech will have occurred naturally. When the 
buttocks become visible and begin to distend the 
perineum, preparations for the delivery are made. 
The buttocks will lie in the anterior–posterior diam￾eter. Once the anterior buttock is delivered and the 
anus is seen over the fourchette (and no sooner than 
this), an episiotomy can be cut. 
Delivery of the legs and lower body 
If the legs are °exed, they will deliver spontaneously. 
If extended, they may need to be delivered using the 
Pinard manoeuvre. This entails using a ÿnger to °ex 92 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 93 04/03/2024 16:07
Fetal malpresentation at˜term 
the leg at the knee and then extend at the hip, ÿrst 
anteriorly then posteriorly. With contractions and 
maternal effort, the lower body will be delivered. 
Usually a loop of cord is drawn down to ensure that 
it is not too short. 
Delivery of the shoulders 
The baby will be lying with the shoulders in the 
transverse diameter of the pelvic midcavity. As the 
anterior shoulder rotates into the anterior–posterior 
diameter, the spine or the scapula will become vis￾ible. At this point, a ÿnger gently placed above the 
shoulder will help to deliver the arm. As the poste￾rior arm/shoulder reaches the pelvic °oor, it too will 
rotate anteriorly (in the opposite direction). Once the 
spine becomes visible, delivery of the second arm will 
follow. This can be imagined as a ‘rocking boat’ with 
one side moving upwards and then the other. The 
Lovset manoeuvre essentially copies these natural 
movements (Figure 6.5). However, it is unnecessary 
A B
C D
A 
C 
B 
D 
and meddlesome to do routinely (one risks pulling 
the shoulders down but leaving the arms higher up, 
alongside the head). 
Delivery of the head 
The head is delivered using the Mauriceau–Smellie– 
Veit manoeuvre: the baby lies on the obstetrician’s 
arm with downward traction being levelled on the 
head via a ÿnger in the mouth and one on each 
maxilla (Figure 6.6). Delivery occurs with ÿrst 
downwards and then upwards movement (as with 
instrumental deliveries). If this manoeuvre proves 
difÿcult, forceps need to be applied. An assistant 
holds the baby’s body upwards while the forceps are 
applied in the usual manner (Figure 6.7). 
Figure 6.6 Mauriceau–Smellie–Veit manoeuvre for 
delivery of the head. 
Figure 6.7 Delivery of the aftercoming head with 
forceps. 
Figure 6.5 Lovset manoeuvre. (A) Turning the infant to 
bring down the anterior shoulder. (B) Downward traction 
and descent of shoulders along the midline (sacral￾pubic) axis. (C) Delivering the anterior arm and shoulder. 
(D) Delivering the posterior arm and shoulder. 93 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 94 04/03/2024 16:07
Antenatal obstetric complications 
 Complications 
The greatest fear with a vaginal breech is that the baby 
will get ‘stuck’. Interference in the natural process by 
the inappropriate use of oxytocic agents or by trying 
to pull the baby out (breech extraction) will paradoxi￾cally increase the risk of obstruction occurring. When 
delay occurs, particularly with delivery of the shoul￾ders or head, the presence of an experienced obstetri￾cian will reduce the risk of death or serious injury. 
KEY LEARNING POINTS 
˜ Breech presentation: ECV should be offered at 
36–37 weeks in selected individuals. 
˜ Elective caesarean section is safer than vaginal 
delivery for a baby presenting by the breech at or 
close to term. 
˜ Planned or unexpected vaginal breech deliveries 
should be attended by experienced clinicians. 
OTHER FETAL MALPRESENTATIONS 
A transverse lie occurs when the fetal long axis lies 
perpendicular to that of the maternal long axis and 
classically results in a shoulder presentation (see 
Figure 6.3D). An oblique lie occurs when the long axis 
of the fetal body crosses the long axis of the maternal 
body at an angle close to 45° (see Figure 6.3E). 
Anyone presenting at term with a transverse or 
oblique lie is at potential risk of cord prolapse fol￾lowing spontaneous rupture of the membranes, 
and prolapse of the hand, shoulder or foot once in 
labour. In most cases, the pregnant woman is mul￾tiparous with a lax uterus and abdominal wall mus￾culature, and gentle version of the baby’s head in 
the clinic or on the ward will restore the presenta￾tion to cephalic. If this does not occur or the lie is 
unstable (alternating between transverse, oblique 
and longitudinal), it is important to think of pos￾sible uterine or fetal causes of this. 
The diagnosis of transverse or oblique lie might 
be suspected by abdominal inspection: the abdomen 
often appears asymmetrical. The SFH may be less 
than expected and, on palpation, the fetal head or 
buttocks may be in the iliac fossa. Palpation over the 
pelvic brim will reveal an ‘empty’ pelvis. 
It goes without saying that labour with the baby’s 
lie anything other than longitudinal will not result in 
a vaginal birth; this is one situation in which, if cae￾sarean section is not performed, both the pregnant 
woman and the baby are at considerable risk of mor￾bidity and mortality. The only exception to this is for 
exceptionally preterm or small babies, where vaginal 
delivery may occur irrespective of lie or presentation. 
A pregnant woman with an unstable lie at term 
should be admitted to the antenatal ward. The nor￾mal plan would be to deliver by caesarean section if 
the presentation is not cephalic in early labour or if 
spontaneous rupture of the membranes occurs. In the 
multiparous, an unstable lie will often correct itself in 
early labour (as long as the membranes are intact). 
POST-TERM PREGNANCY 
A pregnancy that has extended to or beyond 42+0 
weeks’ gestation is deÿned as a prolonged or post￾term pregnancy. Accurate dating remains essential 
for the correct diagnosis and should ideally involve 
a ÿrst-trimester ultrasound estimation of crown– 
rump length. 
Post-term pregnancy affects approximately 10% 
of all pregnancies and the aetiology is unknown. 
Post-term pregnancy is associated with increased 
risks to both the fetus and the mother, including an 
increased risk of stillbirth and perinatal death, and 
prolonged labour and caesarean section. 
Fetal surveillance and induction of labour are 
two strategies employed that may reduce the risk of 
adverse outcome. Unfortunately, there are no known 
tests that can accurately predict fetal outcome post￾term; an ultrasound scan may give temporary reas￾surance if the amniotic °uid and fetal growth are 
normal. Similarly, a CTG should be performed at and 
after 42 weeks. 
Immediate induction of labour or delivery post￾term should take place if there is: 
• reduced amniotic °uid on scan 
• reduction in fetal growth 
• reduced fetal movements 
• abnormal CTG 
• maternal hypertension or any other medical or 
obstetric complication 
94 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 95 04/03/2024 16:07
 
 
 
Fetal malpresentation at˜term 
Induction of labour is discussed further in 
Chapter 12. 
When counselling the parents regarding waiting 
for labour to start naturally after 42 weeks, it is impor￾tant that the pregnant woman is aware that no test 
can guarantee the safety of the baby and that peri￾natal mortality is increased (at least twofold) beyond 
42 weeks. A labour induced post-term is more likely 
to require caesarean section; this may partly be due 
to the reluctance of the uterus to contract properly 
and the possible compromise of the baby leading to 
abnormal CTG. NICE recommends regular surveil￾lance with ultrasound and CTG when patients chose 
to continue the pregnancy beyond 42+0 weeks, after 
informed discussion. 
VAGINAL BLEEDING IN PREGNANCY 
Bleeding in pregnancy is common but invariably 
causes anxiety. It should always be investigated to 
rule out signiÿcant and dangerous causes; in many 
cases of minor bleeding, a cause is never found. 
Vaginal bleeding at less than 24 weeks’ gestation 
is deÿned as a threatened miscarriage and the causes 
and management are described in more detail in 
Chapter 5 of Gynaecology by Ten Teachers, 21st Edition. 
Vaginal bleeding from 24 weeks to delivery of the baby 
is deÿned as an antepartum haemorrhage (APH). The 
causes of APH are placental or local. The incidence of 
APH is 3%. It is estimated that 1% is attributable to 
placenta praevia, 1% is attributable to placental abrup￾tion and the remaining 1% is from other causes. 
BOX 6.9: Causes of APH 
Placental causes 
˜ Placental abruption 
˜ Placenta praevia 
˜ Vasa praevia 
Local causes 
˜ Cervicitis 
˜ Cervical ectropion 
˜ Cervical carcinoma 
˜ Cervical polyp 
˜ Vaginal trauma 
˜ Vaginal infection 
APH must always be taken seriously, and anyone 
presenting with a history of fresh vaginal bleeding 
must be investigated promptly and properly. The key 
questions are whether the bleeding is placental and 
whether the bleeding is compromising the pregnant 
woman and/or fetus. A pale, tachycardic pregnant 
woman looking anxious with a painful, ÿrm abdo￾men, underwear soaked in fresh blood or blood/stain￾ing along the legs, and reduced fetal movements needs 
emergency assessment and management for a pos￾sible placental abruption. A pregnant woman having 
had a small post-coital bleed with no systemic signs or 
symptoms represents a different end of the spectrum. 
HISTORY 
• How much bleeding is there? 
• Triggering factors (e.g. post-coital bleed) 
• Is the bleeding associated with pain or 
contractions? 
• Is the baby moving? 
• Last cervical smear (date and normal or 
abnormal) 
• Is there known vasa praevia (bleeding in such 
scenarios risks severe fetal compromise)? 
EXAMINATION 
• Pulse, blood pressure 
• Is the uterus soft or tender and ÿrm? 
• Fetal heart auscultation/CTG 
• Speculum vaginal examination, with particular 
importance placed on visualizing the cervix 
(having established that placenta is not a praevia, 
preferably using a portable ultrasound machine) 
INVESTIGATIONS 
• Depending on the degree of bleeding, full 
blood count, clotting and, if suspected praevia/ 
abruption, cross-match 6 units of blood 
• Ultrasound (fetal size, presentation, amniotic 
°uid, placental position and morphology) 
MANAGEMENT 
If there is minimal bleeding and the cause is clearly 
local vaginal bleeding, symptomatic management 
95 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 96 04/03/2024 16:07
 
Antenatal obstetric complications 
may be given (e.g. antifungal preparations for can￾didiasis), as long as there is reasonable certainty 
that cervical carcinoma is excluded by smear history 
and direct visualization of the cervix. The manage￾ment of signiÿcant APH is described in detail in 
Chapter 14. 
RHESUS ISOIMMUNIZATION 
Blood groups are deÿned in two ways. First, there is 
the ABO group, allowing four different permutations 
of blood group (O, A, B and AB). Second, there is the 
rhesus system, which consists of C, D and E anti￾gens. The importance of these blood group systems 
is that a mismatch between the fetus and mother 
can mean that, when fetal red cells pass across to the 
maternal circulation, as they do to a greater or lesser 
extent during pregnancy, sensitization of the mater￾nal immune system to these fetal ‘foreign’ red blood 
cells may occur and subsequently give rise to haemo￾lytic disease of the fetus and newborn (HDFN). The 
rhesus system is the one most commonly associated 
with severe haemolytic disease. 
Rhesus locus on chromosome one 
1p34 
dd dd dd dd 
D gene CE gene 
Homozygous rhesus D positive Rh-neg Rh-pos father 
dd Dd dd Dd Heterozygous rhesus D positive 
Rh-neg Rh-pos father 
D gene CE gene mother (homozygote) 
CcEe gene 
AETIOLOGY OF RHESUS DISEASE 
The rhesus system comprises at least 40 antigens, 
the most clinically important of which are C, D 
and E. They are coded on two adjacent genes that 
sit within chromosome 1. One gene codes for anti￾gen polypeptides C/c and E/e while the other codes 
for the D polypeptide (rhesus antigen). The d (little 
d) antigen has not been identiÿed, so it is probable 
that individuals who are D negative lack the antigen 
altogether, as opposed to those with c (little c) or e 
(little e), where c is the allelic antigen of C and e is 
the allelic antigen of E. Antigen expression is usu￾ally dominant, whereas those who have a negative 
phenotype are either homozygous for the recessive 
allele or have a deletion of that gene (Figure 6.8). 
In practice, only anti-D and anti-c regularly cause 
HDFN and anti-D is much more common than 
anti-c. 
The occurrence of HDFN as a result of rhesus 
isoimmunization involves three key stages (Figure 
6.9). First, a rhesus-negative mother must con￾ceive a baby who has inherited the rhesus-positive 
Rh-neg Rh-neg father 
mother 
dd dd 
=> All offspring Rh-neg 
D gene CE gene 
D gene CE gene 
mother 
dd Dd 
(heterozygote) 
=> Half offspring Rh-pos 
CE gene 
dd DD
Dd Dd Dd Dd 
=> All offspring Rh-pos 
Rhesus D negative 
CcEe gene 
Figure 6.8 The parental genotype determinants of rhesus phenotype. (neg, negative; pos, positive; Rh, rhesus.) 96 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 97 04/03/2024 16:07
Fetal malpresentation at˜term 
Feto-placental 
circulation 
Maternal 
circulation 
Maternal red 
cells without 
‘D’ antigen 
(Rh-negative) 
Fetal red 
cells with 
‘D’ antigen 
(Rh-positive) 
A
Maternal antibodies 
produced against 
fetal red cells 
Maternal anti-D 
antibodies produced B
D 
D 
D 
D 
D 
D 
D 
d 
d 
d 
Next 
pregnancy
 Figure 6.9 The mechanism of rhesus sensitization (A) and fetal red cell destruction 
(B). (Rh, rhesus.) 
phenotype from the father. Second, fetal cells 
must gain access to the maternal circulation in a 
sufÿcient volume to provoke a maternal antibody 
response. Finally, maternal antibodies must cross 
the placenta and cause immune destruction of red 
cells in the fetus. 
Rhesus disease does not affect a ÿrst pregnancy, 
as the primary response is usually weak and con￾sists primarily of immunoglobulin (Ig)M antibod￾ies that do not cross the placenta. However, in a 
subsequent pregnancy with a rhesus-positive baby, 
BOX 6.10: Potential sensitizing 
events for rhesus disease 
˜ Miscarriage 
˜ Termination of pregnancy 
˜ APH 
˜ Invasive prenatal testing (chorion villus sampling, 
amniocentesis and cordocentesis) 
˜ Delivery 
that pass across placenta, 
causing fetal red cell lysis 
rhesus-positive red cells pass from the baby to the 
maternal circulation and cause maternal resensitiza￾tion ( see Figure 6.9). On this occasion, the B-cells 
produce a much larger response, this time of IgG 
antibodies that can cross the placenta to the fetal cir￾culation. If these antibodies are present in sufÿcient 
quantities, fetal haemolysis may occur, leading to 
such severe anaemia that the fetus may die unless a 
transfusion is performed. 
PREVALENCE OF RHESUS DISEASE 
The prevalence of D-rhesus negativity is 15% in the 
UK Caucasian population, but lower in all other eth￾nic groups. Approximately 55% of UK Caucasian 
males are heterozygous for the D antigen; there￾fore, around two-thirds of rhesus-negative mothers 
would be expected to carry a rhesus-positive fetus. 
Rhesus disease is most common in countries where 
anti-D prophylaxis is not widespread, such as the 
Middle East and Russia. 
97 
ALGrawanyAntenatal obstetric complications
 PREVENTING RHESUS A small number of rhesus-negative individuals 
ISOIMMUNIZATION become sensitized during pregnancy despite the 
administration of anti-D at delivery and without a The process of isoimmunization can be prevented by clinically obvious sensitizing event. The likelihood is the intramuscular administration of anti-D immu- that a small feto-maternal haemorrhage occurs with- noglobulins to a mother. Anti-D immunoglobulins out any obvious clinical signs; therefore, prophylactic ‘mop up’ any circulating rhesus-positive cells before anti-D would reduce the risk of isoimmunization 
an immune response is excited in the mother. It is nor- from this event. Current UK guidelines suggest that mal practice to administer anti-D as soon as possible all rhesus-negative pregnant women who have not after any potential sensitizing events that may cause been previously sensitized should be offered routine feto-maternal haemorrhage and preferably within 72 antenatal prophylaxis with anti-D, either with a hours of exposure to fetal red cells. However, if, excep- single-dose regimen at around 28 weeks or a two- tionally, this deadline cannot be met, some protection dose regimen given at 28 and 34 weeks’ gestation. may still be offered if anti-D Ig is given up to 10 days 
after the sensitizing event. The exact dose is deter￾mined by the gestation at which sensitization has 
occurred and the size of the feto-maternal haemor￾rhage. A Kleihauer test of maternal blood determines 
the proportion of fetal cells present in the maternal 
sample. It relies on the ability of fetal red blood cells 
to resist denaturation by alcohol or acid and it allows 
calculation of the size of the feto-maternal transfusion 
and the amount of extra anti-D Ig required.
 MANAGEMENT OF RHESUS DISEASE 
IN A SENSITIZED PREGNANT WOMAN
 Once a pregnant woman who is D-rhesus nega￾tive has been sensitized to the D-rhesus antigen, 
no amount of anti-D will ever turn the clock back. 
In a subsequent pregnancy, close surveillance is 
required. Rhesus disease gets worse with successive 
pregnancies, so it is important to note the severity 
of the disease in previous pregnancies. The manage￾ment depends on the clinical scenario.
 The father of the next baby is D-rhesus negative. In 
this situation, there is no risk that the baby will be 
D-rhesus positive and therefore there is no chance of 
rhesus disease.
 The father of the next baby is D-rhesus positive.
He may be heterozygous and, in this situation, 
determining the paternal phenotype is useful in 98
BOX 6.11: Management of sensitizing 
events in the rhesus-negative 
pregnant woman
. In the fi rst trimester of pregnancy, because the 
volume of fetal blood is so small, it is unlikely 
that sensitization would occur, and anti-D is only 
indicated following ectopic pregnancy, molar 
pregnancy, therapeutic termination of pregnancy 
and in cases of uterine bleeding where this is 
repeated, heavy or associated with abdominal 
pain. The dose that should be given is 250 IU.
. For potentially sensitizing events between 12 and 
20 weeks’ gestation, a minimum dose of 250 IU 
should be administered within 72 hours of the 
event and a Kleihauer test should be performed. 
Further anti-D can be given if indicated by the 
Kleihauer test.
. For potentially sensitizing events after 20 weeks’ 
gestation, a Kleihauer test is required and, 
pending the result, a minimum anti-D Ig dose of 
500 IU should be administered within 72 hours of 
the event. Further anti-D can be given if indicated 
by the Kleihauer test.
BOX 6.12: Signs of fetal anaemia
N ote: Clinical and ultrasound features of fetal anaemia 
do not usually become evident unless fetal haemo￾globin is more than 5 g/dL less than the mean for 
gestation or the fetal haemoglobin is less than 6 g/dL.
. Polyhydramnios
. Enlarged fetal heart
. Ascites and pericardial effusions
. Hyperdynamic fetal circulation (can be detected 
by Doppler ultrasound by measuring increased 
velocities in the middle cerebral artery or aorta)
. Reduced fetal movements
. Abnormal CTG with reduced variability, 
eventually a ‘sinusoidal’ trace
Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 98 04/03/2024 16:07Fetal malpresentation at term
anticipating the likely fetal phenotype and, thus, 
the potential for development of HDFN. However, 
it is important to bear in mind that there are issues 
regarding paternal testing, and assuming paternity 
runs the risk of false prediction. Notwithstanding 
this issue, paternal blood grouping is frequently 
used and often useful. In addition, non-invasive 
fetal blood group genotyping using cell-free fetal 
deoxyribonucleic acid (cffDNA) from maternal blood 
samples taken between 16 and 25 weeks’ gestation 
have made it possible to determine the fetal rhesus 
genotype type and this is now recommended for the 
risk assessment and subsequent surveillance plan of 
the fetus at risk of HDFN.
 In a sensitized pregnant woman, if the father is 
D-rhesus positive or unknown, standard manage￾ment involves monitoring antibody levels every 2–4 
weeks from booking. Antibody levels or quantity can 
be described using the titre or by using international 
units (IU) as a standard quantifi cation method. The 
titre simply refers to the number of times a sample 
has been diluted before the amount of antibody 
becomes undetectable; titre of 2, 4, 8, 16, 32, 64, 128, 
etc. Each time a sample is tested, it should be checked 
in parallel with the previous sample to ensure the 
detection of signifi cant changes in the antibody level. 
However, titrations of anti-D do not correlate well 
with the development of HDFN, and the standard 
quantifi cation method (IU/mL) gives more clinically 
relevant levels ( Table 6.2).
I f antibody levels rise, the baby should be exam￾ined for signs of anaemia. In the past, the biliru￾bin concentration of amniotic fl uid was determined 
optically to give an indirect measure of fetal hae￾molysis. This involved an invasive procedure with 
the attendant risks of miscarriage/preterm labour 
and further boosting of the alloimmune response. 
Now, middle cerebral artery (MCA) Doppler peak 
systolic velocity (PSV) measurements are used to 
correlate reliably with fetal anaemia. The sensitivity 
 Table 6.2 Anti-D-rhesus titration
of MCA PSV is reported at 100% with a false-positive 
rate of 12% (Figure 6.10).
A f etus with a raised MCA PSV has a high prob￾ability of anaemia. These cases are not common and 
the treatment should be in, or guided by, tertiary 
fetal medicine centres. Treatment options include 
delivery (if later gestation) or intrauterine transfu￾sion (IUT). Delivery of an anaemic, rapidly haemo￾lysing premature baby is a signifi cant risk and should 
not be undertaken lightly, and must take place in a 
unit where adequate neonatal expertise is available, 
and generally not be before 36–37 weeks’ gestation, 
unless there are specifi c reasons, such as no available 
expertise for IUT.
 IUT is life-saving in a severely anaemic fetus that 
is too premature for delivery to be contemplated. 
The aim is to restore haemoglobin levels, revers￾ing or preventing hydrops or death. A side effect is 
that transfusion will also suppress fetal erythropoi￾esis, which reduces the concentration of antigen￾positive cells available for haemolysis. Blood can be 99
 Anti-D level Outcome
 <4 IU/mL HDFN unlikely
 4–15 IU/mL Moderate risk of HDFN
 >15 IU/mL High risk of hydrops fetalis
 HDFN, haemolytic disease of the fetus and newborn.
 Figure 6.10 Middle cerebral artery Doppler waveform 
analysis of ( A) a fetus with anaemia secondary to rhesus 
disease demonstrating an increased peak systolic velocity 
and (B) the same fetus 48 hours following an intrauterine 
transfusion.
A
B
A
B
Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 99 04/03/2024 16:07
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 100 04/03/2024 16:07
 
Antenatal obstetric complications 
transfused into a fetus in various ways depending on 
the gestation, the site of the cord insertion and the 
clinical situation. Routes of administration include: 
• umbilical vein at the point of the cord insertion 
(ideally through the placenta and not through 
the amniotic sac) 
• intrahepatic vein 
• peritoneal cavity (not as effective but some 
blood is absorbed and this may be the only 
option, for example in early gestations) 
• fetal heart 
Once a decision has been made that the fetus is 
severely anaemic and requires a blood transfusion, 
the invasive procedure aims to ÿrst take a sample to 
conÿrm the anaemia and then infuse the blood dur￾ing a single puncture. 
Transfused blood is: 
• rhesus-D negative 
• cross-matched with a maternal sample 
• densely packed (haemoglobin usually around 
30 g/L) so that small volumes are used 
• white cell depleted and irradiated 
• screened for infection including 
cytomegalovirus 
AT DELIVERY 
If the baby is known to be anaemic or has had mul￾tiple transfusions, a neonatologist must be present at 
delivery should exchange transfusion be required. 
Blood must therefore always be ready for the deliv￾ery. All babies born to rhesus-negative individuals 
should have cord blood taken at delivery for a blood 
count, blood group and indirect Coombs test. 
ABO INCOMPATIBILITY 
ABO blood group isoimmunization may occur when 
the mother is blood group O and the baby is blood 
group A or B. Anti-A and anti-B antibodies are pres￾ent in the maternal circulation naturally, usually sec￾ondary to sensitization against A or B substances in 
food or bacteria. This means that ABO incompatibility 
may occur in a ÿrst pregnancy. In this situation, anti-A 
or anti-B antibodies may pass to the fetal circulation, 
causing fetal haemolysis and anaemia. However, most 
anti-A and anti-B antibodies are mainly IgMs that do 
KEY LEARNING POINTS 
˜ Rhesus disease gets worse with successive 
pregnancies. 
˜ If the father of the fetus is rhesus negative, the 
fetus cannot be rhesus positive. 
˜ If the father of the fetus is rhesus positive, he 
may be a heterozygote (50% likelihood that the 
baby is D-rhesus positive) or a homozygote 
(100% likelihood). 
˜ Non-invasive prenatal testing for fetal D 
genotype in pregnancy is now recommended for 
risk assessment of the fetus for HDFN. 
˜ Anti-D is given only as prophylaxis and is useless 
once sensitization has occurred. 
˜ Prenatal diagnosis for karyotype or attempts at 
determining fetal blood group by invasive testing 
(e.g. chorion villus sampling) may make the 
antibody levels higher in those who are already 
sensitized. 
not cross the placenta. In addition, A and B antigens 
are not fully developed in the fetus. Therefore, ABO 
incompatibility generally causes mild haemolytic dis￾ease of the baby, but may sometimes explain unex￾pected jaundice in an otherwise healthy term infant. 
NEW DEVELOPMENTS 
When a fetus is at risk of HDFN in a sensitized 
rhesus-negative mother, the genotype of the fetus 
is very important. When the father is heterozygous 
for rhesus-D, there is a 50% chance that the fetus 
will be rhesus positive. In this situation, it is impor￾tant to establish the fetal blood group to determine 
whether or not the baby is at risk. This can now be 
done non-invasively by examining cffDNA present 
in a maternal blood sample. Accuracies close to 100% 
are reported for rhesus genotyping. 
A similar approach can be used to prevent unnec￾essary prophylaxis. Currently in the UK, all rhe￾sus-negative pregnant women are offered anti-D. 
However, the disadvantage of this approach is that 
approximately 40% of D-negative people who are 
carrying a rhesus-negative child will be given rou￾tine prophylactic anti-D unnecessarily. This equates 
to approximately 40,000 pregnant women in the UK 
who are receiving prophylaxis unnecessarily each 100 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 101 04/03/2024 16:07
 
 
 
 
 
 
Self-assessment 
year. Fetal blood group genotyping using cffDNA 
from maternal blood samples taken between 16 
and 25 weeks’ gestation have made it possible to 
determine the fetal rhesus genotype type. Routine 
fetal rhesus typing for all rhesus-negative pregnant 
women has been introduced in Denmark and the 
Netherlands to allow selective use of anti-D, and is 
being widely adopted in the UK. 
FURTHER READING 
Qureshi H, Massey E, Kirwan D, et al. ( 2014). BCSH 
guideline for the use of anti-D immunoglobulin 
for the prevention of haemolytic disease of the 
fetus and newborn. Transfusion Medicine , 24: 8–20. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/tme.12091. 
RCOG (1999). Green-top guideline No 20b: The 
management of breech presentation. https:// 
www.rcog.org.uk/globalassets/documents/ 
guidelines/gtg-no-20b-breech-presentation.pdf. 
RCOG (2006). Green-top guideline No 20a: 
External cephalic version and reducing the 
incidence of breech presentation. https://www. 
rcog.org.uk/globalassets/documents/guidelines/ 
gt20aexternalcephalicversion.pdf.
 RCOG (2015). Green-top guideline No 37a: 
Reducing the risk of venous thromboembolism 
during pregnancy and the puerperium. https:// 
www.rcog.org.uk/globalassets/documents/ 
guidelines/gtg-37a.pdf. 
SELF-ASSESSMENT 
For interactive SBAs and EMQs relating to this chapter, visit www.routledge.com/cw/mccarthy. 
CASE HISTORY 
The community midwife refers a 25-year-old woman 
in her second pregnancy to the antenatal clinic at 37 
weeks’ gestation. Clinical examination has shown the 
fetus to be in a breech position. An ultrasound scan con￾ÿrms an extended breech presentation. You are asked to 
counsel this woman as to the possible options that are 
available for her management.
 A What are the available options?
 B What are the advantages and risks of each option?
 ANSWERS
 A There are three available management options that 
need to be discussed with this woman. These are: 
1. elective caesarean section 
2. ECV 
3. vaginal breech delivery
 B First, a brief history should be taken to determine 
whether there are any factors in the history that 
would be a contraindication to vaginal breech 
delivery or ECV. 
The Term Breech Trial demonstrated that there was 
reduction in the perinatal mortality and morbidity with 
elective caesarean section over vaginal breech delivery. 
However, there are some factors that would increase and 
decrease the strength of the recommendation for a cae￾sarean section, such as previous obstetric history and 
the presence of a large or small baby (an ultrasound will 
help with this). 
ECV is carried out at 36–37 weeks’ gestation, but 
can be done as far as in early labour (with intact mem￾branes). The procedure has been shown to reduce the 
number of caesarean sections due to breech presen￾tation. Contraindications to ECV are placenta praevia, 
oligohydramnios, previous caesarean section, multiple 
gestation and pre-eclampsia. The risks of the procedure, 
which need to be outlined, are placental abruption, pre￾mature rupture of the membranes, cord accident, trans￾placental haemorrhage and fetal bradycardia. 
Vaginal breech delivery is still an acceptable option if 
the mother understands the increased risks to the fetus. 
There are a number of factors that increase the likelihood 
of a successful vaginal beech delivery: normal sized 
baby, ˜exed neck, multiparous, deeply engaged breech 
and positive mental attitude of the woman. 
101 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 103 04/03/2024 16:07
7 
Multiple pregnancy 
ASMA KHALIL 
Introduction 103 Antenatal care 110 
Epidemiology 103 Delivery 113 
Aetiology 104 Higher-order multiples 115 
Antenatal care in the presence of a Further reading 115 
multiple pregnancy 104 Self-assessment 116 
Complications of multiple pregnancy 105 
 Learning Objectives 
• Understand the classiÿcation of multiple pregnancies. 
• Understand the risk factors for multiple pregnancies and why the prevalence has increased. 
• Understand the increased complications that occur in multiple pregnancies. 
• Understand the antenatal care in the presence of a multiple pregnancy. 
INTRODUCTION 
Up until 2014, the rates of multiple pregnancies were 
reported to be rising globally, such that 1 in every 29 
births in the USA was a twin birth. This high preva￾lence of multiple pregnancy was attributed predomi￾nantly to advancing age in the pregnant population 
and increasing use of assisted fertility techniques, 
with rates of multiple pregnancy being directly pro￾portional to the number of embryos transferred. 
Recently, the rates of multiple births have shown a 
declining trend owing to advancement in in vitro 
fertilization (IVF) techniques and guidelines from 
regulatory bodies advising single embryo transfer. 
Regardless of chorionicity and amnionicity, compli￾cations in multiple pregnancies are higher than for 
singleton pregnancies and include preterm birth, 
fetal growth restriction (FGR), cerebral palsy and 
stillbirth. The maternal risks are also increased and 
include hypertensive and thromboembolic disease 
and antepartum and post-partum haemorrhage. 
EPIDEMIOLOGY 
The incidence of multiple pregnancy varies world￾wide, with rates varying from approximately 6 per 
1,000 births in Japan to rates of approximately 40 
per 1,000 births in Nigeria. In the UK, the rates of 
multiple pregnancy are approximately 16 per 1,000 
births. The majority (97–99%) of these are twin 
pregnancies, with the remainder being predomi￾nantly triplet pregnancies. Increasing maternal age 
is one of the key risk factors for multiple pregnancy, 
with multiple pregnancy occurring in approximately 
1˜in 10 individuals aged over 45 giving birth in the 
UK. Assisted conception is also responsible for the 
103 
10.1201/9781003196112-7 ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 104 04/03/2024 16:07
 
Multiple pregnancy 
1,000 twins 
700 300 
Dizygotic Monozygotic 
100 
Dichorionic 200
Monochorionic 
700 100 190 10 DCDA DCDA MCDA Monoamniotic 
350 350 100 190 9 1 
Different Same Same Same Non-conjoined Conjoined sex sex sex sex 
 Figure 7.1 Incidence of monozygotic and dizygotic 
twin pregnancies. (DCDA, dichorionic diamniotic; MCDA, 
monochorionic diamniotic.) 
increasing incidence of multiple pregnancies, with 
approximately one in ÿve successful IVF procedures 
resulting in multiple pregnancy. In the USA, over 
one-third of twin pregnancies and approximately 
80% of triplet (and higher order) pregnancies occur 
following treatment for infertility. Figure 7.1 shows 
the relative contributions of the different types 
of twins to a hypothetical random selection of 1,000 
twin pairs. 
AETIOLOGY 
Multiple pregnancy may be classiÿed according to: 
• number of fetuses – twins, triplets, quadruplets, 
etc. 
• number of fertilized eggs – zygosity 
• number of placentae – chorionicity 
• number of amniotic cavities – amnionicity 
Twin pregnancy may be dizygotic (70%) or mono￾zygotic (30%). Dizygotic twins (non-identical) occur 
from ovulation and subsequent fertilization of two 
oocytes. This results in dichorionic diamniotic twins, 
where each fetus has its own placenta and amniotic 
cavity. Although they always have two functionally 
separate placentae (dichorionic), the placentae can 
become anatomically fused together and appear to 
the naked eye as a single placental mass. They always 
have separate amniotic cavities (diamniotic) and the 
two cavities are separated by a thick three-layer 
Chorion 
Amnion 
Lambda 
sign 
Dichorionic 
diamniotic
 Figure 7.2 Schematic diagram showing chorionicity in 
dichorionic and monochorionic twin pregnancies. In the 
dichorionic type, there is an extension of placental tissue 
into the base of the inter-twin membrane, forming the 
lambda sign, whereas in monochorionic, the inter-twin 
membrane is thin and has no extension of the chorionic 
tissue, forming the ‘T’ sign. 
membrane (fused chorion in the middle with amnion 
on either side; Figure 7.2). The fetuses can be either 
same-sex or different-sex pairings.
 Monozygotic (identical) pregnancies result from 
fertilization of a single ovum with subsequent divi￾sion of the zygote. If the zygote splits shortly after 
fertilization, the twins will each have a separate 
placenta and thus will be dichorionic diamniotic. 
Monochorionic diamniotic (20%) pregnancies occur 
when division of the zygote occurs between days 4 
and 8 postfertilization. The vast majority of monocho￾rionic twins have two amniotic cavities (diamniotic) 
but the dividing membrane is thin, as it consists of a 
single layer of amnion alone (see Figure 7.2). 
Monochorionic monoamniotic (1%) pregnancy 
occurs when division occurs between days 8 and 12 
postfertilization and, ÿnally, conjoined twins occur 
when division of the zygote happens after day 13. 
Amnion 
T sign 
Monochorionic 
diamniotic 
ANTENATAL CARE IN THE 
PRESENCE OF A MULTIPLE 
PREGNANCY 
According to the National Institute for Health and 
Care Excellence (NICE) guidelines, treatment and 
care should take into account a pregnant woman’s 
needs and preferences. 
Owing to an increased risk of pregnancy compli￾cations, pregnant women with multiple pregnancies 104 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 105 04/03/2024 16:07
Complications of multiple pregnancy 
that involve a shared amnion should be offered indi￾vidualized care in a tertiary-level fetal medicine unit. 
This care should involve the following: 
• Pregnant women with multiple pregnancies 
should be cared for by a multidisciplinary 
team consisting of a core team of named 
specialist obstetricians, specialist midwives and 
ultrasonographers. 
• Ultrasound assessment is recommended to 
date the pregnancy, to perform ÿrst trimester 
screening and to monitor growth. Abdominal 
palpation or symphysis–fundal height 
measurements should not be used to detect or 
predict FGR. 
Those managing twin pregnancies should remem￾ber the following: 
• Gestation and mode of delivery depends on the 
type of multiple pregnancy. 
• Pregnant women with multiple pregnancies 
should receive the same advice about diet, 
lifestyle and nutritional supplements as in 
routine antenatal care. 
• Pregnant women with multiple pregnancies 
are at higher risk of anaemia than those 
with singleton pregnancies and a full blood 
count should be checked at 20 and 28 weeks’ 
gestation and supplementation with iron, folic 
acid or vitamin B12 initiated. 
• There is no beneÿt in using untargeted 
administration of corticosteroids. Instead, 
corticosteroids should be administered when 
preterm delivery (<34 weeks’ gestation) is 
indicated or suspected. 
COMPLICATIONS OF MULTIPLE 
PREGNANCY 
All of the physiological changes of pregnancy, 
including increased cardiac output, volume expan￾sion, relative haemodilution, diaphragmatic splint￾ing, weight gain and lordosis, are exaggerated in 
multiple gestations. This results in much greater 
stresses being placed on maternal reserves. The 
‘minor’ symptoms of pregnancy may be exaggerated, 
such as nausea, vomiting and heartburn. However, 
for individuals with pre-existing health problems, 
such as cardiac disease, a multiple pregnancy may 
substantially increase their risk of morbidity. 
One of the most common complications of dichori￾onic diamniotic pregnancies (with signiÿcant perina￾tal morbidity as well as mortality) is preterm delivery, 
either spontaneous or iatrogenic due to the occurrence 
of other adverse pregnancy complications such as pre￾eclampsia or FGR (Figure 7.3). Overall, approximately 
60% of twin pregnancies result in spontaneous birth 
before 37 weeks’ gestation. In 15% of cases, delivery 
will be very preterm (before 32 weeks of gestation). For 
monochorionic twins, the chance of preterm delivery 
is increased even further, with 12% born before viabil￾ity and 25% delivering between 24 and 32 weeks. With 
two or more babies resulting from each delivery, mul￾tiple gestations account for 20–25% of neonatal inten￾sive care unit admissions. Unfortunately, screening 
tools for preterm labour (such as home uterine activ￾ity monitoring, serial cervical length assessment, fetal 
ÿbronectin, etc.) have poor predictive performance. 
Therefore, pregnant women should be educated about 
the symptoms and signs of preterm labour so that 
they can seek timely care and so appropriate inter￾vention, such as antenatal corticosteroids and magne￾sium sulphate for neuroprotection, can be instituted. 
In addition to the other complications of twin preg￾nancy described earlier, monochorionic diamniotic 
pregnancies are also at risk of complications spe￾ciÿc to monochorionicity – commonly twin-to-twin 
% 
20 24 28 32 36 40 44 
Gestation (weeks) 
Singleton Twin Triplet 
Figure 7.3 Gestational age distribution at delivery of 
singleton, twin and triplet pregnancies. 105 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 106 04/03/2024 16:07
 
 
Multiple pregnancy 
transfusion syndrome (TTTS) and, more rarely, twin 
anaemia–polycythaemia sequence (TAPS). 
PERINATAL MORTALITY 
Overall perinatal mortality for monochorionic twins 
is estimated to be 30 per 1,000 (compared with 3.8 
per 1,000 among dichorionic twins). The overall 
infant mortality rate for twins is approximately 5.5 
times higher than for singletons, mainly as a result of 
extreme prematurity. The survival at any given ges￾tation is similar for singletons and multiple pregnan￾cies. The stillbirth rate is 12 per 1,000 twin births and 
31 per 1,000 triplet births. This compares with about 
5 in 1,000 singleton pregnancies. With the increas￾ing use of early pregnancy scanning, it has been rec￾ognized that up to 25% of twins may suffer an early 
demise and subsequently ‘vanish’ well before they 
would have previously been detected. After the ÿrst 
trimester, the intrauterine death of one fetus in a twin 
pregnancy may be associated with a poor outcome for 
the remaining co-twin. Maternal complications such 
as disseminated intravascular coagulation have been 
reported, but the incidence of this appears to be very 
low. In dichorionic twins, the second or third trimes￾ter intrauterine death of one fetus may be associated 
with the onset of labour, although, in most cases, the 
pregnancy would continue uneventfully and result 
in delivery at term. By contrast, the fetal death of one 
twin in monochorionic twins may result in immedi￾ate complications in the survivor. These include death 
(15% risk) or brain damage (30% risk) with subse￾quent neurodevelopmental handicap. Acute hypo￾tensive episodes, secondary to placental vascular 
anastomoses with resultant haemodynamic volume 
shifts and acute release of vasoactive substances into 
the survivor’s circulation, have been implicated. 
FETAL GROWTH RESTRICTION 
FGR in multiple pregnancies can be attributed to 
placental insufÿciency (dichorionic twins) or to 
unequal placental sharing with unequal blood ˛ow 
across placental vascular anastomoses (monochori￾onic twins). Compared with singletons, the risk of 
FGR is higher in each individual twin alone and is 
substantially raised in the pregnancy as a whole. For 
growth-restricted fetuses, the antenatal care focuses 
on prediction of the severity of impaired fetal oxy￾genation and determining the appropriate time for 
delivery. This can be reasonably achieved by careful 
and systematic ultrasonographic assessment of fetal 
growth velocity and fetal Doppler assessments such 
as umbilical artery, middle cerebral artery and duc￾tus venosus (DV) studies. In singletons, this is a bal￾ance between the relative risks of intrauterine death 
and the risk of neonatal death or handicap from 
elective iatrogenic preterm delivery. The situation 
is much more complicated in twin pregnancies. The 
potential beneÿt of expectant management or elec￾tive delivery for the small fetus must also be weighed 
against the risk of the same policy for the normally 
grown co-twin. In a dichorionic pregnancy, each 
fetus runs twice the risk of low birthweight and there 
is a 25% chance that at least one of the fetuses will 
be small for gestational age. The chance of subopti￾mal fetal growth for monochorionic twins is almost 
double that for dichorionic twins. In dichorionic twin 
pregnancies where one fetus has growth restriction, 
elective preterm delivery may lead to iatrogenic com￾plications of prematurity in the previously healthy 
co-twin. In general, delivery should be avoided 
before 28–30 weeks’ gestation, even if there is evi￾dence of imminent intrauterine death of the smaller 
twin; however, this may not be applicable in the 
management of monochorionic twins. 
The death of one of a monochorionic twin pair 
may result in either death or handicap of the co-twin 
because of acute hypotension secondary to placental 
vascular anastomoses between the two circulations. 
As the damage potentially happens at the moment of 
death of the ÿrst twin, the timing of delivery may be a 
very difÿcult decision. Below 30 weeks’ gestation, the 
aim is to prolong the pregnancy as far as possible with￾out risking the death of the growth-restricted twin. 
COMPLICATIONS UNIQUE 
TO MONOCHORIONIC TWIN 
PREGNANCIES 
TWIN-TO-TWIN TRANSFUSION 
SYNDROME 
Unique to monochorionic pregnancy is a complication 
involving the development of abnormal unbalanced 
vascular anastomoses leading to the development of 106 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 107 04/03/2024 16:07
 
Complications of multiple pregnancy 
Membranes 
folded around 
the donor twin 
Normal monochorionic twins Twin-to-Twin Transfusion Syndrome 
AV 
AV 
AV 
TTTS. Although vascular connections are found in 
nearly all monochorionic twins (Figure 7.4), approx￾imately 10–15% of monochorionic diamniotic preg￾nancies and 5% of monoamniotic pregnancies will 
subsequently develop TTTS. Four types of vascular 
Figure 7.4 Placental injection of a typical uncomplicated 
monochorionic diamniotic placenta showing arteriov￾enous (AV) anastomosis. There appears to be equal 
sharing of the placental territory and the twins delivered 
at 36 weeks. 
connections have been identiÿed in monochorionic 
pregnancies: arteriovenous (AV), venoarterial, arte￾rioarterial (AA) and venovenous. 
If the connections are unbalanced, with more 
AV connections occurring in one direction than the 
other, alterations in the hydrostatic and osmotic 
forces occur, resulting in the manifestations seen in 
TTTS. An equal number of bidirectional anastomo￾ses results in balanced connections, and TTTS does 
not occur under these circumstances. AA anasto￾moses are protective against the development of 
TTTS. 
TTTS may be diagnosed and graded in severity 
according to the widely accepted Quintero stag￾ing system, which is based on ultrasonographic 
assessment: 
• Stage I: Oligohydramnios and polyhydramnios 
sequence, and the bladder of the donor twin is 
visible. Doppler assessments in both twins are 
normal. Figure 7.5 shows a schematic diagram 
of stage I TTTS. 
• Stage II: Oligohydramnios and polyhydramnios 
sequence, but the bladder of the donor is not 
visualized. Doppler assessments in both twins 
are normal. 
• Stage III: Oligohydramnios and polyhydramnios 
sequence, non-visualized bladder and 
abnormal Doppler assessments. There is 
absent/reversed end-diastolic velocity in the 
umbilical artery, reversed ˛ow in a-wave of 
the DV or pulsatile ˛ow in the umbilical vein 
in either fetus. 
Figure 7.5 Schematic diagram showing stage I Twin-to-Twin transfusion syndrome. 107 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 108 04/03/2024 16:07
Multiple pregnancy 
• Stage IV: One fetus or both fetuses show signs 
of hydrops. 
• Stage V: One fetus or both fetuses have died. 
Infrequently, the evolution of features of TTTS 
might not occur sequentially as described by 
Quintero staging. 
TAPS is a rarer chronic form of TTTS in which a 
large inter-twin haemoglobin difference occurs but 
the oligohydramnios polyhydramnios sequence that 
is observed with TTTS is not seen. It is thought to 
occur from residual small (<1 mm) unidirectional AV 
anastomoses without accompanying AA anastomo￾ses. TAPS may occur spontaneously (3%) or more fre￾quently after laser surgery for TTTS (13%). The small 
• Dating, labelling, chorionicity
• Screening for trisomy 21
16 - and 18-week scan
 • Fetal growth, DVP
 • UA-PI
22 weeks and beyond
 • Fetal growth, DVP
 • UA-PI, MCA-PSV
20-week scan
 • Detailed anatomy, biometry, DVP
 • UA-PI, MCA-PSV
 • Cervical length
11–14 weeks
16 weeks
18 weeks
20 weeks
22 weeks
24 weeks
26 weeks
28 weeks
30 weeks
32 weeks
34 weeks
36 weeks
Figure 7.6 ISUOG recommended ultrasound 
monitoring pathway for monochorionic twin pregnancies. 
(DVP, deepest vertical pocket; MCA-PSV, middle 
cerebral artery peak systolic velocity; UA-PI, umbilical 
artery pulsatility index.) 
residual anastomoses lead to gradual development of 
anaemia in one twin and polycythaemia in the other 
twin. As the vessels are small, this allows haemo￾dynamic compensation, which is thought to be why 
the characteristic oligohydramnios polyhydramnios 
pattern does not occur. Severe polycythaemia can 
occur, leading to fetal and placental thrombosis and 
hydrops fetalis in the anaemic twin. Rarely, mirror 
syndrome – the combination of fetal hydrops and 
maternal pre-eclampsia – has been reported. 
Serial ultrasound is recommended to assess 
growth in multiple pregnancies. According to the 
International Society of Ultrasound in Obstetrics 
and Gynecology (ISUOG) guidelines on multiple 
pregnancy, all monochorionic pregnancies must 
have 2-weekly ultrasound monitoring, starting from 
16 weeks for early detection of complications such as 
TTTS, TAPS and selective FGR (Figure 7.6), thereby 
enabling early intervention to optimize outcomes. 
The risk of developing TTTS in monochorionic twins 
reduces after 26 weeks. Likewise, dichorionic twin 
pregnancies must have monthly growth scans to 
detect discordant growth (Figure 7.7). 
Treatment of twin-to-twin transfusion 
syndrome 
When TTTS is suspected or diagnosed, a referral 
should be made to a tertiary maternal fetal unit. 
Figure 7.7 ISUOG recommended ultrasound monitoring 
pathway for uncomplicated dichorionic twin pregnancies. 
11–14 weeks 
20–22 weeks 
24–26 weeks 
28–30 weeks 
32–34 weeks 
36–37 weeks 
Delivery 
• Dating, labelling,
• Chorionicity
• Screening for trisomy 21
• Detailed anatomy
• Biometry
• Amniotic fluid volume
• Cervical length
• Assessment of fetal growth
• Amniotic fluid volume
• Fetal Doppler
108 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 109 04/03/2024 16:07
 
Complications of multiple pregnancy 
When TTTS is conÿrmed, management options 
include expectant management, fetoscopic laser 
ablation of vascular anastomoses, amnioreduction, 
septostomy and selective feticide. Fetoscopic laser 
ablation is now generally considered the deÿnitive 
treatment of severe (deÿned as Quintero stage II or 
above) TTTS between 16 and 26 weeks’ gestation. 
Above 26 weeks, delivery may be considered. These 
recommendations are based on the results of a meta￾analysis that demonstrated that fetuses undergoing 
laser ablation rather than amnioreduction were twice 
as likely to survive and had an 80% reduction in neu￾rological morbidity (overall survival odds ratio (OR) 
2.04, 95% conÿdence interval (CI) 1.52–2.76; neonatal 
death OR 0.24, 95% CI 0.15–0.40; and neurological 
morbidity OR 0.20, 95% CI 0.12–0.33). 
The procedure is performed under local anaesthetic 
with intravenous sedation, with regional anaesthesia 
or occasionally under general anaesthesia. Under 
ultrasound guidance, a 2–3-mm diameter fetoscope 
is introduced into the amniotic cavity of the recipient 
twin. The location of the dividing twin membrane 
between the two amniotic cavities at the placental 
interface and the placental insertions of the umbili￾cal cords are visualized. AV anastomoses are ablated 
using laser energy. Following the laser therapy, the 
fetoscope is removed and an amnioreduction is per￾formed until the amniotic ˛uid volume appears nor￾mal by ultrasound assessment. 
TWIN ANAEMIA–POLYCYTHAEMIA 
SEQUENCE 
TAPS is another unique but rare complication of 
monochorionic pregnancies. TAPS is a form of slow 
chronic transfusion that is believed to occur via small 
(<1 mm) AV anastomoses and results in highly dis￾cordant haemoglobin concentrations in the twin pair 
(Figure 7.8). The donor twin becomes anaemic while 
the recipient twin suffers from polycythaemia. TAPS 
can occur spontaneously (up to 3% of cases) or could 
be iatrogenic after laser therapy (up to 13% of cases). 
Doppler assessment of fetal MCA PSV (Middle 
cerebral artery Peak systolic velocity) is valuable 
for antenatal diagnosis of TAPS. The management 
options for TAPS include expectant management, 
early delivery, laser therapy, intrauterine transfusion 
of the anaemic twin with/without partial exchange 
Small 
arteriovenous 
anasomosis 
Recipient twin Donor twin 
Shared 
placenta 
Figure 7.8 Twin anaemia–polycythaemia sequence. 
Schematic diagram showing a plethoric polycythaemic twin 
and the pale anaemic twin. Note the small arteriovenous 
anastomosis supplying the polycythaemic twin. 
transfusion of the polycythaemic twin. The choice 
would depend on gestational age at diagnosis, stage 
of TAPS, the pregnant woman’s preference and tech￾nical feasibility of intrauterine therapy. 
TWIN REVERSED ARTERIAL 
PERFUSION 
Twin reversed arterial perfusion (TRAP) sequence or 
acardiac twin (Figure 7.9) is another rare complica￾tion of monochorionic placentation, which comprises 
a twin with an absent or a non-functional heart, per￾fused in a retrograde manner by the normal (pump) 
twin through an AA anastomosis. Historically, the 
prevalence of TRAP sequence has been reported to 
be about 1% of monozygotic twins. The pump twin 
is subjected to a hyperdynamic circulation, which 
eventually may result in progressive high output 
cardiac failure and in utero demise. Studies report 
that, in nearly a third to a half of pregnancies with 
TRAP sequence, the pump twins die in utero if left 
untreated. Therefore, various intrauterine proce￾dures to arrest the circulation of the acardiac twin 
have been tried, ranging from cord occlusion using 109 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 110 04/03/2024 16:07
Multiple pregnancy 
Acardiac twin 
Normal ‘pump’ missing upper 
twin body 
Supply from Shared pump twin to placenta TRAP twin 
Figure 7.9 Schematic diagram showing a normally 
formed pump twin with a twin reversed arterial perfusion 
(TRAP) twin. 
coils or ligation to fetoscopic procedures that coag￾ulate the cord supplying the acardiac twin using 
monopolar or bipolar diathermy and coagulation 
of placental anastomosis using laser. The optimum 
timing of such interventions remains undeÿned. 
Traditionally, fetal interventions were preferred after 
16 weeks of gestation due to the reported increased 
risk of fetal loss and talipes equinovarus with early 
amniocentesis performed before obliteration of the 
coelomic cavity. A few studies have suggested con￾servative management with delayed intervention 
after 16 weeks if there is development of poor prog￾nostic markers, such as rapid growth of the acardiac 
twin (estimated weight >50% of the pump twin), or 
development of features of cardiac failure or hyper￾dynamic circulation in the pump twin. 
MONOCHORIONIC MONOAMNIOTIC 
TWIN PREGNANCY 
Monoamniotic twin pregnancies result from divi￾sion of a single fertilized oocyte. The incidence of 
monoamniotic twins is approximately 1 in 10,000 
pregnancies. It is the least common pattern of pla￾centation but is associated with high morbidity and 
mortality due to the high rate of perinatal mortality 
that occurs secondary to cord accidents resulting in 
fetal loss or neurological morbidity. Monochorionic 
monoamniotic (MCMA) twins have an increased 
risk of congenital anomalies including neural tube 
defects and abdominal wall and urinary tract malfor￾mations. Even though the excess fetal loss reported 
in MCMA twin pregnancies was believed to be sec￾ondary to cord entanglement, the majority is related 
to fetal abnormalities. Cord entanglement is pres￾ent in nearly all MCMA twin pregnancies (Figure 
7.10). Discordant birthweight affects approximately 
20% of surviving monoamniotic twin pairs without 
congenital anomalies. As a result, close surveillance 
with ultrasound is essential. MCMA pregnancies 
are monitored closely with antenatal fetal surveil￾lance and delivery by caesarean section generally 
at 32–34 weeks’ gestation. The ideal method for 
surveillance (whether in- or outpatient) is unclear. 
In some countries, patients are hospitalized from 
28 weeks’ gestation and fetal heart auscultation is 
performed several times daily using cardiotocogra￾phy in an effort to detect signs of cord compression. 
However, there is an absence of evidence regarding 
the superiority of any method of surveillance over 
another. Perinatal mortality occurs in approximately 
20% of fetuses and infants. 
ANTENATAL CARE 
The NICE guidelines recommend that pregnant 
women with uncomplicated dichorionic twin preg￾nancies be offered at least eight antenatal appoint￾ments with a healthcare professional from the core 
team. Table 7.1 provides an overview of care for 
different types of multiple pregnancies, as recom￾mended by NICE 2019 guidelines. Routine antena￾tal care for all pregnant women involves screening 
for hypertension and gestational diabetes. These 
conditions occur more frequently in twin pregnan￾cies than in singleton pregnancies and there is also 
a higher risk of other problems (such as antepartum 
haemorrhage and thromboembolic disease); how￾ever, the management is the same as for a single￾ton. Owing to the increased fetoplacental demand 110 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 111 04/03/2024 16:07
 
2. determine chorionicity
 3. screen for Down syndrome
 4. label the fetuses 
 
Antenatal care 
Fused
placenta
A B 
Chorion Amnion
Figure 7.10 Monochorionic monoamniotic twin pregnancy. (A) Schematic diagram of a monochorionic monoamniotic 
twin pregnancy with cord entanglement. (B) Cord entanglement was conÿrmed at the time of caesarean delivery at 33 
weeks. 
for iron and folic acid, many would recommend 
routine (as opposed to selective) supplementation 
in multiple pregnancies. Minor symptoms of preg￾nancy are more common, but management is again 
unchanged compared to singletons. 
SCREENING IN MULTIPLE 
PREGNANCY 
Pregnant women with multiple pregnancy should 
be offered a ÿrst trimester scan when the crown– 
rump length (CRL) measures 45–84 mm, which 
equates to approximately 11 weeks 0 days to 13 
weeks 6 days. The purpose of this is fourfold, 
namely to:
1. accurately estimate gestational age 
Gestational age is assessed by measuring the 
CRL. In the case of discrepant CRL, generally the 
larger CRL is used to avoid underestimating FGR. 
Pregnancies conceived by assisted reproductive tech￾nology should be dated using the conception date. 
Chorionicity is determined by assessing the num￾ber of placental masses and assessing the lambda 
or T-sign and membrane thickness (see Figure 7.2). 
At this stage, the fetuses are mapped and it is docu￾mented clearly which fetus is where to ensure con￾sistency with future scans throughout pregnancy; 
for example, triplet two maternal upper right side. 
With dichorionic pregnancies, the risk of Down syn￾drome is calculated for each baby. With monocho￾rionic pregnancies, the risk of Down syndrome is 
calculated for the pregnancy as a whole. Assessment 
of the a-wave in the DV at 11–13 weeks’ gestation 
may help identify monochorionic pregnancies at 
risk of severe TTTS, as reversed a-wave is associated 
with an increased risk of developing severe TTTS, 111 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 112 04/03/2024 16:07
Multiple pregnancy Table 7.1 An overview of care for different types of multiple pregnancies, as recommended by NICE 2019 guidelines 
Care 
Dichorionic diamniotic
twins 
Monochorionic
diamniotic twins 
Monochorionic
monoamniotic
twins 
Trichorionic 
trimniotic triplets 
Dichorionic or
monochorionic
triamniotic triplets
Recommended
number of antenatal
appointments 
At least eight antenatal
appointments 
At least 11 antenatal
appointments 
Individualized
care, consultant 
led 
At least nine
antenatal
appointments 
At least 11 antenatal
appointments 
Antenatal care Specialist team Specialist team Specialist team Specialist team Specialist team 
Timing of delivery Offer planned birth at 37 Offer planned birth at 36 Offer planned birth Offer planned birth 
weeks weeks at 32–33 weeks at 35 weeks 
Planned vaginal birth and Planned vaginal birth Offer a caesarean Offer a caesarean 
planned caesarean section and planned caesarean section to section to women
are both safe choices for section are both safe women with a with a triplet 
them and their babies if the choices for them and monochorionic pregnancy 
pregnancy remains their babies if the monoamniotic
uncomplicated and has pregnancy remains twin pregnancy 
progressed beyond 32 uncomplicated and has
weeks, the ÿrst baby is in a progressed beyond 32 
cephalic (head-ÿ rst) weeks, the ÿrst baby is 
presentation and there is no in a cephalic (head-ÿrst) 
signiÿcant size discordance presentation and there 
between the twins is no signiÿcant size 
discordance between 
the twins 
Individualized plan
for delivery 
Mode of delivery Offer a caesarean 
section to women
with a triplet
pregnancy 
112 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 113 04/03/2024 16:07
 
 
Delivery 
as well as other complications including aneuploidy. 
However, due to high false-positive rates, this is not 
widely advocated or must be interpreted with cau￾tion. First-trimester ultrasound markers have been 
found to be poor predictors of TTTS, selective FGR 
and intrauterine demise in monochorionic twin 
pregnancy. Both amniocentesis and chorion villous 
sampling (CVS) can be performed in twin pregnan￾cies, but, in dichorionic pregnancies, CVS is the pre￾ferred method for prenatal diagnosis, as it provides 
ÿrst-trimester diagnosis and the possibility of safer, 
earlier, selective termination if needed. 
ANOMALY SCAN 
Fetuses of multiple pregnancies have higher rates 
of congenital anomalies than singleton fetuses. 
Monozygotic twins are two or three times more likely 
to have structural defects than dizygotic twins or sin￾gleton fetuses. These include midline anomalies such 
as anencephaly and holoprosencephaly. In general, 
only one fetus is affected by the congenital malforma￾tions, should they occur. In 5–20% of cases, the defect 
is present in both twins. Multiple gestations with an 
abnormality in one fetus can be managed expectantly 
or by selective fetocide of the affected twin. In cases 
when the abnormality is non-lethal but may well 
result in disability, the parents may need to decide 
whether the potential burden of a disabled child 
outweighs the risk of loss of the normal twin from 
fetocide-related complications, which occur after 
5–10% of procedures. In cases when the abnormality 
is lethal, it may be best to avoid such risk to the nor￾mal fetus, unless the condition itself threatens the 
survival of the normal twin. Anencephaly is a good 
example of a lethal abnormality that can threaten the 
survival of the normal twin. At least 50% of preg￾nancies affected by anencephaly are complicated by 
polyhydramnios, which can lead to the spontaneous 
preterm delivery of both babies. 
Fetocide in monochorionic pregnancies carries 
increased risk and requires a more invasive tech￾nique, such as cord occlusion/intrafetal laser, with 
such techniques associated with a higher complica￾tion rate. As there are potential vascular anastomo￾ses between the two fetal circulations, intracardiac 
injections cannot be employed. In twins, like in 
singletons, the risk for chromosomal abnormalities 
increases with maternal age. The rate of spontaneous 
dizygotic twinning also increases with maternal age. 
Many pregnant women undergoing assisted concep￾tion techniques (that increase the chance of dizygotic 
twinning) are also older than the mean age of the 
pregnant population. Chromosomal defects may be 
more likely in a multiple pregnancy for various rea￾sons, and couples should be counselled accordingly. 
GROWTH ASSESSMENTS 
Multiple pregnancies are at high risk of FGR. As 
a result, fetal weight should be calculated from 20 
weeks’ gestation at a maximum of 4-week intervals. 
A growth discrepancy of 25% or greater should be 
considered clinically signiÿcant, a tertiary referral 
opinion should be sought and additional monitor￾ing or delivery should be planned, depending on 
gestation. 
Other indications for a tertiary-level fetal medi￾cine opinion include discordant fetal growth, fetal 
anomaly, TRAP, TTTS or single intrauterine demise. 
DELIVERY 
A care plan should be discussed and made with the 
patient, ideally throughout pregnancy, with a clear 
delivery plan discussed and documented early in 
the third trimester. This is essential, as multiple 
pregnancies have a high prevalence of preterm 
delivery. The discussion with the patient should 
include the desired mode for delivery, the gestation 
for induction of labour if there is no spontaneous 
onset of labour, the process for delivery of twin 1 
and twin 2 including internal podalic version, the 
risk of caesarean section, complications following 
delivery including post-partum haemorrhage, the 
desire to breastfeed or not and neonatal care for the 
babies if born preterm. 
INTRAPARTUM MANAGEMENT 
General management of a patient with twin preg￾nancy in labour involves: 
• antenatal education and a pre-agreed birth plan 
• continuous fetal heart monitoring 113 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 114 04/03/2024 16:07
 
 
Multiple pregnancy 
• two neonatal resuscitation trolleys, two 
obstetricians and two paediatricians available, 
with the special care baby unit and anaesthetist 
informed well in advance of the delivery 
• analgesia, ideally in the form of an early 
epidural, to allow for internal podalic version (if 
needed) for twin 2 
• a standard oxytocin solution for augmentation 
prepared, run through an intravenous giving￾set and clearly labelled ‘for augmentation’, for 
use for delivery of the second twin 
• oxytocin infusion in anticipation of post￾partum haemorrhage 
• portable ultrasound 
With uncomplicated dichorionic diamniotic preg￾nancies, vaginal delivery is advocated, provided the 
presenting twin is cephalic. The risk of requiring 
emergency caesarean section for delivery of the sec￾ond twin following vaginal delivery of the ÿrst twin 
is approximately 4%. 
If the second twin is non-vertex, which occurs in 
about 40% of twins, a vaginal delivery can be safely 
considered. If the second twin is a breech, the mem￾branes can be ruptured once the breech is ÿxed in 
the birth canal. A breech extraction may be per￾formed if fetal distress occurs or if a footling breech is 
encountered, but this requires considerable expertise. 
Complications are less likely if the membranes are not 
ruptured until the feet are held by the operator. When 
the fetus is transverse, external cephalic version can be 
successful in more than 70% of cases. The fetal heart 
rate should be closely monitored, and ultrasound can 
be helpful to demonstrate the ÿnal position of the 
baby. If external cephalic version is unsuccessful, and 
assuming that the operator is experienced, an internal 
podalic version can be undertaken (Figure 7.11). 
Internal podalic version is performed by identify￾ing a fetal foot through intact membranes. The foot 
is grasped and pulled gently and continuously into 
the birth canal. The membranes are ruptured as late 
as possible. This procedure is easiest when the trans￾verse lie is with the back superior or posterior. If the 
back is inferior or if the limbs are not immediately 
palpable, ultrasound may help to show the operator 
where they would be found. This will minimize the 
unwanted experience of bringing down a fetal hand 
in the mistaken belief that it is a foot. 
Figure 7.11 Internal podalic version. 
Generally, with dichorionic twin pregnancies, 
delivery from 37 weeks’ gestation is advocated. 
Pregnant women with uncomplicated monocho￾rionic twin pregnancies should be offered elective 
delivery from 36 weeks’ gestation, and this should be 
performed after a course of antenatal corticosteroids 
has been given. However, this approach carries a 1.5% 
risk of late in utero death for monochorionic twins. 
114 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 115 04/03/2024 16:07
 
 
 
Further reading 
Continuing uncomplicated twin pregnancies beyond 
38 weeks’ gestation increases the risk of intrauterine 
fetal death. The indications for instrumental delivery 
of the second twin are the same as for singletons. 
HIGHER-ORDER MULTIPLES 
The incidence of spontaneous triplet pregnancy is 
1 in 6,000–8,000 births. Triplets are associated with 
high morbidity and mortality. According to UK data, 
they have an average gestation of 34 weeks at deliv￾ery, an average birthweight of 1.8 kg and a cerebral 
palsy rate of 26.7 per 1,000 live births. When per￾forming ÿrst trimester screening in monochorionic 
triplet pregnancies, the risk of Down syndrome 
should be calculated for each baby in dichorionic and 
trichorionic triplet pregnancies. NICE recommends 
that pregnant women with uncomplicated monocho￾rionic triamniotic and dichorionic triamniotic triplet 
pregnancies be offered at least 11 antenatal appoint￾ments with a healthcare professional from the core 
team. It is not recommended to prolong pregnancy 
beyond 36 weeks’ gestation. 
MULTIPLE PREGNANCY 
SUPPORT°GROUPS 
Twin pregnancies are associated with a number of 
ÿnancial, personal and social costs for families that 
continue long beyond the neonatal period. A sig￾niÿcant contribution to these costs comes from the 
increased incidence of disability, largely secondary to 
preterm delivery. Several specialized support groups 
for multiple pregnancy exist. In the UK, these include 
the Twins Trust (previously known as Twins and 
Multiple Birth Association [TAMBA]) and the Multiple 
Birth Foundation. All parents expecting twins should 
be given contact details for such resources locally. 
KEY LEARNING POINTS 
˜ Multiple pregnancies are associated 
with increased incidence of pregnancy 
complications, such as pre-eclampsia, 
gestational diabetes, anaemia and post-partum 
haemorrhage. 
˜ Preterm birth, growth restriction and stillbirth 
are key causes of the raised fetal morbidity and 
mortality associated with multiple pregnancies. 
˜ Maternal morbidity and mortality is also 
increased in multiple pregnancies. 
˜ Early ultrasound assessment is key in the 
management of multiple pregnancy, as it 
can correctly classify the type of pregnancy 
according to chorionicity and amnionicity, 
allowing risk to be stratiÿed. 
FURTHER READING 
FIGO Working Group on Good Clinical Practice in 
Maternal-Fetal Medicine (2019). Good clinical 
practice advice: Management of twin pregnancy. 
International Journal of Gynecology & Obstetrics, 
144(3): 330–337. 
Khalil A, Rodgers M, Baschat A, Bhide A, Gratacos 
E, Hecher K, et al. (2016). ISUOG Practice 
Guidelines: Role of ultrasound in twin pregnancy. 
Ultrasound in Obstetrics & Gynecology, 47(2): 
247–263. 
NICE (2019). Twin and Triplet Pregnancy. NICE 
guideline [NG137]. https://www.nice.org.uk/ 
guidance/ng137/chapter/Recommendations. 
Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists 
(2017). Green-top Guideline No 51: Management 
of monochorionic twin pregnancy. BJOG: An 
International Journal of Obstetrics & Gynaecology, 
124(1): e1–45. 
115 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 116 04/03/2024 16:07
 
 
 
 
Multiple pregnancy 
SELF-ASSESSMENT 
For interactive SBAs and EMQs relating to this chapter, visit www.routledge.com/cw/mccarthy. 
CASE HISTORY 1 
Ms B is 38 weeks’ gestation in her second pregnancy. 
This is a dichorionic diamniotic pregnancy that has been 
uncomplicated to date. Ms B presents contracting every 
5 minutes. Twin 1 (the presenting twin) is cephalic and 
twin 2 is cephalic. Her ÿrst pregnancy was a term delivery, 
delivered 11 months previously as a spontaneous vaginal 
delivery. On examination, Ms B is 6 cm dilated and both 
fetal heart recordings are reassuring. An epidural has just 
been inserted and is providing good analgesia.
 A What would you do next? 
Ms B’s waters rupture and she proceeds to have a 
spontaneous vaginal delivery. On delivering twin 1, 
the abdomen is palpated and ultrasound conÿrms 
that twin 2 is cephalic. The fetal heart rate remains 
reassuring.
 B How would you proceed? 
After 25 minutes of reassuring heart monitoring, Ms 
B is contracting once every 10 minutes. Fetal heart 
monitoring remains reassuring. 
C How would you proceed? 
The membranes surrounding twin 2 rupture. Vaginal 
examination reveals that Ms B remains fully dilated. 
However, twin 2 is now transverse with its back 
upwards. The fetal heart tracing shows prolonged 
fetal decelerations. 
D How would you proceed?
 ANSWERS
 A There is no indication to intervene in this situation. 
Ms B has laboured spontaneously and is 
progressing quickly. Fetal heart rate is reassuring. 
Allow labour to progress naturally. Continue fetal 
monitoring.
 B Again, there is no indication to intervene. Ms B has 
successfully delivered twin 1. Waiting allows the 
head of twin 2 to descend, which will increase the 
likelihood of a spontaneous vaginal delivery. 
C There are now two options. The ÿrst option would be 
to perform an amniotomy to rupture the membranes 
of twin 2, which will likely increase the frequency of 
contractions, allowing twin 2 to be delivered. The 
second option would be to start oxytocin infusion 
to try to increase the frequency of contractions 
and allow delivery of twin 2 to proceed. As the 
membranes are intact, one must be cautious with 
the use of oxytocin; therefore, the ideal option 
is to perform a vaginal examination and, when a 
contraction occurs (which will push the fetal head 
into the pelvis), perform artiÿcial rupture of the 
membranes. Oxytocin may be used at this stage to 
augment contractions. 
D This is now an obstetric emergency. Ensure senior 
obstetric help is present. There are two options 
on how to manage this situation. The ÿrst option 
is to perform internal podalic version as described 
in this chapter by performing vaginal examination; 
follow the fetal spine towards the legs and, on 
palpating a foot, apply gentle traction to the foot to 
encourage delivery of the fetus by breech extraction. 
The second option is to transfer the mother to 
the operating theatre and perform a category 1 
caesarean section. As Ms B is multiparous, internal 
podalic version and breech extraction would be 
the quickest way to deliver twin 2 and ensure a 
quick recovery for Ms B. External cephalic version 
would be a third option, but, in the presence of 
a non-reassuring fetal heart rate, this would be 
contraindicated. 
CASE HISTORY 2 
Ms S is 16 weeks’ gestation in her second pregnancy. 
This is a monochorionic diamniotic pregnancy that was 
conceived through IVF. Ms S has an ultrasound scan that 
shows twin 1 with normal growth and polyhydramnios. 
Twin 2 has oligohydramnios with no bladder visualized. 
There is reversed end-diastolic velocity in the umbilical 
artery and reversed °ow in a-wave of the DV. What is the 
diagnosis and what would your management be? 
ANSWER 
This monochorionic diamniotic pregnancy is now compli￾cated by TTTS. This is now Quintero stage III and should 
be referred to a fetal medicine unit with the capacity to 
perform laser ablation treatment as a means to prevent 
any further deterioration. 
116 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 117 04/03/2024 16:07
8 
Preterm labour 
DAVID LISSAUER 
Introduction 117 Management of preterm labour 126 
Why does preterm labour occur? 117 Management of preterm premature 
Overview of preterm labour 117 rupture of membranes 128 
Causes 121 Delivery 128 
Prediction of preterm birth 124 Further reading 129 
Prevention of preterm delivery 125 Self-assessment 130 
 Learning Objectives 
• Be aware of the extent of the problem of 
• Know about the causes of prematurity. 
• Understand the prevention and clinical 
prematurity in the UK and globally. 
management of preterm labour. 
INTRODUCTION 
Preterm labour (PTL) is the onset of labour before 
37 weeks of pregnancy. This chapter will provide an 
overview of PTL in the UK and globally. It includes 
a description of the causes, prevention and clinical 
management of PTL. 
brain volume) is associated with a larger head size 
(Figure 8.1). Each has the potential to increase the 
chance of obstructed labour and the death of both 
the mother and the baby. Consequently, evolution 
would favour the emergence of earlier delivery, 
potentially explaining why PTL is more common in 
humans than other species. 
OVERVIEW OF PRETERM 
WHY DOES PRETERM LABOUR LABOUR 
OCCUR? 
In contrast with other species, in which preterm 
delivery is uncommon, PTL and preterm deliv￾ery are relatively common in human pregnancy. 
A possible explanation lies in human evolution, 
speciÿcally involving bipedalism and encephali￾zation. Bipedalism (upright posture) is associated 
with a narrower pelvis. Encephalization (increased 
The proportion of infants born preterm varies widely 
between different countries. In the UK, 7.4% of 
births were preterm in 2020 (i.e. more than 55,000 
infants). However, this ÿgure is only 5.9% in Sweden 
and Japan, but is 10.2% in the USA (Figure 8.2). 
The countries with the highest numbers of pre￾term births are India (3,519,947; prematurity rate 
13.6%), followed by China (1,168,126; prematurity 
117 
10.1201/9781003196112-8 ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 118 04/03/2024 16:07
Preterm labour 
Australopithecus 
Brain capacity of 
400–530 mL 
Homo sapiens 
Brain capacity of 
1,200–1,600 mL
Figure 8.1 Evo ut l i
Homo erectus 
Brain capacity of 
775–975 mL 
Skull size 
comparison 
on of the human skull. 
Estimated brain volume (mL) Estimated body weight (kg) 
80 
60 
40 
20 
0 3.0 2.0 1.0 0 
Millions of years ago 
2,000 
Homo sapiens 
1,500 
Homo erectus 
1,000 Homo habilis 
Australopithecus 
500 
0 3.0 2.0 1.0 0 
Millions of years ago 
˜°°˛˝˙ˆ˙ˇ˙˘
Preterm birth rate (%) 
<5 0 850 1,700 3,400km 
5–9 
10–14 
15–20 
Data not available 
Not applicable 
Figure 8.2 Estimated preterm birth rates in 2014. (From Chawanpaiboon S, et al. (2019). Lancet Global 
Health, 7(1): E37–E46. https://doi.org/10.1016/S2214-109X(18)30451-0. With permission from Elsevier.) 118 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 119 04/03/2024 16:07
Overview of preterm labour 
0 850 1,700 3,400km
Number of preterm births 
<50,000 
50,000–99,999 
100,000–249,999 
250,000–749,999 
≥750,000
Data not available 
Not applicable 
Figure 8.3 Estimated numbers of preterm births in 2014. (From Chawanpaiboon S, et al. (2019). Lancet Global Health, 
7(1): E37–E46. https://doi.org/10.1016/S2214-109X(18)30451-0. With permission from Elsevier.) 
rate 6.9%), Nigeria (803,178; prematurity rate 11.4%) 
and Bangladesh (603,698; prematurity rate 19.1%) 
(Figure 8.3). 
Worldwide, 5 million children under 5 years of 
age died in 2020. Almost half (47%) died in the neo￾natal period, and this proportion is increasing over 
time. Prematurity is now the single leading cause of 
100
80
Babies who survived
(%, 2017 data) 60
40
20
0 22–23 24–27 28–31 32–36 37–41 42+
deaths in under-5s, with 1.1 million of the 15 mil- Gestation at birth (weeks) 
lion preterm infants dying each year. Most neona￾tal deaths are in low- and middle-income countries; 
43% are in sub-Saharan Africa and 36% are in cen￾tral and southern Asia. 
Of the births that were preterm in England and 
Wales in 2021: 
• 6% were extremely preterm (before 28 weeks) 
• 10% were very preterm (between 28 and 32 
weeks) 
• 83% were moderately preterm (between 32 and 
<37 weeks) 
With decreasing gestation, mortality increases. In 
high-income countries, a baby born at 24 weeks now 
has a 50% chance of surviving, and resuscitation 
Figure 8.4 Survival by gestational age in the UK, showing 
the high survival of infants from 24 weeks’ gestation or 
age. (Data from MBRRACE-UK (2019). Perinatal Mortality 
Surveillance Report.) 
may be considered and performed for babies as early 
as 22 or 23 weeks’ gestation (Figure 8.4). To achieve 
these impressive survival rates, these extremely 
preterm infants require neonatal intensive care for 
survival. They are often in hospital for many weeks 
or months, and many have complex medical needs. 
This may cause a great deal of stress and anxiety for 
the parents and family. Neonatal intensive care is 
also very expensive. 
Although the survival of extremely preterm 
infants has increased, the proportion with long-term 119 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 120 04/03/2024 16:07
Preterm labour 
problems has remained substantial. A follow-up of 
a national cohort of children at 6.5 years who had 
been born extremely preterm (<27 weeks’ gesta￾tional age) in Sweden found that 69% survived and 
66% of the survivors had no or mild disability, 20% 
had moderate disability and 14% had severe disabil￾ity. Cerebral palsy was identiÿed in 9.5%, blindness 
was identiÿed in 2% and hearing impairment was 
identiÿed in 2%. 
The most common impairments of extremely pre￾term infants are learning difÿculties; their risk rises 
as gestation at birth decreases, and learning dif￾ÿculties become increasingly evident during school 
years. Many children have difÿculties with motor 
function and the processing that underpins learning 
and thinking (executive processing). This manifests 
as difÿculty with ÿne motor skills, concentration, 
abstract reasoning and processing several tasks 
simultaneously. Deÿcits in working memory and 
speed of processing information underpin many of 
the difÿculties. The increase in special educational 
needs at school age with decreasing gestation is 
shown in Figure 8.5. The degree of cognitive impair￾ment remains stable through childhood (Figure 8.6). 
Children born extremely preterm have more behav￾ioural disorders then their term peers. By adult life, 
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
Proportion with SEN (log scale) 0.1
24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43
0.05
Estimated gestational age (weeks) 
120
Mean cognitive scores (95% of mean)
0 5 
2.5y 
Term 
Extremely preterm 
6y 11y 19y 
10 
Age (years) 
Cognitive scores completers 
15 20 
110 
100 
90 
80 
70 
Figure 8.6 Cognitive scores remain stable throughout 
childhood up to 19 years for extremely preterm children 
evaluated at each of four time points. (EPICure study. 
Adapted from Linsell L, Johnson S, Wolke D, et al. (2018). 
Archives of Disease in Childhood, 103(4): 363–370. 
Published under CC BY 4.0.) 
educational attainment and employment are modest 
compared with term-born young adults and they are 
less likely to have formed relationships or become 
parents, but self-rating over a range of areas shows 
that the majority are contented. 
Globally, morbidity from prematurity in low￾and middle-income countries is mainly in infants 
born at 28–37 weeks’ gestation and is consider￾able. Estimates of the global burden of neurodevel￾opmental impairment among preterm infants are 
shown in Figure 8.7. 
Survivors with 
12.6 million babies 
32–36 wks 
gestational age 
1.6 million babies 
28–31 wks 
gestational age 
780,000 
babies 
<28 wks 
gestational age 
Neonatal deaths among 
preterm babies in 2010 
neurodevelopmental 
disability in those 
born preterm in 2010 
72,400 children 
(52% of survivors) 
210,400 children 
(24.5% of survivors) 
629,900 children 
(5% of survivors) 
641,500 
699,400 
644,700 
Figure 8.5 Prevalence of special educational needs Figure 8.7 Global mortality and mobility of preterm 
(SEN) by gestational age at birth, showing an increased births. Estimates of global burden of mortality and 
proportion not only at extreme prematurity but also at 34 morbidity for the 15 million preterm infants born in 2010 
to 39 weeks compared with full-term births. Data based (11% of all 135 million births). (From Blencowe H, Lee 
on 407,503 school-aged children in Scotland in 2005. ACC, Cousens S, et al. (2013). Pediatric Research, 
(From MacKay DF, et al. (2010). PLOS Medicine, 7(6): 73(Suppl. 1): 17–34. With permission from Springer 
e10000289. Published under CC BY 4.0.) Nature.) 120 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 121 04/03/2024 16:07
Causes 
CAUSES 
Preterm delivery can be categorized into: 
• spontaneous labour with intact membranes 
(35%) 
• preterm premature rupture of the membranes 
(PPROM) (25%) 
• labour induction or elective caesarean delivery 
for maternal or fetal indications (25%) 
• multiple pregnancy (15%) 
In view of the wide variation in prematurity rates 
between populations, it is not surprising that a wide 
variety of social and medical risk factors have been 
identiÿed. They include: 
• previous preterm delivery 
• short interpregnancy interval (<6 months) 
• maternal age, with risk increased if <20 or >35 
years old 
• maternal nutrition – low body mass index 
increases the risk of spontaneous preterm 
delivery, whereas obesity increases the risk of 
preterm delivery for medical reasons, especially 
diabetes mellitus and pre-eclampsia 
• smoking, including passive and environmental 
air pollution 
• substance misuse 
• ethnicity – in the UK, the prematurity rate 
among Black mothers is higher than that 
among White mothers 
• multiple births 
• maternal medical conditions, pregnancy 
complications and fetal conditions (Figure 8.8) 
• maternal stress 
• socio-economic deprivation 
Some of these risk factors increase the risk of 
infection, in°ammation or uterine stretch in preg￾nancy but the mechanisms of action of many are 
poorly understood. 
There is growing evidence of the association 
between stress and PTL (e.g. with major life events) 
and the increased prevalence of PTL among the poor 
and socially marginalized, as well as among those liv￾ing in stressful socio-demographic conditions (such as 
loss of employment, housing or a partner). Prematurity 
is more common among pregnant women self-report￾ing increased stress or anxiety. The biochemical path￾way through which maternal stress acts is uncertain, 
but it may involve a premature increase in circulating 
corticotrophin-releasing hormone. 
The prematurity rate is also affected by differ￾ences in obstetric management between countries. 
Examples include differences in the proportion of 
multiple births, which varies with different assisted 
reproductive therapy practices and has a marked effect 
Idiopathic Intrauterine stretch Endocrine maturation Intrauterine bleeding
Multiple gestation Premature onset of Abruption
Polyhydramnios labour Antepartum haemorrhage
Uterine anomaly 
Preterm delivery 
Intrauterine infection Fetus Maternal medical conditions Cervical 
Chorioamnionitis IUGR Pre-eclampsia, hypertension weakness 
Bacterial vaginosis Congenital anomalies Chronic medical conditions 
Preterm premature Chromosomal anomalies Urinary tract infection,
rupture of membranes asymptomatic bacteriuria
Other maternal infections, 
including malaria
Psychological stress 
Figure 8.8 Medical conditions associated with prematurity. (From Lissauer T, Fanaroff A, Miall 
L, et al. (2020). Neonatology at a Glance, 4th edn. Wiley Blackwell. With permission. IUGR, 
Intrauterine growth restriction.) 121 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 122 04/03/2024 16:07
 
Preterm labour 
10 
8 
6
%
2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 
Total preterm Moderate preterm Very preterm Extremely preterm 
4 
2 
0 
Figure 8.9 Rate of preterm births in England and Wales from 2010 to 2019. 
(From Ofÿce for National Statistics.) 
on prematurity rate, and differences in the approach 
to early elective delivery for medical complications. 
The rate of preterm birth overall has risen gradu￾ally in England and Wales over the last number of 
years, from 7% in 2010 to 8% in 2017, although there 
was a slight fall to 7.8% in 2019 (Figure 8.9). 
BIOPHYSICAL OR MEDICAL CAUSES 
OF PRETERM LABOUR 
CERVICAL WEAKNESS 
Cervical weakness is classically associated with pain￾less premature cervical dilatation and is suggested by 
a history of painless second-trimester pregnancy loss. 
There is almost certainly an overlap between cervical 
weakness and other factors such as ascending infec￾tion, as, during pregnancy, the cervix not only acts 
as a physical obstacle, keeping the pregnancy in the 
uterus, but also acts as a barrier to ascending infec￾tion through the synthesis of a thick mucus plug in 
the cervical canal that has bactericidal properties. 
Several studies have demonstrated a strong relation￾ship between cervical length and the risk of preterm 
birth, and a previous history of cervical surgery is a 
risk factor for cervical weakness. 
INFECTION 
Infection of the fetal membranes (chorioamnion￾itis) is a major cause of preterm birth, particularly in 
deliveries before 32 weeks’ gestation. It is associated 
with a threefold increase in the risk of preterm birth 
and a fourfold increase in the risk if the membranes 
are ruptured. In most cases, infection ascends from 
the vagina, although the route of infection may be 
transplacental or introduced during invasive proce￾dures. Cervical weakness, resulting in early shorten￾ing, as described earlier, can predispose to ascending 
bacterial infection. However, it is possible for vagi￾nal pathogens to ascend through a normal cer￾vix. Overall, 33% of all pregnancies delivered after 
PPROM are complicated by infection. This rate rises 
the earlier the PPROM occurs, with positive amni￾otic °uid cultures found in 83% of babies delivered 
weighing <1 kg, which approximates to a gestation of 
<28 weeks. Abnormal vaginal °ora, for example bac￾terial vaginosis, affects 16% of pregnant women and 
is associated with PPROM and PTL, with a greater 
risk the earlier in gestation it is identiÿed (relative 
risk: 5–7.5 if identiÿed <16 weeks’ gestation). The 
relationship with preterm birth is not direct, as anti￾biotic treatment of bacterial vaginosis does not con￾sistently reduce the risk of preterm birth. The current 
recommendations are to screen those at high risk 
of preterm delivery for bacterial vaginosis and treat 
those found to be positive. 
UTERINE DISTENSION FROM 
MULTIPLE PREGNANCY AND 
POLYHYDRAMNIOS 
Overall, 56% of multiple births deliver before 37 weeks 
and 10–15% deliver before 32 weeks. Consequently, 122 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 123 04/03/2024 16:07
Causes 
although multiple pregnancies make up only 2% of the 
pregnant population, they contribute disproportion￾ately to preterm births and, consequently, to neonatal 
intensive care unit admissions. The risk of preterm 
birth rises with fetal number, with triplets delivering, 
on average, at 32 weeks and quadruplets delivering at 
28 weeks. Multiple pregnancies have an increased risk 
of pre-eclampsia, fetal growth restriction and other 
medical complications of pregnancy, explaining the 
observation in one study that, of the twins delivered 
preterm, 24% were for medical reasons and 76% were 
after PTL or PPROM. 
Polyhydramnios, the presence of too much amni￾otic °uid, also increases the risk of PTL and PPROM, 
although the effect is not as great as with twins, 
with preterm birth occurring in between 7% and 
25% of fetuses, depending on the severity. Severe 
polyhydramnios can be managed with amnio￾drainage, but this may itself precipitate PTL and/or 
PPROM. Alternatively, non-steroidal anti-in°am￾matory drugs (NSAIDs) may be used, as they reduce 
fetal urine production, but °ow through the ductus 
arteriosus has to be closely monitored, as the inhibi￾tion of prostagladin E production may result in pre￾mature ductal closure. 
UTERINE MÜLLERIAN ANOMALIES 
Congenital Müllerian anomalies are often unrecog￾nized but are estimated to occur in up to 4% of women 
of reproductive age. They occur as a consequence of 
abnormal embryologic fusion and canalization of the 
Müllerian ducts and result in an abnormally formed 
uterine cavity, which can range from an arcu￾ate uterus, which results in minimal fundal cavity 
indentation, to complete failure of fusion resulting 
in uterine didelphys (Figure 8.10). These anomalies 
are associated with adverse pregnancy outcome in 
Didelphic Unicornuate 
Arcuate Septate (partial) Septate (complete) 
Bicornuate (partial) Bicornuate (complete) 
Figure 8.10 Schematic diagram of different types of congenital uterine anomalies. 
Uterine Müllerian anomalies are associated with an increased risk of preterm delivery. 123 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 124 04/03/2024 16:07
Preterm labour 
up to 25% of pregnant women, including ÿrst- and 
second-trimester miscarriage, PPROM, preterm 
birth, fetal growth restriction, breech presentation 
and caesarean section. 
HAEMORRHAGE 
Antepartum haemorrhage and placental abrup￾tion may lead to spontaneous PTL. The presence 
of a subchorionic haematoma in early pregnancy 
increases the risk of later PPROM, either through an 
effect of thrombin on membrane strength or through 
the occurrence of infection in the haematoma. Acute 
bleeding leads to the release of thrombin that directly 
stimulates myometrial contractions. Placental abrup￾tion complicates 1% of all pregnancies and the effects 
depend primarily on its severity and the gestational 
age when it occurs. Risk factors include pre-eclamp￾sia and hypertension, previous abruption, trauma, 
smoking, cocaine use, multiple pregnancy, polyhy￾dramnios, thrombophilias, advanced maternal age 
and PPROM. When an abruption involves 50% or 
more of the placenta, it is frequently associated with 
fetal death. 
PREDICTION OF PRETERM BIRTH 
PAST OBSTETRIC HISTORY 
Having a previous preterm birth increases the risk 
fourfold of a further preterm birth in a subsequent 
pregnancy when compared with someone who has 
had a previous birth at term. If a pregnant woman 
has two preterm births, she is at a 6.5 times greater 
risk of a subsequent preterm birth (Table 8.1). Other 
Table 8.1 Risk of preterm delivery in subsequent 
pregnancies 
First 
delivery 
Second 
delivery 
Relative risk of 
preterm labour 
Term 1 
Preterm 4 
Term Term 0.5 
Preterm Term 1.3 
Term Preterm 2.5 
Preterm Preterm 6.5 
factors that increase the risk of preterm birth are 
previous PPROM, previous use of cerclage, a known 
uterine variant and intrauterine adhesions. Many 
risk scoring systems for predicting preterm birth rely 
heavily on previous obstetric history as a key factor 
and are therefore not useful in a ÿrst pregnancy. 
ULTRASOUND MEASUREMENT OF 
CERVICAL LENGTH 
Cervical length measured by transvaginal ultra￾sound has been shown to be more accurate than 
transabdominal ultrasound or digital examina￾tion. There is a direct relationship between cervical 
length and the risk of preterm birth (Figure 8.11). 
Cervical length surveillance with serial measure￾ment of cervical length throughout the second 
trimester and early third trimester is now used to 
monitor individuals at high risk of preterm birth 
(Figure 8.12). The combination of cervical length 
and obstetric history can predict 80% of extremely 
early spontaneous preterm birth (10% screen￾positive rate). However, universal cervical length 
screening of all pregnant women has not been 
approved in the UK, as it has not been shown to be 
cost-effective. 
90 
80 N=57,839 
70 
60 
50 
% 
40 
30 
20 
10 
0 
0 10 20 30 40 50
Cervical length (mm) 
Figure 8.11 Cervical length and the risk of preterm (<34 
weeks) delivery. 
60 
124 Prevention of preterm delivery
 125
PREVENTION OF PRETERM 
DELIVERY
In those found to be at high risk of preterm birth, 
two interventions are currently available: progester￾one and cervical cerclage.
PROGESTERONE
Progesterone has been known to be important in 
maintaining pregnancy for more than 80 years and is 
thought to promote uterine quiescence and inhibit the 
production of proinfl ammatory cytokines and prosta￾glandins within the uterus. Many studies have been 
carried out to investigate the use of progesterone in 
preventing preterm birth. In pregnancies at high risk 
of preterm birth, there is some evidence that proges￾terone is effective in reducing the risk. However, the 
evidence is confl icting, with the largest randomized 
trial to date (OPPTIMUM) not showing any benefi t 
of vaginal progesterone. However, systematic reviews 
that look at the totality of the previous trials suggest 
that progesterone may be effective, and the evidence is 
strongest for vaginal progesterone. On this basis, cur￾rent National Institute for Health and Care Excellence 
(NICE) guidance recommends offering vaginal pro￾gesterone to pregnant women at high risk of preterm 
birth, such as those with both a history of preterm 
birth and a short cervix. It can also be considered in 
pregnant women who have either a history of preterm 
birth or a short cervix.
CERVICAL CERCLAGE
Transvaginal cervical cerclage may be placed in three 
different circumstances: following three or more 
mid-trimester losses or preterm deliveries (history￾indicated cerclage), when the cervix shortens (usu￾ally <25 mm) in those with a history of cervical 
surgery or previous preterm birth (ultrasound-indi￾cated cerclage) or when the cervix is dilating in the 
absence of contractions (emergency cerclage). The 
exact mechanism by which cerclage helps to prevent 
or delay PTL is not entirely understood. It is likely, 
however, that cerclage provides structural support 
to a weakened cervix and enhances the cervical 
immunological barrier by improving retention of the 
mucus plug and preventing ascending infection by 
maintaining cervical length. Similar to progesterone, 
cervical cerclage does not appear to reduce the risk 
of preterm birth in multiple pregnancies. The differ￾ent types of cerclage are described in Table 8.2 and 
an ultrasound image of a cervical cerclage in situ is 
shown in Figure 8.13.
A transabdominal cerclage is usually inserted 
following a failed vaginal cerclage or extensive cer￾vical surgery. The effectiveness of transabdominal 
cerclage compared with expectant management 
or transvaginal cerclage is not clear. Any potential 
D=34.5 mm A
+
+
Internal os
of cervix
Short close
length
Large membrane
funnel
1 D0.49cm
1 + +
B
Figure 8.12 (A) Normal cervix. (B) Cervical length and funnelling on ultrasound.
Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 125 04/03/2024 16:07
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 126 04/03/2024 16:07
 
Preterm labour 
Table 8.2 Types of cerclage 
Type Description 
McDonald Transvaginal purse-string suture 
transvaginal inserted at the cervicovaginal 
cerclage junction without bladder 
mobilization 
Shirodkar (high Transvaginal purse-string suture 
transvaginal) inserted following bladder 
cerclage mobilization, to allow insertion 
above the level of cardinal 
ligaments 
Transabdominal Suture inserted at the cervicoisthmic 
cerclage junction via laparotomy or 
laparoscopy. Transabdominal 
cerclages can be inserted either 
pre-conceptionally or in the ÿrst 
trimester of pregnancy 
Figure 8.13 Cervical cerclage seen on ultrasound 
(arrows). 
beneÿts of transabdominal cerclage must be weighed 
against its increased operative risks. Patients must 
undergo two operations: one for suture insertion and 
the other for caesarean section. 
MANAGEMENT OF PRETERM 
LABOUR 
Up to 70% of pregnant women who present to the 
labour ward with threatened PTL will not deliver 
during that admission, and up to 50% will deliver 
at term. Deciding who is and who is not in PTL has 
been helped by testing the cervicovaginal °uid lev￾els of fetal ÿbronectin (fFN), a glycoprotein found in 
cervicovaginal °uid, amniotic °uid, placental tissue 
and the interface between the chorion and decidua. 
It acts like glue at the maternal–fetal interface and its 
presence in cervicovaginal °uid between 22 and 36 
weeks’ gestation has been shown to be a predictor of 
preterm birth. Negative fFN testing has a very high 
negative predictive value, enabling most individu￾als with threatened PTL and a negative fFN test to 
be sent home. Those with a positive fFN test can be 
admitted for tocolysis and corticosteroid therapy to 
promote fetal lung maturation. 
TOCOLYTICS 
Tocolytics are used to delay delivery long enough for 
corticosteroid administration to improve neonatal 
lung function and, if necessary, for in utero transfer 
to a maternity department with a neonatal intensive 
care unit. The guidelines for PTL from NICE (2019) 
state that if tocolytics are administered for the medical 
treatment of PTL, the ÿrst choice should be a calcium 
channel blocker (nifedipine) or, otherwise, an oxyto￾cin receptor antagonist (OTR-A; atosiban). However, a 
recent review and network meta-analysis comparing 
all of the trials of different agents for tocolysis found 
that prostaglandin (PG) inhibitors and calcium chan￾nel blockers are most likely the best therapy for PTL 
on the basis of delaying delivery by 48 hours, and 
reducing neonatal mortality, neonatal respiratory 
distress syndrome (RDS) and maternal side effects. 
The different types of tocolytics are discussed brie°y 
in the following sections. 
CALCIUM CHANNEL BLOCKERS 
The effects of calcium channel blockers (e.g. nife￾dipine) in relaxing the contractions of the human 
myometrium have been known for several years. 
Comparing nifedipine with other tocolytics (includ￾ing beta-sympathomimetics, NSAIDs, magnesium 
sulphate and OTR-A), no signiÿcant reductions were 
shown in birth within 48 hours of treatment or in 
perinatal mortality. However, side-effects (includ￾ing headache, hypotension and dyspnoea), discon￾tinuation due to side effects, and reduction in the 126 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 127 04/03/2024 16:07
 
Management of preterm labour 
incidence of neonatal RDS, necrotizing enterocolitis, 
intraventricular haemorrhage and neonatal jaundice 
were least for OTR-A, intermediate for nifedipine 
and greatest for beta-sympathomimetics. 
BETAMIMETICS 
Beta-agonists (ritodrine, salbutamol and terbuta￾line) are predominantly ˜2 adreno-receptor agonists, 
which mediate myometrial relaxation by stimulat￾ing cyclic adenyl monophosphate production. They 
are effective in delaying delivery, but do not improve 
neonatal outcome or ultimate preterm birth rates. 
Furthermore, they have signiÿcant maternal side 
effects, which means that they are rarely used in 
the context of threatened PTL in the UK, although 
globally they are still widely used. The most serious 
side effect is pulmonary oedema, with an estimated 
incidence among treated patients of 1:350–1:400. 
Maternal deaths from acute cardiopulmonary com￾promise are described, with greater risks if beta￾agonists are given in large °uid volumes, in multiple 
pregnancies and in individuals with cardiac disease. 
MAGNESIUM SULPHATE 
Magnesium sulphate is widely used in obstetrics in 
the prevention and treatment of eclampsia. It is also 
used as fetal neuroprotection in pregnant women in 
established PTL or planned preterm birth, as it has 
been shown to reduce the risk of cerebral palsy. It 
can also be used as a tocolytic, as it decreases the 
frequency of depolarization of smooth muscle by 
modulating calcium uptake and results in the inhibi￾tion of uterine contractions. It is widely used for this 
purpose in some countries, but the evidence for it 
prolonging pregnancy is lacking. 
NON-STEROIDAL 
ANTI-INFLAMMATORY DRUGS 
The ÿrst NSAID to be widely used in the management 
of PTL was indomethacin. It is a reversible, non-spe￾ciÿc competitive cyclooxygenase inhibitor. Although 
effective in delaying preterm birth, NSAIDs do have 
adverse fetal effects, as PG synthesis is responsible 
for the maintenance of a patent ductus arteriosus and 
inhibition can lead to its premature closure. This can 
occur as early as the late second trimester, with the 
incidence increasing markedly from 32 weeks. This 
may lead to persistent pulmonary hypertension in the 
fetal circulation of the neonate. Indomethacin has also 
been associated with an increased risk of necrotizing 
enterocolitis and neonatal renal dysfunction. The lat￾ter probably occurs because inhibition of fetal PG syn￾thesis reduces renal perfusion and fetal urine output, 
resulting in reversible oligohydramnios. Therefore, it 
is normally used only prior to 32 weeks’ gestation. 
OXYTOCIN RECEPTOR ANTAGONISTS 
OTRs play an important role in the onset and pro￾gression of labour. The OTR-A atosiban is a competi￾tive antagonist of oxytocin and vasopressin, binding 
to both the OTR and the vasopressin receptors within 
the myometrium. Administration of atosiban results 
in a dose-dependent inhibition of uterine contrac￾tility and oxytocin-mediated PG release. Atosiban 
is 46–48% plasma protein bound, and only a small 
amount appears to cross the placenta into the fetal 
circulation. Treatment with atosiban has been shown 
to prevent labour after 24 hours, 48 hours and 7 days 
in comparison with placebo. 
CORTICOSTEROID THERAPY 
The administration of corticosteroids has the greatest 
in°uence on preterm neonatal outcome. Although 
the use of surfactant therapy in neonates has also 
had a major impact on the incidence and conse￾quences of RDS, antenatal corticosteroids are still 
associated with signiÿcant reduction in neonatal 
mortality, principally through reduced rates of RDS 
and intraventricular haemorrhage. A 2006 Cochrane 
Database Review conÿrmed signiÿcant reductions 
in the risks of mortality, RDS and intraventricular 
haemorrhage in preterm infants of 31%, 44% and 
46%, respectively, after a single course of cortico￾steroids. Their mechanism of action is complex; 
they affect not only fetal lung maturation, but also 
fetal growth, organ system maturation, fetal brain 
development, immune function and the fetal hypo￾thalamic–pituitary–adrenocortical axis. Currently, 
betamethasone or dexamethasone is recom￾mended; both are able to cross the placenta in their 
active form and have comparable properties. Some 127 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 128 04/03/2024 16:07
Preterm labour 
dexamethasone preparations contain a sulphite 
preservative that has been linked with neurotoxic￾ity and should be avoided. 
However, enthusiasm for their use has been tem￾pered by recent concerns, namely based on animal 
and some human data showing that repeated ante￾natal doses could lead to a decrease in birthweight, 
brain size and abnormal neuronal development. 
However, the long-term outcomes related to their 
use have been largely positive and, overall, ante￾natal corticosteroid treatment has been associated 
with less developmental delay in childhood than no 
corticosteroid treatment and a trend towards fewer 
children having cerebral palsy. While 30 years’ fol￾low-up showed no clinical differences in adults who 
were exposed in utero to betamethasone, there are 
no comparable data for dexamethasone. 
ANTIBIOTICS 
Despite a clear link between bacterial infection and 
preterm birth, the results of antibiotic treatment as 
an attempt to prevent PTL have been disappointing. 
The ORACLE trials focused on the use of antibiotics 
in PPROM (over 4,000 participants) and spontane￾ous PTL with intact membranes (over 6,000 partici￾pants). These trials demonstrated that, in singleton 
pregnancies with PPROM, erythromycin improved 
neonatal outcomes, but that antibiotic treatment in 
the presence of intact membranes had no beneÿt. As 
a result of these trials, 10 days of erythromycin has 
been adopted as the treatment of choice for PPROM 
in many obstetric units in the UK. 
MANAGEMENT OF PRETERM 
PREMATURE RUPTURE OF 
MEMBRANES 
PPROM occurs in approximately 2% of all pregnan￾cies and accounts for up to one-third of preterm deliv￾eries. Fifty per cent of pregnant women give birth 
within 1 week and 75% give birth within 2˛ weeks 
of PPROM. The earlier in pregnancy that PPROM 
occurs, the shorter the interval to birth. Although 
postnatal survival following PPROM is directly 
related to birthweight and gestational age at delivery, 
in pregnancies complicated by PPROM prior to 23 
weeks, pulmonary hypoplasia may develop, leading 
to an increased risk of neonatal death, even if delivery 
occurs at later gestational ages. Pulmonary hypopla￾sia following PPROM occurs in approximately 50% 
of cases with PPROM at 19 weeks, falling to about 
10% at 25 weeks. The presence of amniotic °uid 
greater than 2 cm on ultrasound is associated with a 
lower incidence of pulmonary hypoplasia. 
PPROM is diagnosed through clinical history and 
the demonstration of a pool of liquor in the vagina on 
speculum examination. If pooling of amniotic °uid 
is not observed, then further information can be 
obtained by performing an insulin-like growth factor 
binding protein-1 test or placental alpha-microglob￾ulin-1 test of vaginal °uid. Management balances the 
risk of prematurity (if delivery is encouraged) with 
the risk of maternal and fetal infection (if delivery 
is delayed). In general, conservative management 
is followed in PPROM before 34 weeks’ gestation 
unless there is evidence of chorioamnionitis and 
immediate induction of labour is advised in pregnant 
women after 37 weeks’ gestation. 
Conservative management includes intensive 
clinical surveillance for signs of chorioamnionitis 
including regular recording of the pregnant woman’s 
temperature, heart rate, cardiotocography and bio￾chemistry, with a rising white cell count or a rising 
C-reactive protein indicating development of chorio￾amnionitis. Lower genital tract swabs are routinely 
taken, but cultures do not correlate well with the 
risk of chorioamnionitis. In the majority of cases of 
PPROM, there is time for administration of cortico￾steroids and in utero transfer to a maternity depart￾ment with a neonatal intensive care unit before the 
onset of PTL. Tocolysis is contraindicated due to 
the increased risk of maternal and fetal infection in 
patients with PPROM. 
DELIVERY 
When a pregnant woman is in PTL, decision-making 
is helped by detailed assessment of gestation, fetal 
and maternal well-being and is informed by knowl￾edge of gestation-speciÿc local neonatal outcomes. 
Depending on pregnancy gestation, tocolysis may 
128 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 129 04/03/2024 16:07
 
 
Further reading 
be indicated to enable completion of antenatal cor￾ticosteroids, magnesium sulphate to be given and 
antibiotic therapy, if indicated. Delivery at a perina￾tal centre to avoid subsequent transfer and separa￾tion of the infant and mother should be considered. 
Decision-making by the obstetrician should involve 
the neonatologist and parents, as difÿcult decisions 
may be required, balancing the risk to the mother or 
fetus of continuing the pregnancy with the risk of 
prematurity. 
With regard to mode of delivery, vaginal delivery 
is preferred unless the fetus is compromised, when 
caesarean delivery may be indicated. For assisted 
vaginal delivery at less than 34 weeks, forceps rather 
than vacuum devices are preferred, as there is less 
risk of trauma to the infant. For breech presentation, 
there is controversy about optimal mode of deliv￾ery; if before 26 weeks, most are delivered vaginally, 
but after this gestation they are often delivered by 
caesarean section. The neonatal team should be 
present at delivery. Unless the infant requires imme￾diate resuscitation, clamping of the cord should be 
delayed, as this brings signiÿcant neonatal beneÿts. 
These include a reduced need for subsequent blood 
transfusions and potentially also a reduction in the 
KEY LEARNING POINTS 
˜ PTL has multiple causes. 
˜ Worldwide, preterm delivery is the most 
common cause of mortality of children under 
5°years of age. 
˜ Screening with transvaginal ultrasound can 
detect individuals at high risk of preterm 
delivery. 
˜ Progesterone reduces the risk of preterm birth in 
pregnant women with a short cervix. 
˜ Cervical cerclage reduces the risk of preterm 
birth in high-risk pregnant women. 
˜ Antenatal corticosteroids reduce the risk of 
neonatal RDS. 
˜ Tocolysis may be used to allow time for antenatal 
steroids to be given. 
˜ Magnesium sulphate given to the mother prior 
to delivery provides neuroprotection for the 
fetus. 
incidence of necrotizing enterocolitis and intraven￾tricular haemorrhage in the neonate. Infants <32 
weeks’ gestation are usually delivered into a plastic 
bag (wrap) to avoid hypothermia, which compro￾mises outcome. 
FURTHER READING 
Lissauer T, Fanaroff AA, Miall L, Fanaroff J (2020). 
Neonatology at a Glance, 4th edn. Wiley Blackwell. 
NICE (2015). Preterm Labour and Birth. NICE guide￾line [NG25]. Last updated: 10 June 2022. https:// 
www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng25. 
Ohuma E, Moller A-B, Bradley E, et al. (2023) 
National, regional, and global estimates of 
preterm birth in 2020, with trends from 2010: a 
systematic analysis. Lancet, 402: 1261–1271. 
Opondo C, Jayaweera H, Hollowell J, Li Y, Kurinczuk 
JJ, Quigley MA (2020).Variations in neonatal 
mortality, infant mortality, preterm birth and 
birth weight in England and Wales according to 
ethnicity and maternal country or region of birth: 
an analysis of linked national data from 2006 
to 2012. Journal of Epidemiology and Community 
Health, 74(4): 336–345. http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/ 
jech-2019-213093.
 Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists 
(RCOG) (2022). Green-top guideline No 75: 
Cervical cerclage. BJOG: An International Journal 
of Obstetrics & Gynaecology, 129(7): 1178–1210. 
https://obgyn.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ 
full/10.1111/1471-0528.17003. 
Serenius F, Ewald U, Farooqi A, et al. (2016). 
Neurodevelopmental outcomes among extremely 
preterm infants 6.5 years after active perinatal care 
in Sweden. JAMA Pediatrics, 170(10): 954–963. 
https://doi.org/10.1001/jamapediatrics.2016.1210.
 Smith R ( 2007). Parturition. New England Journal of 
Med icine, 356( 3): 271–283. 
Williams TC, Drake AJ (2019). Preterm birth in 
evolutionary context: A predictive adaptive 
response? Philosophical Transactions of the Royal 
Society B: Biological Sciences, 374: 20180121. http:// 
dx.doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2018.0121. 
World Health Organization (2023). Preterm 
birth˛– WHO Fact Sheet. https://www.who.int/ 
news-room/fact-sheets/detail/preterm-birth. 
129 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 130 04/03/2024 16:07
 
 
Preterm labour 
SELF-ASSESSMENT 
For interactive SBAs and EMQs relating to this chapter, visit www.routledge.com/cw/mccarthy. 
CASE HISTORY 1 
Mrs L, a 41-year-old Black woman, attends your clinic 
for a booking visit. This is her second pregnancy. Her 
ÿrst child was born at 26 weeks’ gestation follow￾ing premature rupture of the membranes. This was 
an unplanned pregnancy and her last delivery was 4 
months ago. She is a smoker and has a history of ges￾tational diabetes. 
Identify the key risk factors for preterm delivery and 
prepare a plan for management during the pregnancy. 
ANSWER 
Mrs L is a very high-risk pregnancy with a signiÿcant risk 
of very preterm delivery again. Her main risk factors are 
her age, ethnicity, previous extreme preterm delivery, 
smoking and associated medical condition of diabetes. 
Her management should involve all of the following: con￾sideration for cervical cerclage, smoking cessation ser￾vices, referral to social work and perinatal medicine clinic 
for management of her pregnancy, and commencement 
of aspirin. Her past medical obstetric notes should also 
be obtained and reviewed to ascertain the previous 
events leading to preterm delivery. 
CASE HISTORY 2 
Ms K presents at 31 weeks’ gestation with a story of 
leaking of ˛uid for 12 hours. She is not having any pains.
 A What investigations would you do?
 B Discus your management plan. 
ANSWERS
 A The critical investigation here is a speculum 
examination to examine for pooling of liquor in the 
posterior fornix. This conÿrms PPROM. 
B Ongoing management of this pregnancy involves 
the following: informing the neonatal unit as the risk 
of preterm delivery is very high; administration of 
corticosteroids; consideration of the administration 
of magnesium sulphate; conÿrmation via ultrasound 
of the presenting part; admission to hospital; review 
by a consultant neonatologist; and commencement 
of oral erythromycin. She should be managed within 
a perinatal medicine team with multidisciplinary 
input. 
130 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 131 04/03/2024 16:07
9 
Hypertensive disorders of 
pregnancy 
LOUISE C KENNY 
 
Introduction 131 Chronic hypertension 138 
Classiÿcation of hypertension in Fetal growth restriction 139 
pregnancy 131 Further reading 142 
Pre-eclampsia 132 Self-assessment 142 
 Learning Objectives 
• Understand the classiÿcation of hypertension in pregnancy. 
• Appreciate and be able to differentiate between the different risks associated with various types of 
hypertensive disorders in pregnancy. 
• Understand the pathophysiology of pre-eclampsia. 
• Be aware of the clinical presentation of pre-eclampsia and understand the principles of 
management. 
• Understand the long-term risks to both the pregnant woman and the baby from pre-eclampsia. 
INTRODUCTION 
Hypertension is common in pregnancy. Approximately 
1 in 10 pregnancies will be complicated by one or 
more episodes of raised blood pressure prior to deliv￾ery. In the majority of cases, the cause is a benign 
condition called gestational hypertension, which is 
not associated with adverse outcomes. However, in 
a third of cases (approximately 3% of pregnancies 
overall), the cause is pre-eclampsia. Pre-eclampsia 
is a leading cause of mortality in pregnancy. The 
World Health Organization estimates that, globally, 
between 50,000 and 75,000 pregnant women die of 
this condition each year. Pre-eclampsia is frequently 
accompanied by fetal growth restriction (FGR), and 
both pre-eclampsia and FGR result in increased rates 
of preterm delivery, causing considerable perina￾tal morbidity and mortality. It is also now clear that 
pre-eclampsia has long-term consequences for the 
pregnant woman, as it predisposes to long-term car￾diovascular disease. 
As the population entering pregnancy is doing so 
at an older age, especially in high-resource settings, 
an increasing number of pregnancies are compli￾cated by chronic hypertension. Chronic hyperten￾sion, regardless of the underlying cause, is associated 
with an increased risk of pre-eclampsia and FGR. In 
this chapter, the various types of hypertension and 
their management are discussed. 
CLASSIFICATION OF 
HYPERTENSION IN PREGNANCY 
There is a widely agreed classiÿcation system for 
hypertension in pregnancy. Simply put, there are 
131 
10.1201/9781003196112-9 ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 132 04/03/2024 16:07
 
 
 
 
-
Hypertensive disorders of pregnancy 
three conditions that account for the overwhelming 
majority of cases of hypertension in pregnancy:
 1. non-proteinuric pregnancy-induced 
hypertension 
2. pre-eclampsia
 3. chronic hypertension 
Non-proteinuric pregnancy-induced hyperten￾sion (otherwise known as gestational hypertension) 
is hypertension that arises for the ÿrst time in the 
second half of pregnancy and in the absence of pro￾teinuria. It is not associated with adverse pregnancy 
outcome, and modest increases in blood pressure in 
this setting do not require treatment. However, up 
to one-third of cases of gestational hypertension will 
progress to pre-eclampsia. 
Hypertension in the ÿrst half of pregnancy most 
likely indicates the presence of chronic hyperten￾sion. As is the case in the non-pregnant popula￾tion, most cases of chronic hypertension (~90%) are 
essential hypertension but it is important to remem￾ber that this is a diagnosis of exclusion. Secondary 
causes of hypertension presenting for the ÿrst time 
in the ÿrst half of pregnancy should be excluded. 
Chronic hypertension, of whatever type, can pre￾dispose to the later development of superimposed 
pre-eclampsia. Even in the absence of superimposed 
pre-eclampsia, chronic hypertension is associated 
with increased maternal and fetal morbidity, and 
pregnancies complicated by chronic hypertension 
should therefore be regarded as high risk. The physi￾ological fall in blood pressure that occurs in the ÿrst 
trimester secondary to peripheral vasodilatation can 
mask chronic hypertension. For example, a blood 
pressure of 138/88 mmHg in the ÿrst trimester, while 
still technically within normal limits, raises the sus￾picion of an underlying hypertensive tendency. 
PRE-ECLAMPSIA
 INCIDENCE 
Pre-eclampsia complicates approximately 2–3% 
of pregnancies in the UK, but there is signiÿcant 
global variation. In the most recent UK and Ireland 
Conÿdential Enquiry into Maternal Deaths (2017– 
2019), there were six deaths due to pre-eclampsia, 
which represents a signiÿcant fall from a decade 
previously when 19 deaths occurred in 2006–2008 
triennium because of pre-eclampsia. However, glob￾ally, around 70,000 pregnant women die annually of 
pre-eclampsia, making it a leading cause of maternal 
death in low-resource settings. 
BOX 9.1: Deÿnition of pre eclampsia 
Pre-eclampsia is deÿned as new-onset gestational 
hypertension (systolic blood pressure °140 mmHg 
and/or diastolic blood pressure °90 mmHg) associ￾ated with new onset of at least one of the following: 
˜ proteinuria 
˜ maternal organ dysfunction (liver, neurological, 
haematological or renal involvement) 
˜ uteroplacental dysfunction at or after 20 weeks’ 
gestation 
It is important to note that pre-eclampsia may pres￾ent for the ÿrst time in the intra-partum period or in the 
puerperium. 
DIAGNOSIS OF PRE-ECLAMPSIA 
MEASUREMENT OF BLOOD 
PRESSURE 
To conÿrm the presence of hypertension, blood pres￾sure should be measured on at least two occasions 
4 hours apart using an appropriately sized cuff and 
validated device for use in pregnancy. Blood pressure 
should be measured at every antenatal appointment 
(see Chapter 1). For pregnant women at high risk, 
guidelines recommend monitoring blood pressure at 
increased frequency. 
PROTEINURIA 
Proteinuria is screened for by dipstick testing and con￾ÿrmed by additional laboratory tests using 24-hour 
urine collections or, more recently, spot samples of 
urine. An automated reagent-strip reading device 
rather than visual analysis should be used for dip￾stick screening. Previously, a 24-hour urine collection 
was considered the gold standard for conÿrmation 
of proteinuria, but it has several problems: it is time 
consuming and inconvenient for pregnant women 132 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 133 04/03/2024 16:07
 
 
-
Pre-eclampsia 
Table 9.1 Testing for proteinuria 
Test/result Interpretation
 Dipstick urinalysis Instant result but quantitatively 
inaccurate
 Trace Seldom signiÿcant
 1+ Possible signiÿcant proteinuria, 
warrants quantifying
 °2+ Probable signiÿcant proteinuria, 
warrants quantifying
 Protein:creatinine 
ratio (results 
semi-quantitative) 
Fast (within 1 hour)
 >30 mg/mol Probable signiÿcant proteinuria
 24-hour collection Slow 
300 mg/24 hours Conÿ rmed signiÿ cant proteinuria 
and samples are often incomplete. By deÿnition, it 
leads to a 24-hour delay in conÿrming the diagno￾sis. Therefore, the use of either spot urine albumin to 
creatinine (A:Cr) or protein to creatinine (P:Cr) ratios 
are now recommended to quantify proteinuria. Both 
P:Cr and A:Cr testing are shown to signiÿcantly cor￾relate with proteinuria as detected by 24-hour urine. 
Diagnostic thresholds of 30 mg/mmol and 8 mg/mmol 
have been determined to provide high sensitivity and 
speciÿcity, respectively (see Table 9.1). 
ADDITIONAL LABORATORY TESTS 
International guidelines recommend that pregnant 
women suspected of having pre-eclampsia are inves￾tigated with laboratory tests measuring haemoglo￾bin, platelet count, serum creatinine, liver enzymes 
and serum uric acid to determine the presence of 
maternal organ dysfunction and the diagnosis of 
pre-eclampsia. New guidelines also recommend the 
use of placental growth factor (PlGF) or soluble fms￾like tyrosine kinase (sFlt-1):PlGF ratio testing for 
pre-eclampsia in speciÿc circumstances. sFlt-1 is an 
anti-angiogenic protein that acts as an antagonist to 
the angiogenic proteins PlGF and vascular endothe￾lial growth factor (VEGF). By inhibiting VEGF and 
PlGF, sFlt-1 alters downstream signalling pathways, 
which results in vasoconstriction and endothelial 
dysfunction. Recent large trials have shown that low 
PlGF has a high sensitivity and negative predictive 
value in diagnosing pre-eclampsia needing delivery 
within 14 days, and a sFlt-1:PlGF ratio of <38 can 
rule out pre-eclampsia within the next 7 days. The 
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence 
(NICE) therefore recommends the use of PlGF or 
sFlt-1:PlGF ratio to help rule out pre-eclampsia in 
pregnant women between 20 and 34 + 6 weeks’ ges￾tation who present with suspected pre-eclampsia. 
FETAL ASSESSMENT 
Uteroplacental dysfunction can be evaluated with 
ultrasound assessment of fetal growth and umbilical 
artery Doppler velocimetry to assess blood °ow redis￾tribution in placental insufÿciency (see Chapter 4). 
RISK FACTORS 
Pre-eclampsia is more common in ÿrst pregnancies. 
The reason for this has been the subject of intense 
speculation in recent decades. One theory suggests 
that the normal fetal–maternal transfusion that 
occurs during pregnancy and particularly during 
delivery exposes the pregnant woman to products 
of the fetal (and hence paternal) genome, protecting 
them in subsequent pregnancies. In line with this, 
the protective effect of ÿrst pregnancy seems to be 
BOX 9.2: Risk factors for pre eclampsia 
Major risk factors 
˜ Pre-eclampsia in any previous pregnancy 
˜ Chronic kidney disease 
˜ Autoimmune disease such as systemic lupus 
erythematosus or antiphospholipid syndrome 
˜ Chronic hypertension 
˜ Type 1 or 2 diabetes 
Moderate risk factors 
˜ First pregnancy 
˜ Aged 40 years or older 
˜ Pregnancy interval of more than 10 years 
˜ Body mass index (BMI) of 35 kg/m2 or more at 
ÿrst visit 
˜ Family history of pre-eclampsia 
˜ Multi-fetal pregnancy 
(Adapted from NICE (2019). Hypertension in Pregnancy: 
Diagnosis and Management. NICE guideline [NG133]). 
133 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 134 04/03/2024 16:07
 
Hypertensive disorders of pregnancy 
lost if a woman has a subsequent pregnancy with a 
new partner. Conversely, a previous history of pre￾eclampsia is a major risk factor for pre-eclampsia in 
subsequent pregnancies. This may, in part, be due to 
a genetic predisposition to pre-eclampsia, as there 
is a three- to fourfold increase in the incidence of 
pre-eclampsia in the ÿrst-degree relatives of affected 
individuals. Finally, there are a number of general 
medical conditions and pregnancy-speciÿc factors 
that predispose to the development of pre-eclampsia. 
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY 
Pre-eclampsia is unusual in medicine in that it is 
deÿned by the symptoms and signs it presents with. 
This has arisen largely because, until very recently, 
the underlying pathophysiology of this disorder was 
poorly understood. Pre-eclampsia occurs only in 
pregnancy, but it has been described in pregnancies 
lacking a fetus (molar pregnancies) and in the absence 
of a uterus (abdominal pregnancies), suggesting that 
it is the presence of trophoblast tissue that provides 
the stimulus for the disorder. General thinking sug￾gests that the development of pre-eclampsia is a two￾stage process, which originates in early pregnancy 
(Figure 9.1). In the ÿrst stage, trophoblast invasion 
is patchy and the spiral arteries retain their muscular 
walls. This is thought to prevent the development of a 
high-°ow, low-impedance uteroplacental circulation 
and leads to uteroplacental ischaemia (Figure 9.2). 
The reason why trophoblasts invade less effectively 
in these pregnancies is not known but may re°ect an 
abnormal adaptation of the maternal immune system. 
In the second stage, uteroplacental ischaemia 
results in oxidative and in°ammatory stress, with 
Genetic predisposition 
Abnormal immunological response 
Deficient trophoblast invasion 
Hypoperfused placenta 
Circulating factor(s) 
STAGE ONE 
Abnormal immune 
response and deficient 
placentation 
STAGE TWO 
Maternal endothelial cell 
dysfunction leading to 
maternal syndrome 
Clinical manifestations of disease 
Figure 9.2 The proposed aetiology of pre-eclampsia. 
the involvement of secondary mediators leading to 
endothelial dysfunction, vasospasm and activation 
of the coagulation system (Figure 9.1). As the target 
cell of the disease process, the vascular endothelial 
cell, is so ubiquitous, pre-eclampsia is a truly mul￾tisystem disorder, affecting multiple organ systems, 
often concurrently. 
CARDIOVASCULAR SYSTEM 
Normal pregnancy is characterized by marked 
peripheral vasodilatation resulting in a fall in total 
peripheral resistance despite an increase in plasma 
volume and cardiac rate. Pre-eclampsia is character￾ized by marked peripheral vasoconstriction, result￾ing in hypertension. The intravascular high pressure 
and loss of endothelial cell integrity results in greater 
vascular permeability and contributes to the forma￾tion of generalized oedema. 
Vascular endothelial cell activation 
Endothelium 
Invading 
trophoblasts 
Creation of a high-flow, 
low-resistance zone 
Loss of 
spirality 
Smooth muscle 
(tunica media) 
Replacement of smooth 
muscle and endothelium 
with trophoblasts 
Figure 9.1 Physiological change of spiral arteries by invading trophoblasts. 134 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 135 04/03/2024 16:07
 
 
 
 
 
Pre-eclampsia 
RENAL SYSTEM 
In the kidney, a highly characteristic lesion called glo￾meruloendotheliosis is seen. This is relatively speciÿc 
for pre-eclampsia (it is not seen with other hyper￾tensive disorders) and is associated with impaired 
glomerular ÿltration and selective loss of intermedi￾ate weight proteins, such as albumin and transferrin, 
leading to proteinuria. This in turn causes a reduction 
in plasma oncotic pressure and exacerbates the devel￾opment of oedema. 
HAEMATOLOGICAL SYSTEM 
In the event of endothelial damage, platelets adhere 
to the damaged area. Furthermore, diffuse vascular 
damage is associated with the laying down of ÿbrin. 
Pre-eclampsia in association with increased ÿbrin 
deposition and a reduction in the platelet count may 
accompany and occasionally predate the onset of 
disease. 
LIVER 
In the liver, subendothelial ÿbrin deposition is asso￾ciated with elevation of liver enzymes. This can be 
associated with haemolysis and a low platelet count 
due to platelet consumption (and subsequent wide￾spread activation of the coagulation system). The 
presence of these ÿndings is called haemolysis, ele￾vation of liver enzymes and low platelets (HELLP) 
syndrome. HELLP syndrome is a particularly severe 
BOX 9.3: HELLP syndrome 
˜ HELLP syndrome is an acronym for haemolysis, 
elevation of liver enzymes and low platelets. 
˜ Pregnant women with HELLP syndrome typically 
present with epigastric pain, nausea and 
vomiting. 
˜ Hypertension may be mild or even absent. 
˜ HELLP syndrome is associated with a range 
of serious complications including acute renal 
failure, placental abruption and stillbirth. 
˜ The management of HELLP syndrome involves 
stabilizing the pregnant patient, correcting any 
coagulation deÿcits and assessing the fetus for 
delivery. 
form of pre-eclampsia, occurring in just 2–4% of 
pregnant women with the disease. It is associated 
with a high fetal loss rate (of up to 60%) (see the box 
‘HELLP syndrome’). 
NEUROLOGICAL SYSTEM 
The development of convulsions in a pregnant 
woman with pre-eclampsia, in the absence of any 
other known or likely cause, is deÿned as eclamp￾sia. Vasospasm and cerebral oedema have both 
been implicated in the pathogenesis of eclampsia. 
Retinal haemorrhages, exudates and papilloedema 
are characteristic of hypertensive encephalopa￾thy and are rare in pre-eclampsia, suggesting that 
hypertension alone is not responsible for the cere￾bral pathology. 
PLACENTAL INSUFFICIENCY AND 
FETAL GROWTH RESTRICTION 
The underlying pathophysiology of pre-eclampsia 
predisposes to FGR, which frequently, but not invari￾ably, occurs in pregnancies with pre-eclampsia. The 
presence of placental insufÿciency after 20 weeks’ 
gestation is one of the deÿning features of pre￾eclampsia. However, it is important to note the severe 
FGR may occur in the absence of maternal hyperten￾sion or any other features of pre-eclampsia and, 
similarly, severe pre-eclampsia can occur without 
evidence of FGR. 
CLINICAL PRESENTATION 
The classic symptoms of pre-eclampsia include a 
frontal headache, visual disturbance and epigastric 
pain. However, the majority of pregnant women with 
pre-eclampsia are asymptomatic or merely complain 
of general vague ‘°u-like’ symptoms. 
Clinical examination should include a com￾plete obstetric and neurological examination (see 
Chapter˜1). Hypertension is usually the ÿrst sign but 
occasionally is absent or transient until the late stages 
of the disease. Dependent oedema of the feet is very 
common in healthy pregnant women. However, 
rapidly progressive oedema of the face and hands 
may suggest pre-eclampsia. Epigastric tenderness 
is a worrying sign and suggests liver involvement. 135 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 136 04/03/2024 16:07
Hypertensive disorders of pregnancy 
Neurological examination may reveal hyperre°exia 
and clonus in severe cases. Urine testing for protein 
should be considered part of the clinical examination 
(Table 9.1). 
MANAGEMENT AND TREATMENT 
There is no cure for pre-eclampsia other than to end 
the pregnancy by delivering the baby (and placenta). 
This can be a signiÿcant problem if pre-eclampsia 
occurs early in pregnancy, particularly at gestations 
less than 34 weeks. Therefore, management strate￾gies are aimed at minimizing risk to the pregnant 
woman in order to permit continued fetal growth. In 
severe cases this is often not possible. 
The principles of management of pre-eclampsia 
are: 
• early recognition of the symptomless syndrome 
• awareness of the serious nature of the 
condition in its severest form 
• adherence to agreed guidelines for admission 
to hospital, investigation and the use of 
antihypertensive and anticonvulsant therapy 
• well-timed delivery to pre-empt serious 
maternal or fetal complications 
• postnatal follow-up and counselling for future 
pregnancies 
A diagnosis of pre-eclampsia usually requires 
admission (Table 9.2). Patients with mild hypertension, 
Table 9.2 The management of pregnancy complicated by pre-eclampsia, depending on the degree of hypertension 
Hypertension: Blood pressure of Severe hypertension: Blood pressure of 
Management 140/90–159/109 mmHg 160/110 mmHg or more 
Admission to 
hospital 
Admit if any clinical concerns for the 
well-being of the pregnant woman or baby 
or if there is a high risk of adverse events 
Admit, but if blood pressure falls below 
160/110 mmHg, then manage as for 
hypertension 
Antihypertensive 
pharmacological 
treatment 
Offer pharmacological treatment if blood 
pressure remains above 140/90 mmHg 
Offer pharmacological treatment to all 
pregnant women 
Target blood 
pressure once on 
antihypertensive 
treatment 
Aim for blood pressure of 135/85 mmHg or 
less 
Aim for blood pressure of 135/85 mmHg or 
less 
Blood pressure 
measurement 
At least every 48 hours, and more frequently 
if the pregnant woman is admitted to 
hospital 
Every 15–30 minutes until blood pressure is 
less than 160/110 mmHg, then at least four 
times daily while the pregnant woman is an 
inpatient, depending on clinical circumstances 
Dipstick 
proteinuria 
testing 
Only repeat if clinically indicated, for example 
if new symptoms and signs develop or if 
there is uncertainty over diagnosis 
Only repeat if clinically indicated, for example 
if new symptoms and signs develop or if 
there is uncertainty over diagnosis 
Blood tests Measure full blood count, liver function and 
renal function twice a week 
Measure full blood count, liver function and 
renal function three times a week 
Fetal assessment Offer fetal heart auscultation at every antenatal 
appointment 
Carry out ultrasound assessment of the fetus 
at diagnosis and, if normal, repeat every 
2˛weeks 
Carry out cardiotocography at diagnosis and 
then only if clinically indicated 
Offer fetal heart auscultation at every 
antenatal appointment 
Carry out ultrasound assessment of the fetus 
at diagnosis and, if normal, repeat every 
2˛weeks 
Carry out cardiotocography at diagnosis and 
then only if clinically indicated 
Source: Adapted from NICE (2019). Hypertension in Pregnancy: Diagnosis and Management. NICE guideline [NG133]. Last updated: 
17˛April 2023. 
136 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 137 04/03/2024 16:07
 
 
Pre-eclampsia 
minimal protein and normal haematological and 
biochemical parameters may be monitored as out￾patients, but will require frequent attendance for 
fetal and maternal assessment. Pregnant women 
with severe hypertension, signiÿcant proteinuria or 
abnormal haematological or biochemical parameters 
require admission and inpatient management. 
INVESTIGATIONS 
To monitor maternal complications, the following 
investigations are required: 
• full blood count (with particular emphasis on 
falling platelet count and rising haematocrit) 
• if platelet values are normal, additional clotting 
studies are not indicated 
• serum renal proÿle (including serum uric acid 
levels) 
• serum liver proÿle 
• frequent repeat proteinuria quantiÿcation is 
probably unhelpful once a diagnosis of pre￾eclampsia has been made 
To monitor fetal complications, the following 
investigations are required: 
• ultrasound assessment of: 
• fetal size 
• amniotic °uid volume 
• maternal and fetal Doppler assessments 
• antenatal cardiotocography, used in 
conjunction with ultrasound surveillance – 
provides a useful but by no means infallible 
indication of fetal well-being; a loss of baseline 
variability or decelerations may indicate fetal 
hypoxia. 
TREATMENT OF HYPERTENSION 
The most common cause of death in women who 
die of pre-eclampsia in the UK is cerebral bleeding 
secondary to uncontrolled systolic blood pressure. 
Therefore, the aim of antihypertensive therapy is 
to lower the blood pressure and reduce the risk of 
maternal cerebrovascular accident without reduc￾ing uterine blood °ow and compromising the fetus. 
There are a variety of antihypertensives used in the 
management of pre-eclampsia. 
Labetalol is an alpha-blocking and beta-blocking 
agent. It has a good safety record in pregnancy and 
can be given orally and intravenously. It is the ÿrst 
drug of choice in most national guidelines includ￾ing the current NICE guideline Hypertension in 
Pregnancy: Diagnosis and Management. Nifedipine 
is a calcium-channel blocker with a rapid onset of 
action. It can, however, cause severe headache that 
may mimic worsening disease. Methyldopa is a cen￾trally acting antihypertensive agent. It has a long￾established safety record in pregnancy. However, it 
can only be given orally, it takes upwards of 24 hours 
to take effect and it has a range of unpleasant side 
effects including sedation and depression. These 
properties limit its usefulness. In severe cases of ful￾minating disease, an intravenous infusion of hydral￾azine or labetalol can be titrated rapidly against 
changes in the blood pressure. 
TREATMENT AND PREVENTION 
OF˛ECLAMPSIA 
The drug of choice for the treatment of eclampsia 
is magnesium sulphate. This is given intravenously 
and has been shown to reduce the incidence of fur￾ther convulsions in pregnant women with eclamp￾sia. Magnesium sulphate should also be used in 
patients with severe pre-eclampsia to prevent the 
onset of convulsions. The management of eclampsia 
is described in further detail in Chapter 14. 
SCREENING AND PREVENTION 
The accurate prediction of pregnant women at risk 
of developing pre-eclampsia will facilitate targeting 
of increased antenatal surveillance while allowing 
those at low risk to participate in community-based 
antenatal care. In addition, a predictive test would in 
turn facilitate the development of novel therapeutic 
preventative interventions. 
Unfortunately, there is currently no early preg￾nancy screening test for pre-eclampsia. Despite 
intensive research in this area, no single blood bio￾marker has emerged that either alone or in com￾bination with other biomarkers or clinical data 
possesses sufÿcient sensitivity and speciÿcity to be 
clinically useful. 137 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 138 04/03/2024 16:07
 
 
Hypertensive disorders of pregnancy 
The ability of Doppler ultrasound uterine artery 
waveform analysis to identify pregnant women at 
risk of pre-eclampsia (and other adverse pregnancy 
outcomes) has been investigated with varying suc￾cess. In pregnancies with incomplete trophoblast 
remodelling of the spiral arteries, a characteristic 
‘notch’ can often be seen in the waveform pattern 
that frequently also demonstrates high resistance 
(see Chapter 4 and Figure 4.20). This screening test 
may have a role in women who have already been 
identiÿed as being at risk of the disease because of 
their medical or past obstetric history. However, it is 
not of value in screening low-risk pregnancies. 
Established preventative interventions include 
low-dose aspirin (typically 75–150 mg daily), which 
modestly reduces the risk of pre-eclampsia in high￾risk pregnant women; calcium supplementation may 
also reduce risk, but only in individuals with low 
dietary intake. 
ADDITIONAL POINTS IN 
MANAGEMENT 
Iatrogenic premature delivery of the fetus is often 
required in severe pre-eclampsia. If the pregnant 
woman is sufÿciently stable, she should be trans￾ferred to a centre with adequate facilities to care for 
the baby, and prior to 34 weeks’ gestation steroids 
should be given intramuscularly to the pregnant 
woman to reduce the chance of neonatal respiratory 
distress syndrome. Delivery before term is often by 
caesarean section. Such patients are at particularly 
high risk for thromboembolism and should be given 
prophylactic subcutaneous heparin and issued with 
anti-thromboembolic stockings. In the case of spon￾taneous or induced labour and if clotting studies are 
normal, epidural anaesthesia is indicated, as it helps 
control blood pressure. Ergometrine is avoided in the 
management of the third stage, as it can signiÿcantly 
increase blood pressure. 
Postnatally, blood pressure and proteinuria will 
resolve. However, in a minority of cases, one or both 
persist beyond 6 weeks postpartum and this sug￾gests the presence of underlying chronic hyperten￾sion or renal disease. Additionally, a careful search 
should be made postnatally for underlying medical 
disorders in anyone who presents with severe pre￾eclampsia before 34 weeks’ gestation. 
KEY LEARNING POINTS 
˜ Pre-eclampsia is a multisystem disorder 
that likely originates in the placenta and is a 
signiÿcant cause of maternal and perinatal 
morbidity and mortality. 
˜ There is no cure other than delivery; the aim of 
management is to stabilize the maternal blood 
pressure and prevent seizures and cerebral 
bleeding. 
CHRONIC HYPERTENSION 
Essential hypertension is the underlying cause of 
chronic hypertension in 90% of cases. However, before 
a diagnosis is made, other causes need to be excluded. 
Appropriate investigations include serum creatinine, 
electrolytes, urine analysis (blood, protein and glu￾cose), protein quantiÿcation and renal ultrasound. 
Autoantibody screen and cardiac investigations 
including electrocardiography and echocardiography 
should be considered when there is clinical suspicion 
(history, examination or investigation results) of a sec￾ondary cause. Renal causes account for over 80% of 
cases of secondary hypertension (see Chapter 10). 
BOX 9.4: Causes of chronic hypertension 
˜ Idiopathic 
˜ Essential hypertension 
˜ Vascular disorders 
˜ Renal artery stenosis 
˜ Coarctation of the aorta 
˜ Renal disease 
˜ Polycystic disease 
˜ Diabetic nephropathy 
˜ Chronic glomerulonephritis 
˜ Nephrotic and nephritic syndrome 
˜ Collagen vascular disease 
˜ Systemic sclerosis 
˜ Systemic lupus erythematosus 
˜ Rheumatoid disease 
˜ Endocrine disease 
˜ Phaeochromocytoma 
˜ Conn syndrome 
˜ Cushing syndrome 
˜ Diabetes mellitus 
138 Fetal growth restriction
 139
 The maternal risks of pre-existing hyperten￾sion include pre-eclampsia, abruption, heart fail￾ure and intracerebral haemorrhage. Pre-eclampsia 
develops in around one-third of pregnant women 
with pre-existing hypertension and is more likely to 
affect those with severe hypertension and/or renal 
disease.
 MANAGEMENT
 In mild cases (<150/100 mmHg) there is no imme￾diate indication to treat; however, the pregnancy 
should be monitored carefully to detect changes in 
blood pressure or features of pre-eclampsia (usu￾ally indicated by new proteinuria), as well as FGR 
by serial ultrasound scans. Antihypertensive medi￾cation taken before pregnancy can often be dis￾continued in the fi rst half of pregnancy, as there 
is a physiological reduction in blood pressure. 
Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors, 
angiotensin-receptor blockers and atenolol should 
be discontinued because of concerns of teratogenic￾ity and negative effects on fetal growth.
 If the blood pressure is consistently >150/100 
mmHg, antihypertensive medication should be 
offered to reduce the risk of severe hypertension 
and the attendant risks of intracerebral haemor￾rhage, although treatment does not prevent placen￾tal abruption or superimposed pre-eclampsia, nor 
does it infl uence perinatal outcome. Preferred anti￾hypertensive agents include labetolol, nifedipine 
and methyldopa (centrally acting agent). The aim 
of antihypertensive medication is to maintain the 
blood pressure below 160 mmHg systolic and 80–100 
mmHg diastolic.
 The obstetric management of pre-existing hyper￾tension involves close monitoring for the develop￾ment of superimposed pre-eclampsia and FGR. In 
pregnant women requiring antihypertensive medi￾cation, delivery is usually offered around 39 weeks, 
but may need to be earlier if complications have 
developed.
 Following delivery, the maternal blood pressure 
often decreases, but careful surveillance is required, 
as it tends to increase again on the third or fourth 
post-partum day. Breastfeeding is encouraged and 
medication should be changed to those drugs that 
are considered safe.
FETAL GROWTH RESTRICTION
DEFINITION AND INCIDENCE
FGR is defi ned as a failure of a fetus to achieve its 
genetic growth potential. This usually results in a 
fetus that is small for gestational age (SGA). SGA 
means that the weight of the fetus is less than the 
10th centile for its gestation. Other cut-off points 
(e.g. the 3rd centile) can be used. The terms SGA and 
FGR are not synonymous. It is important to remem￾ber that most SGA fetuses are constitutionally small 
and are not compromised. FGR indicates that there 
is a pathological process operating to restrict the 
growth rate of the fetus. Consequently, some FGR 
fetuses may not actually be SGA, but nevertheless 
will have failed to fulfi l their growth potential.
There are a wide variety of reasons why a baby 
may be born small, including congenital anomalies, 
fetal infections and chromosomal abnormalities 
(these are discussed in more detail in Chapter 5). 
BOX 9.5: Risk factors for developing 
superimposed pre-eclampsia
. Renal disease
. Maternal age >40 years
. Pre-existing diabetes
. Multiple pregnancy
. Connective tissue disease (e.g. antiphospholipid 
syndrome)
. Coarctation of the aorta
. Blood pressure >160/100 mmHg in early 
pregnancy
. Pre-pregnancy BMI >35
. Previous pre-eclampsia
KEY LEARNING POINTS
. Chronic hypertension is associated with a range 
of adverse maternal and perinatal outcomes and 
it should be regarded as a high-risk pregnancy.
. Chronic hypertension may present for the fi rst 
time in pregnancy and it may initially be masked 
by the profound vasodilatation and decrease in 
peripheral vascular resistance seen in the fi rst 
trimester of pregnancy.
Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 139 04/03/2024 16:07
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 140 04/03/2024 16:07
Hypertensive disorders of pregnancy 
However, most babies that are born small are either 
constitutionally small (i.e. healthy but born to small 
parents and fulÿlling their genetic growth potential) 
or are small secondary to abnormal placenta func￾tion and have FGR. 
FGR is a major cause of neonatal and infant mor￾bidity and mortality. There is a signiÿcant cost asso￾ciated with providing adequate facilities to look after 
these babies. In addition, there is an increasing body 
of evidence that certain adult diseases (such as dia￾betes and hypertension) are more common in adults 
who were born with FGR. 
AETIOLOGY 
The common causes of FGR are listed in Table 9.3. 
They are grouped into two main categories: factors 
that directly affect the intrinsic growth potential 
of the fetus and external in°uences that reduce the 
support for fetal growth. Chromosome abnormali￾ties, genetic syndromes and fetal infections can alter 
intrinsic fetal growth potential. External in°uences 
that affect fetal growth can be subdivided into mater￾nal systemic factors and placental insufÿciency. 
Table 9.3 Causes of fetal growth restriction 
Type Causes 
Reduced fetal Aneuploidies (e.g. trisomy 18) 
growth Single gene defects (e.g. Seckel 
potential syndrome) 
Structural abnormalities (e.g. renal 
agenesis) 
Intrauterine infections (e.g. 
cytomegalovirus, toxoplasmosis) 
Reduced fetal 
growth support 
Maternal 
factors 
Undernutrition (e.g. poverty, eating 
disorders) 
Maternal hypoxia (e.g. living at altitude, 
cyanotic heart disease) 
Drugs (e.g. alcohol, cigarettes, cocaine) 
Placental Reduced uteroplacental perfusion (e.g. 
factors inadequate trophoblast invasion, 
sickle cell disease, multiple gestation) 
Reduced fetoplacental perfusion (e.g. 
single umbilical artery, twin–twin 
transfusion syndrome) 
Maternal undernutrition is globally the major 
cause of FGR. Low maternal oxygen saturation, 
which can occur with cyanotic heart disease or at 
high altitude, will reduce fetal oxygen levels and fetal 
metabolism. Smoking, by increasing the amount of 
carboxyhaemoglobin in the maternal circulation, 
effectively reduces the amount of oxygen available to 
the fetus, thus causing FGR. A wide variety of drugs 
other than tobacco can affect fetal growth, includ￾ing alcohol and cocaine, probably through multiple 
mechanisms affecting fetal enzyme systems, placen￾tal blood °ow and maternal substrate levels. 
In developed countries, the most common cause 
of FGR is poor placental function secondary to inade￾quate trophoblast invasion of the spiral arteries. This 
results in reduced perfusion of the intracotyledon 
space, which in turn leads to abnormal development 
of the terminal villi and impaired transfer of oxygen 
and nutrients to the fetus. The placental pathology 
of this is similar to that seen in pre-eclampsia and 
accounts for why pre-eclampsia and FGR commonly 
present together. Less frequently, reduced perfusion 
can occur from other conditions such as maternal 
sickle cell disease and antiphospholipid syndrome 
(see Chapter 10). Multiple pregnancy usually results 
in a sharing of the uterine vascularity, which causes 
a relative reduction in the blood °ow to each pla￾centa. On the fetal side of the placental circulation, 
abnormalities of the umbilical cord, such as a single 
umbilical artery, are associated with FGR as are the 
intraplacental vascular connections found in mono￾chorionic twinning. 
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY 
FGR is frequently classiÿed as symmetrical or asym￾metrical. Symmetrically small fetuses are normally 
associated with factors that directly impair fetal 
growth such as chromosomal disorders and fetal 
infections. Asymmetrical growth restriction is clas￾sically associated with uteroplacental insufÿciency, 
which leads to reduced oxygen transfer to the fetus 
and impaired excretion of carbon dioxide by the pla￾centa. A fall in fetal oxygen and a rise in fetal carbon 
dioxide in the fetal blood induces a chemoreceptor 
response in the fetal carotid bodies with resulting 
vasodilatation in the fetal brain, myocardium and 
adrenal glands, and vasoconstriction in the kidneys, 140 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 141 04/03/2024 16:07
 
Fetal growth restriction 
splanchnic vessels, limbs and subcutaneous tis￾sues. The liver circulation is also severely reduced. 
Normally, 50% of the well-oxygenated blood in the 
umbilical vein passes to the right atrium through 
the ductus venosus, eventually to reach the fetal 
brain, with the remainder going to the portal circu￾lation in the liver. When there is fetal hypoxia, more 
of the well-oxygenated blood from the umbilical 
vein is diverted through the ductus venosus, which 
means that the liver receives less. The result of all 
these circulatory changes is an asymmetrical fetus 
with relative brain sparing, reduced abdominal girth 
and skin thickness. The vasoconstriction in the 
fetal kidneys results in impaired urine production 
and oligohydramnios. Fetal hypoxaemia also leads 
to severe metabolic changes in the fetus re°ecting 
intrauterine starvation. Antenatal fetal blood sam￾pling has shown reduced levels of nutrients such as 
glucose and amino acids (especially essential amino 
acids) and of hormones such as thyroxine and insu￾lin. There are increased levels of corticosteroids and 
catecholamines, which re°ect the increased perfu￾sion of the adrenal gland. Haematological changes 
also re°ect chronic hypoxia, with increased levels of 
erythropoietin and nucleated red blood cells. 
Chronic fetal hypoxia in FGR may eventually lead 
to fetal acidaemia, both respiratory and metabolic, 
which if prolonged can lead to intrauterine death if 
the fetus is not removed from its hostile environment. 
FGR fetuses are especially at risk from profound 
asphyxia in labour due to further compromise of the 
uteroplacental circulation by uterine contractions. 
MANAGEMENT 
The assessment of fetal well-being is described in 
detail in Chapter 4. In brief, the detection of an 
SGA infant contains two elements: ÿrst, the accurate 
assessment of gestational age and, second, the rec￾ognition of fetal smallness. 
Early measurement of the fetal crown–rump 
length before 13 weeks + 6 days’ gestation or a head 
circumference between 13 + 6 and 20 weeks’ gestation 
remains the method of choice for conÿrming gesta￾tional age. Thereafter, the most precise way of assess￾ing fetal growth is by ultrasound biometry (biparietal 
diameter, head circumference, abdominal circumfer￾ence and femur length) serially at set time intervals 
(usually of 4 weeks and no less than 2 weeks). As 
resources in most units do not permit comprehensive 
serial ultrasound in all pregnancies, serial ultrasound 
biometry is usually performed in ‘at risk’ pregnancies 
(see Box 9.6, ‘Pregnancies at risk of FGR’). 
BOX 9.6: Pregnancies at risk of FGR 
˜ Multiple pregnancies (see Chapter 7) 
˜ History of FGR in previous pregnancy 
˜ Current heavy smokers 
˜ Current drug users 
˜ Women with underlying medical disorders: 
– hypertension 
– diabetes 
– cyanotic heart disease 
– antiphospholipid syndrome 
˜ Pregnancies where the symphysis–fundal height 
is less than expected 
When a diagnosis of SGA has been made, the 
next step is to clarify whether the baby is normal and 
simply constitutionally small or whether it is FGR. A 
comprehensive ultrasound examination of the fetal 
anatomy should be made, looking for fetal abnormal￾ities that may explain the size. Even if the anatomy 
appears normal, the presence of symmetrical growth 
restriction in the presence of a normal amniotic °uid 
volume raises the suspicion of a fetal genetic defect 
and the parents should be counselled accordingly. 
Amniocentesis and rapid fetal karyotype should be 
offered. Features suspicious of uteroplacental insufÿ￾ciency are an asymmetrically growth restricted fetus 
with a relatively small abdominal circumference, oli￾gohydramnios and a high umbilical artery resistance 
(see Chapter 4, Figures 4.14–4.16). 
At present, there are no widely accepted treat￾ments available for FGR related to uteroplacental 
insufÿciency. Obvious contributing factors such as 
smoking, alcohol and drug abuse should be stopped 
and the health of the woman should be optimized. 
Low-dose aspirin may have a role in the prevention 
of FGR in high-risk pregnancies but is not effective 
in the treatment of established cases. 
When growth restriction is severe and the fetus is 
too immature to be delivered safely, bed rest in hospi￾tal is usually advised in an effort to maximize placen￾tal blood °ow, although the evidence supporting this 141 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 142 04/03/2024 16:07
 
 
Hypertensive disorders of pregnancy 
practice is limited. The aim of these interventions is 
to gain as much maturity as possible before deliver￾ing the fetus, thereby reducing the morbidity associ￾ated with prematurity. However, timing the delivery 
in such a way that maximizes gestation without 
risking the baby dying in utero demands intensive 
fetal surveillance. The most widely accepted meth￾ods of monitoring the fetus are discussed in detail 
in Chapter 4 and are summarized brie°y in Box 9.7, 
‘Surveillance of the FGR fetus’. 
BOX 9.7: Surveillance of the FGR fetus 
˜ Serial biometry and amniotic ˝uid volume 
measurement performed at no less than 
2-weekly intervals 
˜ In the FGR fetus, dynamic tests of fetal well￾being include: 
– umbilical artery Doppler wave form analysis 
– absence or reversed ˝ow of blood in the 
umbilical artery during fetal diastole – requires 
delivery in the near future 
– in extremely preterm or pre-viable infants 
with absent or reversed end diastolic ˝ow 
in the umbilical artery, other fetal arterial 
and venous Doppler studies, although 
their use has not yet been proven by large 
prospective trials 
˜ Fetal CTG 
PROGNOSIS 
The prognosis of FGR is highly dependent upon the 
cause, severity and gestation at delivery. When FGR 
is related to a congenital infection or chromosomal 
abnormality, subsequent development of the child 
will be determined by the precise abnormality. 
Among babies with FGR secondary to uteropla￾cental insufÿciency, some babies will suffer morbid￾ity or mortality as a result of prematurity. For the 
survivors, the long-term prognosis is good, with low 
incidences of mental and physical disability, and most 
infants demonstrate ‘catch-up growth’ after delivery 
when feeding is established. A link between FGR 
and the adult onset of hypertension and diabetes 
has been established. It remains to be seen whether 
other associations will be found in the future. 
KEY LEARNING POINTS 
˜ SGA refers to those fetuses whose estimated 
weight is less than the 10th centile for their 
gestational age. Most SGA fetuses are healthy. 
˜ FGR refers to any fetus failing to achieve its 
growth potential. Not all SGA fetuses are FGR 
and some FGR fetuses are not SGA. 
˜ FGR carries an increased risk of intra-partum 
asphyxia and stillbirth and a possible long-term 
risk of hypertension and other cardiovascular 
diseases. 
˜ There is no effective treatment and the 
management involves appropriate monitoring 
and timely delivery. 
FURTHER READING 
Knight M, Bunch K, Tuffnell D, Patel R, Shakespeare 
J, Kotnis R, Kenyon S, Kurinczuk JJ (eds.); 
MBRRACE-UK (2021). Saving Lives, Improving 
Mothers’ Care - Lessons learned to inform maternity 
care from the UK and Ireland Conÿdential Enquiries 
into Maternal Deaths and Morbidity 2017-19. 
National Perinatal Epidemiology Unit, University 
of Oxford. 
Magee LA, Brown MA, Hall DR, Gupte S, Hennessy 
A, Karumanchi SA, Kenny LC, McCarthy F, Myers 
J, Poon LC, Rana S, Saito S, Staff AC, Tsigas E, 
von Dadelszen P (2022). The 2021 International 
Society for the Study of Hypertension 
in Pregnancy classiÿcation, diagnosis & 
management recommendations for international 
practice. Pregnancy Hypertension, 27: 148–169. 
https:doi.org/10.1016/j.preghy.2021.09.008. 
NICE (2019). Hypertension in Pregnancy: Diagnosis 
and Management. NICE guideline [NG 133]. Last 
updated: 17 April 2023. https://www.nice.org. 
uk/guidance/ng133/resources/hypertension￾in-pregnancy-diagnosis-and-management￾pdf-66141717671365. 
142 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 143 04/03/2024 16:07
 
Self-assessment 
SELF-ASSESSMENT 
For interactive SBAs and EMQs relating to this chapter, visit www.routledge.com/cw/mccarthy. 
CASE HISTORY 1 
MB is a 34-year-old White primigravid teacher. She pres￾ents in the hospital antenatal clinic for the ÿrst time at 11 
weeks’ gestation. She is noted to be a non-smoker. There 
is no relevant past medical history, but her family history 
reveals that her mother has had hypertension since her late 
40s. MB is 1.56 m tall and weighs 83 kg. Her booking blood 
pressure was 110/74 mmHg and urinalysis was normal. 
The antenatal period was uneventful until 37 weeks. 
At 37 weeks’ gestation, a community midwife noted that 
MB’s blood pressure had risen to 150/100 mmHg and 
that there was 1+ of protein in the urine. MB was referred 
to the hospital as an emergency admission. 
On arrival at the hospital, MB’s blood pressure was 
160/110 mmHg and there was 3+ of protein in the urine. 
She was complaining of some upper abdominal pain and 
there was hyperre˝exia. The fetal heart rate was normal. 
What are the risks in this case?
 ANSWER 
MB is hypertensive and has marked proteinuria, hav￾ing previously been normotensive. The diagnosis is 
pre-eclampsia. The level of the blood pressure denotes 
severe disease. The pregnancy is at term. 
MB is at risk of developing a worsening condition. A 
further rise in her blood pressure will put her at risk of 
intracranial haemorrhage. She may have an eclamptic 
ÿt, develop a coagulopathy and HELLP syndrome, and 
possibly experience renal failure. There is a further risk of 
placental abruption and severe haemorrhage. The fetus 
is at risk secondary to the mother’s condition. 
Plan of action 
˜ The patient does not require resuscitation. 
˜ The fetus does not require emergency delivery. 
˜ Call for help. 
˜ Establish an intravenous line with a wide-bore 
cannula. 
˜ Take blood for clotting studies, full blood count 
and blood biochemistry and save serum. 
˜ Prevent an eclamptic ÿt from occurring: give 
magnesium sulphate intravenously 4 g bolus over 
20 minutes. Continue with 1 g/hour. 
˜ At these doses, monitoring blood levels is 
not necessary unless the urine output falls to 
less than 20 mL/hour (magnesium sulphate is 
excreted via the kidneys). 
˜ Lower the blood pressure. The aim is to achieve a 
diastolic blood pressure of 90–100 mmHg and the 
systolic blood pressure should be treated if above 
160 mmHg. Check the blood pressure every 5 
minutes. Oral labetalol or nifedipine can be used to 
treat blood pressure. If unsuccessful, intravenous 
hydralazine or labetalol, as a bolus followed by an 
infusion, will be needed. 
˜ Measure input and output of ˝uids. 
˜ Put a Foley catheter into the bladder. 
˜ Restrict input from all sources to 80 mL/hour (or 1 
mL/kg/hour). 
˜ If the clotting becomes deranged (platelets <50 × 
109/L), contact a consultant haematologist for advice. 
Management of the case 
In this case, the blood pressure fell to 145/96 mmHg 
on treatment with labetalol. Treatment with magnesium 
sulphate was started and the urine output averaged 
35 mL/hour. Clotting studies, full blood count and bio￾chemistry remained normal. The CTG showed a normal 
fetal heart pattern. 
Once stabilization had been achieved, delivery was 
planned. Because the clotting studies were normal, an epi￾dural was put in place. Vaginal examination showed that 
the cervix was favourable, with the fetus presenting by the 
head. Therefore, induction of labour was commenced, and 
after a rapid labour a 3.2-kg boy was delivered, with normal 
Apgar scores. The estimated blood loss was 600 mL. 
After delivery, MB was monitored in the delivery suite 
for 36 hours. The magnesium sulphate infusion was 
continued for 24 hours after delivery. Oral labetalol was 
commenced, and the infusion was discontinued. There 
was initial concern with regard to the urine output, which 
remained at 25 mL/hour for the ÿrst 6 hours after deliv￾ery. The position was watched, but no active steps were 
taken to redress the issue and, between 6 and 12 hours 
after delivery, the patient began to have a marked diure￾sis. Seven days after delivery, MB’s blood pressure had 
returned to normal without medication.
 Conclusion 
This case demonstrates appropriate management of 
pre-eclampsia at term. Major problems were prevented 
by swift action. MB is at risk of pre-eclampsia in her next 
pregnancy, although it is likely to be less severe. She is 
also at risk of developing hypertension and other forms 
of cardiovascular disease later in life. 
143 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 144 04/03/2024 16:07
 
Hypertensive disorders of pregnancy 
CASE HISTORY 2 
LK is a 25-year-old Black primigravid woman who works 
as a ÿtness instructor. She was seen in the hospital ante￾natal clinic for the ÿrst time at 13 weeks’ gestation. She is 
a non-smoker. There is no relevant past medical history 
and no relevant family history. LK is 1.6 m tall and weighs 
55 kg. Her booking blood pressure was 100/60 mmHg 
and urinalysis was normal. 
The antenatal period was uneventful until 28 + 5 
weeks, when the community midwife noted that LK’s 
symphysial–fundal height was 24 cm and her blood 
pressure was 140/90 mmHg. There was no protein in the 
urine. LK was referred to the hospital and attended the 
fetal assessment unit the following day. 
At the hospital, LK’s blood pressure was 150/96 
mmHg. Urinalysis was negative for protein. An ultra￾sound scan revealed the presence of a fetus with biom￾etry all less than the 10th centile for gestational age, a 
signiÿcantly reduced amniotic ˝uid index and raised 
umbilical artery resistance on Doppler wave form analy￾sis. Laboratory investigations were performed. The PlGF 
was low and her platelet count was 90 × 109/L. 
What is the likely diagnosis and how should the patient 
be managed? 
ANSWER 
LK had an SGA baby with ultrasound features sugges￾tive of FGR. Her blood pressure was mildly elevated and, 
although she did not have proteinuria, the presence of 
uteroplacental dysfunction indicates the diagnosis is 
pre-eclampsia. A low PlGF indicated that LK was highly 
likely to require delivery in the next 14 days. A low platelet 
count indicated that the maternal vascular endothelium 
was compromised. 
Plan of action 
˜ The patient does not require resuscitation. 
˜ The fetus does not require emergency delivery. 
˜ However, the low PlGF indicates a high probability 
that delivery will be required within the next 14 
days. 
˜ Therefore, steroids should be given to promote 
fetal lung maturity in anticipation of premature 
delivery. 
˜ A low platelet count is indicative of maternal 
vascular endothelial involvement and blood tests 
should be repeated at regular intervals, initially 
every 24 hours. 
˜ The fetus has FGR with abnormal umbilical 
artery Doppler and therefore needs increased 
surveillance. 
˜ LK has high blood pressure, which requires 
increased surveillance and may require treatment. 
˜ Therefore, inpatient observation is indicated. 
˜ Deteriorating liver and haematological indices 
indicate worsening disease and the possible onset 
of HELLP syndrome. This mandates delivery and 
therefore magnesium sulphate should be given for 
neuroprotection at this gestation. 
˜ The neonatology team should be informed as 
the fetus will require admission to the neonatal 
intensive care unit. 
Management of the case 
LK was admitted to the antenatal ward for observation. 
Steroids were administered to promote fetal lung maturity 
in anticipation of a premature delivery. LK did not require 
antihypertensive treatment, as her blood pressure was 
never more than 140/90 mmHg following admission. 
However, 48 hours later, LK’s platelet count had fallen to 
50 x10–9/L and her liver function tests were abnormal. A 
decision was made to deliver in the light of the diagnosis 
of pre-eclampsia and deteriorating liver and haemato￾logical indices. Magnesium sulphate was given for neu￾roprotection and LK was delivered by caesarean section 
of a male infant weighing 975 g at 29 weeks’ gestation. 
He was admitted to the neonatal intensive care unit for 
ongoing management and was ultimately discharged 6 
weeks later having made excellent progress. LK made a 
rapid recovery post-delivery. Her blood tests normalized 
within 24 hours and she never required antihypertensive 
treatment. 
Conclusion 
This case demonstrates preterm presentation of pre￾eclampsia, characterized by uteroplacental dysfunction 
and severe FGR. LK was delivered promptly in the light 
of deteriorating liver and haematological indices, thus 
avoiding severe maternal complications of this disease 
including HELLP syndrome. This required premature 
delivery by caesarean section but antenatal treatment 
with steroids and magnesium sulphate helped to mini￾mize the risks of premature delivery to the fetus. LK is at 
high risk of pre-eclampsia in her next pregnancy. She is 
also at risk of developing hypertension and other forms 
of cardiovascular disease later in life. 
144 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 145 04/03/2024 16:07
10 
Medical complications of 
pregnancy 
PHILIPPA J MARSDEN 
Introduction 145 
Maternal deaths and medical disorders 145 
Pre-conception counselling 146 
Renal disease 147 
Endocrine disorders 148 
Heart disease 153 
Respiratory disease 157 
Neurological disorders 160 
Haematological abnormalities 163 
Gastrointestinal disorders 166 
Connective tissue disease 167 
Skin disease 169 
Further reading 170 
Self-assessment 171 
 Learning Objectives 
• Understand the importance of medical conditions in pregnancy in relation to maternal and infant 
health. 
• Appreciate the importance of preconception counselling and its impact on improving pregnancy 
outcomes. 
• Understand the impact of common medical conditions such as hypertension, kidney disease, cardiac 
disease, epilepsy and diabetes on pregnancy. 
• Appreciate the contribution of maternal medical disease to mortality and the need for a multidisci￾plinary approach to care. 
INTRODUCTION 
Pregnancy in women with pre-existing medical 
diseases is becoming increasingly common as the 
treatment of many chronic conditions improves. 
Those with underlying medical conditions are at 
increased risk of developing complications in preg￾nancy, with an associated increase in maternal and 
fetal morbidity and mortality, and this is discussed 
in the next section. In this chapter, the risks and 
management˜ – including the importance of pre￾pregnancy counselling and care during pregnancy 
by a multidisciplinary team (MDT) of doctors and 
health professionals with experience of managing 
the disorder in question during pregnancy˜– of the 
more common pre-existing medical disorders that 
are seen in pregnancy are discussed. 
MATERNAL DEATHS AND 
MEDICAL DISORDERS 
Conÿdential enquiries into maternal deaths (deÿned 
as the death of a woman during pregnancy and up to 
6 weeks after birth) have been undertaken within the 
UK since 1952. Initially, the reports were triennial 
145 
10.1201/9781003196112-10 ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 146 04/03/2024 16:07
Medical complications of pregnancy 
but, since 2009, there has been an annual report 
from Mothers and Babies, Reducing Risk through 
Audits and Conÿdential Enquiries across the UK 
(MBRRACE-UK) speciÿcally aimed at reducing 
maternal mortality and morbidity. MBRRACE-UK 
publishes recommendations to inform future mater￾nity care based on lessons learnt from the enquiry. 
For many years, direct maternal deaths, which 
includes deaths from obstetric complications of 
pregnancy (e.g. haemorrhage, pre-eclampsia and 
venous thromboembolism), predominated over 
indirect maternal deaths, which include deaths that 
result from pre-existing disease, primarily medical 
conditions. Direct deaths have decreased over the 
years as maternity care has improved, with new 
guidelines, treatments and prophylactic measures 
being introduced for common obstetric compli￾cations. However, indirect deaths have, in recent 
years, plateaued, and are now more common than 
direct deaths. This is thought to be multifactorial but 
is likely to be because (1) more women with complex 
medical conditions are surviving to adulthood and 
therefore becoming pregnant, (2) women are start￾ing their families at an older age and (3) obesity has 
dramatically increased. The most common cause 
of maternal death is currently deaths associated 
with cardiac disease, with deaths from neurological 
causes being the third most common. 
Many of the deaths in the MBRRACE-UK reports 
involve common medical disorders, but at times 
the level of complexity and/or severity was not rec￾ognized. There are examples of pregnant women 
who died despite excellent multidisciplinary care, 
but in almost a quarter of these cases improve￾ments to their care may have made a difference to 
their outcome. There are also examples in which 
the medical complexity of the pregnant woman was 
compounded by mental health conditions, difÿcult 
social circumstances or learning difÿculties. These 
pregnant women should be regarded as extremely 
vulnerable, as their ability to comply with treatment 
may be compromised. 
PRE-CONCEPTION COUNSELLING 
Women with pre-existing medical problems can 
often pose complex management issues in pregnancy. 
Ideally, these individuals should be seen for pre￾conception care with a multidisciplinary approach. 
Unfortunately, while such counselling is available 
and does occur, many pregnancies are unplanned. It 
is therefore vital to be aware of the most common 
medical disorders that occur in the reproductive-age 
group and to have an appreciation of the associated 
risks and the appropriate management. 
2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 
Mid-year for each three-year period 
Rate per 100,000 maternities 
14 
12 
10 
8 
6 
4 
2 
0 
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 
Direct and indirect 
maternal death rate 
P-value for trend 
over time = 0.002 
Indirect maternal 
death rate 
P-value for trend 
over time = 0.008 
Direct maternal 
death rate 
P-value for trend 
over time = 0.016 
Direct deaths Indirect deaths Total direct and indirect deaths 
Figure 10.1 Direct and indirect maternal mortality rates per 100,000 maternities using the World Health 
Organization International Classiÿcation of Diseases Maternal Mortality (ICD-MM) tool and previous UK 
classiÿcation systems; 3-year rolling average rates (2004–2017). 146 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 147 04/03/2024 16:07
 
 
Renal disease 
 BOX 10.1: What the pregnant woman 
wants to know 
˜ Will I have a normal healthy baby? 
˜ Will pregnancy make my disease worse? 
˜ Will my disease be worse after pregnancy? 
˜ Will my pregnancy be complicated because of 
my disease? 
˜ How will the care in my pregnancy be different 
because of my disease? 
˜ Is there a risk of my children inheriting my 
condition? 
˜ What treatment is safe during pregnancy? 
˜ Can I have an epidural? 
˜ Should I be delivered by caesarean section? 
˜ Is breastfeeding advisable? 
RENAL DISEASE 
Renal plasma ˛ow increases very early in preg￾nancy and by the second trimester has increased by 
60–80%. Other changes include sodium and water 
retention; therefore, 80% of pregnant women have 
oedema by the end of pregnancy and a signiÿcant 
dilatation of the urinary collecting system. 
Women with chronic kidney disease (CKD) are 
less able to make the renal adaptations necessary for 
a healthy pregnancy. Therefore, pregnancy in women 
with renal disease requires increased maternal and 
fetal surveillance. Pre-pregnancy counselling is rec￾ommended in all women with CKD, and they should 
be made aware of the risks to the fetus and to their 
long-term renal function before conception. 
The pre-pregnancy counselling discussion should 
include the following factors: 
• reliable, safe contraception until the patient 
is advised that renal disease is optimized for 
pregnancy 
• fertility issues, if indicated 
• genetic counselling, if it is an inherited disorder 
• any risks to the mother and fetus during 
pregnancy 
• a review of medication, namely for the 
treatment of blood pressure and an adjustment 
of antihypertensives; in addition, changing to a 
medication that is safe in pregnancy may need 
to be considered 
• the need for low-dose aspirin to reduce the risk 
of pre-eclampsia 
• the need for anticoagulation once pregnant in 
women with signiÿcant proteinuria 
• the likelihood of prolonged admission or early 
delivery 
• the possibility of accelerated decline in 
maternal renal function 
• the need for post-partum follow-up 
CHRONIC KIDNEY DISEASE 
CKD is classiÿed into ÿve stages based on the level 
of renal function (Table 10.1). Stages 1 and 2 affect 
around 3% of the reproductive-age (20–39) popula￾tion and, while stages 3–5 affect 1 in 150 people in 
this age group, pregnancy in these women is less 
common. Some women are found to have CKD for 
the ÿrst time in their pregnancy, and pregnancy can 
unmask previously unrecognized renal disease. 
EFFECT OF PREGNANCY ON 
CHRONIC KIDNEY DISEASE 
Women with CKD stages 1–2 have mild renal dys￾function and usually have an uneventful pregnancy 
and good renal outcome. Pregnancy with a serum cre￾atinine level <125 ˝mol/L, minimal proteinuria (i.e. 
albumin/creatinine ratio of less than 3 mg/mmol) and 
absent or well-controlled hypertension pre-pregnancy 
has been shown to have little or no adverse effect on 
long-term maternal renal function. Women with mod￾erate to severe disease (stages 3–5) are at highest risk of 
complications during pregnancy and of an accelerated 
Table 10.1 Stages of chronic kidney disease 
Stage Description
 Estimated GFR 
(mL/min )
 1 Kidney damage with 
normal/raised GFR
 >90
 2 Kidney damage with mildly 
low GFR
 60–89
 3a Moderately low GFR 44–59 
3b Moderately low GFR 30–44
 4 Severely low GFR 15–29
 5 Kidney failure <15 or dialysis 
GFR, glomerular ÿltration rate. 147 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 148 04/03/2024 16:07
 
 
 
 
Medical complications of pregnancy 
decline in their renal function. Clinical complications 
including hypertension, proteinuria and recurrent uri￾nary infections independently and additively enhance 
the risk of a poor pregnancy outcome. 
The diagnosis of pre-eclampsia is often difÿ￾cult due to the presence of pre-existing hyperten￾sion and/or proteinuria. If pre-eclampsia develops, 
maternal renal function often deteriorates further, 
but any other additional complications, such as post￾partum haemorrhage or the use of non-steroidal 
anti-in˛ammatory drugs (NSAIDs), can critically 
threaten maternal renal function. 
EFFECT OF CHRONIC KIDNEY 
DISEASE ON PREGNANCY OUTCOME 
Pregnancies in individuals with CKD have increased 
risks of preterm delivery, delivery by caesarean sec￾tion and fetal growth restriction (FGR), dependent on 
the degree of renal impairment. The risk of adverse 
pregnancy outcome correlates with the degree of 
renal dysfunction (Table 10.2). 
DIALYSIS 
The incidence of pregnant women on dialysis (stage 5 
CKD) is increasing. Dialysis must be adjusted to allow 
for the physiological changes of pregnancy (plasma 
volume, ˛uid retention, electrolytes), and haemodial￾ysis is usually more effective then peritoneal dialysis 
Table 10.2 Estimated effects of renal function on 
pregnancy outcome and maternal renal function 
Mean pre-pregnancy serum 
creatinine value (mg/dL)
 <125 125–180 >180
 Fetal growth 
restriction (%)
 25 40 65 
Preterm delivery (%) 30 60 >90
 Pre-eclampsia (%) 22 40 60 
Loss of >25% 
renal function 
post-partum (%)
 0 20 50 
End-stage renal failure 
after 1 year (%)
 0 2 35 
Source: Data adapted from Williams and Davidson (2008). Chronic 
kidney disease in pregnancy. BMJ, 326: 211–15. 
 BOX 10.2: Monitoring of patients 
with CKD during pregnancy 
˜ Blood pressure 
˜ Renal function: creatinine 
˜ Urine: infection; proteinuria 
˜ Full blood count: haemoglobin; ferritin 
˜ Renal ultrasound 
˜ Fetal ultrasound: anatomy; uterine artery Doppler 
20–24 weeks; fetal growth in the third trimester 
in achieving this. Complications include preterm 
delivery, polyhydramnios (30–60%), pre-eclampsia 
(40–80%) and caesarean delivery (50%). 
PREGNANCY IN WOMEN WITH 
RENAL TRANSPLANTS 
Conception is rare in women with end-stage kidney 
disease. However, fertility returns rapidly after renal 
transplantation and it is estimated that 2–10% of 
female recipients conceive. Of pregnancies progress￾ing beyond the third trimester, the majority (>90%) 
result in a successful pregnancy outcome. 
 All pregnancies in transplant recipients are high 
risk and should be managed by an MDT. Better 
maternal outcomes have been found with lower 
doses of immunosuppressive therapy, a longer time 
since transplantation and better graft function with 
the absence of chronic rejection. There is an increased 
risk of complications in pregnant women with renal 
transplants, often related to residual underlying dis￾ease; complications include preterm delivery, pre￾eclampsia and urinary tract infection. It is considered 
safe to aim for a vaginal birth. With respect to cae￾sarean section, there is a small risk of damage to the 
transplant during the operation, which is increased 
during an emergency caesarean delivery. 
ENDOCRINE DISORDERS 
Endocrine disorders frequently complicate preg￾nancy, with the most common disorders being pre￾existing diabetes and thyroid dysfunction. Affected 
individuals should be under the care of a health 
professional – either their general practitioner (GP) 
or a specialist – and pre-conception counselling is 148 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 149 04/03/2024 16:07
 
Endocrine disorders 
recommended opportunistically at each encounter. 
Nevertheless, many pregnancies are unplanned, 
and those individuals with the most complex lives 
are at the highest risk of morbidity and mortality. 
In the 2023 MBRRACE-UK report, it was reported 
that thirty-three women died from endocrine causes, 
fourteen during pregnancy and within 6 weeks of 
birth. Causes of maternal death in recent reports 
include diabetes, particularly diabetic ketoacidosis 
and hypoglycaemia, Addison disease, Conn syn￾drome, phaechromocytoma and hyperemesis. Some 
of these women had new onset of an endocrine dis￾order that went unrecognised during or after preg￾nancy. Many of these women also had complex lives 
with a history of substance misuse and domestic 
abuse causing difÿculties with treatment adherence. 
DIABETES MELLITUS 
Pregnancy is a physiological state of glucose intoler￾ance and insulin resistance; therefore, glucose han￾dling is signiÿcantly altered in pregnancy. Pregnant 
women without diabetes have a doubling of insulin 
production from the pancreas, which explains the 
dramatic increase in insulin requirements in women 
with pre-existing diabetes. Fasting levels of plasma 
glucose are lower in pregnancy. This is often dif￾ÿcult to achieve and maintain in individuals with 
pre-existing diabetes, with poor glycaemic control 
having a detrimental effect on the fetus. The renal 
threshold for glucose falls in pregnancy and glycos￾uria is common, which is why glycosuria is not a reli￾able test for diabetes in pregnancy. 
Diabetes may complicate a pregnancy either 
because a woman has pre-existing (type 1 or type 2) 
diabetes mellitus before pregnancy or because dia￾betes develops during the course of the pregnancy, 
known as gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM). 
PRE-PREGNANCY COUNSELLING 
The aim of pre-pregnancy counselling for women 
with pre-existing diabetes is to achieve the best pos￾sible glycaemic control before pregnancy and to pro￾vide education about the implications of pregnancy. 
Preparation for pregnancy is best if the healthcare 
providers delivering care to the pregnant woman 
or person outside of pregnancy are able to provide 
information to help them optimize their diabetes 
and other medications before they embark on a preg￾nancy. Advice includes: 
• optimization of glycaemic control to achieve 
a glycated haemoglobin (HbA1c) level of <48 
mmol/mol without inducing hypoglycaemia 
• high-dose folic acid (5 mg daily) to reduce the 
risk of neural tube defects 
• planning adjustments, and considering 
stopping, other medications such as statins 
and angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) 
inhibitors before pregnancy 
Poor glycaemic control is associated with a sig￾niÿcantly increased risk of congenital malforma￾tions, particularly neural tube defects and cardiac 
anomalies. The most critical period for the embryo 
is the period of organogenesis, which occurs in the 
ÿrst 42 days of pregnancy, often before the preg￾nancy is medically conÿrmed. The level of HbA1c 
in early pregnancy correlates with the risk of early 
fetal loss. The UK National Institute for Health and 
Care Excellence (NICE) guidelines (2020) strongly 
advise that women with diabetes whose HbA1c 
is >86 mmol/mol should not become pregnant, as 
above that level there is a high incidence of congen￾ital malformation and fetal loss during pregnancy. 
Pre-pregnancy care with optimization of glycaemic 
control is associated with reduced rates of all mater￾nal and fetal complications. In the pre-conception 
period, blood sugar monitoring and diabetes ther￾apy should be intensiÿed, and reliable contracep￾tion is advised until glucose control is good. The 
pre-pregnancy target is pre-meal glucose levels of 
4–7 mmol/L. 
Diabetic vascular complications are common in 
women of reproductive age and in those with sig￾niÿcant retinopathy, nephropathy and/or neuropa￾thy beneÿt from MDT review prior to pregnancy. It 
is important that a plan for medication adjustment 
is made and that individuals are counselled regard￾ing the additional potential complications associated 
with diabetic microvascular disease. This is particu￾larly important for women with nephropathy, which 
is associated with a signiÿcantly increased risk of 
complications necessitating preterm delivery. There 
is also a risk that retinopathy can progress in preg￾nancy and during the post-partum period. 149 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 150 04/03/2024 16:07
Medical complications of pregnancy 
MATERNAL AND FETAL 
COMPLICATIONS OF DIABETES 
AND PREGNANCY 
Congenital malformation is a signiÿcant cause of 
mortality and morbidity in women with pre-existing 
diabetes, due to the adverse effect of high glucose 
levels on the developing fetus in the ÿrst trimester. 
Congenital malformations occur in 7 in 100 preg￾nancies with diabetes. This represents a fourfold 
higher risk than in pregnancies without diabetes, 
with cardiac and neural tube defects being the most 
common malformations. 
The fetus produces high levels of insulin during 
the third trimester in response to high glucose levels, 
and the resulting fetal hyperinsulinaemia explains 
the associated neonatal morbidity, including fetal 
macrosomia and neonatal complications such as 
hypoglycaemia, jaundice, respiratory distress syn￾drome and polycythaemia. 
Fetal macrosomia increases the risk of a traumatic 
birth and shoulder dystocia. Accelerated growth pat￾terns are typically seen in the late second and third 
trimesters and are attributable to poorly controlled 
diabetes in the majority of cases. Stillbirth, par￾ticularly in the third trimester, is ÿve times higher 
in pregnancies complicated by diabetes than in the 
general population. Concerns regarding fetal well￾being, particularly in the presence of fetal macro￾somia, frequently prompts early term delivery in 
women with diabetes, which in turn increases the 
likelihood of neonatal unit admission and reduces 
breastfeeding rates. 
The risk of pre-eclampsia is increased threefold 
in women with diabetes, and particularly in those 
with underlying microvascular disease. All individu￾als with diabetes should be offered low-dose aspirin 
(150 mg) from 12 weeks’ until 36 weeks’ gestation to 
reduce the risk of pre-eclampsia. Pregnant women 
with diabetic retinopathy are at risk of progression of 
the disease and should be kept under careful surveil￾lance (retinal screening at booking, at 16–20 weeks’ 
and at 28 weeks’ gestation). Other possible compli￾cations include an increased incidence of infection, 
severe hyperglycaemia, hypoglycaemia and diabetic 
ketoacidosis. Complications that may arise also 
include an increased rate of caesarean and instru￾mental deliveries. 
MANAGEMENT OF TYPES 1 AND 2 
DIABETES IN PREGNANCY 
Women with diabetes should be managed through￾out their pregnancy in joint obstetric/diabetes 
antenatal clinics, where they are seen either once a 
week or once every 2 weeks by an MDT involving 
diabetic specialist midwives and nurses, a dietician, 
an obstetrician and a physician. The aim is to sup￾port the pregnant woman and her family during 
the pregnancy to safely optimize glycaemic control 
and to improve outcomes for the mother and baby. 
Women with diabetes should be seen as early as 
possible by the specialist team, ideally by 10 weeks, 
but earlier if possible, in view of the high percent￾age of unplanned pregnancies, even among those 
with pre-existing diabetes. Blood glucose monitor￾ing is encouraged seven times a day (before and 
1-hour after meals) with a target of <5.3 mmol/L and 
a 1-hour postprandial level target of <7.8 mmol/L. 
Pregnant women will require additional support 
and education regarding diet, the use of oral hypo￾glycaemic agents such as metformin (where appro￾priate), insulin adjustments for hyperglycaemia and 
the management of hypoglycaemia, particularly in 
individuals with reduced hypoglycaemic awareness, 
a condition that is common in pregnancy. Insulin 
resistance increases dramatically over the course of 
pregnancy and, therefore, women with pre-existing 
diabetes are usually required to increase their dose 
of insulin or metformin during the second half of 
pregnancy. 
A plan for the pregnancy should be set out in 
early pregnancy and should include renal and retinal 
screening, fetal surveillance and a plan for delivery. 
Women with diabetes should be offered a fetal anom￾aly scan at 19–20 weeks to detect congenital malfor￾mations, and this should include a detailed assessment 
of the cardiac out˛ow tracts. Serial growth scans in 
the third trimester are recommended to assess fetal 
growth and diagnose macrosomia and polyhydram￾nios. Timing and mode of delivery should be deter￾mined on an individual basis but, in general, provided 
the pregnancy has gone well and there are no other 
contraindications, pregnant women with diabetes 
should be able to aim for a vaginal birth between 37 
and 39 weeks. However, the development of macroso￾mia or maternal complications such as pre-eclampsia, 150 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 151 04/03/2024 16:07
 
Endocrine disorders 
together with the rate of failed induction, is such that 
the caesarean section rate among diabetic women 
is as high as 50%. For pregnant women requiring 
insulin, there should be close monitoring of mater￾nal blood glucose levels in established labour, and 
an insulin/glucose infusion to reduce the risk of neo￾natal hypoglycaemia should be considered. Insulin 
requirements return to pre-pregnancy levels imme￾diately following delivery and insulin doses should be 
adjusted accordingly. Women should be informed of 
the increased risk of hypoglycaemia in the postnatal 
period, particularly if they are breastfeeding. 
GESTATIONAL DIABETES 
GDM complicates 10–15% of pregnancies depending 
on the diagnostic criteria used. Screening for GDM 
is important, as the diagnosis and treatment of GDM 
BOX 10.3: Effects of pregnancy 
on˜diabetes 
˜ Nausea and vomiting, particularly in early 
pregnancy 
˜ Greater importance of tight glucose control 
˜ Increase in insulin dose requirements in the 
second half of pregnancy 
˜ Increased risk of severe hypoglycaemia with 
unawareness 
˜ Increase in risk of diabetic ketoacidosis 
˜ Risk of deterioration of pre-existing retinopathy 
˜ Risk of deterioration of established nephropathy 
BOX 10.4: Effects of diabetes on 
pregnancy 
˜ Increased risk of miscarriage 
˜ Risk of congenital malformation 
˜ Risk of macrosomia 
˜ Increased risk of pre-eclampsia 
˜ Increased risk of stillbirth 
˜ Increased risk of infection 
˜ Increased operative delivery rate 
˜ Increased risk of shoulder dystocia 
˜ Increased risk of neonatal complications such as 
respiratory distress syndrome, hypoglycaemia, 
jaundice and polycythaemia 
has been shown to improve outcomes for the mother 
and baby, including reducing the risk of fetal macro￾somia, trauma during birth (for both the mother and 
the baby), induction of labour and/or caesarean sec￾tion, neonatal hypoglycaemia and perinatal death. 
Women who develop GDM are also at increased risk 
of type 2 diabetes, and education about diet and life￾style during pregnancy can have important implica￾tions for future health. 
NICE guidelines (2020) recommend a diagno￾sis of GDM based on a fasting glucose level of ˙5.6 
mmol/L and/or a 2-hour (post-75 g glucose load) of 
7.8 mmol/L. Screening involves a glucose tolerance 
test at 24–28 weeks in the presence of any of the fol￾lowing risk factors: 
• previous GDM – this group of pregnant women 
should also have a glucose tolerance test or 
self-monitoring of glucose as early as possible 
in pregnancy, to detect previously undiagnosed 
type 2 diabetes 
• body mass index (BMI) above 30 kg/m2 
• previous macrosomic baby weighing 4.5 kg 
or˜more 
• an ethnicity with a high prevalence of diabetes 
• a family history of diabetes (a ÿrst-degree 
relative with diabetes) 
The principles of management during pregnancy 
are the same as for women with pre-existing dia￾betes. Pregnant women who have a fasting plasma 
glucose level below 7 mmol/L at diagnosis should be 
offered a trial of diet and exercise change. However, 
if targets are not met with 1–2 weeks, metformin 
and/or insulin should be offered. 
One of the most important components of the 
management of women who develop GDM is 
the exclusion of type 2 diabetes after pregnancy. 
Screening with a fasting glucose should be offered 
at 6–13 weeks after childbirth, or an HBA1c if after 
13 weeks. 
THYROID DISEASE 
Thyroid disease is common in those of childbear￾ing age. Many of the symptoms of thyroid disease, 
such as heat intolerance, constipation, fatigue, pal￾pitations and weight gain, resemble those of nor￾mal pregnancy and therefore new presentations of 151 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 152 04/03/2024 16:07
 
 
 
Medical complications of pregnancy 
thyroid disease can be difÿcult to detect during preg￾nancy. Physiological changes of pregnancy, including 
plasma volume expansion, increased thyroid-binding 
globulin production and relative iodine deÿciency, 
mean that thyroid hormone reference ranges for the 
non-pregnant population are not useful in preg￾nancy. Free thyroxine (fT4), free triiodothyronine 
(fT3) and thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) should 
be analysed when assessing thyroid function in preg￾nancy; total T3 and T4 should not be used. There is a 
fall in TSH and a rise in fT4 concentrations in the ÿrst 
trimester of normal pregnancy, followed by a fall in 
fT4 concentration with advancing gestation. 
HYPOTHYROIDISM 
Hypothyroidism is common and found in around 
1% of pregnant women. Worldwide, the commonest 
cause of hypothyroidism is iodine deÿciency, but this 
is rarely seen in the developed world, where auto￾immune Hashimoto thyroiditis is more common. 
Women diagnosed with hypothyroidism should con￾tinue thyroid replacement therapy during pregnancy, 
and biochemical euthyroidism is the aim, that is, 
maintaining the TSH at the lower end of the normal 
range. Thyroid function tests should be performed at 
booking and at 28 weeks, or more often if dose adjust￾ments are required. Suboptimal replacement therapy 
with levothyroxine has been associated with devel￾opmental delay and pregnancy loss in some studies; 
however, corrected hypothyroidism does not seem to 
in˛uence pregnancy outcome or complications. 
HYPERTHYROIDISM 
Autoimmune thyrotoxicosis (Graves’ disease) affects 
around 2 per 1,000 pregnancies and is usually diag￾nosed before pregnancy. Other causes of hyperthy￾roidism (5% overall) include toxic adenoma, subacute 
thyroiditis and toxic multinodular goitre. Symptoms 
include tremor, sweating, insomnia, hyperactivity 
and anxiety. Signs include goitre, Graves’ ophthal￾mopathy, tachycardia, hypertension with a wide 
pulse pressure, weight loss and pretibial myxoedema. 
Treatment during pregnancy should be drug therapy 
with the aim of maintaining maternal fT3 and fT4 
levels in the high/normal range. Radioactive iodine 
is contraindicated because it completely obliterates 
the fetal thyroid gland. Treatment options include 
carbimazole or propylthiouracil using the lowest 
acceptable dose, as high doses cross the placenta and 
may cause fetal hypothyroidism. 
Uncontrolled thyrotoxicosis is associated with 
increased risks of miscarriage, preterm delivery and 
FGR. Thyroid function therefore needs to be closely 
monitored, and many women can reduce their dose 
of medication, with almost one-third able to stop 
treatment in pregnancy. As TSH receptor-stimu￾lating antibodies cross the placenta, women with 
positive antibody titres during pregnancy should be 
referred for fetal surveillance during pregnancy, and 
after birth the baby should be reviewed by the neo￾natology team to exclude thyroid dysfunction. 
PITUITARY TUMOURS IN 
PREGNANCY 
Hyperprolactinaemia is an important cause of infer￾tility and amenorrhoea, and is most often due to a 
benign pituitary microadenoma. The pituitary gland 
enlarges by 50% during pregnancy, but it is rare for 
microadenomas to cause problems. Serial prolactin 
levels are unhelpful for monitoring tumour growth 
in pregnancy. Bromocriptine and cabergoline are 
usually stopped in pregnancy, and visual ÿelds 
and relevant symptoms such as frontal headache 
are monitored. If there is any suspicion of tumour 
growth during pregnancy, appropriate neuroimag￾ing should be arranged. Women with macroadeno￾mas (>1 cm) should be managed by an MDT during 
pregnancy (obstetrician/endocrinologist). 
ADRENAL DISEASE 
Adrenal disorders are covered here because, although 
they are uncommon in pregnancy, they can mimic 
common pregnancy symptoms and are also impor￾tant to remember as a differential diagnosis in ges￾tational hypertension that proves difÿcult to control. 
MBRRACE-UK report recommended that, when pre￾sented with a pregnant woman with complex symp￾toms, the emphasis should be on making a diagnosis, 
not simply excluding a diagnosis. Individuals on long￾term steroids may need additional steroids (e.g. intra￾venous hydrocortisone) in labour, as adrenal function 
will be suppressed by the endogenous steroids. 152 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 153 04/03/2024 16:07
 
 
 
Heart disease 
CUSHING SYNDROME 
Cushing syndrome is rare in pregnancy, as most 
affected women are infertile. It is characterized by 
increased glucocorticoid production, usually due 
to hypersecretion of adrenocorticotrophic hor￾mone from a pituitary tumour. However, in preg￾nancy, adrenal causes (tumours) are more common. 
Diagnosis is difÿcult because many of the symptoms 
(e.g. striae, weight gain, weakness, glucose intoler￾ance and hypertension) mimic normal pregnancy 
changes. If suspected, plasma cortisol levels should 
be measured (although levels increase in pregnancy) 
and adrenal imaging with ultrasound, computed 
tomography (CT) scan or magnetic resonance imag￾ing (MRI) should be used. There is a high incidence 
of pre-eclampsia, preterm delivery and stillbirth 
among those with Cushing syndrome. 
CONN SYNDROME 
Conn syndrome is caused by an adrenal tumour pro￾ducing excess aldosterone. While rare in pregnancy, 
it is considered one of the more common causes of 
secondary hypertension and therefore it is important 
to remember as a cause of gestational hypertension. 
Conn syndrome usually presents with hypertension 
and hypokalaemia and is diagnosed by high aldo￾sterone and low renin and enlargement of adrenals 
with CT scan or ultrasound. 
ADDISON DISEASE 
Addison disease (adrenal insufÿciency) is an autoim￾mune condition associated with clinical symptoms 
of exhaustion, nausea, hypotension, hypoglycae￾mia and weight loss. In previously diagnosed and 
adequately treated patients, the pregnancy usually 
continues normally. Replacement steroids should 
be continued in pregnancy and increased at times 
of stress such as hyperemesis and delivery. A new 
diagnosis is difÿcult to make in pregnancy because 
the cortisol levels, instead of being characteristically 
very low, may be in the low–normal range due to the 
physiological increase in cortisol-binding globulin in 
pregnancy. Occasionally, the disease may present as 
a crisis, and treatment consists of glucocorticoid and 
˛uid replacement. 
PHAEOCHROMOCYTOMA 
Phaeochromocytoma is a very rare catecholamine￾producing tumour usually arising within the adre￾nal medulla. In pregnancy, affected individuals may 
present with a hypertensive crisis, and the symptoms 
may be similar to those of pre-eclampsia or gesta￾tional hypertension. It should therefore be consid￾ered as a differential diagnosis when a pregnant 
woman presents with new-onset severe hyperten￾sion. A characteristic feature of a phaeochromocy￾toma is that the hypertension is paroxysmal, whereas 
in pre-eclampsia the hypertension is sustained. The 
diagnosis is conÿrmed by measurement of catechol￾amines in a 24-hour urine collection and in plasma, 
as well as by adrenal imaging. 
HEART DISEASE 
Peripheral dilatation and subsequent fall in systemic 
vascular resistance leads to an increase in plasma 
volume and a 40% increase in cardiac output in preg￾nancy. This is achieved primarily by an increase in 
stroke/volume but also by an increase in heart rate. 
The increase in plasma volume is greater than the 
increase in cardiac output, with a resulting lowering 
of blood pressure in pregnancy. The changes start 
early in pregnancy with a maximum cardiac output 
at about 28 weeks. Labour is associated with a fur￾ther increase in cardiac output (15% in the ÿrst stage 
and 50% in the second stage). Immediately after 
birth, contraction of the uterus causes the transfer of 
a signiÿcant volume of blood from the uterus into the 
systemic circulation. This explains why pregnancy 
increases the risk of pulmonary oedema and cardiac 
compromise for women with cardiac conditions, the 
degree of risk depending on the underlying heart 
condition, with the greatest risk being in the second 
stage and immediately after birth. 
MATERNAL MORTALITY/MORBIDITY 
FROM CARDIAC CAUSES 
Cardiac disease remains the most common cause of 
indirect maternal death and the most common cause 
of maternal death overall. There has been no statis￾tically signiÿcant change in the maternal mortality 153 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 154 04/03/2024 16:07
Medical complications of pregnancy 
Other 11% 
Aortic dissection 11% 
Sudden arrhythmic
cardiac deaths with a 
morphologically normal
heart (SAD/MNH) 18% 
Ischaemic deaths 24% 
Valvular heart disease 7% 
Essential hypertension 1% 
Myocardial disease cardiomyopathy 27% 
Figure 10.2 Causes of cardiovascular deaths in the UK and Ireland, 2015–2017. 
rate from cardiovascular disease in the UK over Electrocardiography, the measurement of tropo￾the last 30 years. Almost a quarter of the individu- nin levels and echocardiography are recommended 
als (22%) who died from cardiovascular causes in when a pregnant woman has chest pain and unex￾recent MBRRACE-UK reports were recognized to plained or new cardiovascular signs or symptoms. 
have a pre-existing cardiac problem, although some 
had clear symptoms and signs of cardiac disease, PRE-EXISTING CARDIAC which were not recognised. Maternal mortality rates 
CONDITIONS from cardiovascular disease increase with age, with 
women aged 35–39 years at a three times higher risk PRE-PREGNANCY COUNSELLING of death than women aged 20–24 years. 
Despite cardiovascular disease being the leading Most women with heart disease will be aware of 
cause of maternal death in both the UK and Ireland their condition prior to becoming pregnant. These 
for almost 20 years, it is commonly not considered individuals should be fully assessed by an MDT, 
when pregnant women present with typical symp- including an obstetrician and cardiologist special￾toms. Considering a cardiac cause for symptoms is izing in looking after pregnant women with car￾very important; see the following ‘Red ˛ags’ box diac problems. This should preferably occur before 
for important indicators of cardiovascular disease. embarking on a pregnancy and the maternal and 
RED FLAGS 
˜ Sudden onset of pain radiating to arm, shoulder, 
back or jaw 
˜ Breathlessness with chest pain, haemoptysis or 
syncope 
˜ Orthopnoea 
˜ Syncope during exercise 
˜ Persistent tachycardia 
˜ Repeated presentation with pain and/or pain 
requiring opiates 
˜ Pain severe enough to prevent the new parent 
from caring for their baby 
fetal risks should be carefully explained. An echocar￾diogram should be arranged and a plan to optimize 
medication should be made. 
ANTENATAL MANAGEMENT 
Experienced cardiologists/physicians and obstetri￾cians should manage pregnant women with signiÿ￾cant heart disease in a joint obstetric/cardiac clinic. 
Continuity of care makes the detection of subtle 
changes in maternal well-being more likely. In trying 
to distinguish between ‘normal’ symptoms of preg￾nancy and impending cardiac failure, it is impor￾tant to ask the pregnant woman if she has noted 154 Heart disease
 Most women will remain well during the ante￾natal period, and outpatient management is usually 
possible, although they should be advised to have 
a low threshold for reducing their normal physi￾cal activities ( see Table 10.3). Echocardiography is 
non-invasive and is useful for assessing heart func￾tion and valves over time, and an echocardiogram at 
the booking visit and at around 28 weeks’ gestation 
is usual. Any signs of deteriorating cardiac status 
should be carefully investigated and treated.
 Anticoagulation is essential in patients with con￾genital heart disease who have pulmonary hyper￾tension (PH) or artifi cial valve replacements, and in 
those in or at risk of atrial fi brillation. Low-molecular￾weight heparin is used as an alternative to warfarin or 
to the direct factor Xa inhibitors (such as rivaroxaban), 
neither of which are recommended in pregnancy.
 MANAGEMENT OF LABOUR 
any breathlessness (particularly at night or when AND DELIVERY
lying fl at), any change in her heart rate or rhythm, In most cases, the aim of management is to await any increased tiredness or a reduction in exercise the onset of spontaneous labour, but the induction of tolerance ( Table 10.3). Routine physical examina- labour should be considered for obstetric indications 
tion should include pulse rate, blood pressure, jugu￾lar venous pressure, heart sounds, ankle and sacral 
oedema, and the presence of basal crepitations.
 155
 BOX 10.5: Issues to discuss during 
pre-pregnancy counselling of women 
with heart disease
. Risk of maternal death
. Possible reduction of maternal life expectancy
. Effects of pregnancy on cardiac disease
. Mortality associated with high-risk conditions
. Risk of fetus developing congenital heart disease
. Risk of preterm labour and FGR
. Need for frequent hospital attendance and 
possible admission
. Intensive maternal and fetal monitoring during 
labour
. Other options – contraception, adoption, 
surrogacy
. Timing of pregnancy – often, early delivery will 
be advised
 Table 10.3 Stages of heart failure – New York Heart 
Association (NYHA) classifi cation
 Class Patient symptoms
 1: Mild No limitation of physical activity. Ordinary 
physical activity does not precipitate 
fatigue, palpitations, dyspnoea or angina
 2: Mild Slight limitation of physical activity. 
Comfortable at rest, but ordinary 
physical activity results in fatigue, 
palpitation or dyspnoea
 3: Moderate Marked limitation of physical activity. 
Comfortable at rest, but less than 
ordinary activity causes fatigue, 
palpitation or dyspnoea
 4: Severe Unable to carry out any physical activity 
without discomfort. Symptoms of 
cardiac insuffi ciency at rest. If any 
physical activity is undertaken, 
discomfort is increased
 BOX 10.6: High-risk cardiac conditions
. Systemic ventricular dysfunction (ejection fraction 
<30%, New York Heart Association classes III–IV)
. Pulmonary hypertension
. Cyanotic congenital heart disease
. Aortic pathology (dilated aortic root >4 cm, 
Marfan syndrome)
. Ischaemic heart disease
. Left heart obstructive lesions (aortic, mitral 
stenosis)
. Prosthetic heart valves (metal)
. Cardiomyopathy
BOX 10.7: Fetal risks of maternal 
cardiac disease
. Recurrence (congenital heart disease)
. Maternal cyanosis (fetal hypoxia)
. Iatrogenic prematurity
. FGR
. Effects of maternal drugs (teratogenesis, FGR, 
fetal loss)
Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 155 04/03/2024 16:07
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 156 04/03/2024 16:07
156 
Medical complications of pregnancy 
and in very high-risk individuals to ensure that 
delivery occurs at a predictable time when all of the 
relevant staff are present or available. Epidural anaes￾thesia is often recommended, as this reduces pain￾related stress and, thereby, some of the demand on 
cardiac function. However, regional anaesthesia is not 
without some risk to both the mother and the baby 
in some cardiac conditions, principally because of the 
potential complication of maternal hypotension. The 
input of a senior anaesthetist to formulate and docu￾ment an anaesthetic management plan and minimize 
the procedure-related risks is essential. Prophylactic 
antibiotics should be given to anyone with a structural 
heart defect to reduce the risk of bacterial endocarditis. 
Assuming normal progress in labour, the sec￾ond stage may be kept short, with an elective for￾ceps or ventouse delivery to reduce maternal effort 
and the requirement for increased cardiac output. 
Caesarean section should be performed when the 
maternal condition is considered too unstable to 
tolerate the physiological demands of labour. Post￾partum haemorrhage, in particular, can lead to major 
cardiovascular instability. Ergometrine may be asso￾ciated with intense vasoconstriction, hypertension 
and heart failure, and therefore active management 
of the third stage is usually with Syntocinon™ (syn￾thetic oxytocin) alone, which should be given slowly 
to patients with signiÿcant heart disease. High-level 
maternal surveillance is required until the main hae￾modynamic changes following delivery have passed. 
SPECIFIC CONDITIONS 
ISCHAEMIC HEART DISEASE 
The risk of myocardial infarction (MI) during preg￾nancy is estimated to be 1 in 10,000, with a peak 
incidence in the third trimester, although the inci￾dence appears to be increasing. Risk factors include 
multiparity, age >40 years, increased BMI, smok￾ing, hypertension/pre-eclampsia and multiple preg￾nancy. The maternal mortality from an acute MI is 
approximately 20%. Neonatal and fetal morbidity/ 
mortality are also markedly increased. 
The underlying pathology is atherosclerotic in under 
half of cases, with coronary artery dissection being the 
primary cause in the post-partum period. The diag￾nosis of MI in pregnant women is often missed, and 
prompt diagnosis and therapy are necessary to reduce 
the high associated maternal and perinatal mortality. 
Thrombolytic therapy can be used in pregnancy, as the 
risks of fetal and maternal haemorrhage are small and 
treatment can save the life of the mother. 
MITRAL AND AORTIC STENOSIS 
Obstructive lesions of the left heart are well-recog￾nized risk factors for maternal morbidity and mortal￾ity, as they result in an inability to increase cardiac 
output to meet the demands of pregnancy. Aortic 
stenosis (AS) is usually congenital and mitral stenosis 
is usually rheumatic in origin. For those with known 
mitral stenosis, 40% experience worsening symptoms 
during pregnancy, with the average time of onset of 
pulmonary oedema being 30 weeks. Maternal mortal￾ity is reported to be 2%, and the risk of an adverse fetal 
outcome is directly related to the severity of mitral ste￾nosis. Pregnancy is usually well tolerated in women 
with isolated, mild and moderate AS, with normal 
exercise capacity and good ventricular function.
 
 BOX 10.8: Management of labour in 
women with heart disease 
˜ Avoid induction of labour if possible 
˜ Use prophylactic antibiotics 
˜ Ensure °uid balance 
˜ Avoid the supine position 
˜ Discuss regional/epidural anaesthesia/analgesia 
with senior anaesthetist 
˜ Keep the second stage short 
˜ Use Syntocinon™ judiciously
 BOX 10.9: Risk factors for the 
development of heart failure in pregnancy 
˜ Respiratory or urinary infections 
˜ Anaemia 
˜ Obesity 
˜ Corticosteroids 
˜ Multiple gestation 
˜ Hypertension 
˜ Arrhythmias 
˜ Pain-related stress 
˜ Fluid overload Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 157 04/03/2024 16:07
 
Respiratory disease 
However, the risk of maternal death in those with 
severe AS is reported to be 17%, with fetal mortality 
30%. Treatment in pregnancy for both AS and mitral 
stenosis is bed rest and medical treatment. 
MARFAN SYNDROME 
Marfan syndrome is a rare, autosomal dominant, 
connective tissue abnormality that may lead to mitral 
valve prolapse, aortic regurgitation and aortic rupture 
or dissection. Aortic dissection classically presents 
with severe sudden-onset pain in the chest, back, 
neck or abdomen. The pain may be tearing in nature, 
and typically between the shoulder blades. Pregnancy 
increases the risk of aortic rupture or dissection and 
has been associated with maternal mortality of up 
to 50% when there is marked aortic root dilatation. 
Uterine inversion and post-partum haemorrhage are 
more common in women with Marfan syndrome. 
PULMONARY HYPERTENSION 
PH is characterized by an increase in the pulmo￾nary vascular resistance resulting in an increased 
workload placed on the right side of the heart. The 
demands of increasing blood volume and cardiac 
output may not be met by an already compromised 
right ventricle and pregnancy is associated with a 
high risk of maternal death. 
Women with PH should have pre-conception 
counselling and should be advised about the very 
signiÿcant risks of pregnancy, including the high risk 
of maternal death, with a recommendation for reli￾able contraception such as vasectomy, sterilization or 
long-acting contraception such as the Mirena® intra￾uterine device or implant. Termination of pregnancy 
should be discussed with women who conceive with 
PH or who are diagnosed with PH in pregnancy, as 
the mortality of the condition is high, at 30–50%. 
The main symptoms are fatigue, breathlessness 
and syncope, and clinical signs are those of right 
heart failure. Close monitoring by an MDT is crucial. 
PERI-PARTUM CARDIOMYOPATHY 
This is a rare condition and is the development of 
heart failure without an obvious cause late in the 
third trimester and in the ÿrst few months after birth. 
Risk factors include multiple pregnancy, advanced 
maternal age, multiparity, hypertension and Afro￾Caribbean origin. It is important to remember as 
a possible cause if a pregnant woman presents 
with shortness of breath, particularly at night or 
when lying ˛at. If a pulmonary embolism has been 
excluded, an echocardiogram should be performed. 
RESPIRATORY DISEASE 
There is a signiÿcant increase in oxygen demand in 
normal pregnancy due to the increase in both meta￾bolic rate and the consumption of oxygen. There is a 
40–50% increase in ventilation, primarily related to 
an increase in tidal volume, rather than an increase 
in respiratory rate. Breathlessness is common in 
pregnancy, particularly in the third trimester, and is 
often a subjective feeling of breathlessness. However, 
breathlessness may be caused by a range of patholo￾gies (including anaemia, asthma, respiratory infec￾tion, pulmonary embolism and heart failure) and 
must be investigated if there is any concern. 
The MBRRACE-UK 2023 report, which reported 
on maternal deaths between 2019 and 2021, reported 
twelve maternal deaths from respiratory disorders: 
the commonest causes being from asthma and cys￾tic ÿbrosis. The number of women dying from cystic 
ÿbrosis in pregnancy is increasing, which probably 
re˛ects the improvements in care for this condition 
resulting in larger numbers of affected individuals 
surviving into adulthood and choosing to embark 
upon pregnancy. 
RESPIRATORY INFECTION 
Respiratory infection is more likely to cause severe 
illness in pregnant people than in the general pop￾ulation due to the changes to the immune system, 
heart, and lungs during pregnancy. Outbreaks of 
in˛uenza H1N1, in˛uenza A and, more recently, the 
global coronavirus disease 19 (COVID-19) pandemic 
have been associated with a signiÿcant number of 
maternal deaths attributed to respiratory infection. 
Viral pneumonia follows a more complicated course 
in pregnancy, and affected individuals often decom￾pensate more quickly. In˛uenza and COVID-19 are 
covered in detail in Chapter 11. 157 
ALGrawanyMedical complications of pregnancy
 15
Parenteral steroid cover may be needed for those 
who are on regular corticosteroids, regular medica￾tions should be continued throughout labour and 
bronchoconstrictors such as ergometrine or prosta￾glandin F2a should be avoided in individuals with 
severe asthma. Adequate hydration is important in 
labour, and regional anaesthesia is favoured over 
general anaesthesia to decrease the risk of broncho￾spasm, to provide adequate pain relief and to reduce 
oxygen consumption and minute ventilation.
Many women with asthma are concerned about 
the effect of drugs on the fetus, and this can lead to 
inappropriate cessation of treatment in early preg￾nancy. Women should be reassured that inhaled 
beta-sympathomimetics, long-acting b2 agonists 
such as salmeterol and corticosteroids are safe in 
pregnancy with no association with fetal malfor￾mations or perinatal morbidity in large studies and 
reviews. Very low levels of oral corticosteroids cross 
the placenta, and the safety data are also reassuring. 
The data are also reassuring on the safety of the leu￾kotriene antagonist montelukast during pregnancy. 
Overall, it is safer to take asthma drugs in pregnancy 
than to leave asthma uncontrolled. 
BOX 10.10: Pneumonia: Warning signs 
. Respiratory rate >30 breaths/minute 
. Hypoxaemia; pO2 <7.9 kPa on room air 
. Acidosis; pH <7.3 
. Hypotension 
. Disseminated intravascular coagulation 
. Elevated blood urea 
. Evidence of multiple organ failure 
BOX 10.11: Key messages
. Women should be advised of the importance of 
maintaining good control of their asthma during 
pregnancy to avoid problems for both them and 
their baby. 
. Women with asthma should be counselled 
regarding the importance and safety of 
continuing their asthma medications during 
pregnancy to ensure good asthma control.
Bacterial pneumonia should be treated using 
the same antibiotics as outside pregnancy, with 
penicillin or cephalosporins usually the fi rst choice, 
and erythromycin used if atypical organisms are 
suspected. 
ASTHMA IN PREGNANCY
The worldwide prevalence of asthma is increasing, 
with 2–4% of pregnant women affected, making it 
the most common chronic condition in pregnancy. 
Asthma is not consistently affected by pregnancy, 
although exacerbations of asthma are more likely 
to occur in individuals with severe asthma than in 
those with mild asthma, and most episodes occur 
later in pregnancy, with respiratory viral infections 
being the most frequent trigger, followed by poor 
adherence to inhaled or oral corticosteroid therapy. 
There is evidence that proactive management of 
asthma-related symptoms and attacks during preg￾nancy reduces maternal and fetal morbidity. An 
association between gestational hypertension and 
asthma has been shown, but asthma does not appear 
to be a risk factor for pre-eclampsia.
Labour and delivery are usually unaffected 
by asthma, and attacks are uncommon in labour. 8
BOX 10.12: Key messages for asthma 
and pregnancy
. Pregnancy is a time to improve asthma care.
. Poorly controlled asthma confers an increased 
risk to the mother and fetus.
. Smoking cessation should be encouraged.
. There is no contraindication to most fi rst-line 
treatments for asthma when used in pregnancy.
. Overall, it is safer to take asthma drugs in 
pregnancy than to leave asthma uncontrolled. 
Oral corticosteroids can be used in pregnancy. 
. Patient education regarding the condition and 
the adequate use of medications should be 
ensured. 
. Optimal control and response to therapy should 
be ensured throughout pregnancy. 
. Exacerbations should be managed aggressively 
and delays in treatment should be avoided. 
. Acute attacks should be managed the same as 
in a non-pregnant individual. 
. An MDT approach should be offered. 
Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 158 04/03/2024 16:07Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 159 04/03/2024 16:07
Neurological disorders 
CYSTIC FIBROSIS 
Cystic ÿbrosis (CF) is the most common inherited 
life-threatening disease. It is an inherited autosomal 
recessive condition, with a carrier frequency of around 
1 in 25 in the general population. The thick mucus that 
is produced leads to infections and chronic in˛am￾mation, particularly affecting the lungs, gut and 
pancreas. Life expectancy is increasing and, there￾fore, more women are surviving to an age at which 
pregnancy is possible. Pre-conception counselling by 
a specialist MDT is important. This will include the 
impact of CF on the pregnancy, but will also include 
genetic counselling and the offer of checking the CF 
carrier status of the father so that the risk of the fetus 
being affected or being a carrier can be determined. 
This will help to inform discussions about whether 
a pregnant woman and her partner may wish to opt 
for prenatal diagnosis, either by testing during preg￾nancy or by pre-implantation genetic diagnosis. In the 
latter, the couple undergoes assisted conception, the 
embryos are tested for CF and healthy embryos are 
inserted in the uterus. 
Individuals with CF who have higher forced 
expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) and higher 
body weights have been shown to be more likely to 
become pregnant. The live birth rate ranges from 
70% to 90%, and the rate of spontaneous miscar￾riage is no different from the general population. 
However, the prematurity rate is around 25% due 
to a higher rate of spontaneous preterm labour and 
early planned delivery when maternal health dete￾riorates. Maternal prognosis is poor if there is pul￾monary hypertension, infection with Burkholderia 
cepacia, if FEV1 is <50% that predicted or if there 
is chronic hypoxia. While pregnancy does not sig￾niÿcantly shorten survival in women with CF, the 
long-term prognosis still needs to be considered, as 
individuals with CF still have a much shortened life 
expectancy, particularly those with poor lung func￾tion at the start of pregnancy. 
Pregnant women with CF should be jointly man￾aged by an obstetrician and a respiratory physician 
with expertise in CF, ideally in a specialist centre. 
Most individuals will have a daily physiotherapy 
regimen and will require prolonged antibiotic ther￾apy and hospital admission during infective exacer￾bations. Close attention should be paid to maternal 
nutritional status and weight gain during pregnancy, 
with screening for GDM also indicated. Fetal growth 
and well-being should be monitored by serial ultra￾sound scans, as there is an association with FGR. 
Ideally, a vaginal delivery should be the aim in the 
absence of any other obstetric indications for caesar￾ean section. 
NEUROLOGICAL DISORDERS 
EPILEPSY 
Epilepsy is the most common serious neurological 
condition in pregnancy. Approximately 30% of those 
with epilepsy are women in their childbearing years, 
which means that 1 in 200–250 pregnancies occur 
in women with a history of epilepsy. Anti-epileptic 
medication increases the risk to the baby and, 
although the majority of women with epilepsy (about 
two-thirds) will not have an increase in seizure fre￾quency during pregnancy, there is a 10-fold increase 
in mortality among pregnant women with epilepsy, 
which is directly related to poorly controlled epilepsy. 
Maternal deaths in individuals with epilepsy have 
increased in recent years, now accounting for one in 
ÿve indirect maternal deaths in recent MBRRACE-UK 
reports. The majority of those who died as a result of 
epilepsy had not had pre-conception counselling and 
many had stopped their medication. Contributing 
factors included women being concerned about 
taking medication in pregnancy or being unable to 
tolerate medication in early pregnancy, as well as the 
falling levels of some AEDs in pregnancy due to the 
physiological and pharmacokinetic changes in preg￾nancy. In the MBRRACE-UK 2023 report, 14 of the 17 
women died as a result of SUDEP. It is important that 
individuals with epilepsy and health professionals 
are aware of the risk factors for SUDEP in pregnancy 
(see Box 10.13, ‘SUDEP known risk factors’). 
The management of epilepsy and pregnancy can 
be challenging owing to the need to balance the risk 
of AEDs to the fetus and the risk of seizures to the 
mother. The principles of epilepsy management are 
that while the risks to pregnancy from seizures out￾weigh those from anticonvulsant medication, sei￾zures should still be controlled with the minimum 
possible dose of the optimal drug. 159 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 160 04/03/2024 16:07
Medical complications of pregnancy 
Box 10.13: Key messages for epilepsy 
˜ Having epilepsy carries signiÿcant risks to the 
mother and the baby. 
˜ Pre-conception counselling is important to 
reduce those risks. 
˜ Sodium valproate and Topiramate are not 
recommended in those of childbearing age 
unless there is a Pregnancy Prevention 
Programme (PPP) in place. 
˜ Early referral in pregnancy to an obstetric/ 
epilepsy specialist team is recommended, 
urgently if the pregnancy is unplanned, to 
optimize anti-epileptic drug (AED) regimens. 
˜ It is never recommended to stop or change 
AEDs abruptly without an informed discussion. 
˜ Pregnant women with epilepsy should have 
regular planned antenatal care with a designated 
obstetric/epilepsy care team. 
˜ Women with epilepsy should be informed that 
the introduction of safety precautions may 
signiÿcantly reduce the risk of accidents and 
minimize anxiety. 
˜ It is important that women with epilepsy 
are aware of the increased risk of sudden 
unexpected death in epilepsy (SUDEP) in 
pregnancy and have a risk assessment and plan 
of care before, during and after pregnancy. 
˜ Women should be regularly assessed for risk 
factors for seizures and adherence to AEDs with 
rapid referral for neurology review if women have 
worsening epilepsy symptoms. 
˜ Nocturnal seizures should be regarded as a ‘red 
°ag’ indicating that women with epilepsy need 
urgent referral to an epilepsy service. 
˜ Women should have access to their designated 
epilepsy care team within a maximum of 2 weeks. 
˜ Postnatal review is recommended to ensure 
AED doses are appropriately adjusted. 
Source: MBRRACE-UK, NICE, RCOG. 
PRE-PREGNANCY COUNSELLING 
IN˜EPILEPSY 
The majority (96%) of women with epilepsy have a 
good outcome, and those who have been seizure-free 
for >12 months are likely to remain seizure-free if 
they are compliant with treatment. Pregnant women 
and children should be referred to an epilepsy spe￾cialist if they are taking valproate, if they are taking 
more than one AED (polytherapy), or if they have 
been seizure-free for more than 2 years and wish to 
discuss the option of stopping AEDs. There should 
also be a discussion about the impact of AEDs on 
contraception. Since up to half of pregnancies are 
unplanned, pre-conception counselling should be 
part of any consultation with a woman with epilepsy 
of childbearing age. A summary of pre-pregnancy 
advice is detailed in Box 10.14. 
Women with epilepsy should be provided with 
verbal and written information on the risks of self￾discontinuation of AEDs. This discussion should 
include the risk of SUDEP and the effects of seizures 
on the fetus. It should be stressed that it is never rec￾ommended to stop or change AEDs abruptly without 
an informed discussion. 
The majority of AEDs cross the placenta and are 
potentially teratogenic and, therefore, the principal 
concern for the fetus is the increased risk of congeni￾tal malformations, with the risk to the fetus being 
highest in the ÿrst trimester during organogenesis. 
BOX 10.14: SUDEP known risk factors 
Seizure-related factors 
˜ Uncontrolled seizures 
˜ Tonic–clonic seizures 
˜ Nocturnal seizures 
˜ Epilepsy starting before the age of 16 years 
˜ Increasing frequency of seizures 
Treatment factors 
˜ Infrequent epilepsy reviews and engagement 
with an epilepsy clinician 
˜ Ineffective AED treatment 
˜ Frequent medication changes 
˜ Sub-therapeutic doses of AEDs 
Individual factors 
˜ Living alone or sleeping alone 
˜ Not taking medication as prescribed 
˜ Sleep deprivation 
˜ Stress 
˜ Alcohol or substance misuse 
˜ Learning disability 
Source: MBRRACE-UK 2020; adapted from https://sudep.org. 
160 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 161 04/03/2024 16:07
-
Neurological disorders 
BOX 10.15: Pre pregnancy advice 
˜ Individuals with epilepsy should be offered 
effective contraception to avoid unplanned 
pregnancies. 
˜ The importance of compliance with medication 
should be stressed. 
˜ Folic acid 5 mg should be taken for a minimum 
of 3 months before conception. 
˜ The speciÿc risk of congenital malformation should 
be explained for the AED that the woman is taking. 
˜ The risk of recurrent seizures should be explained 
and a discussion should be had about SUDEP. 
˜ Seek epilepsy specialist advice for the following: 
˜ altering medication according to seizure 
frequency˛– the lowest effective dose of the 
most appropriate AED should be used 
˜ if the woman is having recurrent seizures or 
is on polytherapy or sodium valproate 
The major fetal abnormalities associated with AEDs 
are neural tube defects, facial clefts, and cardiac and 
urogenital defects. Polytherapy increases the risk of 
major congenital abnormality by about 3% for each 
additional AED. Many of these abnormalities are 
detectable by ultrasound and therefore all pregnant 
women should be offered detailed anomaly scan￾ning. There is also an association between AEDs 
and FGR, particularly with polytherapy. Women on 
multiple drug therapy should, wherever possible, be 
converted to monotherapy before pregnancy, and all 
women with epilepsy should be advised to start tak￾ing a folic acid 5 mg daily supplement prior to con￾ception to reduce the risk of neural tube defects and 
continue this through pregnancy. 
Of all the AEDs, lamotrigine and levetiracetam 
have the lowest incidence of fetal malformations, 
whereas sodium valproate is associated with a par￾ticularly high risk of congenital malformations (10%). 
Children exposed to valproate in utero also have a 
higher risk of neurodevelopmental delay, including 
learning difÿculties and autistic spectrum disorder. 
Sodium valproate must not be used unless epilepsy 
cannot be controlled with other AEDs. A Pregnancy 
Prevention Programme (PPP), designed to make sure 
these women are fully aware of the risks and the need 
to avoid becoming pregnant, should be in place for 
any woman or girl on Valproate able to have children. 
Despite the risks of continuing anticonvulsants in 
pregnancy, failure to do so may lead to an increased 
frequency of epileptic seizures that may result in both 
maternal and fetal hypoxia. It is clear that, while poly￾therapy and valproate exposure should be minimized, 
women should be maintained on the lowest effective 
dose of an AED. Minimizing exposure through the 
use of an ineffective AED or dose will beneÿt neither 
the pregnant woman nor the fetus. However, any 
increases in dose need to be made in response to the 
clinical picture. 
PREGNANCY, LABOUR AND 
POSTNATAL APPROACH 
A multidisciplinary approach to the care of preg￾nant women with epilepsy is paramount, with the 
MDT including an obstetrician with expertise of 
epilepsy and pregnancy, a neurologist with an inter￾est in epilepsy and pregnancy, epilepsy specialist 
nurses, a midwife and the pregnant woman’s GP. If 
the woman is not taking folic acid 5 mg, this should 
be started as soon as pregnancy is suspected and 
this dose should be continued throughout preg￾nancy. Pregnant women with epilepsy taking AEDs 
who have well-controlled epilepsy and have had 
pre-conceptual advice should be seen in a hospi￾tal antenatal clinic (a specialist MDT is recom￾mended by MBRRACE-UK and the Royal College 
of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists) at the time of 
their dating scan. Women who become unexpectedly 
pregnant whose epilepsy is not well controlled or 
who are on polytherapy or valproate should be seen 
as soon as possible in the ÿrst trimester, before the 
dating scan, and should either be seen in a specialist 
MDT antenatal clinic or be referred to an epilepsy 
specialist on an urgent basis. 
Many factors contribute to altered drug metabo￾lism in pregnancy and result in a fall in anticonvulsant 
drug levels. This combined with sleep deprivation or 
stress and poor compliance with medication can all 
lead to an increase in ÿt frequency in pregnancy. In 
particular, lamotrigine and levetiracetam levels fall 
signiÿcantly and early in pregnancy, resulting in sei￾zure activity, often necessitating an increased dose. 
This is very signiÿcant, as the incidence of SUDEP 
is higher in individuals taking lamotrigine than in 
those taking other AEDs. 161 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 162 04/03/2024 16:07
Medical complications of pregnancy 
BOX 10.16: Causes of seizures in 
pregnancy 
˜ Epilepsy 
˜ Eclampsia 
˜ Cerebral vascular accident 
˜ Space-occupying lesions (e.g. tumour, 
tuberculoma) 
˜ Encephalitis or meningitis 
˜ Cerebral venous thrombosis 
˜ Drug and alcohol withdrawal 
˜ Hypoglycaemia 
˜ Rarely, cerebral malaria, toxoplasmosis or 
thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura 
In view of the association with FGR, serial growth 
scans should be arranged in the third trimester. In 
the antenatal period, women with epilepsy should 
be regularly assessed for the following: risk factors 
for seizures, such as sleep deprivation and stress; 
adherence to AEDs; and seizure type and frequency. 
The most likely cause of a seizure in pregnancy is an 
epileptic seizure; however, there are also important 
causes to be aware of during pregnancy, for example 
eclampsia or intracranial pathology (see Box 10.15, 
‘Causes of seizures in pregnancy’). 
The risk of seizures in labour and in the postnatal 
period is low, but seizures are more likely with poorly 
controlled epilepsy and are aggravated by pain, stress, 
dehydration and sleep deprivation. Most women with 
epilepsy can aim for a vaginal birth unless there are 
obstetric indications. In addition, epilepsy alone is not 
usually an indication for induction of labour or cae￾sarean section, unless there is an accelerated seizure 
frequency in pregnancy. Anti-epileptic medication 
should be continued during labour. 
There should be a discussion, during pregnancy, 
about the impact of AEDs on breastfeeding and 
contraception. The concentration of most AEDs in 
breast milk is negligible and breastfeeding should 
be encouraged, although feeding is best avoided for 
a few hours after taking medication. Information 
on safe handling of the neonate should be given 
to all epileptic mothers. Effective contraception is 
extremely important with regard to stabilization of 
epilepsy and planning of future pregnancies to opti￾mize outcomes. 
MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS 
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a relapsing and remitting 
disease that causes disability through demyelination 
of nerves, leading to weakness, lack of coordination, 
numbness in the hands or feet, blurred vision, tremor, 
spasticity and voiding dysfunction. One in 1,000 
pregnancies is estimated to occur in women with 
MS. The onset of MS during pregnancy is unusual, 
with optic neuritis reported as the predominant 
symptom, usually post-partum. Pregnant women 
with MS are no more likely to experience complica￾tions in their pregnancy than those unaffected, nor 
are there increased risks of preterm delivery, FGR or 
congenital malformation. The course of MS during 
pregnancy changes, with a lower relapse rate ante￾natally and a signiÿcantly higher rate of relapse dur￾ing the ÿrst 3 months post-partum. Pregnancy has 
no adverse effect on the progression of long-term 
disability and, in fact, pregnancy after MS onset may 
be associated with a lower risk of progression of the 
condition. 
Having MS should not make birth more compli￾cated, and the mode of delivery should be decided 
using obstetric indications. Regional anaesthesia is 
not contraindicated and no effect on the subsequent 
risk of relapse has been found. 
HEADACHES AND PREGNANCY 
Headaches are common in pregnancy and usually 
are benign, self-limiting and either tension head￾aches or migraine. However, pregnant women are at 
risk of catastrophic intracranial pathology, and fail￾ure to consider a more serious cause can lead to sig￾niÿcant morbidity and mortality. Alongside epilepsy, 
stroke represents the other major neurological cause 
of maternal death in the UK. In the MBRRACE-UK 
2023 report, in 2019–2021 there were 13 women who 
died from stroke during or up to 6 weeks after preg￾nancy: six died from subarachnoid haemorrhage, 
one died from intracerebral haemorrhage and two 
died from thrombotic strokes. A further nine women 
died between 6 weeks and 1 year after the end of 
pregnancy (subarachnoid haemorrhage and intrace￾rebral haemorrhage being the commonest causes). 
Headache is also the most common prodromal symp￾tom with eclampsia and may be the only presenting 162 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 163 04/03/2024 16:07
 
Haematological abnormalities 
symptom of cerebral venous thrombosis, which is 
more common in pregnancy. A number of maternal 
deaths are reported each year due to eclampsia and 
cerebral venous thrombosis. 
It is therefore important to be aware of ‘red ˛ags’ 
when a pregnant woman presents with a headache 
that may indicate a more serious cause (see the fol￾lowing ‘Red ˛ags’ box). A detailed and thorough neu￾rological examination is crucial and should include 
fundoscopy. It is vital that there is an MDT approach 
and that senior obstetric, physician, anaesthetic and 
radiological opinions are sought at an early stage. 
High blood pressure should be promptly managed 
and appropriate investigations, including imaging, 
should be arranged urgently. It is also important to 
recognize that pregnancy should not alter the stan￾dard of care for stroke. Pregnancy, caesarean section 
or the immediate post-partum state are not absolute 
contraindications to thrombolysis (intravenous or 
intra-arterial), clot retrieval or craniotomy. 
More benign headaches can usually be man￾aged in pregnancy with simple analgesia and anti￾emetics. Migraine is in˛uenced by cyclical changes 
in the sex hormones, and attacks often occur during 
the menstrual period, attributed to a fall in oestro￾gen levels. Migraine can improve in pregnancy, but 
20% of pregnant women will experience migraine￾like headaches, many of whom do not get migraines 
outside pregnancy. Obstetric complications are 
not increased in migraine sufferers. Migraine dur￾ing pregnancy should also be treated with simple 
analgesia (codeine may make migraine worse) and, 
where possible, avoidance of factors that trigger the 
attack. Low-dose aspirin, beta-blockers and amitrip￾tyline may be used as migraine prophylaxis. 
RED FLAGS 
Red °ags in the history and examination of a pregnant 
woman presenting with headache: 
˜ Sudden-onset headache/thunderclap or worst 
headache ever 
˜ Headache that takes longer than usual to 
resolve or persists for more than 48 hours 
˜ Has associated symptoms – fever, seizures, 
focal neurology, photophobia, diplopia 
˜ Excessive use of opioids 
HAEMATOLOGICAL 
ABNORMALITIES 
HAEMOGLOBINOPATHIES 
SICKLE CELL DISEASE 
Sickle cell disease (SCD) is the most common 
inherited condition in the world and mostly affects 
people whose family origins are in the Middle East, 
Sub-Saharan Africa, parts of India and parts of the 
Mediterranean. It is an autosomally inherited genetic 
condition in which abnormal haemoglobin contains 
beta-globin chains with an amino acid substitution 
that results in the red blood cells becoming sickle 
shaped, which can then occlude small blood vessels. 
There is often severe anaemia, chronic hyperbiliru￾binaemia, a predisposition to infection and CKD. 
Pulmonary hypertension is found in up to 30% of 
patients and is associated with a high mortality rate. 
Advances in the treatment of SCD have resulted in 
the average lifespan in the Western world extending 
past 50 years, which means many more women with 
the condition are now becoming pregnant. 
Pregnancy is associated with an increased inci￾dence of sickle cell crises, which may result in epi￾sodes of severe pain, typically affecting the bones 
or chest. Acute chest syndrome may result from an 
initial uncomplicated crisis and is responsible for 
around 25% of all deaths in SCD. Crises in preg￾nancy may be precipitated by hypoxia, stress, infec￾tion and haemorrhage. Affected individuals are also 
at an increased risk of miscarriage, pre-eclampsia, 
placental dysfunction resulting in FGR and prema￾ture labour, with three times the risk of eclampsia 
compared with those without SCD. Thromboembolic 
events including cerebral vein thrombosis and deep 
venous thrombosis are implicated in the higher rates 
of maternal deaths reported in SCD. 
BOX 10.17: Clinically signiÿcant 
variants of haemoglobin 
˜ Sickle cell trait (HbAS) 
˜ Sickle cell disease (HbSS) 
˜ Sickle cell/haemoglobin C disease (HbSC) 
˜ Sickle cell/beta thalassaemia 
163 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 164 04/03/2024 16:07
Medical complications of pregnancy 
BOX 10.18: Management of sickle cell 
crisis in pregnancy 
˜ Prompt treatment 
˜ Adequate hydration 
˜ Oxygen 
˜ Analgesia 
˜ Screen for infection (urinary, respiratory) 
˜ Antibiotics 
˜ Blood transfusion (leucocyte depleted and 
phenotype speciÿ c) 
˜ Exchange transfusion 
˜ Prophylaxis against thrombosis (heparin) 
˜ Fetal monitoring 
Like other medical disorders, ideal management 
begins with pre-pregnancy optimization of maternal 
health and education about the risks in pregnancy. 
If the partner also has SCD or is a carrier, specialist 
counselling is advisable to decide whether the couple 
wish to ÿnd out whether their baby has SCD. This 
could involve pre-implantation genetic diagnosis as 
part of an in vitro fertilization (IVF) cycle or prenatal 
diagnosis during pregnancy. 
Pregnant women with SCD should be managed 
by a specialist MDT consisting of an obstetrician 
and a haematology team specialising in SCD and 
should be seen regularly throughout pregnancy, 
with regular growth scans of the baby. High-dose 
folate supplements (5 mg daily) are recommended 
and low-dose aspirin (150 mg daily) is advised 
from 12 to 36 weeks. Hydroxycarbamide is usually 
stopped in early pregnancy, but pregnant women 
with SCD are advised to continue antibiotic pro￾phylaxis. There is a low threshold for antenatal 
thromboprophylaxis, and all affected individuals 
are advised to take daily heparin injections after 
birth for 6 weeks. Blood transfusions are not often 
given in pregnancy but can be if necessary. People 
with SCD often have antibodies due to multiple 
previous transfusions and therefore blood needs to 
be carefully cross-matched. 
Sickle cell carriers have a 1:4 risk of having a 
baby with SCD if their partner also has sickle cell 
trait. Carriers are usually ÿt and well, but are at an 
increased risk of urinary tract infection, and rarely 
suffer from crises. 
THALASSAEMIA 
Thalassaemia is a common genetic blood disorder 
causing a reduced production of normal haemoglobin. 
Depending on which globin chain is affected, alpha￾or beta-thalssaemia results. In alpha-thalassaemia 
minor, there is a deletion of one of the two normal 
alpha genes required for haemoglobin production. 
Although the affected individual is chronically anae￾mic, this condition rarely produces obstetric com￾plications except in cases of severe blood loss. It is 
important to discuss genetic counselling and offer 
screening of the partner for thalassaemia. If the part￾ner is also affected, there is a 1:4 chance of the fetus 
having alpha-thalassaemia major, which is lethal. In 
this situation, either pre-implantation genetic diag￾nosis as part of an IVF cycle or prenatal diagnosis 
would be offered. 
The beta-thalassaemias result from defects in 
the normal production of the beta chains. Beta￾thalassaemia minor/trait is more commonly found 
in people from the eastern Mediterranean, but 
may also occur sporadically in other communities. 
Consequently, all pregnant women should be offered 
electrophoresis as part of the antenatal screening pro￾cess. Partners should also be offered screening. If both 
partners have beta-thalassaemia minor, there is a 1:4 
chance the fetus could have beta-thalassaemia major, 
which is associated with profound anaemia from birth 
and again genetic counselling would be advised. Beta￾thalassaemia minor is usually not a problem antena￾tally, although women tend to be mildly anaemic. Iron 
and folate supplements should be given. 
Women with beta thalassaemia major should be 
cared for by a specialist obstetric and haematology 
team. They may need regular blood transfusions dur￾ing pregnancy, which can lead to too much iron in 
their body (iron overload), which can cause problems 
with organs such as the liver, heart, lungs, pancreas 
and pituitary gland. To prevent this, iron chelation can 
be given by injection in the second half of pregnancy. 
THROMBOCYTOPENIA 
Thrombocytopenia is deÿned as a platelet count <150 
× 109/L. Gestational thrombocytopenia is common 
and is found in 7–8% of the pregnant population. A 
modest drop in the platelet count to 100–150 × 109/L 
164 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 165 04/03/2024 16:07
Haematological abnormalities 
BOX 10.19: Causes of 
thrombocytopenia in pregnancy 
Idiopathic 
˜ Increased consumption or destruction 
˜ Autoimmune 
˜ Antiphospholipid syndrome 
˜ Pre-eclampsia 
˜ Haemolysis, elevated liver enzymes and low 
platelets (HELLP) syndrome 
˜ Disseminated intravascular coagulation 
˜ Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura 
˜ Hypersplenism 
Decreased production 
˜ Sepsis 
˜ Human immunodeÿciency virus (HIV) infection 
˜ Malignant marrow inÿltration 
is very unlikely to be associated with complications 
and bleeding is rarely a complication unless the 
count is <50 × 109/L. However, the diagnosis of ges￾tational thrombocytopenia is a diagnosis of exclusion 
and can be made only when autoimmune and other 
causes have been excluded. It usually occurs in later 
pregnancy, with no prior history of thrombocytope￾nia outside pregnancy and a normal platelet count 
recorded at the start of pregnancy. No intervention is 
required other than monitoring of the platelet count 
during and after pregnancy. There is no association 
with fetal thrombocytopenia and spontaneous resolu￾tion occurs after delivery. 
AUTOIMMUNE THROMBOCYTOPENIA 
In immune thrombocytopenic purpura, autoanti￾bodies are produced against platelet surface anti￾gens, leading to platelet destruction. The incidence 
in pregnancy is around 1 in 5,000. The maternal 
platelet count may fall at any stage of pregnancy and 
can reach levels of <50 × 109/L, but maternal bleed￾ing during pregnancy or at birth is unlikely if the 
platelet count is >50 × 109/L. There is a 5–10% chance 
of associated fetal thrombocytopenia (<50 × 109/L), 
which cannot be predicted using maternal counts or 
antibody tests. 
Pregnant women with immune thrombocytope￾nic purpura who become pregnant should be cared 
for by a specialist obstetric/haematology team. If the 
platelet count is very low, treatment with corticoste￾roids or intravenous immunoglobulin (Ig)G may be 
considered. Vaginal delivery should be facilitated, 
and epidural/spinal anaesthesia should be avoided if 
the platelet count is <80 × 109/L. Fetal blood sam￾pling in labour and instrumental delivery are best 
avoided because of the risk of fetal thrombocytope￾nia causing neonatal haemorrhage/haematomas. A 
cord blood sample must be collected to exclude neo￾natal thrombocytopenia. 
BLEEDING DISORDERS 
INHERITED COAGULATION 
DISORDERS 
Von Willebrand disease, carriers of haemophilia A 
and B, and factor XI deÿciency account for over 90% 
of all women with inherited bleeding disorders. 
Haemophilia A (FVIII deÿciency) and haemophilia 
B (FIX deÿciency) are X-linked defects with preva￾lences of 1 in 10,000 and 1 in 100,000, respectively, 
in the population. Carriers of haemophilia A or B 
usually have clotting factor activity about 50% of 
normal, but while factor VIIIC levels increase in 
pregnancy, factor IXC levels increase only slightly. 
Von Willebrand disease is the most common inher￾ited bleeding disorder, with an estimated preva￾lence of 1%. It results from either a qualitative or 
quantitative defect in von Willebrand factor (VWF). 
The inheritance of von Willebrand disease is usu￾ally autosomal dominant and, while increases in 
factor VIIIC and VWF antigen activity usually occur 
during normal pregnancy, they cannot be relied on 
BOX 10.20: Bleeding disorders during 
pregnancy and delivery 
Inherited 
˜ Vascular abnormalities 
˜ Platelet disorders 
˜ Coagulation disorders 
Acquired 
˜ Thrombocytopenia 
˜ Disseminated intravascular coagulation 
˜ Acquired coagulation disorders 
˜ Marrow disorders 
165 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 166 04/03/2024 16:07
 
Medical complications of pregnancy 
to buffer the effects of the disease, particularly in 
severe cases. 
Where possible, carriers of haemophilia and 
women with von Willebrand disease should be iden￾tiÿed and counselled prior to pregnancy. Baseline 
coagulation factor assays should be performed as 
soon as pregnancy is conÿrmed and should be 
repeated in the third trimester. In haemophilia carri￾ers, tests to conÿrm fetal sex should be offered, either 
by ultrasound or through sampling fetal deoxyribo￾nucleic acid (DNA) in maternal blood, as this in˛u￾ences the use of interventions in labour. 
Individuals with bleeding disorders are at sig￾niÿcant risk of primary and secondary post-partum 
haemorrhage, and this risk can be minimized by 
appropriate prophylactic treatment. Planning for 
delivery requires multidisciplinary input, including a 
specialist obstetric/haematology team, and is guided 
by the third-trimester clotting factor levels, taking 
into account the precise nature of the bleeding ten￾dency. Those deemed to be at signiÿcant risk should 
have a care plan written that may include the use of 
factor concentrate, tranexamic acid or desmopressin 
(DDAVP®) to cover labour and delivery. 
In haemophilia carriers, epidurals may be permit￾ted if the clotting factor is considered to be satisfactory. 
Invasive fetal monitoring, ventouse and rotational for￾ceps should be avoided if there is a possibility that the 
fetus may be affected, and cord blood samples should 
be collected for coagulation tests. 
GASTROINTESTINAL DISORDERS 
Pregnant women with pre-existing gastrointestinal 
disease may or not be under consultant care. Pre￾conception counselling, as with other medical condi￾tions, is important to review medication and consider 
the impact of the disease on the pregnancy and the 
baby, and the impact of pregnancy on the disease. 
Opportunistic discussions about contraception and 
pregnancy should be had wherever possible. 
Gastrointestinal disorders can be associated 
with signiÿcant maternal and perinatal mortality/ 
morbidity. In the MBRRACE-UK report (2023), 
there were 14 women who died from gastrointestinal 
disorders, six of whom died between 6 weeks 
and 1 year after the end of pregnancy. Causes of 
morbidity and death from gastrointestinal disorders 
include pancreatitis, bowel perforations, ulcers 
and hepatitis and volvulus. There was a delay in 
diagnosis in many of these women, and the need 
to investigate women who present recurrently with 
pain, breathlessness and, more recently, mental 
health concerns is paramount. 
COELIAC DISEASE 
Coeliac disease is a gluten-sensitive enteropathy 
with a prevalence of around 0.3–1% in the general 
population. It has been estimated that up to 1 in 70 
pregnant women are affected by coeliac disease, but 
that many are undiagnosed. Untreated coeliac dis￾ease is associated with high rates of spontaneous 
miscarriage and other adverse pregnancy outcomes 
such as FGR. Once a gluten-free diet is established, 
women with coeliac disease can expect a healthy 
pregnancy outcome. Awareness that they are pre￾disposed to other autoimmune diseases is the only 
other consideration . 
INFLAMMATORY BOWEL DISEASE 
The majority of patients with in˛ammatory bowel 
disease (IBD), which includes ulcerative colitis and 
Crohn disease, are diagnosed during their repro￾ductive years (incidence 3 per 1,000 pregnancies). 
Pregnancy does not usually alter the course of IBD, 
but new-onset IBD, uncontrolled disease activity at 
conception and previous bowel resection increases 
the risk of an adverse pregnancy outcome. Similarly, 
disease ˛are during pregnancy is more likely if the 
disease is active at the time of conception. Pregnant 
women with either ulcerative colitis or Crohn disease 
have been shown to have similar rates of disease 
exacerbation, although ˛ares in the ÿrst trimester 
and post-partum are more common in disease. 
Supplementation with high-dose folic acid (5 mg 
daily) is recommended, and supplementation with 
other vitamins is indicated according to measured 
deÿciencies. Women with IBD have increased rates 
of delivery by caesarean section, preterm birth and 
FGR. Caesarean section is indicated for the usual 
obstetric indications, if there is active perianal dis￾ease in Crohn disease and usually if there is an ileo￾anal pouch. 166 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 167 04/03/2024 16:07
 
Connective tissue disease 
The use of medication during conception and 
pregnancy is a cause of concern for many patients 
with IBD. Methotrexate is contraindicated, but the 
majority of other medications used to induce or 
maintain remission, including 5-aminosalicylates 
(including sulphasalazine, azathioprine, ciclosporin 
and corticosteroids), are considered safe in pregnancy 
and during breastfeeding. Experience with anti￾in˛ammatory monoclonal antibodies is growing and 
increasing evidence suggests agents such as in˛ix￾imab are low risk in the ÿrst two trimesters of preg￾nancy. A relapse of IBD in pregnancy may be treated 
with corticosteroids: oral, intravenous or enemas. 
PEPTIC ULCER DISEASE 
Peptic ulceration is less common in pregnancy, and 
pre-existing ulceration tends to improve during 
pregnancy, probably due to altered oestrogen levels 
and the improved maternal diet. Complications such 
as haemorrhage or perforation are rare. Treatment 
with antacids and common anti-ulcer medication 
(e.g. ranitidine, omeprazole) is safe. Pregnancy is not 
a contraindication to endoscopy. 
GALLSTONES 
The prevalence of gallstones in pregnancy is around 
19% in the multiparous population and 8% in the 
nulliparous. However, acute cholecystitis is much 
less common, occurring in around 0.1% of pregnan￾cies. The aetiology of increased biliary sludge and 
gallstones in pregnancy is multifactorial. Increased 
oestrogen levels lead to increased cholesterol secre￾tion and supersaturation of bile, and increased pro￾gesterone levels cause a decrease in small intestinal 
motility. Conservative medical management is rec￾ommended initially, especially during the ÿrst and 
third trimesters, in which surgical intervention may 
confer a risk of miscarriage or premature labour, 
respectively. Medical management involves intra￾venous ˛uids, correction of electrolytes, bowel rest, 
pain management and broad-spectrum antibiotics. 
However, relapse rates (40–90%) are high during 
pregnancy and surgical intervention may be war￾ranted, preferentially performed (open or laparo￾scopic cholecystectomy) in the second trimester. 
PANCREATITIS 
Pancreatitis is uncommon in pregnancy. The clini￾cal presentation combines nausea and vomiting with 
severe epigastric pain, and attacks usually occur in the 
third trimester of pregnancy. The most common cause 
of pancreatitis in pregnancy is gallstones, followed by 
alcohol, with hypertriglyceridaemia and hyperpara￾thyroidism much rarer causes. Acute pancreatitis in 
pregnancy can be life threatening and is associated 
with a signiÿcant preterm birth rate and high fetal 
mortality. It is therefore an important differential 
diagnosis in pregnant women with upper abdominal 
pain who are clinically unwell and an amylase test is 
an important investigation. Management is usually 
supportive, with a small percentage of women devel￾oping chemical peritonitis associated with cardiac, 
renal and gastrointestinal complications, necessitat￾ing intensive care. The decision to deliver the baby 
should be considered if the clinical condition deterio￾rates, must be an MDT approach and must take into 
account the gestation of the pregnancy. 
RED FLAGS 
Repeated presentation in pregnancy or postnatally 
with pain and/or pain requiring opiates should be con￾sidered a ‘red °ag’ and warrants a thorough assess￾ment to establish the cause. 
CONNECTIVE TISSUE DISEASE 
SYSTEMIC LUPUS ERYTHEMATOSUS 
Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a chronic 
autoimmune in˛ammatory disease. SLE affects 
approximately 1 in 1,000 people in the UK and is six 
times more common in women than in men. It is also 
six times more common in people of Black Caribbean 
ethnicity. It may cause disease in any organ system, 
but it principally affects the joints (90%), skin (80%), 
lungs, nervous system, kidneys and heart. The diag￾nosis is suggested by the ÿnding of a positive assay 
for antinuclear antibodies, while the presence of 
antibodies to double-stranded DNA is the most spe￾ciÿc for SLE. Pre-conception counselling is impor￾tant in individuals with SLE. 
167 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 168 04/03/2024 16:07
 
 
Medical complications of pregnancy 
BOX 10.22: Classiÿcation criteria for APS 
Clinical 
˜ Thrombosis: venous or arterial 
˜ Pregnancy morbidity: 
˜ fetal death at >10 weeks 
˜ preterm birth at <35 weeks due to severe 
pre-eclampsia or growth restriction 
˜ three or more unexplained miscarriages at 
<10 weeks 
Laboratory 
˜ Anticardiolipin antibodies: IgG and/or IgM 
and/or beta-2 glycoprotein: signiÿcant on two 
occasions, 12 weeks apart 
˜ Lupus anticoagulant: two occasions, 12 weeks 
apart 
BOX 10.21: American College 
of Rheumatology criteria for the 
classiÿcation of SLE 
˜ Malar rash 
˜ Discoid rash 
˜ Photosensitivity 
˜ Oral ulcers 
˜ Non-erosive arthritis 
˜ Pleuritis or pericarditis 
˜ Renal disorder 
˜ Neurological disorder 
˜ Haematological disorder 
˜ Immunological disorder 
˜ Positive antinuclear antibodies 
SLE is characterized by periods of disease activity, 
˛ares and remissions. Pregnancy increases the risk 
of ˛ares, and ˛ares are more common in the late sec￾ond and third trimesters. Active disease at the time of 
conception or new-onset SLE in pregnancy increase 
the chance of a ˛are. SLE is associated with signiÿ￾cant risks of miscarriage, fetal death, pre-eclampsia, 
preterm delivery and FGR. Those with lupus nephri￾tis are at greatest risk of these adverse outcomes, 
although pregnancy does not seem to alter renal 
function in the long term. Pregnancy outcome is also 
adversely affected by pre-existing hypertension and 
the presence of antiphospholipid antibodies. 
Owing to these signiÿcant risks, pregnant women 
with SLE require intensive monitoring for both mater￾nal and fetal indications and should be prescribed low￾dose aspirin to start by 12 weeks’ gestation. Baseline 
renal studies, including a 24-hour urine collection for 
protein, should be performed. Blood pressure should 
be monitored closely because of the increased risk of 
pre-eclampsia. Serial ultrasonography is performed 
to assess fetal growth and well-being with umbili￾cal artery Doppler. If antenatal treatment is required 
for SLE, steroids, azathioprine, sulfasalazine and 
hydroxychloroquine may be given safely. NSAIDs 
should be avoided before 12 weeks and after 20 weeks 
of pregnancy. 
Among mothers with SLE, 30% also have anti￾Ro/La antibodies, which cross the placenta and can 
cause the clinical syndromes neonatal lupus and 
congenital heart block. The risk of neonatal lupus 
is around 5%, rising to 25% if a previous child was 
affected. The risk of congenital heart block is around 
2% and usually appears in utero at 18–20 weeks’ ges￾tation, is permanent and difÿcult to treat and is asso￾ciated with a 20% rate of perinatal mortality. 
ANTIPHOSPHOLIPID SYNDROME 
The term antiphospholipid syndrome (APS) is used to 
describe the association of anticardiolipin antibodies 
and/or lupus anticoagulant with the typical clinical 
features of arterial or venous thrombosis, fetal loss 
after 10 weeks’ gestation, three or more miscarriages 
at less than 10 weeks’ gestation or delivery before 
35 weeks’ gestation due to FGR or pre-eclampsia. 
Importantly, a diagnosis of APS requires that the 
positive antibody titres must be present on two occa￾sions, 3 months apart. APS may be primary or found 
in association with SLE. 
In women with APS who have suffered repeated 
pregnancy loss or severe obstetric complications, the 
combined use of low-dose aspirin and low-molec￾ular-weight heparin has been shown to reduce the 
pregnancy loss rate. 
RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS 
Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a chronic in˛amma￾tory autoimmune disease that affects more women 
than men, and around 1 in 1,000 pregnancies is 168 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 169 04/03/2024 16:07
 
Skin disease 
affected. Most individuals with RA (75%) experi￾ence improvement during pregnancy but, of those 
who improve, 90% suffer a ˛are post-partum. Unlike 
other connective tissue diseases, no adverse effects 
of RA on pregnancy are reported, and there are no 
increases in pregnancy loss rates. The main concern 
for patients with RA is the safety of medication used 
to control the disease. If paracetamol-based analge￾sics are insufÿcient, corticosteroids are preferred to 
NSAIDs, although the latter can be used between 12 
and 20 weeks if needed. Azathioprine and hydroxy￾chloroquine can be used in pregnancy. The mode of 
delivery is determined by the usual obstetric indica￾tions, except when severe RA limits hip abduction 
and vaginal delivery is not possible. 
SKIN DISEASE 
PHYSIOLOGY 
Many physiological changes affect the skin during 
pregnancy. Increased pigmentation, especially on 
the face, areolae, axillae and abdominal midline, 
is common. Spider naevi affect the face, arms and 
upper torso, and broad pink linear striae (striae 
gravidarum) frequently appear over the lower abdo￾men and thighs. Pruritus without rash affects up to 
20% of normal pregnancies, but bile acids should 
always be performed to exclude intrahepatic cho￾lestasis of pregnancy (see Chapter 6). 
PRE-EXISTING SKIN DISEASE 
Atopic eczema is a common pruritic skin condition 
affecting 1–5% of the general population. Although 
it usually improves in pregnancy, it is the most com￾mon pregnancy rash. It can be treated with emol￾lients, bath additives and topical steroids if necessary. 
Hand and nipple eczema are particularly common 
post-partum. 
Psoriasis affects 2% of the population and, dur￾ing pregnancy, it remains unchanged in around 40% 
of patients, improves in another 40% and worsens in 
around 20%. Topical steroids can still be used, while 
methotrexate is contraindicated. 
Acne usually improves in pregnancy but can 
˛are in the third trimester and acne rosacea often 
worsens. Oral or topical erythromycin can be used, 
but tetracyclines and retinoids are contraindicated. 
SPECIFIC DERMATOSES OF 
PREGNANCY 
POLYMORPHIC ERUPTION OF 
PREGNANCY 
Polymorphic eruption of pregnancy is the most 
common pregnancy-speciÿc dermatosis. It is a self￾limiting pruritic in˛ammatory disorder that usually 
presents in the third trimester and/or immediately 
post-partum. The estimated incidence is about 1 in 
200 pregnancies and it is more common in primi￾gravida and twin pregnancies. Polymorphic eruption 
of pregnancy often begins on the lower abdomen, 
involving pregnancy striae, and extends to the thighs, 
buttocks, legs and arms, while sparing the umbilicus 
and rarely involving the face, hands and feet. In 70% 
of patients, the lesions become con˛uent and wide￾spread, resembling a toxic erythema. Symptomatic 
treatment is usually sufÿcient with antihistamines 
and emollients, but topical steroids may be required. 
Pregnancies appear to be otherwise unaffected, with 
no tendency to recur. 
PRURIGO OF PREGNANCY 
Prurigo of pregnancy is a common pruritic disorder 
that occurs in 1 in 300 pregnancies and presents as 
excoriated papules on extensor limbs, the abdomen 
and the shoulders. It is more common in individu￾als with a history of atopy. Prurigo usually starts 
at around 25–30 weeks of pregnancy and resolves 
after delivery with no effect on the mother or baby. 
Treatment is symptomatic with topical steroids and 
emollients. 
PRURITIC FOLLICULITIS OF 
PREGNANCY 
Pruritic folliculitis is a pruritic follicular eruption 
with papules and pustules that mainly affect the 
trunk, but can involve the limbs. It is similar in 
appearance to acne lesions and is sometimes con￾sidered a type of hormonally induced acne. Its onset 
is usually in the second and third trimester and it 
169 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 170 04/03/2024 16:07
 
 
 
Medical complications of pregnancy 
resolves weeks after delivery. Topical steroid treat￾ment is effective. 
PEMPHIGOID GESTATIONIS 
Pemphigoid gestationis is a rare pruritic autoim￾mune bullous disorder with an incidence of around 
1 in 10,000–60,000 pregnancies. It most commonly 
presents in the late second or third trimester with 
lesions beginning around the umbilicus and pro￾gressing to widespread clustered blisters, spreading 
to the limbs, palms and soles but sparing the face. It 
is intensely pruritic and very distressing. Diagnosis 
KEY LEARNING POINTS 
˜ Women with medical conditions that adversely 
affect pregnancy outcome should be offered 
pre-pregnancy counselling by an appropriately 
experienced MDT of healthcare professionals. 
˜ Women with medical problems that preclude 
safe pregnancy should be offered safe, effective 
and appropriate contraception. 
˜ Asthma is the most common chronic disease 
encountered in pregnancy. 
˜ Pulmonary hypertension is associated with a risk 
of maternal mortality of up to 50% in pregnancy. 
˜ Individuals who become pregnant with serum 
creatinine values above 124 ˝mol/L have an 
increased risk of accelerated decline in renal 
function and poor outcome of pregnancy. 
˜ Pre-existing diabetes increases maternal and 
fetal obstetric morbidity. 
˜ The incidence of fetal macrosomia in diabetes 
can be reduced through good blood glucose 
control. 
˜ The risk of perinatal and maternal morbidity 
is˛increased in pregnancies complicated by 
SCD. 
˜ The main issues for pregnant women with 
epilepsy relate to the teratogenic risk of 
anticonvulsant medication drugs and the risk of 
SUDEP if epilepsy is poorly controlled. 
˜ It is important to be aware of red °ags that 
suggest serious illness so that a diagnosis can 
be made and promptly managed. 
FURTHER READING 
James DK, Steer PJ, Weiner CP, Gonik B (2018). 
High Risk Pregnancy: Management Options, 5th edn. 
Nelson-Piercy C (2020). Handbook of Obstetric 
Medicine, 6th edn. 
is made by the clinical appearance and by direct 
immuno˛uorescence. Once established, the dis￾ease runs a complex course with exacerbations and 
remissions, and ˛ares post-partum in 75% of cases. 
Management aims to relieve pruritus and prevent 
new blister formation, and is achieved through 
the use of potent topical steroids and/or oral pred￾nisolone. There is some association with preterm 
delivery and small-for-gestational-age births, but 
no increase in pregnancy loss has been reported. 
Pemphigoid gestationis recurs in most subsequent 
pregnancies and may recur on the combined oral 
contraceptive pill. 
Williams D, Davison J (2008). Chronic kidney 
disease in pregnanc y. BM J, 336 (7637) : 211–215. 
MBRRACE-UK. https://www.npeu.ox.ac.uk/ 
mbrrace-uk. 
170 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 171 04/03/2024 16:07
 
 
 
Self-assessment 
SELF-ASSESSMENT 
For interactive SBAs and EMQs relating to this chapter, visit www.routledge.com/cw/mccarthy. 
CASE HISTORY 1 
CASE HISTORY 2 
A 36-year-old woman with a history of type 1 diabetes 
is referred to the diabetes pregnancy service, as she is 
considering a pregnancy. She has mild retinopathy, has 
not had any previous pregnancies and does not currently 
take any regular medication in addition to her insulin. Her 
most recent HbA1c is 65 mmol/mol. 
A What medication should she start prior to trying for a 
pregnancy?
 B Is her diabetes satisfactorily controlled and should 
she be encouraged to delay pregnancy? 
C What important pregnancy complications should 
be discussed with her prior to her embarking on a 
pregnancy? 
ANSWERS
 A Folic acid should be recommended to all women 
planning a pregnancy, but a higher dose should 
be prescribed to those with diabetes in view of the 
increased risk of neural tube defects. They should 
be advised to take 5 mg daily for 3 months prior to 
pregnancy.
 B Her diabetes is not satisfactorily controlled, as her 
HbA1c is above the target range (42 mmol/mol). 
She should be encouraged to test her blood sugars 
pre- and post-meals and make adjustments to her 
insulin, aiming to maintain her blood sugars between 
4 and 7 mmol/L. 
C Prior to pregnancy, it is useful to inform women of 
the need for the additional surveillance required in 
pregnancies complicated by maternal diabetes. The 
increased risk of miscarriage, congenital anomalies 
and pregnancy complications such as pre￾eclampsia, fetal macrosomia, stillbirth and neonatal 
complications should be discussed. It should be 
emphasized that good glycaemic control signiÿcantly 
reduces the risk of all of these complications. 
Mrs L, a 42-year-old woman, presents to your clinic at 
32 weeks’ gestation. Her platelets have been recorded 
as 40 × 109/L. No previous full blood count has been 
performed. List the differential diagnosis for thrombocy￾topenia in pregnancy. 
ANSWER 
The causes of thrombocytopenia include increased 
consumption or destruction, autoimmune, APS, pre￾eclampsia, HELLP syndrome, disseminated intravascu￾lar coagulation, thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura 
and hypersplenism. It can also occur due to decreased 
production due to sepsis, HIV infection and malignant 
marrow inÿltration. Gestational thrombocytopenia and 
pre-eclampsia are the commonest causes of low plate￾lets in pregnancy. 
171 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 173 04/03/2024 16:07
11 
Perinatal i nfections 
DAVID LISSAUER 
Introduction 173 Perinatal infections causing long-term 
Maternal infections and sepsis 173 disease 188 
Congenital infections 178 Further reading 191 
Neonatal infection 184 Self-assessment 192 
 Learning Objectives 
• Know about the common infections that may affect the pregnant woman, fetus and neonate. 
• Be aware of the infections included in routine pregnancy screening. 
• Know about the principles of management of perinatal infection. 
INTRODUCTION 
This chapter covers the main infections affecting the 
pregnant woman, fetus and neonate immediately 
after birth. An overview of perinatal infections is 
shown in Figure 11.1. 
The pregnant woman may encounter the same 
range of infections as all adults, but the illness may be 
more severe because of the physical and immunologi￾cal changes that occur during pregnancy. Bacterial sep￾sis is a major problem; although uncommon in the UK 
and other high-income countries, it can cause severe 
illness requiring intensive care and it places both the 
mother and the fetus at risk of death. Viral infections 
can also cause severe illness, as encountered with coro￾navirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) during the pandemic. 
Congenital infection may occur from transplacental 
spread and may be detected on antenatal screening 
or at birth or months or years later. Neonatal infec￾tion is usually acquired from organisms encountered 
from ascending infection shortly before birth or during 
delivery, or by nosocomial spread or in breast milk. 
MATERNAL INFECTIONS 
AND SEPSIS 
The most common infections experienced in preg￾nancy are genital tract and urinary tract infections 
and skin or wound infections, especially after cae￾sarean section or perineal wounds. Genital tract 
infections include chorioamnionitis – an intra￾amniotic infection that occurs prior to birth and 
involves infection of any combination of the amni￾otic ˜uid, placenta, fetus or fetal membranes – and 
endometritis, namely intrauterine infection after 
birth, miscarriage or termination of pregnancy. 
Common maternal infections and their clinical fea￾tures are shown in Table 11.1. 
If a maternal infection is associated with organ 
dysfunction and becomes life threatening, it is 
termed maternal sepsis. Maternal sepsis is one of the 
most important causes of maternal mortality world￾wide, including in high-income countries. In the 
UK, infections are the second most common cause 
of pregnant women being admitted to intensive 173 
10.1201/9781003196112-11 ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 174 04/03/2024 16:07
Perinatal infections 
Maternal infection Congenital infection Neonatal infection 
Pregnancy or 
post partum In utero Shortly before or at delivery 
or postnatally Timing 
Genital tract 
Wound/skin 
Urinary 
tract/local/ 
generalized 
Transplacental Transplacental/birth canal or 
nosocomial or breast milk 
First few weeks of life 
Early onset (<7 days) 
or late onset (>7 days) 
Months or 
years later 
Viral 
HSV 
VZV 
Bacteria 
Group B 
streptococcus
Gram-negative 
organisms 
Listeria 
Chlamydia 
Gonococcus 
HIV 
Hepatitis B 
Hepatitis C 
Antenatal screening, 
at birth or 
months/years later 
Route of 
infection 
Pregnancy or 
post partum 
Time of 
presentation 
Table 11.1 Common maternal infections and their clinical features 
Maternal sepsis 
Chorioamnionitis 
Endometritis 
Localized infection 
e.g. wound, urinary 
tract infection, 
mastitis 
Malaria 
COVID 19 
Viral 
CMV 
Rubella 
Parvovirus 
VZV 
Others 
Toxoplasmosis 
Syphilis 
Listeria 
Examples 
Figure 11.1 An overview of perinatal infections. (CMV, cytomegalovirus; COVID-19, coronavirus disease 2019; HIV, 
human immunodeÿciency virus; HSV, herpes simplex virus; VZV, varicella zoster virus.) 
Infection Clinical features 
Chorioamnionitis Abdominal pain, offensive vaginal discharge or lochia, uterine tenderness, fetal 
tachycardia >160 beats per minute, fever 
Endometritis Abdominal pain, vaginal bleeding, offensive discharge, uterine tenderness, delayed 
uterine involution, fever 
Infected wound (perineal or 
abdominal) 
Discharge from wound, pain, erythema and swelling around wound 
Urinary tract infection Dysuria, increased frequency, urgency, abdominal/˜ank/back pain, rigors, fever, 
nausea and vomiting 
Breast abscess/mastitis Breast pain and tenderness, erythema, painful induration, nipple discharge 
Respiratory tract infection Productive cough, sore throat, shortness of breath/difÿculty breathing, chest pain, fever 
Toxic shock syndrome 
(streptococcal and 
staphylococcal) 
Nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, watery vaginal discharge, generalized maculopapular 
rash, conjunctival suffusion 
Meningitis Headache, rash, photophobia, neck stiffness, confusion, fever, nausea and vomiting 
AETIOLOGY AND EPIDEMIOLOGY 
care. Globally, in 2020, maternal sepsis accounted 
for 10% of the 280,000 maternal deaths, making it Some infections occur more commonly in the preg￾a major cause of maternal mortality alongside post- nant population (e.g. mastitis and malaria) and oth￾partum haemorrhage and eclampsia. ers are more severe during pregnancy (e.g. in˜uenza 174 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 175 04/03/2024 16:07
Maternal infections and sepsis 
Figure 11.2 Factors causing an increased risk of maternal infections. 
Physical changes 
Breast engorgement and
lactation – risk of mastitis 
environment 
Urinary stasis – risk of
urinary tract infection 
Elevated diaphragm and
reduced respiratory volume
– worsen respiratory tract
infections 
Table 11.2 Risk factors for developing maternal sepsis 
during pregnancy or post-partum 
Maternal risk factors Obstetric risk factors 
Social factors (poverty, lack Cervical cerclage 
of access to care) Prolonged rupture of 
Obesity membranes 
Diabetes in pregnancy Amniocentesis and 
Iron deÿciency anaemia other invasive 
Maternal age >35 years procedures 
Impaired immunity/ Vaginal trauma 
immunosuppressant Caesarean birth 
medication Retained pregnancy 
Ethnicity (Black and South tissue 
East Asian) Multiple gestation 
Renal/cardiac/liver disease 
History of pelvic infection 
and varicella zoster). This is because, during preg￾nancy, there are physical and immunological changes 
to accommodate the developing fetus (Figure 11.2). 
While anyone can be affected by infections during or 
after pregnancy, there are some important risk fac￾tors (Table 11.2). 
Maternal infections and sepsis are caused by a 
wide range of organisms, but the most common 
are Escherichia coli, beta-haemolytic streptococci of 
Immunological changes 
Altered cellular and 
humoral immunity –
tolerogenic environment to
enable placentation and
fetal development 
Immune privileged
placental and uterine 
Pregnancy events 
Frequent procedures
predisposing to infection
such as caesarean section, 
perineal trauma,
intravenous cannulation 
and urinary catherisation 
Lanceÿeld group A (group A strep) and mixed infec￾tions. Infections with coliform bacteria are particu￾larly common in urinary sepsis or in pregnant women 
with premature rupture of the membranes. Wound 
infections are associated with staphylococcal infec￾tion, including methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus 
aureus (MRSA). Like in all populations, antimicro￾bial resistance is increasing and makes management 
.tlfÿ cuidmore 
PREVENTION 
Preventing infections includes meticulous attention 
to hand hygiene and other infection prevention and 
control practices, such as aseptic technique during 
sterile procedures. Vaccination against important 
infections such as in˜uenza and COVID-19 should 
be encouraged. There are also a number of obstetric 
situations and procedures in which the risks of infec￾tion are sufÿciently high that antibiotic prophylaxis 
is recommended. 
MANAGEMENT 
All providers looking after women who are pregnant 
or post-partum need to be very vigilant to spot infec￾tions early and treat them appropriately. This can be 175 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 176 04/03/2024 16:07
Perinatal infections 
BOX 11.1: Situations in which antibiotic 
prophylaxis is and is not recommended 
Recommended 
˜ Third- or fourth-degree perineal tears (these 
involve the anal sphincter muscle or rectal mucosa) 
˜ Caesarean section (given before skin incision) 
˜ Preterm prelabour rupture of membranes 
˜ Operative vaginal birth 
˜ Manual removal of the placenta 
˜ Known group B Streptococcus (GBS) colonization 
or previous affected infant (given in labour) 
Not recommended 
˜ Uncomplicated vaginal birth 
˜ Meconium-stained liquor 
˜ After episiotomy 
challenging, as some of the physiological changes of 
pregnancy make the clinical features more difÿcult 
to recognize. For example, increased frequency of 
urination is both a common feature of normal preg￾nancy and a feature of urinary tract infections. Some 
normal investigation ranges must be interpreted in 
the context of pregnancy (e.g. blood lactate is often 
raised during labour due to the physical exertion and 
altered ranges for serum creatinine mean that renal 
dysfunction could be missed if unadjusted normal 
ranges are used). 
Women from ethnic minorities and other margin￾alized groups are at particular risk and they must be 
encouraged to seek advice without delay if they are 
concerned about symptoms of infection. Providers 
must ensure that they do not dismiss concerns raised 
by individuals in these groups and must also be 
aware that some features of infection may present 
differently, such as the differing appearance of skin 
rashes on different skin types. 
Women with infections in pregnancy need to be 
meticulously monitored. They can often compensate 
physiologically for an extended period and then dete￾riorate rapidly. This means that careful attention needs 
to be paid to changes in vital signs and these need to 
be interpreted in the context of the expected physi￾ological changes of pregnancy. For example, early 
warning scoring systems adjusted for pregnancy￾speciÿc ranges should be used. Early escalation to 
senior clinicians is recommended in individuals 
whose clinical condition appears to be deteriorating. 
Antimicrobial choices need to take account of not 
only the clinical presentation and likely source but 
also the prevalent organisms and their antimicrobial 
resistance patterns. Consideration is also needed for 
the safety of any treatments for the fetus or the infant 
during breastfeeding. Identiÿcation of the organism 
should be attempted so the antibiotic choice can be 
tailored accordingly. This requires collection of correct 
specimens for microbiological examination such as 
blood cultures, urine samples and wound or pus swabs. 
Maternal sepsis is a life-threatening emergency 
and rapid treatment is required. The use of a sepsis 
bundle can help ensure pregnant women reliably 
and rapidly get the key treatments they need. Crucial 
aspects of this are ensuring an immediate and senior 
clinical review, delivery of appropriate antibiot￾ics within 1 hour, intravenous ˜uids and oxygen if 
indicated, detailed monitoring to ensure response to 
treatment and escalation of care if needed. 
COVID-19 AND INFLUENZA 
The UK Obstetric Surveillance Survey (UKOSS) 
looks at less common obstetric conditions that have 
a signiÿcant burden on perinatal and maternal mor￾tality and morbidity. UKOSS reviewed the impact 
of COVID-19 infection on pregnancy outcomes and 
at the risk factors associated with severe COVID-19 
in pregnant women in the UK between March 2020 
and October 2021. During this time, 65% of pregnant 
women admitted to hospital had mild infection, 21% 
had moderate infection and 14% had severe infec￾tion. In total, 22 individuals in this cohort died (all 
with severe COVID-19), 59 babies were stillborn and 
10 infants died in the neonatal period. 
Compared with pregnant women who had mild 
or moderate infection, those with severe COVID-19 
infection: 
• were more likely to give birth early (before 32 
weeks of pregnancy): 22.6% versus 2.7% 
• had a 50-fold higher risk of their birth being 
induced or by caesarean section, speciÿcally 
due to their COVID-19 infection 
• were more likely to give birth by pre-labour 
caesarean section (76% versus 30%) 176 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 177 04/03/2024 16:07
 
Maternal infections and sepsis 
• had a higher proportion of stillborn babies 
(3.3% versus 1.2%) 
• had a 12-fold increased risk of their babies 
being admitted to a neonatal intensive care 
unit, in part due to an increase in preterm birth 
Until the end of 2023, newer variants, such as 
the Omicron variant, have been associated with less 
severe maternal and fetal effects, with no evidence of 
the placentitis that was often observed in the Delta 
variant, particularly in the unvaccinated population. 
In addition, pregnant women who are 30 years of 
age or over, are overweight, are of a minority eth￾nicity, have gestational diabetes or have pre-exist￾ing hypertension have a greater risk of contracting 
severe COVID-19. 
Evidence from the last in˜uenza pandemic (2009/ 
H1N1) also showed that pregnant women were par￾ticularly vulnerable to severe infection resulting in 
increases in both maternal and perinatal mortality. 
The UK Conÿdential Enquiries into Maternal Deaths 
and Morbidity (2009–2012) showed that, during that 
time, 1 in 11 pregnant women who died had in˜u￾enza. Factors associated with admission to hospital 
included obesity, asthma, multiparity, multiple preg￾nancy, being of Black or of another minority group 
ethnicity and smoking. 
All pregnant women in the UK are encouraged 
to have seasonal ˜u and COVID-19 vaccines and the 
importance of this in preventing serious morbidity 
and mortality cannot be overemphasized. Prompt 
treatment with antiviral agents; a multidisciplinary 
team approach with early involvement of respiratory 
physicians, infectious disease specialists and senior 
obstetricians; and consideration of intensive care at 
an early stage are essential. 
MALARIA 
INFECTIVE ORGANISMS 
Although malaria can be caused by four species of 
malarial parasite (Plasmodium falciparum, P. vivax, P. 
ovale and P. malariae), the one that carries the worst 
prognosis for the mother and fetus, and the organ￾ism of greatest importance on a worldwide scale, is P. 
falciparum. This is a protozoan parasite transmitted 
by the female anopheline mosquito. 
INCIDENCE 
Incidence varies depending on geographical loca￾tion, but malaria is endemic in sub-Saharan Africa, 
South Asia and some parts of South America. It is 
estimated that one billion people worldwide carry 
parasites at any time, and 620,000 died from malaria 
in 2020. Pregnant women have an increased risk of 
malarial infection compared with the non-pregnant 
population. The incidence of parasitaemia has been 
found to be higher in the primiparous population 
(66%) than in the multiparous population (21–29%). 
In endemic areas, where many people are semi￾immune, malarial parasites are often found in large 
numbers sequestrated in the placenta, even when 
blood ÿlms are negative. This may lead to the diag￾nosis being missed, unless there is a high index of 
suspicion and the placenta is examined appropriately. 
CLINICAL FEATURES 
Maternal effects include a cyclical spiking pyrexia, 
which may be associated with miscarriage and pre￾term labour. Severe anaemia may develop rapidly, 
but many pregnant women from endemic areas 
may also have other risk factors for severe anaemia. 
Hypoglycaemia is common and may be severe in preg￾nancy. Pulmonary oedema, due to abnormal capillary 
permeability, results in high mortality (approximately 
50%). Haemolysis causes jaundice and renal failure. 
Fetal effects include premature delivery and fetal 
growth restriction (FGR). Placental sequestration of 
parasites is associated with abnormal uteroplacen￾tal Doppler wave forms and is also implicated in the 
higher rate of transmission of human immunodeÿ￾ciency virus (HIV). Coinfection with HIV is common 
in many of the areas where malaria is endemic, and 
vertical transmission of both malaria and HIV to the 
fetus is more common if the two infections coexist. 
MANAGEMENT 
If malaria is suspected, prompt symptomatic and 
supportive treatment with appropriate antimalarial 
therapy is indicated. The choice of antimalarial will 
vary, depending on local patterns of disease and 
drug resistance, and expert advice should be sought. 
In endemic areas, preventative strategies include the 177 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 178 04/03/2024 16:07
 
Perinatal infections 
use of insecticide-treated bed nets and intermittent 
preventative treatment during pregnancy. 
If pregnant women from non-endemic areas are 
planning to travel to endemic areas, they should 
do so only if absolutely necessary during preg￾nancy. Insecticide sprays, mosquito nets, appro￾priate clothing to reduce the risk of mosquito bites 
and drug prophylaxis can all be used. Expert advice 
on which antimalarial is appropriate for the area 
should be obtained. The potential risks of teratoge￾nicity must be balanced against the serious risk of 
contracting malaria. 
CONGENITAL INFECTIONS 
CYTOMEGALOVIRUS 
Cytomegalovirus (CMV) is the most common con￾genital infection in the UK, affecting 0.5–1 in every 
1,000 live births. 
INFECTIVE ORGANISM 
CMV is a deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) herpes virus. 
It is transmitted by respiratory droplet transmission 
and is excreted in the urine. 
PREVALENCE 
CMV infection is common in the UK; about 60% of 
women are CMV seropositive when they become 
pregnant, so 40% are susceptible, although there is 
also a risk of reactivation or reinfection. It is estimated 
that 1–2% of individuals seroconvert during preg￾nancy. Of these, it is estimated that 5–10% of their 
babies will be severely affected at birth. Although 
90% appear asymptomatic at birth, 10–15% of them 
are at risk of sensorineural hearing loss (which may 
be progressive) and developmental delay. 
Primary infection is more likely to cause symp￾tomatic congenital CMV (40% transmission rate) and 
long-term sequelae than reactivation or reinfection 
(1%). However, the high incidence of CMV seroposi￾tivity among the pregnant population worldwide 
(>90%) means that more infants with congenital 
infection are born following reactivation or reinfec￾tion than from primary infection. 
CLINICAL FEATURES 
Primary infection in the mother usually produces no 
symptoms or mild non-speciÿc ˜u-like symptoms. 
The diagnosis is often made after abnormalities are 
identiÿed in the severely affected fetus on ultrasound 
scanning. The main features are growth restriction, 
microcephaly, intracranial calciÿcation (Figure˜11.3), 
ventriculomegaly, ascites (see Figure 11.5) and 
hydrops. The neonate may be anaemic and throm￾bocytopaenic, with hepatosplenomegaly, jaundice 
and a purpuric rash. 
MANAGEMENT 
A serological diagnosis of primary CMV can be 
made by demonstrating the development of CMV 
antibodies in a seronegative individual, who initially 
develops CMV immunoglobulin (Ig)M antibody and 
subsequently IgG antibody. Virology laboratories 
usually keep the blood sample taken in early preg￾nancy, so, if infection is suspected, a sample taken at 
the time of presentation can be compared with the 
initial booking sample to determine if seroconver￾sion has occurred. As IgM can be secreted for sev￾eral months, it is not sufÿcient to simply demonstrate 
IgM in a sample at the time of presentation; it has to 
be a new ÿnding in someone who was negative for 
IgM at the time of booking. 
Figure 11.3 Ultrasound of a fetal brain demonstrating 
intracranial calciÿcation secondary to cytomegalovirus 
infection. (Courtesy of Dr Ed Johnstone, St Mary’s 
Hospital, Manchester.) 178 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 179 04/03/2024 16:07
 
 
 
 
Congenital infections 
If it is suspected that the fetus may be infected, as 
the virus is excreted in fetal urine, amniotic ˜uid can 
be tested for the virus by polymerase chain reaction 
(PCR). There may be a role in some cases for treat￾ment of an infected fetus with antivirals. 
If severe abnormalities from congenital CMV 
infection are detected on ultrasound, termination 
of pregnancy should be considered. More difÿcult 
is when CMV infection is identiÿed but the fetus 
appears normal on ultrasound, as there remains a 
10–20% risk of hearing loss and neurodisability. There 
is some evidence that antiviral treatment of infants 
with central nervous system involvement improves 
hearing and neurodevelopmental outcomes. 
SYPHILIS 
Syphilis is a sexually acquired infection caused by 
Treponema pallidum, which in pregnancy is associ￾ated with FGR, non-immune fetal hydrops, congeni￾tal syphilis (cerebral calciÿcation and other cerebral 
and gastrointestinal anomalies and bone lesions), 
stillbirth, preterm birth and neonatal death. In the 
infant it can cause anaemia, jaundice, hepatospleno￾megaly, rhinitis, eye abnormalities, a rash on the 
hands and feet and neurodisability. 
Its incidence during pregnancy in the UK is low 
and has reduced over the last decade. There is a highly 
effective screening programme with more than 99% 
of the eligible population screened. Of 676,000 preg￾nant women screened in 2018 in England, 1,028 were 
screen positive, of whom 470 required treatment, and 
only three cases of congenital syphilis were reported. 
However, syphilis remains a problem worldwide, with 
more than one million pregnant women estimated to 
be infected globally in 2020, making it an important 
cause of stillbirth worldwide. The global incidence of 
congenital syphilis in 2020 was estimated at 425 cases 
per 100,000 livebirths. 
CLINICAL FEATURES 
Primary syphilis may present as a painless genital 
ulcer 3–6 weeks after the infection is acquired, which 
is called a chancre (condylomata lata) (Figure 11.4). 
However, this may be on the cervix and so may go 
unnoticed. 
Figure 11.4 Primary syphilitic chancre. (Courtesy of 
Dr°Raymond Maw, Royal Victoria Hospital, Belfast.) 
Secondary manifestations occur 6 weeks to 6 
months after infection and present as a maculopapu￾lar rash or lesions affecting the mucous membranes. 
Ultimately, 20% of untreated patients will develop 
symptomatic cardiovascular tertiary syphilis and 
5–10% will develop symptomatic neurosyphilis. 
In pregnant women with early, untreated (pri￾mary or secondary) syphilis, 70–100% of infants will 
be infected and approximately 25% will be stillborn. 
The risk of congenital transmission declines with 
increasing duration of maternal syphilis prior to 
pregnancy. 
SCREENING 
As treatment is highly effective, routine antenatal 
screening is recommended for all pregnant women 
and the uptake for national screening in the UK is 
very high (>95%). Treponemal tests detect speciÿc 
treponemal antibodies and include enzyme immu￾noassays (EIAs), T. pallidum haemagglutination 179 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 180 04/03/2024 16:07
 
 
Perinatal infections 
assay and the ˜uorescent treponemal antibody￾absorbed test. EIAs detect IgG and IgM and are rap￾idly replacing the non-speciÿc treponemal antibody 
tests, the venereal diseases research laboratory 
(VDRL) test and rapid plasma reagin tests. EIAs are 
over 98% sensitive and over 99% speciÿc, in con￾trast with the non-treponemal tests, which may 
result in false-negatives, particularly in very early 
or late syphilis, in patients with reinfection or in 
those who are HIV positive. The VDRL test may be 
false-positive in patients with lupus. Overall, there 
is a signiÿcant false-positive rate from screening 
tests; pregnant women should therefore be referred 
for expert assessment and diagnosis in a genitouri￾nary medicine (GUM) clinic. 
None of these serological tests will detect syphi￾lis in its incubation stage, which may last for an 
average of 25 days. Congenital infections including 
syphilis may be suspected from abnormalities on 
antenatal ultrasound. 
MANAGEMENT 
The initial step is to conÿrm the diagnosis and to test 
for any other sexually transmitted diseases. Once a 
diagnosis of syphilis is conÿrmed, the GUM clinic 
will institute appropriate contact tracing of sexual 
partners. Older children may also need to be screened 
for congenital infection. Treatment is indicated for 
acute infection, for inadequately treated infection or 
if treatment prior to pregnancy is uncertain. 
Parenteral penicillin has a 98% success rate for 
preventing congenital syphilis if given before 36 
weeks’ gestation. A Jarish–Herxheimer reaction may 
occur with treatment as a result of the release of pro￾in˜ammatory cytokines in response to dying organ￾isms. This presents as a worsening of symptoms and 
fever for 12–24 hours after commencement of treat￾ment. It may be associated with uterine contractions 
and fetal distress. Some clinicians therefore admit 
pregnant women at the time of commencement of 
treatment for monitoring. 
If the pregnant woman is not treated during 
pregnancy, the baby should be treated after deliv￾ery. An infected baby may be born without signs or 
symptoms of disease but if untreated may develop 
seizures and developmental impairment. Infants of 
treated mothers should be assessed at birth. 
TOXOPLASMOSIS 
INFECTIVE ORGANISM 
Toxoplasma gondii is a protozoan parasite found in cat 
faeces, soil, uncooked meat and unwashed salads or 
raw vegetables. Infection occurs by ingestion of the 
parasite from undercooked meat or from unwashed 
hands or food. 
PREVALENCE 
Around 350 cases of toxoplasmosis are reported in 
England and Wales each year, but the actual number 
of infections could be as high as 350,000 and esti￾mates suggest up to one-third of the population will 
be infected by toxoplasmosis at some point in their 
life. However, congenital toxoplasmosis is rare in 
the UK, with estimates suggesting only 1 in every 
10,000–30,000 live births. 
SCREENING 
Only about 10 severely affected babies are diag￾nosed per year in the UK and, for this reason, the UK 
National Screening Committee recommends that 
screening for toxoplasmosis should not be offered 
routinely. There is a lack of evidence that antenatal 
screening and treatment reduces mother-to-child 
transmission or the complications associated with T. 
gondii infection. In the UK, pregnant women should 
be advised about appropriate preventative measures, 
such as avoiding eating undercooked meat and 
wearing gloves and washing hands when handling 
cat litter or gardening. 
Even in France, where the infection rate during 
pregnancy is higher and the pregnant population is 
screened monthly, the beneÿts of such a programme 
appear to be limited. 
CLINICAL FEATURES 
The initial infection is usually asymptomatic or may 
be a glandular fever-like illness. Parasitaemia usu￾ally occurs within 3 weeks of infection. Therefore, 
congenital infection is only a signiÿcant risk if the 
mother acquires the infection during or immediately 
before pregnancy. 180 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 181 04/03/2024 16:07
 
 
 
Congenital infections 
Infection during the ÿrst trimester of pregnancy 
is most likely to cause severe fetal damage (85%), but 
only 10% of infections are transmitted to the fetus at 
this gestation. In the third trimester, 85% of infec￾tions are transmitted, but the risk of fetal damage 
decreases to around 10%. 
Severely infected infants may have ventriculo￾megaly or microcephaly, chorioretinitis and cere￾bral calciÿcation. These features may be detected on 
ultrasound scan. The majority of infected infants are 
asymptomatic at birth but develop sequelae several 
years later. 
MANAGEMENT 
The diagnosis of primary infection with toxoplasmo￾sis during pregnancy is made by the Sabin–Feldman 
dye test. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays are 
available for IgM antibody. However, IgM may per￾sist for months or even years, so often serial testing 
for rising titres is necessary. If suspicion of congeni￾tal toxoplasmosis has arisen because of an abnor￾mal ultrasound scan of the fetus, an amniocentesis 
can be performed. PCR analysis of amniotic ˜uid is 
highly accurate for the identiÿcation of T. gondii. 
Spiramycin treatment can be used in pregnancy. This 
reduces the incidence of transplacental infection but 
has not been shown to deÿnitively reduce the incidence 
of clinical congenital disease. If congenital infection is 
identiÿed on ultrasound, termination of pregnancy can 
be considered, or treatment with sulphadiazine and 
pyrimethamine may be given, although evidence of the 
efÿcacy of this treatment is lacking. 
CHICKENPOX (VARICELLA 
ZOSTER VIRUS) 
INFECTIVE ORGANISM 
Chickenpox is caused by the varicella zoster virus 
(VZV), a herpes virus that is transmitted by droplet 
spread and direct personal contact. 
PREVALENCE 
In the UK, over 90% of individuals over 15 years 
of age are immune to chickenpox. Although con￾tact with chickenpox is common in pregnancy, 
infection during pregnancy is uncommon, with an 
estimated prevalence of 3 in every 1,000 pregnancies. 
Antenatal screening for chickenpox is not currently 
recommended in the UK, but individuals identiÿed 
as being seronegative can consider vaccination either 
pre-pregnancy or in the postnatal period. 
CLINICAL FEATURES 
Non-immune pregnant women are more vulner￾able to chickenpox and may develop a serious pneu￾monia, hepatitis or encephalitis. The mortality rate 
is approximately ÿve times higher in the pregnant 
population than in the non-pregnant population. 
Pneumonia occurs in about 10% of pregnant women 
with chickenpox and is more severe at later gesta￾tions. It may also cause fetal varicella syndrome 
(FVS) or varicella infection of the newborn. 
MANAGEMENT 
Women should be asked whether they have had chick￾enpox or shingles or 2 recorded doses of varicella vac￾cine at the initial booking visit. If this is the case, and 
they are immunocompetent, this is sufÿcient evidence 
of immunity. If not, they should be advised to avoid 
contact with infected individuals during pregnancy, 
and, if contact occurs, to advise their doctor or mid￾wife as soon as possible. Signiÿcant contact is deÿned 
as being in the same room as an infected person for 15 
or more minutes or face-to-face contact. Individuals 
are infectious for 48 hours prior to appearance of the 
rash and until the vesicles crust over (usually 5 days). 
Testing for immunity 
If a pregnant woman with no history of immunity 
has been in contact with chickenpox, she should have 
a blood test for conÿrmation of VZV immunity by 
testing for VZV IgG. This can usually be performed 
within 24–48 hours and the virology laboratory may 
be able to use serum stored from the early pregnancy 
booking blood sample. 
Management of the non-immune pregnant 
woman exposed to chickenpox 
If immunity is not conÿrmed and there has been sig￾niÿcant exposure, the individual should be offered 
post-exposure prophylaxis (PEP). As the efÿcacy of 181 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 182 04/03/2024 16:07
Perinatal infections 
varicella zoster immunoglobulin (VZIG) in preventing 
chickenpox has been found to be poor, guidelines for 
the UK from 2023 (UK Health Security Agency) are for 
antivirals to be used for PEP in susceptible individuals, 
with VZIG recommended only for neonates. 
Management of chickenpox in pregnancy 
Women with chickenpox should avoid contact with 
other pregnant women and neonates until the 
lesions have crusted over. Current recommendations 
state that oral aciclovir should be prescribed for preg￾nant women if they present within 24 hours of the 
onset of the rash and if they are more than 20 weeks’ 
gestation. Aciclovir should also be considered before 
20 weeks’ gestation. VZIG has no therapeutic ben￾eÿt once chickenpox has developed. If the pregnant 
woman smokes, has chronic lung disease, is taking 
corticosteroids or is in the second half of pregnancy, 
a hospital assessment should be considered, even in 
the absence of complications. 
Individuals hospitalized with varicella should be 
nursed in isolation from babies or potentially suscep￾tible pregnant women or non-immune staff. 
Delivery during the viraemic period may be haz￾ardous. The maternal risks are bleeding, thrombocy￾topaenia, disseminated intravascular coagulopathy 
and hepatitis. There is a risk of varicella infection of 
the newborn with signiÿcant morbidity and mortal￾ity. Supportive treatment and intravenous aciclovir 
is therefore desirable, allowing resolution of the rash 
and transfer of protective antibodies from the mother 
to the fetus. However, delivery may be required to 
facilitate assisted ventilation in cases in which vari￾cella pneumonia is complicated by respiratory failure.
 Fetus 
Spontaneous miscarriage does not appear to be 
increased if chickenpox occurs in the ÿrst trimester. 
FVS is characterized by one or more of the following: 
• skin scarring in a dermatomal distribution 
• eye defects (microphthalmia, chorioretinitis, 
cataracts) 
• hypoplasia of the limbs 
• neurological abnormalities (microcephaly, 
cortical atrophy, mental restriction and 
dysfunction of bowel and bladder sphincters) 
FVS occurs in only very few infected fetuses 
(approximately 1%). FVS has been reported as early 
as 3 weeks’ and up to 28 weeks’ gestation. The risk 
appears to be lower in the ÿrst trimester (0.55%). No 
case of FVS has been reported when maternal infec￾tion has occurred after 28 weeks. 
If chickenpox occurs in pregnancy, referral to 
a fetal medicine specialist should be considered at 
16–20 weeks or 5 weeks after infection for discussion 
and detailed ultrasound examination, when ÿndings 
such as limb deformity, microcephaly, hydrocepha￾lus, soft-tissue calciÿcation and FGR can be detected. 
A time lag of at least 5 weeks after the primary infec￾tion is advised, as it takes several weeks for these fea￾tures to manifest.
 Following the primary infection, the virus 
remains dormant in sensory nerve root ganglia but 
can be reactivated to cause herpes zoster or shin￾gles, a vesicular erythematous skin rash in a derma￾tomal distribution. The risk of a pregnant woman 
acquiring infection from an individual with herpes 
zoster in non-exposed sites (for example thoraco￾lumbar) is low. 
Management around delivery 
If infection occurs at term, there is a signiÿcant risk 
of varicella of the newborn. Elective delivery should 
normally be avoided until 7 days after the onset of 
maternal rash to allow for the passive transfer of 
antibodies from the mother to the infant. 
If birth occurs within the 7-day period following 
the onset of the maternal rash or if the mother devel￾ops the chickenpox rash within 7 days after birth, 
prophylactic VZIG and antiviral therapy may be 
indicated. The infant should be monitored for signs 
of infection. 
Neonatal infection should be treated with aciclo￾vir following discussion with a neonatologist and 
virologist. 
PARVOVIRUS 
INFECTIVE ORGANISM 
Parvovirus B19 is a relatively common infection in preg￾nancy and is transmitted through respiratory droplets. 
182 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 183 04/03/2024 16:07
 
 
Congenital infections 
INCIDENCE 
About 50% of the pregnant population is susceptible 
to infection. Infection is most common in those who 
work with young children, for example teachers. 
Routine screening in pregnancy is not recommended, 
as prevention of fetal infection is not possible. 
CLINICAL FEATURES 
In adults, many (20–25%) are asymptomatic or 
experience a mild ˜u-like illness and/or arthropa￾thy. In children, it usually causes a characteristic 
rash (slapped cheek syndrome). There is a transpla￾cental transmission rate of 17–33% and the fetus is 
most vulnerable in the second trimester. In most, 
there is spontaneous resolution with no long-term 
consequences, but the virus can infect the liver, 
which is the main source of haematopoiesis in the 
second trimester. This can lead to an aplastic anae￾mia, which may result in fetal hydrops. Hydrops 
is when ˜uid accumulates in two or more spaces 
in the fetus, such as pleural effusions, pericardial 
effusion, ascites (Figure 11.5) or skin oedema. 
This occurs secondary to high-output cardiac fail￾ure. Presentation is usually on ultrasound scan. In 
an anaemic fetus that has not developed hydrops 
or in a fetus in which this has progressed to cause 
hydrops, the velocity of blood ˜ow in the fetal mid￾dle cerebral artery is high and this can be detected 
on ultrasound (Figure 11.6). 
Figure 11.5 Fetal ascites. (Courtesy of Dr Ed Johnstone, 
St Mary’s Hospital, Manchester.) 
Figure 11.6 Middle cerebral Doppler assessment to test 
for fetal anaemia. (Courtesy of Dr Ed Johnstone, St Mary’s 
Hospital, Manchester.) 
MANAGEMENT 
The diagnosis is made by demonstrating seroconver￾sion of the mother, who develops IgM antibodies to 
parvovirus B19, having previously tested negative. 
PCR in maternal and fetal blood or amniotic ˜uid is 
the most sensitive and accurate diagnostic test. 
If a fetus is severely anaemic or has developed 
hydrops, an in utero blood transfusion may be required. 
If the fetus survives the anaemia, the outcome is usu￾ally normal. Before 20 weeks, intrauterine transfusion 
is not possible and the fetal loss rate is approximately 
10%. Beyond 20 weeks, treatment with transfusion can 
reduce the fetal loss rate to approximately 1%. 
RUBELLA 
The importance of maternal infection with rubella 
lies in its ability to cause congenital rubella syn￾drome in the fetus. Rubella infection in the mother 
may cause a maculo-papular rash or is asymp￾tomatic. The risk and extent of fetal damage are 
mainly determined by the gestational age at mater￾nal infection. Infection before 12 weeks’ gestation 
causes deafness, congenital heart disease, cataracts 
and other abnormalities in over 80% of cases. About 
30% of fetuses of mothers infected at 13 to 16 weeks’ 
gestation have impaired hearing; beyond 18 weeks’ 
183 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 184 04/03/2024 16:07
 
 
 
Perinatal infections 
gestation, the risk to the fetus is low. Viraemia after 
birth continues to damage the infant. 
In the UK, European Union, North America and 
other high-income countries where the mumps, 
measles and rubella vaccine is part of the routine 
childhood vaccination programme, rubella infection 
has become extremely rare and congenital rubella 
syndrome is rarely encountered. This is why routine 
antenatal screening for immunity to rubella has been 
discontinued in the UK. By 2020, the rubella vaccine 
had been incorporated into the national immuniza￾tion schedule of 194 countries, and 93 (48%) have 
eliminated rubella transmission. However, it may 
still be encountered in countries without a sufÿ￾ciently high immunization rate. 
LISTERIA 
INFECTIVE ORGANISM 
Listeria monocytogenes is an aerobic and facultatively 
anaerobic motile Gram-positive bacillus. It has an 
unusual life cycle with obligate intracellular replica￾tion. People with reduced cell-mediated immunity, and 
hence pregnant individuals, are therefore most at risk. 
INCIDENCE 
The incidence of L. monocytogenes infection in preg￾nant women is around 18 times higher than in the 
non-pregnant population, but is still rare, with rates 
of 1 in 8,000. Contaminated food is the usual source 
of infection. Usual sources are unpasteurized milk, 
ripened soft cheeses, pâté and ready-to-eat food 
unless thoroughly reheated, and pregnant women 
should be given information on risk reduction by 
dietary modiÿcation. 
CLINICAL FEATURES 
Pregnant women with listeriosis most commonly 
suffer from a ˜u-like illness with fever and general 
malaise. About one-third of cases may be asymp￾tomatic. Transmission to the fetus may occur either 
via the ascending route through the cervix or trans￾placentally secondary to maternal bacteraemia. 
Approximately 20% of affected pregnancies result 
in miscarriage or stillbirth. Premature delivery may 
occur in over 50%. Neonates may have respiratory 
distress, fever, seizures or sepsis and the overall 
neonatal mortality rate has been estimated at 38%. 
Meconium staining of the amniotic ˜uid in a preterm 
infant may increase clinical suspicion of listeriosis. 
Neonatal infection is rare. 
MANAGEMENT 
The diagnosis of listeriosis depends on clinical suspi￾cion and isolation of the organism from blood, vaginal 
swabs or the placenta. Intravenous antibiotic treat￾ment is indicated for affected adults and neonates. 
NEONATAL INFECTION 
GROUP B STREPTOCOCCUS 
INFECTIVE ORGANISM 
GBS (Streptococcus agalactiae) is a Gram-positive 
coccus frequently found as a vaginal commensal. 
It can cause sepsis in the neonate and transmission 
can occur from the time the membranes are rup￾tured until delivery. 
PREVALENCE 
GBS is recognized as the most frequent cause of 
severe early-onset (less than 7 days of age) infec￾tion in newborn infants in high-income countries. 
Approximately 21% of pregnant women in the UK 
carry GBS as a commensal in the vagina. The back￾ground incidence of early-onset GBS disease in the 
UK is 0.5 in 1,000 births, which increases to 2.5 in 
1,000 in women with GBS carriage conÿrmed in the 
current pregnancy. 
The mortality from early-onset GBS disease in the 
UK is 6% in term infants and 18% in preterm infants. 
Even when treated appropriately, some infants will 
still die of early-onset disease, particularly when the 
disease is well established prior to birth. 
SCREENING 
Universal screening is carried out in the USA, but this 
practice is not currently recommended in the UK. The 
optimal screening approach remains unclear and can 
be either based on risk factors, or a universal screening 184 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 185 04/03/2024 16:07
 
Neonatal infection 
approach can be used. The best strategy may depend 
on the prevalence of GBS in the population. 
CLINICAL FEATURES 
The mother will not have symptoms, as GBS is a com￾mon vaginal commensal. An infected neonate may 
demonstrate signs of neonatal sepsis, including sud￾den collapse, tachypnoea, nasal ˜aring, poor tone, etc. 
MANAGEMENT 
Antenatal 
If GBS is detected incidentally, antenatal treatment 
is not recommended, as it does not reduce the likeli￾hood of GBS colonization at the time of delivery. 
Intra-partum antibiotic prophylaxis 
It is during labour that infection of the fetus/neonate 
occurs. Antibiotics (benzylpenicillin) given in labour 
are estimated to be 60–80% effective in reducing 
early-onset neonatal GBS infection. Clindamycin 
was traditionally used as an alternative antibiotic in 
individuals suspected of having a penicillin allergy, 
but increasing resistance means alternatives such a 
cephalosporins or vancomycin (for severe allergy) 
are increasingly recommended. 
The Royal College of Obstetricians and 
Gynaecologists (RCOG) recommends that intra￾partum antibiotic prophylaxis is discussed with 
pregnant women (see Box 11.2, ‘Risk factors for 
GBS prophylaxis’) and that the recommendation for 
using prophylaxis is stronger if more than one risk 
factor is present. 
BOX 11.2: Risk factors for GBS 
prophylaxis 
˜ Intrapartum fever (>38°C) 
˜ Prolonged rupture of membranes greater than 
18 hours 
˜ Prematurity (<37 weeks) 
˜ Previous infant with GBS 
˜ Incidental detection of GBS in current pregnancy 
˜ GBS bacteriuria 
˜ GBS colonization is a previous pregnancy, unless 
they have a recent negative test this pregnancy 
Approximately 15% of all UK pregnancies have 
one or more of the risk factors and, using this strat￾egy, 25% of pregnant women will receive intra-par￾tum antibiotics with 50–69% reduction in early-onset 
GBS infection in the neonate. Therefore, 5,882 women 
need to be treated to prevent one neonatal death. 
It is recommended that intravenous penicillin is 
given as soon as possible after the onset of labour 
(or after development of a risk factor) and 4-hourly 
until delivery. 
Individuals in whom GBS carriage was detected in 
a previous pregnancy have around a 50% chance of 
again having GBS in this pregnancy. They should have 
the option of prophylaxis discussed with them and 
may opt for either prophylaxis or repeat testing in late 
pregnancy. If chorioamnionitis is suspected, broad￾spectrum antibiotic therapy including an agent active 
against GBS should replace GBS-speciÿc antibiotic 
prophylaxis. Women undergoing planned caesarean 
delivery in the absence of labour or membrane rupture 
do not require antibiotic prophylaxis for GBS, regard￾less of GBS colonization status. The risk of neonatal 
GBS disease is extremely low in this circumstance. 
Neonate 
Many infants with early-onset GBS disease have 
symptoms at or soon after birth. Neonatal sepsis 
can progress rapidly to death. Whether they received 
intra-partum antibiotics or not, any newborn infant 
with clinical signs compatible with infection should 
be treated promptly with broad-spectrum antibiot￾ics, which provide cover against early-onset GBS dis￾ease and other common pathogens. Blood cultures 
should always be obtained before antibiotic treat￾ment is commenced and cerebrospinal ˜uid cultures 
should be considered. Randomized controlled trials 
have not provided a sufÿcient evidence base for clear 
treatment recommendations in well newborn infants 
whose mothers had risk factors for GBS. Some clini￾cians will recommend treatment of the infants, while 
others will prefer to observe them because the bal￾ance of risks and beneÿts of treatment is uncertain. 
Each hospital will have its own guideline. 
Gram-negative infection 
In high-income countries, infection from Gram￾negative organisms is less common than GBS. 
Infection is acquired by exposure of the infant shortly 185 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 186 04/03/2024 16:07
 
 
Perinatal infections 
before or at delivery. The organisms can cause early￾or late-onset neonatal infection, and result in signiÿ￾cant morbidity and mortality. 
HERPES SIMPLEX VIRUS 
INFECTIVE ORGANISM 
Herpes simplex virus (HSV) is a double-stranded 
DNA virus. There are two viral types, HSV-1 and 
HSV-2. The majority of orolabial infections are 
caused by HSV-1. These infections are usually 
acquired during childhood through direct physical 
contact such as kissing. Genital herpes is a sexually 
transmitted infection and is most commonly caused 
by HSV-2 (Figure 11.7). 
INCIDENCE 
Genital herpes is the most common ulcerative sexu￾ally transmitted infection in the UK. There has been 
an increasing prevalence of anogenital herpes in the 
UK over the last decade with around 20,000 cases 
per year. Neonatal herpes is a viral infection with a 
high morbidity and mortality, and is most commonly 
acquired at or near the time of delivery due to contact 
with infected secretions. It is rare, with an estimated 
incidence of 2 per 100,000 live births. 
CLINICAL FEATURES 
Genital herpes presents as ulcerative lesions on the 
vulva, vagina or cervix. It may be recurrent, when 
Figure 11.7 Primary genital herpes. (Courtesy of 
Dr°Richard Lau, St George’s Hospital, London.) 
the lesion is usually less ˜orid. A primary infection 
may be associated with systemic symptoms and may 
cause urinary retention. 
Neonatal herpes may be caused by HSV-1 or 
HSV-2, as either viral type can cause genital herpes. 
Almost all cases of neonatal herpes occur as a result 
of direct contact with infected maternal secretions, 
although it can be acquired postnatally from an 
infected caregiver.
 Neonatal herpes is classiÿed into three subgroups: 
localized (to the skin, eye and/mouth), local central 
nervous system disease (encephalitis alone) and dis￾seminated infection (with multiple organ involve￾ment). Factors in˜uencing transmission include the 
type of maternal infection (primary or recurrent), 
the presence of transplacental maternal neutralizing 
antibodies, the duration of rupture of membranes 
before delivery, the use of fetal scalp electrodes and 
the mode of delivery. The risks are greatest in the 
presence of a new infection (primary genital herpes) 
in the third trimester, particularly within 6 weeks of 
delivery, as viral shedding may persist and the baby 
is likely to be born before the development of pro￾tective maternal antibodies. Very rarely, congenital 
herpes may occur as a result of transplacental intra￾uterine infection. 
MANAGEMENT 
Symptomatic genital herpes infections are conÿrmed 
by direct detection of HSV. A swab for viral detection 
should be used. Anyone with suspected ÿrst-episode 
genital herpes should be referred to a genitourinary 
physician, who will conÿrm the diagnosis by viral 
culture or PCR, advise on management and arrange 
a screen for other sexually transmitted infections. 
The use of aciclovir is recommended and is associ￾ated with a reduction in the duration and severity 
of symptoms and a decrease in the duration of viral 
shedding. It is well tolerated and considered safe in 
pregnancy. 
It may be difÿcult to distinguish clinically between 
recurrent and primary genital HSV infections, as 
up to 15% of ÿrst-episode HSV infections are not 
true primary infections. For individuals presenting 
within 6 weeks of expected delivery, type-speciÿc 
HSV antibody testing is advisable. The presence of 
antibodies of the same type as the HSV isolated from 186 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 187 04/03/2024 16:07
 
 
 
 
Neonatal infection 
genital swabs would conÿrm this episode to be a 
recurrence rather than a primary infection.
 Primary infections 
Providing that delivery does not ensue within the 
next 6 weeks, the pregnancy should be managed 
expectantly and vaginal delivery anticipated. There 
is no evidence that HSV acquired in pregnancy is 
associated with an increased incidence of congenital 
abnormalities. Following ÿrst- or second-trimester 
acquisition, suppressive aciclovir from 36 weeks of 
gestation reduces HSV lesions at term and hence the 
need for delivery by caesarean section. 
Caesarean section should be the recommended 
mode of delivery for all women developing ÿrst-epi￾sode genital herpes in the third trimester, particu￾larly those developing symptoms within 6 weeks of 
expected delivery, as the risk of neonatal transmis￾sion of HSV is very high, at about 40%. For women 
who opt for a vaginal birth, rupture of membranes 
should be avoided and invasive procedures, such as 
fetal scalp electrodes or fetal scalp pH measurement, 
should not be used. Intravenous aciclovir given 
intra-partum to the mother and subsequently to the 
neonate may be considered.
 Recurrent episodes 
A recurrent episode of genital herpes occurring during 
the antenatal period is not an indication for delivery by 
caesarean section. Women presenting with recurrent 
genital herpes lesions at the onset of labour should be 
advised that the risk to the baby of neonatal herpes is 
very small (1–3%). Daily suppressive aciclovir should 
be considered from 36 weeks’ gestation. Women with 
recurrent genital herpes lesions and conÿrmed rup￾ture of membranes at term should be advised to have 
delivery expedited by the appropriate means. Invasive 
procedures in labour should be avoided for women 
with recurrent genital herpes lesions. The neonatolo￾gist should be informed of babies born to mothers with 
recurrent genital herpes lesions at the time of labour. 
CHLAMYDIA 
INFECTIVE ORGANISM 
Chlamydia trachomatis is an obligate intracellular 
organism. 
PREVALENCE 
Chlamydia is the most common sexually transmitted 
organism in the UK and USA. Among the population 
who are sexually active and under 25 years old, 1 in 
8–10 screen positive for chlamydia and there are over 
100,000 cases diagnosed in women per year in the 
UK. In the UK, an opportunistic chlamydia screening 
programme for those under 25 years has been initi￾ated. While it is not a routine antenatal screening test 
in the UK, the National Institute for Health and Care 
Excellence (NICE) recommends that all women book￾ing for antenatal care, who are younger than 25 years, 
are informed of the national screening programme. 
CLINICAL FEATURES 
Chlamydia is frequently asymptomatic in the preg￾nant population. Infection with chlamydia is asso￾ciated with preterm rupture of membranes, preterm 
delivery and low birthweight. Transmission to the 
fetus occurs at the time of delivery and can cause 
conjunctivitis and pneumonia. 
MANAGEMENT 
Treatment with azithromicin or erythromycin is rec￾ommended. Tetracyclines such as doxycycline should 
be avoided if possible during pregnancy. Appropriate 
contact tracing can be arranged via a GUM clinic. 
GONORRHOEA 
INFECTIVE ORGANISM 
Neisseria gonorrhoeae is a Gram-negative diplococcus. 
PREVALENCE 
The prevalence of gonorrhoea in pregnancy var￾ies with the population studied. In the UK, it is the 
second most common bacterial sexually transmitted 
disease, with around 8,000 cases per year in women. 
CLINICAL FEATURES 
Gonococcal infection in women is frequently asymp￾tomatic, or they may present with a mucopurulent 187 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 188 04/03/2024 16:07
 
 
Perinatal infections 
discharge or dysuria. Rarely, disseminated gonor￾rhoea may cause low-grade fever, a rash and polyar￾thritis. There is an increased risk of coinfection with 
chlamydia and an increased risk of preterm rupture 
of membranes and preterm birth. Transmission 
to the fetus occurs at the time of delivery and can 
cause ophthalmia neonatorum. Ocular prophylaxis 
with erythromycin ointment is given to all newborn 
infants in the USA and a number of countries, but 
not in the UK. 
MANAGEMENT 
Bacteriological swabs should be taken and speciÿc 
swabs/testing for concomitant infection with chla￾mydia should also be undertaken. Cephalosporins are 
effective against gonococcus, but empirical treatment 
for chlamydia should also be considered. Appropriate 
contact tracing can be arranged via a GUM clinic. 
PERINATAL INFECTIONS CAUSING 
LONG-TERM DISEASE
 HUMAN IMMUNODEFICIENCY 
VIRUS 
INFECTIVE ORGANISM 
HIV is a ribonucleic acid (RNA) retrovirus transmit￾ted through sexual contact, blood and blood prod￾ucts, shared needles usually among intravenous 
drug users, or vertical (mother-to-child) transmis￾sion, which mainly occurs in the late third trimester 
or during labour, delivery or breastfeeding. 
PREVALENCE 
In 2019, there were 818 pregnancies in the UK in 
women living with HIV (about 1 in 1000). Of these, 
90% were known to be living with HIV before 
pregnancy, with the remainder diagnosed during 
pregnancy. 65% were of Black African women and 
people. Worldwide, improved access to treatment 
and prevention of mother-to-child transmission has 
ensured that the prevalence of HIV is decreasing, but 
more than 5% of pregnant women in sub-Saharan 
Africa are still living with HIV. 
SCREENING 
In the UK, all pregnant women should be offered 
screening for HIV early in pregnancy, as antenatal 
interventions have been shown to reduce mother￾to-child transmission of HIV infection. A positive 
HIV antibody test result should be given in person 
by an appropriately trained health professional; this 
may be a specialist nurse, midwife, HIV physician 
or obstetrician. The issue of disclosure of the HIV 
diagnosis to the partner should be handled with 
sensitivity and they should be reassured that their 
conÿdentiality will be respected. 
Some women remain at risk of becoming infected 
with HIV during their pregnancy. These individuals 
should be offered repeat testing during pregnancy. 
Rapid HIV tests should be offered to anyone who 
presents for labour unbooked. 
Pre-exposure prophylaxis is a strategy to prevent 
HIV in people at high risk of acquiring the disease, 
such as individuals with partners who have HIV or 
people who suffer from intimate partner violence. 
They will need detailed counselling and advice if 
planning a pregnancy or if they become pregnant, as 
they will need to balance the risks of acquiring HIV 
with the potential risks of taking antiviral drugs. 
CLINICAL FEATURES 
Untreated, infection with HIV begins with an asymp￾tomatic stage with gradual compromise of immune 
function eventually leading to acquired immunode￾ÿciency syndrome (AIDS). The time between HIV 
infection and the development of AIDS ranges from a 
few months to as long as 17 years in untreated patients. 
MANAGEMENT 
The principal risks of mother-to-child (vertical) 
transmission are related to maternal plasma viral 
load, obstetric factors and infant feeding (Table˜11.3). 
Interventions to reduce the risk of HIV transmission 
can reduce the risk of vertical transmission from 
25–30% to less than 0.5%. These include: 
• antiretroviral therapy, given antenatally, intra￾partum and lifelong to the mother to fully 
suppress plasma viral load 188 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 189 04/03/2024 16:07
 
Perinatal infections causing long-term disease 
Table 11.3 Risk factors for vertical transmission of human 
immunodeÿciency virus (HIV) 
Increased risk of 
transmission 
Reduced risk of 
transmission 
Advanced maternal HIV 
disease 
Low or undetectable viral 
load at time of delivery 
High maternal plasma 
viral load
 Antiretroviral therapy 
Low CD4 lymphocyte 
counts 
Delivery by caesarean 
section 
Prolonged rupture of 
membranes 
Exclusive formula feeding
 Chorioamnionitis
 Preterm delivery 
Coexisting viral infections 
(e.g. herpes, hepatitis C)
 Breastfeeding (doubles 
transmission rate) 
• elective caesarean section in the presence of a 
detectable viral load at delivery 
• post-exposure prophylaxis antiretroviral 
therapy to the infant for 4 weeks 
In high-income countries, mothers are advised to 
formula feed, although some with an undetectable 
viral load may choose to breastfeed with close surveil￾lance. In resource-poor settings, mothers are advised 
to breastfeed on fully suppressed combination antiret￾roviral therapy. If the mother is not on antiretroviral 
therapy, the infant should receive daily antiretroviral 
therapy during the entire period of breastfeeding. 
A planned vaginal delivery is an option for indi￾viduals who have a viral load below 50 copies/mL at 
36 weeks’ gestation. Historically, it has been routine 
obstetric practice to avoid obstetric intervention in this 
cohort (amniotomy, use of fetal scalp electrodes, fetal 
blood sampling, instrumental delivery). However, 
recent evidence shows that pregnant women with an 
undetectable viral load (<50 copies/mL) are not at an 
increased risk from these interventions. A caesarean 
delivery is recommended for individuals with a high 
viral load (>400 copies/mL). Anyone with a very high 
viral load (>1,000 copies/mL) at the time of delivery 
should also be given intravenous azidothymidine if 
they are undergoing a planned caesarean section or 
present with spontaneous rupture of membranes. 
DIAGNOSIS OF HIV IN INFANTS 
Maternal antibodies cross the placenta and are 
detectable in most neonates of HIV-positive moth￾ers. The HIV antibody test can therefore not be used 
until after 18 months of age. Direct viral ampliÿca￾tion by PCR is therefore required for the diagnosis in 
infants. Conÿrmation that the infant is uninfected 
requires at least two negative tests after cessation of 
post-exposure prophylaxis or breastfeeding. 
KEY LEARNING POINTS 
˜ The prevalence of HIV is around 1 per 1,000 
pregnancies in the UK; the majority of infected 
women are born abroad. 
˜ Antiretroviral therapy is recommended in 
pregnancy and lifelong, and the choice, dosing 
and timing of therapy should be planned by an 
HIV physician. 
˜ Treatment with viral suppression therapy can 
usually reduce the viral load to undetectable 
(<50°copies/mL). 
˜ Vaginal delivery is recommended (in the absence 
of other obstetric contraindications) in individuals 
with an undetectable viral load at or beyond 36 
weeks’ gestation. 
˜ Planned caesarean section delivery should be 
offered to women with a high viral load in late 
pregnancy. 
˜ Infants born to women with HIV should be given 
antiretroviral therapy. 
˜ Women living with HIV (regardless of viral 
load at delivery) in high-income countries 
are recommended to feed their babies with 
formula°milk. 
˜ In resource-poor countries, breastfeeding on 
fully suppressive maternal antiretroviral therapy is 
recommended. 
HEPATITIS B 
INFECTIVE ORGANISM 
The hepatitis B virus (HBV) is a DNA virus that is 
transmitted mainly in blood, but also in other body 
˜uids such as saliva, semen and vaginal ˜uid. Drug 
users who share needles are also at high risk. The 189 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 190 04/03/2024 16:07
 
Perinatal infections 
most common way chronic infection is acquired is 
from mother-to-child transmission during labour or 
at birth from ingestion of maternal blood and from 
breast milk. It is also spread horizontally within fam￾ilies during childhood. 
PREVALENCE 
Two billion people worldwide are infected with 
HBV. More than 350 million have chronic (lifelong) 
infection. Infants who become infected are usu￾ally asymptomatic during childhood, but 30–50% 
develop chronic HBV liver disease, which may prog￾ress to cirrhosis and carries a long-term risk of hepa￾tocellular carcinoma. 
In the UK, the prevalence of hepatitis B surface 
antigen (HBsAg) in pregnancy has been found to 
range from 0.4% to 1%. Higher rates of infection are 
found in inner city areas or in individuals originating 
from high prevalence countries in the Far East and 
sub-Saharan Africa. China has the largest burden of 
HBV infection, with more than 5% of the pregnant 
population infected in 2020. 
SCREENING 
Serological screening for HBV should be performed 
in pregnancy (UK National Screening Committee 
recommendation). Infants are at high risk of becom￾ing chronic carriers if their mothers are positive for 
the hepatitis B e antigen (HBeAg positive) or have a 
high HBV viral load or high quantitative HBsAg; the 
risk is markedly reduced if e-antibodies are present. 
It has been estimated that chronic carriers of HBsAg 
are 22 times more likely to die from hepatocellular 
carcinoma or cirrhosis than non-carriers. 
MANAGEMENT 
Pregnant women who are HBsAg positive should be 
further assessed by a specialist, alongside detailed 
serology to ascertain their transmission risk, and 
should be screened for coinfection with other blood￾borne viruses. Ongoing monitoring will also be 
needed for the long-term consequences of chronic 
infection, for example hepatocellular carcinoma. 
Pregnancy in individuals with the highest risk of 
vertical transmission, such as those with a high viral 
DNA load, may be offered antiviral therapy (such as 
tenofovir disoproxil). Caesarean section is not rec￾ommended solely to avoid vertical transmission of 
hepatitis B. However, use of fetal scalp electrodes 
and fetal blood sampling in labour should be avoided 
where possible. After birth for infants at high risk of 
transmission, passive immunization with hepatitis 
B Ig is advised. This provides immediate protec￾tion against any virus transmitted to the baby from 
contact with blood during delivery, and should be 
given immediately after delivery. All infants born to 
HBsAg-positive mothers should be given HBV vac￾cination as soon after birth as possible and further 
doses should be given during the ÿrst year of life. 
This provides protection for 95% of infants. 
HEPATITIS C 
INFECTIVE ORGANISM 
The hepatitis C virus (HCV) is an RNA virus. 
Acquisition of the virus occurs predominantly 
through infected blood products and injection of 
drugs. It can also occur with tattooing and body 
piercing. Vertical transmission can occur due to con￾tact with infected maternal blood around the time of 
delivery, and the risk is higher in those coinfected 
with HIV. Sexual transmission is extremely rare. 
PREVALENCE 
In the UK, the overall antenatal prevalence has been 
estimated to be around 1%, with regional variation. 
The risk of vertical transmission is estimated to lie 
between 3% and 5%, and it is estimated that 70 
births each year are infected with HCV as a result 
of vertical transmission in the UK, the risk of which 
increases with increasing maternal viral load. 
SCREENING 
Current recommendations vary between countries 
about whether pregnant women should be offered 
routine screening for HCV or if it should be offered 
only to those with risk factors such as individuals 
known to be injecting drug users. In the UK, univer￾sal screening is not currently offered. The rationale for 
this is a lack of evidence-based effective interventions 
for the treatment of HCV during pregnancy, and a lack 190 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 191 04/03/2024 16:07
 
 
 
 
Further reading 
of evidence about which interventions reduce vertical 
transmission of HCV. Other countries offer screening 
so that pregnant women can be made aware of their 
status, can receive counselling and risk stratiÿcation, 
and can consider treatment before a future pregnancy. 
CLINICAL FEATURES 
HCV is a major public health concern due to its 
long-term consequences for health. It is one of the 
major causes of liver cirrhosis, hepatocellular carci￾noma and liver failure. Following initial infection, 
only 20% of individuals will have hepatic symptoms, 
80% being asymptomatic. The majority of pregnant 
women with hepatitis C will not have reached the 
phase of having the chronic disease and may well be 
unaware that they are infected. 
MANAGEMENT 
Testing for HCV in the UK involves detection of 
anti-HCV antibodies in serum with subsequent con￾ÿrmatory testing by PCR for the virus, if a positive 
result is obtained. Upon conÿrmation of a positive 
test, post-test counselling and referral to a hepatolo￾gist for management should be offered. 
Antiviral curative treatment for hepatitis C is now 
readily available, but the existing treatment regimens 
are not recommended for use in pregnancy. Ribavirin 
is teratogenic, so pregnant women and their partners 
receiving ribavirin are recommended to avoid preg￾nancy during treatment and for 6 months after the 
completion of treatment. 
There is no strong evidence regarding the impact 
of the mode of delivery on hepatitis C transmission. 
Therefore, elective caesarean section is not recom￾mended for all women with hepatitis C, although 
it is recommended if the individual is also HIV 
KEY LEARNING POINTS 
˜ Screening for infections in pregnancy is 
associated with a reduction in the burden of 
some long-term viral conditions, particularly HIV 
and hepatitis B. 
˜ Active management of HIV infection in 
pregnancy dramatically reduces the risk of 
vertical transmission. 
˜ Most treatments for infections are suitable 
for use in pregnancy (with a small number 
of exceptions) and treatment should not be 
withheld because of the pregnancy. 
˜ A small number of infections can cause 
congenital anomalies in the fetus that can be 
identiÿed on antenatal ultrasound. 
positive. Breastfeeding is also not contraindicated in 
women with HCV infection, except if the mother has 
cracked or bleeding nipples or in the context of HIV 
coinfection. 
FURTHER READING 
British HIV Association guidelines for the manage￾ment of HIV infection. https://www.bhiva.org/ 
pregnancy-guidelines. 
Public Health England (2013). Fetal Anomaly 
Screening Programme. Last updated: 27 July 
2021. https://www.gov.uk/guidance/ 
fetal-anomaly-screening-programme-overview.
 NICE (2021). Antenatal Care. NICE guideline [NG201]. 
https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng201
 RCOG Clinical Guidelines. https://www.rcog.org. 
uk/guidelines. 
191 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 192 04/03/2024 16:07
 
Perinatal infections 
SELF-ASSESSMENT 
For interactive SBAs and EMQs relating to this chapter, visit www.routledge.com/cw/mccarthy. 
CASE HISTORY 1 
A 26-year-old teacher attends the antenatal clinic 
complaining of reduced fetal movements at 28 weeks’ 
gestation having been in contact with slapped cheek 
syndrome 6 weeks previously. She has an ultrasound 
scan performed that shows fetal ascites.
 A What is the likely diagnosis and how might this be 
conÿrmed?
 B What assessment using Doppler ultrasound should 
be performed on the baby? 
C What therapy could be considered for the fetus that 
may improve the outcome? 
ANSWERS
 A The diagnosis is likely to be acute parvovirus B19 
infection. This can be conÿrmed with a maternal 
blood test conÿrming IgM and/or new IgG 
antibodies. In addition, amniotic ˛uid can be tested 
for parvovirus by PCR.
 B A middle cerebral artery Doppler velocity can be 
performed, which may be consistent with fetal 
anaemia caused by aplastic anaemia. 
C If the fetus is conÿrmed to be anaemic, intrauterine 
blood transfusion can be considered. This can 
potentially prolong the pregnancy until the fetus 
has recovered or has reached a gestation at which 
it is safe to consider delivery. Normally, only one 
transfusion is required, as the fetus can recover from 
the infection and haematopoiesis will restart. 
CASE HISTORY 2 
Mrs L, a 36-year-old woman, presents to labour ward. 
She is 36 weeks’ pregnant and gives a history consis￾tent with premature prelabour rupture of membranes 
for 28 hours. She labours spontaneously after develop￾ing a temperature of 38.2°C and delivers a 2.5-kg baby 
boy. Shortly after delivery, the baby has several ‘dusky’ 
episodes. Ten minutes later, the mother rings the alarm 
bell as her baby has become unresponsive and requires 
resuscitation.
 A What is the likely diagnosis?
 B What risk factors does Mrs L have for this 
complication? What are the other risk factors for this 
complication? 
C What is the treatment? 
ANSWERS
 A The likely diagnosis is sepsis secondary to GBS. 
This will be conÿrmed by neonatal septic screening, 
which will show GBS in the blood with or without 
cerebrospinal ˛uid. The acute deterioration of the 
baby is consistent with the aggressive nature of GBS 
infection.
 B Mrs L had prolonged rupture of membranes and 
was preterm. She also developed a pyrexia intra￾partum. Other risk factors include a previous infant 
with GBS, incidental detection of GBS in current 
pregnancy and GBS bacteriuria. 
C Neonatal management following resuscitation is 
focused mainly around the supportive treatment and 
administration of intravenous antibiotics. 
192 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 193 04/03/2024 16:07
12 
Labour: Normal and abnormal 
DEIRDRE J MURPHY 
Introduction 193 Place of birth 218 
Maternal and fetal anatomy 194 Pain relief in labour 219 
Physiology of labour 200 Labour in special circumstances 222 
Normal labour 202 Induction of labour 225 
Management of normal labour 205 Clinical risk management 227 
Abnormal labour 212 Further reading 228 
Management of abnormal labour 213 Self-assessment 229 
 Learning Objectives 
• Understand the maternal and fetal anatomy relevant to labour and birth. 
• Understand the physiological principles of labour and birth. 
• Understand the contributors to normal labour and its management. 
• Understand the contributors to abnormal labour and its management. 
• Introduce the social, psychological and governance elements of labour and birth. 
INTRODUCTION 
Labour or human parturition is the physiological 
process that results in the birth of a baby, the delivery 
of the placenta and the signal for lactation to begin. 
At a human level, it is a major life event for the preg￾nant woman and her partner that heralds the start of 
parenting. In terms of providing care to a woman in 
labour, attention must be paid to safety and clinical 
outcomes, but also to the patient’s emotional well￾being and desire for a fulÿlling birth experience. 
Normal labour requires observation, monitoring 
and support, and falls within the scope of midwifery 
care. Abnormal labour must be recognized and acted 
upon, and requires a multidisciplinary approach 
including midwifery, obstetrics, anaesthetics and 
neonatology. While most labours result in a positive 
outcome, some labours result in tragedy, and each 
healthcare team needs to have the skillset to care for 
women and their families through all types of events. 
Health professionals who manage labour must 
understand the anatomy and physiology of the preg￾nant woman and fetus, what distinguishes normal 
from abnormal labour, when it is appropriate to 
intervene, how to intervene safely and how to sup￾port the woman and her partner through unexpected 
labour events. The ÿrst important step is to make an 
accurate diagnosis of labour. Labour is then divided 
into three stages:
 1. The ÿrst stage begins when labour is diagnosed 
and ends when full cervical dilatation is 
reached. 
193 
10.1201/9781003196112-12 ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 194 04/03/2024 16:07
Labour: Normal and abnormal 
2. The second stage begins with full cervical 
dilatation and ends with the birth of the baby.
 3. The third stage begins with the birth of the 
baby and ends with complete delivery of the 
placenta and membranes. 
Complications can occur during any of the three 
stages and can be divided into maternal and perina￾tal (fetal-neonatal) complications. 
An understanding of the physiological and ana￾tomical principles involved in normal and abnormal 
labour is best summarized using the ‘3 Ps’, which 
are the powers, the passages and the passenger. The 
‘powers’ refers to forces: ÿrstly, the contractions of 
the uterine muscle that result in the passage of the 
fetus through the birth canal and, secondly, the 
maternal effort of pushing in the second stage of 
labour. The ‘passages’ refers to the birth canal itself, 
which is made up of the bony pelvis and ligaments, 
the muscles of the pelvic °oor and the soft tissues 
of the perineum. The ‘passenger’ refers to the fetus 
in terms of its size (small, average or large), presen￾tation (the part of the fetus entering the pelvis ÿrst; 
e.g. vertex of head, face, brow or breech) and position 
(the orientation of the presenting part in relation to 
the maternal pubic symphysis; e.g. occipito-anterior 
(OA) or occipito-posterior [OP]). When the 3Ps are 
favourable (average size baby, vertex presentation 
and OA position), normal labour is likely to ensue, 
resulting in a spontaneous vaginal birth. When any 
of the 3Ps are unfavourable, labour is likely to be 
abnormal and require intervention, which can result 
in morbidity or mortality. 
It is important that labour and birth outcomes 
are audited locally, nationally and internation￾ally to ensure that optimal outcomes are achieved 
and that lessons are learned when adverse events 
occur. Priorities, choice and outcomes differ 
greatly depending on whether a birth occurs in a 
high-income or low-income setting. Even within 
settings, there can be marked differences in the 
perspectives of pregnant women and their care 
providers, re°ected in the planned place of birth, 
choice of care provider, analgesia use, mode of 
delivery and outcomes for women and their babies. 
Childbirth has physical, psychological, social, cul￾tural and political dimensions, which makes it a 
very interesting area to work in. 
MATERNAL AND FETAL ANATOMY 
BONY PELVIS 
PELVIC INLET 
The pelvic inlet or brim is bounded anteriorly by the 
upper border of the symphysis pubis (the joint sepa￾rating the two pubic bones); laterally by the upper 
margin of the pubic bone, the iliopectineal line and 
the ala of the sacrum; and posteriorly by the promon￾tory of the sacrum (Figure 12.1). The normal trans￾verse diameter in this plane is 13.5 cm and is wider 
than the anterior–posterior (AP) diameter, which is 
normally 11.0 cm (Figure 12.2). For this reason, the 
fetal head typically enters the pelvis orientated in a 
transverse position in keeping with the wider trans￾verse diameter. The angle of the inlet is normally 60º 
to the horizontal in the erect position, but in Afro￾Caribbean women this angle may be as much as 90º. 
This increased angle may delay the head entering 
and descending through the pelvis compared with 
labour in Caucasian women. 
MID-PELVIS 
The mid-pelvis, also known as the mid-cavity, can be 
described as an area bounded anteriorly by the middle 
of the symphysis pubis; laterally by the pubic bones, 
the obturator fascia and the inner aspect of the ischial 
Iliac crest 
Sacroiliac 
joint Ilium
Anterior Sacrum 
superior 
iliac spine 
bone 
foramen 
Ischial tuberosity 
Obturator 
Ischium 
Coccyx 
Os pubis 
Pubic symphysis 
Superior and 
inferior rami 
of the pubic 
Figure 12.1 The bony pelvis. 
194 Maternal and fetal anatomy
bone and spines; and posteriorly by the junction of 
the second and third sections of the sacrum. The mid￾pelvis is almost round, as the transverse and anterior 
diameters are similar at 12 cm. The ischial spines are 
palpable vaginally and are used as important land￾marks for two purposes: (1) to assess the descent of 
the presenting part on vaginal examination (e.g. sta￾tion zero is at the level of the ischial spines, –1 is 1 cm 
above the spines and +1 is 1 cm below the spines) and 
(2) when administering a local anaesthetic pudendal 
nerve block. The pudendal nerve passes behind and 
below the ischial spine on each side. A pudendal nerve 
block may be used for a vacuum or forceps-assisted 
birth. Station zero is an important landmark clini￾cally because assisted vaginal birth can be performed 
only if the fetal head has descended to the level of the 
ischial spines or below.
PELVIC OUTLET
The pelvic outlet is bounded anteriorly by the lower 
margin of the symphysis pubis; laterally by the 
descending ramus of the pubic bone, the ischial tuber￾osity and the sacrotuberous ligament; and posteriorly 
by the last piece of the sacrum. The AP diameter of 
the pelvic outlet is 13.5 cm and the transverse diam￾eter is 11 cm (Figures 12.3 and 12.4). Therefore, the 
transverse is the widest diameter at the inlet, but at the mid-pelvis where the transverse and AP diameters are 
outlet it is the AP diameter, and the fetal head must similar. In addition, the pelvic axis describes an imagi￾rotate from a transverse to an AP position as it passes nary J-shaped curved line, a path that the centre of the 
through the pelvis. Typically, this happens in the fetal head must take during its passage through the 
 195
Sacroiliac joint
13.5 cm
11.0 cm
Figure 12.2 The pelvic brim. AP of outlet
13.5 cm
AP of inlet
AP of mid-pelvis
11.0 cm
12.0 cm
60°
Figure 12.3 Sagittal section of the pelvis demonstrating 
the anterior–posterior (AP) diameters of the inlet and outlet.
11.0 cm
13.5 cm
Figure 12.4 The pelvic outlet.
Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 195 04/03/2024 16:07
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 196 04/03/2024 16:07
Labour: Normal and abnormal 
pelvis, from entry at the inlet and descent and rotation 
in the mid-pelvis to exit at the outlet. Recognizing the 
important features of the maternal pelvis is central to 
understanding the mechanism of labour. 
PELVIC SIZE AND SHAPE 
The pelvic measurements described previously are 
average values and relate to bony points. The pelvic 
ligaments at the pubic ramus and the sacroiliac joints 
loosen towards the end of the third trimester and 
these diameters may increase as the pelvis becomes 
more °exible. It is also possible to enhance the pelvic 
dimensions with more favourable positions for the 
woman in labour (e.g. squatting or kneeling). 
A variety of pelvic shapes are described, and 
these may contribute to difÿculties encountered in 
labour. The gynaecoid pelvis is the most favour￾able and the most common (Figure 12.5). Other 
pelvic shapes are shown in Figures 12.6 to 12.8. 
An android-type pelvis is said to predispose to 
failure of rotation and deep transverse arrest, and 
the anthropoid shape encourages an OP position. 
A platypelloid pelvis is also associated with an 
increased risk of obstructed labour due to failure of 
the head to engage, rotate or descend. 
Short stature, ethnicity, previous pelvic fractures 
and metabolic bone disease, such as rickets, may all 
be associated with measurements less than the popu￾lation average. It is now uncommon to perform X-rays 
or computed tomography/magnetic resonance imag￾ing scans of the pelvis to measure the pelvic dimen￾sions because pelvic imaging has proven to be of little 
clinical use in predicting the outcome of labour. 
PELVIC FLOOR 
This is formed by the two levator ani muscles, which, 
with their fascia, form a musculofascial gutter dur￾ing the second stage of labour (Figure 12.9). The 
conÿguration of the bony pelvis together with the 
gutter-shaped pelvic °oor muscles encourage the 
fetal head to °ex and rotate as it descends through 
the mid-pelvis towards the pelvic outlet. 
A B C
Figure 12.5 The gynaecoid pelvis: (A) brim, (B) lateral view and (C) outlet. 
A B C
Figure 12.6 The android pelvis: (A) brim, (B) lateral view and (C) outlet. 196 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 197 04/03/2024 16:07
 
Maternal and fetal anatomy 
A B C
Figure 12.7 The anthropoid pelvis: (A) brim, (B) lateral view and (C) outlet. 
A B C
Figure 12.8 The platypelloid pelvis: (A) brim, (B) lateral view and (C) outlet. 
Figure 12.9 The musculofascial gutter of the levator sling. 
PERINEUM 
The ÿnal obstacle to be overcome by the fetus during 
labour is the perineum. The perineal body is a conden￾sation of ÿbrous and muscular tissue lying between the 
vagina and the anus (Figure 12.10). It receives attach￾ments of the posterior ends of the bulbo-cavernous 
muscles, the medial ends of the superÿcial and deep 
transverse perineal muscles and the anterior ÿbres of 
the external anal sphincter. The perineum is taut and 
relatively resistant in the nulliparous individual and 
pushing can be prolonged. Vaginal birth may result 
in tearing of the perineum and pelvic °oor muscles, 
or an episiotomy (surgical cut) may be required. The 
perineum is stretchy and less resistant in multiparous 
individuals, resulting in faster labour and a higher 
probability of delivering with an intact perineum. 
FETAL SKULL 
SKULL BONES, SUTURES AND 
FONTANELLES 
The fetal skull is made up of the vault, the face and 
the base. The sutures are the lines formed where the 
individual bony plates of the skull meet one another. 
At term, the sutures joining the bones of the vault 197 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 198 04/03/2024 16:07
Labour: Normal and abnormal 
Ischio-cavernosus 
muscle Symphysis 
pubis Bulbo-cavernosus 
muscle 
Clitoris Superficial 
transverse 
Urethra perineal muscle 
Urogenital 
diaphragm 
Pubo￾Perineal coccygeus body muscle 
Anus 
Ilio-coccygeus 
muscle 
Coccygeus Gluteus maximus 
muscle muscle 
Coccyx A
Symphysis 
pubis Obturator 
foramen 
Urethra Arcus 
tendineus 
Vagina 
Anal 
spine 
Ischial 
canal 
Pubo￾coccygeus Coccygeus muscle muscle 
Coccyx Ilio-coccygeus 
muscle 
B
Figure 12.10 The perineum, perineal body and pelvic 
˜ oor from below, showing superÿ cial (A) and deeper 
(B)˛views. The pelvic ˜ oor muscles are made up of the 
levator ani (pubo-coccygeus and ilio-coccygeus). 
are soft, unossiÿ ed membranes, whereas the sutures 
of the fetal face and the skull base are ÿ rmly united 
(Figure 12.11). The vault of the skull is composed of 
the parietal bones and parts of the occipital, frontal 
and temporal bones. Between these bones there are 
four membranous sutures: the sagittal, frontal, coro￾nal and lambdoidal sutures.
198 
Posterior 
fontanelle Lambdoidal 
suture 
Sagittal Parietal bone 
suture and 
eminence 
Coronal Anterior 
suture fontanelle 
Frontal Frontal 
suture bone 
Vertex 
Parietal Anterior 
bone fontanelle 
Posterior 
fontanelle Frontal 
bone 
Occipital Coronal bone suture 
Temporal Mandible 
bone 
Figure 12.11 The fetal skull from superior and lateral 
views. 
The fontanelles are the junctions of the vari￾ous sutures. The anterior fontanelle, also known as 
bregma, is at the junction of the sagittal, frontal and 
coronal sutures and is diamond shaped. On vaginal 
examination, four suture lines can be felt. The poste￾rior fontanelle lies at the junction of the sagittal suture 
and the lambdoidal sutures between the two parietal 
bones and the occipital bone and is smaller and trian￾gular shaped. On vaginal examination, three suture 
lines can be felt. The fact that the sutures are not ÿ xed 
is important for labour. It allows the bones to move 
together and even to overlap. The parietal bones 
usually slide over the frontal and occipital bones. 
Furthermore, the bones themselves are compressible. 
Together, these characteristics of the fetal skull allow 
a process called ‘moulding’ to occur, which reduces Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 199 04/03/2024 16:07
Maternal and fetal anatomy 
Figure 12.12 A schematic representation of moulding of 
the fetal skull. 
the diameters of the fetal head and encourages prog￾ress through the bony pelvis, while still protecting 
the underlying brain (Figure˜12.12). However, severe 
moulding or moulding early in labour can be a sign of 
obstructed labour due to a fetal malposition (failure of 
the head to rotate to OA) or cephalopelvic dispropor￾tion (CPD), namely a fetal head that is disproportion￾ately large compared with the maternal pelvis. 
The area of the fetal skull bounded by the two 
parietal eminences and the anterior and posterior 
fontanelles is termed the ‘vertex’. In normal labour, 
the vertex of the fetal head is the presenting part and 
the posterior fontanelle (indicating the occiput) is 
used to deÿne the position of the fetal head in rela￾tion to the pubic symphysis. The anatomical differ￾ences between the anterior and posterior fontanelles 
on vaginal examination facilitate correct diagnosis of 
the fetal head position in labour. The OA position is 
the most favourable for a spontaneous vaginal birth. 
An occipito-transverse (OT) or OP position is con￾sidered a malposition and may result in prolonged 
labour, assisted vaginal birth or caesarean section. 
DIAMETERS OF THE SKULL 
The fetal head is ovoid in shape. The attitude of 
the fetal head refers to the degree of °exion and 
Anterior Occipito- fontanelle 
Suboccipito￾frontal 
diameter 
Occipito￾frontal 
diameter 
11cm 
mental 
diameter 
Posterior 
fontanelle 
Suboccipito￾bregmatic diameter 
10 cm 
9.5 cm 13 cm
S inciput 
Vertex 
Occ pi ut 
Bregma 
Submento-bregmatic 
diameter = 9.5 cm 
Figure 12.13 The diameters of the fetal skull. 
extension at the upper cervical spine. Different lon￾gitudinal diameters are presented to the pelvis in 
labour depending on the attitude of the fetal head 
(Figures 12.13 and 12.14). 
The longitudinal diameter that presents with a 
°exed attitude of the fetal head (chin on the chest) 
is the suboccipito-bregmatic diameter. This is 
usually 9.5 cm and is measured from beneath the 
occiput (suboccipital) to the centre of the anterior 
fontanelle (bregma). The longitudinal diameter 
that presents in a less well-°exed head, such as is 
found in an OP position, is the suboccipito-frontal 
diameter. It is measured from the suboccipital 
region to the prominence of the forehead and 
measures 10 cm. 
With further extension of the head, the occipito￾frontal diameter presents (de°exed OP). This is 
measured from the root of the nose to the posterior 
fontanelle and is 11.5 cm. The greatest longitudinal 
diameter that may present is the mento-vertical, 
which is taken from the chin to the furthest point 
of the vertex and measures 13 cm. This is known as 
a brow presentation that is usually too large to pass 
through the normal pelvis. Extension of the fetal 
head beyond this point results in a smaller diameter. 
The submento-bregmatic diameter is measured from 
below the chin to the anterior fontanelle and is 9.5 
cm. This is termed a face presentation. A face presen￾tation can deliver vaginally when the chin is anterior 
(mento-anterior position). 
199 
ALGrawanyLabour: Normal and abnormal
 200
PHYSIOLOGY OF LABOUR
The mechanisms underlying human labour are not 
fully understood and differ from other animal mod￾els that have been studied. In particular, the process 
that initiates labour is poorly understood. The cervix, 
which is initially long, fi rm and closed with a pro￾tective mucus plug, must soften, shorten, thin out 
(efface) and dilate for labour to progress. Passage of 
the mucus plug refl ects this process and is termed a 
‘show’. The uterus must change from a state of relax￾ation to an active state of regular, strong, frequent 
contractions to facilitate transit of the fetus through 
the birth canal. Each contraction must be followed 
by a resting phase in order to maintain placental 
blood fl ow and adequate perfusion of the fetus. The 
pressure of the presenting part on the pelvic fl oor 
muscles as the fetus descends from the mid-pelvis 
to the pelvic outlet produces a maternal urge to push 
enhanced further by stretching of the perineum. The 
onset of labour occurs when the factors that inhibit 
contractions and maintain a closed cervix diminish 
KEY LEARNING POINTS
Maternal and fetal anatomy
. The pelvic inlet is wider in the transverse than in 
the AP diameter.
. The pelvic outlet is wider in the AP than in the 
transverse diameter.
. The ischial spines are in the mid-pelvis and 
denote station zero.
. The fetal head enters the pelvis in a transverse 
position, rotates in the mid-pelvis and delivers in 
an AP position.
. Pelvic dimensions may increase during labour 
due to pelvic ligament laxity.
. The shape of the pelvis and pelvic fl oor muscles 
aid fl exion and rotation of the fetal head.
. The sutures and fontanelles are used to assess 
the position and attitude of the fetal head.
. Moulding of the skull bones during labour 
reduces the dimensions of the fetal head.
. A fetus in a fl exed OA position with a gynaecoid 
pelvis is most favourable for vaginal birth.
. Perineal tissues present resistance to delivery 
especially in the nulliparous population.
Measurement
Attitude
Diameter
Well flexed
Suboccipito￾bregmatic
9.5 cm
Less well flexed
(partially extended)
or deflexed
Occipito-frontal Occipito-mental
11.5 cm
Extended
‘brow
presentation’
13.0 cm
Hyperextended
‘face
presentation’
Submento￾bregmatic
9.5 cm
Flexed Extended
Figure 12.14 The effect of fetal attitude on the presenting diameter.
Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 200 04/03/2024 16:07Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 201 04/03/2024 16:07
Physiology of labour 
and are overtaken by factors that do the opposite. 
Both the pregnant woman and the fetus appear to 
contribute to this process. 
UTERUS 
Myometrial cells of the uterus contain ÿlaments 
of actin and myosin that bring about contractions 
in response to an increase in intracellular calcium. 
Prostaglandins and oxytocin increase intracellular 
free calcium ions, whereas beta-adrenergic com￾pounds and calcium-channel blockers do the oppo￾site. Separation of the actin and myosin ÿlaments 
brings about relaxation of the myocyte; however, 
unlike any other muscle cell of the body, this actin– 
myosin interaction occurs along the full length of the 
ÿlaments so that a degree of shortening occurs with 
each successive interaction. This progressive short￾ening of the uterine smooth muscle cells is called 
retraction and occurs in the cells of the upper part 
of the uterus. The result of this retraction process 
is the development of the thicker, actively contract￾ing ‘upper segment’. At the same time, the lower 
segment of the uterus becomes thinner and more 
stretched. Eventually, this results in the cervix being 
‘taken up’ (effacement) into the lower segment of the 
uterus, thus forming a continuum with the lower 
uterine segment (Figure 12.15). The cervix then 
dilates and the fetus descends in response to this 
directional force. 
It is essential that the myocytes of the uterus con￾tract in a coordinated way. Individual myocytes are 
laid down in a mesh of collagen. There is cell-to-cell 
communication by means of gap junctions, which 
facilitate the passage of various products of metabo￾lism and electrical current between cells. These gap 
junctions are absent for most of the pregnancy but 
appear in signiÿcant numbers at term. Gap junc￾tions increase in size and number with the progress 
of labour and allow greater coordination of myocyte 
activity. Prostaglandins stimulate their formation, 
while beta-adrenergic compounds are thought to do 
the opposite. A uterine pacemaker from which con￾tractions originate probably exists but has not been 
demonstrated histologically. 
Uterine contractions are involuntary in nature 
and there is relatively little extrauterine neuronal 
control. The frequency of contractions may vary 
Upper uterine segment 
Lower uterine segment 
Cervix 
Vagina 
Figure 12.15 The thick upper segment and the thin lower 
segment of the uterus at the end of the ÿrst stage of labour. 
The dotted lines indicate the position assumed by the 
uterus during contraction. 
during labour and with parity. Throughout the 
majority of labour, they occur at intervals of 2–4 
minutes and are described in terms of the frequency 
within a 10-minute period (2 in 10 increasing to 4–5 
in 10 in advanced labour). Their duration also varies 
during labour, from 30 to 60 seconds or occasionally 
longer. 
CERVIX 
The cervix contains myocytes and ÿbroblasts sepa￾rated by a ‘ground substance’ made up of extracellu￾lar matrix molecules. Interactions between collagen, 
ÿbronectin and dermatan sulphate (a proteoglycan) 
during the earlier stages of pregnancy keep the 
cervix ÿrm and closed. Contractions at this point 
do not bring about effacement or dilatation. Under 
the in°uence of prostaglandins and other humoral 
mediators, there is an increase in proteolytic activity 
and a reduction in collagen and elastin. Interleukins 
bring about a pro-in°ammatory change with a sig￾niÿcant invasion by neutrophils. Dermatan sulphate 
is replaced by the more hydrophilic hyaluronic acid, 
which results in an increase in water content of the 
201 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 202 04/03/2024 16:07
 
 
 
 
Labour: Normal and abnormal 
cervix. This causes cervical softening or ‘ripening’, so 
that contractions, when they begin, can bring about 
the processes of effacement and dilatation. 
HORMONAL FACTORS 
Progesterone maintains uterine relaxation by sup￾pressing prostaglandin production, inhibiting 
communication between myometrial cells and pre￾venting oxytocin release. Oestrogen opposes the 
action of progesterone. Prior to labour, there is a 
reduction in progesterone receptors and an increase 
in the concentration of oestrogen relative to proges￾terone. Prostaglandin synthesis by the chorion and 
the decidua is enhanced, leading to an increase in 
calcium in°ux into the myometrial cells. This change 
in the hormonal milieu also increases gap junction 
formation between individual myometrial cells, cre￾ating a functional syncytium, which is necessary 
for coordinated uterine activity. The production of 
corticotrophin-releasing hormone by the placenta 
increases towards term and potentiates the action of 
prostaglandins and oxytocin on myometrial contrac￾tility. The fetal pituitary secretes oxytocin and the 
fetal adrenal gland produces cortisol, which stimu￾lates the conversion of progesterone to oestrogen. As 
labour becomes established, the output of oxytocin 
increases through the Ferguson re°ex. Pressure from 
the fetal presenting part against the cervix is relayed 
via a re°ex arc involving the spinal cord and results 
in increased oxytocin release from the maternal pos￾terior pituitary. 
NORMAL LABOUR 
DIAGNOSIS OF LABOUR 
The onset of labour can be deÿned as the presence 
of strong, regular, painful contractions resulting in 
progressive cervical change. In practice, the diagno￾sis is suspected when a pregnant woman presents 
with contraction-like pains and is conÿrmed when 
the midwife performs a vaginal examination that 
reveals effacement and dilatation of the cervix. Loss 
of the ‘show’ (blood-stained plug of mucus passed 
from the cervix) or spontaneous rupture of the mem￾branes (SROM) does not deÿne the onset of labour, 
although these events may occur around the same 
time. Labour can be well established before either of 
these events occurs, and both may precede labour by 
many days. 
STAGES OF LABOUR 
Labour can be divided into three stages. The deÿ￾nitions of these stages rely predominantly on ana￾tomical criteria and, in real terms, the exact time 
of transition from ÿrst to second stage may not be 
apparent. The important events in normal labour 
are the diagnosis of labour and the maternal urge to 
push, which usually corresponds with full dilatation 
of the cervix and the baby’s head distending the pel￾vic °oor. Deÿning the three stages of labour becomes 
more relevant if labour is not progressing normally. 
The average duration of ÿrst labours is 8–12 hours 
and that of subsequent labours is 4–6 hours. First 
labours rarely last more than 18 hours and second 
and subsequent labours do not usually last more 
than 12 hours. 
FIRST STAGE 
This describes the time from the diagnosis of labour 
to full dilatation of the cervix (10 cm). The ÿrst stage 
of labour can be divided into two phases. The ‘latent 
phase’ is the time between the onset of regular 
painful contractions and 3–4 cm cervical dilatation. 
During this time, the cervix becomes ‘fully effaced’. 
Effacement is a process by which the cervix shortens 
in length as it becomes incorporated into the lower 
segment of the uterus. The process of effacement 
may begin during the weeks preceding the onset of 
labour but will be complete by the end of the latent 
phase. Effacement and dilatation should be thought 
of as consecutive events in the nulliparous popula￾tion but may occur simultaneously in the multipa￾rous. Dilatation is expressed in centimetres from 0 
to 10 cm. The duration of the latent phase is vari￾able and time limits are arbitrary. However, it usually 
lasts between 3 and 8 hours, being shorter in mul￾tiparous women. 
The second phase of the ÿrst stage of labour is called 
the ‘active phase’ and describes the time between the 
end of the latent phase (3–4 cm dilatation) and full 
cervical dilatation (10 cm). It is also variable in length, 202 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 203 04/03/2024 16:07
 
 
Normal labour 
usually lasting between 2 and 6 hours, and is shorter 
in multiparous women. Cervical dilatation during the 
active phase occurs typically at 1 cm/hour or more in 
a normal labour and is considered abnormal only if it 
occurs at less than 1 cm in 2 hours. 
SECOND STAGE 
This describes the time from full dilatation of the 
cervix to delivery of the fetus or fetuses. The sec￾ond stage of labour may also be subdivided into 
two phases. The ‘passive phase’ describes the time 
between full dilatation and the onset of involuntary 
expulsive contractions. There is no maternal urge to 
push and the fetal head is still relatively high in the 
pelvis. The second phase is called the ‘active second 
stage’. There is a maternal urge to push because the 
fetal head is low (often visible), causing a re°ex need 
to ‘bear down’. In normal labour, the second stage is 
often diagnosed at this late point because the mater￾nal urge to push prompts the midwife to perform a 
vaginal examination. If a pregnant woman never 
reaches a point of involuntary pushing, the active 
second stage is said to begin when she starts mak￾ing voluntary pushing efforts directed by the mid￾wife. Conventionally, a normal active second stage 
should last no longer than 2 hours in a nulliparous 
woman and 1 hour in a parous individual. Although 
these deÿnitions are arbitrary, there is evidence that 
a second stage of labour lasting more than 3 hours 
is associated with increased maternal and fetal mor￾bidity. Use of epidural anaesthesia will in°uence 
the length and management of the second stage of 
labour. A passive second stage of 1 or 2 hours is usu￾ally recommended to allow the head to rotate and 
descend prior to active pushing. 
THIRD STAGE 
This is the time from birth of the fetus or fetuses 
until complete delivery of the placenta(e) and mem￾branes. The placenta is typically delivered within a 
few minutes of the birth of the baby. A third stage 
lasting more than 30 minutes is deÿned as abnor￾mal, unless the woman has opted for ‘physiological 
management’ (see the section ‘Management of third 
stage’ later in this chapter), in which case it is reason￾able to extend this deÿnition to 60 minutes. 
DURATION OF LABOUR 
There is no ideal length of labour, but morbidity 
increases when labour is too fast (precipitous) or too 
slow (prolonged). Precipitous labour is deÿned as 
birth of the fetus within less than 3 hours of the onset 
of regular contractions. From a psychological perspec￾tive, the morale of most pregnant women starts to 
deteriorate after 6 hours in active labour and, after 12 
hours, the rate of deterioration accelerates. There is a 
greater incidence of fetal hypoxia and need for opera￾tive delivery associated with long labours. It is difÿcult 
to deÿne prolonged labour, but it would be reasonable 
to suggest that labour lasting longer than 12 hours in 
the nulliparous population and 8 hours in the mul￾tiparous population should be regarded as prolonged. 
MECHANISMS OF LABOUR 
This refers to the series of changes in position and 
attitude that the fetus undergoes during its passage 
through the birth canal. It is described here for the 
vertex presentation and the gynaecoid pelvis. The 
relation of the fetal head and body to the maternal 
pelvis changes as the fetus descends through the pel￾vis. This is essential so that the smallest diameters of 
the fetal skull are present at each stage of the descent. 
Engagement 
The fetal head normally enters the pelvis in the 
transverse position or some minor variant of this, 
taking advantage of the widest pelvic diameter. 
Engagement is said to have occurred when the wid￾est part of the presenting part has passed success￾fully through the inlet. The number of ÿfths of the 
fetal head palpable abdominally is used to describe 
whether engagement has taken place. If more than 
two-ÿfths of the fetal head is palpable abdominally, 
the head is not yet engaged. Engagement occurs in 
the majority of nulliparous women prior to labour, 
usually by 37 weeks’ gestation, but it occurs in labour 
for the majority of multiparous women. 
Descent 
Descent of the fetal head is needed before °exion, inter￾nal rotation and extension can occur (Figure˜12.16). 
During the ÿrst stage and passive phase of the sec￾ond stage of labour, descent of the fetus occurs with 203 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 204 04/03/2024 16:07
 
Labour: Normal and abnormal 
Figure 12.16 Descent and ˜exion of the head followed 
by internal rotation and ending in birth of the head by 
extension. 
uterine contractions. In the active phase of the sec￾ond stage of labour, descent of the fetus is assisted by 
voluntary efforts of the woman using her abdominal 
muscles and the Valsalva manoeuvre (‘pushing’). 
Flexion 
The fetal head is not always completely °exed when it 
enters the pelvis. As the head descends into the nar￾rower mid-pelvis, °exion occurs (chin onto chest). 
This passive movement occurs due, in part, to the 
surrounding structures and is important in reducing 
the presenting diameter of the fetal head. 
Internal rotation 
If the head is well °exed, the occiput will be the 
leading point and, on reaching the sloping gutter 
of the levator ani muscles, it will be encouraged to 
rotate anteriorly so that the sagittal suture now lies 
in the AP diameter of the pelvic outlet (the widest 
diameter). If the fetus has engaged in the OP posi￾tion, internal rotation can occur from an OP position 
to an OA position. This long internal rotation may 
explain the increased duration of labour associated 
with OP position. Alternatively, an OP position 
may persist, resulting in a ‘face to pubes’ delivery. 
Furthermore, the persistent OP position may be 
associated with extension of the fetal head and a 
resulting increase in the diameter presented to the 
pelvic outlet. This may lead to obstructed labour 
and the need for assisted vaginal birth by vacuum 
or forceps or caesarean section. 
Extension 
Following completion of internal rotation, the 
occiput is beneath the symphysis pubis and the 
bregma is near the lower border of the sacrum. 
The well-°exed head now extends and the occiput 
escapes from underneath the symphysis pubis and 
distends the vulva. This is known as ‘crowning’ of 
the head. The head extends further and the occiput 
underneath the symphysis pubis acts as a fulcrum 
point as the bregma, face and chin appear in suc￾cession over the posterior vaginal opening and 
perineal body. This extension process if controlled 
reduces the risk of perineal trauma. However, the 
soft tissues of the perineum offer resistance and 
some degree of tearing occurs in the majority of 
ÿrst births. 
Restitution 
When the head is delivering, the occiput is directly 
anterior. As soon as it crosses the perineum, the head 
aligns itself with the shoulders, which have entered 
the pelvis in the oblique position. This slight rota￾tion of the occiput through one-eighth of the circle is 
partial restitution. 
In order to be delivered, the shoulders have to 
rotate into the direct AP plane (the widest diam￾eter at the outlet). When this occurs, the occiput 
rotates through a further one-eighth of a circle to 
the transverse position. This completes restitution 
(Figure 12.17). 
Figure 12.17 Restitution of the head after delivery as 
the anterior shoulder rotates forwards to pass under the 
subpubic arch. 204 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 205 04/03/2024 16:07
 
Management of normal labour 
Delivery of the shoulders and fetal body 
When restitution has occurred, the shoulders will be 
in the AP position. The anterior shoulder is under the 
symphysis pubis and delivers ÿrst, and the posterior 
shoulder delivers subsequently. 
Normally, the rest of the fetal body is delivered 
easily, with the posterior shoulder guided over the 
perineum by gentle upwards traction in the opposite 
direction, so delivering the baby on to the maternal 
abdomen. 
MANAGEMENT OF NORMAL 
LABOUR 
Women are advised to contact their local labour suite 
or their community midwife if they think their waters 
may have broken (SROM) or when their contractions 
are occurring every 5 minutes or more. It is important 
to recognize that women have very different thresh￾olds for seeking advice and reassurance. The need for 
pain relief may result in admission to hospital before 
either of these two criteria is reached. Whether at 
home or in hospital, the attending midwife will then 
make an assessment based on the history and clinical 
examination, as well as the preferences of the woman. 
HISTORY 
A detailed history should be taken, including past 
obstetric history, history of the current pregnancy, 
relevant medical history and events leading up to 
hospital attendance. The admission history and 
examination provide an initial screen for labour and 
potential maternal and/or fetal risk. If all features 
are normal and reassuring, the woman will remain 
under midwifery care. If there are risk factors identi￾ÿed, medical involvement in the form of the on-call 
obstetric team may be appropriate. 
ADMISSION EXAMINATION 
It is important to identify women who have a raised 
body mass index, as this may complicate the man￾agement of labour. The temperature, pulse and blood 
pressure must be recorded on admission and a sam￾ple of urine tested for protein, blood, ketones, glu￾cose and nitrates. 
BOX 12.1: Admission history 
˜ Previous births and size of previous babies 
˜ Previous caesarean section(s) 
˜ Onset, frequency, duration and perception of 
strength of the contractions 
˜ Whether membranes have ruptured and, if so, 
colour and amount of amniotic ˜uid seen 
˜ Presence of abnormal vaginal discharge or 
bleeding 
˜ Recent activity of the fetus (fetal movement) 
˜ Medical or obstetric issues of note (e.g. 
diabetes, hypertension, fetal growth restriction) 
˜ Any special requirements (e.g. an interpreter or 
particular emotional/psychological needs) 
˜ Maternal expectations of labour and birth/birth 
preferences or a birth plan 
ABDOMINAL EXAMINATION 
After the initial inspection for scars indicating previ￾ous surgery, it is important to determine the lie of 
the fetus (longitudinal, transverse or oblique) and 
the nature of the presenting part (cephalic or breech). 
If it is a cephalic presentation, the degree of engage￾ment must be determined in terms of ÿfths palpable 
abdominally. A head that remains high (four- to 
ÿve-ÿfths palpable) is a poor prognostic sign for suc￾cessful vaginal birth. If there is any doubt as to the 
presentation or if the head is high, an ultrasound 
scan should be performed to conÿrm the presenting 
part or the reason for the high head (e.g. OP position, 
de°exed head, placenta praevia, ÿbroid, etc.). 
Abdominal examination also includes an assess￾ment of the contractions; this takes time (at least 10 
minutes) and is done by palpating the uterus directly. 
The tocograph provides reliable information on the 
frequency, regularity and duration of contractions, 
but not the strength. 
VAGINAL EXAMINATION 
The purpose and technique of vaginal examination 
is explained to the woman and her consent must be 
obtained. The examination should be conducted in 
a manner that maintains the woman’s dignity and 
privacy. The index and middle ÿngers are passed to 205 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 206 04/03/2024 16:07
 
Labour: Normal and abnormal 
the top of the vagina and the cervix. The cervix is 
examined for position, length and effacement, con￾sistency, dilatation and application to the presenting 
part. The length of the cervix at 36 weeks is about 3 
cm. It gradually shortens by the process of effacement 
and may still be uneffaced in early labour. The dilata￾tion is estimated digitally in centimetres. At about 4 
cm of dilatation, the cervix should be fully effaced. 
Providing the cervix is at least 4 cm dilated, it should 
be possible to determine both the position and the 
station of the presenting part. When no cervix can be 
felt, this means the cervix is fully dilated (10 cm). 
A vaginal examination also allows assessment 
of the fetal head position, station and attitude and 
the presence of caput or moulding. In normal labour, 
the vertex will be presenting and the position can 
be determined by locating the occiput. The occiput 
is identiÿed by feeling for the triangular posterior 
fontanelle and the three suture lines. Normally, the 
occiput will be transverse (OT) or anterior (OA). 
Failure to feel the posterior fontanelle may be because 
the head is de°exed (abnormal attitude), the occiput 
is posterior (malposition) or there is so much caput 
and moulding that the sutures cannot be felt. All of 
these indicate the possibility of a prolonged labour 
or a degree of mechanical obstruction. Relating the 
leading part of the head to the ischial spines will give 
an estimation of the station. This vaginal assess￾ment of station should always be taken together with 
assessment of the degree of engagement by abdomi￾nal palpation. If the head is fully engaged (no ÿfths 
palpable) at or below the ischial spines (0 to +1 cm or 
more) and the occiput is anterior (OA), the outlook is 
favourable for vaginal birth. 
The condition of the membranes should also be 
noted. If they have ruptured, the colour and amount 
of amniotic °uid draining should be noted. A gener￾ous amount of clear °uid is a good prognostic feature; 
scanty, heavily blood-stained or meconium-stained 
°uid is a warning sign of possible fetal compromise. 
FETAL ASSESSMENT IN LABOUR 
A healthy term fetus is usually able to withstand the 
demands of normal labour. However, with each con￾traction, placental blood °ow and oxygen transfer 
are temporarily interrupted and a fetus that is com￾promised prior to labour will deteriorate. Insufÿcient 
oxygen delivery to the fetus causes a switch from 
aerobic to anaerobic metabolism and results in 
the generation of lactic acid and hydrogen ions. In 
excess, these saturate the buffering systems of the 
fetus and cause a metabolic acidosis, which, if pro￾longed and severe, can cause permanent neurologi￾cal injury or perinatal death. Hypoxia and acidosis 
cause changes in the fetal heart rate (FHR) pattern, 
which can be detected by auscultation and cardioto￾cography (CTG). Meconium (fetal stool) is often 
passed by a healthy fetus at or after term as a result 
of maturation of the gastrointestinal tract; in this 
scenario, it is usually thin and a very dark green or 
brown colour. However, it may also be expelled from 
a fetus exposed to intrauterine hypoxia or acidosis; 
in this scenario, it is often thicker and much brighter 
green in colour. 
In labour, the FHR should be auscultated with a 
Pinard stethoscope or by using a hand-held Doppler 
device. It should be listened to for at least 1 min￾ute, immediately after a contraction. This should be 
repeated every 15 minutes during the ÿrst stage of 
labour and at least every 5 minutes in the second stage. 
The practice of performing an ‘admission CTG’ on all 
women is no longer recommended; however, a CTG 
should be performed if there are issues that might 
complicate labour and birth. Most of these women 
will be advised to have continuous EFM throughout 
labour using CTG. Women who begin labour with 
intermittent auscultation will be advised to change to 
continuous CTG if complications occur during labour. 
BOX 12.2: Fetal assessment options 
in˜labour 
˜ Amniotic ˜uid – fresh meconium, absence of 
˜uid and blood-stained ˜uid or bleeding are 
markers of potential fetal compromise 
˜ Intermittent auscultation of the fetal heart using 
a Pinard stethoscope or a hand-held Doppler 
ultrasound 
˜ Continuous external electronic fetal monitoring 
(EFM) using CTG 
˜ Continuous internal EFM using a fetal scalp 
electrode (FSE) and CTG 
˜ Fetal scalp stimulation 
˜ Fetal scalp blood sampling 
206 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 207 04/03/2024 16:07
 
Management of normal labour 
BOX 12.3: Indications for continuous CTG 
˜ Meconium staining of the amniotic ˜uid 
˜ Abnormal FHR detected by intermittent 
auscultation 
˜ Maternal pyrexia (temperature ˝38.0°C or 
˝37.5°C on two occasions) 
˜ Fresh vaginal bleeding 
˜ Augmentation of contractions with an oxytocin 
infusion 
˜ Maternal request 
˜ Epidural analgesia 
The interpretation of the FHR pattern on a CTG is 
discussed in Chapter 4. In brief, features of a normal 
FHR pattern include a baseline heart rate of between 
110 and 160 beats per minute (bpm, averaged over a 
20-minute interval or more), variability of between 5 
and 25 bpm (variation in the FHR above and below 
the baseline), accelerations (a transient increase in 
FHR of at least 15 bpm lasting at least 15 seconds) 
and the absence of decelerations (transient decrease 
in the FHR of 15 bpm or more). 
Each feature of the CTG (baseline rate, variability, 
accelerations and decelerations) should be assessed 
each time a CTG is reviewed. Each feature can be 
described as ‘reassuring’, ‘non-reassuring’ or ‘abnor￾mal’ according to certain nationally agreed deÿni￾tions outlined in the National Institute for Health 
and Care Excellence (NICE) guideline on intra-par￾tum management. If all four features are reassuring, 
then the CTG is classiÿed as ‘normal’ (Figure 12.18). 
If only one feature is non-reassuring, then the CTG is 
classiÿed as ‘suspicious’. If there are two or more non￾reassuring features or any one abnormal feature, then 
the CTG is ‘pathological’. The CTG can be difÿcult 
to interpret and it carries a signiÿcant false-positive 
rate (i.e. it often raises the possibility of fetal compro￾mise when in fact the fetus is still in good condition 
or compensating well). Any reversible causes must be 
considered and addressed (e.g. dehydration, woman 
lying °at) and, if it persists, further assessment of 
the fetus may be necessary with fetal scalp stimu￾lation or fetal scalp blood sampling (see the section 
‘Management of possible fetal compromise’ later in 
this chapter). If this is not possible or safe, then the 
baby should be delivered without delay. Education 
and training are crucial in the interpretation and 
response to CTG monitoring in labour. 
The quality of a CTG recording is sometimes poor 
because of the fetal position or maternal obesity. A 
fetal scalp electrode (FSE) may overcome this prob￾lem. It is ÿxed onto the skin of the fetal scalp and picks 
200 
180 
160 
140 
120 
100 
100 
80 
60 
40 
20 
0 
100 
80 
60 
40 
20 
0 
80 
60 
12 
09.05.07 1 cm/min 09.05.07 1 cm/min 09.05.07 1 cm/min 
10 
8 
6 
4 
2 
0 
12 
10 
8 
6 
4 
2 
0 
12 
10 
8 
6 
4 
2 
0 
200 
180 
160 
140 
120 
100 
80 
60 
013 014 015 kP a kP a kP a 
Figure 12.18 A normal cardiotocograph showing a baseline fetal heart rate of approximately 120 beats per minute 
(bpm), baseline variability of 10–15 bpm, frequent accelerations, and no decelerations. The uterus is contracting 
approximately once every 5 minutes (or 2 in 10). 207 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 208 04/03/2024 16:07
Labour: Normal and abnormal 
up the FHR directly. It is contraindicated in the pres￾ence of signiÿcant maternal infection (e.g. human 
immunodeÿciency virus (HIV) or hepatitis C). 
PARTOGRAM 
The introduction of a graphic record of labour in the 
form of a partogram has been an important devel￾opment. This record allows an instant visual assess￾ment of the progress of labour based on the rate of 
cervical dilatation compared with an expected norm, 
according to the parity of the woman, so that slow 
progress can be recognized and appropriate actions 
taken to correct it where possible. Other key obser￾vations are entered onto the chart, including the fre￾quency and strength of contractions, the descent of 
the head in ÿfths palpable and station, the amount 
and colour of the amniotic °uid draining, and basic 
observations of maternal well-being, such as blood 
pressure, heart rate and temperature (Figure 12.19). 
A line can be drawn on the partogram at the end 
of the latent phase demonstrating progress of 1 cm 
dilatation per hour. Another line (‘the action line’) 
can be drawn parallel and 4 hours to the right of 
it. If the plot of actual cervical dilatation reaches 
the action line, indicating slow progress, then con￾sideration should be given to measures that aim to 
improve progress such as hydration, mobility, mater￾nal position, artiÿcial rupture of membranes (ARM) 
or oxytocin (see the section ‘Management during the 
ÿrst stage’). Progress can also be considered slow if 
the cervix dilates at less than 1 cm every 2 hours. 
MANAGEMENT DURING 
THE FIRST STAGE 
Women who are in the latent phase of labour 
should be encouraged to mobilize and should be 
managed away from the labour suite where pos￾sible. Indeed, they may well go home to return 
later when the contractions are stronger or more 
frequent. Encouragement and reassurance are 
extremely important. Intervention during this phase 
is best avoided unless there are risk factors identiÿed. 
Simple analgesics are preferred over nitrous oxide 
gas and epidurals. Vaginal examinations are usu￾ally performed every 4 hours to determine when the 
active phase has been reached (approximately 4 cm 
KEY LEARNING POINTS 
Management of the ÿrst stage of labour 
˜ The ÿrst stage of labour is the time from the 
diagnosis of labour to full dilatation of the cervix. 
˜ One-to-one midwifery care should be provided. 
˜ Additional emotional support from a birth partner 
should be encouraged. 
˜ Obstetric and anaesthetic care should be 
available as required. 
˜ Maternal and fetal well-being should be monitored. 
˜ Vaginal examinations are performed 4 hourly or 
as clinically indicated. 
˜ Progress of labour is monitored using a 
partogram with timely intervention if abnormal. 
˜ Appropriate pain relief should be provided 
consistent with the woman’s wishes. 
˜ Ensure adequate hydration and light diet to 
prevent ketosis. 
dilatation and full effacement). Thereafter, the timing 
of examinations should be decided by the midwife in 
consultation with the woman: 4 hourly is standard 
practice, but this frequency may be increased if the 
midwife thinks that progress is unusually slow or 
fast or if there are fetal concerns. The lower limit of 
normal progress is 1 cm dilatation every 2 hours once 
the active phase has been reached. Descent of the 
presenting part through the pelvis is another crucial 
component of progress and should be recorded at 
each vaginal examination. 
During the ÿrst stage, the membranes may be 
intact, may have ruptured spontaneously or may be 
ruptured artiÿcially. If the membranes are intact, it is 
not necessary to rupture them if the progress of labour 
is satisfactory. Artiÿcial rupture of membranes (ARM) 
may be appropriate if progress in labour is slow. 
Maternal and fetal observations are carried out 
and recorded on the partogram. Women should 
receive one-to-one care (i.e. from a dedicated mid￾wife) and should not be left alone for any signiÿcant 
period of time once labour has established. Women 
should be able to choose their preferred birth part￾ner and should be able to adopt whatever positions 
they ÿnd most comfortable. Mobility during labour 
is encouraged and it is likely that standing upright 
encourages progress. This can be more challenging 208 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 209 04/03/2024 16:07
Management of normal labour 
Figure 12.19 A typical partogram. This is a partogram of a nulliparous woman of short stature with a big baby and an 
augmented labour. The labour culminates in an emergency caesarean section for cephalopelvic disproportion. 209 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 210 04/03/2024 16:07
Labour: Normal and abnormal 
with continuous CTG monitoring. Women may drink 
during established labour and those who are becom￾ing dehydrated may beneÿt from intravenous °uids 
to prevent ketosis, which can impair uterine contrac￾tility. Light diet is acceptable if there is no obvious 
risk factor for needing a general anaesthetic and if 
the woman has not had pethidine or diamorphine 
for pain relief, which can cause vomiting. Shaving 
and enemas are unnecessary and antacids need only 
be given to women with risk factors for complications 
or to those who have had opioid analgesia. A variety 
of methods of pain relief are available, depending on 
the location of the birth (these are discussed in the 
section ‘Pain relief in labour’ later in this chapter). 
‘Active management of labour’ is a collection of 
interventions that was routinely recommended to 
nulliparous women to maximize the chances of a 
normal birth. It included one-to-one midwifery care, 
2-hourly vaginal examinations, early ARM and use 
of oxytocin augmentation if progress fell more than 
2 hours behind the schedule of 1 cm dilatation per 
hour. A variety of studies failed to show any obvious 
beneÿt of active management, except that derived 
from one-to-one care, which is now the only compo￾nent recommended for all women in normal labour. 
MANAGEMENT DURING THE 
SECOND STAGE 
If the labour has been normal, the ÿrst sign of the 
second stage is likely to be an urge to push experi￾enced by the woman. Full dilatation of the cervix 
should be conÿrmed by a vaginal examination if the 
head is not visible. The woman will get an expulsive 
re°ex with each contraction and will generally take 
a deep breath, hold it and strain down (the Valsalva 
manoeuvre). Women will be guided by their own 
urge to push; however, the midwife has an important 
role to play, with advice, support and reassurance if 
progress is slow. Women should be discouraged from 
lying supine or semi-supine and should adopt any 
other position that they ÿnd comfortable. Lying in 
the left lateral position, squatting and ‘all fours’ are 
particularly effective options. Maternal and fetal sur￾veillance intensiÿes in the second stage, as described 
previously. The development of fetal acidaemia may 
accelerate, and maternal exhaustion and ketosis 
increase in line with the duration of active pushing. 
Use of regional analgesia (epidural or spinal) may 
interfere with the normal urge to push, and the sec￾ond stage is more often diagnosed on a routine sched￾uled vaginal examination. Pushing is usually delayed 
for at least an hour and up to 2 hours if an epidural 
is in situ (the ‘passive second stage’); however, in all 
cases, guidelines recommend that the baby should be 
delivered within 4 hours of reaching full dilatation. 
DESCENT AND DELIVERY OF 
THE FETAL HEAD 
The progress of descent of the fetal head can be judged 
by watching the perineum. At ÿrst, there is a slight 
general bulge as the woman bears down. When the 
head stretches the perineum, the anus will begin to 
open, and soon after this the baby’s head will be seen 
at the vulva at the height of each contraction. Between 
contractions, the elastic tone of the perineal muscles 
will push the head back into the pelvic cavity. The 
perineal body and vulva will become more and more 
stretched, until eventually the head is low enough to 
pass forwards under the subpubic arch. When the head 
no longer recedes between contractions it is described 
as crowning. This indicates that it has passed through 
the pelvic °oor and delivery is imminent. Vaginal and 
perineal tears are common consequences of vaginal 
birth, particularly during ÿrst births. The ‘hands-on’ 
approach has been very popular. As crowning occurs, 
the hands of the accoucheur (midwife or obstetri￾cian) are used to °ex the fetal head and guard the 
perineum. The belief is that controlling the speed of 
delivery of the fetal head will limit maternal soft tis￾sue damage. Once the head has crowned, the woman 
should be discouraged from bearing down by telling 
them to take rapid, shallow breaths (‘panting’). 
DELIVERY OF THE SHOULDERS 
AND REST OF THE BODY 
Once the fetal head is born, a check is made to see 
whether the cord is wound tightly around the neck, 
thereby making delivery of the body difÿcult. If this is 
the case, the cord may need to be clamped and divided 
before delivery of the rest of the body. With the next 
contraction, there is restitution of the head, and the 
shoulders can be delivered. To aid the delivery of the 
shoulders, there should be gentle traction on the head 210 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 211 04/03/2024 16:07
 
Management of normal labour 
downwards and forwards until the anterior shoulder 
appears beneath the pubis. The head is then lifted 
gradually until the posterior shoulder appears over 
the perineum and the baby is then swept upwards to 
deliver the body and legs. Shoulder dystocia (difÿculty 
in delivering the shoulders) is discussed in Chapter 14. 
IMMEDIATE CARE OF THE NEONATE 
After the baby is born, it lies between the mother’s 
legs or is delivered directly on to her abdomen. The 
baby will usually take its ÿrst breath within seconds. 
There is no need for immediate clamping of the cord, 
and indeed about 80 mL of blood will be transferred 
from the placenta to the baby before cord pulsations 
cease, reducing the chances of later neonatal anae￾mia and iron deÿciency. The baby’s head should be 
kept dependent to allow mucus in the respiratory 
tract to drain, and oropharyngeal suction should be 
applied only if necessary. Delayed cord clamping is 
recommended for at least 3 minutes unless the baby 
needs immediate resuscitation. The baby should have 
an Apgar score calculated at 1 minute of age (see 
Chapter 16), which is then repeated at 5 minutes. 
Immediate skin-to-skin contact between the mother 
and the baby will help bonding and promote the fur￾ther release of oxytocin, which will encourage uterine 
contractions. The baby should be dried and covered 
with a warm blanket or towel, maintaining maternal 
contact. Initiation of breastfeeding should be encour￾aged within the ÿrst hour of life, and routine newborn 
measurements of head circumference, birthweight 
and temperature are usually performed soon after this 
hour has elapsed. Before being transferred from the 
delivery room, a prophylactic dose of vitamin K should 
be given (if parental consent has been given) and the 
infant should have a general examination for abnor￾malities and a wrist label attached for identiÿcation. 
MANAGEMENT OF THE 
THIRD STAGE 
The third stage is the interval between the birth of 
the baby and the complete expulsion of the placenta 
and membranes. This normally takes between 5 and 
10 minutes and is considered prolonged after 30 min￾utes unless a physiological approach is preferred. 
BOX 12.4: Signs of placental separation 
˜ Apparent lengthening of the cord 
˜ A small gush of blood from the placental bed 
˜ Rising of the uterine fundus to above the 
umbilicus (Figure 12.20) 
˜ Uterine contraction resulting in ÿrm globular feel 
on palpation 
Figure 12.20 Signs of separation and descent of the 
placenta. After separation, the uterine upper segment 
rises and feels more rounded. 
BOX 12.5: Active management of the 
third stage 
˜ Intramuscular or intravenous injection of 10 IU 
oxytocin, immediately after delivery of the baby 
˜ Clamping and cutting of the umbilical cord 
(delayed cord clamping is now recommended) 
˜ Controlled cord traction (Figure 12.21) 
Figure 12.21 Delivering the placenta by controlled cord 
traction. 211 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 212 04/03/2024 16:07
 
Labour: Normal and abnormal 
Separation of the placenta occurs because of the 
reduction of volume of the uterus due to uterine con￾traction and the retraction (shortening) of the lattice￾like arrangement of the myometrial muscle ÿbres. A 
cleavage plane develops within the decidua basalis 
and the separated placenta lies free in the lower seg￾ment of the uterine cavity. Management of the third 
stage can be described as ‘active’ or ‘physiological’. 
ACTIVE MANAGEMENT 
Active management of the third stage should be 
recommended to all women because high-quality 
evidence shows that it reduces the incidence of post￾partum haemorrhage from 15% to 5%. When the 
signs of placental separation are recognized, con￾trolled cord traction is used to expedite delivery of 
the placenta. When a contraction is felt, the left hand 
should be moved suprapubically and the fundus 
elevated with the palm facing towards the woman. 
At the same time, the right hand should grasp the 
cord and exert steady traction so that the placenta 
separates and is delivered gently, care being taken 
to peel off all the membranes, usually with a twist￾ing motion. Uterine inversion is a rare complication, 
which may occur if the uterus is not adequately con￾trolled with the left hand and excessive traction is 
exerted on the cord in the absence of complete sepa￾ration and a uterine contraction (see Chapter 14). 
In approximately 2% of cases, the placenta will not 
be expelled by this method. If no bleeding occurs, a 
further attempt at controlled cord traction should be 
made after 10 minutes. If this fails, the placenta is 
‘retained’ and will require manual removal under gen￾eral or regional anaesthesia in the operating theatre. 
It is now recognized that a modiÿed approach to 
active management of the third stage may be prefer￾able with delayed cord clamping for between 1 and 
3 minutes. This approach allows autotransfusion of 
placental blood to the neonate while maintaining 
the beneÿt of a reduced risk of post-partum haemor￾rhage. It is of particular importance in preterm birth. 
PHYSIOLOGICAL MANAGEMENT 
In physiological management of the third stage, 
the placenta is delivered by maternal effort and no 
uterotonic drugs are given to assist this process. It 
is associated with heavier bleeding, but women who 
are not at increased risk of post-partum haemor￾rhage should be supported if they choose this option. 
In the event of haemorrhage (estimated blood loss 
>500 mL) or if the placenta remains undelivered after 
60 minutes of physiological management, active 
management should be recommended. 
After completion of the third stage, the placenta 
should be inspected for missing cotyledons or a suc￾centuriate lobe. If these are suspected, examination 
under anaesthesia and manual removal of placental 
tissue should be arranged, because the risk of post￾partum haemorrhage is high. 
Finally, the genital tract of the mother should be 
inspected for any tears or lacerations. Minor tears 
do not require suturing, but tears extending into 
the perineal muscles (or, indeed, an episiotomy) will 
require careful repair (see Chapter 13). 
KEY LEARNING POINTS 
Features of normal labour: 
˜ spontaneous onset at 37–42 weeks’ gestation 
˜ singleton pregnancy 
˜ cephalic vertex presentation 
˜ no artiÿcial interventions 
˜ cervical dilatation of at least 1 cm every 2 hours 
in the active phase of the ÿrst stage 
˜ an active second stage of no more than 2 hours 
in nulliparous women and 1 hour in multiparous 
women 
˜ spontaneous vaginal birth 
˜ a third stage lasting no more than 30 minutes 
with active management or 60 minutes with 
physiological management 
ABNORMAL LABOUR 
Labour becomes abnormal when there is poor prog￾ress (as evidenced by a delay in cervical dilatation or 
descent of the presenting part) and/or when the fetus 
shows signs of compromise. In addition, if there is 
a fetal malpresentation, a multiple pregnancy or a 
uterine scar, or if labour has been induced, labour 
cannot be considered normal. Progress in labour is 
dependent on the 3Ps as described previously (pow￾ers, passages, passenger). Abnormalities in one or 
more of these factors can slow the normal progress of 212 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 213 04/03/2024 16:07
Management of abnormal labour 
Cervical dilatation (cm) 
10 
9 
8 
7 
6 
5 
4 
3 
2 
1 
0 
Normal labour 
Secondary arrest 
Figure 12.22 Abnormalities of the partogram. 
labour. Plotting the ÿndings of serial vaginal exami￾nations on the partogram will help to highlight slow 
progress during the ÿrst and second stages of labour. 
PATTERNS OF ABNORMAL 
PROGRESS IN LABOUR 
The use of a partogram to plot the progress of labour 
improves the detection of slow progress. Three pat￾terns of abnormal labour are commonly described 
(Figure 12.22). 
‘Primary arrest’ is the term used to describe poor 
progress in the active ÿrst stage of labour (<2 cm 
cervical dilatation/4 hours) and is also more com￾mon in nulliparous women. It is typically caused by 
inefÿcient uterine contractions, but can also result 
from CPD, malposition and malpresentation of the 
fetus. ‘Secondary arrest’ occurs when progress in 
the active ÿrst stage is initially good but then slows, 
or stops altogether, typically after 7 cm dilatation. 
Although inefÿcient uterine contractions may be 
the cause, fetal malposition, malpresentation and 
CPD feature more commonly than in primary arrest. 
‘Arrest in the second stage of labour’, not to be con￾fused with ‘secondary arrest’, occurs when birth is 
not imminent after the usual interval of pushing in 
the second stage of labour. This may be due to inef￾ÿcient uterine activity, malposition, malpresentation, 
CPD or a resistant perineum. It may also be due to 
maternal exhaustion, fear or pain. 
Latent phase 
Active phase 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 
Time (hours) 
Primary dysfunctional labour 
Prolonged latent phase 
MANAGEMENT OF ABNORMAL 
LABOUR 
POOR PROGRESS IN THE FIRST 
STAGE OF LABOUR 
DYSFUNCTIONAL UTERINE ACTIVITY 
(‘POWERS’) 
This is the most common cause of poor progress in 
labour. It is more common in nulliparous and older 
women and is characterized by weak, irregular and 
infrequent contractions. The assessment of uter￾ine contractions is carried out by clinical exami￾nation and by using external uterine tocography. 
Intrauterine pressure catheters are available and 
these do give a more accurate measurement of the 
pressure being generated by the contractions, but 
they are invasive and rarely necessary. A frequency 
of four contractions per 10 minutes is usually con￾sidered ideal. Fewer contractions than this does not 
necessarily mean progress will be slow, but more 
frequent examinations may be indicated to detect 
poor progress earlier. When poor progress in labour 
is suspected, it is usual to recommend repeat vagi￾nal examination at 2 hours, rather than 4 hours after 
the last. If delay is conÿrmed, the woman should 
be offered ARM and, if there is still poor progress 
in a further 2 hours, advice should be sought from 
an obstetrician regarding the use of an oxytocin 213 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 214 04/03/2024 16:07
Labour: Normal and abnormal 
—TOCOext 
—US2 
kPa 
12 
10 
8 
6 
4 
2 
0 
100 
80 
60 
40 
20 
0 
200 
180 
160 
140 
120 
100 
80 
60 
12 
10 
8 
6 
4 
2 
0 
100 
80 
60 
40 
20 
0 
200 
180 
160 
140 
120 
100 
80 
60 
12 
10 
8 
6 
4 
2 
0 
100 
80 
60 
40 
20 
0 
200 
180 
160 
140 
120 
100 
80 
60 
22:50 22.09.06 1 cm/min 23:00 22.09.06 1 cm/min 23:10 22.09.06 1 cm/min 
kPa kPa 
Figure 12.23 A pathological cardiotocograph secondary to uterine hyperstimulation. 
infusion to augment the contractions. The infusion 
is commenced at a low rate initially and increased 
every 30 minutes, according to a well-deÿned pro￾tocol. Continuous EFM is necessary, as excessively 
frequent strong contractions may cause fetal com￾promise (Figure 12.23). Women should be offered 
an epidural before oxytocin is started, along with 
ongoing hydration and emotional support. 
Multiparous women are less likely to experience 
poor progress in labour secondary to dysfunctional 
uterine activity. Extreme caution must be exer￾cised when making this diagnosis in a multiparous 
woman when an alternative explanation, such as 
malposition, malpresentation or obstructed labour 
due to CPD, is more likely. An obstetrician must be 
closely involved in the assessment of such a situa￾tion and the decision to augment with oxytocin must 
be considered very carefully. Excessive uterine con￾tractions in a truly obstructed labour may result in 
uterine rupture in a multiparous woman, a complica￾tion that is extremely rare in a nulliparous woman. 
Augmentation with oxytocin is contraindicated if 
there are concerns regarding the condition of the 
fetus. If progress fails to occur despite 4–6 hours of 
augmentation with oxytocin, a caesarean section 
will usually be recommended. 
CEPHALOPELVIC DISPROPORTION 
(‘PASSAGES’ AND ‘PASSENGER’) 
CPD implies anatomical disproportion between the 
fetal head and the maternal pelvis. It can be due to a 
large head, a small pelvis or a combination of the two 
relative to each other. Women of short stature (<1.60 
m) with a large baby in their ÿrst pregnancy are poten￾tial candidates to develop this problem. The pelvis 
may be unusually small because of previous fracture 
or metabolic bone disease. Rarely, a fetal anomaly will 
contribute to CPD. Obstructive hydrocephalus may 
cause macrocephaly (abnormally large fetal head), 
and fetal thyroid and neck tumours may cause exten￾sion at the fetal neck. Relative CPD is more common 
and occurs with malposition of the fetal head. The OP 
position is associated with de°exion of the fetal head 
and presents a larger skull diameter to the maternal 
pelvis (Figure 12.24; see also Figure 12.14). 
Oxytocin can be given carefully to a primigravida 
with mild to moderate CPD if the CTG is normal. 
Relative disproportion may be overcome if the mal￾position is corrected (i.e. rotation to a °exed OA posi￾tion). Oxytocin must never be used in a multiparous 
woman when CPD is suspected, and it should be 
used with caution in women with a uterine scar. 
214 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 215 04/03/2024 16:07
Management of abnormal labour 
11 cm 
R 
Figure 12.24 Vaginal palpation of the head in the right 
occipito-posterior position. The circle represents the 
pelvic cavity, with a diameter of 12 cm. The head is poorly 
˜exed so that the anterior fontanelle is easily felt. 
L 
BOX 12.6: Findings suggestive of CPD 
˜ Fetal head is not engaged in labour 
˜ Progress is slow or arrests despite efÿcient 
uterine contractions 
˜ Vaginal examination shows severe moulding and 
caput formation 
˜ Head is poorly applied to the cervix 
˜ Haematuria 
MALPRESENTATION (‘PASSENGER’) 
A ÿrm application of the fetal presenting part on to 
the cervix is necessary for good progress in labour. 
A face presentation (Figures 12.25 and 12.26) may 
apply poorly to the cervix and the resulting progress in 
labour may be slow, although vaginal birth is still pos￾sible. Brow presentation is associated with the mento￾vertical diameter presenting, which is simply too large 
to ÿt through the bony pelvis unless °exion occurs 
or hyperextension to a face presentation (Figures 
12.27 and 12.28). Brow presentation therefore often 
manifests as slow progress in the ÿrst stage, often in 
a multiparous woman. Shoulder presentations cannot 
deliver vaginally and, once again, slow progress will 
occur. Malpresentations are more common in women 
9.5 cm 
Figure 12.25 Vaginal examination in the left mento￾anterior position. The circle represents the pelvic cavity, 
with a diameter of 12 cm. 
Figure 12.26 The mechanism of labour with a face 
presentation. The head descends with increasing 
extension. The chin reaches the pelvic ˜oor and undergoes 
forwards rotation. The head is born by ˜exion. 
of high parity and carry a risk of uterine rupture if 
labour is allowed to continue without progress. 
ABNORMALITIES OF THE BIRTH 
CANAL (‘PASSAGES’) 
The bony pelvis may cause delay in the progress of 
labour as discussed earlier (CPD). Abnormalities of the 
uterus and cervix can also delay labour. Unsuspected 215 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 216 04/03/2024 16:07
Labour: Normal and abnormal 
Figure 12.27 Brow presentation. The head is above 
the brim and not engaged. The mento-vertical diameter 
of the head is trying to engage in the transverse diameter 
at the brim. 
ÿbroids in the lower uterine segment can prevent 
descent of the fetal head. Delay can also be caused by 
‘cervical dystocia’, a term used to describe a non-com￾pliant cervix that effaces but fails to dilate because of 
severe scarring or rigidity, usually because of previous 
cervical surgery such as a cone biopsy. Caesarean sec￾tion may be necessary. 
POOR PROGRESS IN THE SECOND 
STAGE OF LABOUR 
Birth of the baby is expected to take place within 3 
hours of the start of the active second stage (pushing) 
in nulliparous women and 2 hours in parous women. 
Delay is diagnosed if delivery is not imminent after 2 
hours of pushing in a nulliparous labour and 1 hour for 
a parous woman. The causes of second-stage delay can 
again be classiÿed as abnormalities of the powers, the 
passages and the passenger. Secondary dysfunctional 
uterine activity (‘powers’) is a common cause of sec￾ond-stage delay and may be exacerbated by epidural 
analgesia. Having achieved full dilatation, the uterine 
13 cm 
Figure 12.28 Vaginal examination with brow presentation. 
The circle represents the pelvic cavity, with a diameter of 
12 cm. The mento-vertical diameter of 13 cm is too large to 
permit engagement of the head. 
contractions may become weak and ineffectual and this 
is sometimes associated with maternal dehydration 
and ketosis. If no mechanical problem is anticipated 
and the woman is nulliparous, the treatment is with 
rehydration and intravenous oxytocin. If the woman is 
multiparous, a full clinical assessment should be per￾formed by a skilled obstetrician prior to considering 
oxytocin due to the risks described previously. 
Delay in the second stage can occur because of 
a narrow mid-pelvis (android pelvis), which pre￾vents internal rotation of the fetal head (‘passages’). 
This may result in arrest of descent of the fetal head 
at the level of the ischial spines in the transverse 
position, a condition called deep transverse arrest 
(Figure˜12.29). Delay can also occur because of a per￾sistent OP position of the fetal head (‘passenger’). In 
this situation, the head will have to either undergo a 
long rotation to OA or be delivered in the OP position 
(i.e. face to pubes). It may also occur due to a resistant 
perineum, particularly in a nulliparous woman. 
Assisted vaginal birth should be considered for 
prolonged second stage if the safety criteria have 
been fulÿlled. If the safety criteria for assisted vagi￾nal birth are not met, then delivery will be by cae￾sarean section. A resistant perineum resulting in 
signiÿcant delay may be an indication for an episi￾otomy (see Chapter 13). 
216 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 217 04/03/2024 16:07
Management of abnormal labour 
Figure 12.29 Deep transverse arrest of the head. 
KEY LEARNING POINTS 
Management options for delay in the second 
stage of labour: 
˜ continued pushing with encouragement 
˜ regular reviews of progress and fetal well-being 
˜ oxytocin to augment contractions 
˜ episiotomy for a resistant perineum 
˜ assisted vaginal birth (vacuum or forceps) 
˜ caesarean section 
FETAL COMPROMISE IN LABOUR 
Concern for the well-being of the fetus is one of the 
most common reasons for medical intervention dur￾ing labour. The fetus may have been compromised 
before labour, and the reduction in placental blood 
°ow associated with contractions may reveal this 
and over time lead to fetal hypoxia and acidosis. 
Fetal compromise may present as fresh meconium 
staining to the amniotic °uid or an abnormal CTG. 
However, neither of these ÿndings conÿrms fetal 
hypoxia or acidosis. Meconium can be passed for 
physiological reasons, such as fetal maturity, and it 
is well recognized that the abnormal CTG carries 
a high false-positive rate for the diagnosis of fetal 
compromise. ‘Suspected fetal compromise’ is there￾fore a more accurate term than ‘fetal distress’. In 
many cases, babies delivered by vacuum, forceps or 
caesarean section for suspected fetal compromise are 
found to be in good condition. 
BOX 12.7: Risk factors for fetal 
compromise in labour 
˜ Placental insufÿciency – intrauterine growth 
restriction and pre-eclampsia 
˜ Prematurity (<37 weeks) 
˜ Prolonged pregnancy (>42 weeks) 
˜ Multiple pregnancy 
˜ Prolonged labour 
˜ Use of oxytocin/hyperstimulation 
˜ Precipitate labour 
˜ Intra-partum abruption 
˜ Cord prolapse 
˜ Uterine rupture/dehiscence 
˜ Diabetes in pregnancy 
˜ Cholestasis of pregnancy 
˜ Maternal pyrexia/chorioamnionitis 
˜ Oligohydramnios 
RECOGNITION OF FETAL 
COMPROMISE 
Meconium staining of the amniotic °uid is consid￾ered signiÿcant when it is either thick or tenacious 
and dark green, bright green or black. Any particu￾late meconium should also be of concern. Thin and 
light meconium is more likely to represent fetal gut 
maturity than fetal compromise. However, when any 
meconium is seen in the liquor, consideration should 
be given to starting continuous EFM with the CTG 
and this is mandatory if the meconium is thick and 
dark. Another reason for commencing the CTG is if 
a change in the heart rate is noted with intermittent 
auscultation, particularly fetal tachycardia, bradycar￾dia or FHR decelerations. The CTG may have already 
been recorded throughout the labour because of 
underlying risk factors that predate the labour. 
Interpretation of the CTG is discussed in more detail 
in Chapter 4. 
MANAGEMENT OF POSSIBLE 
FETAL COMPROMISE 
A number of resuscitative manoeuvres should be 
considered when a CTG is classiÿed as ‘suspicious’. 
These include repositioning of the pregnant woman, 
intravenous °uids, reducing or stopping the oxytocin 
217 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 218 04/03/2024 16:07
Labour: Normal and abnormal 
BOX 12.8: Resuscitating the fetus 
in˜labour 
˜ Maternal dehydration and ketosis can be 
corrected with intravenous ˜uids. 
˜ Maternal hypotension secondary to an epidural 
can be reversed by a ˜uid bolus, although 
a vasoconstrictor such as ephedrine is 
occasionally necessary. 
˜ Uterine hyperstimulation from excess oxytocin can 
be treated by turning off the infusion temporarily 
and using tocolytic drugs, such as terbutaline. 
˜ Venocaval compression and reduced uterine 
blood ˜ow can be eased by turning the woman 
to a left lateral position. 
infusion and correction of epidural-associated hypo￾tension. It is reasonable to continue observation of the 
CTG and more complex intervention is not required. 
If a CTG becomes ‘pathological’, these reversible fac￾tors should also be considered, but it is also impor￾tant to carry out an immediate vaginal examination 
to exclude malpresentation and cord prolapse and 
to assess the progress of the labour. If the cervix is 
fully dilated, it may be possible to assist the delivery 
of the baby vaginally using the forceps or vacuum. 
Alternatively, if the cervix is not fully dilated, fetal 
blood sampling can be considered. This is usu￾ally only possible when the cervix is dilated 3 cm or 
more. A normal result will support continuing labour, 
although it may need to be repeated every 30–60 
minutes if the CTG abnormalities persist or worsen. 
An abnormal result mandates immediate delivery, by 
caesarean section if the cervix is not fully dilated. 
FETAL SCALP STIMULATION 
Digital fetal scalp stimulation is a second-line test of 
fetal well-being that may be indicated when there are 
concerns about the FHR pattern on a CTG. The test 
is performed during a vaginal examination by digi￾tal rubbing of the fetal scalp to elicit an FHR accel￾eration or an increase in variability. A gentle rubbing 
pressure should be applied to the fetal scalp with the 
examining ÿngers (index and middle ÿngers) for a 
duration of approximately 30 to 60 seconds. The 
FHR pattern on the CTG is monitored closely for 1 
to 10 minutes following stimulation looking for evi￾dence of an elicited FHR acceleration (deÿned as an 
increase in the FHR of ˝15 bpm for at least 15 sec￾onds) and/or normal FHR variability (5 to 25 bpm). 
FETAL BLOOD SAMPLING 
Fetal blood sampling is a second-line test of fetal 
well-being that may be indicated when there are 
concerns about the FHR pattern on a CTG. The test 
involves collection of a capillary sample of blood from 
the fetal scalp to assess fetal pH and/or lactate. An 
amnioscope with a light source is inserted into the 
vagina, positioned through the cervix and applied 
directly onto the fetal scalp. The fetal scalp is visual￾ized and dried using gauze and then ethyl chloride 
is sprayed by an assistant to induce a reactive hyper￾aemia. Once dry, a thin layer of parafÿn is applied 
to the fetal scalp to facilitate droplet formation of 
the capillary sample. A shallow fetal scalp incision/ 
puncture is performed and, once a blood droplet has 
formed, it is collected in a heparin-coated capillary 
tube. One or more samples may be required to get a 
reliable result. Following collection, the incision site 
is pressed with gauze to prevent further bleeding. 
A normal pH value is above 7.25. A pH below 7.20 
is conÿrmation of fetal compromise. Values between 
7.20 and 7.25 are ‘borderline’. The base deÿcit can 
also be useful in interpretation of the fetal scalp pH. 
A base excess of more than –12.0 demonstrates a 
signiÿcant metabolic acidosis, with increasing risk 
of fetal neurological injury beyond this level. More 
than one fetal scalp sample may be necessary over 
the course of the labour. A downwards trend in the 
fetal scalp pH values is to be expected and should be 
assessed together with how the labour is progress￾ing. If an abnormal CTG persists in labour, then, 
despite normal values, fetal scalp sampling should 
be repeated every 60 minutes, or sooner if the CTG 
deteriorates. If the result is borderline, it should be 
repeated no more than 30 minutes later. 
PLACE OF BIRTH 
Most births in high-income countries take place 
in hospital. However, depending on the circum￾stances, women may have the opportunity to choose 218 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 219 04/03/2024 16:07
Pain relief in labour 
between hospital birth, home birth or birth in a mid￾wifery unit or birth centre. Currently, less than 5% 
of women deliver at home in most areas of the UK. 
Some midwifery units are based within a hospital 
environment and some are stand-alone. The pub￾lished evidence guiding women on the outcomes of 
birth in the different settings is limited to observa￾tional studies, the largest of which is the Birthplace 
in England study. The chance of a normal birth at 
home or in a midwifery unit is higher than in an 
obstetric unit, and the best outcomes are for women 
who are multiparous and without complicating fac￾tors. All women should be informed, however, that 
unexpected emergencies can occur in labour and that 
the outcome from these may be better in a hospital 
setting. It should also be made clear that the need 
for transfer into hospital, during labour, is possible 
from home or a midwifery unit. Women with issues 
that increase the chance of problems occurring dur￾ing labour should be recommended to deliver in an 
obstetric unit, and local guidelines provide a list of 
obstetric, fetal and medical factors to assist mid￾wives and obstetricians when counselling women. 
In addition, a variety of indications are listed for 
intra-partum transfer into an obstetric unit, includ￾ing maternal pyrexia in labour, delayed progress in 
labour, concerns regarding fetal well-being, hyper￾tension, retained placenta and complicated perineal 
trauma requiring suturing. Use of epidural pain relief 
is restricted to hospital settings. Some women will 
chose to labour or give birth in water. At present, 
there is insufÿcient good-quality evidence to either 
support or discourage water birth. 
PAIN RELIEF IN LABOUR 
There is a social and cultural dimension to the provi￾sion and uptake of analgesia in labour. Some women 
and their carers believe that there is an advantage in 
avoiding analgesia, whereas others will use all meth￾ods on offer to limit their pain. Professionals who 
are knowledgeable about labour and the available 
options for pain relief should give tailored advice 
according to the needs and priorities of the indi￾vidual woman. The method of pain relief is to some 
extent dependent on the previous obstetric record of 
the woman, the course of labour and the anticipated 
duration of labour. Although the ÿnal decision rests 
with the woman, there are certain circumstances in 
which particular forms of analgesia are contraindi￾cated and should not be offered. 
NON-PHARMACOLOGICAL 
METHODS 
One-to-one care in labour from a midwife alongside 
a supportive birth partner has been shown to reduce 
the need for analgesia. Relaxation and breathing 
exercises may help the woman to manage her pain. 
Prolonged hyperventilation can make her dizzy and 
can cause alkalosis. Homeopathy, acupuncture and 
hypnosis are sometimes employed, but their use has 
not been associated with a signiÿcant reduction in 
pain scores or with a reduced need for conventional 
methods of analgesia. 
Relaxation in warm water during the ÿrst stage 
of labour often leads to a sense of well-being and 
allows women to cope much better with pain. The 
temperature of the water should not exceed 37.5ºC. 
Transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS) 
works on the principle of blocking pain ÿbres in the 
posterior ganglia of the spinal cord by stimulation of 
small afferent ÿbres (the ‘gate’ theory). It may be of 
use in the latent phase of labour and is often used by 
women at home. It has been shown to be ineffective 
in reducing pain scores or the need for other forms of 
analgesia in established labour. It does not have any 
adverse effects. 
PHARMACOLOGICAL METHODS 
Opiates, such as pethidine and diamorphine, are 
still used in many obstetric units and indeed can be 
administered by midwives without the involvement 
BOX 12.9: Side effects of opioid 
analgesia 
˜ Nausea and vomiting (they should always be 
given with an anti-emetic) 
˜ Maternal drowsiness and sedation 
˜ Delayed gastric emptying (increasing the risks of 
general anaesthesia) 
˜ Short-term respiratory depression of the baby 
˜ Possible interference with breastfeeding 
219 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 220 04/03/2024 16:07
Labour: Normal and abnormal 
of medical staff. This may be one of the reasons for 
their popularity. They provide only limited pain relief 
during labour and may have signiÿcant side effects. 
Opiates tend to be given as intramuscular injec￾tions; however, an alternative is a subcutaneous or 
intravenous infusion by a patient-controlled anal￾gesic device. This allows the woman, by pressing a 
dispenser button, to determine the level of analgesia 
that they require. If a very short-acting opiate is used, 
the opiate doses can be timed with the contractions. 
This method of pain relief is particularly popular 
among women who cannot have an epidural and 
ÿnd non-pharmacological options insufÿcient. 
INHALATIONAL ANALGESIA 
Nitrous oxide in the form of entonox (an equal mix￾ture of nitrous oxide and oxygen) is available on most 
labour wards. It has a quick onset, a short duration 
of effect and is more effective than pethidine. It may 
cause light-headedness and nausea. It is not suitable 
for prolonged use from early labour because hyper￾ventilation may result in hypocapnoea, dizziness 
and, rarely, tetany and fetal hypoxia. It is most suit￾able in the active ÿrst stage of labour or while awaiting 
epidural analgesia. 
EPIDURAL ANALGESIA 
Epidural (extradural) analgesia is the most reliable 
means of providing effective analgesia in labour. 
Failure to provide an epidural is one of the most fre￾quent causes of upset and disappointment among 
labouring women. The epidural service must be well 
organized to be effective, and fortunately resources 
are now available in most hospital settings so that 
a signiÿcant delay in the placement of an epidural 
is unusual. 
The woman must be informed about the ben￾eÿts and risks, and the ÿnal decision should rest 
with her unless there is a deÿnite contraindication. 
It is important to warn her that she may lose sen￾sation and movement in her legs temporarily, and 
that intravenous access and a more intensive level 
of maternal and fetal monitoring will be necessary, 
for example with CTG. The effect of epidural anal￾gesia on labour duration and the operative delivery 
BOX 12.10: Indications and 
contraindications for epidural analgesia 
Indications 
˜ Prolonged labour/oxytocin augmentation 
˜ Gestational hypertensive disorders 
˜ Multiple pregnancy 
˜ Selected medical conditions affecting the 
pregnant woman 
˜ A high risk of operative intervention 
Contraindications 
˜ Coagulation disorders (e.g. low platelet count) 
˜ Local or systemic sepsis 
˜ Hypovolaemia 
˜ Logistical: insufÿcient numbers of trained staff 
(anaesthetic and midwifery) 
rate has been a controversial issue. The evidence is 
now clear that epidural analgesia does not increase 
caesarean section rates; however, the second stage is 
longer with a delayed urge to push. In some clinical 
situations, an epidural in the second stage of labour 
may assist a vaginal birth by relaxing the woman and 
allowing time for the head to descend and rotate. 
Complications of regional analgesia 
Hypotension can occur with epidural analgesia 
although it is more common with spinal anaesthe￾sia. It can usually be rectiÿed with intravenous °uid 
boluses but may need vasopressors. Occasionally, 
hypotension in the pregnant woman will lead to fetal 
compromise. 
Bladder dysfunction can occur if the bladder is 
allowed to overÿll because the woman is unaware 
of the need to micturate, particularly after the birth 
while the spinal or epidural anaesthesia is wearing 
off. Over-distension of the detrusor muscle of the 
bladder can permanently damage it and leave long￾term voiding problems. To avoid this, catheterization 
of the bladder should be carried out during labour. 
Accidental dural puncture occurs in approxi￾mately 1% of cases. If the subarachnoid space is 
accidentally reached with an epidural needle, this 
may allow leakage of cerebrospinal °uid and results 
in a ‘spinal headache’. This is characteristically 
experienced on the top of the head and is relieved 
220 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 221 04/03/2024 16:07
hiatus
Pain relief in labour 
by lying °at and exacerbated by sitting upright. If 
the headache is severe or persistent, a blood patch 
may be necessary. This involves injecting a small 
volume of the woman’s blood into the epidural 
space at the level of the accidental dural puncture. 
The resulting blood clot is thought to block off the 
leak of cerebrospinal °uid. 
Accidental total spinal anaesthesia (injection 
of epidural doses of local anaesthetic into the sub￾arachnoid space) causes severe hypotension, respi￾ratory failure, unconsciousness and death if not 
recognized and treated immediately. The woman 
requires intubation, ventilation and circulatory sup￾port. Hypotension must be treated with intravenous 
°uids, vasopressors and positioning of the woman 
on her left side. In some cases, urgent delivery of the 
baby may be required to overcome aorto-caval com￾pression and so permit resuscitation of the woman. 
Spinal haematomata and neurological complica￾tions are rare and are usually associated with other 
factors such as bleeding disorders. Drug toxicity can 
occur with accidental placement of a catheter within 
a blood vessel. This is normally noticed by aspiration 
prior to injection. 
Short-term respiratory depression of the baby is 
possible because all modern epidural solutions con￾tain opioids, which reach the circulation of the preg￾nant woman and may cross the placenta. 
Technique 
After detailed discussion, the woman’s back is 
cleansed and local anaesthetic is used to inÿltrate the 
skin. The woman may be in an extreme left lateral 
position or sitting upright but leaning over. Flexion at 
the upper spine and at the hips helps to open up the 
spaces between the vertebral bodies of the lumbar 
spine. Aseptic technique is used. The epidural cath￾eter is normally inserted at the L2–L3, L3–L4 or L4– 
L5 interspace and should come to lie in the epidural 
space, which contains blood vessels, nerve roots and 
fat (Figure 12.30). The catheter is aspirated to check 
for position and, if no blood or cerebrospinal °uid is 
obtained, a ‘test dose’ is given to conÿrm the cath￾eter position (Figure 12.31). This test dose is a small 
volume of dilute local anaesthetic that would not be 
expected to have any clinical effect. If indeed it has 
no obvious effect on sensation in the lower limbs, the 
L1
Cord L2
L3
Dura￾arachnoid
Epidural
space
L4
L5
S1
S2
Subarachnoid
space S3
Filum
terminal
CO1 Sacral
hiatus
Figure 12.30 Sagittal section of the lumbo-sacral spinal 
cord. 
catheter is correctly sited. If, however, there is a sen￾sory block, leg weakness and peripheral vasodilata￾tion, the catheter has been inserted too far and into 
the subarachnoid (spinal) space. Inserting the nor￾mal dose of local anaesthetic into the spinal space by 
accident would risk complete motor and respiratory 
paralysis. If none of these signs is observed 5 min￾utes after injection of the test dose, a loading dose 
can be administered. The epidural solution is usu￾ally a mixture of low-concentration local anaesthetic 
(e.g. 0.0625–0.1% bupivacaine) with an opioid such 
as fentanyl. Combining the opioid with the local 
221 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 222 04/03/2024 16:07
 
Labour: Normal and abnormal 
Skin Spine Epidural
A
B
space
Ligamentum
flavum
Dura
Figure 12.31 Needle positioning for an epidural 
anaesthetic: midline (A) and paramedian (B) approaches. 
anaesthetic reduces the amount of local anaesthetic 
required and this reduces the motor blockade and 
peripheral autonomic effects of the epidural (e.g. 
hypotension). 
After the loading dose is given, the woman should 
be kept in the right or left lateral position and her 
blood pressure should be measured every 5 minutes 
for 15 minutes. 
A fall in blood pressure may result from the vaso￾dilatation caused by blocking of the sympathetic 
tone to peripheral blood vessels. This hypotension is 
usually short lived but may cause a fetal bradycardia 
due to redirection of blood away from the uterus. 
It should be treated with intravenous °uids and, 
if necessary, vasoconstrictors such as ephedrine. 
The woman should never lie supine, as aorto-caval 
compression can reduce their cardiac output and so 
compromise placental perfusion. Hourly assessment 
of the level of the sensory block using a cold spray 
is critical in the detection of a block that is creep￾ing too high and risking respiratory compromise. 
Regional analgesia can be maintained throughout 
labour with either intermittent boluses or continu￾ous infusions. Patient-controlled epidural analgesia 
is an option. Women should be encouraged to move 
around and adopt whichever upright position suits 
them best. Full mobility is more difÿcult. Regional 
anaesthesia should be continued until after comple￾tion of the third stage of labour, including repair of 
any perineal injury. 
SPINAL ANAESTHESIA 
A spinal block is considered more effective than 
that obtained by an epidural and is of faster onset. 
A ÿne-gauge atraumatic spinal needle is passed 
through the epidural space, through the dura and 
into the subarachnoid space, which contains the 
cerebrospinal °uid. A small volume of local anaes￾thetic is injected, after which the spinal needle is 
withdrawn. This may be used as anaesthesia for 
caesarean sections, for the trial of assisted vaginal 
births (in theatre), for manual removal of a retained 
placenta and for the repair of difÿcult perineal and 
vaginal tears. Spinal anaesthesia is not used for 
routine analgesia in labour. 
Combined spinal–epidural analgesia has gained 
in popularity. This technique has the advantage of 
producing a rapid onset of pain relief and the pro￾vision of prolonged analgesia. Because the initiat￾ing spinal dose is relatively low, this is an option for 
immediate pain relief in labour. 
LABOUR IN SPECIAL 
CIRCUMSTANCES 
WOMEN WITH A UTERINE SCAR 
Some women will have a pre-existing uterine scar, 
usually because of a previous caesarean section. 
Approximately 25–35% of all deliveries in high￾income countries are by caesarean section and 99% 
of these are performed through the lower segment of 
the uterus because blood loss is less, healing is better 
and the risk of subsequent uterine rupture is lower 
than following an upper segment or ‘classical’ cae￾sarean section. There are still a few indications for 
upper segment caesarean section (e.g. extreme pre￾maturity) and it is important that these women are 
counselled appropriately. It is estimated that uterine 
rupture or dehiscence (scar separation) occurs in 
approximately 1 in 200 women who labour sponta￾neously with a pre-existing lower segment uterine 
222 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 223 04/03/2024 16:07
Labour in special circumstances 
200 
100 
80 
60 
40 
20 
0 
47 kPa 48 49
14:50 1 cm/min 15:00 1 cm/min 15:10 1 cm/min 
12 
10 
8 
6 
4 
2 
0 
12 
10 
8 
6 
4 
2 
0 
12 
10 
8 
6 
4 
2 
0 
180 
160 
140 
120 
100 
80 
60 
200 
100 
80 
60 
40 
20 
0 
180 
160 
140 
120 
100 
80 
60 
200 
100 
80 
60 
40 
20 
0 
180 
160 
140 
120 
100 
80 
60 
–US2 
—TOCOext 
kPa kPa 
Figure 12.32 Fetal bradycardia to a heart rate of 90 beats per minute, lasting approximately 11 minutes. 
scar. The risk is two to three times higher in women 
with a previous upper segment incision. 
Signs of uterine rupture include severe lower 
abdominal pain, vaginal bleeding, haematuria, ces￾sation of contractions, tachycardia in the pregnant 
woman and fetal compromise (often a bradycardia; 
Figure 12.32). Uterine rupture carries serious risks 
(shock, need for blood transfusion and operative 
repair, possibly a hysterectomy) to the pregnant 
woman and serious fetal risks (hypoxia, permanent 
neurological injury and perinatal death). Rupture of 
the uterus is more likely to occur late in the ÿrst stage 
of labour, with induced or accelerated labour, and in 
association with a large baby. 
Labour after a previous caesarean section is 
known as vaginal birth after caesarean (VBAC). 
Approximately 60–70% of women who attempt a 
VBAC will give birth vaginally and the remainder 
will need repeat caesarean delivery. The chance of a 
successful vaginal birth depends on a number of fac￾tors, including a previous vaginal birth, size of the 
baby and the original indication for a caesarean birth. 
If a woman with a previous history of a caesar￾ean section is admitted in labour, close surveil￾lance is required to identify early signs of uterine 
rupture. Continuous CTG monitoring is strongly 
BOX 12.11: Relative contraindications 
to VBAC 
˜ Two or more previous caesarean section 
scars 
˜ Need for induction of labour (IOL) 
˜ Previous labour outcome suggestive of CPD 
˜ Previous classical caesarean section (absolute 
contraindication) 
recommended and there should be a low threshold 
for urgent delivery by repeat caesarean section. 
Some women will have scars on the uterus as a 
result of a previous myomectomy. In general, there 
is low risk of rupture of a myomectomy scar unless 
the uterine cavity was opened during the procedure. 
MALPRESENTATION 
BREECH PRESENTATION 
The antenatal management of breech presentation 
and the mechanics of the delivery are discussed in 
Chapter 6. Most breech presentations recognized at 
term (˝37 weeks) are delivered by caesarean section. 
Although this is evidence based, and it is probably 
 223 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 224 04/03/2024 16:07
Labour: Normal and abnormal 
BOX 12.12: Complications of a breech 
labour and birth 
˜ Increased risk of cord prolapse: particularly with 
footling breech 
˜ Increased risk of CTG abnormalities, as cord 
compression is common 
˜ Mechanical difÿculties with the delivery of the 
shoulders and/or after-coming head leading to 
damage of the visceral organs or the brachial 
plexus 
˜ Delay in the delivery of the head, which may 
occur with a larger fetus, leading to prolonged 
compression of the umbilical cord and asphyxia 
˜ Uncontrolled rapid delivery of the head, which 
may occur with a smaller fetus and predisposes 
to tentorial tears and intracranial bleeding 
˜ A small or preterm fetus, which may deliver 
through an incompletely dilated cervix resulting 
in head entrapment 
safer for breech babies to be delivered this way, there 
is still a place for a vaginal breech birth in certain 
circumstances. Individual choice and the failure to 
detect breech presentation until very late in labour 
mean that obstetricians need to be competent in the 
skills of vaginal breech delivery and aware of the 
potential complications. Poor progress in a breech 
labour is taken by most to be an indication for cae￾sarean section. However, some obstetricians support 
the use of augmentation with oxytocin if contrac￾tions are infrequent. 
FACE PRESENTATION 
Face presentation occurs in about 1 in 500 labours 
and is due to complete extension of the fetal head. 
In the majority of cases, the cause for the extension 
is unknown, although it is frequently attributed to 
excessive tone of the extensor muscles of the fetal 
neck. Rarely, extension may be due to a fetal anomaly 
such as a thyroid tumour. The presenting diameter is 
the submento-bregmatic, which measures 9.5 cm, and 
is approximately the same in dimension as the sub￾occipito-bregmatic (vertex) presentation. Despite this, 
engagement of the fetal head is late and progress in 
labour is frequently slow, possibly because the facial 
bones do not mould. It is diagnosed in labour by pal￾pating the nose, mouth and eyes on vaginal examina￾tion (see Figure 12.25). If progress in labour is good 
and the chin remains mento-anterior, vaginal birth 
is possible, with the head being delivered by °exion 
(see Figure˜ 12.26). If the chin is posterior (mento￾posterior position), delivery is impossible, as extension 
over the perineum cannot occur. In this circumstance, 
caesarean section is performed. Oxytocin should not be 
used and, if there is any concern about the fetal condi￾tion, caesarean section should be carried out. Forceps 
delivery is acceptable for low mento-anterior face pre￾sentation but vacuum extraction is contraindicated. 
BROW PRESENTATION 
Brow presentation arises when there is less extreme 
extension of the fetal neck than that with a face pre￾sentation. It can be considered a midway position 
between vertex and face. It is the least common mal￾presentation, occurring in 1 in 1,500–2,000 labours. 
The causes are similar to those of face presentation, 
although some brow presentations arise as a result of 
exaggerated extension associated with an OP posi￾tion. The presenting diameter is the mento-vertical 
(measuring 13.5 cm) (see Figures 12.14 and 12.27). 
This is incompatible with a vaginal birth. It is diag￾nosed in labour by palpating the anterior fontanelle, 
supra-orbital ridges and nose on vaginal examina￾tion (see Figure 12.28). If this presentation persists, 
delivery can be achieved only by caesarean section. 
SHOULDER PRESENTATION 
This is reported as occurring in 1 in 300 pregnancies 
at term, but few of these women will go into labour. 
Shoulder presentation occurs as the result of a trans￾verse or oblique lie of the fetus and the causes of 
this abnormal presentation include placenta praevia, 
high parity, pelvic tumour and uterine anomaly (see 
Chapter 6). Delivery should be by caesarean section. 
Delay in making the diagnosis risks cord prolapse 
and uterine rupture. 
MULTIPLE PREGNANCY 
The mechanics of the delivery of twins is discussed 
in greater detail in Chapter 7. 224 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 225 04/03/2024 16:07
Induction of labour 
KEY LEARNING POINTS 
Normal and abnormal labour management 
˜ Most labours are uncomplicated and the 
outcomes are good. 
˜ Labour can be a hazardous journey for the baby 
and the woman. 
˜ Labour is divided into three stages. 
˜ Progress in the ÿrst and second stage of labour 
is monitored with a partogram. 
˜ Fetal well-being is monitored using the FHR, 
amniotic ˜uid and, where necessary, fetal blood 
sampling. 
˜ The term ‘suspected fetal compromise’ should be 
used if there are concerns about fetal well-being. 
˜ Abnormalities of the uterine contractions (the 
‘powers’), the pelvis and lower genital tract (the 
‘passages’) and the fetus (the ‘passenger’) can 
cause abnormal labour. 
˜ Augmentation of labour with an oxytocin infusion 
will often correct inefÿcient uterine contractions 
and may help correct a fetal malposition. 
˜ Augmentation of labour with oxytocin can be 
dangerous in multiparous women, in those with 
a uterine scar, in cases of a malpresentation and 
when there are concerns about fetal well-being. 
˜ Abnormal progress in the ÿrst stage of 
labour can be managed with ARM, oxytocin 
augmentation or emergency caesarean section. 
˜ Abnormal progress in the second stage 
of labour can be managed with oxytocin 
augmentation, episiotomy, assisted vaginal birth 
(vacuum or forceps) or caesarean section. 
˜ An abnormal third stage of labour may result in 
manual removal of placental tissue and/or post￾partum haemorrhage. 
INDUCTION OF LABOUR 
Induction of labour (IOL) is the planned initiation of 
labour prior to its spontaneous onset. Approximately 
20–30% of births in the UK occur following IOL. 
The common reasons for IOL are listed in this sec￾tion. Broadly speaking, an IOL is performed when 
the risks of continuing to the fetus and/or the woman 
outweigh those of bringing the pregnancy to an end. 
It should be performed only if there is a reasonable 
chance of success and if the risks of the process to 
the woman and/or fetus are acceptable. If either of 
these is not the case, the woman should be advised 
to await spontaneous labour or a caesarean section 
should be performed. 
The most common reason for IOL is prolonged 
pregnancy (previously described as ‘post-term’ or 
‘post-dates’). There is evidence that pregnancies 
extending beyond 42 weeks’ gestation are associated 
with a higher risk of stillbirth, fetal compromise in 
labour, meconium aspiration and mechanical prob￾lems at delivery. Because of this, women are usually 
recommended IOL at around 41 weeks’ gestation. 
Induction for prolonged pregnancy does not increase 
the rate of caesarean section. The evidence is high 
quality and the recommendation is a strong one; 
however, 300–400 pregnancies need to be induced to 
prevent one perinatal death that would have occurred 
if the pregnancies had been managed expectantly 
beyond 42 weeks’ gestation. Women who choose not 
to be induced for this reason are offered more inten￾sive serial fetal monitoring (see Chapter 6). 
Pre-labour rupture of membranes (PROM) is 
another common indication for IOL. It is not uncom￾mon for the membranes to rupture and the subse￾quent onset of labour to be signiÿcantly delayed. The 
longer the delay between membrane rupture and 
delivery of the baby, the greater the risk of ascending 
infection (chorioamnionitis) and infectious morbidity 
in both the mother and the neonate. At term (beyond 
37 weeks), good-quality evidence supports IOL 
approximately 24 hours following membrane rup￾ture. This policy, endorsed in the NICE guideline on 
IOL, reduces rates of chorioamnionitis, endometritis 
and admissions to the neonatal unit. The evidence 
is less clear at present when PROM occurs preterm 
(PPROM). Before 34 weeks, some other additional 
indication is needed to justify IOL if the membranes 
rupture (e.g. suspected infection in the mother, fetal 
compromise, growth restriction). Between 34 and 37 
weeks, in an otherwise straightforward pregnancy, 
the risks and beneÿts of IOL need to be assessed on 
an individual basis. 
Pre-eclampsia and other hypertensive disor￾ders often indicate earlier delivery. Pre-eclampsia 
at term is normally managed with IOL; however, at 
very preterm gestations (<34 weeks) or when there 225 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 226 04/03/2024 16:07
 
 
Labour: Normal and abnormal 
is rapid deterioration of the woman or signiÿcant 
fetal compromise, caesarean delivery may be a bet￾ter option. Diabetes (both pre-existing and gesta￾tional diabetes), twin gestation and intrahepatic 
cholestasis of pregnancy are all common reasons for 
IOL at 38 weeks’ gestation, and sometimes earlier. 
The published evidence is limited, and several ran￾domized controlled trials are in progress to address 
these issues. 
Suspected fetal macrosomia (>90th percentile), 
in the absence of diabetes, is now considered an 
indication for IOL following publication of a large 
randomized controlled trial. The difÿculty with 
this approach is that the estimation of fetal weight 
by ultrasound has an error margin of 10–20%, and 
some inductions may subsequently prove to have 
been unnecessary. 
‘Social’ IOL is controversial and is performed to 
satisfy the domestic and organizational needs of the 
woman and her family. It is mostly discouraged, and 
there must be careful counselling as to the potential 
risks involved. These are determined essentially by 
the parity and the cervical condition. If the situation 
is favourable for vaginal birth, with higher parity 
and a favourable cervix (see the next section, ‘Bishop 
score’), social indications are more acceptable. 
There are a number of absolute contraindications 
to IOL, including placenta praevia and severe fetal 
compromise. A deteriorating condition of the mother 
with major antepartum haemorrhage, pre-eclampsia 
or cardiac disease may favour caesarean delivery. 
Breech presentation is a relative contraindication to 
IOL, and women with a previous history of caesar￾ean birth need to be informed of the greater risk of 
uterine rupture. Preterm gestation is not an absolute 
contraindication, but induction at <34 weeks is asso￾ciated with a much higher risk of failure and the need 
for subsequent caesarean section. 
Table 12.1 Modiÿed Bishop score 
BOX 12.13: Indications for IOL 
˜ Prolonged pregnancy (usually offered after 41 
completed weeks) 
˜ PROM >24 hours 
˜ Pre-eclampsia and other gestational 
hypertensive disorders 
˜ Fetal growth restriction 
˜ Diabetes mellitus 
˜ Fetal macrosomia 
˜ Deteriorating illness in the mother 
˜ Unexplained antepartum haemorrhage 
˜ Twin pregnancy continuing beyond 38 weeks 
˜ Intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy 
˜ Iso-immunization against red cell antigens in the 
mother 
˜ ‘Social’ reasons 
BISHOP SCORE 
As the time of spontaneous labour approaches, the 
cervix becomes softer, shortens, moves forwards, 
effaces and starts to dilate. This re°ects the natural 
preparation for labour. If labour is induced before this 
process has occurred, the induction process will tend 
to take longer. Bishop produced a scoring system to 
quantify this process prior to IOL (Table˜ 12.1). A 
high Bishop score (a ‘favourable’ cervix) is associated 
with an easier, shorter induction process that is less 
likely to fail. A low score (an ‘unfavourable’ cervix) is 
associated with a longer IOL that is more likely to fail 
and result in caesarean section. 
METHODS 
IOL was traditionally performed by ARM. In the 
mid-1950s, synthetic oxytocin (Syntocinon˛) became 
available and was then used as an intravenous infusion 
Score 0 1 2 3 
Dilatation of cervix (cm) 0 1–2 3–4 5 or more 
Consistency of cervix Firm Medium Soft – 
Length of cervical canal (cm) >2 1–2 0.5–1 <0.5 
Position of cervix Posterior Mid Anterior – 
Station of presenting part –3 –2 –1 or 0 Below spines 
226 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 227 04/03/2024 16:07
 
 
 
Clinical risk management 
after rupture of the membranes. In unfavourable cases, 
it was often unsuccessful and sometimes it was impos￾sible to rupture the membranes. In the late 1960s, syn￾thetic prostaglandin became available. Various routes 
and preparations have been used, but the most com￾mon formulation in current use is prostaglandin E2, 
inserted vaginally into the posterior fornix as a tablet, 
gel or controlled-release pessary. Two doses of tablets 
or gel are often required, given at least 6 hours apart. 
The controlled-release pessary is left in place for up to 
24 hours. Prostaglandins can be used even when the 
cervix is favourable. Labour may ensue following the 
administration of prostaglandin, but ARM and oxyto￾cin are often also necessary, particularly in nulliparous 
women. Oxytocin has a short half-life and is given 
intravenously, as a dilute solution. The response to 
oxytocin is highly variable and a strict protocol exists 
for its use. The starting infusion rate is low and deÿned 
increments follow every 30 minutes until three to ÿve 
contractions are achieved in every 10 minutes. 
Mifepristone (an anti-progesterone) and miso￾prostol (prostaglandin E1) can be used to induce 
labour, but complication rates seem higher and this 
drug combination is currently used in the UK only 
to induce labour following intrauterine fetal death. 
‘Membrane sweeping’ describes the insertion of 
a gloved ÿnger through the cervix and its rotation 
around the inner rim of the cervix. This strips the 
chorionic membrane from the underlying decidua 
and releases natural prostaglandins. It can be 
uncomfortable for the woman and is possible only if 
the cervix is beginning to dilate and efface. It can be 
performed more than once and evidence shows that 
it reduces the need for formal induction. It is usually 
performed only at term, and placenta praevia must 
be excluded before it is offered. It should be consid￾ered an adjunct to the normal processes of induction. 
BOX 12.14: Methods of induction 
˜ Membrane sweep (offer weekly from 40 weeks) 
˜ Prostaglandin gel, tablet or pessary to ripen 
cervix and initiate contractions 
˜ ARM (cervix must be favourable) 
˜ Oxytocin infusion (membranes ruptured ÿrst, 
spontaneous or artiÿcial) 
˜ Mifepristone and misopostol (for intrauterine fetal 
death) 
COMPLICATIONS OF INDUCTION 
OF LABOUR 
It is generally agreed that a woman is likely to expe￾rience more pain with an induced labour, and the use 
of epidural analgesia is more common in induced 
labour. Long labours augmented with oxytocin pre￾dispose to post-partum haemorrhage secondary to 
uterine atony. Fetal compromise may occur during 
induced labours and this, in part at least, is due to 
uterine hyperstimulation as a side effect of the use 
of prostaglandins and oxytocin (see Figure 12.23). 
A contraction frequency of more than ÿve contrac￾tions per 10 minutes should be treated by stopping 
the oxytocin and, if necessary, administration of 
a tocolytic drug, most commonly a subcutaneous 
injection of the beta-2 agonist terbutaline. Uterine 
hyperstimulation may precipitate a fetal bradycardia 
and the need for emergency caesarean section if the 
FHR fails to resolve promptly. If ARM is performed 
while the fetal head is high, then cord prolapse may 
occur, again precipitating the need for emergency 
caesarean section. Women with a previous caesar￾ean section scar are at greater risk of uterine rupture 
if they are induced. The risk of scar rupture increases 
from 1 in 200 in a spontaneous labour to as high as 1 
in 50 if IOL is performed using prostaglandins. 
IOL may fail and this is said to have occurred if an 
ARM is still impossible after the maximum number of 
doses of prostaglandin have been given or if the cer￾vix remains uneffaced and less than 3 cm dilated after 
an ARM has been performed and oxytocin has been 
administered for 6–8 hours with regular contractions. 
When an induction fails, the options include a rest 
period followed by attempting induction again or per￾forming a caesarean section. Delaying delivery fur￾ther is acceptable only if there is no major threat to the 
fetal or maternal condition. This may be the case with 
a failed social induction, for example. Failed induction 
in the setting of pre-eclampsia or fetal growth restric￾tion will usually necessitate a caesarean delivery. 
CLINICAL RISK MANAGEMENT 
Risk management is an approach to healthcare pro￾vision that aims to limit harm occurring to patients 
and to improve the quality of care. Clinical risk 227 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 228 04/03/2024 16:07
Labour: Normal and abnormal 
management (CRM) can be applied to all areas 
of medicine, but the labour ward provides one of 
the best illustrations of its importance to modern 
healthcare. 
Labour and birth carry a serious risk of harm. 
Trauma to the mother (both physical and psycho￾logical) and infant neurological injuries are examples 
of poor outcomes following birth that can poten￾tially be avoided in many cases. Legal action is fre￾quently taken after outcomes such as these, and this 
is expensive for the NHS in litigation payments and 
is distressing for all involved. The aim of CRM is to 
improve standards of care and subsequently reduce 
the harm occurring to women and their babies. This 
in turn should reduce the number of complaints made 
against hospitals and the ÿnancial costs of litigation. 
Shoulder dystocia, for example, can result in bra￾chial plexus injury, intra-partum asphyxia and seri￾ous perineal trauma in the mother. In many cases, 
these poor outcomes following shoulder dystocia 
can be avoided by appropriate management. Regular 
staff education and the performance of shoulder 
dystocia ‘drills’ can limit adverse outcomes. In these 
drills, the manoeuvres used to safely overcome 
shoulder dystocia are rehearsed to facilitate timely 
skilled intervention in the event of a real emergency. 
The use of guidelines and protocols drawn from evi￾dence-based medicine is another tool of CRM. These 
help to reduce errors and to prevent erratic or incor￾rect decision-making. 
Medical and midwifery staff are encouraged to 
report when things ‘go wrong’. Once a ‘near-miss’ 
or an adverse outcome has occurred, careful docu￾mentation is vital if claims of negligence are to be 
defended. Good communication between the staff 
and the patient involved may help to clear up mis￾understandings and minimize the chances of a for￾mal complaint or legal action. Root-cause analysis is 
a technique that serves to examine in detail a poor 
outcome, or near-miss, so that every step of the 
patient journey is scrutinized to see if the outcome 
could have been prevented. This approach allows 
assessment of both systemic (organizational) and 
individual (doctor/midwife) contributors to errors. In 
this way, lessons are learned for the future and unit 
policies and guidelines can be adjusted accordingly. 
It is usually the case that a whole series of failings or 
errors need to occur together for an avoidable poor 
outcome to result (a cascade effect). Organizational 
systems as a whole often contribute, and one indi￾vidual is rarely solely responsible for a poor outcome. 
Audit of labour ward outcomes is an impor￾tant tool in CRM. If guidelines are not being fol￾lowed and certain standards are not being met, this 
will be detected by audit and steps will be taken to 
address the problem. A repeat audit should show 
that improvements have occurred as a result of the 
actions taken. 
KEY LEARNING POINTS 
Important elements of CRM 
˜ Focus on safety and quality of care 
˜ Clinical audit 
˜ Education and training 
˜ Clinical incident reporting 
˜ Root-cause analysis of adverse events 
˜ Systems for complaints and claims handling 
˜ Guidelines and research 
˜ Service development 
FURTHER READING 
Birthplace in England Collaborative Group (2011). 
Perinatal and maternal outcomes by planned 
place of birth for healthy women with low risk 
pregnancies in England national prospective 
cohort study. BMJ, 343: d7400. 
NICE (2021). Inducing Labour. NICE clinical guideline 
[NG207]. 
NICE (2023). Intrapartum Care. NICE guideline 
[NG235]. 
228 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 229 04/03/2024 16:07
Self-assessment 
SELF-ASSESSMENT 
For interactive SBAs and EMQs relating to this chapter, visit www.routledge.com/cw/mccarthy. 
CASE HISTORY 
Ms A is a 28-year-old woman who booked for antena￾tal care in her ÿrst pregnancy. She attended for shared 
care between her midwife and obstetrician and her preg￾nancy was uncomplicated. She was aiming for a physi￾ological approach to labour and birth. Her membranes 
ruptured spontaneously at 40 weeks and 4 days. The 
liquor was clear, the baby was active and her vital signs 
were normal. She was advised that she could wait for 
24 hours to allow spontaneous labour to establish if all 
was well. Regular contractions started after 4 hours and 
she presented to the labour ward later that night. On 
abdominal examination, she was assessed to have an 
average size fetus with one-ÿfth of the head palpable, 
conÿrming engagement. She had regular painful con￾tractions at a rate of 3–4 in 10 and was coping well. The 
cervix was soft, central, effaced and 4 cm dilated with 
the vertex 2 cm above the ischial spines. The liquor con￾tinued to be clear. She was transferred to a labour room 
in spontaneous labour. She˛was monitored with intermit￾tent auscultation of the FHR at 15-minute intervals and her 
vital signs were checked every 4 hours. The contractions 
spaced out to 2 in every 10 minutes and, 8 hours after 
admission, she was found to be 6 cm dilated. 
What is the diagnosis and what are the management 
options? 
ANSWER 
This is arrest of labour in the ÿrst stage (primary arrest), 
most likely due to inefÿcient uterine contractions. The 
membranes have ruptured spontaneously and therefore 
the next option is to commence an oxytocin infusion to 
augment labour. In this case, Ms A progressed to full 
dilatation 4 hours after commencing oxytocin and pro￾gressed to a spontaneous vaginal birth. 
229 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 231 04/03/2024 16:07
13 
O perative delivery 
DEIRDRE J MURPHY 
 
Introduction 231 Caesarean section 242 
Perineal repair 231 Clinical risk management 248 
Episiotomy 233 Further reading 248 
Assisted vaginal birth 235 Self-assessment 248 
 Learning Objectives 
• Understand the assessment and management of perineal tears. 
• Understand the assessment and management of episiotomy. 
• Understand the indications, contraindications, procedures and complications of assisted vaginal 
birth with vacuum or forceps. 
• Understand the indications, procedure, complications and consequences of caesarean section. 
• Introduce the concept of risk management in relation to operative delivery. 
INTRODUCTION 
Operative delivery encompasses caesarean sec￾tion, assisted vaginal birth by vacuum or forceps, 
episiotomy and repair of perineal tears. While most 
women aim for a spontaneous vaginal birth with an 
intact perineum, referred to as a “normal birth”, this 
outcome is achieved in barely half of all women who 
labour in high-income settings. The most common 
form of operative intervention is suturing of a perineal 
tear or episiotomy. Uncomplicated perineal tears and 
episiotomies are usually repaired by a midwife but, if 
the tear is complex, it will require repair in an operat￾ing theatre by an obstetrician. Women who encoun￾ter complications that require urgent delivery in the 
ÿrst stage of labour (for either maternal or fetal indi￾cations) will need an emergency caesarean section. 
Complications that require expedited birth in the sec￾ond stage of labour present a choice between assisted 
vaginal birth with a vacuum or forceps and delivery 
by caesarean section. A further group of women will 
have a scheduled caesarean section performed before 
the onset of labour. In all cases, operative intervention 
should be performed only when the beneÿts outweigh 
the potential risks. The needs of the mother and the 
baby should be balanced with careful consideration of 
the potential consequences in the short term and long 
term. Operative deliveries should be performed only 
by clinicians who have competency in the procedure 
or under direct supervision of an experienced trainer. 
PERINEAL REPAIR 
The ÿrst important step following the birth of a baby 
and the delivery of the placenta is to assess the woman 
carefully to identify and classify any perineal tear￾ing. A complete assessment includes both vaginal and 231 
10.1201/9781003196112-13 ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 232 04/03/2024 16:07
Operative delivery 
BOX 13.1: Classiÿ cation of perineal tears 
˜ First-degree tears are lacerations of the skin or 
vaginal epithelium only. 
˜ Second-degree tears involve perineal muscles 
and includes episiotomy. 
˜ Third-degree tears involve any part of the anal 
sphincter complex (external or internal): 
– 3a: less than 50% of the external anal 
sphincter is torn 
– 3b: more than 50% of the external anal 
sphincter is torn 
– 3c: the tear involves the internal anal 
sphincter and/or complete disruption of the 
external sphincter 
˜ Fourth-degree tears involve the anal sphincter 
complex extending into the rectal mucosa. 
rectal examination. Eighty-ÿ ve per cent of women who 
have a vaginal birth will have some degree of perineal 
trauma and 60–70% will require suturing. Perineal 
tears should be classiÿ ed as ÿ rst-, second-, third- or 
fourth-degree tears and, when in doubt, the operator 
should classify according to a higher rather than a lower 
grade (see Box 13.1, ‘Classiÿ cation of perineal tears’). 
This will ensure that the woman receives optimal care. 
Perineal massage can be performed in the ante￾natal period and this may reduce the risk or extent 
of tearing. Similarly, the use of warm compresses, 
gentle perineal support and controlled crowning 
of the fetal head may reduce trauma at the time of 
birth. Perineal tears occur more commonly with pro￾longed labour, especially prolonged pushing, with 
big babies, malposition such as occipito-posterior 
and in association with forceps or vacuum-assisted 
delivery. Third- and fourth-degree tears are grouped 
together and termed obstetric anal sphincter injuries 
(OASIs). OASIs are reported in approximately 3% of 
nulliparous and 0.5% of multiparous individuals. In 
general terms, external anal sphincter incompetence 
causes faecal urgency, whereas internal anal sphinc￾ter incompetence causes faecal incontinence. 
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE 
First-degree tears or minor lacerations with minimal or 
no bleeding may not require surgical repair and will heal 
spontaneously. Second-degree tears and episiotomies 
A B
C D
Figure 13.1 Repair of an episiotomy/second-degree 
perineal tear. (A) The perineum prior to the repair. 
(B) Continuous repair of the vaginal mucosa. 
(C) Subcutaneous suture of the skin. (D) Completed repair. 
require surgical repair. A systematic approach should 
be followed for perineal repair (Figure 13.1). An expla￾nation should be provided to the mother and verbal 
consent should be documented or, if a complex tear 
requires repair in an operating theatre, written con￾sent should be gained. Adequate analgesia should be 
provided by inÿ ltration with local anaesthetic or top￾ping up an epidural. The operator should recheck the 
extent of grazes and lacerations with a vaginal and rec￾tal examination. Sometimes, the anatomy is distorted 
and assessment is improved following positioning in 
lithotomy with effective anaesthesia. If a tear is more 
complex than initially appreciated, a more experienced 
operator may be required. 
It may be helpful to place a pad or tampon high 
in the vagina to prevent blood loss from the uterus 232 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 233 04/03/2024 16:07
 
Episiotomy 
obscuring the view. Care needs to be taken that this 
is removed at the end of the procedure. The vagi￾nal mucosa is repaired ÿrst using rapidly absorb￾able suture material on a large, round body needle. 
A knot should be tied above the apex of the cut or 
tear (as severed vessels retract slightly) and a con￾tinuous stitch should be used to close the vaginal 
mucosa. Interrupted sutures are then placed to close 
the muscle layer. Closure of the perineal skin fol￾lows with either interrupted sutures or a continuous 
subcuticular stitch, which produces more comfort￾able results. A gentle vaginal examination should 
be performed to check for any missed tears and to 
ensure that good apposition has been achieved. A 
rectal examination should be performed to conÿrm 
that the sphincter feels intact and to ensure that no 
sutures have been inadvertently placed through the 
rectal mucosa. If sutures are felt in the rectum they 
must be removed and replaced. The pad or tampon 
should be removed and a careful count of swabs, 
instruments and needles should be completed and 
documented in the records alongside the operation 
note and post-operative instructions. Analgesia 
should be prescribed. 
OBSTETRIC ANAL SPHINCTER 
INJURY REPAIR 
Repair of third- and fourth-degree tears should be 
performed or directly supervised by a trained practi￾tioner. There must be adequate analgesia. In practice, 
this means either a regional or a general anaesthetic, 
as local inÿltration does not allow relaxation of the 
sphincter enough to allow a satisfactory repair. The 
lighting must be adequate and an assistant is usually 
needed. Repair of the rectal mucosa and/or internal 
anal sphincter should be performed ÿrst. The torn 
external sphincter is then repaired. It is important 
to ensure that the muscle is correctly approximated 
with long-acting sutures so that the muscle is given 
adequate time to heal. Some surgeons opt for an end￾to-end repair, while others use an overlap technique; 
current evidence suggests that the outcome is similar 
with both methods. The remainder of the perineal 
repair is the same as for second-degree trauma. The 
surgical repair should be documented and a clinical 
incident form should be completed for risk assess￾ment purposes. 
OBSTETRIC ANAL SPHINCTER 
INJURY AFTERCARE 
Lactulose (laxative) and a bulk agent, such as ispa￾ghula husk, are recommended for 5–10 days and the 
woman should remain in hospital until she has had 
a ÿrst bowel motion. An oral broad-spectrum anti￾biotic should be prescribed for 5 to 7 days to reduce 
the risk of infection. Regular oral analgesia should 
also be prescribed. All women who have sustained 
a third- or fourth-degree tear should be offered 
follow-up in the postnatal period. A team approach 
via a specialist perineal clinic is ideal; physiotherapy 
should include augmented biofeedback, as this has 
been shown to improve continence. At 6–12 weeks, a 
full evaluation of the degree of symptoms should take 
place. This must include careful questioning regard￾ing urinary and faecal symptoms and advice in rela￾tion to future pregnancy and delivery. Asymptomatic 
women should be advised that the risk of recurrence 
in a future pregnancy is 6–8% and that vaginal birth 
is safely achievable. Symptomatic women should be 
offered investigation including endoanal ultrasound 
and manometry (see Chapter 15). Women with 
ongoing troublesome symptoms should be offered 
an elective caesarean section for future deliveries. 
EPISIOTOMY 
An episiotomy is a surgical incision of the perineum 
performed during the second stage of labour to 
enlarge the vulval outlet and assist vaginal birth. 
Although episiotomies were described in textbooks 
dating back to the mid-18th century, widespread use 
of the procedure increased during the early 20th cen￾tury. By the 1970s, rates were as high as 90% and it 
was widely believed that episiotomy was preferable 
to tearing. A number of randomized controlled tri￾als were conducted comparing restrictive versus rou￾tine use of episiotomy. The evidence was collated in 
a Cochrane systematic review, which demonstrated 
that a restrictive approach resulted in less posterior 
perineal trauma and less need for suturing with no 
difference in pain, urinary incontinence or dyspa￾reunia. A routine episiotomy was not protective of 
more severe perineal tears (OASIs). In the UK, rates 
now approximate the World Health Organization 233 
ALGrawanyOperative delivery
 234
recommendation of 10% of spontaneous vaginal 
births; however, there remains considerable interna￾tional variation (rates are 50% in the USA and 99% in 
Eastern Europe). Episiotomy is more commonly indi￾cated as part of assisted vaginal birth, particularly for 
forceps and nulliparous women.
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
An episiotomy is performed in the second stage 
of labour, usually when the perineum is being 
stretched and it is deemed necessary, for example 
when the birth needs to be expedited for a fetal 
bradycardia or pushing is prolonged due to a tight 
perineum. The issue of consent to episiotomy should 
be addressed as part of antenatal education; when 
the fetal head is crowning, it is diffi cult to obtain 
true informed consent. If epidural anaesthesia is in 
place and time allows, it should be topped up prior 
to cutting with the patient upright to get best cover￾age of the perineal area. In the absence of an effec￾tive epidural, the perineum should be infi ltrated 
with local anaesthetic.
A mediolateral episiotomy at a 60. angle to the 
midline is recommended. A midline episiotomy is 
an incision in a comparatively avascular area and 
results in less bleeding, quicker healing and less 
pain; however, there is an increased risk of exten￾sion to involve the anal sphincter (OASI). A medio￾lateral episiotomy should start at the posterior part 
of the fourchette and be angled at 60. away from 
the anal sphincter, so that any extension will avoid 
the sphincter (Figure 13.2). The episiotomy should 
be repaired in the same way as a second-degree 
tear unless there has been involvement of the anal 
sphincter complex requiring an OASI repair in 
theatre.
COMPLICATIONS
Short-term complications of perineal trauma or epi￾siotomy include pain, infection and haemorrhage. 
Long-term effects include dyspareunia, inconti￾nence of urine and incontinence of fl atus or faeces. 
The risks are highest with OASI, especially if an anal 
sphincter injury has been missed. These morbidities 
can have a profound impact on women’s health, rela￾tionships and self-esteem.
Mons pubis 
Prepuce of
clitoris
Glans of
clitoris
Frenulum of
prepuce
Hymen of
vagina
Duct of greater
vestibular gland
Vestibular fossa
(fossa navicularis)
Frenulum
Mediolateral Midline labiorum
Labium majus
(pulled aside)
Union of labia
majora
(commissura
posterior)
Figure 13.2 A right mediolateral episiotomy.
KEY LEARNING POINTS
. First- or second-degree tearing and 
uncomplicated episiotomy can be repaired under 
epidural or local anaesthesia in a labour room by 
a midwife or obstetrician.
. Assessment of the anal sphincter complex 
is essential in all cases to ensure that a 
third- or fourth-degree tear (OASI) has not 
been missed.
. Third- or fourth-degree tears require regional 
anaesthesia and are usually repaired in an 
operating theatre by an obstetrician with good 
lighting and an assistant.
. Either ‘end-to-end’ or overlap repair of the anal 
sphincter muscle with a long-acting suture 
material is acceptable.
. Aftercare is important for all women who tear, 
but women with OASI should receive antibiotics, 
(Contd.)
Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 234 04/03/2024 16:07Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 235 04/03/2024 16:07
Assisted vaginal birth 
stool softeners and follow-up specialist review 
including physiotherapy. 
˜ Women who experience signiÿcant pelvic ˛oor 
symptoms following OASI should be offered an 
elective caesarean section in a future pregnancy. 
˜ Mediolateral episiotomy should be performed 
in preference to midline, and it should be used 
restrictively. 
(Contd.) 
ASSISTED VAGINAL BIRTH 
Assisted vaginal birth (AVB) refers to a vaginal 
birth with the use of any type of forceps or vacuum 
extractor (ventouse). The terms instrumental deliv￾ery, operative vaginal delivery and AVB are used 
interchangeably. The latter is preferred, as the focus 
is on assisting the mother. The goal of AVB is to 
expedite the birth with a minimum of maternal or 
neonatal morbidity. As with other forms of intra￾partum intervention, AVB should be performed 
only when the safety criteria have been met and 
when the beneÿts outweigh the risks. The guide￾lines of the Royal College of Obstetricians and 
Gynaecologists (RCOG) advise that obstetricians 
should achieve experience in spontaneous vaginal 
birth prior to commencing training in AVBs. AVBs 
should be conducted by obstetricians with compe￾tency in the chosen procedure or by trainees under 
direct supervision of an experienced trainer. When 
these conditions are adhered to, the outcomes of 
AVB are good. 
In the UK, between 10% and 15% of deliveries are 
assisted with forceps or ventouse. The rate in nul￾liparous women is as high as 30%. The incidence of 
AVB varies widely both within and between coun￾tries and this has an impact on rates of second-stage 
caesarean section. Different strategies have been 
employed to help lower rates of AVB, including pro￾vision of one-to-one midwifery care in labour, the 
presence of a birth partner, delayed pushing in the 
second stage of labour especially with epidural anal￾gesia, the use of oxytocin to enhance expulsive con￾tractions in the second stage of labour and maternal 
repositioning to increase the effects of gravity and 
the maternal urge to push. 
HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE 
The history of AVB is fascinating. Although the use of 
birth instruments was initially limited to the extrac￾tion of dead fetuses via destructive techniques, from 
as early as 1500 BC there have been reports of success￾ful deliveries of live infants in obstructed labour. In the 
16th and 17th centuries, the male midwife appeared 
as a new health practitioner and frequently dealt with 
obstructed labour. The development of the modern 
obstetric forceps by the Chamberlens, a Huguenot 
family practising in England, dramatically changed the 
role of assisted delivery in favour of a live infant. The 
Chamberlens kept their secret for more than a century; 
however, it is thought that Peter Chamberlen the elder 
was the pioneer in the development of forceps. Hugh 
Chamberlen, his son, unsuccessfully tried to persuade 
the great French obstetrician François Mauriceau to 
adopt obstetric forceps. Hugh Chamberlen’s visit to 
Paris failed miserably when Mauriceau mischievously 
challenged him to deliver the baby of a mother in 
obstructed labour with a contracted pelvis due to rick￾ets; Chamberlen’s futile efforts had disastrous effects 
and both mother and baby succumbed. Nonetheless, 
forceps-assisted delivery became more widely 
accepted in part due to the work of William Smellie, a 
Scottish doctor working in the poorer parts of London. 
Smellie was a great teacher and described the use of 
forceps in his Treatise on the Theory and Practice of 
Midwifery, published in 1752. In 1849, the Edinburgh 
professor of obstetrics James Young Simpson, subse￾quently known for pioneering the use of chloroform in 
childbirth, designed the Air Tractor, which consisted 
of a metal syringe attached to a soft rubber cup. This 
was the earliest known vacuum extractor to assist 
childbirth. However, it did not gain widespread use 
until the 1950s, when it was popularized in a series of 
studies by Tage Malmstrom, a Swedish obstetrician. 
AVB remains controversial to this day. 
INDICATIONS 
The indications for AVB can be divided into fetal 
and maternal indications, although in many cases 
these factors coexist. The most common fetal indi￾cation is suspected fetal compromise usually based 
on cardiotocograph (CTG) abnormalities. The most 
common maternal indication is a prolonged active 235 
ALGrawanyOperative delivery
second stage of labour. The underlying aetiology 
for a prolonged second stage should be evaluated 
in terms of the 3Ps (‘powers’, ‘passages’ and ‘pas￾senger’; see Chapter 12). It may relate to ineffi cient 
uterine activity or poor maternal pushing (‘powers’), 
short maternal stature, a less favourable pelvic shape 
or a tight perineum (‘passages’), a macrosomic fetus, 
malposition or malpresentation (‘passenger’). A mis￾match between the passages and the passenger may 
result in cephalopelvic disproportion. Depending on 
the overall clinical fi ndings, it may be appropriate to 
use an oxytocin infusion, change the maternal posi￾tion and offer further encouragement, or proceed 
directly to AVB. In some cases, the fi ndings will be 
a contraindication to AVB and favour delivery by 
caesarean section. The indications are summarised 
in Table 13.1. The complexity of the procedure is 
 236
refl ected in how low the fetal head has descended 
within the pelvis (station) and whether rotation is 
required. The classifi cation system is described in 
Table 13.2.
CONTRAINDICATIONS
A careful assessment should take place to ensure 
that the safety criteria for AVB have been fulfi lled 
(Table 13.3). When the safety criteria are not met, 
AVB is contraindicated, for example a high fetal 
head two-fi fths palpable abdominally with station 
above the ischial spines. The vacuum should not be 
used in gestations of less than 34 completed weeks 
because of the risk of cephalohaematoma and intra￾cranial haemorrhage. It is relatively contraindicated 
at gestational ages of 35–36 weeks. It should not 
be used for a face or breech presentation. There is 
minimal additional risk of fetal haemorrhage if the 
vacuum extractor is employed following fetal blood 
sampling or application of a fetal scalp electrode. 
Forceps and vacuum extractor deliveries before full 
dilatation of the cervix are contraindicated.
Table 13.1 Indications for AVB
Type Indication
Fetal Suspected fetal compromise (pathological 
cardiotocograph, abnormal pH or lactate 
on fetal blood sampling, meconium)
Maternal Nulliparous women: lack of continuing 
progress for 3 hours (total of active and 
passive second stage of labour) with 
regional anaesthesia or 2 hours without 
regional anaesthesia
Multiparous women: lack of continuing 
progress for 2 hours (total of active and 
passive second stage of labour) with 
regional anaesthesia or 1 hour without 
regional anaesthesia
Maternal exhaustion/distress
Medical indications to avoid prolonged 
pushing or Valsalva (e.g. cardiac disease, 
hypertensive crisis, cerebral vascular 
disease, uncorrected cerebral vascular 
malformations, myasthenia gravis, spinal 
cord injury)
Combined Fetal and maternal indications for 
assisted vaginal birth often coexist
Source: International guidelines (Royal College of Obstetricians 
and Gynaecologists, American Congress of Obstetricians and 
Gynecologists and UK National Institute for Health and Care 
Excellence) largely agree on second stage duration. Note, no 
indication is absolute and each case should be considered 
individually.
Table 13.2 Classifi cation of AVB
Type Classifi cation
Outlet Fetal scalp visible without separating the labia
Fetal skull has reached the pelvic fl oor
Rotation does not exceed 45.
Low Leading point of the skull is at station +2 cm 
or more but not on the pelvic fl oor
Two subdivisions: (a) rotation of 45. or less 
and (b) rotation more than 45.
Mid Fetal head is no more than one-fi fth palpable 
per abdomen, usually zero fi fths
Leading point of the skull is above station 
+2 cm but not above the ischial spines 
(station 0 to +1)
Two subdivisions: (a) rotation of 45. or less 
and (b) rotation of more than 45.
High Not appropriate; therefore, not included in 
classifi cation (station –1 or above)
Source: Adapted from Royal College of Obstetricians and 
Gynaecologists (2020) and American Congress of Obstetricians 
and Gynecologists (2015).
Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 236 04/03/2024 16:07Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 237 04/03/2024 16:07
 
Assisted vaginal birth 
Table 13.3 Safety criteria for assisted vaginal birth 
Area Criteria 
Full abdominal 
and vaginal 
examination 
Head is fully engaged (zero ÿfths palpable) or no more than one-ÿfth palpable per abdomen 
Cervix is fully dilated and the membranes ruptured 
Station at level of ischial spines or below (0/+1/+2/+3) 
Exact position of the head has been determined so correct placement of the instrument can 
be˛achieved 
Caput and moulding is no more than moderate (+ or ++) 
Pelvis is deemed adequate 
Preparation of 
the mother 
Clear explanation given and informed consent obtained 
Trust has been established and the woman offers full cooperation 
Appropriate anaesthesia is in place; for mid-pelvic rotational delivery this will usually be a regional 
block; a pudendal block may be appropriate, in the context of urgency; a perineal block may be 
sufÿcient for low-pelvic or outlet delivery 
Maternal bladder has been emptied recently 
In-dwelling catheter has been removed or balloon de˜ated 
Aseptic technique 
Preparation of 
staff 
Operator has the knowledge, experience and skill necessary 
Adequate facilities are available (appropriate equipment, bed, lighting) and access to an 
operating theatre 
Back-up plan in place in case of failure to deliver. For mid-pelvic deliveries, theatre staff should be 
available immediately to allow a caesarean section to be performed without delay (<30 minutes); 
senior obstetrician should be present if a junior obstetrician is conducting the delivery 
Anticipation of complications that may arise (e.g. shoulder dystocia, post-partum haemorrhage) 
Personnel present that are trained in neonatal resuscitation 
Source: Adapted from RCOG Guidelines 2020. 
CHOICE OF INSTRUMENT 
The guidelines of the RCOG in the UK recommend 
that obstetricians should be competent and conÿdent 
in the use of both forceps and vacuum and that prac￾titioners should choose the most appropriate instru￾ment for the individual circumstances. The choice of 
instrument should be based on a combination of indi￾cation, experience and training. The aim should be 
to complete the delivery successfully with the lowest 
possible morbidity, and the preferences of the mother 
should be taken into account. Vacuum and forceps 
have been compared in a number of randomized con￾trolled trials within a Cochrane systematic review. 
The incidence of maternal pelvic °oor trauma in 
deliveries performed with the vacuum is signiÿcantly 
less than with forceps and OASI in particular is twice 
as common with forceps delivery (8% versus 3–4%). 
While long-term follow-up data are limited, one of 
the largest randomized controlled trials showed no 
difference in pelvic °oor symptoms between women 
delivered by forceps or vacuum when assessed at 
approximately 5 years after the birth. Vacuum is pre￾ferred as a ÿrst-line instrument by many obstetri￾cians in terms of reduced maternal trauma, but this 
needs to be balanced with a failure rate of 10–20% 
compared with a failure rate with forceps of 5% or 
less for similar deliveries. The morbidities for the 
baby differ, with a higher incidence of cephalohae￾matoma and cerebral haemorrhage with vacuum 
and a higher incidence of lacerations and facial palsy 
with forceps. 
237 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 238 04/03/2024 16:07
 
Operative delivery 
Vacuum (compared with forceps) is signiÿcantly 
more likely to be associated with: 
• failure to achieve a vaginal birth 
• cephalohaematoma (subperiosteal bleed) 
• retinal haemorrhage 
• maternal worries about the baby 
Vacuum (compared with forceps) is signiÿcantly less 
likely to be associated with: 
• the use of maternal regional/general anaesthesia 
• signiÿcant maternal perineal and vaginal trauma 
• severe perineal pain at 24 hours 
Vacuum and forceps are similar in terms of: 
• delivery by caesarean section (where failed 
vacuum is completed by forceps) 
• low 5-minute Apgar scores 
PLACE OF DELIVERY/RISK OF 
FAILURE 
AVBs in the mid-pelvis (station 0/+1) are more dif￾ÿcult either because there is a malposition and 
rotation is required or because there is relative 
cephalopelvic disproportion (see Table 13.2). These 
deliveries require a higher degree of skill and there 
is a higher risk of failure. The alternative is to deliver 
by caesarean section, which can also be very chal￾lenging with the head deep in the pelvis, resulting 
in fetal impaction where the head is wedged and dif￾ÿcult to elevate into the abdominal wound. The saf￾est approach for mid-pelvic or rotational AVB is to 
perform these deliveries in an operating theatre with 
timely recourse to caesarean section if required. 
There have been no randomized controlled trials 
comparing AVB with second-stage caesarean sec￾tion and the decision relies on clinical judgement. 
A prospective cohort study in the UK reported that 
women who were delivered by caesarean section in 
the second stage of labour were more likely to have a 
major haemorrhage and prolonged hospital stay than 
women delivered by AVB, whereas babies delivered 
by caesarean section were less likely to have trauma 
but were more likely to require admission to the 
neonatal unit than those delivered by AVB. What 
was striking was the outcome of subsequent births, 
with almost 70% of women who had a second-stage 
caesarean section going on to have a repeat caesar￾ean section in the next birth, compared with only 
10% of women whose ÿrst birth was successful AVB. 
It is therefore usual to aim for AVB in the second 
stage of labour rather than caesarean section, unless 
there are contraindications or the woman expresses 
a clear preference for caesarean section. It is essen￾tial that skilled obstetricians are present to supervise 
complex operative deliveries performed by trainees, 
whatever the time of day or night. 
PROCEDURE 
The anatomy of the birth canal and its relationship 
to the fetal head must be understood as a prerequi￾site to becoming skilled in the safe use of forceps or 
vacuum (see Chapter 12). 
ASSESSMENT 
A thorough abdominal and vaginal examination 
should take place to conÿrm the fetal lie, presenta￾tion, engagement, station, position, attitude and 
degree of caput or moulding. This will conÿrm 
whether the basic safety criteria for AVB have been 
met. A pelvic examination will determine whether 
there are any ‘mechanical’ contraindications to per￾forming an AVB. If, for example, a contracted pelvis 
is the cause of failure to progress in the second stage, 
then consideration should be given to the choice of 
instrument or whether it may be more prudent to per￾form a caesarean section. The angle of the subpubic 
arch, the curve of the sacral hollow and the presence 
of °at or prominent ischial spines all contribute to the 
decision of whether an AVB may be safely performed. 
Anthropoid (narrow), android (male/funnel-shaped) 
or platypelloid (elliptical) pelvises all make instru￾mental deliveries more difÿcult and may preclude the 
use of rotational forceps. Assessment during a trial 
push is very helpful in determining whether descent 
occurs, and it may also be possible to attempt manual 
rotation of a fetal malposition at this point. 
ANALGESIA 
Analgesic requirements are greater for forceps than 
for vacuum-assisted births. When rotational forceps 
or mid-pelvic direct traction forceps are needed, 238 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 239 04/03/2024 16:07
Assisted vaginal birth 
regional analgesia is preferred. For a rigid cup vac￾uum-assisted delivery, a pudendal block with peri￾neal inÿltration may be all that is needed and, if a 
soft cup is used, analgesic requirements may be lim￾ited to perineal inÿltration with local anaesthetic. 
POSITIONING 
AVBs are traditionally performed with the patient in 
the lithotomy position. The angle of traction needed 
requires that the bottom part of the bed be removed. 
In patients with limited abduction (such as those with 
symphysis pubis dysfunction), it may be necessary to 
limit abduction of the thighs to a minimum. The blad￾der should be emptied with a catheter to avoid injury. 
CONTINGENCY PLANNING 
With any AVB, there is the potential for failure with 
the chosen instrument and the operator must have 
a back-up plan for such an event. It may be possi￾ble to complete a failed vacuum-assisted birth with 
low-pelvic forceps, but failed or abandoned forceps 
delivery will almost always result in caesarean sec￾tion. With any difÿcult AVB, the risk of shoulder dys￾tocia after successful delivery of the fetal head should 
be considered, as should the potential for post-partum 
haemorrhage. The operator must develop the skills 
necessary to anticipate such events and to manage 
the consequences in a logical and calm manner. If the 
AVB is being performed for suspected fetal compro￾mise, then the need for neonatal resuscitation should 
be anticipated and a neonatologist should have been 
called to attend. 
INSTRUMENT TYPES 
VENTOUSE/VACUUM EXTRACTORS 
The basic premise of vacuum extraction is that a suc￾tion cup, of a silastic or rigid construction, is con￾nected, via tubing, to a vacuum source (Figure 13.3). 
Either directly through the tubing or via a connect￾ing ‘chain’, direct traction can then be applied to the 
A B
C
Figure 13.3 Ventouse/vacuum extractor cups. 
(A) Metal ventouse cup. (B) Silicone rubber cup. 
(C) OmniCup™. 239 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 240 04/03/2024 16:07
 
 
Operative delivery 
presenting part coordinated with maternal push￾ing to expedite birth. Recent developments have 
removed the need for cumbersome external suction 
generators and have incorporated the vacuum mech￾anism into ‘hand-held’ pumps (e.g. OmniCup™). 
Initial clinical trials suggested that the failure rate is 
higher with hand-held disposable devices, but this 
may have related to the learning curve of adapting to 
new instruments. More recent large case series have 
reported success rates similar to that of standard 
vacuum devices. 
Technique 
Soft vacuum cups are signiÿcantly more likely to fail 
to achieve vaginal delivery than rigid cups; how￾ever, they are associated with less scalp injury. There 
appears to be no difference in terms of maternal 
trauma. The soft cups are appropriate for uncompli￾cated deliveries with an occipito-anterior position; 
metal or rigid cups appear to be more suitable for 
occipito-posterior, transverse and potentially difÿ￾cult occipito-anterior position deliveries in which the 
infant is larger or there is more caput. 
For successful use of the vacuum, determination 
of the °exion point is vital. This is located at the ver￾tex, which, in an average term infant, is on the sagit￾tal suture 3 cm anterior to the posterior fontanelle 
and thus 6 cm posterior to the anterior fontanelle. 
The centre of the cup should be positioned directly 
over this, as failure to do so will lead to progressive 
de°exion of the fetal head during traction and an 
inability to deliver the baby safely. 
The operating vacuum pressure for nearly all 
types of device is between 0.6 and 0.8 kg/cm2. It is 
prudent to increase the suction to 0.2 kg/cm2 ÿ rst 
and then to recheck that no maternal tissue is caught 
under the cup edge. When this is conÿrmed, the suc￾tion can then be increased. 
Traction must occur in the plane of least resis￾tance along the axis of the pelvis – the traction plane 
(Figure 13.4). This will usually be at exactly 90º to the 
cup and the operator should keep a thumb and fore￾ÿnger on the cup and fetal scalp to ensure that the 
traction direction is correct and to feel for slippage. 
Safe and gentle traction is then applied coordinated 
with uterine contractions and voluntary maternal 
expulsive efforts. There is a descent phase, bring￾ing the head onto the perineum, which is usually 
Figure 13.4 Kielland rotational forceps (left) and Simpson 
non-rotational forceps (right). 
achieved in at most three pulls. The crowning phase 
should occur shortly afterwards and, depending on 
the resistance of the perineum, may occur with one 
further pull or some operators prefer to use up to 
three very small pulls to minimize perineal trauma. 
With any vacuum, the operator should allow no more 
than two episodes of breaking the suction ‘pop-offs’ 
in a vacuum-assisted birth, and the maximum time 
from application to delivery should ideally be less 
than 15 minutes. Rotation is achieved by the natural 
progression of the head through the pelvis. 
It is not acceptable to use a vacuum when the posi￾tion of the fetal head is unknown, there is a signiÿ￾cant degree of caput that may either preclude correct 
placement of the cup or, more sinisterly, indicate a 
substantial degree of cephalopelvic disproportion, or 
the operator is inexperienced in the use of the instru￾ment. For a demonstration video, please see https:// 
www.youtube.com/watch?v=OMFa0gtpBQc. 
FORCEPS 
Types of forceps 
The basic forceps design has not changed radically 
over many years and all types in use today consist of 
two blades with shanks, joined together at a lock, with 
handles to provide a point for traction. The speciÿc 
details of construction vary between instruments. 
Non-rotational forceps are used when the head is 
occipito-anterior with no more than 45º deviation to 
the left or right. Examples such as Neville Barnes or 
Simpson forceps (see Figure 13.4) have a pelvic curve 240 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 241 04/03/2024 16:07
 
Assisted vaginal birth 
and a non-sliding lock. If the head is positioned more 
than 45º from the vertical, rotation must be accom￾plished before traction. Forceps designed for rotation, 
such as Kielland forceps, have minimal pelvic curve 
to allow rotation around a ÿxed axis; the sliding lock 
of the Kielland forceps (see Figure 13.4) facilitates 
correction of asynclitism (lateral tilt). 
TECHNIQUE 
For forceps, all of the usual prerequisites for safe 
AVB apply, but, in addition, it is essential that the 
operator checks the pair of forceps to ensure that a 
matching pair has been provided and that the blades 
lock with ease (both before and after application). 
By convention, the left blade is inserted before the 
right with the operator’s hand protecting the vaginal 
wall from the blades. With proper placement of the 
forceps blades, they come to lie parallel to the axis 
of the fetal head and between the fetal head and the 
pelvic wall. The operator then articulates and locks 
the blades, checking their application before apply￾ing traction (Figure 13.5). 
Traction should be applied intermittently, coordi￾nated with uterine contractions and maternal expul￾sive efforts. The axis of traction changes during the 
delivery and is guided along the J-shaped curve of 
the pelvis. As the head begins to crown, the blades 
Figure 13.5 Application of forceps. 
are directed to the vertical and the head is deliv￾ered. Forceps-assisted births should be completed 
in no more than three pulls. Speciÿc techniques are 
required for rotational forceps deliveries and only 
those who have been properly trained in their use 
should employ them. Rotation occurs between con￾tractions and the descent phase is similar to non￾rotational forceps. 
The role of episiotomy at vacuum and forceps 
delivery is controversial, with con°icting studies 
reported. A randomized controlled trial reported 
that a routine approach to episiotomy was neither 
protective nor associated with an increased risk of 
OASI, but the sample size was insufÿcient to draw 
deÿnitive conclusions. In practice, most obstetri￾cians cut an episiotomy routinely for forceps-assisted 
delivery especially in nulliparous births where anal 
sphincter damage is more likely. In parous women, 
particularly those requiring vacuum-assisted birth, 
an episiotomy may not be necessary. For a demon￾stration video, please see https://pie.med.utoronto. 
ca/TVASurg/project/routine-forceps-delivery/. 
SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS 
FAILURE OF THE CHOSEN 
INSTRUMENT 
Failure to complete delivery vaginally can occur 
when the choice of instrument is wrong (e.g. silas￾tic vacuum where there is marked caput), when the 
application of the instrument is wrong (e.g. vacuum 
cup application over the anterior fontanelle) or when 
the position has been wrongly deÿned (most com￾monly occipito-posterior/occipito-anterior errors), 
leading to inappropriately large diameters present￾ing to the pelvis. Failure is also more common if the 
fetus is large or maternal effort is poor. 
There have been no randomized studies assessing 
the best approach to take following failure to deliver 
with the ÿrst choice of instrument. Observational 
studies show that outcomes for babies are worse 
with multiple or sequential use of instruments than 
if the instrument of ÿrst choice is successful. In addi￾tion, the rates of third- and fourth-degree tears are 
higher when a second instrument is used. The opera￾tor must choose the approach most likely to result in 
timely delivery with the least morbidity. 241 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 242 04/03/2024 16:07
 
 
 
Operative delivery 
When the ÿrst instrument fails, a number of 
scenarios may apply. If the reason for failure was 
cup detachment of a vacuum and the fetal head is 
occipito-anterior and on the perineum, low-pelvic or 
lift-out forceps to complete delivery is acceptable and 
likely to be less traumatic than a second-stage cae￾sarean section. If the instrument failed because there 
was little or no descent with the ÿrst pull of a cor￾rectly applied instrument with traction in the correct 
axis of the pelvis, then delivery must be by caesar￾ean section, as the likely diagnosis is cephalopel￾vic disproportion. If the instrument failed because 
the position was incorrectly deÿned, then the next 
option will be either a rotational instrumental deliv￾ery or a caesarean section. If there is any uncertainty, 
senior help should be sought immediately and a full 
re-evaluation should take place, ideally in an oper￾ating theatre. In many cases, delivery by caesarean 
section will be the safer option for the fetus. 
COMPLICATIONS 
The risk of fetal trauma in relation to forceps-assisted 
birth, particularly rotational procedures, has been long 
established. There is now a growing recognition that 
vacuum-assisted birth can also be associated with sig￾niÿcant morbidity. In addition, there has been a grow￾ing recognition of the short- and long-term morbidity 
of maternal pelvic °oor injury following AVB. This can 
result in incontinence (urinary or faecal) or pelvic °oor 
prolapse. It is not surprising, therefore, that there has 
been an increase in litigation relating to vacuum and 
forceps-assisted births. If we are to offer women the 
option of safe AVBs, we need to improve our approach 
to clinical care. The goal should be to minimize the 
risk of morbidity and, where morbidity occurs, to opti￾mize early recognition and aftercare. It is also impor￾tant to remember that caesarean section, particularly 
in the second stage of labour, carries signiÿcant mor￾bidity and implications for future births. 
AVBs with both vacuum and forceps can be asso￾ciated with signiÿcant maternal and fetal complica￾tions. Traumatic vaginal birth is considered to be the 
most important risk factor for faecal incontinence 
in women and may occur not only after recognized 
third-degree perineal tears, but also as a conse￾quence of unrecognized anal sphincter injury. Post￾partum haemorrhage is more common in women 
needing AVB than in women who deliver spontane￾ously, but is less common than in women delivered 
by caesarean section in the second stage. Measures 
to limit this include early recognition of abnormal 
bleeding and the use of an oxytocin infusion post￾delivery, prompt suturing and careful identiÿcation 
of high vaginal wall tears. 
Fetal complications are no less important; the 
incidence of cephalohaematoma is increased with 
the use of the vacuum and there are rare reports of 
life-threatening intracranial injuries such as subga￾leal haemorrhage. Forceps-assisted injuries include 
facial palsy, intra- or extra-cranial haemorrhage and 
skull fracture. Risks of trauma to the baby correlate 
with the duration of the procedure, the station of the 
fetal head at the commencement of the procedure, 
the need for rotation and the condition of the fetus 
immediately prior to attempted AVB. It is impor￾tant to remember that the risks of traumatic injury 
increase signiÿcantly among babies who are exposed 
to multiple attempts at both vacuum and forceps￾assisted delivery and this should be avoided by care￾ful case selection and contingency planning. 
KEY LEARNING POINTS 
˜ AVB should be classiÿed according to the 
position and station of the presenting part. 
˜ Clinical assessment and conÿrmation that the 
safety criteria have been met are essential prior 
to AVB. 
˜ Vacuum or forceps may be suitable depending 
on the clinical circumstances and operator’s 
preference. 
˜ AVBs with a higher chance of failure should be 
conducted in an operating theatre. 
˜ Contingency planning is an essential part of any 
AVB. 
˜ Anticipation and early management of maternal 
and neonatal complications is essential. 
CAESAREAN SECTION 
A caesarean section is a surgical procedure in which 
incisions are made through the abdomen (lapa￾rotomy) and uterus (hysterotomy) to deliver one or 242 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 243 04/03/2024 16:07
Caesarean section 
more babies. In the UK and other high-income coun￾tries, between 25% and 35% of all babies are now 
delivered by caesarean section. The principal aims 
should be to ensure that women who need delivery 
by caesarean section receive it and that those who 
do not avoid unnecessary intervention. In 1985, con￾cern regarding the increasing frequency of caesarean 
section led the World Health Organization to hold 
a consensus conference. This conference concluded 
that there were no health beneÿts above a caesarean 
section rate of 10–15%. More recently it has been 
suggested that there is maternal and neonatal ben￾eÿt with caesarean section rates up to 19%. Despite 
this, rates of caesarean section continue to increase 
year on year with marked variation both nationally 
and internationally. 
HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE 
There are three theories about the origin of the 
name caesarean. It is said to derive from a Roman 
legal code called Lex Caesarea, which allegedly con￾tained a law prescribing that the baby be cut out of 
its mother’s womb if she died before giving birth. 
The derivation of the name is also attributed to an 
ancient story, told in the ÿrst century AD by Pliny 
the Elder, who claimed that an ancestor of Caesar 
was delivered in this way. An alternative etymology 
suggests that the procedure’s name derives from the 
Latin verb caedere, to cut. Caesar’s mother, Aurelia, 
lived through childbirth and successfully gave birth 
to her son, ruling out the possibility that the Roman 
dictator and general was born by caesarean section. 
However, the Catalan saint, Raymond Nonnatus 
(1204–1240), received his surname (from the Latin 
non natus, not born) because he was born by caesar￾ean section; his mother died while giving birth to 
him. The ÿrst recorded incidence of a woman surviv￾ing a caesarean section was in 1500 in Switzerland: 
Jakob Nufer, a pig gelder, is supposed to have per￾formed the operation on his wife after a prolonged 
labour. From the 16th century onwards, the proce￾dure had a high mortality and was performed only 
when the mother was already dead or considered 
to be beyond help. In Great Britain and Ireland, the 
mortality rate in 1865 was 85%. On 5˛March 2000, 
Inés Ramírez performed a caesarean section on her￾self and survived, as did her son. She˛is believed to 
be the only woman to have performed a successful 
caesarean section on herself. 
Key steps in reducing mortality at caesarean sec￾tion were: 
• adherence to principles of asepsis 
• introduction of uterine suturing by Max Sänger 
in 1882 
• extraperitoneal caesarean section and then 
moving to low transverse incision 
• anaesthetic advances 
• blood transfusion 
• antibiotic prophylaxis and treatment 
CLASSIFICATION 
Traditionally, caesarean sections have been clas￾siÿed as elective or emergency. Elective caesarean 
sections are usually booked days or weeks ahead 
of time and are conducted during daytime hours. 
There is sometimes confusion between elective 
caesarean section and emergency caesarean section 
prior to labour. This can be overcome by using the 
term scheduled caesarean section for procedures 
that are planned ahead of time. All other caesarean 
sections can be classiÿed as emergency, irrespec￾tive of whether the woman was in labour or not. 
The degree of urgency should be described clearly 
using a standard classiÿcation to ensure that there 
is effective communication between the members 
of the multidisciplinary team, particularly the the￾atre staff, anaesthetist and obstetrician. 
INDICATIONS 
There are many different reasons for perform￾ing a delivery by caesarean section. The four major 
BOX 13.2: Classiÿcation system for 
emergency caesarean section 
˜ Category 1: immediate threat to the life of the 
woman or the fetus 
˜ Category 2: maternal or fetal compromise that is 
not immediately life threatening 
˜ Category 3: requires early delivery 
˜ Category 4: at a time to suit the woman and 
maternity services 
243 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 244 04/03/2024 16:07
 
Operative delivery 
indications accounting for greater than 70% of oper￾ations are:
 1. previous caesarean section 
2. malpresentation (mainly breech)
 3. failure to progress in labour
 4. suspected fetal compromise in labour 
Other indications, such as multiple pregnancy, 
placental abruption, placenta praevia, fetal disease 
and maternal disease are less common. No list can 
be truly comprehensive and, whatever the indica￾tion, the overriding principle is that whenever the 
risk to the mother and/or the fetus from vaginal birth 
exceeds that from abdominal delivery, a caesarean 
section should be undertaken. Absolute indications 
for recommending delivery by caesarean section are 
few, almost all indications are relative and there will 
be circumstances in which caesarean section may be 
best for one woman but not for another. Maternal 
requests for caesarean section need to be differenti￾ated, namely women who request caesarean section 
because of a previous traumatic birth experience 
(e.g. emergency caesarean section, difÿcult AVB or 
third-degree tear) and women who request caesar￾ean section because they wish to avoid labour and 
vaginal birth. There is also increasing recognition of 
a condition termed tokophobia, which describes an 
irrational fear of childbirth that can be very incapac￾itating for the woman. Legally, a lack of consent in 
a woman with the capacity to give consent will pro￾hibit caesarean section regardless of the perceived 
clinical need. 
PROCEDURE 
INFORMED CONSENT 
Informed consent must always be obtained prior 
to surgery and, ideally, the possibility of caesar￾ean section and the potential indications will have 
been discussed as part of antenatal education. The 
level of information provided in the acute set￾ting must be commensurate with the urgency of 
the procedure, and a common-sense approach is 
needed. Although it is difÿcult to impart complete 
and thorough information when caesarean sections 
are performed as urgent procedures, women must 
understand what is being planned and why. It is 
important to remember that no other adult may give 
consent for another (although it is good practice to 
keep the birth partner fully informed). When there 
is incapacity to consent (as may occur with condi￾tions such as eclampsia), the doctor is expected to 
act in the woman’s best interests. The national con￾sent forms require both the beneÿts and the risks 
to be discussed with patients and recorded on the 
consent form. 
PREPARATION 
Most scheduled caesarean sections are performed 
under spinal anaesthesia with the mother awake 
and the partner present. If an epidural has been 
sited during labour, there is usually sufÿcient time 
to top-up the anaesthesia in preparation for emer￾gency caesarean section. General anaesthesia is 
occasionally required when regional anaesthe￾sia is contraindicated or ineffective or when gen￾eral anaesthesia is indicated due to the degree of 
urgency. The bladder should be emptied before 
the procedure commences and a urinary catheter 
is usually left in situ. A left lateral tilt minimizes 
aorto-caval compression and reduces the incidence 
of hypotension (and diminished placental perfu￾sion). The anaesthetic block is conÿrmed and the 
abdomen is cleaned and draped. Prophylactic anti￾biotics should be administered intravenously prior 
to the surgical incision. 
ABDOMINAL INCISION 
The skin and subcutaneous tissues are incised using 
either (1) a transverse curvilinear incision two ÿn￾gerbreadths above the symphysis pubis extending 
from and to points lateral to the lateral margins of 
the abdominal rectus muscles (pfannenstiel incision) 
or (2) a transverse suprapubic incision with no curve. 
Subcutaneous tissues are separated by blunt dissec￾tion, and the rectus sheath is incised transversely 
along the middle 2 cm. This incision is then extended 
with scissors before the fascial sheath is separated 
from the underlying muscle by further blunt dis￾section. Separation is performed cephalad to permit 
adequate exposure of the peritoneum in a longitu￾dinal plane. The recti are separated, the peritoneum 
is incised and the abdominal cavity is entered. The 244 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 245 04/03/2024 16:07
 
Caesarean section 
transverse suprapubic incision has the advantages 
of improved cosmetic results, decreased analgesic 
requirements and superior wound strength. 
A vertical skin incision is indicated in cases of 
extreme maternal obesity, when there is suspicion 
of other intra-abdominal pathology necessitating 
surgical intervention or when access to the uterine 
fundus may be required (classical caesarean section). 
The lower midline incision is made from the lower 
border of the umbilicus to the symphysis pubis and 
may be extended caudally towards the xiphisternum. 
Sharp dissection to the anterior rectus sheath is per￾formed and is then freed of subcutaneous fat. The 
rectus sheath is then incised, taking care to avoid 
damage to any underlying bowel, and extended infe￾riorly to the vesical peritoneal re°ection and supe￾riorly to the upper limit of the abdominal incision. 
The vertical incision provides greater ease of access 
to the pelvic and intra-abdominal organs and may 
be enlarged more easily; however, the incidence of 
wound dehiscence is increased. 
UTERINE INCISION 
A lower uterine segment transverse incision is used 
in over 95% of caesarean deliveries due to ease of 
repair, reduced blood loss and low incidence of 
dehiscence or rupture in subsequent pregnancies 
(Figure 13.6). The loose re°ection of vesico-uterine 
serosa overlying the uterus is incised and divided 
laterally, the underlying lower uterine segment is 
re°ected with blunt dissection, the developed blad￾der °ap is retracted and the lower uterine segment is 
opened in a transverse plane for a distance of 1–2 cm; 
the incision is extended laterally to allow delivery of 
the fetus without extension into the broad ligament 
or uterine vessels. There are relatively few absolute 
A B
Figure 13.6 Uterine incisions for caesarean section. 
(A) Transverse lower segment incision. (B) Classical 
caesarean section incision. 
indications for classical caesarean section (which 
incorporates the upper uterine segment in a verti￾cal incision; see Figure 13.6). These include a lower 
uterine segment obscured by ÿbroids or a lower seg￾ment covered with dense adhesions, both of which 
may make entry difÿcult. Other indications include 
placenta praevia, transverse lie with the back down, 
fetal abnormality (e.g. conjoined twins) or caesarean 
section in the presence of a carcinoma of the cervix 
(so as to avoid damage to the cervix and its vascular 
and lymphatic supply). 
Once the uterus is incised, the membranes are 
ruptured if still intact and the operator’s hand is posi￾tioned below the presenting part. If cephalic, the head 
is °exed and delivered by elevation though the uter￾ine incision either manually or with forceps. Fundal 
pressure is applied by the assistant to aid delivery; 
this should not commence until the presenting part is 
located within the incision for fear of converting the 
lie from longitudinal to transverse. Once the fetus is 
delivered, an oxytocic agent (5 IU Syntocinon™ intra￾venously) is administered to aid uterine contraction 
and placental separation. The placenta is delivered by 
controlled cord traction; manual removal signiÿcantly 
increases the intraoperative blood loss and post-oper￾ative infectious morbidity. 
CLOSURE 
Closure of the uterus should be performed in either 
single or double layers with continuous or interrupted 
sutures. The initial suture should be placed just lat￾eral to the incision angle and the closure should be 
continued to a point just lateral to the angle on the 
opposite side. A running stitch is often used and this 
may be locked to improve haemostasis. A second 
layer is commonly used as a means to improve hae￾mostasis and with the aim to improve the integrity 
of the scar. Once repaired, the incision is assessed for 
haemostasis and additional ‘ÿgure-of-eight’ sutures 
can be used to control any bleeding points. Peritoneal 
closure is not routine and depends on the operator’s 
preference. Abdominal closure is performed in the 
anatomical planes with high-strength low-reactivity 
materials, such as polyglycolic acid or polyglactin. 
The skin can be closed with either absorbable or 
non-absorbable suture material or with clips, again 
depending on operator preference. 245 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 246 04/03/2024 16:07
 
Operative delivery 
COMPLICATIONS 
Although caesarean section is relatively safe, the 
woman needs to be counselled about potential com￾plications. Common complications include haem￾orrhage, infection of the wound, urinary tract or 
endometrium, and for the baby include transient 
tachypnea of the newborn. Conÿdential Enquiries 
into Maternal Deaths have enabled the risks associ￾ated with different methods of delivery to be anal￾ysed; the case fatality rate for all caesarean sections 
is ÿve times that for vaginal birth, although for elec￾tive caesarean section the difference does not reach 
statistical signiÿcance. Some maternal deaths fol￾lowing caesarean section are not attributable to the 
procedure itself, but rather to medical or obstetric 
disorders that lead to the decision to deliver using 
this approach. 
INTRAOPERATIVE COMPLICATIONS 
Haemorrhage 
Haemorrhage may be a consequence of damage to the 
uterine vessels or may be incidental as a consequence 
of uterine atony or placenta praevia. In patients with 
an anticipated high risk of haemorrhage (e.g. known 
cases of placenta praevia), blood should be routinely 
cross-matched. There are many manoeuvres to man￾age haemorrhage; these range from oxytocin infu￾sion, administration of prostaglandins, bimanual 
compression and conservative surgical procedures 
(such as uterine compression sutures) to the more 
radical, but life-saving, hysterectomy. 
Caesarean hysterectomy 
The most common indication for caesarean hyster￾ectomy is uncontrollable maternal haemorrhage; 
life-threatening haemorrhage requiring immediate 
treatment occurs in approximately 1 in 1,000 deliv￾eries. The most important risk factor for emergency 
peri-partum hysterectomy is a previous caesarean 
section – especially when the placenta overlies the 
old scar, increasing the risks of placenta accreta (see 
Chapter 14). Other indications for hysterectomy 
are atony, uterine rupture, extension of a transverse 
uterine incision and ÿbroids preventing uterine clo￾sure and haemostasis. This operation, while a major 
undertaking, should not be left too late, as the risk 
of operative complications, maternal morbidity and 
mortality increase with increasing haemorrhage. 
Placenta praevia 
The proportion of patients with a placenta praevia 
increases almost linearly after each previous caesar￾ean section and, as the risks of such a complication 
increase with increasing parity, future reproductive 
intentions are very relevant to any individual deci￾sion for operative delivery. 
Organ damage 
Bowel damage may occur during a repeat procedure 
or if adhesions are present from previous surgery. 
The risk of bladder injury is increased after pro￾longed labours when the bladder is displaced cau￾dally, after previous caesarean section when scarring 
obliterates the vesico-uterine space or when a verti￾cal extension to the uterine incision has occurred. If 
damage is suspected, then transurethral instillation 
of methylene blue-coloured saline will help to delin￾eate the defect. When such an injury is observed, 
repair with an absorbable suture as a single continu￾ous or interrupted layer is appropriate. The urinary 
catheter should remain in situ for 7–10 days. Damage 
to the ureters is uncommon, as re°ection of the blad￾der displaces them rostrally. 
POST-OPERATIVE COMPLICATIONS 
Infection 
Women undergoing caesarean section have a 5–20-
fold greater risk of an infectious complication than 
those undergoing a vaginal birth. Complications 
include fever, wound infection, endometritis, bacte￾raemia and urinary tract infection. Other common 
causes of post-operative fever include haematoma, 
atelectasis and deep vein thrombosis. Labour, its 
duration and the presence of ruptured membranes 
appear to be the most important risk factors, with 
obesity playing a particularly important role in the 
occurrence of wound infections. The most impor￾tant source of microorganisms responsible for 
post-caesarean section infection is the genital tract, 
particularly if the membranes are ruptured preop￾eratively. Even in the presence of intact membranes, 
246 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 247 04/03/2024 16:07
 
 
Caesarean section 
microbial invasion of the intrauterine cavity is com￾mon, especially with preterm labour. Infections are 
commonly polymicrobial and pathogens isolated 
from infected wounds and the endometrium include 
Escherichia coli, other aerobic Gram-negative rods 
and Group B Streptococcus. General principles for 
the prevention of any surgical infection include skin 
antisepsis, prophylactic antibiotics and good surgi￾cal technique. 
Venous thromboembolism 
Deaths from pulmonary embolism remain an impor￾tant direct cause of maternal death, and caesarean 
section is a major risk factor. The signs and symp￾toms of pulmonary emboli and deep vein thrombo￾sis are detailed in Chapter 6. The incidence of such 
complications can be reduced by adequate hydration, 
early mobilization and administration of prophylac￾tic heparin. Early recognition and prompt initiation 
of treatment will reduce the consequences of venous 
thromboembolism. 
Psychological 
All difÿcult births carry increased maternal physical 
and psychological morbidity. The psychological well￾being of women delivered by emergency caesarean 
section may be compromised by delayed contact 
with the baby – a factor that should be minimized 
wherever possible. The obstetrician who performed 
the surgery should review the woman prior to hos￾pital discharge to discuss the indication for opera￾tive delivery, the potential for complications and the 
implications for the future, as well as to answer any 
questions the woman or her partner may have. 
SUBSEQUENT BIRTH FOLLOWING 
CAESAREAN SECTION 
In many units, caesarean section rates for primigravi￾dae are 20–30%. Consequently, the problem of man￾aging a woman with a previous caesarean section 
in a subsequent pregnancy is common. It is a vital 
part of antenatal care that women are given a clear 
understanding of the options for management from 
early on in their pregnancy, with the caveat that this 
may need to be adapted if pregnancy complications 
occur. The management in pregnancy following a 
caesarean section should be to review the previous 
delivery records, discuss the available options and 
select the appropriate choice through a shared deci￾sion-making process with the woman. The dictum 
popularized in the USA ‘once a caesarean, always a 
caesarean’ is misleading; up to 70% of women with 
a previous caesarean section who labour achieve a 
vaginal birth. It is important, however, to discuss the 
risks and beneÿts of elective repeat caesarean section 
(ERCS) compared with attempted vaginal birth after 
caesarean section (VBAC). 
From a maternal perspective, ERCS avoids 
labour with its risk of pelvic °oor trauma (urinary 
and faecal problems), the need to undergo emer￾gency caesarean section, and scar dehiscence or 
rupture with subsequent morbidity and mortality. 
However, ERCS carries maternal risks: increased 
bleeding, febrile morbidity, prolonged recovery, 
thromboembolism, long-term bladder dysfunction 
and increased risks of placenta praevia/accreta in 
future pregnancies. From a fetal perspective, an 
ERCS reduces the risks associated with scar rup￾ture, but increases the risk of transient tachypnoea 
or respiratory distress syndrome. There is limited 
robust evidence to inform decision-making, as most 
data relate to observational studies. 
The risk of scar rupture is probably the most 
important clinical consideration when determining 
whether delivery should be by ERCS or by attempted 
VBAC. Most published studies do not differenti￾ate between scar dehiscence and rupture; however, 
analysis of observational and comparative stud￾ies indicates that the excess risk of uterine rupture 
following attempted VBAC compared with women 
undergoing ERCS is between 0.5% and 1%. 
Providing that the ÿrst operation was carried out 
for a non-recurrent indication and that the obstetric 
situation close to term in the subsequent pregnancy 
is favourable, then it is appropriate to offer a trial of 
labour after caesarean section to any woman with a 
single uncomplicated lower segment caesarean sec￾tion and no other adverse obstetric feature. The pre￾dominant factors to consider when determining the 
preferred mode of delivery include the preferences of 
the mother, the risks of a repeat operation, the risks 
of labour to the baby and the risk of labour to the 
integrity of the uterine scar. 
247 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 248 04/03/2024 16:07
 
Operative delivery 
KEY LEARNING POINTS 
˜ Caesarean section should be recommended 
when the beneÿts outweigh the risks. 
˜ Informed written consent is required. 
˜ Lower uterine segment caesarean section under 
regional anaesthesia is optimal. 
˜ Common maternal complications include 
haemorrhage, infection and pain. 
˜ Common neonatal complications include 
transient respiratory morbidity. 
˜ The risks and beneÿts of ERCS versus VBAC 
require counselling on an ongoing basis. 
˜ Up to 70% of women who labour following a 
single caesarean section achieve a VBAC. 
˜ All adverse outcomes of attempted AVB and 
caesarean section require a clinical incident form 
and review. 
CLINICAL RISK MANAGEMENT 
Operative delivery, whether by vacuum, forceps 
or caesarean section, has never been free from 
controversy and is not without risks. Litigation is 
more likely to occur following perinatal death, 
cerebral palsy, brachial plexus injury and maternal 
pelvic °oor damage. Common allegations against 
practitioners include inadequate indication for an 
operative delivery, inadequate supervision of less 
experienced operators, a lack of informed consent, 
excessive use of force with vacuum or forceps and 
delayed delivery by caesarean section. The fear of 
litigation should not dictate good medical practice. 
It is essential, however, that operators are appro￾priately trained in decision-making, operate within 
their competencies, have access to senior support 
(or a second opinion) and are effective communica￾tors. Clinical incident forms should be completed as 
part of risk management procedures when adverse 
outcomes occur, and both individual and systems￾based reviews are important elements of any orga￾nization with a learning culture. 
FURTHER READING 
Murphy DJ, Strachan BK, Bahl R; RCOG (2020). 
Assisted vaginal birth. BJOG, 127: e70–e112. 
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence 
(NICE) (2011). Caesarean Section. Clinical 
guideline [CG 132]. 
RCOG (2015). Green-top Guideline No 45: Birth 
after previous Caesarean birth. 
RCOG (2015). Green-top guideline No 29: Third￾and fourth-degree perineal tears, management. 
SELF-ASSESSMENT 
For interactive SBAs and EMQs relating to this chapter, visit www.routledge.com/cw/mccarthy. 
CASE HISTORY 1 
Ms B, a 24-year-old nulliparous woman, went into sponta￾neous labour at 39 weeks’ gestation. She had no relevant 
past medical history and ÿndings on examination were 
unremarkable; vital signs were normal, the sympyhsis fun￾dal height was appropriate for the gestational age, pre￾sentation was cephalic and the fetal head was engaged 
with one-ÿfth palpable abdominally. Delay in the ÿrst stage 
of labour led to artiÿcial rupture of the membranes (clear 
liquor drained) and subsequent use of an oxytocin infu￾sion. Ms B requested epidural analgesia, which was sited 
and effective. When the vaginal examination was repeated, 
the cervix was fully dilated, with the fetal head at the level 
of the ischial spines and in a right occipito-transverse 
position. There was minimal caput and moulding. Clear 
liquor continued to drain and there was a normal fetal 
heart rate pattern on the CTG. The midwife waited 1 hour 
for passive descent and then encouraged active pushing. 
After 50 minutes of pushing, the presenting part was just 
visible and there were late decelerations on the CTG. The 
registrar assessed Ms B and noted that the fetal head was 
zero ÿfths palpable abdominally and the fetal size was 
average; on vaginal examination, the fetal head position 
was occipito-anterior, station was +2cm with moderate 
caput and moulding, and pelvic dimensions were aver￾age. Ms B had been pushing well but was visibly tiring 
with slow progress over the previous 10 minutes. The 
248 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 249 04/03/2024 16:07
Further reading 
late decelerations persisted on the CTG and the baseline B The primary indication for AVB in this case relates 
had risen to 165 beats per minute. The registrar recom- to the ÿnding of late decelerations and a rising 
mended AVB and verbal consent was given. baseline on the CTG, re˛ecting potential fetal 
hypoxia and the risk of fetal compromise. In addition, A Were the safety criteria for AVB met? while the woman had been pushing for 50 minutes B What was the indication for AVB? and this is not considered prolonged, she was visibly C What type of instrument should be used? tiring and making little further progress, which is also 
an indication for assistance. As with many AVBs, 
the indication was based on both fetal and maternal ANSWERS factors.
 A The ÿndings on abdominal and vaginal examination C The choice here was between vacuum and forceps. 
are crucial to any consideration of this question. If there was marked caput and moulding, a higher 
On examination, zero ÿfths of the fetal head were station of the presenting part or the mother was 
palpable, the position was occipito-anterior and pushing poorly then forceps may be preferred. In 
at station spines +2cm with moderate caput and this case, the baby had rotated and descended 
moulding. The pelvic dimensions were average. to spines +2cm and the caput and moulding 
The patient had effective analgesia and gave verbal was no more than moderate, with average pelvic 
consent to AVB. The prerequisites for AVB were met dimensions. Vacuum-assisted birth is likely to be 
and the procedure should be classiÿed as low-pelvic preferred in these circumstances, as the chance of 
not requiring rotation. This type of AVB should be success is high and the risk of signiÿcant perineal 
within the skillset of an average registrar and can be tearing (including OASI) is lower than with forceps. 
conducted in a delivery room as the risk of failure is 
very low. 
CASE HISTORY 2 
Following on from the ÿrst case history, Mrs B consents 
to an assisted vaginal birth.
 A How should the delivery be conducted?
 B What complications should be anticipated after the 
birth? 
ANSWERS
 A The procedure should be explained to Ms B and 
her partner. The neonatologist should be called in 
case resuscitation is required. The patient should 
be positioned in the lithotomy position with the 
end of the bed removed. The obstetrician should 
conÿrm that the epidural analgesia is effective and, if 
necessary, the perineum can be inÿltrated with local 
anaesthesia. The bladder should be emptied with a 
catheter. The clinical ÿndings should be conÿrmed 
once more. The choice is between a sialastic 
vacuum or a rigid disposable vacuum cup. The 
vacuum cup is applied over the ˛exion point of the 
fetal head and checked to ensure that no maternal 
tissues are trapped. The pressure is increased to 0.8 
kg/cm2 and the application of the cup is rechecked. 
The woman is encouraged to push with contractions 
while the obstetrician exerts traction along the axis 
of the pelvis. The head descends onto the perineum 
with two pulls and delivers with the assistance of 
a right mediolateral episiotomy with the next push. 
The head restitutes and the shoulders deliver easily 
on the next contraction. A healthy male infant of 
birthweight 3.4 kg is delivered onto his mother’s 
abdomen and is vigorous at birth (Apgar score 
9 at 1 minute and 10 at 5 minutes; paired cord 
bloods normal). There is delayed cord clamping 
after which the third stage is actively managed 
and the episiotomy is repaired. Antibiotics are 
administered and analgesia is prescribed. The AVB 
is documented on the standard proforma.
 B There is a risk that the baby may be delivered in 
poor condition due to intra-partum hypoxia and may 
require resuscitation. There is a risk of trauma to 
the baby, which may include cephalohaematoma or 
scalp abrasions and much less commonly a serious 
complication such as subgaleal haemorrhage. There 
is a risk of an extended perineal or vaginal tear that 
may include the anal sphincter. There is an increased 
risk of post-partum haemorrhage, perineal infection, 
urinary retention or incontinence. Complications are 
mitigated by careful practice, active management 
of the third stage, administration of prophylactic 
antibiotics and education in relation to aftercare 
post-AVB. 
249 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 251 04/03/2024 16:07
14 
Obstetric emergencies 
FERGUS M cCARTHY 
Introduction 251 Shoulder dystocia 261 
Prevention of obstetric emergencies 252 Thrombosis and thromboembolism 263 
Collapsed/unresponsive patient 252 Uterine inversion 263 
Sepsis 254 Uterine rupture 264 
Obstetric haemorrhage 255 Impact head at caesarean section 265 
Eclampsia 259 Further reading 266 
Amniotic ˜uid embolism 260 Self-assessment 266 
Umbilical cord prolapse 261 
 Learning Objectives 
• Understand the incidence of common obstetric emergencies. 
• Understand the risk factors for common obstetric emergencies. 
• Understand the early warning signs in obstetric emergencies. 
• Be able to provide a stepwise approach in the management of common obstetric emergencies. 
INTRODUCTION 
Obstetric emergencies are common and often result 
in signiÿcant maternal and fetal morbidity and mor￾tality. Regardless of the emergency, it is essential 
that they are managed in a methodological, step￾wise manner to limit morbidity and mortality and 
maintain safety for staff and patients. Accurate doc￾umentation is essential, as is the opportunity for a 
postnatal debrief to allow the woman (and partner if 
present) an opportunity to ask questions and under￾stand what happened. This chapter covers common 
obstetric emergencies and also rare obstetric emer￾gencies that may result in signiÿcant morbidity or 
mortality. A stepwise approach to managing these 
obstetric emergencies is suggested. 
One maternal death occurs every minute world￾wide. In the UK, it is estimated that 1 in every 100 
births results in a high-dependency unit admission, 
while 1 in every 1,000 results in an intensive care unit 
admission. Maternal mortality is unacceptably high. 
Every day in 2017, approximately 810 women died 
worldwide from preventable causes related to preg￾nancy and childbirth, namely about 295,000 over the 
whole year. The vast majority of these deaths (94%) 
occurred in low-resource settings, and most could 
have been prevented. Leading causes of maternal 
mortality include thrombosis and thromboembo￾lism, haemorrhage, sepsis, amniotic °uid embolism 
and cardiac disease. 
An emergency is deÿned as a serious situation or 
occurrence that happens unexpectedly and demands 
251 
10.1201/9781003196112-14 ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 252 04/03/2024 16:07
 
Obstetric emergencies 
Table 14.1 Incidence of obstetric emergencies 
Obstetric emergency Estimated rates
 Maternal collapse Collapse affects 0.14–6 in 1,000 (14–600 in 100,000) births in the UK
 Sepsis Worldwide, puerperal sepsis is estimated to complicate at least 75,000 maternal deaths 
every year (the majority in low-income countries) 
In the USA, sepsis is estimated to complicate approximately 1 in 3,000 deliveries
The estimated incidence of haemorrhage in the UK is 3.7 in 1,000 pregnancies 
An estimated 125,000 women are thought to die annually worldwide as a consequence of 
haemorrhage
This affects 2.0 in 100,000 deliveries (95% CI 1.5–2.5), with maternal mortality rates of 
0.33 per 100,000 pregnancies and perinatal mortality rates of 135 per 1,000 total births 
(95% CI 45–288) in the UK
In the UK, this occurs in 3–5% of ÿrst-time pregnancies and 2–3% of pregnancies overall, 
with mortality rates of 0.38 per 100,000 maternities 
Severe forms are estimated to affect up to 18% of pregnant women in parts of Africa, 
with a mortality rate of 10–25%
Approximately 50% of maternal venous thromboembolism events occur during 
pregnancy 
In the UK, overall prevalence is 1 in 1,600 pregnancies and the incidence of antenatal 
pulmonary embolism is 1.3 in 10,000, with a case fatality rate of 3.5% and overall 
mortality rates of 1.08 per 100,000 pregnancies
The prevalence of cardiac disease in pregnancy in the developed world is 0.2–3%, and 
the mortality rate in the UK is 2.25 per 100,000 pregnancies
 Major obstetric 
haemorrhage 
 Amniotic ˜uid 
embolism 
 Pre-eclampsia and 
eclampsia 
 Thrombosis and 
thromboembolism 
 Cardiac disease 
 Shoulder dystocia The prevalence rate is 0.58–0.70% 
CI, conÿdence interval. 
immediate action. Prompt recognition and treatment 
of these emergencies/complications of pregnancy is 
essential to limit morbidity and mortality. The inci￾dence and outcomes of obstetric emergencies varies 
hugely from country to country (e.g. deaths from 
complications such as pre-eclampsia are rare in the 
UK but are prevalent in Africa; Table 14.1). This 
chapter aims to cover all major obstetric emergen￾cies including the incidence, risk factors and warning 
signs to recognize at-risk women, as well as sug￾gested management strategies. 
PREVENTION OF OBSTETRIC 
EMERGENCIES 
It is not possible to prevent or predict all obstet￾ric emergencies, but it is essential to recognize 
early warning signs, reduce risk factors and have 
appropriate support present in anticipation of obstet￾ric emergencies. 
COLLAPSED/UNRESPONSIVE 
PATIENT 
The general structured approach to the management 
of acute illness and trauma is the same for pregnant 
and non-pregnant patients and is summarized in 
Figure 14.1. Management consists of the following 
structured approach.
 Identify life-threatening problems:
 A Airway – with cervical spine control.
 B Breathing – with ventilation. Look for chest 
movements, listen for breath sounds and feel for 
movement of air for a maximum of 10 seconds. 
If breathing is present, give high-°ow oxygen. 
If breathing is absent, start ventilation. 252 Collapsed/unresponsive patient
 Figure 14.1 The structured approach to managing obstetric emergencies.
 C Circulation – with haemorrhage control. D Disability – neurological status using the AVPU 
Minimize aorto-caval compression (Figure score: Alert, responds to Voice, responds 
14.2). Absence of breathing in the presence of a to Pain, Unresponsive. Following initial 
clear airway is now used as a marker of absence resuscitation, perform a Glasgow coma score 
of circulation. If there is no circulation, start (GCS). GCS ≤8 indicates a compromised airway 
cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR): 30 chest and will require intubation.
compressions followed by two ventilations. E Exposure – depending on environment. Perform 
Manage hypovolaemia/haemorrhage full examination of patient, remembering 
concurrently. risks of hypothermia (use warming blanket 
if needed) and patient’s dignity. Monitoring 
may include non-invasive blood pressure, 
pulse oximetry, electrocardiogram (ECG), 
end tidal carbon dioxide and respiratory rate. 
Consider urinary catheter and nasogastric tube 
depending on circumstances (e.g. hourly urine 
output is essential in severe pre-eclampsia).
 Resuscitation:
. Deal with any problems as you fi nd them. 
Consider differential diagnosis (Figure 14.3).
. Assess fetal well-being and viability: deal with 
threat to life of fetus. Assess fetal well-being 
using cardiotocography (CTG). 253
Prepare and prevent
Call for help
Talk to the patient
Turn into left lateral tilt
Assess the airway
Assess breathing and circulation
Immediately commence chest
compressions 100/min
Provide chest compressions to
ventilation breaths 30:2
Insert two large bore
cannulae
Administer high-flow
oxygen if airway
open and breathing
Consider and treat
the cause
 Figure 14.2 Left lateral tilt. The pregnant woman is 
tilted to the left to move the pregnant uterus off the 
abdominal vessels, thus improving cardiac output. There 
are various methods of achieving this; many hospitals 
have special wedge-shaped cushions, but pillows and 
blankets can be used.
Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 253 04/03/2024 16:08
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 254 04/03/2024 16:08
 
 
Obstetric emergencies 
Figure 14.3 The differential diagnosis of acute maternal collapse. 
Pulmonary embolus, tension 
pneumothorax, amniotic fluid 
embolism, anaphylaxis 
Illegal drugs (heroin, cocaine, 
amphetamines, benzodiazepines), 
pharmacological interventions 
(magnesium sulphate, opioids, 
local anaesthetic overdose), 
metabolic (hypoglycaemia) 
Deep venous thrombosis 
• Notes review: review trends of vital signs/review 
notes. 
• Deÿ nitive care: order investigations and plan 
treatment – speciÿc management depending 
on underlying cause. 
An anaesthetist experienced in obstetric care is 
critical in the successful management of obstetric 
emergencies. Difÿculties that anaesthetists encoun￾ter in the resuscitation of the pregnant woman 
include increased risk of aspiration of gastric con￾tents, increased metabolic oxygen consumption com￾bined with a decreased functional residual capacity, 
pregnancy weight gain and increased breast size 
making optimal placement of head and intubation 
more difÿcult and, ÿnally, aorto-caval compression 
and the effects of the gravid uterus on venous return. 
Eclampsia, subarachnoid or 
other intracranial haemorrhage, 
head trauma 
Myocardial infarction, 
aortic dissection, arrthymias, 
cardiomyopathy, large vessel 
aneurysm 
Placental abruption, sepsis, 
haemorrhage (antepartum, 
post-partum) 
SEPSIS 
Sepsis in the UK remains a signiÿcant cause of 
maternal death. The mortality rate for pregnancy￾related sepsis has continued to increase steadily 
since its nadir in 2012–2014. 
BOX 14.1: Sepsis: Prevention, risk 
factors and warning signs 
˜ Prevention: all maternal observations should 
be documented on a MEOWS chart to allow 
early detection of sepsis and subsequent 
treatment. 
˜ Risk factors: ruptured membranes, 
immunocompromised patients, 
immunosuppressants, obesity, diabetes, 
minority ethnic group origin, anaemia, urinary 
tract infections, vaginal discharge, previous 
pelvic infection, group B streptococcal 
infection, amniocentesis and other invasive 
procedures, cervical cerclage, group A 
streptococcal infection in close contacts. 
˜ Warning signs: pyrexia, hypothermia, 
tachycardia, increased respiratory rate, 
hypotension, rise in MEOWS score and oliguria. 
Patients may rigor, have a rash, have reduced 
levels of consciousness and not respond to initial 
treatment. 
KEY LEARNING POINTS 
Maternal collapse 
˜ Obtain a left lateral tilt of at least 15–20° at the 
earliest opportunity to prevent/minimize aorto￾caval compression in any patient. 
˜ Resuscitation of a pregnant woman is more 
difÿcult due to reduced lung capacity, reduced 
venous return if supine, greater oxygen demand 
from the fetus and increased weight. 
˜ The use of Modiÿed Early Obstetric Warning 
System (MEOWS) scores are key in the early 
recognition of the clinical deterioration of a patient. 
254 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 255 04/03/2024 16:08
 
 
Obstetric haemorrhage 
MANAGEMENT 
The Surviving Sepsis Campaign ‘resuscitation bun￾dles’ set out key points in the timely management 
of sepsis: 
• Obtain blood cultures prior to antibiotic 
administration. 
• Administer broad-spectrum antibiotic within 
1 hour of recognition of severe sepsis. Every 
1 hour delay in administrating antibiotics 
increases mortality by approximately 8%. 
• Measure serum lactate. A normal lactate level is 
generally less than 2.3 mmol/L. 
• In the event of hypotension and/or a serum 
lactate level of ˝4 mmol/L, deliver an initial 
minimum 20 mL/kg of crystalloid or an 
equivalent. 
• If there is no response, administer vasopressors 
for hypotension that is not responding to initial 
°uid resuscitation to maintain mean arterial 
pressure of ˝65 mmHg. 
• In the event of persistent hypotension despite 
°uid resuscitation and/or a lactate level of 
˝4 mmol/L, aim to achieve a central venous 
pressure of ˝8 mmHg, a central venous oxygen 
saturation of ˝70% or mixed venous oxygen 
saturation of ˝65%. 
Involve a microbiologist or infectious disease 
physician early, particularly if the woman does not 
respond to ÿrst-choice antibiotics. 
Severe sepsis may be deÿned by one or more of 
the following factors: 
• temperature >38ºC or <36ºC 
• heart rate >100 beats per minute 
• respiratory rate >20 respirations per minute 
• white cell count >17 × 109/L or <4 × 109/L with 
>10% immature band forms 
Severe sepsis has a higher maternal mortality 
than sepsis/infection and requires aggressive prompt 
treatment and timely involvement of the multidisci￾plinary team. 
ANTIBIOTIC USE 
Each hospital should have its own antibiotic guide￾lines, as the incidence of resistant organisms varies 
both within and between countries. The selection of 
antibiotics should be guided by risk factors and poten￾tial sources of sepsis. A combination of either piper￾acillin/tazobactam or a carbapenem plus clindamycin 
provides very broad coverage for the treatment of 
severe sepsis. Other antibiotic options include: 
• co-amoxiclav – provides Gram-positive and 
anaerobic cover; does not cover methicillin￾resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA), 
Pseudomonas or extended spectrum ˜-lactamase 
(ESBL)-producing organisms 
• metronidazole – provides anaerobic cover 
• clindamycin – covers streptococci and 
staphylococci including MRSA; also switches 
off exotoxin production 
• gentamicin – provides Gram-negative cover 
against coliforms and Pseudomonas 
KEY LEARNING POINTS 
Management of sepsis 
˜ Blood cultures should be performed before 
antibiotics are administered. 
˜ Culture of other samples should be performed 
based on clinical suspicion (e.g. high vaginal 
swab, midstream urine, sputum culture). 
˜ The key organisms involved in puerperal 
sepsis are Lanceÿeld group A ˜-haemolytic 
streptococcus and Escherichia coli. 
˜ Early diagnosis, rapid administration of broad￾spectrum antibiotics and review by senior 
doctors and midwives is essential to reduce 
mortality and improve outcome. 
˜ Lactate and haemoglobin should be measured 
and repeat measurements should be planned to 
help assess the response to initial treatment. 
˜ Accurate hourly urine output should be 
measured. 
˜ High-˜ow oxygen should be administered. 
OBSTETRIC HAEMORRHAGE 
Obstetric haemorrhage is a leading cause of mater￾nal mortality worldwide and is responsible for up to 
50% of maternal deaths in some countries. In the UK 
it is responsible for approximately 10% of all direct 
maternal deaths. 
255 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 256 04/03/2024 16:08
 
 
 
 
 
Obstetric emergencies 
ANTEPARTUM HAEMORRHAGE 
This is deÿned as vaginal bleeding after 20 weeks’ 
gestation. It complicates 2–5% of pregnancies and 
most cases involve relatively small amounts of blood 
loss. However, signiÿcant blood loss poses a risk 
of mortality and morbidity to both the mother and 
baby. The causes can be classiÿed into three groups:
 1. placental causes: placental abruption, placenta 
praevia 
2. fetal cause: vasa praevia
 3. maternal causes: vaginal trauma, cervical 
ectropion, cervical carcinoma, vaginal infection 
and cervicitis 
Placental causes are the most worrying, as poten￾tially the mother’s and/or fetus’s life is in danger and 
often the bleeding may be more severe than with 
other causes such as cervical ectropion. However, 
any antepartum haemorrhage must always be taken 
seriously, and any woman presenting with a his￾tory of fresh vaginal bleeding must be investigated 
promptly and properly. The key question is whether 
the bleeding is placental and is compromising the 
mother and/or fetus or whether it has a less signiÿ￾cant cause. 
HISTORY 
• How much bleeding is there? 
• What were the triggering factors (e.g. post￾coital bleed)? 
• Is it associated with pain or contractions? 
• Is the baby moving? 
• When was the last cervical smear (date and 
normal/abnormal)? 
EXAMINATION 
• Take the pulse and blood pressure. 
• Is the uterus soft or tender and ÿrm? 
• Undertake fetal heart auscultation/CTG. 
• Undertake speculum vaginal examination, with 
particular importance placed on visualizing the 
cervix (having established that placenta is not a 
praevia, preferably using a portable ultrasound 
machine). 
INVESTIGATIONS 
• Depending on the degree of bleeding, full 
blood count, clotting and, if suspected praevia/ 
abruption, cross-match 6 units of blood. 
• Ultrasound (fetal size, presentation, amniotic 
°uid, placental position and morphology). 
PLACENTAL ABRUPTION 
Placental abruption is the premature separation of the 
placenta from the uterine wall. The bleeding is mater￾nal and/or fetal and abruption is acutely dangerous for 
both the mother and the fetus (Figure 14.4). 
BOX 14.2: Placental abruption: 
Prevention, risk factors and warning 
signs 
˜ Prevention: avoidance of precipitating factors 
such as control of blood pressure and 
avoidance of precipitants such as cocaine 
and˛smoking 
˜ Risk factors: hypertension (including pre￾eclampsia), smoking, trauma to the maternal 
abdomen, cocaine, polyhydramnios, multiple 
pregnancy, fetal growth restriction (FGR) 
˜ Warning signs: maternal collapse, feeling cold, 
light-headedness, restlessness, distress and 
panic, painful abdomen, vaginal bleeding 
CLINICAL PRESENTATION 
The characteristic presentation of placental abrup￾tion is that of painful bleeding associated with a tense 
rigid abdomen. The absence of a tense abdomen does 
not rule out a placental abruption. Placental abrup￾tion may be diagnosed on ultrasound but the absence 
of any ultrasound changes does not rule it out and 
patients should be managed on the basis of their 
clinical ÿndings. Maternal signs and symptoms may 
include vaginal bleeding, abdominal pain, sweating, 
shock, hypotension, tachycardia, absence or reduced 
fetal movements and tense painful abdomen. CTG 
may reveal evidence of fetal distress. 
The degree of vaginal bleeding does not necessarily 
correlate with the degree of abruption, as abruptions 
256 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 257 04/03/2024 16:08
Obstetric haemorrhage 
A
B
Figure 14.4 (A) Placental abruption with revealed 
haemorrhage. ( B) Placental abruption with concealed 
haemorrhage. 
may be revealed (See Figure 14.4A) where signiÿ cant 
vaginal bleeding occurs or concealed (i.e. signiÿ cant 
separation between placenta and uterus but blood is 
concealed between the placenta and uterus so there is 
little vaginal bleeding seen [see Figure 14.4B]).
PLACENTA PRAEVIA
 A placenta covering or encroaching on the cervical os 
may be associated with bleeding, either provoked or 
spontaneous. The bleeding is from the mother and 
not the fetal circulation and is more likely to compro￾mise the mother than the fetus (Figure 14.5). 
BOX 14.3: Placenta praevia: 
Prevention, risk factors and warning 
signs 
˜ Prevention: avoidance of non-clinically indicated 
caesarean section 
˜ Risk factors: multiple gestation, previous 
caesarean section, uterine structural anomaly, 
assisted conception 
˜ Warning signs: low-lying placenta at 20-week 
anomaly scan, maternal collapse, feeling cold, 
light-headedness, restlessness, distress and 
panic, painless vaginal bleeding 
Minor placenta praevia Major placenta praevia
 Figure 14.5 Placenta praevia. 
257 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 258 04/03/2024 16:08
 
Obstetric emergencies 
CLINICAL PRESENTATION AND 
DIAGNOSIS 
The characteristic presenting complaint of bleeding 
associated with a placenta praevia is that of painless 
vaginal bleeding. The bleeding may trigger preterm 
labour so, often, patients with bleeding from placenta 
praevia will have irregular abdominal pain associated 
with uterine contractions. A placenta praevia is diag￾nosed using ultrasound, preferably transvaginal, to 
allow accurate measurement of the placental edge from 
the internal os. Often, patients will have been high￾lighted as having a low-lying placenta at their anomaly 
scan so there should be a high index of suspicion in any 
of these patients presenting with vaginal bleeding. 
MANAGEMENT 
If there is minimal bleeding and the cause is clearly 
local vaginal bleeding, symptomatic management 
may be given (for example antifungal preparations for 
candidiasis) as long as there is reasonable certainty 
that cervical carcinoma is excluded by smear history 
and direct visualization of the cervix. Placental causes 
of bleeding are a major concern. A large-gauge intra￾venous cannula is sited; blood is sent for full blood 
count, clotting and cross-match; and appropriate fetal 
and maternal monitoring is instituted. If there is major 
fetal or maternal compromise, decisions may have to 
be made about immediate delivery irrespective of ges￾tation; an attempt at maternal steroid injection should 
still be made. If this is the situation, and bleeding is 
continuing, emergency management is required. If 
bleeding settles, the woman must be admitted for 48 
hours, as the risk of re-bleeding is high within this 
time frame. Rhesus status is important: if the mother 
is rhesus negative, send a Kleihauer test (to determine 
whether any, or how much, fetal blood has leaked 
into the maternal circulation) and administer anti-D. 
When there is substantial vaginal bleeding (in excess 
of 500 mL), antenatal corticosteroids should be con￾sidered if gestation is under 35 weeks, as the risk of 
preterm delivery is signiÿcant. 
VASA PRAEVIA 
Vasa previa occurs when fetal vessels traverse the 
fetal membranes over the internal cervical os. These 
vessels may be either from a velamentous insertion 
of the umbilical cord or joining an accessory (suc￾centuriate) placental lobe to the main disc of the pla￾centa. The diagnosis is usually suspected when either 
spontaneous or artiÿcial rupture of the membranes 
is accompanied by painless fresh vaginal bleeding 
from rupture of the fetal vessels. This condition is 
associated with a very high perinatal mortality from 
fetal exsanguination. If the baby is still alive, once 
the diagnosis is suspected the immediate course of 
action is delivery by emergency caesarean section. 
KEY LEARNING POINTS 
˜ Placenta praevia is most dangerous for the mother. 
˜ Placental abruption is more dangerous for the 
fetus than for the mother. 
˜ Vasa praevia is not dangerous for the mother but 
is nearly always fatal for the baby. 
˜ Management involves resuscitation and 
stabilization of the mother and senior input 
regarding timing of delivery. 
POST-PARTUM HAEMORRHAGE 
Post-partum haemorrhage, deÿned as blood loss of 
˝500 mL, affected 13% of all pregnancies in England 
in 2011 and 2012. In the UK and Ireland, there 
were 17 direct deaths due to obstetric haemorrhage 
between 2009 and 2012. This gives an overall mor￾tality rate of 0.49 per 100,000 pregnancies (95% CI 
0.29–0.78) and a case fatality rate for massive haem￾orrhage of approximately 1 per 1,200 women. 
Major obstetric haemorrhage is deÿned as blood 
loss of ˝2,500 mL or requiring a blood transfusion of 
˝5 units of red cells or treatment for coagulopathy. 
Major obstetric haemorrhage affected 0.6% of preg￾nancies in Scotland in 2011. 
SIGNS AND SYMPTOMS OF 
HAEMORRHAGE 
• Symptoms: anxiety, thirst, nausea, cold, pain, 
dizziness 
• Signs: rising fundus, peritonism, reduced urine 
output, tachypnoea, tachycardia, hypotension, 
narrow pulse pressure 258 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 259 04/03/2024 16:08
 
-
Eclampsia 
BOX 14.4: Post partum haemorrhage: 
Prevention, risk factors and warning 
signs 
˜ Prevention: haemoglobin levels below the normal 
range for pregnancy should be investigated and 
iron supplementation should be considered 
if indicated to optimize haemoglobin prior to 
delivery. Prophylactic use of oxytocin agents 
should be considered for high-risk patients. 
˜ Risk factors for uterine atony (the most 
common cause of haemorrhage): macrosomia, 
multiple pregnancy, prolonged labour, oxytocin 
use, induction of labour, grand multiparity, 
polyhydramnios, antepartum haemorrhage, 
placental abruption. 
˜ Other risk factors for obstetric haemorrhage: 
placenta praevia (see Figure 14.5) and accreata, 
previous multiple caesarean sections (risk 
of placenta accreata is greater than 60% for 
women who have had three or more previous 
caesarean sections), perineal trauma, full 
bladder, underlying haematological disorder 
(e.g. factor VIII deÿciency), disseminated 
intravascular coagulation. There are three main 
areas from which haemorrhage occurs: uterus, 
placenta and cervix/vagina. Uterine causes of 
haemorrhage include atony (the most common 
cause of haemorrhage), uterine inversion and 
rupture. Remember, haemorrhage may be 
concealed. 
˜ Warning signs: failure of uterus to contract 
following delivery of the placenta, maternal 
collapse. 
KEY LEARNING POINTS 
Management of obstetric haemorrhage 
( Figure 14.6) 
˜ Do not delay ˜uid resuscitation and blood 
transfusion because of false reassurance from a 
single haemoglobin result – treat the patient, not 
the result. 
˜ Be proactive – young ÿt women compensate 
extremely well. Therefore, ongoing bleeding 
should be acted on without delay. Minimal signs 
of haemorrhage exist up to 1,000 mL of loss. The 
commonly used sign of hypotension is a very 
late sign in blood loss occurring after 2,000 mL 
of loss. 
˜ Consider the administration of blood 
components before coagulation indices 
deteriorate if a woman is bleeding and is likely to 
develop a coagulopathy. 
˜ Consider early recourse to hysterectomy if 
simpler medical and surgical interventions prove 
ineffective. 
˜ In patients in whom complications are anticipated 
(e.g. placenta accreata), ideally obtain advanced 
consent (with partner present if possible) to 
cover possible interventions including blood 
transfusion, interventional radiology, leaving 
placenta in situ and hysterectomy. 
ECLAMPSIA 
Pre-eclampsia is a potentially life-threatening 
hypertensive disorder of pregnancy characterized 
by vascular dysfunction and systemic in°ammation 
involving the brain, liver and kidneys of the mother. 
Eclampsia refers to the occurrence of one or more 
generalized convulsions and/or coma in the setting 
of pre-eclampsia and in the absence of other neu￾rological conditions. The UK Obstetric Surveillance 
System report gives an estimated incidence of 
eclampsia of 27.5 cases per 100,000 pregnancies, with 
case fatality rate estimated to be 3.1%. Eclampsia is 
associated with signiÿcant maternal morbidity, in 
particular cerebrovascular events (2.3%). Cerebral 
haemorrhage has been reported to be the most com￾mon cause of death in patients with eclampsia (pre￾viously this was pulmonary oedema) and stroke is 
known to be the most common cause of death (45%) 
in women with haemolysis, elevated liver enzymes 
and low platelets (HELLP) syndrome. 259 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 260 04/03/2024 16:08
 
Obstetric emergencies 
Figure 14.6 Algorithm for the management of obstetric 
haemorrhage. (IM, intramuscular; IV, intravenous.) 
• Initiate obstetric haemorrhage protocol 
• Call for senior help 
• Scribe to clearly document timing of events, people
 present and interventions administered 
• Uterine compression/rub up contractions 
• Empty uterus and vagina of clot 
• Empty bladder 
• Uterotonic agents 
• Bimanual compression of uterus if atony is the cause 
• Intravenous access ×2 large bore cannulae 
• Full blood count/group and cross-match/
 coagulation profile 
• Fluid replacement: cross-matched blood or
 O-negative blood if unavailable 
• Rapid infuser with fluid warmer/cell saver set up 
A stepwise approach to use of uteronic agents would be: 
• 5–10 units IV/IM oxytocin 
• 40 units oxytocin in 100 mL normal saline over 4 hours 
• 800–1,000 µg rectal misoprostol 
• Syntometrine (ergometrine 500 µg and
 Syntocinon™ 5 units) 
• Repeat ergometrine (500 µg) IM or slow IV push 
• Carbaprost 0.25 mg by IM repeated at intervals of not
 less than 15 minutes to a maximum of eight doses
 (contraindicated in women with asthma) 
If ongoing bleeding consider: 
• Disseminated intravascular coagulation and
 replacement of clotting agents 
• Senior help – interventional radiology, gynaeoncology 
• Transfer to operating theatre for surgical invention
 (uterine balloon insertion, iliac ligation, uterine artery
 embolization, hysterectomy) 
• Clear documentation of sequence of events and
 cause of bleeding 
• Debrief of staff, family members and patient 
• Risk report 
BOX 14.5: Eclampsia: Prevention, risk 
factors and warning signs 
˜ Prevention: low threshold for administration 
of magnesium sulphate in women with pre￾eclampsia who are thought to be unstable or 
suffering from severe pre-eclampsia. However, 
remember all patients with pre-eclampsia 
regardless of perceived severity are at risk of 
eclampsia. 
˜ Risk factors: difÿcult to predict, uncontrolled 
hypertension, two or fewer prenatal care visits, 
primigravidity, obesity, Black ethnicity, history of 
diabetes, age <20 years. 
˜ Warning signs: epigastric pain and right upper 
quadrant tenderness, headache, uncontrolled 
hypertension, agitation, hyper-re˜exia and 
clonus, facial (especially periorbital) oedema, 
poor urine output, papilloedema. 
MANAGEMENT 
First, summon senior help and the emergency alert 
team. The initial approach is similar to that of the 
collapsed patient with a focus on airway, breathing 
and circulation. Magnesium sulphate is indicated as 
the ÿrst-line anticonvulsant and should be admin￾istered as soon as possible either in women at risk 
of eclampsia or when eclampsia occurs. A load￾ing dose of 4 g is given followed by a maintenance 
infusion of 1 g/hour generally for 24 hours after 
delivery. Magnesium sulphate has a narrow thera￾peutic range and overdose can cause respiratory 
depression and ultimately cardiac arrest. The anti￾dote is 10 mL 10% calcium gluconate given slowly 
intravenously. 
AMNIOTIC FLUID EMBOLISM 
Amniotic °uid embolism is a rare cause of maternal 
collapse and is believed to be caused by amniotic 
°uid entering the maternal circulation. This causes 
acute cardiorespiratory compromise and severe 
disseminated intravascular coagulation. In some 
cases, there may be an abnormal maternal reaction 
to amniotic °uid as the primary event. It is difÿ￾cult to diagnose when it occurs and it is typically 260 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 261 04/03/2024 16:08
Shoulder dystocia 
BOX 14.6: Amniotic ˜uid embolism: 
Prevention, risk factors and warning 
signs 
˜ Prevention: unknown 
˜ Risk factors: population proportional attributable 
risks are 35% for induction of labour, 13% for 
ethnic-minority women 35 years or older, and 
7% for multiple pregnancy 
˜ Warning signs: maternal collapse, shortness 
of breath, chest pain, feeling cold, light￾headedness, restlessness, distress and panic, 
pins and needles in the ÿngers, nausea and 
vomiting 
diagnosed at post-mortem, with the presence of 
fetal cells (squames or hair) in the maternal pulmo￾nary capillaries. 
MANAGEMENT 
In the case of sudden collapse, management should 
be the structured ABC approach (airway, breathing 
and circulation). The prognosis is poor, with approxi￾mately 30% of patients dying in the ÿrst hour and 
only 10% surviving overall. Management is support￾ive, requiring intensive care, and there are no speciÿc 
therapies available. Symptoms occurring just before 
the collapse may be helpful in diagnosis. Perimortem 
caesarean section should be carried out within 5 
minutes or as soon as possible after cardiac arrest. 
This is for the beneÿt of the woman to improve the 
effect of resuscitation. 
UMBILICAL CORD PROLAPSE 
Umbilical cord prolapse may be deÿned as the descent 
of the umbilical cord through the cervix alongside or 
past the presenting part in the presence of ruptured 
membranes (Figure 14.7). It is estimated to occur in 
0.1–0.6% of pregnancies with the perinatal mortality 
rate estimated to be 91 per 1,000. 
MANAGEMENT 
When suspected, perform speculum or digital exam￾ination immediately, as early detection is crucial for 
BOX 14.7: Umbilical cord prolapse: 
Prevention, risk factors and warning 
signs 
˜ Prevention: with transverse, oblique or unstable 
lie, elective admission to hospital after 37+0 
weeks’ gestation allows for quick delivery should 
membranes rupture. Women with non-cephalic 
pre-labour preterm rupture of membranes 
should be managed as inpatients. Avoid artiÿcial 
induction of labour when the presenting part 
is non-stable and/or mobile. When performing 
vaginal examination, avoid upwards pressure on 
the presenting part. 
˜ Risk factors: polyhydramnios, multiparity, 
multiple pregnancy/second twin, unstable, 
transverse and oblique lie, fetal congenital 
abnormalities, low birthweight (<2.5 kg), internal 
podalic version, large balloon catheter induction 
of labour. 
˜ Warning signs: signs of fetal distress on CTG 
following artiÿcial or spontaneous rupture of 
membranes. 
timely delivery and in the prevention of fetal mor￾bidity and mortality (reported as high as 25–50% of 
cases). When diagnosed, summon senior help and 
prepare the operating theatre for emergency delivery. 
If diagnosed, attempt to prevent further cord com￾pression by elevating the presenting part or ÿlling 
the bladder. Avoid handling the cord, as this causes 
cord spasm. Place the mother in a knee-to-chest or 
left lateral position, ideally with the head slightly 
declined. Conÿrm fetal viability by auscultation of 
the fetal heart using CTG. Delivery is generally per￾formed by emergency caesarean section (category 1 
if pathological fetal heart pattern or category 2 if nor￾mal fetal heart pattern). 
SHOULDER DYSTOCIA 
Shoulder dystocia is deÿned as a vaginal cephalic 
delivery that requires additional obstetric manoeu￾vres to deliver the fetus after the head has delivered 
and gentle traction has been unsuccessful in deliv￾ering the shoulders (Figure 14.8). It is associated 261 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 262 04/03/2024 16:08
Obstetric emergencies 
A B
 Figure 14.7 Cord prolapse. (A) Cord presentation: the cord is below the presenting party (head in this case but 
commonly a malpresentation) with the membranes intact. (B) Cord prolapse: the membranes have ruptured and the cord 
is below the presenting part and has prolapsed into the vagina.
Figure 14.8 Shou der dystocia. After de l livery of the 
head, shoulder dystocia occurs due to the shoulders 
being unable to pass under the maternal symphysis 
pubis. 
with signiÿ cant morbidity for both the mother and 
the fetus.
Maternal complications include increased perineal 
trauma (third- and fourth-degree tear), post-partum 
haemorrhage and psychological trauma. Fetal compli￾cations include brachial plexus injury (2–7% at birth 
reducing to 1–3% at 12 months of age), fractured clav￾icle or humerus (1–2%) and hypoxic brain injury. 
The suggested management algorithm for shoul￾der dystocia is shown in Figure 14.9. 262 
• Call for senior help (neonatology, senior midwife,
 obstetric consultant) 
• Drop the level of the delivery bed as low as it will go and
 flatten the back of the bed so the woman is completely
 flat. Remove the foot of the bed to allow access 
• McRoberts position – using one assistant on each of the
 mother’s legs, flex and abduct the legs at the hip (thighs
 to abdomen). This flattens the lumbosacral spine and
 will facilitate delivery in approximately 90% of cases 
• Suprapubic pressure: apply over the posterior aspect of
 the anterior fetal shoulder. It can be used in a constant
 and then rocking motion 
• Consider episiotomy 
• Deliver posterior arm and shoulder or consider internal
 rotational manoeuvres, including Rubin II: insert a hand
 behind the anterior shoulder and push it towards the
 chest. This will adduct the shoulders then push them
 into the diagonal 
• Woods’ screw: pressure on the anterior aspect of the
 posterior shoulder to aid rotation. Reverse Woods’
 screw: rotate the baby in the opposite direction 
• Change position to all fours 
• Finally consider symphiotomy, cleidotomy or
Zavanelli manoeuvre 
• Debrief staff, patient and partner 
• Write comprehensive notes 
• Risk report and risk committe review 
Figure 14.9 Algorithm for management of shoulder 
dystocia. Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 263 04/03/2024 16:08
 
Uterine inversion 
BOX 14.8: Shoulder dystocia: 
Prevention, risk factors and warning 
signs 
˜ Prevention: diagnosis and optimal control of 
gestational and insulin-dependent diabetics, 
reduction of maternal obesity. Careful plan for 
mode of delivery in women with previous shoulder 
dystocia delivery (recurrence rate 10–15%). 
˜ Risk factors: macrosomia, poorly controlled 
gestational and insulin-dependent diabetes, 
maternal obesity, previous shoulder dystocia, 
instrumental. 
˜ Warning signs: failure of restitution of head 
following delivery of the head, retraction of the 
fetal head against the perineum (analogous to a 
turtle withdrawing into its shell). 
THROMBOSIS AND 
THROMBOEMBOLISM 
BOX 14.9: Thrombosis and 
thromboembolism: Prevention, risk 
factors and warning signs 
˜ Prevention: thrombosis assessment should be 
performed on all patients early in pregnancy 
as per the Royal College of Obstetricians and 
Gynaecologists (RCOG) guideline, to assess 
the need for antenatal thromboprophylaxis and 
on each admission to hospital to assess for 
additional risk factors; managing patients where 
possible as outpatients and limiting bed rest; 
thromboembolic stockings; prophylactic low￾molecular-weight heparin for at-risk patients 
˜ Risk factors: immobility, obesity, increased 
maternal age (˝35 years), underlying medical 
conditions, pre-eclampsia, dehydration, multiple 
pregnancy, raised body mass index (BMI) (˝30 
kg/m2), smoker, grand multiparity, thrombophilia 
˜ Warning signs: immobility, dehydration, calf pain, 
shortness of breath 
Thrombosis and venous thromboembolism (VTE) 
continues to be the leading cause of direct deaths 
occurring within 42 days of the end of pregnancy. 
There has been a welcome decrease in the maternal 
mortality rate from VTE, which is now at a similar 
rate to what it was in 2012–2014 – an encouraging 
sign of improved detection of risk and better preven￾tion. However, the Mothers and Babies: Reducing Risk 
through Audits and Conÿdential Enquiries across the 
UK (MBRRACE-UK) report published in 2021 into 
maternal deaths and morbidity in 2017–2019 demon￾strates that more than two-thirds of maternal deaths 
could still be prevented with improvements to care. 
VTE is 10 times more common in pregnancy than in 
the non-pregnant population. Women with VTE may 
be asymptomatic or present with a range of symptoms 
(speciÿc and non-speciÿc) including calf or groin pain 
and/or swelling that is often unilateral, low-grade 
pyrexia to more extreme presentations including hae￾moptysis, shortness of breath, collapse and death. 
When deep vein thrombosis is suspected clinically, 
compression duplex ultrasound should be under￾taken. If this is negative and there is a low level of 
clinical suspicion, anticoagulant treatment can be dis￾continued. If clinical suspicion remains high or symp￾toms fail to resolve, ultrasound may be repeated or 
magnetic resonance venography may be performed. 
When pulmonary embolus is suspected, investigative 
options include chest X-ray (to rule out other respira￾tory causes of chest symptoms such as pneumonia), 
low limb Doppler to rule out lower limb VTE and 
ÿnally a ventilation perfusion (V/Q scan) or computed 
tomography pulmonary angiography. The measure￾ment of D-dimers is not helpful and should not be 
performed, as they are often elevated secondary to 
physiological changes in the coagulation system in 
pregnancy. Treatment of conÿrmed or suspected 
VTE is with therapeutic low-molecular-weight hepa￾rin given daily in two divided doses according to the 
patient’s weight. In the case of a collapsed patient with 
pulmonary embolus, management options include 
intravenous unfractionated heparin, thrombolytic 
therapy or thoracotomy and surgical embolectomy. 
This complex management decision is taken by the 
multidisciplinary resuscitation team, including senior 
physicians, obstetricians and radiologists. 
UTERINE INVERSION 
Uterine inversion occurs when the uterus is partially 
or wholly inverted (Figure 14.10). Four degrees of 263 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 264 04/03/2024 16:08
Obstetric emergencies 
BOX 14.10: Uterine inversion: 
Prevention, risk factors and warning 
signs 
˜ Prevention: senior in-house supervision and help 
to deal with this emergency 
˜ Risk factors: full dilatation sections, 
malpresentations, prolonged second stage, 
intravenous Syntocinon™ prior to a decision 
to deliver by caesarean section, unsuccessful 
instrumental delivery, prolonged second stage, 
hyperstimulated uterus 
˜ Warning signs: see risk factors 
A
B
C
Figure 14.10 Uterine inversion. 
inversion have been described: ÿrst degree, when the 
inverted fundus extends to but not through the cer￾vix; second degree, when the inverted fundus extends 
through cervix but remains within the vagina; third 
degree, when the inverted fundus extends outside 
the vagina; and total inversion, when the vagina and 
uterus are inverted. Prompt recognition is essen￾tial, as the longer it is inverted the more difÿcult it 
becomes to replace, as a retraction ring forms, pre￾venting eversion. 
MANAGEMENT 
As soon as the diagnosis is made, manual replace￾ment should be attempted. If unsuccessful, transfer 
the patient to the operating theatre for replacement 
of the uterus under anaesthetic. If unsuccessful, 
attempt hydrostatic replacement by running 2–3 L of 
warm saline via tubing into the vagina using your 
hands to create a seal around the vulva. This causes 
vagina vault and cervical ballooning, which allows 
the uterus and placenta to gradually reduce thus cor￾recting the inversion. This is then conÿrmed manu￾ally and oxytocin is commenced once the uterus 
contracts in an attempt to maintain uterine con￾traction. If this is unsuccessful, surgical procedures 
including hysterectomy may be necessary. 
UTERINE RUPTURE 
Uterine rupture is a catastrophic event with signiÿ￾cant associated maternal and fetal morbidity and 
mortality. It most commonly occurs in women who 
have previously delivered by caesarean section. In 
the UK, between April 2009 and April 2010, the esti￾mated incidence of uterine rupture was 2 per 10,000 
pregnancies overall. These rates increased to 21 and 
3 per 10,000 pregnancies in women with a previous 
caesarean delivery planning vaginal or elective cae￾sarean delivery, respectively. Two women with uter￾ine rupture died (case fatality 1.3%, 95% CI 0.2–4.5). 
There were 18 perinatal deaths associated with uter￾ine rupture among 145 infants (perinatal mortality 
124 per 1,000 total births, 95% CI 75–189). 264 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 265 04/03/2024 16:08
 
 
Impacted head at caesarean section 
BOX 14.11: Uterine rupture: 
Prevention, risk factors and 
warning°signs 
˜ Prevention: reduce rates of primary caesarean 
section. Avoid vaginal delivery in women 
with previous myomectomies in which the 
endometrial cavity has been breached. Act with 
caution when inducing women with previous 
caesarean sections. 
˜ Risk factors: previous myomectomies that have 
breached the endometrial cavity. The odds of 
rupture are increased in women who had two 
or more previous caesarean deliveries (adjusted 
odds ratio (aOR) 3.02, 95% CI 1.16–7.85), 
when it has been less than 12 months since 
the last caesarean delivery (aOR 3.12, 95% CI 
1.62–6.02) and in labour induction and oxytocin 
use (aOR 3.92, 95% CI 1.00–15.33). The 
estimated incidence of uterine rupture was 2 per 
10,000 pregnancies overall and 21 and 3 per 
10,000 pregnancies in women with a previous 
caesarean delivery planning vaginal or elective 
caesarean delivery, respectively. 
˜ Warning signs: maternal shock, fetal distress/ 
unable to auscultate fetal heart, unable 
to palpate any presenting part on vaginal 
examination, severe sudden abdominal pain. 
MANAGEMENT 
An urgent laparotomy is required once uterine rup￾ture is diagnosed. Vaginal examination should be 
performed and the fetus delivered by the quickest 
route possible. Assisted vaginal delivery is reason￾able if the woman is fully dilated and safe vaginal 
delivery is possible. Regardless, an urgent lapa￾rotomy is then required to examine and repair the 
uterine rupture. 
IMPACTED HEAD AT CAESAREAN 
SECTION 
An impacted head at caesarean section can be an 
extremely stressful situation for the operating 
BOX 14.12: Impacted head at 
caesarean section: Prevention, risk 
factors and warning signs 
˜ Prevention: senior in-house supervision and 
help to deal with this emergency 
˜ Risk factors: full dilatation sections, 
malpresentations, prolonged second stage, 
intravenous Syntocinon™ prior to a decision 
to deliver by caesarean section, unsuccessful 
instrumental delivery, prolonged second stage, 
hyperstimulated uterus 
˜ Warning signs: see risk factors 
clinician and for the parents. Many obstetricians 
ÿrst encounter impaction of the fetal head while in 
training, often at night without immediate access 
to senior help. No ÿgures exist for the exact inci￾dence rates but it could potentially affect as many as 
20,000 births per year (there are 200,000 caesarean 
sections in the UK each year with approximately 
10% at full dilation). 
MANAGEMENT 
Full dilatation sections should have the obstetric 
consultant present in anticipation of this compli￾cation. Allow the uterus to relax before disimpact￾ing the head. Disengagement of the head requires 
°exion and rotation of the head into the trans￾verse position prior to delivery by lateral °exion. 
Forcing the head upwards risks trauma, including 
fractures to the fetal head and extension to the 
uterine angles, which can result in haemorrhage 
and damage to the viscera. If you are unable to °ex 
and rotate the head, consider the use of a uterine 
relaxant such as glyceryl trinitrate spray or terbu￾taline, but beware the risk of post-partum haem￾orrhage following the use of uterorelaxant agents. 
Other options include having a senior assistant 
°ex and rotate the head vaginally or the use of 
newer devices designed to release the vacuum 
that occurs between the fetal head and pelvis (e.g. 
C-Snorkel®). However, minimum evidence exists 
to support their use and extreme care must be 
taken to avoid iatrogenic trauma. 265 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 266 04/03/2024 16:08
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Obstetric emergencies 
FURTHER READING 
Knight M, Kenyon S, Brocklehurst P, Neilson J, 
Shakespeare J, Kurinczuk JJ (eds); MBRRACE-UK 
(2014). Saving Lives, Improving Mothers’ Care – 
Lessons learned to inform future maternity care 
from the UK and Ireland Conÿdential Enquiries into 
Maternal Deaths and Morbidity 2009–12. National 
Perinatal Epidemiology Unit, University of Oxford . 
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence 
(2010). Hypertension in Pregnancy: Diagnosis and 
Management. Clinical guideline [CG107]. http:// 
www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg107/resources/ 
guidance-hypertension-in-pregnancy-pdf. 
Paterson-Brown S, Howell C (2016). Managing 
Obstetric Emergencies and Trauma.The MOET 
Course Manual. Cambridge University Press. 
RCOG (2009). Green-top guideline No 37a. Reducing 
the risk of thrombosis and embolism during 
pregnancy and the puerperium. https://www. 
rcog.org.uk/guidance/browse-all-guidance/green￾top-guidelines/reducing-the-risk-of-thrombosis￾and-embolism-during-pregnancy-and-the-puer￾perium-green-top-guideline-no-37a/. 
RCOG (2009). Green-top guideline No 37b. The 
acute management of thrombosis and embolism 
during pregnancy and the puerpurium. https:// 
www.rcog.org.uk/guidance/browse-all-guidance/ 
green-top-guidelines/thrombosis-and-embolism￾during-pregnancy-and-the-puerperium-acute￾management-green-top-guideline-no-37b/. 
RCOG (2009). Green-top Guideline No 52. 
Prevention and management of postpartum 
haemorrhage. https://www.rcog.org.uk/globalas￾sets/documents/guidelines/gt52postpartumhaem￾orrhage0411.pdf. 
RCOG (2011). Green-top guideline No 56 . 
Maternal collapse in pregnancy and the puer￾perium. https://www.rcog.org.uk/guidance/ 
browse-all-guidance/green-top-guidelines/ 
maternal-collapse-in-pregnancy-and-the-puer￾perium-green-top-guideline-no-56/.
 RCOG (2012). Green-top guideline No 64a . Bacterial 
sepsis in pregnancy. https://www.rcog.org.uk/ 
globalassets/documents/guidelines/gtg_64a.pdf.
 RCOG (2014). Green-top guideline No 50 . Umbilical 
cord prolapse. https://www.rcog.org.uk/globalas￾sets/documents/guidelines/gtg-50-umbilicalcord￾prolapse-2014.pdf. 
SELF-ASSESSMENT 
For interactive SBAs and EMQs relating to this chapter, visit www.routledge.com/cw/mccarthy. 
CASE HISTORY 1 
Ms B is 39 weeks’ gestation in her second pregnancy. Her 
ÿrst pregnancy was a term delivery, delivered 11 months 
previously by caesarean section at 5 cm dilated due to 
failure to progress. Ms B was induced due to FGR and has 
been on oxytocin for 4 hours and has made good prog￾ress. She is now 9 cm dilated when she develops severe 
constant lower abdominal pain over the area of her scar. 
The midwife looking after her labour records the fetal heart 
rate as 46 beats per minute and calls an emergency alert.
 A What is the likely diagnosis?
 B What risk factors does Ms B have for this 
complication? 
C How would you manage this situation?
 ANSWERS
 A Ms B has likely ruptured her uterus due to the nature 
and location of the pain (constant and severe, worse 
above her scar) and the fetal bradycardia that has 
now occurred. Differential diagnosis includes fetal 
distress.
 B Ms B has had a previous caesarean section and has 
been induced due to FGR. The use of oxytocin also 
increased the risk of uterine rupture. Ms B has also 
had a short interpregnancy interval (<12 months), 
which increases the risk of uterine rupture. 
C Management involves calling for senior help (senior 
obstetrician, neonatal team, anaesthetic team), 
safe delivery of the fetus and repair of the rupture. 
Delivery of the fetus is by the safest quickest 
route. A vaginal examination should be performed 
and an assessment for vaginal delivery should 
be made. If vaginal delivery is possible, then this 
should be performed and an assessment should 
be undertaken for examination under anaesthetic 
and/or laparotomy. If vaginal delivery is not 
possible, the patient should be transferred to the 
operating theatre for category 1 caesarean section, 
examination under anaesthetic and laparotomy. 266 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 267 04/03/2024 16:08
Self-assessment 
CASE HISTORY 2 
Ms F is 30 minutes after a spontaneous vaginal delivery 
of a 4.7 kg baby boy. You are called to review her as 
the midwife noticed a ‘large gush’ of blood vaginally after 
she performed a routine palpitation of the uterine fundus, 
which she described as ‘soft’. The midwife looking after 
her informs you on arrival that her heart rate is 110 beats 
per minute and her blood pressure is 80/40 mmHg.
 A What is the likely diagnosis?
 B What risk factor does Ms F have for this 
complication? 
C What is the differential diagnosis? 
D How would you manage this situation? 
ANSWERS
 A Ms B is suffering from a post-partum haemorrhage 
likely secondary to uterine atony. She is now 
developing signs of signiÿcant blood loss.
 B Ms B has had a macrosomic baby, which 
increases her risk of uterine atony and post-partum 
haemorrhage. 
C Tone, tissue, trauma and thrombin are the main 
causes of post-partum haemorrhage. Although 
the description sounds most like uterine atony, it is 
important to complete a thorough assessment and 
ensure there are not other contributing factors such 
as a high vaginal wall tear that will require speciÿc 
management and repair. 
D Management involves calling for senior help (senior 
obstetrician, neonatal team, anaesthetic team). 
As uterine atony is the most likely cause, uterine 
massage should be started to stimulate uterine 
contractions and empty the uterus of clot. Ensure 
intravenous access and that appropriate bloods 
tests are sent. Administer intravenous ˜uids and 
uterotonic agents assessing the response after 
each medication is administered (see Figure 14.6 
for stepwise management and further detail). 
Post-partum haemorrhage management is often 
practised now in simulation training. 
267 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 269 04/03/2024 16:08
15 
Puerperium 
ANDREW D WEEKS 
Introduction 269 Breasts and breastfeeding 284 
Physiological changes 269 Contraception 289 
Recovery after childbirth 270 Perinatal death 289 
Puerperal disorders 275 Further reading 290 
Psychiatric disorders 281 Self-assessment 291 
 Learning Objectives 
• Understand the physiological changes that occur in the normal puerperium. 
• Understand the common disorders of the puerperium and how to manage them. 
• Understand the process of breastfeeding and common disorders associated with it. 
• Be able to recognize and manage common post-partum psychiatric disorders. 
INTRODUCTION PHYSIOLOGICAL CHANGES
The puerperium refers to the 6-week period follow￾ing completion of the third stage of labour, when 
considerable adjustments occur before return to the 
pre-pregnant state. For those with complex medical 
problems, the early puerperium is especially dan￾gerous, and most maternal deaths occur during this 
time (Figure 15.1). During this period of physiologi￾cal change, the mother is also vulnerable to psycho￾logical disturbances, which may be aggravated by 
adverse social circumstances. Adequate understand￾ing and support from the mother’s partner and fam￾ily are crucial. Difÿculty in coping with the newborn 
infant occurs more frequently with the ÿrst baby, and 
vigilant surveillance is therefore necessary by the 
community midwife, general practitioner (GP) and 
health visitor. 
 UTERINE INVOLUTION 
Involution is the process by which the post-partum 
uterus, weighing about 1 kg, returns to its pre-preg￾nancy state of less than 100 g. Immediately after 
delivery, the uterine fundus lies about 4 cm below 
the umbilicus or, more accurately, 12 cm above the 
symphysis pubis. However, by 2 weeks, the uterus 
becomes no longer palpable above the symphy￾sis (Figure 15.2). Involution occurs by a process of 
autolysis, whereby muscle cells diminish in size as 
a result of enzymatic digestion of cytoplasm. This 
has virtually no effect on the number of muscle cells, 
and the excess protein produced from autolysis is 
absorbed into the bloodstream and excreted in the 
urine. Involution appears to be accelerated by the 
269 
10.1201/9781003196112-15 ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 270 04/03/2024 16:08
Puerperium 
Number of deaths 
120 
100 
80 
60 
40 
20 
0 
UK maternal deaths 2016-2018 
<20 weeks >20 weeks Day of birth Postnatal 
(to 6 weeks) Direct deaths Indirect deaths 
Figure 15.1 Timing of maternal deaths in the UK, 
2016–2018. 
A B C
 Figure 15.2 Involution of the uterus. (A) Day 1: 18-week￾sized uterus (just below the umbilicus). (B) Day 7: 14-week￾sized uterus. (C) Day 14: 12-week-sized uterus. The uterus 
is larger following caesarean section and in multiparous 
women. 
release of oxytocin in women who are breastfeeding, 
as the uterus is smaller than in those who are bottle 
feeding. A delay in involution in the absence of any 
other signs or symptoms (e.g. bleeding) is of no clini￾cal signiÿcance. 
BOX 15.1: Causes of a high postnatal 
uterus 
˜ Full bladder 
˜ Loaded rectum 
˜ Retained products of conception (or clots) 
˜ Broad ligament haematoma (uterus is high and 
pushed laterally) 
˜ Uterine infection 
˜ Fibroids 
GENITAL TRACT CHANGES 
Following delivery of the placenta, the lower segment 
of the uterus and the cervix appear °abby and there 
may be small cervical lacerations. In the ÿrst few 
days, the cervix can readily admit two ÿngers; by the 
end of the ÿrst week it should become increasingly 
difÿcult to pass more than one ÿnger, and certainly 
by the end of the second week the internal os should 
be closed. However, the external os can remain open 
permanently, giving a characteristic funnel shape to 
the parous cervix. Assessment of the postnatal cer￾vix is important in diagnosing retained products of 
conception (see the section ‘Secondary post-partum 
haemorrhage’ later in this chapter). 
LOCHIA 
Lochia is postnatal blood-stained uterine discharge 
comprising blood and necrotic decidua. Only the 
superÿcial layer of decidua becomes necrotic and is 
sloughed off. The basal layer adjacent to the myome￾trium is involved in the regeneration of new endo￾metrium and this regeneration is complete by the 
third week. 
During the ÿrst few days after delivery, the 
lochia is red (lochia rubra) and this gradually 
changes to pink as the endometrium is formed. By 
the second week, the discharge becomes serous 
(lochia serosa) and then ÿnally turns to a scanty 
yellow-white discharge (lochia alba) that lasts 
for about 1 month. Persistent red lochia suggests 
delayed involution that is usually associated with 
infection or a retained piece of placental tissue (see 
the sections ‘Secondary post-partum haemorrhage’ 
and ‘Genital tract infection/puerperal sepsis’ later 
in this chapter). 
KEY LEARNING POINT 
Two weeks after birth, the lochia should no longer be 
red, the uterus should not be palpable above the sym￾physis pubis and pain from any perineal tears should 
be much improved or gone. 
RECOVERY AFTER CHILDBIRTH 
RECOVERY AFTER NORMAL BIRTH 
Childbirth is a process of enormous signiÿcance 
in human lives, and with it comes massive physi￾cal and emotional changes. Although most parents 
will describe it as the best, most exciting experience 
of their lives, others will have bad outcomes and 
describe it as their worst. However, whatever the 270 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 271 04/03/2024 16:08
 
 
 
 
Recovery after childbirth 
experience, there are very few who are not physically 
and emotionally drained in the ÿrst few weeks after 
childbirth. The combination of excitement, physical 
tiredness after labour and dealing with a demand￾ing newborn makes this a time during which moth￾ers (and fathers) often need a lot of support. Around 
the world, cultures have developed diverse ways of 
dealing with this. Traditionally, women from China 
and South India are conÿned to their homes for the 
ÿrst month postnatally, whereas traditional Sikh 
women are not allowed to cook for 40 days. Touch 
between men and women is prohibited while locia 
is being passed in some Orthodox Jewish couples 
and those from the Zulu tribe in South Africa. While 
some of these may seem strange in a modern world, 
these traditions recognize the enormity of what the 
woman had just been through and serve to provide 
new mothers with the chance to recover. 
Alongside the psychological changes (see the sec￾tion ‘Psychiatric disorders’ later in this chapter), the 
main physical effects are on the perineum, bladder 
and bowel. 
PERINEAL PAIN 
Perineal discomfort is a common problem for moth￾ers. About 80% complain of pain in the ÿrst 3 days 
after delivery, with a quarter continuing to suffer dis￾comfort at day 10. Discomfort is greatest in women 
who sustain spontaneous tears or have an episiot￾omy, especially following instrumental delivery. A 
number of non-pharmacological and pharmacologi￾cal therapies have been used with varying degrees 
of success. However, local cooling (with crushed ice, 
witch hazel or tap water) and topical anaesthetics, 
such as 5% lignocaine gel, provide short-term symp￾tomatic relief. Effective analgesia following perineal 
trauma can be achieved with regular paracetamol. 
If necessary, diclofenac given rectally or orally may 
also be added. Codeine derivatives are best avoided, 
as they cause constipation in the mother and drowsi￾ness in some breastfed babies. 
The perineum should be kept clean with daily 
cleaning or showering using tap water only, frequent 
changing of sanitary pads and handwashing before 
and after this (National Institute for Health and Care 
Excellence (NICE) 2021). Infections of the perineum 
are surprisingly uncommon considering the risk of 
bacterial contamination during delivery. However, 
all women should be asked about perineal pain, dis￾charge, swelling and wound breakdown at postna￾tal visits – women with sutures or symptoms should 
also be examined (NICE 2021). Signs of infection 
(redness, pain, swelling and heat), especially with a 
raised temperature, must be taken seriously. Swabs 
for microbiological culture should be taken from the 
infected perineum, and broad-spectrum antibiotics 
(see the section ‘Genital tract infection/puerperal 
sepsis’ later in this chapter) should be commenced. 
If there is a collection of pus, drainage should be 
encouraged by removal of any skin sutures; other￾wise, infection can spread, with increasing morbidity 
and a poor anatomical result. 
Spontaneous opening of repaired perineal tears 
and episiotomies is usually the result of secondary 
infection. Surgical repair should never be attempted 
in the presence of infection. The wound should be 
irrigated twice daily and healing allowed to occur 
by secondary intention. If there is a large, gaping 
wound, secondary repair should be performed only 
when the infection has cleared, there is no cellulitis 
or exudate present, and healthy granulation tissue 
can be seen. 
BLADDER FUNCTION 
Voiding difÿculties and overdistension of the blad￾der are not uncommon after childbirth, especially 
if regional anaesthesia (epidural/spinal) has been 
used. It is now known that after epidural anaes￾thesia the bladder may take up to 8 hours to regain 
normal sensation. During this time, about 1 litre of 
urine may be produced. Therefore, if urinary reten￾tion occurs, considerable damage may be in°icted 
on the detrusor muscle. Overstretching of the 
detrusor muscle can dampen bladder sensation and 
make the bladder hypocontractile, particularly with 
ÿbrous replacement of smooth muscle. In this situ￾ation, over°ow incontinence of small amounts of 
urine may erroneously be assumed to be normal 
voiding. Fluid loading prior to epidural analgesia, 
the antidiuretic effect of high concentrations of oxy￾tocin during labour, increased post-partum diuresis 
(particularly in the presence of peripheral oedema) 
and increased °uid intake by breastfeeding moth￾ers all contribute to increased urine production in 271 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 272 04/03/2024 16:08
 
 
 
 
Puerperium 
the puerperium. Therefore, an intake/output chart 
alone may not detect incomplete emptying of the 
bladder. 
Women who have undergone a traumatic deliv￾ery, such as a difÿcult instrumental delivery, or 
who have suffered multiple/extended lacerations or 
a vulvovaginal haematoma may ÿnd it difÿcult to 
void because of pain or periurethral oedema. Other 
causes of pain, such as prolapsed haemorrhoids, anal 
ÿssures, abdominal wound haematoma or even stool 
impaction of the rectum may interfere with voiding. 
The midwife needs to be particularly vigilant after 
an epidural or spinal anaesthetic to avoid bladder 
distension. A distended bladder either would be pal￾pable as a suprapubic cystic mass or may displace the 
uterus laterally or upwards, thereby increasing the 
height of the uterine fundus. 
A formal assessment of bladder function is best 
made 6 hours postnatally, at which time the woman 
should have passed at least 300 mL of urine. If, after 
another attempt, they have passed less than that (or 
none at all), then a small intermittent catheter can 
be inserted, which should drain less than 150 mL. 
Those with more than this need close observation, 
but if there is over 1 litre of urine in the bladder then 
an indwelling catheter is left in for 48 hours to allow 
periurethral swelling to settle. 
To minimize the risk of overdistension of the 
bladder in women who have had a spinal anaesthetic 
(for caesarean section or manual removal of the pla￾centa), a urinary catheter is left in the bladder for at 
least 12 hours until the woman is mobile. 
Although vaginal delivery is strongly implicated 
in the long-term development of urinary stress 
incontinence, it rarely poses a problem in the early 
puerperium. Therefore, any incontinence should be 
investigated to exclude a vesicovaginal, urethro￾vaginal or, rarely, ureterovaginal ÿstula. Obstetric 
ÿstulae are rare in the UK, but are a source of consid￾erable morbidity in developing countries as a com￾plication of obstructed labour. Prolonged pressure of 
the fetal head on the bladder or urethra causes pres￾sure necrosis, and incontinence follows in the second 
week when the slough separates. Small ÿstulae may 
close spontaneously after a few weeks of free bladder 
drainage; large ÿstulae will require surgical repair by 
a specialist. 
KEY LEARNING POINT 
To prevent overdistension of the postnatal bladder, 
check that a woman has passed at least 300 mL in the 
ÿrst 6 hours after giving birth. If they haven’t, then use 
a catheter or ultrasound to check that less than 150 mL 
remains in the bladder after voiding. 
BOWEL FUNCTION 
Constipation is a common problem in the early 
puerperium as a result of an interruption in the 
normal diet, intra-partum dehydration and opiate 
use. Advice on adequate °uid intake and increase in 
ÿbre intake may be all that is necessary. However, 
constipation may also be the result of fear of evacu￾ation due to pain from a sutured perineum, pro￾lapsed haemorrhoids or anal ÿssures. Avoidance of 
constipation and straining is of utmost importance 
in women who have sustained a third- or fourth￾degree tear. A large, hard stool in this situation could 
disrupt the repaired anal sphincter and cause anal 
incontinence. It is therefore important to ensure that 
these women are prescribed lactulose and ispaghula 
husk or methylcellulose immediately after the repair, 
for a period of 2 weeks. 
The high prevalence of anal incontinence and 
faecal urgency following childbirth has only recently 
been recognized. One prospective study using anal 
endosonography at 6 weeks following vaginal birth 
identiÿed evidence of occult anal sphincter trauma 
in a third of primiparous women (only 13% were 
symptomatic) and in a remarkable 80% of those 
who had undergone forceps delivery. Larger, retro￾spective, short-term studies of parous women indi￾cate a symptom prevalence of between 6% and 10%. 
Long-term anal incontinence following primary 
repair of a third- or fourth-degree tear occurs in 
5% of women, and anovaginal/rectovaginal ÿstulae 
occur in 2–4% of these women (Figure 15.3). It is 
therefore important to consider a ÿstula as a cause 
of anal incontinence in the post-partum period, 
particularly if the woman complains of passing 
wind or stool per vagina. Approximately 50% of 
small anovaginal ÿstulae will close spontaneously 
over a period of 6 months, but larger ÿstulae will 
require formal repair. 
272 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 273 04/03/2024 16:08
 
Recovery after childbirth 
Anal Defect in external Internal
anal epithelium sphincter 
sphincter 
defect 
Internal External 
anal anal A B sphincter Probe sphincter 
Figure 15.3 (A) Transanal ultrasound showing the anal mucosa and anterior disruption of the internal 
anal sphincter (dark band) following a third-degree tear at delivery. (B) Diagrammatic representation of (A). 
PELVIC FLOOR EXERCISES 
It is a widespread belief that pelvic °oor exercises 
tone up the muscles of the pelvic °oor and should 
therefore be advocated in the post-partum period. 
However, large randomized trials to evaluate their 
beneÿt in preventing genital prolapse, urinary 
incontinence or anal incontinence are lacking. There 
is also no evidence that antenatal exercises prevent 
incontinence or prolapse. However, as general exer￾cise is known to strengthen striated muscle and as 
pelvic °oor exercises are unlikely to be harmful, 
women are still taught postnatal exercises. This 
should also serve to cultivate a feeling of pelvic °oor 
awareness, so that women with pelvic °oor dysfunc￾tion seek medical help sooner. 
RECOVERY FROM CAESAREAN 
SECTION 
Many women now deliver their baby by caesarean 
section. Although this reduces the risk of pelvic °oor 
problems, it increases the risk of other complica￾tions including infection (wound, urine and chest), 
anaemia and thromboembolism. The infective risks 
are discussed in the section ‘Genital tract infection/ 
puerperal sepsis’ later in this chapter, but are reduced 
by routine antibiotics at the time of caesarean sec￾tion and careful wound care. The wound should be 
covered by a sterile dressing in theatre, which is 
removed after 24 hours. Women are advised to gen￾tly clean and dry the wound daily with tap water. 
Sutures or staples are removed on the ÿfth day. 
Anaemia is common post-operatively and, given 
the inaccuracy of blood loss estimation, all women 
should have their haemoglobin levels measured post￾operatively (ideally on day 2 or 3). Asymptomatic 
women with mild to moderate anaemia (haemoglo￾bin >7 g/dL) can be treated with iron tablets, while 
the post-operative recovery of those with severe 
anaemia will be helped greatly by an iron infusion or 
blood transfusion. 
The combination of abdominal surgery, pre￾operative bed rest and physiological changes in 
clotting makes women who have had a caesarean 
section particularly prone to thromboembolism. 
Other risk factors include thrombophilias, immo￾bility, previous thromboembolism, pre-eclampsia, 
post-partum haemorrhage (PPH), obesity, mul￾tiple pregnancy and smoking. Early mobilization 
and good hydration are important for all women, 
with 1–6 weeks of low-molecular-weight heparin 
given to those with multiple risk factors. In the UK, 
early mobilization is now encouraged, with low￾risk women being discharged from hospital on day 
1 or 2 following caesarean section. The changes 
discussed here have contributed to a decrease in 
thromboembolism deaths in the UK from a peak 
273 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 274 04/03/2024 16:08
 
Puerperium 
of 2.2 per 100,000 births in 1994–1996 to 0.92 per 
100,000 in 2017–2019. 
After the ÿrst few days, women who have under￾gone caesarean section should not have routine bed 
rest but should slowly increase their activity levels 
aided by oral analgesia as required. They can resume 
activities such as carrying heavy items, formal exer￾cise, sexual intercourse and driving once they have 
returned to their pre-caesarean section strength 
with no physical restrictions or pain. 
POSTNATAL VISITS 
The degree of care provided by the health service var￾ies from country to country. In the UK, a mother who 
has delivered in hospital may be discharged within 6 
hours of an uncomplicated birth, although they may 
request to stay longer. Globally, however, the World 
Health Organization (WHO) recommends that 
women who give birth in a facility stay for at least 24 
hours for monitoring before discharge (Table 15.1). 
Traditionally, a midwife would visit the mother and 
newborn daily for a minimum of 10 days after deliv￾ery, with the health visitor taking on continuing care 
for up to 4 weeks. However, postnatal care is generally 
now a demand-led service for low-risk women, with 
Table 15.1 Minimum postnatal care package 
recommendations by NICE (2021) and WHO (2013) 
NICE guidelines WHO guidelines 
Discharged home at 
6˜hours after facility birth 
Minimum 24-hour stay 
after facility birth 
First postnatal visit within 
36 hours by midwife 
Home visit by health 
worker within 24 hours 
after home birth 
Visit by health visitor in 
ÿrst 7 days if not visited 
antenatally 
Home visit at day 2 or 3 
by health worker 
Health visitor home visit at 
7–14 days 
Home visit at 7–14 days 
by health worker 
General practitioner 
postnatal review at 
6–8˜weeks 
Postnatal review at 
6˜weeks with health 
worker 
Additional visits or stays in the facility are arranged for those with 
complications or additional needs. 
Source: NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence; 
WHO, World Health Organization. 
only one routine midwifery visit before care is handed 
over to the health visitor. More frequent visits will be 
required for high-risk women, for those with difÿ￾cult social circumstances or if an abnormality such as 
hypertension or a pyrexia has been detected. 
BOX 15.2: Maternal health 
components of postnatal care visits 
Postnatal assessments of physical health 
(NICE 2021) 
˜ Infection-related symptoms 
˜ Nipple and breast discomfort 
˜ Pain 
˜ Symptoms of thromboembolism 
˜ Vaginal discharge and bleeding 
˜ Symptoms of anaemia 
˜ Bladder function 
˜ Symptoms of pre-eclampsia 
˜ Bowel function 
˜ Healing of any wounds (perineal or caesarean 
section) 
˜ Examination to include temperature, pulse, pallor 
and wounds 
˜ Test blood pressure and urine for protein 
Topics for postnatal discussion (NICE 2021) 
˜ The postnatal period and what to expect 
˜ Postnatal mental health problems and how to 
seek help 
˜ Danger signs and how to seek help 
˜ Pelvic °oor exercises 
˜ Fatigue 
˜ Diet, physical activity, smoking, alcohol and drug 
use 
˜ Sexual intercourse and contraception 
˜ Domestic violence 
Additional topics in low- or middle-income 
settings (WHO 2013) 
˜ Importance of birth spacing 
˜ Hygiene and handwashing 
˜ Safer sex and condoms 
˜ Importance of bed nets at night in malaria￾endemic areas 
˜ Early mobilization, adopting gentle exercise with 
plenty of rest 
˜ Routine oral iron and folate supplements 
Additional topics on infant care and breastfeeding are 
covered in the relevant sections in this chapter. 
274 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 275 04/03/2024 16:08
 
Puerperal disorders 
At each visit, women should be speciÿcally asked 
about their recovery, including bowel and bladder 
function, fatigue, headache and perineum (see Box 
15.2, ‘Maternal health components of postnatal care 
visits’). Further questions will cover breastfeeding 
and the health of the newborn (see Chapter˜ 16). 
During this time, it is crucial that women are also 
provided with information about danger signs 
(Table˜ 15.2) and given emotional support. They 
should also be provided with contact details of where 
they can get information. Mothers who are not 
rubella immune should be offered immunization. 
Table 15.2 Signs and symptoms of potentially serious 
postnatal conditions for which women should seek 
immediate medical advice 
 Signs and symptoms Condition 
Sudden or very heavy vaginal 
bleeding, persistent or 
increased vaginal bleeding, 
or passage of clots, 
placental tissue or 
membranes*
 Retained placental 
tissue or endometritis 
Abdominal, pelvic or perineal 
pain, fever, shivering or 
vaginal discharge with an 
unpleasant smell
 Infection 
Leg swelling and tenderness 
or shortness of breath 
Venous 
thromboembolism 
Chest pain Venous 
thromboembolism or 
cardiac problems 
Persistent or severe 
headache
 Hypertension, 
pre-eclampsia, 
postdural-puncture 
headache, migraine, 
intracranial pathology 
or infection
 Worsening reddening and 
swelling of breasts persisting 
for more than 24 hours 
despite self-management
 Mastitis 
Source: Based on NICE (2021). 
* NICE guidelines recommend taking extra care if women are 
anaemic or have a booking weight of under 50 kg (NICE 2021). 
NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence; WHO, 
World Health Organization. 
The only routine tests to be performed at every 
postnatal visit are the maternal blood pressure, 
pulse, temperature and urinalysis. Other maternal 
examinations and observations should be deter￾mined by the mother’s condition and symptoms (see 
Table 15.2). For example, those with offensive vagi￾nal loss or signs of infection will require pulse and 
temperature assessments along with an assessment 
of uterine involution. Those who have had a PPH or 
who have abnormal vaginal bleeding will require an 
assessment of uterine involution along with pulse 
and blood pressure. For women with antenatal anae￾mia, complicated deliveries or PPH, the haemoglo￾bin level should be checked between day 1 and day 
3 and iron should be offered to those who are anae￾mic. Women who are particularly symptomatic or 
who have a haemoglobin level of <7 g/dL should be 
offered an iron infusion or blood transfusion. 
At 2 weeks postnatally, women should be speciÿ￾cally asked about the resolution of the ‘baby blues’ 
(see the section ‘Pathophysiology of post-partum 
affective disorders’ later in this chapter). 
A formal postnatal examination is generally car￾ried out at about 6 weeks’ post-partum by the GP, or 
by the obstetrician if delivery was complicated. The 
examination includes an assessment of the woman’s 
mental and physical health (see Table 15.3), as well 
as the progress of the baby. In particular, direct 
questions should be asked about urinary, bowel 
and sexual function. Incontinence and dyspareunia 
are embarrassing issues that women do not readily 
discuss. Weight, urine analysis and blood pressure 
are checked and an examination is performed as 
required. If a cervical smear is due, it can be taken, 
although it is preferable to wait until 3 months’ post￾partum. Contraception, pelvic °oor exercises and 
infant immunizations are also discussed. 
PUERPERAL DISORDERS
 HYPERTENSION 
During pregnancy, women with hypertension are 
carefully managed with monitoring, antihyperten￾sives and timed delivery to prevent complications. 
After childbirth, however, they often receive less 
attention, even though they remain at signiÿcant 275 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 276 04/03/2024 16:08
 
Puerperium 
Table 15.3 Diagnosis and management of puerperal pyrexia 
Symptoms Diagnosis Speciÿc investigations Management
 Cough
 Purulent sputum 
Dyspnoea
 Pneumonia Sputum M, C & S Chest X-ray Physiotherapy
 Antibiotics
 Sore throat
 Cervical lymphadenopathy
 Tonsillitis Throat swab Antibiotics
 Headaches 
Neck stiffness (epidural/ 
spinal anaesthetic)
 Meningitis Lumbar puncture Antibiotics
 Dysuria 
Loin pain and tenderness
 Pyelonephritis Urine M, C & S Antibiotics 
Increased ˛uid intake
 Secondary PPH 
Tender bulky uterus
 Endometritis or 
retained placental 
tissue 
Clinical diagnosis with or without 
pelvic ultrasound
 Antibiotics and/or 
uterine evacuation
 Pelvic/calf pain/tenderness Deep vein 
thrombosis 
Doppler/venogram of legs Low-molecular-weight 
heparin
 Chest pain
 Dyspnoea
 Pulmonary embolism Chest X-ray and blood gases, 
lung perfusion scan, angiogram
 Low-molecular-weight 
heparin 
Painful engorged breasts Mastitis or breast 
abscess
 Clinical examination 
M, C & S of expressed milk
 Express milk
 Antibiotics 
Incision and drainage 
M, C & S, microscopy, culture and sensitivity; PPH, post-partum haemorrhage. 
risk for the ÿrst week. Nearly half of all eclamp￾tic ÿts occur postnatally, and it is the highest risk 
time for °uid overload. Those with severe pre￾eclampsia should be managed for the ÿrst 24 hours 
on a high-dependency unit until their blood pres￾sure is controlled and they achieve a good diuresis 
(see Chapter 9). Those with mild or moderate pre￾eclampsia are managed on a postnatal ward until 
stable. They should continue any antenatally pre￾scribed antihypertensives with the aim of keeping 
their blood pressure under 150/100 mmHg. Labetalol 
or slow-release nifedipine are good choices for this, 
and are commonly needed for 1–2 weeks postnatally. 
First-line therapy for new-onset postnatal hyperten￾sion is nifedipine or amlodipine (if of African origin) 
or enalapril (if of European origin). For more con￾trol, these can be combined or atenolol or labetalol 
can be added. At home, the blood pressure is mea￾sured every 2 days and the dosage halved when it is 
<140/90 mmHg. Those who are still on antihyper￾tensives 6 weeks postnatally should be referred for 
specialist assessment. Women should be informed 
that the recurrence risk of pre-eclampsia is around 
15% (higher still if it was early onset) and that their 
long-term risk of developing cardiovascular disease 
is doubled. 
SECONDARY POST-PARTUM 
HAEMORRHAGE 
Secondary PPH is deÿned as fresh bleeding from 
the genital tract between 24 hours and 6 weeks 
after delivery (see Chapter 14). The most common 
time for secondary PPH is between days 7 and 14. 
The cause is usually either endometritis or retained 
placental tissue, and it is often very difÿcult to dis￾tinguish between them. Classically, women with 
endometritis have constant low abdominal pain and 
a tender uterus with a closed internal os. In con￾trast, women with retained products of conception 
have crampy low abdominal pain and a uterus larger 
than appropriate (see Figure 15.2) with an open 
276 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 277 04/03/2024 16:08
 
 
 
 
Puerperal disorders 
internal os. There is often a history of a prolonged 
third stage of labour or sometimes the passage of 
bits of placental tissue or membranes. Both endo￾metritis and retained products may have symptoms 
and signs of infection with low-grade fever, pun￾gent lochia and uterine tenderness. Those bleeding 
heavily will require circulatory support with °uids or 
blood along with strong oxytocics (e.g. ergometrine) 
and uterine evacuation. Antibiotics should be given 
if placental tissue is found, even without evidence of 
overt infection. If blood loss is not excessive, the use 
of pelvic ultrasound to exclude retained products is 
sometimes used, but is only helpful if the uterus is 
seen to be empty. Debris, clots and °uid are com￾monly found even within the normal post-partum 
uterus and their presence does not mean that there 
is retained placental tissue. In the absence of a clear 
diagnosis, expectant management with empirical 
antibiotics is often used. Other causes of secondary 
PPH include hormonal contraception, bleeding dis￾orders (e.g. von Willebrand disease) and, occasion￾ally, choriocarcinoma. 
OBSTETRIC PALSY 
Obstetric palsy, or traumatic neuritis, is a condition 
in which one or both lower limbs develop signs of a 
motor and/or sensory neuropathy following delivery. 
Presenting features include sciatic pain, foot-drop, 
paraesthesia, hypoaesthesia and muscle wasting. The 
mechanism of injury is proximal nerve damage when 
the lumbosacral plexus and nerve tracks are stretched 
and compressed by the fetal head as they cross the 
pelvic brim. It is almost always associated with pro￾longed or obstructed labour and is now very rare 
following modern labour management. If obstetric 
paralysis develops following a normal labour, then 
epidural complications and/or herniation of lumbo￾sacral discs should be excluded, particularly if the 
woman has been in an exaggerated lithotomy posi￾tion for instrumental delivery. Peroneal nerve palsy 
can occur when the nerve is compressed between 
the head of the ÿbula and the lithotomy pole, result￾ing in unilateral foot-drop. The development of uri￾nary and faecal incontinence is most likely due to 
structural damage to the anal sphincter muscle and 
supporting fascia. 
SYMPHYSIS PUBIS DIASTASIS 
Spontaneous separation of the symphysis pubis 
occurs in at least 1 in 800 vaginal deliveries. It is usu￾ally noticed after delivery and has been associated 
with forceps delivery, a rapid second stage of labour 
or severe abduction of the thighs during delivery. 
Common signs and symptoms include symphyseal 
pain aggravated by weight-bearing and walking, 
a waddling gait, pubic tenderness and a palpable 
interpubic gap. Treatment includes bed rest, anti￾in°ammatory agents, physiotherapy and a pelvic 
corset to provide support and stability. 
THROMBOEMBOLISM 
The risk of thromboembolic disease rises ÿvefold 
during pregnancy and the puerperium. The majority 
of fatal thromboembolisms occur in the puerperium 
and are more common after caesarean section. Those 
at high risk may be given prophylactic heparin injec￾tions. If deep vein thrombosis or pulmonary embo￾lism is suspected, full anticoagulant therapy should 
be commenced and a lower limb compression ultra￾sound and/or lung scan should be carried out within 
24–48 hours (see Chapters 6 and 14). 
PUERPERAL PYREXIA 
Signiÿcant puerperal pyrexia is deÿned as a temper￾ature of 38°C or higher on any 2 of the ÿrst 10 days 
post-partum, excluding the ÿrst 24 hours. A mildly 
elevated temperature is not uncommon in the ÿrst 24 
hours, but any pyrexia associated with tachycardia 
merits investigation. In about 80% of women who 
develop a temperature in the ÿrst 24 hours following 
a vaginal delivery, no obvious evidence of infection 
can be identiÿed. The reverse holds true for women 
delivering by caesarean section, when a wound 
infection should be considered. Common sites asso￾ciated with puerperal pyrexia include chest, throat, 
breasts, urinary tract, pelvic organs, caesarean or 
perineal wounds, and legs (Table 15.3). 
CHEST COMPLICATIONS 
Chest complications are most likely to appear in the 
ÿrst 24 hours after delivery, particularly after general 
277 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 278 04/03/2024 16:08
 
Puerperium 
anaesthesia. Atelectasis may be associated with fever 
and can be prevented by early and regular chest 
physiotherapy. Aspiration pneumonia (Mendelson 
syndrome) must be suspected if there is a spiking 
temperature associated with wheezing, dyspnoea or 
evidence of hypoxia following a general anaesthetic. 
GENITAL TRACT INFECTION/ 
PUERPERAL SEPSIS 
Genital tract infection following delivery is referred 
to as puerperal sepsis and is synonymous with older 
descriptions of puerperal fever, milk fever and child￾bed fever. It was not realized until the mid-19th cen￾tury that the high maternal mortality and morbidity 
in the UK was due to poor hygiene; the establishment 
of lying-in hospitals and overcrowding perpetuated 
the condition to epidemic proportions. Until 1937, 
puerperal sepsis was the major cause of maternal 
mortality. The discovery of sulphonamides in 1935 
and improved hygiene at the time of birth resulted in 
a dramatic fall in maternal mortality. However, sur￾veys continue to show that, around the world, sepsis 
deaths are still common, accounting for around 10% 
of all maternal deaths. 
AETIOLOGY 
A mixed °ora with low virulence normally colo￾nizes the vagina. Puerperal infection is usually 
polymicrobial and involves contaminants from the 
bowel that colonize the perineum and lower genital 
tract (see Box 15.3, ‘Organisms commonly associ￾ated with puerperal genital infection’). Following 
delivery, natural barriers to infection are temporar￾ily removed and therefore organisms with a patho￾genic potential can ascend from the lower genital 
tract into the uterine cavity. Placental separation 
exposes a large raw area equivalent to an open 
wound, and retained products of conception and 
blood clots within the uterus can provide an excel￾lent culture medium for infection. Furthermore, 
vaginal delivery is commonly associated with lac￾erations of the genital tract (uterus, cervix and 
vagina). Although these lacerations may not need 
surgical repair, they can become a focus for infec￾tion similar to iatrogenic wounds, such as caesarean 
section and episiotomy. 
BOX 15.3: Organisms commonly 
associated with puerperal genital 
infection 
Aerobes 
˜ Gram-positive: 
– beta-haemolytic Streptococcus, groups A, 
B and D 
– Staphylococcus epidermidis and S. aureus 
– enterococci – Streptococcus faecalis 
˜ Gram-negative: 
– Escherichia coli 
– Haemophilus in˜ uenzae 
– Klebsiella pneumoniae 
– Pseudomonas aeruginosa 
– Proteus mirabilis 
˜ Gram-variable: 
– Gardenella vaginalis 
Anaerobes 
– Peptococcus sp. 
– Peptostreptococcus sp. 
– Bacteroides sp. – B. fragilis, B. bivius and B. 
disiens 
– Fusobacterium sp. 
Miscellaneous 
– Chlamydia trachomatis 
– Mycoplasma hominis 
– Ureaplasma urealyticum 
BOX 15.4: Common risk factors for 
puerperal infection 
˜ Underlying conditions: 
– obesity 
– diabetes 
– human immunodeÿciency virus (HIV) 
˜ Antenatal: 
– chorioamnionitis 
– prolonged rupture of membranes 
– cervical cerclage for cervical incompetence 
˜ Intra-partum: 
– prolonged labour 
– multiple vaginal examinations 
– instrumental delivery 
– caesarean section 
– manual removal of the placenta 
– retained products of conception 
278 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 279 04/03/2024 16:08
 
 
Puerperal disorders 
PREVENTION 
Increased awareness of the principles of general 
hygiene, a good surgical approach and the use of 
aseptic techniques have all contributed to the decline 
in severe puerperal sepsis. Unfortunately, although 
it is over 150 years since the Hungarian obstetrician 
Ignaz Semelweiss identiÿed the importance of hand￾washing for preventing spread of infection between 
postnatal women, poor attention to hand-washing 
remains a signiÿcant problem. The arrival of alcohol￾based hand rubs has facilitated the process: every 
clinician should use them regularly in clinical areas, 
at least between every patient contact. The risk of 
postnatal infection is higher following caesarean 
section, preterm pre-labour rupture of membranes, 
operative vaginal births, manual removal of placenta 
or third-degree tears, but can be prevented by rou￾tine prophylactic antibiotics. For caesarean sections, 
a single intraoperative dose of antibiotics (penicillin 
or ÿrst-generation cephalosporin) is given before the 
skin incision. Antibiotic prophylaxis should also be 
used for those with group B Streptococcus coloniza￾tion. Puerperal parametritis develops in a third of 
women who had a pre-existing C. trachomatis infec￾tion, but presentation is usually delayed. The risk of 
postnatal infection can be further reduced by vagi￾nal cleansing with chlorhexidine or povidone-iodine 
prior to emergency caesarean section. The problem of 
resistant bacteria (e.g. methicillin-resistant S. aureus 
[MRSA]) has led some units to routinely screen all 
women admitted electively to the hospital so that 
those carrying the resistant bacteria can be barrier 
nursed to prevent their spread. 
CLINICAL PRESENTATION 
There are a number of factors that determine the 
clinical course and severity of the infection, namely 
the general health and resistance of the woman, the 
virulence of the offending organism, the presence of 
haematoma or retained products of conception, the 
timing of antibiotic therapy and associated risk fac￾tors. The common methods of spread of puerperal 
infection are as follows: 
• An ascending infection from the lower genital 
tract or primary infection of the placental 
site may spread via the fallopian tubes to the 
ovaries, giving rise to a salpingo-oophoritis 
and pelvic peritonitis. This could progress to a 
generalized peritonitis and the development of 
pelvic abscesses. 
• Infection may spread directly into the 
myometrium and the parametrium, giving rise 
to an endometritis or parametritis, also referred 
to as pelvic cellulitis. Pelvic peritonitis and 
abscesses may also occur. 
• Infection may spread to distant sites via 
lymphatics and blood vessels. Infection from 
the uterus can be carried by uterine vessels into 
the inferior vena cava via the iliac vessels or, 
directly, via the ovarian vessels. This could give 
rise to a septic thrombophlebitis, pulmonary 
infections or generalized septicaemia and 
endotoxic shock. 
In contrast with pelvic in°ammatory disease 
unrelated to pregnancy, tubal involvement in puer￾peral sepsis is in the form of peri-salpingitis, which, 
Table 15.4 Investigations for puerperal genital infections 
Investigations Abnormalities 
Full blood count Anaemia, leucocytosis 
and thrombocytopaenia 
Urea and electrolytes Fluid and electrolyte 
imbalance 
Culture of blood, sputum 
or breast milk or swabs 
from high vagina, wound 
or throat 
Bacterial or viral culture 
Chest X-ray Evidence of infection 
Pelvic ultrasound Retained products and 
pelvic abscess 
Clotting screen 
(haemorrhage or shock) 
Disseminated 
intravascular 
coagulation 
Blood lactate Lactic acid ˝2 mmol/L 
(can be raised 
immediately after birth 
so serial samples are 
useful) 
Blood gas (arterial if 
respiratory effects) 
Acidosis and hypoxia 
(shock), hypoglycaemia 
and lactic acidosis 
279 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 280 04/03/2024 16:08
Puerperium 
Table 15.5 Risk stratiÿcation for suspected sepsis BOX 15.5: Symptoms of puerperal 
pelvic infection 
˜ Malaise, headache, fever and rigors 
˜ Abdominal discomfort, vomiting and diarrhoea 
˜ Offensive lochia 
˜ Secondary PPH 
BOX 15.6: Signs of puerperal pelvic 
infection 
˜ Pyrexia and tachycardia 
˜ Uterus – boggy, tender and larger 
˜ Infected wounds – caesarean/perineal 
˜ Peritonism 
˜ Paralytic ileus 
˜ Indurated adnexae (parametritis) 
˜ Bogginess in pelvis (abscess) 
rarely, causes tubal occlusion and consequent infer￾tility. Tubo-ovarian abscesses are also a rare com￾plication of puerperal sepsis. Investigations for 
puerperal genital infections are shown in Table 15.4. 
MANAGEMENT 
Mild to moderate infections can be treated with a 
broad-spectrum antibiotic (e.g. co-amoxiclav or a 
cephalosporin, such as cefalexin, plus metronida￾zole). Depending on the severity, the ÿrst few doses 
should be given intravenously. 
With severe infections, there is a release of in°am￾matory and vasoactive mediators in response to the 
endotoxins produced during bacteriolysis. The resul￾tant local vasodilatation causes circulatory embar￾rassment and hence poor tissue perfusion. This 
phenomenon is known as septicaemic, septic or endo￾toxic shock, and the features are shown in Table 15.5. 
Delay in appropriate management could be fatal and 
immediate high-dose, broad-spectrum antibiotics and 
resuscitation with intravenous °uids must be provided 
on a high-dependency unit. Close liaison with micro￾biologists and internal medicine specialists is vital. 
Necrotizing fasciitis is a rare but frequently 
fatal infection of the skin, fascia and muscle. It 
 Moderate- to 
high-risk criteria Severe sepsis 
Patient or family reports 
new onset of altered 
behaviour or mental 
state 
Objective evidence of new 
altered mental state 
Respiratory rate: 21–24 
breaths per minute 
(counted over 60 
seconds) 
Respiratory rate ˝25 breaths 
per minute (counted over 
60 seconds), or need for 
oxygen to keep O2 
saturation >92%. 
Systolic blood pressure: 
91–100 mmHg 
Systolic blood pressure: ˙90 
mmHg (or >40 mmHg 
below normal)
 Heart rate: 100–130 
beats per minute or 
new onset arrhythmia 
Heart rate: >130 beats per 
minute 
Not passed urine in past 
12–18 hours (or urine 
output 0.5–1 mL/kg if 
catheterized) 
Not passed urine in past 18 
hours (or urine output <0.5 
mL/kg if catheterized) 
Signs of potential 
infection at surgical 
site 
Skin mottled or ashen, 
cyanosis and non￾blanching skin rash
 Tympanic temperature: 
<36°C 
Source: Based on National Institute for Health and Care 
Excellence (NICE) 2017. If there are any criteria for severe 
sepsis, emergency investigation and treatment is needed. If 
any moderate- to high-risk criteria are identiÿed, urgent clinical 
review is needed within an hour. 
can originate in perineal tears, episiotomies and 
caesarean section wounds. Perineal infections 
extend rapidly to involve the buttocks, thighs 
and lower abdominal wall. A variety of bacteria 
can be involved, but anaerobes predominate and 
Clostridium perfringens is usually identiÿed. In addi￾tion to general signs of infection, there is extensive 
necrosis, crepitus and in°ammation. As well as the 
measures usually taken to manage septic shock, 
wide debridement of necrotic tissue under general 
anaesthesia is absolutely essential to avoid mortal￾ity. Split-thickness skin grafts may be necessary at 
a later date. 
280 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 281 04/03/2024 16:08
 
 
Psychiatric disorders 
BOX 15.7: Sepsis management 
(actions to be completed within 
an°hour) 
˜ Administer oxygen (aim for oxygen saturation of 
94–98%) 
˜ Take blood for culture (also for full blood count, 
C-reactive protein, urea and electrolytes, liver 
function tests and coagulation) 
˜ Check lactate (if ˛2 mmol/L, repeat after °uid 
challenge) 
˜ Give intravenous °uids (if hypotensive or lactate 
>2, give 500 mL over 15 minutes) 
˜ Give intravenous antibiotics within 1 hour 
˜ Measure urine output accurately (insert catheter, 
use °uid balance chart) 
˜ Identify source (cultures, chest X-ray and 
electrocardiogram as indicated) 
PSYCHIATRIC DISORDERS 
Although the incidence of mild mental health prob￾lems is not signiÿcantly different during pregnancy, 
the risk of bipolar or severe depressive illness is 
greatly increased post-partum and this period 
represents the highest risk period in a woman’s 
life for the development of a psychiatric disorder. 
Furthermore, women with previous serious men￾tal health problems are at high risk of a recurrence 
during both the antepartum and post-partum peri￾ods. A multidisciplinary approach, supervised by 
specialist perinatal mental health teams, is vital 
to optimize care, limit morbidity and help prevent 
the tragic cases of suicide detailed in the maternal 
mortality reports. The problems of substance and 
alcohol misuse during pregnancy overlap signiÿ￾cantly with mental health issues, and coordination 
is required between specialist services and provid￾ers of maternity care. 
The impact of psychiatric disease in pregnancy has 
been emphasized repeatedly by the UK Conÿdential 
Enquiries into Maternal Deaths (of Mothers and 
Babies, Reducing Risk through Audits and Conÿdential 
Enquiries across the UK [MBRRACE-UK]). The 2021 
report Saving Lives: Improving Mothers’ Care covers 
2017–2019 and reports on 191 deaths, 10 (5%) of which 
were from suicide. Suicide during pregnancy is unusu￾ally violent (shootings, hangings) in contrast with sui￾cide attempts in younger women, which commonly 
take the form of overdose and are less frequently suc￾cessful. This emphasizes the severity of mental health 
problems occurring after delivery, when most mater￾nal suicides take place. 
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY OF POST￾PARTUM AFFECTIVE DISORDERS 
Psychosocial factors play a major role in the aetiology 
of non-psychotic mild and moderate post-partum 
depressive illness. This is in contrast with puerperal 
psychosis and severe post-partum depressive illness, 
in which other factors (e.g. family history) predomi￾nate, suggesting a biological aetiology. 
The constancy of incidence across cultures and 
the temporal relationship with childbirth would 
tend to suggest a neuroendocrine basis for the 
more severe conditions. Changes in cortisol, oxy￾tocin, endorphins, thyroxine, progesterone and 
oestrogen have all been implicated in the causa￾tion. Comparable dramatic changes in steroidal 
hormones outside the post-partum period have a 
well-known association with affective psychoses 
and mood disorders. A plausible theory is that the 
sudden fall in oestrogen post-partum triggers a 
hypersensitivity of certain dopamine receptors in a 
predisposed group of women and may be respon￾sible for the severe mood disturbance that follows. 
The occurrence and the severity of the ‘postnatal 
blues’ are thought to be related to both the absolute 
level of progesterone and the relative drop from a 
prepartum level. However, there is no clear associa￾tion between the ‘post-partum blues’ and affective 
psychoses and there is no evidence to implicate pro￾gesterone in the aetiology of puerperal psychosis or 
severe postnatal depression. 
Depression is a characteristic feature of hypo￾thyroidism, which may occur as a consequence of 
post-partum thyroiditis. The other features of hypo￾thyroidism may be missed, and checking thyroid 
function is important in women with milder depres￾sive symptoms in the ÿrst year following childbirth, 
as correction with thyroid supplements may elevate 
the mood. 
281 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 282 04/03/2024 16:08
 
Puerperium 
NORMAL EMOTIONAL AND 
PSYCHOLOGICAL CHANGES 
DURING PREGNANCY 
Diagnosing mental illness in pregnancy is compli￾cated by the wide variety of ‘normal’ emotional and 
behavioural changes that may occur. 
POSTNATAL 
• The ‘pinks’: for the ÿrst 24–48 hours following 
delivery, it is very common for women to 
experience an elevation of mood, a feeling of 
excitement, some overactivity and difÿculty 
sleeping. 
• The ‘blues’: as many as 80% of women may 
experience the ‘postnatal blues’ in the ÿrst 2 
weeks after delivery. Fatigue, short temper, 
difÿculty sleeping, depressed mood and 
tearfulness are common but usually mild, and 
resolve spontaneously in the majority of cases. 
The following psychological disruptions should 
not be considered normal and require further 
assessment: 
• panic attacks 
• episodes of low mood of prolonged duration 
(>2 weeks) 
• low self-esteem 
• guilt or hopelessness 
• suicidal thoughts 
• thoughts of (or actual) self-harm – these are 
very unusual in pregnancy or early post￾partum and should always prompt referral 
• any mood changes that disrupt normal 
social functioning 
• ‘biological’ symptoms (e.g. poor appetite, 
early wakening) 
• change in ‘affect’ 
SCREENING FOR MENTAL HEALTH 
PROBLEMS DURING AND AFTER 
PREGNANCY 
NICE Clinical Guideline No 45, Antenatal and 
Postnatal Mental Health, sets out screening ques￾tions that all postnatal women should be asked (see 
Box 15.8, ‘NICE screening questions for mental 
health problems during and after pregnancy’). If the 
answers to these questions raise concerns, then the 
woman should be referred back to her GP, to her own 
psychiatrist (if she has one) or to a specialist perina￾tal mental health team depending on the severity of 
the symptoms or previous history. 
BOX 15.8: NICE screening questions 
for mental health problems during and 
after pregnancy 
All women should be asked the following at booking 
and in the postnatal period: 
“During the past month, have you often been both￾ered by: 
˜ feeling down, depressed or hopeless? 
˜ having little interest or pleasure in doing things?” 
POST-PARTUM (NON-PSYCHOTIC) 
DEPRESSIVE ILLNESS 
Between 10% and 15% of women will suffer with 
some form of depression in the ÿrst year after the 
delivery of their baby. At least 7% will satisfy the 
criteria for mild major depressive illness and many 
more could be described as having minor depression; 
3–5% will suffer a severe major postnatal depres￾sive episode. Without treatment, most women will 
recover spontaneously within 3–6 months; however, 
1 in 10 will remain depressed at 1 year. 
Women with a history of severe depression are at 
even higher risk. Those with a history of depression 
not related to pregnancy carry between a 1:3 and 1:5 
risk of a major post-partum depressive illness, while 
the recurrence rate of postnatal depression is as high 
as 50%. 
CLINICAL FEATURES 
In contrast with puerperal psychosis, non-psychotic 
post-partum depression usually presents later in the 
postnatal period, most commonly around 6 weeks, 
with a more gradual onset. The 6-week postnatal 
check is an ideal opportunity to detect early post￾partum non-psychotic depression, but the signs are 
282 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 283 04/03/2024 16:08
Psychiatric disorders 
often missed. NICE recommends that all women are 
asked about their mood at least twice in the post￾partum period by midwives, obstetricians, health 
visitors or GPs, ideally at 6 weeks and 3–4 months 
after the birth (see Box 15.8, ‘NICE screening ques￾tions for mental health problems during and after 
pregnancy’). Particular attention should be paid to 
the assessment of women with risk factors for post￾natal depressive illness. Indeed, women deemed at 
highest risk should be under close surveillance by a 
specialist community psychiatric nurse, with early 
admission to the local mother-and-baby unit if there 
are signs of concern. Those who screen positive on 
the two questions in Box 15.8 should receive a more 
detailed questionnaire, for example the 10-question 
Edinburgh Postnatal Depression Scale, which has 
been validated in multiple languages. 
Severe postnatal affective disorders usually pres￾ent earlier than milder forms and, in this group, 
biological risk factors may be more important than 
psychosocial factors. 
Treatment options include: 
• remedy of social factors 
• non-directive counselling 
• interpersonal psychotherapy 
• cognitive–behavioural therapy 
• drug therapy 
The earlier the onset of the depression and the 
more severe it becomes, the more likely it is that 
formal psychiatric intervention will be needed. 
However, randomized trials have demonstrated the 
beneÿts of non-directive counselling from specially 
trained midwives and health visitors in the manage￾ment of milder disorders. Even simple encourage￾ment to join a local postnatal group may prevent 
social isolation and limit depression. 
If pharmacotherapy is deemed necessary, tricy￾clic antidepressants or selective serotonin reuptake 
inhibitors (SSRIs) are appropriate. There is good evi￾dence to support the safety of the former in breast￾feeding, but less so for the latter. However, SSRIs in 
usual doses are probably safe. 
There has been popularity in the past for treating 
postnatal depression with progestogens in the erro￾neous belief that the fall in progesterone levels post￾partum is the cause of postnatal depression. There 
is no good evidence to support this, and it may even 
be harmful if the use of other effective treatments 
is delayed because of it. This practice should there￾fore be avoided. High-dose oestrogen regimes have 
been tried in research trials, but these are not used 
routinely. 
Women with a past history of severe postnatal 
depressive illness may be candidates for some form 
of prophylactic treatment, and the help of a special￾ist in perinatal mental health care should be sought 
before delivery. 
BOX 15.9: Risk factors for postnatal 
depressive illness 
˜ Past history of psychiatric illness 
˜ Depression during pregnancy 
˜ Obstetric factors (e.g. caesarean section/fetal or 
neonatal loss) 
˜ Social isolation and deprivation 
˜ Poor relationships 
˜ Recent adverse life events (bereavement/illness) 
˜ Severe postnatal ‘blues’ 
BOX 15.10: Symptoms of severe 
postnatal depressive disorder 
˜ Early-morning wakening 
˜ Poor appetite 
˜ Diurnal mood variation (worse in the mornings) 
˜ Low energy and libido 
˜ Loss of enjoyment 
˜ Lack of interest 
˜ Impaired concentration 
˜ Tearfulness 
˜ Feelings of guilt and failure 
˜ Anxiety 
˜ Thoughts of self-harm/suicide 
˜ Thoughts of harm to the baby 
MBRRACE-UK ‘red °ag’ presentations (require imme￾diate referral) 
˜ Recent signiÿcant change in mental state or 
emergence of new symptoms 
˜ New thoughts or acts of violent self-harm 
˜ New and persistent expressions of incompetency 
as a mother or estrangement from the infant 
283 
ALGrawany 284
Puerperium
 PUERPERAL PSYCHOSIS
T his very severe disorder affects between 1:500 
and 1:1,000 women after delivery. It rarely presents 
before the third post-partum day (most commonly 
the fi fth), but it usually does so before 4 weeks. The 
onset is characteristically abrupt, with a rapidly 
changing clinical picture.
 MANAGEMENT
P ost-partum psychosis is a psychiatric emergency. 
The patient should be referred urgently to a psy￾chiatrist and will usually require admission to a 
psychiatric unit. If possible, this should be a mother￾and-baby unit under the supervision of a specialist 
perinatal mental healthcare team. These units pre￾vent separation of the baby from the mother and this 
may help with bonding and the future relationship.
 Treatments include:
. acute pharmacotherapy with benzodiazepines 
(e.g. lorazepam) and antipsychotics (e.g. 
chlorpromazine or haloperidol)
. lithium carbonate
. electroconvulsive therapy, particularly for 
severe depressive psychoses 
 Recovery usually occurs over 4–6 weeks, although 
treatment with antidepressants will be needed for at 
least 6 months. These women remain at high risk 
of pregnancy-related and non-pregnancy-related 
recurrences. The risk of recurrence in a future preg￾nancy is approximately 1 in 2, particularly if the 
next pregnancy occurs within 2 years of the one 
complicated by puerperal psychosis. Women with a 
previous history of puerperal psychosis should be 
considered for prophylactic lithium, started on the 
fi rst post-partum day.
 ANXIETY DISORDERS
 Pregnancy, the anticipation of labour and the arrival 
of a new baby may all exacerbate an existing anxiety 
disorder. Cognitive–behavioural therapy may limit 
the need for drug treatment. Neonatal withdrawal 
effects are evident in the babies born to women who 
have used regular higher doses of benzodiazepines 
during pregnancy, and their use should be limited 
where possible. Breastfeeding may help to reduce 
the severity of the neonatal withdrawal (neonatal 
abstinence syndrome), as small amounts do reach 
breast milk.
 BREASTS AND BREASTFEEDING
 ANATOMY
 The breasts are largely made up of glandular, adipose 
and connective tissue ( Figure 15.4). They lie super￾fi cial to the pectoralis major, external oblique and 
serratus anterior muscles, extending between the 
second and sixth ribs from the sternum to the axilla. 
A pigmented area called the areola, which contains 
sebaceous glands, surrounds the nipple. During 
pregnancy, the areola becomes darker and the seba￾ceous glands become prominent (Montgomery’s 
tubercles). The breast is comprised of 15–25 func￾tional units arranged radially from the nipple and 
each unit is made up of a lactiferous duct, a mam￾mary gland lobule and alveoli. The lactiferous ducts 
BOX 15.11: Risk factors for post￾partum psychosis
. Previous history of puerperal psychosis
. Previous history of severe non-post-partum 
depressive illness
. Family history (fi rst- or second-degree relative) of 
bipolar disorder/affective psychosis
BOX 15.12: Symptoms of puerperal 
psychosis
. Restless agitation
. Insomnia
. Perplexity/confusion
. Fear/suspicion
. Delusions/hallucinations
. Failure to eat and drink
. Thoughts of self-harm
. Depressive symptoms (guilt, self-worthlessness, 
hopelessness)
. Loss of insight
Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 284 04/03/2024 16:08Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 285 04/03/2024 16:08
 
 
Breasts and breastfeeding 
Figure 15.4 The breast during lactation. 
Pectoralis major 
muscle 
Lactiferous 
sinus 
Fat 
Glandular 
tissue 
dilate to form a lactiferous sinus before converging 
to open in the nipple. Contractile myoepithelial cells 
surround the ducts as well as the alveoli. 
PHYSIOLOGY 
The human species is unique in that most of the 
breast development occurs at puberty and is there￾fore primed to produce milk within 2 weeks of hor￾monal stimulation. The control of mammary growth 
and development is not fully understood and many 
hormones may contribute to this process. In general, 
oestrogens stimulate proliferation of the lactiferous 
ducts (possibly with adrenal steroids and growth 
hormones), while progesterone is responsible for the 
development of the mammary lobules. During early 
pregnancy, lactiferous ducts and alveoli proliferate, 
while in later pregnancy the alveoli hypertrophy 
in preparation for secretory activity. The lactogenic 
hormones prolactin and human placental lactogen 
probably modulate these changes during pregnancy. 
COLOSTRUM 
Colostrum is a yellowish °uid secreted by the breast 
that can be expressed as early as the 16th week of 
pregnancy, but is replaced by milk during the second 
post-partum day. Colostrum has a high concentration 
of proteins but contains less sugar and fat than breast 
milk, although it contains large fat globules. The pro￾teins are mainly in the form of globulins, particularly 
immunoglobulin A (IgA), which plays an important 
role in protection against infection. Colostrum is also 
believed to have a laxative effect, which may help 
empty the baby’s bowel of meconium. 
BREAST MILK 
The major constituents of breast milk are lactose, 
protein, fat and water. However, the composition 
of breast milk is not constant; early lactation differs 
from late lactation, one feed differs from the next 
and the composition can even change during a feed. 
Compared with cow’s milk, breast milk provides 
slightly more energy and has less protein but more 
fat and lactose. The major protein fractions are lact￾albumin, lactoglobulin and caseinogen. Lactalbumin 
is the major protein in breast milk, whereas caseino￾gen forms 90% of the protein in cow’s milk. The min￾eral content (particularly sodium) is much higher in 
cow’s milk, which can therefore be dangerous if given 
to a baby who is dehydrated from gastroenteritis. In 
addition to IgA, breast milk contains small amounts 
of IgM and IgG and other factors such as lactoferrin, 
macrophages, complement and lysozymes. Although 
breast milk contains a lower concentration of iron, 
its absorption is better than from cow’s milk or iron￾supplemented infant formula (75%, 30% and 10%, 
respectively). The improved bioavailability may be 
related to lactoferrin, an iron-binding glycoprotein, 
which also inhibits bacterial growth. With the excep￾tion of vitamin K, all other vitamins are found in 
breast milk and therefore vitamin K is given to the 
baby to minimize the risk of haemorrhagic disease 
(see Chapter 16). 
PROLACTIN 
Prolactin is a long-chain polypeptide produced from 
the anterior pituitary; levels rise up to 20-fold dur￾ing pregnancy and lactation. Peak levels of prolac￾tin are reached within 45 minutes of suckling, but 
return to normal immediately after weaning and in 
non-breastfeeding mothers. The exact mechanism of 
action is not fully understood, but prolactin appears 
285 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 286 04/03/2024 16:08
Puerperium 
to have a direct action on the secretory cells to syn￾thesize milk proteins. Prolactin is essential for lac￾tation and it is hypothesized that nipple stimulation 
prevents the release of prolactin-inhibiting factor 
from the hypothalamus, thereby initiating the pro￾duction of prolactin by the anterior pituitary. This 
theory is supported by the fact that lactation can be 
arrested with bromocriptine, a dopamine agonist 
that inhibits prolactin. A similar phenomenon occurs 
following pituitary necrosis (Sheehan syndrome) 
when prolactin production ceases. 
OXYTOCIN 
Once milk has been produced under the in°uence 
of prolactin, it has to be delivered to the infant. The 
milk-ejection or let-down re°ex is initiated by suck￾ling, which stimulates the pulsatile release of oxyto￾cin from the posterior pituitary. Oxytocin contracts 
the myoepithelial cells surrounding the alveoli, as 
well as the myoepithelial cells lying longitudinally 
along the lactiferous ducts, thereby aiding the expul￾sion of milk. Oxytocin release can also be stimulated 
by visual, olfactory or auditory stimuli (e.g. hearing 
the baby cry), but can be inhibited by stress. Oxytocin 
can also stimulate uterine contractions, giving rise to 
the ‘after pains’ of childbirth. 
BREASTFEEDING 
.laibeneÿ c 
Women who opt to breastfeed tend to decide before 
or very early in their pregnancy. This decision is usu￾ally based on previous experience, in°uence of fam￾ily or friends, culture and custom. A new mother 
who is unprepared for breastfeeding may ÿnd it a 
frustrating task and turn to bottle feeding. There is 
now evidence to suggest that antenatal classes and 
literature on breastfeeding given antenatally may be 
The most common reasons mothers give for 
abandoning breastfeeding are inadequate milk pro￾duction and sore and cracked nipples. Both of these 
problems can be overcome by correct positioning 
of the baby on the breast (Figure 15.5). The mouth 
should be placed over the nipple and areola so that 
suction created within the baby’s mouth draws the 
breast tissue into a teat that extends as far back as 
the junction of the soft and hard palate. The tongue 
A
B
Figure 15.5 (A) Poor positioning for breastfeeding. 
(B)˝Good positioning. 
applies peristaltic force to the underside of the teat 
against the support of the hard palate. In this way, 
there should be no to-and-fro movement of the teat 
in and out of the baby’s mouth, thus minimizing 
friction. The mother should also be taught how to 
implement the rooting re°ex. When the skin around 
the baby’s mouth is touched, the mouth begins to 
gape. At this point, the mother should reposition the 
baby so that the lower rim of the baby’s mouth ÿts 
well below the nipple, allowing a liberal mouthful 
of breast tissue. When the baby is properly attached, 
breastfeeding should be pain free. The use of creams 
and ointments for cracked nipples has not been 
shown to be beneÿcial and the use of a nipple shield 
merely reduces milk production. 
Although no study has identiÿed the threshold 
of the critical time limit for successful breastfeeding, 
early suckling appears to be beneÿcial. However, this 
should not be rushed and perhaps should be done 286 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 287 04/03/2024 16:08
Breasts and breastfeeding 
initially under supervision when the mother is com￾fortable and in privacy. 
There is no scientiÿc evidence to justify a rigid 
breastfeeding schedule. Babies should be fed on 
BOX 15.13: Commonly used drugs in 
breastfeeding by mothers 
Breastfeeding contraindicated 
˜ Aspirin (at doses of 300 mg or more) 
˜ Amiodarone 
˜ Lithium 
˜ Anticancer drugs (antimetabolites) 
˜ Radioactive substances (stop breastfeeding 
temporarily) 
Continue breastfeeding with caution 
Neonatal side effects possible (monitor baby closely): 
˜ benzodiazepines (e.g. diazepam), psychiatric 
drugs and anticonvulsants 
˜ carbimazole 
Use alternative drug if possible: 
˜ chloramphenicol, tetracyclines, metronidazole, 
cipro° oxacin 
Monitor baby for jaundice: 
˜ sulphonamides, dapsone, sulphamethoxazole/ 
trimethoprim (cotrimoxazole), sulphadoxine/ 
pyrimethamine 
Use alternative drug (may inhibit lactation): 
˜ oestrogens, including oestrogen-containing 
contraceptives, thiazide diuretics, regular 
ergometrine 
Safe in usual dosage (monitor baby) 
Most commonly used drugs: 
˜ analgesics and antipyretics – short courses of 
paracetamol, low-dose aspirin, ibuprofen, heparin, 
occasional doses of morphine and pethidine 
˜ antibiotics – ampicillin, amoxicillin, cloxacillin and 
other penicillins, erythromycin 
˜ anti-tuberculosis drugs, anti-leprosy drugs (see 
dapsone above) 
˜ antimalarials (except me°oquine, sulphadoxine/ 
pyrimethamine), antihelminthics, antifungals 
˜ bronchodilators (e.g. salbutamol), 
corticosteroids, antihistamines, antacids, drugs 
for diabetes, most antihypertensives, digoxin 
˜ nutritional supplements of iodine, iron, vitamins 
demand and left on the breast until feeding ÿnishes 
spontaneously. An imposed time limit on feeding 
can have a deleterious effect on calorie intake. 
Supplementary feeds of formula, glucose or water 
are sometimes given to breastfed infants in the mis￾taken belief that the baby is still hungry or thirsty. 
This should be discouraged, as it increases the risk of 
total abandonment of breastfeeding. 
Test-weighing infants before and after a feed to 
establish the quantity of milk intake has no role in 
healthy babies but is sometimes used by specialists 
to explore the reasons for poor weight gain. 
When treating a breastfeeding woman, care needs 
to be taken to avoid drugs that can be passed onto 
the baby through the breast milk (see Box 15.13, 
‘Commonly used drugs in breastfeeding by mothers’). 
BOX 15.14: Advantages of 
breastfeeding 
˜ Readily available at the right temperature and 
ideal nutritional value 
˜ Cheaper than formula feed 
˜ Has a contraceptive effect with associated 
amenorrhoea 
˜ In the longer term it is associated with reduced: 
– necrotizing enterocolitis in preterm babies 
– childhood infective illnesses, especially 
gastroenteritis 
– atopic illnesses (e.g. eczema and asthma) 
– juvenile diabetes 
– childhood cancer, especially lymphoma 
– premenopausal breast cancer 
NON-BREASTFEEDING MOTHERS 
There are various reasons why a woman may not 
breastfeed, ranging from a choice based on personal 
preference to the tragedy of a stillbirth. Previously, 
all women infected with HIV were discouraged from 
breastfeeding due to the presence of HIV in breast 
milk. However, it is now clear that the highest risk 
of transmission from the mother to the child is from 
mixed breast- and bottle feeding. Furthermore, in 
resource-poor settings, child mortality is increased 
by not breastfeeding. Therefore, while HIV-positive 
women in resource-rich settings are advised not to 287 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 288 04/03/2024 16:08
 
 
 
 
 
Puerperium 
breastfeed, WHO recommends that women in low￾resource settings take antiretroviral medication and 
exclusively breastfeed. 
Non-breastfeeding mothers may suffer consid￾erable engorgement and breast pain. Dopamine 
receptor stimulants, such as bromocriptine and cab￾ergoline, inhibit prolactin and thus suppress lactation. 
However, both commonly cause drowsiness, hypo￾tension, headache and gastrointestinal side effects. 
Furthermore, °uid restriction and a tight brassiere 
have been shown to be as effective as bromocriptine 
usage by the second week and therefore this is the 
method of choice for the suppression of lactation. 
BREAST DISORDERS 
BLOOD-STAINED NIPPLE DISCHARGE 
Blood-stained nipple discharge of pregnancy (‘rusty 
pipe syndrome’) is typically bilateral and believed to 
be due to epithelial proliferation. It usually occurs in 
late pregnancy or early breastfeeding and lasts for up 
to 1 week. As the condition is self-limiting, no inves￾tigation or treatment is necessary, and the woman 
should be reassured. 
PAINFUL NIPPLES 
Nipples become very sensitive during late pregnancy 
and in the ÿrst week of breastfeeding. ‘Sensitive nipples’ 
can cause marked discomfort during the ÿrst minute 
of breastfeeding, but it settles spontaneously. ‘Painful 
nipples’, however, occur after the ÿrst week of feeding 
and worsen during feeds. A common cause of this is 
cracked nipples (small ÿssures in the nipple) and this 
is associated with an increased risk of breast abscess. 
The cause is usually poor positioning of the baby on the 
breast, although thrush (candidiasis) may also cause 
soreness. The treatment is to correct the underlying 
problem, but may also require local antibiotic ointment, 
analgesics or even resting the affected nipple. The milk 
can be expressed during this time and the breastfeed￾ing restarted once the nipples have healed. 
GALACTOCELE 
A galactocele (or lactocele) is a sterile, milk-ÿlled 
retention cyst of the mammary ducts following 
blockage by thickened secretions. It is identiÿed as 
a °uctuant swelling with minimal pain and in°am￾mation. It usually resolves spontaneously assisted by 
massage of the breast towards the nipple, but may 
also be aspirated; with increasing discomfort, surgi￾cal excision may become necessary. 
BREAST ENGORGEMENT 
Engorgement of the breasts usually begins by the sec￾ond or third post-partum day and if breastfeeding has 
not been effectively established, the overdistended 
and engorged breasts can be very uncomfortable. 
Breast engorgement results in a puerperal fever of 
up to 39°C in around 15% of women. Although the 
fever rarely lasts more than 16 hours, other infective 
causes must be excluded. A number of remedies for 
the treatment of breast engorgement, such as manual 
expression, ÿrm support, cabbage leaves, ice bags 
and electric breast can all be effective, but allowing 
the baby easy access to the breast is the most effec￾tive method of treatment and prevention. 
MASTITIS 
In°ammation of the breast is not always due to an 
infective process. Mastitis is commonly related to 
breastfeeding problems and occurs when a blocked 
duct obstructs the °ow of milk and distends the 
alveoli. If this pressure persists, the milk extrava￾sates into the perilobular tissue, initiating an in°am￾matory process. The affected segment of the breast 
is painful and appears red and oedematous. The 
woman also experiences °u-like symptoms with 
a tachycardia and pyrexia. In contrast with breast 
engorgement, the pyrexia with infective mastitis 
develops later (typically the third to fourth post-par￾tum week) and persists for longer. The most com￾mon infecting organism is S. aureus, which is found 
in 40% of women with mastitis. 
Other bacteria include coagulase-negative staphy￾lococci and Streptococcus viridans. Early localized mas￾titis can be managed with massage of the breast 
(towards the nipple) and analgesia. If the masti￾tis worsens, then a sample of the milk should be 
taken for microbiological culture and °ucloxacil￾lin commenced while awaiting sensitivity results. 
Breastfeeding should be continued during this pro￾cess. About 10% of women with mastitis develop 288 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 289 04/03/2024 16:08
Perinatal death 
a breast abscess (diagnosed using ultrasound). 
Treatment is by a radial surgical incision and drain￾age under general anaesthesia. 
CONTRACEPTION 
The exact mechanism of lactational amenorrhoea is 
poorly understood, but the most plausible hypoth￾esis is that during lactation there is inhibition of 
the normal pulsatile release of luteinizing hormone 
from the anterior pituitary. Breastfeeding therefore 
provides a contraceptive effect, but it is not totally 
reliable, as up to 10% of women conceive while 
breastfeeding. However, it has recently been shown 
that a mother who is still in the phase of post-par￾tum amenorrhoea while fully breastfeeding their 
baby has a less than 2% chance of conceiving in 
the ÿrst 6 months. Although this is comparable to 
some other forms of contraception (see Gynaecology 
by Ten Teachers), most women with good access to 
healthcare use some sort of additional contracep￾tion, such as barrier methods. 
An intrauterine contraceptive device may be 
inserted immediately postnatally or at the time of a 
caesarean section, but the expulsion rate is doubled 
to 10% and there is a high rate of perforation on 
insertion (~1%). It is ideal therefore to wait for 4–8 
weeks to allow for involution. 
The combined oral contraceptive pill enhances 
the risk of thrombosis in the early puerperium and 
can have an adverse effect on the quality and con￾stituents of breast milk. Its use is therefore restricted 
to non-breastfeeding women at low risk of throm￾bosis. In others, the progesterone-only pill (the 
minipill) is preferable. Both should be commenced 
about day 21 following delivery. Injectable contra￾ception, such as depot medroxyprogesterone acetate 
(Depo-Provera™) given 3-monthly or norethister￾one enantate (Noristerat™) given 2-monthly, is also 
very effective. Injectable contraception can be given 
within 48 hours of delivery for convenience, but 
it can cause breakthrough bleeding and therefore 
should preferably be given 5–6 weeks post-partum. 
Sterilization can be offered to mothers who are 
certain that they have completed their family. Tubal 
ligation can be performed during caesarean section 
or by the open method (mini-laparotomy) in the ÿrst 
few post-partum days. However, it is better delayed 
until after 6 weeks post-partum, when it can be done 
by laparoscopy. This allows the mother to spend 
more time in comfort with their newborn baby and, 
furthermore, laparoscopic clip sterilization is less 
traumatic and associated with a lower failure rate. 
Women who are not breastfeeding should com￾mence the pill 3 weeks after delivery, as ovulation 
can occur by 4–6 weeks post-partum. 
PERINATAL DEATH 
Bereavement counselling following perinatal death 
requires special expertise and is best left to a senior 
clinician and a trained bereavement counsellor. 
Inappropriate management of this traumatic period 
can have a devastating effect on the woman’s emo￾tional and marital life. Effective communication and 
support are crucial and women should be encour￾aged to contact organizations such as the Stillbirth 
and Neonatal Death Society (SANDS). 
BOX 15.15: Useful deÿnitions for 
describing perinatal death 
˜ Stillbirth: a baby born with no signs of life 
˜ Perinatal death: stillbirth >24 weeks’ gestation or 
death within 7 days of birth 
˜ Live birth: any baby that shows signs of life 
irrespective of gestation 
The grieving process can be facilitated by practices 
such as seeing and holding the dead baby, naming 
the baby and taking hand-/footprints and photo￾graphs. Coming to terms with the perinatal death of 
a twin is more complicated because the mother has 
to mourn one baby and celebrate the arrival of the 
other. 
A post-mortem is the most important diagnos￾tic test, even though there may be no positive ÿnd￾ings. Couples who decline a post-mortem may do so 
because of religious reasons or because of anxieties 
about the invasive techniques. In this situation, a 
partial post-mortem should be discussed, whereby 
an autopsy of a single organ or a tissue biopsy can 
be performed. A full-body X-ray or, preferably, 289 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 290 04/03/2024 16:08
 
Puerperium 
Table 15.6 Investigations into perinatal death 
Investigations Reason 
For all perinatal deaths unless cause clearly known 
Full blood count Anaemia, leucocytosis 
HbA1c Undiagnosed diabetes 
Thyroid function tests Undiagnosed hypothyroidism 
Virology, infection screen Cytomegalovirus, parvovirus, toxoplasmosis 
Autoantibody screen (anticardiolipin, lupus anticoagulant 
and anti-beta-2 glycoprotein-1 antibodies) 
Anti-phospholipid syndrome, systemic lupus 
erythematosus 
Thrombophilia screen (do at least 6 weeks postnatally) Thrombophilias 
Swab from baby’s axilla Fetal infection/chorioamnionitis 
Placental swab for culture (from maternal side only) Infections such as Listeria monocytogenes 
Placental pathology Evidence of infection or vasculopathy 
Post-mortem or full-body X-ray or MRI To identify congenital defects 
Selective investigations (only if clinical indication) 
Urine for cocaine metabolites If maternal substance abuse is suspected
 Kleihauer test If abruption is suspected 
Red cell antibodies (including anti Ro and La) In cases of fetal hydrops or haemolytic disease 
Maternal alloimmune antiplatelet antibodies If intracranial haemorrhage is found at post-mortem 
Chromosomal analysis of umbilical cord If fetal abnormality is suspected 
HbA1c, glycated haemoglobin; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging. 
magnetic resonance imaging may be useful in some 
cases (Table 15.6). 
If the baby was stillborn, a stillbirth certiÿcate 
should be completed by the attending doctor; other￾wise, the paediatrician should complete the certiÿ￾cate. The certiÿcate should be given to the parents to 
register the death with the Registrar of Births and 
KEY LEARNING POINTS 
˜ The puerperium refers to the 6-week period 
following childbirth. 
˜ Care during this transition period is crucial as the 
woman returns to her pre-pregnant state. 
˜ Perineal discomfort is a major complaint 
following vaginal delivery and therefore adequate 
analgesia should be prescribed. 
˜ All women should be screened for depression at 
least twice in the post-partum period. 
˜ Common disorders include puerperal sepsis, 
thromboembolism and bowel and bladder 
dysfunction. 
Deaths. Funeral arrangements can be made privately 
or by the hospital. 
Every mother who has lost a baby should have 
the 6-week postnatal visit at hospital to discuss the 
underlying cause and to plan for the future. 
FURTHER READING 
Knight M, Bunch K, Tuffnell D, Patel R, Shakespeare 
J, Kotnis R, Kenyon S, Kurinczuk JJ (eds.); 
MBRRACE-UK (2021). Saving Lives, Improving 
Mothers’ Care – CORE report lessons learned to 
inform maternity care from the UK and Ireland 
Conÿdential Enquiries into Maternal Deaths 
and Morbidity 2017–19. National Perinatal 
Epidemiology Unit, University of Oxford.
 NICE (2021). Postnatal Care. NICE guideline 
[NG194]. 
NICE (2016). Sepsis: Recognition, Diagnosis and 
Early Management. NICE guideline [NG51]. Last 
updated: 13 September 2017. 290 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 291 04/03/2024 16:08
 
Self-assessment 
NICE (2014). Antenatal and Postnatal Mental Health: WHO (2015). WHO Recommendations for Prevention 
Clinical Management and Service Guidance. Clinical and Treatment of Maternal Peripartum Infections. 
guideline [CG192]. Last updated: 11 February WHO Press. 
2020. WHO (2014). WHO Recommendations on Postnatal 
Care of the Mother and New-born. WHO Press . 
SELF-ASSESSMENT 
For interactive SBAs and EMQs relating to this chapter, visit www.routledge.com/cw/mccarthy. 
CASE HISTORY 1 
An 18-year-old woman with a body mass index of 35 
who had a forceps delivery after a prolonged second 
stage of labour 10 days previously presents with heavy, 
fresh vaginal bleeding and clots. She feels unwell and 
complains of abdominal cramps. On examination, she 
has a temperature of 38.2°C and there is mild suprapu￾bic tenderness. Vaginal examination reveals blood clots, 
but no products of conception. The cervix admits one 
ÿnger and the uterus is tender and measures 16 weeks 
in size. A review of the delivery notes reveals that the pla￾centa was delivered complete, but the membranes were 
noted to be ragged.
 A What is the most likely diagnosis?
 B What are the key features that suggest retained 
products of conception? 
C How should the patient be managed?
 ANSWERS
 A Secondary PPH due to infected retained products of 
conception.
 B Secondary PPH. Enlarged uterus. Open cervical os. 
C Blood cultures. Intravenous broad-spectrum 
antibiotics (e.g. cephalosporin and metronidazole). 
Surgical evacuation of the retained products. 
CASE HISTORY 2 
A recent Eastern European immigrant to the UK, with 
minimal English, was seen by her GP at 12 weeks’ gesta￾tion. The only history of note was that her father had suf￾fered a long-standing psychiatric illness that the woman 
believed to be ‘schizophrenia’. He died when she was 
young in a road trafÿc accident. Her pregnancy pro￾ceeded without complication, and she went home on the 
second postnatal day following a normal delivery at term. 
Within a couple of weeks, her partner reported to the 
community midwife that he had concerns about her 
mood. She seemed agitated, fearful and unduly con￾cerned about the well-being of the baby and she refused 
any help offered by him. The GP saw her, without an 
interpreter, and diagnosed ‘postnatal depression’. He 
commenced tricyclic antidepressants. However, 1 week 
later, she became frankly delusional and believed that 
her partner was trying to kill the baby. She was hardly 
sleeping and eating very little, but was continuing to 
breastfeed her baby.
 A What is the most likely diagnosis?
 B How should this be managed? 
C How should her breastfeeding be managed? 
D In retrospect, how should the pregnancy have been 
managed?
 ANSWERS
 A The most likely diagnosis is puerperal psychosis.
 B She should be admitted to a regional mother-and￾baby unit with her newborn where she can receive 
multidisciplinary care from the specialist medical, 
nursing and midwifery staff. The antidepressants 
should be stopped and she should be treated 
with benzodiazepines and antipsychotics (e.g. 
tri° uoperazine). 
C She should be encouraged to continue 
breastfeeding but the baby should be monitored for 
side effects. 
D Ideally, the woman should have been seen with 
an interpreter and asked to explore the nature of 
her family history. This would have revealed that 
her father suffered from schizophrenia. If this had 
been known, then it could have prompted review 
by a specialist in perinatal mental health, leading to 
regular postnatal review by a community psychiatric 
nurse being organized. This might have led to earlier 
intervention and prevented her deterioration to such 
a severe state. 
291 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 293 04/03/2024 16:08
16 
Neonates 
EUGENE DEMPSEY 
 
Introduction 293 
Newborn transition 294 
Routine newborn care 295 
Commonly encountered neonatal 
problems in the term infant 297 
An approach to the dysmorphic infant 302 
Neurological concerns 303 
Prematurity 307 
Palliative care 313 
Importance of clinical trials in 
neonatal care 314 
Conclusion 314 
Further reading 314 
Self-assessment 315 
Learning Objectives 
• Understand and be able to describe the unique features of newborn babies and the transition to 
extrauterine life. 
• For common neonatal problems, be able to describe: 
• key features from an obstetric point of view 
• urgent action in the delivery room or soon afterwards
• important messages for parents 
• Describe key points relevant to postnatal management that need to be communicated by profes￾sionals involved in antenatal care. 
INTRODUCTION 
The word neonatology was ÿrst coined in 1960 and, 
needless to say, signiÿcant advances in neonatal care 
have occurred over the last 60 years. Mortality for 
babies delivered at 1 kg in the 1960s was 95%, whereas 
today survival for these infants is 95%. This signiÿcant 
improvement has come about thanks to the ongoing 
collaboration between neonatologists, obstetricians 
and midwives working hand in hand to ensure the 
best outcome for newborn infants and their families. 
This chapter is about newborn infants and is 
directed primarily at an obstetrical audience. Areas 
in which neonatal care and obstetrical care are inter￾twined are addressed. Central to this relationship is 
our understanding of neonatal transition and how 
aberrations in this process can result in adverse out￾comes for the newborn. This chapter provides an 
insight into caring for sick term newborn infants, in 
particular with conditions such as pulmonary hyper￾tension and neonatal encephalopathy. It gives a gen￾eral overview of some of the more common neonatal 
conditions encountered during the ÿrst days of life. 
Caring for preterm infants, and in particular those 
delivered at the cusp of viability, is an area in which 
discussions between neonatologists and obstetri￾cians are crucial to ensure the best possible outcome. 
293 
10.1201/9781003196112-16 ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 294 04/03/2024 16:08
 
Neonates 
An overview of the key challenges, both antenatally 
and postnatally, is presented in this chapter. Finally, 
the importance of ongoing communication between 
the various specialities, along with communication 
with the newborn infant’s family, is addressed. 
NEWBORN TRANSITION 
The transition to extrauterine existence is a highly 
complex process. The fetal lungs are liquid ÿlled, pul￾monary blood °ow is very low and no gas exchange 
occurs. Oxygenated blood is provided by the pla￾centa: this travels via the umbilical vein to the ductus 
venosus into the right atrium, preferentially across 
the patent foramen ovale into the left atrium and 
ventricle, providing oxygenated blood to the brain 
and heart via the carotid and coronary vessels. When 
babies are born and the cord is clamped, signiÿcant 
alterations occur. Now, the infant has to derive oxy￾genated blood from the lungs. Therefore, lung °uid 
must be cleared at birth to permit gas exchange. This 
highlights the importance of lung aeration as the key 
component in newborn resuscitation/stabilization. 
Three phases of respiratory adaptation have been 
described:
 1. airway liquid clearance 
2. lung °uid within the interstitial tissue 
compartment
 3. gas exchange 
The ÿrst phase, airway liquid clearance, occurs to 
some extent with advancing gestation and is stim￾ulated by labour. Hormones such as cortisol and 
adrenaline enhance the in utero absorption of lung 
°uid. A small amount of °uid is lost during deliv￾ery secondary to fetal spinal °exion, which results 
in the ‘squeezing’ out of °uid out via the mouth 
and nose at delivery. The greatest removal of lung 
°uid occurs with the onset of breathing when the 
clearance of lung °uid occurs from the proximal to 
the distal airways. The second phase of clearance 
is characterised by the presence of this lung °uid 
within the interstitial tissue compartment. This °uid 
can re-enter the alveoli depending on the variation 
in pressure gradients generated with respiration and, 
as such, serves as the basis for transient tachypnoea 
of the newborn, one of the most common breathing 
difÿculties encountered in term newborn infants 
(which will be discussed in the section ‘Commonly 
encountered neonatal problems in the term infant’ 
later in this chapter). Fluid clearance occurs via the 
lymph system in the subsequent hours. Grunting, 
the process of partially closing the glottis to increase 
intra-alveolar pressure, contributes to a reduction in 
this cycle of the re-entry of °uid. The ÿnal phase is 
characterized by gas exchange. Surfactant produc￾tion increases with advancing gestational age and is 
augmented by labour, thus increasing the amount of 
surfactant in the lung °uid. 
The cardiovascular changes that take place fol￾lowing delivery involve primarily reorganizing the 
systemic and pulmonary circulations. Lung aeration 
results in a decrease in pulmonary vascular resis￾tance, an increase in pulmonary blood °ow and, as a 
result, an increase in the volume of blood contained 
in the left ventricle. The timing of cord clamping 
is critical here. Immediate clamping results in an 
increase in systemic vascular resistance and a reduc￾tion in blood return via the umbilical vein to the right 
atrium, pulmonary bed and ultimately left ventricle. 
In this situation, the left ventricle has decreased vol￾ume and has to pump against increased resistance 
and thus cardiovascular compromise can occur. The 
timing of cord clamping is thus essential and, in 
essence, needs to occur at least following initiation 
of spontaneous breathing or following adequate ven￾tilation. It is apparent that lung aeration is the criti￾cal element of adaption, reafÿrming the importance 
of effective ventilation as the mainstay of newborn 
stabilization. These factors highlight the importance 
of understanding adaptation and the implications for 
practice for both obstetricians and neonatologists 
at the time of delivery. Communication between 
both groups of professionals at this time is critical to 
ensuring optimal adaptation. Figure 16.1 depicts an 
example of delayed cord clamping. 
NEWBORN RESUSCITATION 
TRAINING PROGRAMMES AND 
SIMULATION 
Newborn adaptation is a complex process, as pre￾viously discussed. What is interesting is that the 
majority of infants will transition with minimal input 
required. However, when it is required, it is essential 294 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 295 04/03/2024 16:08
Routine newborn care 
Figure 16.1 Delayed cord clamping following the delivery 
of the baby. The baby is dried, stimulated and allowed to 
rest on the mother’s draped legs. 
that appropriately trained personnel are present and 
provide the necessary support. Numerous newborn 
resuscitation training programmes exist. The pur￾pose of standardized neonatal resuscitation training 
programmes is to translate the science of resuscita￾tion into training, allowing transfer of the knowledge 
and skills of resuscitation to the participant, with the 
ultimate goal being to improve outcome. 
Newborn Life Support (NLS) is the training pro￾gramme used in the UK and all personnel involved in 
newborn care are expected to be trained in this pro￾gramme. The key element of all programmes is effec￾tive mask ventilation to in°ate the lungs and facilitate 
transition, as described previously (i.e. highlighting 
the importance of lung aeration). A recent meta￾analysis found that neonatal resuscitation training 
programmes in low- and middle-income countries 
reduced early neonatal mortality, but the effect of 
these programmes on birth asphyxia and neurode￾velopmental outcomes is yet to be determined. 
Simulation is a really important element of new￾born resuscitation training. Professor DM Gaba, in 
his article ‘The future vision of simulation in health￾care’ (Quality and Safety in Health Care, 2004), states 
that simulation is a technique – not a technology – 
‘to replace or amplify real experiences with guided 
experiences that evoke or replicate substantial 
aspects of the real world in a fully interactive man￾ner’. Simulation locations do not necessarily need 
to be high ÿdelity. Every centre caring for newborn 
infants should strive to ensure access to neonatal 
mannequins – the necessary essential equipment to 
replicate real-world scenarios – and have appropriate 
time set aside to ensure that standardized frequent 
training occurs. Joint sessions including obstetri￾cal and neonatal personnel should occur frequently 
to address emergency scenarios such as shoulder 
dystocia, placental abruption and extreme preterm 
deliveries, as well as the management of extreme 
preterm infants receiving delayed cord clamping. 
Infrequent interventions such as chest compressions 
and adrenaline administration highlight the impor￾tance of adequate simulation training. Frequent on￾site mock code scenarios/simulation sessions should 
include this important aspect of resuscitation care, 
as these low-occurrence events are very high-stress 
situations for all involved. 
KEY LEARNING POINTS 
˜ The majority of term newborn infants transition to 
extrauterine life without any support required. 
˜ Respiratory adaptation includes three phases: 
airway ˜uid clearance, interstitial ˜uid clearance 
and effective gas exchange. 
˜ Lung aeration is the key to successful transition, 
resulting in a reduction in pulmonary vascular 
resistance and an increase in pulmonary 
blood°˜ ow. 
˜ Personnel trained in newborn resuscitation 
should be readily available. 
ROUTINE NEWBORN CARE 
The vast majority of term babies are managed on 
the postnatal ward and do not require admission to 
the special care baby unit (SCBU) or the neonatal 
intensive care unit (NICU). They should all have a 
routine newborn assessment. Similar to antenatal 
care, postnatal care is based on a risk assessment 
and stratiÿcation into groups that are used to guide 
management, with movement between groups very 
important if the baby’s needs change. 
Routine care is conducted by mothers, with con￾tact by maternity staff members to support feeding, 
advise mothers (e.g. if it is their ÿrst baby), anticipate 
social problems and detect issues such as jaundice or 
hypoglycaemia. 295 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 296 04/03/2024 16:08
 
 
 
Neonates 
Targeted care is aimed at babies at risk of condi￾tions such as infection or hypoglycaemia. Neonates 
who have risk factors for infection may be safely 
observed rather than given antibiotics. Babies at risk 
of hypoglycaemia because of conditions such as fetal 
growth restriction or maternal diabetes have pre￾feed estimations of blood glucose. These issues are 
dealt with in greater detail in the section ‘Commonly 
encountered neonatal problems in the term infant’ 
later in this chapter. 
NEWBORN EXAMINATION 
Every newborn infant should have a full, detailed 
newborn examination prior to discharge. This is 
typically performed by a medical doctor but in many 
institutions can be performed by advanced nurse 
practitioners, neonatal nurses or midwives speciÿ￾cally trained in this area. A structured approach to 
the examination is critical. While a detailed descrip￾tion of the examination is beyond the scope of this 
chapter, a full head-to-toe assessment is typically 
performed with the parents present. The examina￾tion can occur in the crib or on the mother’s bed. 
Expose the newborn with the nappy left in situ. 
Begin by palpating the suture lines of the skull, 
noting any caput or cephalohematomas. Subgaleal 
haemorrhages are rare but can be signiÿcant. The 
head circumference, weight and length should be 
plotted appropriately for the particular gestational age. 
Undertake fundoscopy to ensure bilateral red re°exes 
are present, review the palate by inspection and palpa￾tion, and note ear position; this completes examina￾tion of the face. Crepitus over the clavicular area may 
represent a clavicular fracture; inspect the chest for 
symmetry and respiratory rate, palpate for any heaves 
or thrills and then auscultate for heart sounds, any 
added sounds and the presence of any murmurs. 
The liver edge is typically palpable and the tip of a 
spleen may be palpable in up to 10% of all newborns. 
An easily palpable spleen is abnormal. In the groin 
area, check for any hernia, palpate the femoral pulses 
and check for the presence of testes in boys. Ensure 
the anal margin is normal and note any sacral dim￾ples. Typical foot anomalies include a calcaneovalgus 
deformity or postural talipes. Fixed talipes requires 
orthopaedic intervention. Complete the exam by 
performing a standard neurological exam, including 
an assessment of tone by ‘pulling the baby to sit’ 
holding the baby in vertical and ventral suspension 
and determining the presence of a number of primi￾tive re°exes. I typically ÿnish by assessing the hips. 
HIP SCREENING 
The hips should be abducted and adducted in order 
to elicit dislocated or dislocatable hips. If the hips 
are dislocated or dislocatable, the baby is referred for 
orthopaedic management. Developmental dysplasia 
of the hip (DDH) occurs in 1–2 per 1,000 live births, 
with up to 20 per 1,000 live births having unstable 
hips. Untreated DDH leads to abnormal gait, limp 
and early onset of hip osteoarthrosis, requiring early 
hip replacement. Treatment of DDH is effective with 
a harness in most infants. Neonatal screening for 
DDH is well established. Risk factors include ÿrst￾born female infants, a positive family history and 
breech presentation. 
When the neonatal screen for DDH is positive, 
the baby is referred for ultrasound and orthopaedic 
assessment. If DDH is conÿrmed, the initial treat￾ment is with a Pavlik harness that holds the legs in 
the best position to support the growth of the acetab￾ulum. The harness is used for up to 12 weeks and in 
a very high percentage of cases (approximately 95%) 
no further intervention is required. If the harness 
does not solve the problem, then surgical approaches 
are likely to be required. Many babies have stable 
joints but are found to have a ‘clicky hip’. This is not 
abnormal but can be associated with an unstable 
joint, so babies with clicky hips are also referred for a 
hip ultrasound and orthopaedic review. 
HEARING SCREENING 
Some cases of permanent hearing loss can be detected 
in the newborn period, and this allows early provi￾sion for the child and family. In high-income settings, 
screening should be done with objective tests. In the 
UK, newborn hearing screening is conducted with 
otoacoustic emissions. Screen failure or an uncertain 
response leads to an automated auditory brainstem 
response test. In income-constrained settings, ques￾tionnaires or behavioural testing can be used in a tar￾geted or unselected way but need to be piloted and 
linked to educational and other support. 296 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 297 04/03/2024 16:08
Commonly encountered neonatal problems in the term infant 
NEWBORN BLOOD SPOT TESTING 
In the UK, the newborn blood test is done about 5 
days after birth. The diseases screened for are sickle 
cell disease, cystic ÿbrosis, congenital hypothyroid￾ism and six metabolic conditions: phenylketonuria 
(PKU), medium-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase 
deÿciency (MCADD), maple syrup urine disease 
(MSUD), isovaleric acidaemia (IVA), glutaric acid￾uria type 1 (GA1) and homocystinuria (pyridoxine 
unresponsive) (HCU). 
KEY LEARNING POINTS 
˜ The majority of newborn infants can be managed 
on the postnatal ward and do not require 
admission to the SCBU. 
˜ Newborn screening includes physical 
examination, newborn hearing screening and 
newborn blood spot. 
˜ Newborn blood spot testing screens for nine 
inherited conditions in the UK. 
COMMONLY ENCOUNTERED 
NEONATAL PROBLEMS IN THE 
TERM INFANT 
TRANSIENT TACHYPNOEA OF 
THE NEWBORN 
Transient tachypnoea of the newborn is one of the 
most common reasons for admission to the new￾born nursery. It is caused by inadequate lung °uid 
clearance and is much more common following elec￾tive caesarean section. It is more common in infants 
delivered at 37/38 weeks than those delivered at 39 
weeks. It is characterized by tachypnoea, grunting, 
sternal recession and, at times, an oxygen require￾ment. The pathophysiology is described in the sec￾tion ‘Newborn transition’ earlier in this chapter. 
For a small, but not insigniÿcant, number, more 
advanced respiratory support is required, includ￾ing the provision of high-°ow nasal cannula, nasal 
continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) or 
occasionally mechanical ventilation. An awareness 
of this risk is important for both obstetricians and 
families when deciding on the timing of elective 
delivery. Standard management includes admission 
to the SCBU, administration of respiratory support 
as outlined earlier and intravenous °uids or nasogas￾tric tube feeding if not too distressed. Reassurance 
should be given to the parents that the symptoms 
should settle over the ÿrst 24 hours, but that, for a 
minority of infants, they may get worse before they 
get better. Occasional complications can arise such 
as a pneumothorax, which may require needle aspi￾ration or the placement of a pigtail catheter. This is 
a difÿcult procedure to learn, and training should 
occur in a simulation setting. Only when a trainee is 
deemed competent in the simulation setting should 
this procedure be undertaken. 
HYPOGLYCAEMIA 
The newborn baby needs to adapt from a continu￾ous infusion of maternal glucose via the placenta 
to intermittent feeds when delivered. Healthy term 
babies can cope with gaps between feeds because 
they have enough glycogen stores and the endocrine 
milieu will mobilize these stores. Therefore, glucose 
concentrations are not measured in healthy babies 
born at term unless there are certain risk factors. 
If babies are at risk of not being able to cope with 
intermittent feeds, they are screened by measuring 
blood glucose before feeds. This means that there 
is a need for clear communication about risk fac￾tors from the antenatal team to the postnatal team. 
As noted previously, some babies become hypo￾glycaemic and some of them become symptomatic. 
Most of these have risk factors. Therefore, targeted 
monitoring should occur in those infants deemed to 
have risk factors. Box 16.1, ‘Causes of hypoglycae￾mia’, outlines some of the conditions that require 
glucose screening. 
Pre-feed glucose is the important measurement. 
Post-feed measurements have limited value because 
of inconsistencies in absorption. Severe hypogly￾caemia can cause brain injury, so it is an emergency 
and needs prompt intervention. Prolonged neona￾tal hypoglycaemia damages the brain and is largely 
avoidable. Hypoglycaemia can present in many ways 
and so a blood sugar test is always warranted if there 
is a clinical concern. As with any unwell newborn, it 
is standard practice to check the blood sugar. 297 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 298 04/03/2024 16:08
Neonates 
BOX 16.1: Causes of hypoglycaemia 
Transient hypoglycaemia associated with 
neonatal causes: 
˜ prematurity 
˜ low birthweight 
˜ fetal growth restriction 
˜ postmature 
˜ perinatal stress 
˜ hypothermia 
˜ infection 
˜ polycythaemia 
Transient hypoglycaemia associated with 
maternal causes: 
˜ maternal medications (e.g. propranolol) 
˜ maternal conditions (e.g. gestational diabetes) 
Persistent hypoglycaemia: 
˜ hyperinsulinism 
˜ inborn errors of metabolism 
˜ endocrine disorders 
Most causes of hypoglycaemia are transient and 
will respond to appropriate medical therapy, includ￾ing intravenous dextrose infusions and feeding. 
There are rare situations in which the sugar can be 
persistently low and, in these situations, other causes 
need to be considered, such as hyperinsulinism or 
underlying endocrine problems. 
JAUNDICE 
In the days after birth, the production of bilirubin 
is often more than the liver enzymes can handle. 
This leads to an increase in the circulating concen￾trations of unconjugated bilirubin. This can pres￾ent as jaundice and is a concern because very high 
concentrations of unconjugated bilirubin are neu￾rotoxic. The liver enzymes are induced over the ÿrst 
3–4 days after birth. Breastfed babies take longer to 
induce their enzymes, but this does not cause harm. 
Pathological jaundice is a sign of a departure from 
the expected normal adaptation. Visible jaundice 
within 24 hours of birth is most often pathological 
and is usually due to infection or haemolysis and 
needs prompt assessment. 
The management of neonatal jaundice involves 
strong overlap between maternity and neonatal 
services. Antenatal information about conditions 
that lead to jaundice is invaluable for starting treat￾ment promptly. Postnatal management can usually 
be conducted on the postnatal wards, keeping the 
mother with the baby. 
The management of neonatal jaundice involves 
well-established pathways that include escala￾tions of therapy guided by bilirubin measurements. 
Treatment of jaundice is based on phototherapy 
(Figure 16.2), which uses light in the visible spec￾trum to conduct a photoisomerization of bilirubin 
to safe isomers, some of which are excreted rap￾idly. This is administered by the projection of light 
onto the neonate’s skin. Light in the wavelength of 
460–490 nm triggers an isomeric change in the bili￾rubin molecule, making it more water soluble, and 
increases the proportion excreted in the urine. The 
key to successful phototherapy is adequate expo￾sure. Inappropriate positioning of the light source 
can lead to non-uniform illumination of exposed 
skin. Positioning the infant within the recom￾mended distance of the light source and in an opti￾mal position within the incubator/cot to maximize 
exposure are important considerations that may 
often be overlooked during treatment. If overhead 
lights are used, then the eyes should be protected. 
Phototherapy can be interrupted for breastfeed￾ing unless there is a high likelihood of exchange 
transfusion. 
If phototherapy does not prevent the concentra￾tions of bilirubin from climbing to levels associ￾ated with brain injury, then exchange transfusion 
may be indicated. Exchange transfusion involves 
Figure 16.2 Neonate undergoing phototherapy. 298 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 299 04/03/2024 16:08
 
Commonly encountered neonatal problems in the term infant 
withdrawing a small aliquot of blood from the 
baby and replacing it with a small aliquot of cross￾matched blood. This is repeated every 5 minutes, 
typically over 3–4 hours. The aim is to replace twice 
the baby’s circulating volume (140 mL/kg). If there 
is evidence of active alloimmune disease (e.g. rhesus 
or ABO incompatibility) on direct antiglobulin test￾ing, then immunoglobulin during phototherapy may 
reduce the need for exchange transfusion. 
Causes of neonatal jaundice include abnormali￾ties of red cell enzymes or structure, extravasated 
blood (e.g. cephalohematoma), increased enterohe￾patic circulation and endocrine conditions such as 
hypothyroidism. Prolonged jaundice is not uncom￾mon in solely breastfed infants and can be present up 
to 8 weeks. However, investigations are required to 
rule out other potential causes and, ultimately, pro￾longed jaundice secondary to breast milk is a diag￾nosis of exclusion. 
Conjugated bilirubin is not neurotoxic. High 
circulating concentrations of conjugated bilirubin 
re°ect problems excreting bile. This can be due to 
an obstruction. In term babies, this can relate to the 
rare but important condition of biliary atresia. In 
preterm babies, obstructive jaundice is often related 
to parenteral nutrition. In all age groups, conjugated 
or prolonged jaundice has an extensive differential 
diagnosis that requires detailed evaluation. 
HEART MURMURS 
Murmurs are very common in newborn infants, 
especially when they are examined within the 
ÿrst day of life. The majority of these are innocent 
in nature and often re°ect transitional adaptation 
such as mild tricuspid regurgitation or a patent duc￾tus arteriosus. They are often short, soft and sys￾tolic in their nature. Loud harsh systolic murmurs 
are often muscular ventricular septal defects, but 
clinical diagnosis can be difÿcult. It is important to 
listen for the quality of the heart sounds, the qual￾ity of the murmur, the location of the murmur and 
the presence of any parasternal heaves. Palpation 
of the femoral and brachial pulses are important. 
Locating the femoral pulses at times can be chal￾lenging, so it is important to have the baby settled 
for this element of the examination. Truly absent or 
diminished femoral pulses are often associated with 
coarctation of the aorta. Diminished femoral and 
brachial pulses are often associated with hypoplas￾tic left heart syndrome. Universal pulse oximetry 
screening is used in many countries to help identify 
cyanotic heart disease. Currently, it is not part of 
the UK screening programme. An echocardiogram 
is essential if there is clinical concern relating to the 
cardiac evaluation. 
HYPOSPADIAS 
Hypospadias occurs in 1 in 300 boys. It typically 
involves an abnormally placed urinary meatus, chor￾dee (bend) of the penis and a retracted foreskin. 
Surgical correction takes place typically around 1 
year after birth. It is important to advise the parents 
to avoid circumcision, because the foreskin is used 
during the operation. 
Hypospadias may rarely be part of ambiguous 
genitalia. If a baby has ambiguous genitalia, it is 
important to share concerns with the family, to avoid 
assigning a sex and to arrange urgent review by a 
skilled multidisciplinary team (including paediatric 
endocrinologists, surgeons and radiologists). This 
can be a very traumatic event for parents, so psycho￾social support is essential. 
CLEFT LIP AND PALATE 
In the UK, the care of babies with cleft lip or pal￾ate is centralized into 11 networks (nine in England 
and Wales, one each in Scotland and Northern 
Ireland). The immediate management is based on 
individualized assessment of the baby’s feeding 
abilities. Many children with cleft lip or palate need 
adaptations to the feeding process, for example by 
giving expressed breast milk using a °exible teat. 
Corrective surgery is not urgent and is usually 
done several months after birth. Cleft lip is usually 
repaired around 4 months and cleft palate around 
9 months. 
SUSPECTED INFECTIONS 
In newborn babies, several risk factors and signs 
of infection can be seen. The problem is that these 
signs are common and often non-speciÿc (poor 
feeding and mild respiratory distress) and, while 299 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 300 04/03/2024 16:08
 
 
 
Neonates 
proven infection is rare, it can have devastating con￾sequences. Thus, any suspected infection requires 
prompt treatment. Aggressive treatment is continued 
if there is a proven infection or if clinical condition is 
poor. For example, treatment for suspected infection 
can be stopped after 24–36 hours if the baby is well, 
blood cultures are negative and two measurements 
of C-reactive protein are less than 10 mg/L. A key to 
managing suspected and proven infection is antimi￾crobial stewardship in the neonatal unit. It is impor￾tant that centres have established a multidisciplinary 
team that focuses on antibiotic usage. Widespread 
antibiotic usage brings its own unwanted side effects, 
including antibiotic resistance and impacts on the 
developing intestinal microbiome (see the section 
‘Prematurity’ later in this chapter). 
EARLY 
The incidence of proven early-onset neonatal 
infection is 1–2 per 1,000 live births. Up to 1 in 10 
neonates may be treated with antibiotics for sus￾pected early-onset neonatal infection. Most of these 
courses of antibiotics are stopped early, within 48 
hours. Early-onset neonatal infection is caused by 
a limited range of bacteria. A baby may be well at 
birth and gradually deteriorate in the hours after 
birth. Sometimes the baby is acutely unwell at birth 
and the course is fulminant, requiring multi-organ 
support in intensive care. 
The most common Gram-positive cause of 
early-onset neonatal infection in the UK is group B 
Streptococcus (GBS, Streptococcus agalactiae). Invasive 
GBS illness is severe. As described in Chapter 
11, this bacterium is part of the intestinal °ora for 
many people. About 20% of the population carries 
GBS in their stool at any one time, including preg￾nant women. Women colonized with GBS are at 
increased risk of having a baby with invasive GBS. 
For this reason, women are screened for GBS car￾riage, either universally or in a targeted manner. 
Evidence of GBS colonization triggers intra-partum 
antibiotic prophylaxis, which reduces the incidence 
of invasive GBS disease. GBS is susceptible to ben￾zyl penicillin; therefore, benzyl penicillin is a useful 
agent for intra-partum antibiotic prophylaxis and 
treatment. A treatment course for proven GBS infec￾tion is at least 7 days. 
Other Gram-positive causes of early-onset neo￾natal infection are Staphylococcus aureus and group A 
Streptococcus, but these are much less common. 
A common cause of Gram-negative early-onset 
neonatal infection is Escherichia coli. As in other 
age groups, E. coli can cause a life-threatening 
systemic infection requiring full intensive care. 
Antimicrobial susceptibility varies with the local 
prevalence of antimicrobial resistance. Given the 
vertical pattern of infection, resistance patterns 
will vary with patterns of community resistance. A 
third-generation cephalosporin and gentamicin are 
used for the initial treatment of E. coli (and other 
Gram-negative bacteria). A lumbar puncture to 
rule out meningitis is essential in all proven culture 
positive infections and may be indicated if there are 
clinical concerns in the absence of a proven posi￾tive culture. Haemophilus in˜uenzae is an occasional 
cause of early-onset neonatal infection due to ver￾tical transmission. This is due to non-capsulate, 
non-serotypeable forms that are not covered by the 
This is treated with cefotaxime. 
LATE 
Some late-onset neonatal infection occurs at home, 
in which case the babies will have community￾acquired bacteria rather than hospital- acquired 
bacteria. Early or late neonatal infection can be asso￾ciated with meningitis, which is often associated 
with a poor outcome in childhood. Meningitis may 
not have clinical signs, so neonatologists have a low 
threshold for performing a lumbar puncture. 
OTHER INFECTIONS 
Syphilis 
Babies born to women with positive treponemal 
serology need clinical evaluation and syphilis serol￾ogy testing unless there is deÿnitive proof of mater￾nal biological false-positive serology or cure. In the 
UK, congenital syphilis is rare. It affects around 10 
babies a year, usually among women presenting to 
maternity services in the third trimester with back￾grounds of socio-economic deprivation and cha￾otic lifestyles. The diagnosis of congenital syphilis 
is difÿcult, so maternity staff need to work closely 
routineimmunization against in˜ uenzae .H type b.
300 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 301 04/03/2024 16:08
Commonly encountered neonatal problems in the term infant 
with paediatricians, genitourinary medicine spe￾cialists and paediatric infectious disease specialists. 
Babies are treated if congenital syphilis is suspected 
or maternal treatment is within 4 weeks of birth 
or incomplete. The usual treatment is intravenous 
benzyl penicillin for 2 weeks or more. Guidance on 
treatment regimens by paediatric infectious disease 
specialists is essential. 
Herpes simplex 
Neonatal herpes simplex virus (HSV) infection is 
often fatal (20%) and leads to signiÿcant disability 
among survivors (>60%). Neonatal HSV is usually 
vertically transmitted. If an active, maternal pri￾mary infection is underway at the time of birth, the 
baby has a signiÿcant risk of developing systemic 
herpes. If a recurrence of genital herpes is under￾way at the time of birth, the risk of neonatal herpes 
is much lower (<3%). Thus, it is very important to 
notify the neonatal team if a mother has evidence of 
genital herpes and to provide as much information 
as possible about the clinical history and diagnosis. 
Caesarean section is an effective way to reduce the 
incidence of infection among women known to have 
primary genital herpes. 
Neonatal HSV infection presents in three ways: 
localized, central nervous system (CNS) and dis￾seminated. The localized form is relatively benign, 
but the neurological and disseminated manifesta￾tions of neonatal HSV are severe illnesses often 
requiring extensive intensive care. The treatment is 
intravenous acyclovir. Various treatment algorithms 
exist on the management of suspected HSV infec￾tion. Again, consultation with paediatric infectious 
disease specialists is essential.
 Varicella zoster 
Neonatal varicella occurs in the babies of mothers 
who develop chicken pox. If the baby is born more 
than 5 days after the mother develops the rash, then 
transplacental antibodies provide some protection 
and the illness is not severe. If the baby is born fewer 
than 5 days after the mother develops the rash, then 
the baby is not protected and can develop a severe 
infection complicated by pneumonitis. The sever￾ity of neonatal varicella can be reduced if the baby 
receives varicella zoster immunoglobulin (VZIG) as 
soon after birth as possible. 
Babies born to women who develop chicken pox 7 
days before or 7 days after birth should receive VZIG. 
If a woman has shingles, then the baby is protected 
from infection with varicella zoster virus by mater￾nal antibodies; the mother and the baby can stay 
together, and routine observation should occur. 
Human immunodeÿciency virus 
The management of babies born to mothers with 
human immunodeÿciency virus (HIV) is well 
described in national guidelines. The principles are 
that each woman needs an individualized care plan 
that re°ects her risk status and is drawn up by a mul￾tidisciplinary team. 
UK guidance is that babies born to women with 
a low viral load (<50 HIV ribonucleic acid (RNA) 
copies/mL plasma) should receive monotherapy 
with zidovudine for 4 weeks. If a woman has >50 
HIV RNA copies/mL plasma or maternal HIV is 
diagnosed within 3 days of birth, combination post￾exposure prophylaxis with three agents should be 
started under expert supervision. With appropriate 
post-exposure prophylaxis, less than 1% of babies 
born to HIV-positive mothers will be infected. In the 
absence of post-exposure prophylaxis, 15% of babies 
born to HIV-positive mothers became infected in a 
UK cohort study.
 Cytomegalovirus 
Symptomatic congenital cytomegalovirus (CMV) 
causes learning disabilities or sensorineural hear￾ing loss. Congenital CMV can be treated with gan￾ciclovir intravenously for 6 weeks. This reduces the 
severity of CNS damage and hearing loss. As with 
the various infections listed previously, consultation 
with a paediatric disease specialist to determine risk 
and the need for intervention should always occur. 
PULMONARY HYPERTENSION 
Persistent pulmonary hypertension of the newborn 
(PPHN) is a relatively common condition occurring 
in 0.5 to 7 per 1,000 live births and results in a mortal￾ity ranging between 4% and 33% depending on the 
underlying pathology. Inhaled nitric oxide (iNO) and 
extracorporeal membrane oxygenation are the only 
current therapeutic options systematically evaluated 
in clinical trials. The vasodilatation induced by iNO 301 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 302 04/03/2024 16:08
Neonates 
is mediated by increasing concentrations of the sec￾ond messengers: cyclic guanyl monophosphate and 
cyclic adenosine monophosphate in pulmonary vas￾cular smooth muscle. The widespread use of iNO has 
resulted in a reduction in the need for extracorpo￾real membrane oxygenation. However, up to 40% of 
infants treated with iNO either have only a transient 
response or fail to demonstrate an improvement. 
Furthermore, the increasing cost of administering 
iNO to infants with PPHN may prohibit its use in 
developing countries. Alternative interventions con￾tinue to be trialled including sildenaÿl and bosantan. 
The condition is clinically characterized by hypox￾emic respiratory failure due to the lack of transition 
of the pulmonary vasculature from a high-resis￾tance fetal to a low-resistance extrauterine circuit. 
Pulmonary vascular resistance remains high result￾ing in right to left shunting across the patent foramen 
ovale and the patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) result￾ing in hypoxemia. The key to successful manage￾ment is lowering the pulmonary vascular resistance 
and increasing myocardial performance. One poten￾tial cause of pulmonary hypertension is meconium 
aspiration syndrome. Meconium staining of amni￾otic °uid (MSAF) occurs in approximately 10–15% of 
term deliveries. MSAF is thought to be a sign of fetal 
distress and is often associated with other conditions 
such as placental insufÿciency and cord compression. 
The management of babies born through MSAF has 
changed signiÿcantly over the years. Previously, the 
head was suctioned on the perineum, but this prac￾tice changed following a trial highlighting a worse 
neonatal outcome when routine suctioning occurred. 
The Newborn Resuscitation Program (NRP) previ￾ously recommended endotracheal intubation and 
suctioning with a meconium aspirator in all infants 
born through MSAF for the prevention of meconium 
aspiration syndrome. This subsequently changed 
to only intubating when the baby was non-vigor￾ous. In the more recent 2015 International Liaison 
Committee on Resuscitation recommendations, the 
emphasis has changed to initiating positive pressure 
ventilation during the ÿrst minute of life, even in 
non-vigorous infants. The indication for intubation 
for tracheal suctioning may be necessary if positive 
pressure ventilation does not allow for adequate ven￾tilation and it is suspected that there is mechanical 
obstruction due to meconium. 
KEY LEARNING POINTS 
˜ The more common reasons for admission to the 
special care unit include transient tachypnoea, 
jaundice and hypoglycaemia. 
˜ Early infection is rare, but can be devastating. 
˜ Management of congenital infections such as 
syphilis, CMV and HIV require multidisciplinary 
input. 
˜ The key to the management of pulmonary 
hypertension is lowering pulmonary pressures. 
AN APPROACH TO THE 
DYSMORPHIC INFANT 
Dysmorphic features are common in the general 
population. One or two dysmorphic features may not 
lead to a diagnosis or have any effect on the child. 
For example, 5% of the population may have a single 
palmar crease. It is important to adopt a standard 
approach to the examination and to document all of 
the features of concern. A constellation of features 
may represent an underlying condition. Always look 
at the parents, as they may have some similar fea￾tures. A detailed family history is also important. If 
concerns remain, then the need to perform genetic 
testing should be discussed with the family, and 
karyotype, microarray or additional testing may 
need to be done. Discussion with a clinical geneticist 
may help guide appropriate investigations. 
TRISOMY 21 IN NEONATES 
The most common syndrome in the neonate is tri￾somy 21: Down syndrome. This can be expected 
based on sonographic or genetic analyses con￾ducted during pregnancy or sometimes can be 
unexpected. Unexpected cases occur in people who 
decline antenatal screening for this condition and 
in people who have been screened as low risk. A 
risk of 1:2,000 means that 1 in 2,000 women will 
have a baby with Down syndrome. The older the 
mother, the greater the risk. 
Honesty and transparency are important when 
dealing with a case of suspected Down syndrome. 
The ideal is to share suspicions with both parents in 302 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 303 04/03/2024 16:08
 
Neurological concerns 
a calm, private setting. However, this is not always 
possible. If a parent raises concerns about Down syn￾drome, those concerns should be acknowledged and 
a paediatric opinion sought as soon as possible. 
A paediatric assessment of suspected Down syn￾drome will usually take the form of a shared exam￾ination of the baby with the parents. All features 
of the baby are described and positives are shared. 
Features that are different from many children are 
pointed out (not abnormal features). A genetic test 
is always done, even if an experienced clinician can 
make a deÿnitive diagnosis based on the examina￾tion alone. If there is a clinical suspicion of trisomy 
21, but not all of the typical features are present, it 
is usually worth doing the genetic test, even if the 
likelihood is low. If one set of clinicians raise the 
concern, other groups are likely to raise the same 
concern. The genetic test is usually a °uorescent 
in situ hybridization (FISH) test that can give a 
result within 24–48 hours. A deÿnitive karyotype 
is needed to report the type of trisomy and to indi￾cate the value of genetic testing in parents and the 
future risk. Non-disjunction does not need testing 
of family members and is associated with a low risk 
of recurrence (1%). 
The days after diagnosis are traumatic for the 
family. Some common problems can be present in 
the ÿrst day. These include an oxygen dependency 
secondary to pulmonary hypertension (which 
generally settles over a few days), hypoglycaemia, 
polycythaemia and jaundice. The dominant clini￾cal problem is establishing feeds. Some babies with 
trisomy 21 can learn to feed on the postnatal wards 
with their mother, but some are admitted to the neo￾natal unit for a period of tube feeding. Breastfeeding 
should be encouraged. A cardiac defect is seen in 
about half of all cases of trisomy 21 and is sought 
using echocardiography. Ideally, an echocardiogram 
should be performed prior to discharge. Rarer con￾ditions associated with trisomy 21 include duodenal 
atresia and Hirschsprung disease. The parents are 
given information about the condition overall. The 
family may wish to connect with various support 
groups. Input from early-intervention services in 
the community should be sought prior to discharge. 
Babies go home when they can feed. Appropriate 
clinical follow-up should be arranged, including 
cardiology follow-up if required. 
NEUROLOGICAL CONCERNS 
SEIZURES 
Seizures are relatively common in the newborn 
period, affecting 1–2 per 1,000 livebirths. Hypoxic 
ischaemic encephalopathy (HIE) is the most com￾mon cause of neonatal seizures, causing about half 
of neonatal seizures. However, there is a broad dif￾ferential. Other causes of neonatal seizures include 
cerebral infarction (stroke), intracranial haemor￾rhage (intraventricular haemorrhage (IVH) and 
subdural), meningitis, electrolyte disturbances 
(hypocalcaemia, hypomagnesemia), hypoglycae￾mia, and rarer metabolic disorders and structural 
brain disorders. 
The assessment of neonatal seizures is based on 
description followed by interpretation. Neonates 
have speciÿc patterns of seizures, including tonic, 
clonic, subtle and myoclonic. Tonic–clonic seizures 
are rare in neonates. Clinical observation is not reli￾able. Ideally, electroencephalography (EEG) or cere￾bral function monitoring is used, albeit the latter may 
have limited use in seizure detection. Other features 
such as autonomic changes (respiratory rate, blood 
pressure, oxygen saturations) are also important fea￾tures of seizures. Jitters are not seizures. Jitters affect 
up to half of babies. Jitters involve repeated move￾ments at 1–3 Hz, typically on stimulation. Jitters can 
be restrained, in contrast with seizures. Benign sleep 
myoclonus can mimic seizures and can be fright￾ening for parents. Parents should be reassured that 
these are a normal phenomenon. Clear history tak￾ing is essential, and often parents will have recorded 
the event on their mobile phone, which can be very 
helpful on review. 
Investigations are directed towards ÿnding the 
cause of the seizures and looking for a prognosis. 
While cranial ultrasound may be useful, brain mag￾netic resonance imaging (MRI) is the ÿrst-line imag￾ing modality. 
The evidence base for the treatment of neonatal sei￾zures is limited. Conventional therapy involves phe￾nobarbital. Supplementary agents include midazolam, 
levetiracetam, phenytoin and sodium valproate. 
The prognosis of neonatal seizures depends 
on the cause. Overall, about half of children with 303 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 304 04/03/2024 16:08
Neonates 
neonatal seizures will have neurodevelopmental 
abnormalities. The proportion is much higher if 
there is cerebral dysgenesis. Of children with neo￾natal seizures, 10% to 20% have seizures in later 
life (this proportion will be higher if there is a brain 
malformation). 
NEONATAL ENCEPHALOPATHY 
Neonatal encephalopathy has a broad differential 
diagnosis. Neonatal encephalopathy is often, but 
not always, associated with events during and after 
labour. Thus, the neonatal approach is to evaluate 
the diagnosis with an open mind and assess the 
baby systematically before making a diagnosis and 
offering a prognosis. It may take some time to come 
to a deÿnitive answer. In the meantime, the baby is 
treated aggressively for potential conditions. Causes 
of neonatal encephalopathy are wide and include 
HIE, infection (bacterial and viral, e.g. HSV), drugs 
(maternal therapeutic drugs, maternal abuse of 
drugs or neonatal therapeutic drugs), CNS malfor￾mations and metabolic conditions (hypoglycaemia, 
aminoacidaemias, organic acidaemias, pyridoxine 
dependency, mitochondrial disorders, urea cycle dis￾orders, etc.). The most common condition is HIE. 
HYPOXIC ISCHAEMIC 
ENCEPHALOPATHY 
Perinatal asphyxia accounts for approximately 6 
per 1,000 live births. When the asphyxia is severe 
or prolonged, it can lead to HIE. This is the lead￾ing cause of acquired brain injury in term infants, 
affecting 1–2 per 1,000 live births in the developed 
world. HIE is caused by a disruption in blood and/ 
or oxygen supply to the brain. HIE can be caused 
by antenatal insults secondary to placental or cord 
problems or to peri-partum events such as placental 
abruption, shoulder dystocia, signiÿcant antepartum 
haemorrhage or cord accident. Postnatal events are 
a very rare cause. The severity of the condition and 
clinical features vary depending on the duration and 
severity of the original event. Following the original 
event, if circulation is restored, reperfusion occurs. 
Secondary energy failure occurs 6–48 hours after 
the initial insult. HIE is typically classiÿed into three 
categories: mild, moderate and severe (described 
in Table˜ 16.1). These categories are not necessarily 
independent of one another. Grading is currently 
assigned based on clinical assessment. 
Mild HIE accounts for almost 40% of all HIE cases. 
Infants with mild HIE are noted to be hyper-alert or 
Table 16.1 Modiÿed Sarnat Scoring System for hypoxic ischaemic encephalopathy 
Area Stage 1 (mild) Stage 2 (moderate) Stage 3 (severe) 
Level of consciousness Hyperalert Lethargic Stuporous or comatose 
Spontaneous activity Active Decreased Absent 
Posture Mild distal ˜exion Strong distal ˜exion, 
complete extension or 
‘frog-legged’ position 
Decerebrate 
Tone Hypertonic, jittery Hypotonia (axial and/or limb) Flaccid 
Primitive re˜ exes
 Suck Weak Weak/absent Absent
 Moro Strong, low threshold Incomplete, high threshold Absent 
Autonomic function
 Pupils Mydriasis Miosis Variable, ÿxed, dilated, 
unresponsive to light 
Heart rate Normal, tachycardia Bradycardia Variable, irregular 
Respiratory rate Regular, spontaneous 
breathing 
Periodic, irregular breathing 
effort 
Apnoeic 
Seizures None Common: focal or multi-focal Uncommon 
304 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 305 04/03/2024 16:08
Neurological concerns 
irritable. They may demonstrate mild distal °exion 
of their limbs. They may have a weak suck and have 
mydriasis and tachycardia. They may have a strong 
Moro re°ex, which is easy to elicit. Muscle tone can 
be normal with normal spontaneous activity and 
normal respirations. Although previously thought to 
have a normal outcome, studies now show that any￾where up to 25% of infants with mild HIE may have 
an abnormal motor or emotional/behavioural out￾come, although this may not become apparent until 
school-going age or beyond. 
Approximately 40% of infants with HIE will fall 
into the moderate HIE group. These infants are 
lethargic with decreased spontaneous activity. They 
have central hypotonia and demonstrate strong dis￾tal °exion. Their suck may be weak or absent and 
their Moro re°ex may be weak or incomplete. They 
may have a low heart rate, have miosis and dem￾onstrate periodic breathing. Seizures may occur 
in this group and, if present, they tend to occur 
between 12 and 72 hours of life. These infants meet 
current criteria for intervention with therapeutic 
hypothermia (TH) and have a 20–40% risk of sig￾niÿcant adverse outcome. 
Severe HIE is the least common but most dev￾astating category of HIE. These infants are stupor￾ous or in a coma. Their muscle tone is signiÿcantly 
decreased. They are °accid and may demonstrate 
decerebrate posturing of their limbs. They have 
an absent suck and Moro. Their heart rate is vari￾able, they tend to be apnoeic and their pupils can 
be unequal, ÿxed, dilated or show poor light re°ex. 
Seizures are most common in this group. This group 
also display evidence of multi-organ dysfunction and 
may have signs of acute renal and liver failure. These 
infants tend to die in the neonatal period or, if they 
survive, have signiÿcant impairments, including 
cerebral palsy and signiÿcant learning difÿculties. 
TH has now become the standard of care for all 
infants with moderate to severe HIE. TH involves 
lowering an infant’s core temperature to 33–34°C 
for 72 hours then slowly rewarming over 12 hours. 
To be effective, TH must be initiated early, within 6 
hours of birth. In this short time frame, the infants 
who may beneÿt from TH must be resuscitated, sta￾bilized and identiÿed. To further complicate matters, 
HIE is an evolving and dynamic process. Clinical 
examination may remain the same, improve or 
deteriorate over these 6 hours. The decision to initi￾ate TH is currently based on the use of clinical and 
biochemical assessments. 
ELECTROENCEPHALOGRAPHY 
Neonatal EEG is extremely useful for the assessment 
of neurological function in infants with perinatal 
asphyxia and seizures. EEG is an electrophysiologi￾cal technique for the recording of electrical activity 
arising from the brain. This is performed by placing 
electrodes on the scalp, which provides a recording of 
brain activity. Multichannel EEG, the gold standard 
for EEG monitoring, can be challenging in neonates, 
as electrode application can be difÿcult, it is complex 
and it requires expert interpretation. Personnel with 
the level of experience required to interpret neonatal 
multichannel EEG are usually not readily available 
in most NICUs. 
A simpler EEG method is used in many NICUs 
across the world – amplitude integrated EEG (aEEG). 
aEEG is a compressed version of the traditional EEG 
that utilizes a limited number of channels. aEEG has 
some potential limitations. The recording is crude 
and non-experts still struggle in the interpretation 
of it. aEEG is also heavily affected by artefact, that is, 
any recorded electrical activity that was not created 
in the brain. This could be cardiac activity, neonatal 
movement or external factors such as a healthcare 
worker administering medications. Training in aEEG 
application and interpretation is essential. 
MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING 
MRI is the radiological imaging method of choice for 
brain imaging in infants with HIE. MRI is highly cor￾related with long-term neurodevelopmental outcome 
and is therefore a good surrogate marker of outcome. 
It is superior to cranial ultrasound at detecting injury 
in the deep grey matter. MRI provides a detailed 
assessment of the infant’s brain structure. 
The most common sequences reported in neonatal 
imaging are T1- and T2-weighted images, diffusion 
weighted imaging (DWI) and magnetic resonance 
spectroscopy. T1 and T2 images are useful for assess￾ing grey and white matter abnormalities and ana￾tomical structure. DWI measures the diffusion of 
water molecules in a tissue and is the best modality to 305 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 306 04/03/2024 16:08
 
Neonates 
detect acute infarction. A combination of T1, T2 and 
DWI sequences of the brain are best for identifying 
hypoxic ischaemic injury. Numerous scoring systems 
exist, one of the most common being the Barkovich 
MRI Scoring System as outlined in Table 16.2. 
Appropriate communication with the family at 
this time is essential, as this can be a very stressful 
Table 16.2 Barkovich MRI Scoring System 
Score Description 
Basal ganglia (BG) 
0 Normal or isolated focal cortical infarct 
1 Abnormal signal in thalamus 
2 
Abnormal signal in thalamus and lentiform 
nucleus 
3 
Abnormal signal in thalamus, lentiform 
nucleus and perirolandic cortex 
4 More extensive involvement 
Watershed (W) 
0 Normal 
1 Single focal infarction 
2 
Abnormal signal in anterior or posterior 
watershed white matter 
3 
Abnormal signal in anterior or posterior 
watershed cortex and white matter 
4 
Abnormal signal in both anterior and posterior 
watershed zones 
5 More extensive cortical involvement 
Basal ganglia/watershed (BG/W) 
0 Normal 
1 Abnormal signal in basal ganglia or thalamus 
2 Abnormal signal in cortex 
3 
Abnormal signal in cortex and basal nuclei 
(basal ganglia or thalami) 
4 Abnormal signal in entire cortex and basal nuclei 
Summation (S) 
Arithmetic sum of BG and W 
Enhancement (E) 
0 No enhancement 
1 Enhancement in white matter only 
2 Enhancement in deep grey matter nuclei 
3 Enhancement in cerebral cortex 
4 
Enhancement in cortex and deep grey matter 
or white matter 
time. The provision of information, including on the 
evolution of the clinical assessment, EEG and MRI 
data, is key to assessing long-term outcome risk. 
Appropriate multidisciplinary input from neurology, 
neurophysiology, radiology, physiotherapy, occupa￾tional therapy and speech and language are essential 
and individualized to the patient’s needs. 
LOCALIZED NEUROLOGY 
UPPER LIMB 
Brachial plexus palsies are often noted after birth. 
These may be associated with difÿcult deliveries, but 
this does not explain all cases. Erb palsy affects the 
C5 and C6 nerve roots, giving rise to a distinctive 
posture with the arm held at the baby’s side, inter￾nally rotated and pronated. Klumpke palsy affects C8 
and T1 but is rare. Total recovery occurs in 75% of 
babies over a few weeks to months. Referrals to phys￾iotherapy and orthopaedics are essential to mini￾mize complications such as contracture and to assess 
for surgical intervention if there is no improvement. 
FACE 
Facial palsy is seen in neonates and is likely to be 
due to pressure from the mother’s sacral promontory 
during labour. The use of forceps may exacerbate this 
in some cases. Recovery is usually complete within 
a few weeks. Asymmetric crying facies is often mis￾interpreted as a facial palsy. This entity is related to 
hypoplasia of the orbicularis oris muscle. 
LUMBOSACRAL AREA 
Small ‘dimples’ at the bottom of the back are com￾mon, affecting around 5% of babies. They can be 
associated with spinal lesions if the bottom of the 
dimple is not visible, if the area is high up or to 
the side or if there is a change to the skin nearby. 
Ultrasound of the lower spine is indicated if there is 
any suspicion of a worrying feature. 
NEONATAL FRACTURES 
The most common sites of neonatal fracture are 
clavicle, humeral shaft and femoral shaft. Less 
common sites are at the epiphyses of the humerus 306 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 307 04/03/2024 16:08
Prematurity 
or femur. Some fractures are sustained during birth. 
Almost all neonatal fractures heal without sequelae. 
Immobilization is difÿcult in this age group and may 
not help. Analgesia is important (e.g. with paracetamol). 
KEY LEARNING POINTS 
˜ Seizures are common in newborn infants, 
affecting 1–2 per 1,000 live births. 
˜ HIE is the leading cause of acquired brain injury 
in newborns. 
˜ HIE accounts for approximately 50% of all seizures. 
˜ EEG and MRI are essential investigations in the 
care of infants with HIE. 
˜ Communication with the family is key. 
PREMATURITY 
Preterm infants are at a greater risk of morbidity than 
term infants. The moderate to late preterm infant 
group represents approximately 75–80% of all pre￾term births. UK data show that babies born between 
32 and 36 weeks’ gestation represent approximately 
6–7% of all births and approximately 75% of all pre￾term births, equating to approximately 40,000 babies 
born each year in England and Wales. Mortality for 
this group of infants is very low, but there are many 
short- and longer term morbidities associated with 
late preterm birth. Typically, all babies delivered at 
<35 weeks are admitted to the SCBU, with variable 
admission rates above 35 weeks. Often, the reasons 
for admission include poor feeding, hypoglycaemia 
or jaundice. 
Very preterm birth refers to infants delivered at 
less than 32 weeks, and extreme preterm infants 
are those delivered at less than 28 weeks. With con￾tinuing advances in technology, pharmacology and 
medical innovation, the boundaries for survival con￾tinue to be lowered. The gestational age at which a 
live born neonate has a 50% chance of survival has 
decreased from approximately 32 weeks’ gestation in 
the 1960s to 23/24 weeks’ gestation today. 
Decision-making at the limit of viability (22–24 
weeks), in particular whether resuscitation should 
occur or not and whether one should continue with 
intensive care or withdraw support, remains a very 
challenging process for all involved. There are a 
number of key players, namely the parents and the 
healthcare providers, all of whom have the baby’s 
best interest as their primary concern. To help make 
complex decisions at the borderline of viability, it is 
important that the most up-to-date outcome data 
are available. Numerous sources of data are avail￾able, including large single-unit cohort studies and 
national and international studies. 
The most important data when counselling 
expectant parents at the borderline of viability are 
one’s own institutional data, and it is important 
that those involved in the antenatal discussions are 
aware of the most up-to-date data to inform fami￾lies. The original EPICure data from 1995 were very 
informative for families and healthcare staff caring 
for extremely preterm infants. Those data equally 
highlighted some of the challenges around deliv￾ery of care at this time, including the high propor￾tion of infants that were cared for in units that had 
small numbers of babies in this gestation category. 
Today, we see signiÿcant differences in outcomes 
across countries, some of this related to the approach 
to care. Survival is higher in regions where there is 
a much more proactive approach to management. 
A more centralized approach to care is now taken, 
along with more active neonatal management. 
Caring for extreme preterm infants in tertiary cen￾tres is perhaps one of the most important elements 
in managing peri-viable birth. 
One of the principle concerns is that, as survival 
improves at lower gestational ages, so too will the 
number of babies with signiÿcant problems, resulting 
in lifelong issues for the parents and family. Long￾term neurodevelopmental outcome is essential when 
expectant parents are being counselled. The original 
EPICure study reported on long-term outcomes at a 
median of 6 years and found rates of severe, mod￾erate and mild disability to be 22%, 24% and 34%, 
respectively, in all survivors of delivery at less than 
26 weeks. The American Academy of Paediatrics 
reported in 2002 that 30–50% of surviving children 
born at less than 25 weeks had moderate to severe 
impairment. Prevalence studies of the rate of cerebral 
palsy over different time periods have produced dif￾ferent results, with some seeming to support better 
longer-term outcomes. There are undoubtedly many 
methodological issues with each of these studies, but 
it is fair to surmise that, the lower the gestational 307 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 308 04/03/2024 16:08
 
Neonates 
age, the greater the risk of mortality and the higher 
incidence of signiÿcant problems (however these are 
deÿned) in the survivors. 
The recent British Association of Perinatal 
Medicine (BAPM) publication entitled Perinatal 
Management of Extreme Preterm Birth Before 27 Weeks 
of Gestation provides an excellent and timely over￾view of the challenges faced by caregivers and fami￾lies and provides a new risk-based framework for 
management. This is an updated framework from the 
previous 2008 version and an important point to note 
is that survival at 23 weeks in 2008 is more similar 
to survival at 22 weeks today (2022). One of the key 
concerns highlighted previously is the risk of severe 
impairment in survivors. This is estimated to be 
approximately one in four survivors with delivery at 
23 weeks and one in seven with delivery at 24 weeks. 
The number of babies surviving delivery at 22 weeks 
with severe impairment is difÿcult to quantify; such 
data would have wide conÿdence intervals due to the 
relatively small numbers. However, it would, at best, 
be the same as that at 23 weeks, although one would 
have to assume that the rate of severe impairment 
was higher at 22 weeks (Table 16.3). 
There are a number of key factors that in°u￾ence outcome. These include gestational age, 
birthweight, sex, multiplicity and antenatal steroid 
administration. The BAPM framework describes a 
predominantly gestation-based risk assessment, 
reÿned by other factors including fetal factors (male 
sex, multiple pregnancy, congenital anomaly and 
poor fetal growth), clinical conditions (prolonged 
pre labour rupture of membranes before 24 weeks), 
therapeutic interventions (antenatal steroids and 
magnesium sulphate) and the clinical setting in 
which infants are cared for. Based on these risk fac￾tors, patients are categorized as extremely high risk 
Table 16.3 Outcome for babies born alive at 22–26 weeks* 
(>90%), high risk (50–90%) or moderate risk (<50%) 
based on their chance of either dying or surviving 
with severe impairment. 
Counselling of parents is critical. The information 
should be provided in a caring and empathetic way. 
The information needs to be communicated clearly 
and concisely and needs to be up to date. Ideally, 
senior members of staff should lead the discussion 
and, following the consultation, a clear treatment 
plan should be documented in the maternal notes. 
This may re°ect an active management plan or a 
palliative approach to care. For example, for a male 
infant delivered at 22 weeks with a history of chorio￾amnionitis, no antenatal steroids administered and 
weighing less than 400 g, a palliative approach may 
be the most appropriate approach to take. 
Some of the key obstetrical components to be 
addressed include the administration of antenatal 
steroids, the use of tocolysis, magnesium sulphate 
administration, the mode of delivery and delayed 
cord clamping. When there are concerns around 
infection or signiÿcant haemorrhage, tocolysis may 
not be appropriate. The main aim of tocolysis may 
be to achieve the maximum beneÿt from antena￾tal corticosteroids and allow timely transfer to a 
tertiary-level unit that cares for babies delivered 
at the cusp of viability. Perhaps one of the greatest 
areas of debate relates to the mode of delivery, espe￾cially when the fetus is in breech presentation and 
may require a classical incision. Extremely preterm 
caesarean delivery can be difÿcult and carries addi￾tional risks for the mother. These include haemor￾rhage, infection, bowel injury and risks for future 
pregnancies. Senior obstetrical decision-making in 
conjunction with the mother and the neonatal team 
is warranted. This highlights the importance of com￾munication between the various specialities and the 
Gestation 22 weeks 23 weeks 24 weeks 25 weeks 26 weeks 
Survival 30% (21–49%) 40% (32–44%) 60% (55–65%) 70% (70–78%) 80% (70–85%) 
Signiÿ cant developmental 
problems 
1 in 3 1 in 4 1 in 7 1 in 7 1 in 10 
Source: Adapted from BAPM (2019). Perinatal Management of Extreme Preterm Birth Before 27 Weeks of Gestation. A BAPM Framework 
for Practice. 
* Some babies born this prematurely cannot survive labour and birth. The ÿgures in brackets indicate how certain we are of the true 
survival rate. Up to a quarter of children without severe disability may nonetheless have milder forms of disability such as learning 
difÿculty, mild cerebral palsy or behavioural problems. 308 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 309 04/03/2024 16:08
Prematurity 
family. The˛antenatal consultation allows open and 
frank discussion. Parental views are explored, bal￾anced information is provided to the family and out￾come data are discussed. The consultation provides 
the family with an opportunity to discuss potential 
options and treatment plans. 
Neonatal management plans are discussed in 
advance. It is important that exactly what these terms 
(active and palliative) mean is discussed during the 
antenatal consultation with the neonatology team. It 
is important to inform the families of how the infant 
might appear and that, in situations in which palliation 
may be chosen, some infants may cry at birth. There 
also has to be the caveat that, in certain circumstances 
(albeit rarely), plans may need to be revised (e.g. in 
situations in which the baby is born in unexpectedly 
good condition and the weight is signiÿcantly differ￾ent from what had been determined previously). 
When an active approach is taken, it is essential 
that a consultant neonatologist is present to guide 
the stabilization process. Delayed cord clamping 
for at least 60 seconds should occur, and stabiliza￾tion should follow one of the standardized newborn 
resuscitation programmes being delivered in that 
institution (e.g. NLS, NRP). Prevention of hypother￾mia with the use of a plastic bag and the provision of 
CPAP with a face mask via a T-piece device to ensure 
lung in°ation is central to newborn stabilization. 
A rising heart rate is a re°ection of effective stabi￾lization. Some centres will intubate and administer 
surfactant, others may try to avoid the placement of 
an endotracheal tube and instead insert a ÿne bore 
catheter to provide surfactant while the baby is spon￾taneously breathing and in receipt of CPAP. The sta￾bilization process should typically occur in the same 
room as the parents who should be provided with the 
opportunity to touch their baby prior to subsequent 
transfer to the neonatal unit where hopefully a long 
journey will begin. 
PREMATURITY AND COMPLICATIONS 
A general understanding of some of the common 
morbidities associated with preterm birth is impor￾tant for the obstetrician. These include morbidities 
such as respiratory distress syndrome (RDS), bron￾chopulmonary dysplasia (BPD), necrotizing entero￾colitis (NEC), IVH and periventricular leukomalacia. 
The importance of the antenatal consultation, detail￾ing the journey and stressing the importance of 
breast milk provision cannot be overstated. We will 
begin this section by discussing the beneÿts of breast 
milk and then review the various morbidities associ￾ated with preterm birth. 
BREAST MILK 
Breastfeeding is the gold standard for newborn 
infants and has substantial health, growth and devel￾opment beneÿts. The World Health Organization 
(WHO) recommends that infants should be exclu￾sively breastfed for the ÿrst 6 months (WHO 2017). 
Formula feeding attempts to mimic breast milk, but 
it does not contain all of the nutritional and non￾nutritional components. Breast milk has multiple 
bioactive and immune factors such as antibodies, 
immunoglobulins, lactoferrin, lysozyme, growth 
factors, white blood cells, microRNAs, stem cells 
and human milk oligosaccharides (HMOs). Each 
of these have direct health beneÿts and are critical 
for the developing infant immune system. Breast 
milk contains probiotics such as Biÿ dobacterium and 
Lactobacillus and HMOs encourage the prolifera￾tion of these probiotic microorganisms in the infant 
gut. Feeding preterm infants breast milk results in 
a signiÿcant reduction in the incidence of NEC and 
sepsis. It is easy to see how this may be the case 
when one considers the non-nutritional components 
outlined previously. Encouraging breast milk for the 
preterm infant is essential, and efforts should be 
made during antenatal visits to encourage mothers 
to consider breastfeeding. 
Breastfeeding is also associated with longer term 
beneÿts such as a reduction in the risk of immune￾mediated diseases including asthma, in°ammatory 
bowel disease, type 1 diabetes and metabolic dis￾eases later in life and it is probable that the infant gut 
microbiota plays a role here. 
The intestinal microbiota in early life plays a major 
role in infant health and development, having an 
impact on maturation of the immune system, protec￾tion against pathogens and in°uencing the long-term 
metabolic welfare of the host. Breast milk provides 
the optimal active ingredients for the growth of ben￾eÿcial microbial species. Our understanding of the 
intestinal microbiome is only in its infancy. 309 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 310 04/03/2024 16:08
 
 
Neonates 
It must also be remembered that breastfeed￾ing also confers health beneÿts to the mother. One 
must not forget the potential psychological beneÿts 
it gives to mothers to know that their milk has sig￾niÿcant health beneÿts for their baby and that they 
are contributing to their infant’s well-being. In situ￾ations in which breast milk is not available, there are 
donor milk banks available that can be used to sup￾ply breast milk for the very preterm population. 
COMMON MORBIDITIES 
Respiratory distress syndrome 
RDS is caused by primary surfactant deÿciency 
combined with structural immaturity of the lung. 
Antenatal corticosteroids signiÿcantly decrease the 
incidence of RDS. The more immature the infant, the 
greater the incidence of RDS, the greater the likeli￾hood that they will receive mechanical ventilation 
and other modalities such as high-frequency oscil￾lation and thus the greater chance of longer term 
pulmonary morbidity. Management has evolved 
over the last 20 years and the mainstay of therapy 
is now aimed at trying to avoid mechanical venti￾lation with CPAP and early surfactant replacement 
therapy. Advances in surfactant administration 
have included the intubation surfactant extubation 
(INSURE) technique, the less invasive surfactant 
administration (LISA) technique with a ÿne bore 
catheter and, more recently, nebulized surfactant 
therapy. When babies are intubated and mechani￾cally ventilated for whatever reason (RDS, infection, 
apnoea), the goal must be to try and safely remove 
the endotracheal tube as quickly as possible to avoid 
all of the adverse effects of mechanical ventilation 
and the increased risk of BPD. 
Bronchopulmonary dysplasia 
BPD is one of the most common complications of 
prematurity, affecting up to 40% of infants deliv￾ered at less than 28 weeks’ gestation. It is a complex 
multifactorial disorder. BPD occurs preterm when 
the lungs are evolving from the canalicular to the 
saccular stage of development. Exposure to air, 
oxygen, adverse effects of mechanical ventilation, 
infection and in°ammation lead to a derangement 
of this normal process. Intrauterine growth failure, 
infection and chorioamnionitis can also have an 
impact on this process and contribute to the devel￾opment of deranged lung growth and abnormal 
vascular development. 
The deÿnition has continued to evolve from the 
original Northway classiÿcation through to more 
recent deÿnitions such as the US National Institute 
of Child Health and Human Development deÿnition 
from 2018, which classiÿes the condition as a con￾tinuum rather than a ‘yes or no’ phenomenon. The 
most recent suggested classiÿcation attempts to cat￾egorize babies as mild, moderate or severe based on 
the need for various levels of respiratory support and 
oxygen need. 
Prevention is always better than cure. Strategies 
aimed at reducing BPD are aimed at avoiding some of 
the key factors associated with the development of the 
disorder. In the delivery suite, this means avoiding/ 
minimizing oxygen toxicity, avoiding mechanical 
ventilation if possible, less invasive means of provid￾ing surfactant and, if ventilation is required, avoiding 
volutrauma and barotrauma. Reducing the number 
of days with an endotracheal tube in situ is impor￾tant and the use of non-invasive ventilation such as 
CPAP is key. Infection often results in an increase 
in respiratory support and often an increase in the 
number of ventilator days. PDA has been associated 
with the development of BPD. Centres using pro￾phylactic indomethacin as a therapy have lower rates 
of PDA and BPD than centres that do not. The next 
few years will provide more evidence around ductal 
management and adverse outcome in the extreme 
preterm infant group. 
Medical therapies aimed at prevention include 
the use of caffeine, intramuscular vitamin A and 
postnatal corticosteroid administration. Caffeine was 
found to be associated with a lower incidence of BPD 
in the ‘caffeine for apnoea of prematurity’ trial and 
vitamin A decreased BPD rates. The issue with vita￾min A administration is the frequent intramuscular 
injections that are required. Recent trials of steroid 
use have demonstrated some beneÿt. 
Management of established cases of BPD should 
include input from multiple disciplines including 
neonatology, cardiology, pulmonology and dietet￾ics. Therapies often include diuretics and bron￾chodilators but their efÿcacy is not well studied. 
Corticosteroids remain the mainstay of treatment. 
Controversy still remains around the optimal drug, 310 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 311 04/03/2024 16:08
 
 
Prematurity 
timing and duration of therapy. Pulmonary hyper￾tension is common in the setting of BPD. Additional 
therapies such as nitric oxide, sildenaÿl and bosen￾tan are now being used, but there is currently little 
evidence to support their use. 
Circulatory challenges 
Circulatory instability is a common occurrence in 
the extreme preterm infant. It is often characterized 
by a low blood pressure. Hypotension is commonly 
diagnosed and treated in the very preterm infant, but 
there is enormous variation in practice, largely due to 
a lack of good evidence. It has been associated with 
adverse short-term and long-term outcomes. The 
evidence to support current management strategies 
is minimal and mostly dependent on small studies 
with short-term physiological end points. Preterm 
infants with blood pressure lower than average 
often have no biochemical or clinical signs of shock. 
Careful observation of such infants without inter￾vention may well be appropriate. 
Excessive intervention in preterm infants may 
be unnecessary or even harmful. The most com￾mon approach to treatment is to give one or more 
°uid boluses followed by dopamine. Fluctuations in 
blood pressure following commencement of inotro￾pes are well recognized and could also trigger IVH. 
Furthermore, dopamine, the most used inotrope, has 
effects on many physiological functions, including 
pituitary effects, which lead to secondary hypothy￾roidism, a known risk factor for poor long-term neu￾rodevelopmental outcome in the preterm infant. 
Many clinicians rely on absolute blood pres￾sure values to guide intervention. Blood pressure 
reference ranges are often based on birthweight, 
gestational age and postnatal age criteria. These 
statistically determined values vary considerably. 
The Joint Working Group of the BAPM has recom￾mended that the mean arterial blood pressure in 
mmHg should be maintained above the gestational 
age in weeks. Despite little published evidence to 
support this ‘rule’, it remains the most common cri￾teria used to deÿne hypotension. Evidence is lack￾ing in this area of newborn care and the next few 
years may bring clarity to a more individualized 
approach. The use of neonatal echocardiography 
has increased, and this should help provide greater 
clarity on the underlying pathophysiology. The hope 
then is that a more tailored approach may lead to an 
improved outcome. 
Patent ductus arteriosus 
The ductus arteriosus connects the pulmonary 
artery to the descending aorta. During the ÿrst days 
of the feto-neonatal transition, the ductus should 
close. Patency of the ductus arteriosus is the most 
common cardiovascular abnormality of the newborn 
and affects up to 60% of babies born at less than 28 
weeks’ gestation. PDA is associated with multiple 
morbidities (BPD, IVH, NEC, poor neurodevelop￾mental outcome) and death. Early identiÿcation and 
treatment of a haemodynamically signiÿcant duct 
may be important to ameliorate these associations. 
Clinical signs can increase a clinician’s suspicion 
of the presence of PDA, but they are not useful in 
identifying a haemodynamically signiÿcant duct 
without a bedside echocardiogram. Clinical signs 
most often present beyond the ÿrst few days of age at 
which stage the risk of morbidity is higher. Clinical 
effects of the ductus can be divided into those caused 
by excessive pulmonary blood °ow and those due 
to reduced systemic blood °ow, which occur in the 
setting of left to right °ow at the level of the ductus 
(Table 16.4). 
Despite multiple studies – some aimed at prophy￾laxis and others at treating a symptomatic ductus, with 
others advocating the complete opposite and adopting 
a conservative approach – the best approach remains 
elusive at present. Further trials in this area are war￾ranted. When medical therapy fails, surgical treatment 
is warranted. Previously, this involved a thoracotomy, 
but today the duct can be closed percutaneously. 
Necrotizing enterocolitis 
NEC is a serious gastrointestinal complication that 
occurs primarily in preterm neonates and causes 
signiÿcant morbidity and mortality. Its incidence is 
approximately 5–10% in babies delivered at less than 
32 weeks and is more likely with decreasing gesta￾tional age. It is a multifactorial problem characterized 
by by intestinal immaturity and bacterial overgrowth 
in association with altered blood °ow. It is more com￾mon in the more immature and growth-restricted 
infants. Prolonged early courses of postnatal antibi￾otics are also associated with an increased incidence 
of NEC. It can be devastating when it occurs. 311 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 312 04/03/2024 16:08
Neonates 
Table 16.4 Physiological and clinical effects of a haemodynamically signiÿcant patent ductus arteriosus 
Excessive pulmonary ˜ ow Reduced systemic ˜ ow 
Physiological effects 
Reduced lung compliance Fall in aortic end diastolic ˜ow velocity 
Pulmonary oedema PDA steal phenomenon: reduction of cerebral/renal/mesenteric perfusion 
Reduced gas exchange Lactic acidosis 
Increased pulmonary vascular resistance 
Clinical effects 
Tachypnoea Low diastolic blood pressure 
Increased oxygen requirements Wide pulse pressure 
Increased carbon dioxide retention Bounding pulses 
Ventilator dependence Hepatomegaly (right heart failure) 
Apnoea and bradycardia Feeding intolerance 
Low urine output 
PDA, patent ductus arteriosus. 
The provision of the mother’s own breast milk is 
the most effective way to decrease an infant’s risk 
of acquiring NEC as outlined previously. The evi￾dence base for the use of probiotics remains conten￾tious. Studies are limited by low power and a lack 
of consistency between probiotic strains, treatment 
regimens and study design. However, meta-analyses 
have shown beneÿt, particularly when administered 
in conjunction with maternal-expressed breast milk, 
and is associated with a reduction in the incidence 
of NEC. A 2020 Cochrane review by Sharif et al. 
assessed 56 trials with over 10,000 infants; it found 
that the use of probiotics was associated with a 46% 
reduction in risk of NEC (relative risk (RR) 0.54, 95% 
conÿdence interval (CI) 0.45–0.65) with a number 
needed to treat of 33 (95% CI 25–50). Furthermore, 
probiotics were associated with an overall reduction 
in mortality (RR 0.76, 95% CI 0.65–0.89) with a num￾ber needed to treat of 50 (95% CI 50–100). 
Intraventricular haemorrhage/periventricular 
leukomalacia 
Acquired brain injury in very preterm infants usually 
results from haemodynamic instability and cerebral 
dysautoregulation. IVH in preterm neonates occurs 
in up to 60% of those weighing 500–750 g and in 
10–20% of those weighing 1,000–1,500 g. The poten￾tial sequelae can be devastating, including death and 
signiÿcant long-term neurodevelopmental delay. 
Germinal matrix IVH and periventricular leukoma￾lacia account for most of the cerebral brain injury in 
very preterm infants. The subependymal germinal 
matrix is rich in immature vessels, which are poorly 
supported by connective tissue. Fluctuations in cere￾bral blood °ow with pressure changes promote a 
cycle of ischemia followed by reperfusion and this 
plays an important role in the pathogennesis of IVH. 
Most neonates with IVH are asymptomatic. 
The Papile classiÿcation system of IVH is based 
on the degree of bleeding and is described as grades 
I to IV. Grades I and II represent mild IVH. Grades 
III and IV represent moderate-to-severe IVH – these 
neonates are at an increased risk of more signiÿcant 
outcomes including post-haemorrhagic hydrocepha￾lus and shunt insertion, cerebral palsy and learning 
difÿculties. Risk factors include prematurity (partic￾ularly in neonates <32 weeks’ gestational age), low 
birthweight, hypotension, RDS, pneumothorax, PDA 
and hypoxia. 
Periventricular leukomalacia is the most common 
form of white matter injury in preterm infants and 
results in cerebral palsy and learning difÿculties in a 
large percentage of survivors. This area of the brain is 
particularly sensitive to low perfusion-related injury. 
Often this occurs in the setting of chorioamnionitis 
and premature rupture of membranes. 
312 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 313 04/03/2024 16:08
Palliative care 
Retinopathy of prematurity 
Babies born before 32 weeks’ gestation or weighing 
less than 1,500 g are at risk of retinopathy of pre￾maturity (ROP). Untreated, this condition leads to 
vascular proliferation in the retina and potentially 
retinal detachment and blindness. Treatment is 
effective and a screening programme is well estab￾lished. The ÿrst successful treatment was cryother￾apy, which has been superseded by laser treatment. 
Laser treatment may be superseded by other treat￾ments such as intraocular injection with antibodies 
that block the actions of vascular endothelial growth 
factor (VEGF). In the past, ROP was thought to be 
due to administration of excessive amounts of oxy￾gen. More recently, it has become clear that oxygen 
is only part of the problem. Other factors such as low 
birthweight, poor growth, low levels of insulin-like 
growth factor and excessive activity of VEGF are 
now thought to contribute to the development of 
ROP. The interventions listed here have signiÿcantly 
reduced the risk of signiÿcant visual impairment. 
KEY LEARNING POINTS 
˜ Clear communication between caregivers and 
expectant parents is critical when extreme 
preterm birth is imminent. 
˜ An awareness of major outcome data is key. 
˜ An understanding of the key morbidities of 
preterm birth is essential. 
PALLIATIVE CARE 
While neonatal mortality remains very low, when 
newborns die, it is often in the immediate neonatal 
period. The perinatal team needs to develop a shared 
approach to this distressing circumstance. Fetal 
medicine services frequently identify the fetuses 
likely to die shortly after birth. When the families 
of babies with a potentially life-limiting condition 
choose to continue the pregnancy, a series of discus￾sions is convened to discuss the options. Sometimes, 
it is possible to give a ÿrm estimate that the baby will 
die within minutes of birth. More commonly, it may 
not be possible to be sure whether the baby will live 
for minutes, hours or days. The neonatal contribu￾tion is to identify the possible scenarios and outline 
what is likely to happen in each scenario. Short-term 
survival for minutes or hours is often managed on 
the labour suite, preferably in a dedicated area that 
is designed to enhance family comfort. If the baby 
survives for 2–3 days, management in a sensitively 
selected area of the postnatal or neonatal ward may 
be optimal. If survival for more than 2–3 days is pos￾sible, then contact can be made with a local hospice 
so that families can consider that option. 
Parallel planning is undertaken for several sce￾narios because of the uncertainty and variability 
between babies. Thus, a plan is made for each of the 
likely scenarios. These plans provide a framework 
for discussion and are often changed in the light of 
events. Parents should be given a range of options 
and should be supported to identify the course of 
action that meets their preferences. Paediatric pal￾liative care team involvement is very helpful, even 
if the baby is not expected to travel to a hospice. The 
birth plan takes account of the neonatal options 
and the mother’s obstetric needs and wishes. The 
trade-offs between type of birth (e.g. vaginal birth 
versus caesarean section) and the condition of the 
baby will be speciÿc to each family. The team may 
need to account for the need for postnatal investiga￾tions if there is any uncertainty about the diagnosis 
or prognosis. 
Families may wish to take a dying baby or a baby’s 
body home and this should be facilitated. Organ 
transplant of some organs is technically possible in 
some cases but requires considerable planning and 
organization to ensure that an efÿcient system is in 
place before an opportunity to discuss transplanta￾tion arises. 
The secret to the ‘perinatal hospice’ is shared 
working, advance planning and prospective map￾ping of the relevant services. Once a plan (or a set of 
parallel plans) has been agreed for a family, then all 
members of the team need to be aware of the plan 
and to follow it. This requires very clear, compre￾hensive documentation that is immediately avail￾able to all caregivers. Unexpected events need to be 
escalated rapidly to the most experienced member of 
the team so that appropriate adaptations to the plan 
can be made. Palliative care services can facilitate 
313 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 314 04/03/2024 16:08
 
Neonates 
follow-up for the family. Supporting a family before area. Their involvement in aspects of study design 
and after the death of a baby is demanding work and is important. Through a collaborative approach, we 
staff should be offered debrief sessions and other will be able to conduct important future trials to help 
support as appropriate. address many of the unanswered questions in peri￾natal and neonatal care. 
IMPORTANCE OF CLINICAL 
TRIALS IN NEONATAL CARE CONCLUSION 
Research-active centres generally have better out￾comes overall for patients than non-research-active 
centres. It is important that obstetricians and neo￾natologists are aware of ongoing studies within both 
ÿelds. These studies have contributed signiÿcantly to 
the evidence base upon which many interventions 
now occur (e.g. antenatal steroids, antenatal magne￾sium sulphate, surfactant administration, probiotics 
and TH). Obtaining informed consent in newborn 
trials presents many challenges that are not neces￾sarily encountered in other areas of medicine. The 
process of informed consent requires several pre￾speciÿed criteria to be met. These include adequate 
disclosure and comprehension of the information 
provided, voluntariness and that the patient (in this 
case the parent) is deemed to be competent. The 
provision of information involves both disclosure 
of adequate information and comprehension of the 
information provided. The wording of information 
booklets and consent forms is critical to the parents’ 
understanding of what is being asked of them. A 
summary of the intervention in non-medical terms 
is essential, and information on the risks and ben￾eÿts of the treatment addressed, conÿdentiality, 
refusal to participate or withdrawal at any point is 
also provided. 
Therapeutic research in neonatal care is essential. 
Most parents are happy for their children to partici￾pate in clinical research. There are challenges with 
the current informed consent process. Some of these 
relate to the inherent difÿculties associated with 
having a sick newborn in the NICU. It is important 
that parents are given sufÿcient time to comprehend 
this information. It is important that parents are 
approached at an appropriate time and do not in any 
way feel coerced into participating. Listening to par￾ents and getting their opinions on the consent pro￾cess is critical to our ability to conduct trials in this 
This chapter addresses some of the key areas of peri￾natal care. Normal adaptation is described, along 
with many of the transient transitional problems that 
arise during the ÿrst days of life. Many of the chal￾lenges in caring for newborn infants born extremely 
preterm, babies born with suspected neonatal 
encephalopathy and babies with signiÿcant adap￾tation challenges such as pulmonary hypertension 
are highlighted. An understanding of these condi￾tions will facilitate effective communication between 
healthcare providers, but most importantly with 
families at what can be a very challenging time. 
FURTHER READING 
BAPM (2019). Perinatal Management of Extreme 
Preterm Birth Before 27 Weeks of Gestation. A BAPM 
Framework for Practice. https://www.bapm.org/ 
resources/80-perinatal-management-of-extreme￾preterm-birth-before-27-weeks-of-gestation-2019. 
Martinello K, Hart AR,Yap S, et al. (2017). Management 
and investigation of neonatal encephalopathy: 2017 
update. Archives of Disease in Childhood – Fetal and 
Neonatal Edition, 102: F346–F358. 
Moore T, Hennessy EM, Myles J, et al. (2012). 
Neurological and developmental outcome in 
extremely preterm children born in England in 
1995 and 2006: the EPICure studies. BMJ, 345: 
e7961. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.e7961. 
Morton SU, Brodsky D (2016). Fetal physiology 
and the transition to extrauterine life. Clinics 
in Perinatology, 43(3): 395-407. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.clp.2016.04.001. 
Resuscitation Council UK. NLS (Newborn Life 
Support) Course. https://www.resus.org. 
uk/training-courses/newborn-life-support/ 
nls-newborn-life-support . 
314 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 315 04/03/2024 16:08
 
Self-assessment 
SELF-ASSESSMENT 
For interactive SBAs and EMQs relating to this chapter, visit www.routledge.com/cw/mccarthy. 
CASE HISTORY 2 
A 28-year-old dentist presents in preterm labour at 26 
weeks’ gestation. You have been asked to have an ante￾natal discussion with the couple. Please discuss the key 
points you would like to address.
 A Survival overall at 26 weeks is over 80–85%.
 B The duration of stay in the neonatal unit is 
approximately 3 months, but can be longer if 
signiÿcant problems are encountered along the 
way. These include breathing difÿculties, the risk of 
bleeding into the immature brain, the risk of infection 
and the risk of in˜ammation/infection in the abdomen. 
C The family should be reassured that the neonatal 
team will be present at the delivery and will 
communicate fully with them in the delivery suite. 
D Many babies will need ventilatory support at birth 
and for some time period thereafter.
 E The importance of breast milk and its beneÿts 
should be stressed.
 F The majority of survivors will go to mainstream 
school. Some will need additional support with 
reading or paying attention. 
G 10% of survivors are at risk of signiÿcant disability. 
CASE HISTORY 1 
A 34-year-old primigravid woman is found to have anhy￾dramnios at an 18-week scan. No kidneys can be seen 
on the scan and a follow-up MRI scan also failed to iden￾tify renal tissue. A diagnosis of renal aplasia is made. The 
couple elect to continue the pregnancy. A follow-up scan 
4 weeks later conÿrms anhydramnios. An antenatal dis￾cussion takes place at 28 weeks. Please discuss the key 
factors that need to be addressed.
 A Input from the multidisciplinary team: fetal 
medicine specialists, neonatologists, nephrologists 
and the paediatric palliative care team.
 B The diagnosis and prognosis: the baby will most 
likely die due to severe pulmonary hypoplasia. 
Extensive resuscitation is not in the baby’s best 
interests. 
C The implications for the baby: the baby may die 
in utero or during labour; the baby may die within 
minutes of birth – if this is likely, the baby will stay 
with the mother immediately after birth; rarely, the 
baby survives for a longer period if full intensive 
care support is provided. However, the outcome will 
be the same: the baby will die within the ÿrst days 
of life. The sequence of events may turn out to be 
different but an initial good response after birth does 
not change the ultimate prognosis. Anhydramnios 
from 18 weeks in the presence of bilateral multicystic 
kidneys is not compatible with life. 
D The range of options for the family: the family can 
ask the professionals to do what they think best; 
the family can be part of joint decision-making. The 
family can stay together at all times. Careful planning 
needs to take place around end-of-life care and the 
family need to be involved. Some families may have 
requested a trial of breathing support and the extent 
of this support should be addressed well in advance. 
Clear communication is key.
 E The extent and nature of resuscitation that 
is offered immediately after birth: a senior 
neonatologist should be present to direct the 
management. Clear plans need to be developed. 
The goal should be to ensure that the baby is 
comfortable. 
315 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 317 04/03/2024 16:08
Index
3Ps of labour 194 
abdominal circumference (AC) 48 
ultrasound plots 49 
abdominal examination 8–10 
normal labour 205 
abdominal pain 83 
abdominal wall defects 74 
see also exomphalos; gastroschisis 
abnormal labour 212–13 
patterns of 213 
poor progress in the ÿrst stage 213–16, 229 
poor progress in the second stage 216–17 
see also assisted vaginal birth; breech presentation; 
malpresentation; preterm labour 
ABO blood groups 96 
ABO incompatibility 100 
acardiac twin 109–10 
accelerations 53, 207 
achondroplasia 70 
acne 169 
acoustic impedance 46 
acquired immunodeÿciency syndrome (AIDS) 188 
actin 201 
active management of labour 210 
third stage 211–12 
active phase, ÿrst stage of labour 202–3 
active second stage of labour 203 
acute cholecystitis 167 
acute pancreatitis 167 
Addison disease 153 
adrenal disorders 152–3 
adverse outcomes 228 
‘after pains’ 286 
alcohol consumption 4, 18, 86, 88 
effect on birthweight 32 
alimentary system, fetal development 35–6 
allergies 6–7 
alpha-thalassaemia 22–3, 39, 164 
ambiguous genitalia 299 
amlodipine 276 
amniocentesis 64, 67 
associated risks 68 
comparison with chorion villus sampling 67–8 
amnion 40 
amnioreduction 109 
amniotic °uid 40 
altered volumes 41 
see also oligohydramnios; polyhydramnios 
assessment of 206 
functions 41 
meconium staining 217, 302 
ultrasound assessment 52 
amniotic °uid embolism 252, 260–1 
amniotic °uid index (AFI) 40, 52, 88 
amplitude integrated EEG 305 
anaemia, fetal 
congenital parvovirus infection 183 
Doppler assessment 58 
of prematurity 42 
signs of 98 
twin anaemia–polycythaemia sequence 109 
anaemia, maternal 
antenatal 21 
postnatal 273, 275 
anaesthesia 
for caesarean section 244 
in maternal heart disease 156 
see also pain relief 
anal incontinence 272, 277 
anal sphincter injuries 232, 272, 273 
aftercare 233 
repair 233 
analgesia see pain relief 
anatomy 
bony pelvis 194–6 
fetal skull 197–9 
pelvic °oor 196, 197 
perineum 197, 198 
android-type pelvis 196, 216 
anembryonic pregnancy (blighted ovum) 47 
anencephaly 113 
aneuploidies 
prenatal diagnosis 69–70, 71 
see also Down syndrome 
angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors 
139 
angiotensin receptor blockers 139 
317 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 318 04/03/2024 16:08
Index 
anhydramnios 38 
case history 315 
causes 89 
see also oligohydramnios 
anomaly scan 49–50 
multiple pregnancies 113 
antenatal care 15 
advice, reassurance and education 18 
aims 17 
blood pressure measurement 21 
BMI and weight assessment 18 
booking investigations 21–4 
booking visit 18 
breastfeeding education 20 
cardiac conditions 154 
case histories 27–8 
delivery options 20–1 
development of 15 
in diabetes mellitus 150 
dietary advice 18–19 
in epilepsy 161–2 
exercise advice 19–20 
ÿrst trimester 18–25 
ÿrst-trimester ultrasound 24 
high-risk pregnancies 25 
history in the UK 16–17 
infection screen 23–4 
multiple pregnancies 104–5, 110–13 
second trimester 25–6 
service provision 17–18 
urine tests 21 
antepartum haemorrhage (APH) 32, 95–6, 256 
management 258 
placenta praevia 257–8 
placental abruption 256–7 
preterm labour 124 
vasa praevia 258 
anterior fontanelle (bregma) 198 
anterior superior iliac spine 194 
anthropoid pelvis 196, 197 
antibiotic prophylaxis 176, 279 
group B Streptococcus 185 
antibiotics 255 
in preterm labour 128 
in puerperal infections 280 
antibodies, fetal production 39 
anticoagulation 85–6 
in cardiovascular disease 155 
anti-D antibody level monitoring 99 
anti-D immunoglobulin 22, 98 
antidepressants 283 
anti-epileptic drugs (AEDs) 6, 159 
breastfeeding 162 
congenital malformation risk 160–1 
neonatal use 303 
antihypertensives 276 
in chronic hypertension 139 
in pre-eclampsia 137 
antimalarial drugs 177–8 
antiphospholipid syndrome (APS) 5, 84, 168 
anxiety disorders, post-partum 284 
aortic dissection 157 
aortic stenosis 156–7 
Apgar score 211 
arcuate uterus 123 
arcus tendineus 198 
areola 284 
arrest of labour 213 
ÿrst stage 213–16 
second stage 216–17 
artiÿcial rupture of membranes (ARM) 208, 226–7 
complications 227 
ascites, fetal 183 
asphyxia, perinatal 304 
aspiration pneumonia 278 
aspirin, low-dose 141, 163 
breastfeeding 287 
in connective tissue disorders 168 
pre-eclampsia risk reduction 25, 138, 150 
in sickle cell disease 164 
assisted vaginal birth (AVB) 235 
analgesia 238–9 
assessment 238 
case history 248–9 
choice of instrument 237–8 
classiÿcation 236 
comparison with second-stage caesarean section 
238 
complications 242 
contingency planning 239 
contraindications 236 
episiotomy 241 
failure of chosen instrument 241–2 
forceps delivery 240–1 
historical perspective 235 
indications 235–6 
mid-pelvic 238 
position 239 
preterm 129 
safety criteria 237 
ventouse extraction 239–40 
asthma 158 
asymptomatic bacteriuria 7, 21, 82 
atelectasis 278 
318 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 319 04/03/2024 16:08
atenolol 139, 276 breast disorders 288–9 
atopic eczema 169 abscesses 174, 276, 289 
atosiban 127 mastitis 174, 276, 288–9 
atresias 36 breast engorgement 288 
duodenal 43–4 breast examination 8 
attitude, fetal 199 breast milk composition 285, 309 
effect on presenting diameter 200 breastfeeding 20, 286–7, 309–10 
audit 228 advantages 287 
auscultation 10 and antidepressants 283 
autoimmune thrombocytopenia 165 and anti-epileptic drugs 162 
autoimmune thyrotoxicosis (Graves’ disease) 152 drug recommendations 287 
azathioprine 169 effect on uterine involution 270 
HIV-infected mothers 189, 287–8 
B-lymphocytes, fetal development 39 initiation of 211 
backache 78 jaundice 298, 299 
Barkovich MRI Scoring System 306 lactational amenorrhoea 289 
baseline fetal heart rate 53 nipple pain 288 
behavioural states, fetal 40 positioning 286 
benign sleep myoclonus 303 suppression of lactation 288 
bereavement counselling 289 breasts 
betamethasone 127–8 anatomy 284–5 
betamimetics 127 physiology 285 
beta-thalassaemia 22–3, 39, 164 breathing, newborn infants 294 
bicornuate uterus 81, 123 breathlessness 157 
biophysical proÿle (BPP) 56 breech presentation 90, 223–4 
biparietal diameter (BPD) 47 case history 101 
birth canal abnormalities 215–16 classiÿcation 90 
birth centres 20–1 complications 224 
birthweight, determinants of 31–2 external cephalic version 91, 92 
Bishop score 226 management options 90, 92 
bladder function, postnatal 220, 271–2 predisposing factors 90 
bladder injury 246 preterm labour 129 
bleeding disorders 165–6 second twins 114 
blighted ovum (anembryonic pregnancy) 47 vaginal delivery 90–1, 92–4 
blisters, pemphigoid gestationis 170 bregma (anterior fontanelle) 198 
blood, fetal development 39 bromocriptine 288 
blood groups 22, 96 bronchopulmonary dysplasia (BPD) 310–11 
blood patch 221 brow presentation 199, 215, 216, 224 
blood pressure, preterm infants 311 bulbo-cavernosus muscle 198 
blood pressure measurement 7, 21, 132 
blood spot testing, neonates 297 cabergoline 288 
‘blues,’ postnatal 281, 282 caesarean hysterectomy 246 
body mass index (BMI) 7, 18 caesarean section 242–3, 248 
high, maternal and neonatal complications of 19 abdominal incision 244–5 
bony pelvis 194–6 antibiotic prophylaxis 279 
booking investigations 21–4 classiÿcation 243 
booking visit 18 closure 245 
bowel damage 246 complications 246–7 
bowel function, postnatal 272 delivery 245 
brachial plexus palsies 306 history of 222–3, 227, 243 
bradycardia, fetal 53, 223 impacted head 265 
breast cancer 82 indications 243–4 
319 
Index 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 320 04/03/2024 16:08
Index 
informed consent 244 
maternal requests for 244 
preparation 244 
preterm 308 
recovery 273–4 
second-stage 238 
subsequent pregnancy management 247 
and thromboembolic disease 273 
uterine incision 245 
caffeine 310 
calcium channel blockers 
in pre-eclampsia 137 
in preterm labour 126–7 
calcium supplementation 138 
cannabis 86 
carbaprost 260 
carbimazole 152 
cardiac output 153 
cardiotocography (CTG) 52–3, 54, 55, 206–7 
case histories 61–2 
computerized 54–5 
important features 53–4 
indications for 217 
uterine hyperstimulation 214 
cardiovascular disease 206 
antenatal care 154 
causes of death 154 
fetal risks 155 
high-risk conditions 155 
ischaemic heart disease 156 
labour and delivery 155–6 
Marfan syndrome 157 
maternal mortality 153–4 
mitral and aortic stenosis 156–7 
peri-partum cardiomyopathy 157 
preconceptual counselling 154, 155 
pulmonary hypertension 157 
red °ags 154 
stages of heart failure 155 
cardiovascular examination 8 
cardiovascular system 
maternal physiological changes 153 
newborn transition 294 
carpal tunnel syndrome 78 
catheterisation 272 
cell-free fetal deoxyribonucleic acid (cffDNA) 64 
aneuploidy screening 70, 71 
fetal blood group testing 71, 99, 100–1 
single-gene disorder diagnosis 70 
central nervous system, fetal development 34 
cephalopelvic disproportion (CPD) 214–15 
cerebral venous thrombosis 163 
cerebroplacental ratio 59 
cervical cancer 81–2 
cervical cerclage 125–6 
cervical dystocia 216 
cervical length 122, 124 
measurement 51, 124, 125 
cervical smears 5 
cervical treatment, past medical history 5 
cervical weakness 122 
cervix 
Bishop score 226 
dilatation 202–3, 208 
effacement 202 
examination of 205–6 
physiology of labour 201–2 
postnatal changes 270 
Chamberlen, Peter and Hugh 235 
Changing Childbirth (1993) 17 
chickenpox (varicella zoster virus) 181–2, 301 
chlamydia infection 5, 187 
cholestasis 79 
chorioamnionitis 122, 128, 174 
chorion 40 
chorion villus sampling (CVS) 64, 65–7 
associated risks 68 
comparison with amniocentesis 67–8 
chorionicity determination 48–9, 104, 111 
chromosomal defects 
effect on fetal size 31 
karyotyping 66 
microarray analysis 67 
prenatal diagnosis 69–70 
see also Down syndrome 
chronic hypertension 132, 138–9 
chronic kidney disease (CKD) 147–8 
circulatory instability, preterm infants 311 
classical caesarean section 245 
see also caesarean section 
cleft lip or palate 299 
clicky hips 296 
clinical risk management (CRM) 227–8, 248 
clinical trials 314 
clitoris 198 
Clostridium perfrigens 280 
coagulation disorders 165–6 
cocaine 4, 32 
coccygeus muscle 198 
coccyx 194, 198 
coeliac disease 166 
collapsed patient 252–4 
causes 254 
colostrum 285 
 320 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 321 04/03/2024 16:08
Index 
combined test, Down syndrome screening 69 
community-based care 18 
complaints, handling 228 
complement system, fetal development 39 
complete (°exed) breech presentation 90 
complications of pregnancy 77 
abdominal pain 83 
ABO incompatibility 100 
breast cancer 82 
cervical cancer 81–2 
common minor disorders 80 
due to abnormalities of pelvic organs 80–2 
gastrointestinal symptoms 78–9 
malpresentation 89–94 
multiple pregnancies 105–10 
musculoskeletal problems 78 
oedema 80 
oligohydramnios 88, 89 
polyhydramnios 89 
post-term pregnancy 94–5 
rhesus isoimmunization 96–101 
substance abuse 86 
thrombophilia 84 
urinary tract infection 82 
vaginal bleeding 95–6 
varicose veins 79–80 
venous thromboembolism 83–6 
computerized cardiotocography 54–5 
cone biopsy, past history of 5, 216 
congenital heart disease, maternal 155 
congenital infections 174 
case history 192 
chickenpox 181–2, 301 
cytomegalovirus 178–9, 301 
listeriosis 184 
parvovirus 182–3 
rubella 183–4 
syphilis 179–80, 300–1 
toxoplasmosis 180–1 
congenital malformations 
alimentary system 35–6 
and Down syndrome 303 
pulmonary hypoplasia 35 
relationship to maternal BMI 19 
risk from anti-epileptic drugs 160–1 
risk in diabetes mellitus 149, 150 
risk in multiple pregnancies 113 
ultrasound diagnosis 49–50 
urinary tract 37–8 
uterine 81, 123 
conjoined twins 104 
conjugated bilirubin 299 
Conn syndrome 153 
connective tissue disease 167–9 
constipation 78 
postnatal 272 
consultant care 17–18 
contraception 289 
contraceptive history 4 
contractions 
assessment of 205 
augmentation of 213–14 
dysfunctional uterine activity 213–14, 216 
labour diagnosis 202 
rate and duration of 201 
controlled cord traction 211, 212 
convulsions 
causes in pregnancy 162 
eclampsia 135 
neonatal 303–4 
see also epilepsy 
cord clamping 211, 212, 294, 295 
cord entanglement 111 
cordocentesis 68 
coronal sutures 198 
corticosteroids 
in asthma 158 
in bronchopulmonary dysplasia 310 
in in°ammatory bowel disease 167 
in preterm labour 127–8 
topical 169 
corticotrophin-releasing hormone 202 
counselling 
before invasive tests 64–5 
in perinatal death 289 
preconceptual 1–2, 6, 13–14 
in preterm labour 308, 315 
COVID-19 176–7 
Crohn disease 166–7 
crown–rump length (CRL) 47, 69 
crowning 204, 210 
Cusco speculum 11 
Cushing syndrome 153 
cystic ÿbrosis 157, 159 
cytomegalovirus (CMV) 178–9, 301 
intracranial calciÿcation 178 
D-dimer 85, 263 
dating the pregnancy 2 
ÿrst-trimester ultrasound 24 
Dawes Redman criteria 55 
decelerations, fetal heart rate 53–4, 55, 207 
deep transverse arrest 216, 217 
deep vein thrombosis (DVT) 83–4, 263, 276, 277 
321 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 322 04/03/2024 16:08
Index 
deep vein thrombosis (DVT) (Contd) 
diagnosis 85 
prevention 86, 87 
risk from caesarean section 247 
treatment 85–6 
dehydration, maternal 218 
delayed cord clamping 211, 212, 295 
delivery options 20–1 
depressive illness, post-partum 282–3 
pathophysiology 281 
risk factors 283 
symptoms and red °ags 283 
dermatan sulphate 201 
descent of the fetus 203–4 
developmental dysplasia of the hip (DDH) 296 
Developmental Origins of Health and Disease 
(DOHaD) hypothesis 29 
dexamethasone 127–8 
diabetes mellitus 149 
case history 171 
congenital malformations 149, 150 
effects on fetus 31 
fetal macrosomia 150 
interaction with pregnancy 151 
management in pregnancy 150–1 
maternal complications 150 
preconceptual counselling 149 
pre-eclampsia risk 150 
see also gestational diabetes mellitus 
diabetic retinopathy 150 
dialysis 148 
diamorphine 219–20 
diaphragmatic hernia 35 
dichorionic twins 
antenatal care 110–13 
case history 116 
delivery 114 
fetal growth restriction 106 
perinatal mortality 106 
ultrasonography 48–9, 108–9 
see also multiple pregnancies; twin pregnancies 
didelphic uterus 123 
dietary advice 18–19 
diffusion-weighted imaging 305–6 
dilatation of the cervix 202–3, 206, 208 
dimples, lumbosacral 306 
disability, risk after preterm birth 120 
dizygotic twin pregnancies 104 
see also multiple pregnancies; twin pregnancies 
domestic abuse 3 
dopamine 311 
Doppler ultrasound 46, 56 
case history 61 
cerebroplacental ratio 59 
fetal vessels 57–8 
middle cerebral artery 99, 183 
umbilical artery waveforms 56–7 
uterine artery 58–9, 138 
Down syndrome (trisomy 21) 
fetal growth restriction 31 
neonatal management 302–3 
prenatal diagnosis 69–70, 71 
risk calculation, multiple pregnancies 111 
screening 24 
drug history 6 
Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) 76 
ductus arteriosus 33 
delayed closure 34, 42, 311 
ductus venosus 33 
Doppler ultrasound 58 
duodenal atresia, case history 43–4 
duplex kidney 37 
dural puncture 220–1 
duration of labour 203 
dysfunctional uterine activity 213 
secondary 216 
eclampsia 135, 162–3, 259–60, 276 
incidence 252 
postnatal 275–6 
ectopic pregnancy 47 
past history of 5 
eczema 169 
effacement 201, 202, 206 
elective caesarean section 243 
see also caesarean section 
elective repeat caesarean section (ERCS) 247 
electroencephalography (EEG), neonatal 305 
emergencies see obstetric emergencies 
emergency caesarean section 243 
see also caesarean section 
encephalopathy, neonatal 304–5 
endocrine disorders 
adrenal disease 152–3 
pituitary tumours 152 
thyroid disease 151–2 
see also diabetes mellitus; gestational diabetes 
mellitus 
endocrine system, fetal development 39 
endometriosis 5 
endometritis 174, 276–7, 279 
engagement 9, 10, 203 
 322 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 323 04/03/2024 16:08
Index 
entonox 220 Ferguson re°ex 202 
EPICure study 307 fertility treatment, history taking 5 
epidural anaesthesia 220 fetal abnormalities 
and bladder function 271 ultrasound diagnosis 49–50 
complications 220–1 see also congenital malformations 
indications and contraindications 220 fetal alcohol syndrome 88 
maternal hypotension 218 fetal anaemia 
technique 221 congenital parvovirus infection 183 
and urge to push 210 Doppler assessment 58 
epigenetic changes 31 signs of 98, 99 
epilepsy 6, 160 Fetal Anomaly Screening Programme 70 
antenatal care 161–2 fetal assessment in labour 206–8 
anti-epileptic drugs 160–1 fetal attitude 199 
key messages 159 effect on presenting diameter 200 
labour and postnatal period 162 fetal blood group, non-invasive prenatal testing 71, 
preconceptual counselling 160, 161 99, 100–1 
episiotomy 233–4 fetal blood sampling 218 
at assisted vaginal birth 241 fetal bradycardia 53, 223 
complications 234 fetal breathing movements (FBMs) 34–5 
infections 271 fetal circulation 32–3 
postnatal analgesia 271 changes at birth 294 
repair 232–3 persistent 34 
surgical technique 234 fetal compromise in labour 217–18 
Erb palsy 306 fetal development 
ergometrine 260 alimentary system 35–6 
Escherichia coli, neonatal infections 300 behavioural states 40 
essential hypertension 138 blood and immune system 39 
estimated date of delivery (EDD) 2 central nervous system 34 
estimated fetal weight (EFW) 30 endocrine system 39 
centile chart 30 kidney and urinary tract 37–8 
ultrasound plots 49 liver, pancreas and gall bladder 36–7 
examination see obstetric examination respiratory system 34–5 
exchange transfusion 298–9 skin and homeostasis 38 
exercise advice 19–20 fetal ÿbronectin (fFN) 126 
exomphalos (omphalocele) 35, 74 fetal growth 29 
case history 75 determinants of 31–2 
extended (frank) breech presentation 90 small for gestational age 30 
extension, fetal head 204 fetal growth restriction (FGR) 25, 30–1 
external cephalic version (ECV) 91, 101 amniotic °uid volume 52 
contraindications and risks 92 and anti-epileptic drugs 161 
extreme preterm birth case histories 61–2, 144 
deÿnition 307 causes 140 
long-term outcomes 307–8 deÿnition 139 
risk assessment 308 fetal monitoring 142 
management 141–2 
face presentation 199, 215, 224 multiple pregnancies 106, 113 
facial asymmetry 306 pathophysiology 140–1 
facial palsy 306 in pre-eclampsia 135 
factor XI deÿciency 165 prognosis 142 
family history 6 risk factors 141 
femur length (FL) 48, 49 ultrasonography 48, 49 
 323 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 324 04/03/2024 16:08
Index 
fetal haemoglobin (HbF) 39 foot-drop 277 
fetal head footling breech presentation 90 
descent and delivery 210 foramen ovale 34 
see also fetal skull forceps delivery 
fetal heart analgesia 238–9 
auscultation 10 comparison with ventouse delivery 237–8 
ultrasonography 50 complications 242 
fetal heart rate 53–4 contraindications 236 
monitoring during labour 206–7 failure of 241–2 
fetal hydrops 39, 183 historical background 235 
fetal hypoxia 141 technique 241 
fetal impaction 238, 265 see also assisted vaginal birth 
fetal lie 9 forceps types 240–1 
fetal macrosomia 150 fourth-degree tears 232 
induction of labour 226 fractures, neonatal 306–7 
fetal movements 40 frank (extended) breech presentation 90 
fetal poles 8 frontal bones 198 
fetal scalp electrodes (FSEs) 207–8 full blood count (FBC) 21–2 
fetal scalp stimulation 218 
fetal size assessment 29–30 galactocele 288 
fetal skull gall bladder, fetal development 36 
anatomy 197–8 gallstones 167 
diameters 199 gastrointestinal disorders 166–7 
moulding 198–9 gastro-oesophageal re°ux 79 
fetal tachycardia 53 gastroschisis 74–5 
fetal varicella syndrome (FVS) 182 genital herpes 186–7, 301 
fetal vessels, Doppler ultrasound 57–8, 61 genitalia, ambiguous 299 
fetal well-being assessment gestation calendars 2 
cardiotocography 52–5 gestational age, limit of viability 307 
ultrasonography 51, 52–9 gestational age determination 
fetocide 113 dating the pregnancy 2 
FGFR3 gene 70 multiple pregnancies 111 
ÿbroids (leiomyomata) 80–1 ultrasonography 24, 47–8 
ÿrst-degree tears 232 gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) 19, 22, 151 
ÿrst stage of labour 202–3 risk factors 26 
management 208, 210 screening 25–6 
poor progress 213–16, 229 see also diabetes mellitus 
ÿ stulae gestational hypertension 131, 132 
fetal 36 gestational thrombocytopenia 22, 164–5 
maternal 272 glomeruloendotheliosis 135 
°exed (complete) breech presentation 90 gluteus maximus muscle 198 
°exion, fetal head 204 gonorrhoea 187–8 
°u (in°uenza) 177 governance 26 
folic acid supplementation 73 Gram-negative infections, neonatal 185–6, 300 
in diabetes mellitus 149, 171 Graves’ disease (autoimmune thyrotoxicosis) 152 
in epilepsy 161 gravidity 4 
in high BMI 19 group B Streptococcus (GBS) infections 184–5, 300 
in in°ammatory bowel disease 166 case history 192 
multiple pregnancies 105 growth hormone, fetal production 39 
fondaparinux 85–6 gut, fetal development 35–6 
fontanelles 198 gynaecoid pelvis 196 
324 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 325 04/03/2024 16:08
Index 
gynaecological history 4–5 
haemoglobin, fetal 39 
haemoglobinopathies 163 
sickle cell disease 23, 163–4 
thalassaemia 22–3, 164 
haemolytic disease of the fetus and newborn (HDFN) 
aetiology 96–7 
delivery 100 
intrauterine transfusion 99–100 
prevalence 97 
prevention of isoimmunization 98 
sensitizing events 97 
haemophilia carriers 165–6 
Haemophilus in˜uenzae 300 
haemorrhage 255 
antepartum 256–8 
in caesarean section 246 
incidence 252 
major 258 
management algorithm 260 
post-partum 258–9, 267 
haemorrhoids 79 
hair follicles, fetal development 38 
hand-washing 279 
Hashimoto thyroiditis 152 
HbA1c levels 149 
head circumference (HC) 47 
ultrasound plots 49 
headaches 162–3 
dural puncture 220–1 
red °ags 163 
hearing screening 296 
heart disease 
antenatal care 154 
fetal risks 155 
high-risk conditions 155 
incidence 252 
ischaemic 156 
labour and delivery management 155–6 
Marfan syndrome 157 
maternal mortality 153–4 
mitral and aortic stenosis 156–7 
peri-partum cardiomyopathy 157 
preconceptual counselling 154, 155 
red °ags 154 
heart failure 
risk factors for development in pregnancy 156 
stages of 155, 156 
heart murmurs, neonatal 299 
height measurement 7 
HELLP syndrome 135, 259 
hepatitis B (HBV) 23, 189–90 
hepatitis C (HCV) 24, 190–1 
heroin 32, 86 
herpes simplex virus (HSV) 186–7, 301 
high-risk pregnancies 25 
hip screening 296 
history taking see obstetric history 
home birth 20, 219 
hormonal contraception 289 
hormones 
fetal production 39 
see also oestrogen; oxytocin; progesterone 
hospital birth centres 21, 219 
hospital deliveries 
discharge after birth 274 
historical background 16–17 
human immunodeÿciency virus (HIV) 24, 177, 188–9, 
301 
and breastfeeding 287–8 
diagnosis in infants 189 
risk factors for vertical transmission 189 
hydrocephalus 214 
hydrops 39, 183 
hydroxychloroquine 169 
hyperemesis gravidarum 78–9 
hyperprolactinaemia 152 
hypertension 7, 19, 131 
chronic 138–9 
classiÿcation 131–2 
phaeochromocytoma 153 
postnatal 275–6 
postpartum persistence 138 
in pre-eclampsia 137 
pulmonary see pulmonary hypertension 
see also pre-eclampsia 
hyperthyroidism 152 
hypoglycaemia, neonatal 36, 297–8 
hypospadias 299 
hypotension 
preterm infants 311 
secondary to epidural anaesthesia 218, 220, 221, 
222 
sepsis 255 
hypothermia, therapeutic 305 
hypothyroidism, maternal 152 
hypoxic ischaemic encephalopathy (HIE) 62, 303, 
304–5 
Barkovich MRI Scoring System 306 
modiÿed Sarnat Scoring System 304 
hysterectomy 246 
325 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 326 04/03/2024 16:08
Index 
iliac crest 194 intrauterine transfusion (IUT) 99–100 
ilio-coccygeus muscle 198 intraventricular haemorrhage (IVH) 42, 312 
ilium 194 intubation surfactant extubation (INSURE) technique 
imaging 310 
MRI 60, 71, 305–6 invasive testing 64 
ultrasonography see ultrasonography amniocentesis 67 
immune system, fetal development 39 chorion villus sampling 65–7 
immune thrombocytopenic purpura 165 comparison of tests 67–8 
immunoglobulins, fetal production 39 cordocentesis 68 
incontinence for aneuploidies 69–70 
anal 272, 277 informed consent 65 
urinary 272, 277 post-procedure care 68 
indomethacin 127 pretest counselling 64–5 
induction of labour (IOL) 225 involution 269–70 
Bishop score 226 iron deÿciency 21 
complications 227 ischaemic heart disease 156 
contraindications 226 ischial spines 195, 198 
failure of 227 ischial tuberosity 194 
historical background 16 ischio-cavernosus muscle 198 
indications for 94, 225–6 
methods 226–7 Jarish–Herxheimer reaction 180 
infections jaundice, neonatal 36, 42, 298–9 
after caesarean section 246–7 jitters, neonatal 303 
as cause of preterm labour 122 
effect on fetal size 31 karyotyping 66 
neonatal 299–301 kidney 
perinatal 173 changes in pre-eclampsia 135 
see also congenital infections; maternal chronic kidney disease 147–8 
infections; neonatal infections fetal development 37–8 
perineal 271 physiological changes 147 
puerperal 278–81 renal transplantation 148 
respiratory 157–8 Kielland forceps 240, 241 
screening for 23 Kleihauer test 98 
in°ammatory bowel disease (IBD) 166–7 Klumpke palsy 306 
in°iximab 167 
in°uenza 177 labetalol 137, 276 
informed consent laboratory tests 
for caesarean section 244 full blood count 21–2 
for invasive testing 65 in perinatal death 290 
neonatal clinical trials 314 pre-eclampsia diagnosis 132–3 
inhalational analgesia 220 pre-eclampsia monitoring 137 
inhaled nitric oxide (iNO) 301–2 in puerperal infections 279 
injectable contraception 289 labour 193 
instrumental delivery see assisted vaginal birth 3Ps 194 
insulin, fetal hyperinsulinaemia 31 abnormal see abnormal labour 
interleukins, role in labour 201 clinical risk management 227–8 
internal podalic version 114 diagnosis 202 
internal rotation 204 duration of 203 
intracerebral haemorrhage 162 fetal compromise 217–18 
intrauterine contraceptive devices 289 fetal skull anatomy 197–200 
conception with IUD in situ 4 ÿrst stage arrest 213–16, 229 
326 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 327 04/03/2024 16:08
induction see induction of labour 
malpresentation 94, 223–4 
see also breech presentation 
maternal anatomy 194–7, 198 
mechanisms of 203–5 
pain relief 219–22 
physiology 200–2 
place of birth 218–19 
second-stage arrest 216–17, 236 
stages of 193–4, 202–3 
women with a uterine scar 222–3 
labour management 
active management 210 
admission examination 205–6 
fetal assessment 206–8 
ÿrst stage 208, 210 
history 205 
partograms 208, 209 
second stage 210–11 
third stage 211–12 
lactation 285–6 
breast disorders 288 
suppression of 288 
lactational amenorrhoea 289 
lactocele 288 
lambdoidal sutures 198 
lamotrigine 161 
lanugo 38 
large loop excision of the transformation zone 
(LLETZ) 5 
laser ablation, twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome 
109 
last menstrual period (LMP) 2 
latent phase of labour 202 
management 208 
learning difÿculties, risk after preterm birth 120 
lecithin (phosphatidylcholine) 34 
left lateral tilt 253 
leiomyomata (ÿbroids) 80–1 
lepirudin 85–6 
less invasive surfactant administration (LISA) 
technique 310 
levator ani muscles 196, 197 
levetiracetam 161 
lie 9 
see also malpresentation 
listeriosis 184 
lithium 284 
liver 
changes in pre-eclampsia 135 
fetal development 36–7 
lochia 270 
longitudinal lie 9 
Lovset manoeuvre 93 
lower segment caesarean section 245 
see also caesarean section 
low-molecular-weight heparins (LMWHs) 85 
lumbosacral dimples 306 
lungs 
fetal development 34–5 
newborn transition 294 
macrocephaly 214 
magnesium sulphate 260 
in pre-eclampsia 137 
in preterm labour 42, 127 
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) 60, 71 
neonatal brain 305–6 
malaria 177–8 
malpresentation 89–90, 215, 223–4 
breech see breech presentation 
oblique lie 94 
transverse lie 94 
Marfan syndrome 157 
mastitis 174, 276, 288–9 
maternal age 
and birthweight 32 
and Down syndrome risk 69 
and rate of twinning 113 
maternal infections 173–4 
aetiology and epidemiology 174–5 
associated organisms 175 
COVID-19 176–7 
in°uenza 177 
malaria 177–8 
management 175–6 
prevention 175 
risk factors 175 
maternal mortality 15–16, 251 
cardiovascular causes 153–4 
endocrine causes 149 
epilepsy 160 
gastrointestinal disorders 166 
MBRRACE-UK reports 146 
minority ethnic groups 3 
rates per 100,000 maternities 146 
respiratory causes 157 
risk factors 3 
stroke 162 
timing of 270 
Maternity Matters (2007) 17 
Maternity Transformation Programme 17 
Index 
327 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 328 04/03/2024 16:08
Index 
Mauriceau–Smellie–Veit manoeuvre 93 
MBRRACE-UK reports 146 
adrenal disorders 152 
endocrine disorders 149 
epilepsy 160 
gastrointestinal disorders 166 
respiratory disease 157 
stroke 162 
suicide 281 
McDonald transvaginal cerclage 126 
McRoberts position 262 
meconium 206 
meconium aspiration syndrome 36, 302 
meconium staining of amniotic °uid (MSAF) 217, 
302 
medical history 5–6 
medication 
antidepressants 283 
anti-epileptic drugs (AEDs) 6, 159–62, 303 
antihypertensives 137, 139, 276 
antimalarial drugs 177–8 
breastfeeding 287 
sources of advice 6 
membrane sweeping 227 
meningitis 174, 276, 300 
mental illness 5, 6 
screening for 282 
see also psychiatric disorders, post-partum 
mento-anterior position 215 
mesonephric (Wolfÿan) duct 37 
methotrexate 167 
methyldopa 137 
middle cerebral artery 
cerebroplacental ratio 59 
Doppler ultrasound 57, 58, 99, 183 
mid-pelvis (mid-cavity) 194–5 
midwifery units 20, 219 
mifepristone 227 
migraine 163 
minority ethnic groups 3 
mirror syndrome 108 
miscarriage 
history of 5 
missed 47 
risk from chorion villus sampling 66 
threatened 95 
misoprostol 227 
in obstetric haemorrhage 260 
mitral stenosis 156–7 
monochorionic diamniotic placenta 107 
monochorionic monoamniotic (MCMA) twins 110 
cord entanglement 111 
monochorionic twins 104 
antenatal care 112 
case history 116 
death of one twin 106 
delivery 114–15 
fetal growth restriction 106 
perinatal mortality 106 
twin anaemia–polycythaemia sequence 109 
twin reversed arterial perfusion sequence 109–10 
twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome 89, 106–9 
ultrasonography 48–9, 108–9 
vascular connections 107 
see also twin pregnancies 
monozygotic twin pregnancies 104 
montelukast 158 
‘morning sickness’ 78 
moulding, fetal skull 198–9 
Müllerian anomalies 123 
multiple pregnancies 103 
anomaly scan 113 
antenatal care 104–5, 110–13 
case histories 116 
chorion villus sampling 66 
classiÿcation 104 
complications 105–10 
congenital malformations 113 
delivery 113–15 
epidemiology 103–4 
fetal growth restriction 106 
gestational age distribution at delivery 105 
growth assessments 113 
higher-order multiples 115 
monochorionic monoamniotic twins 110, 111 
monochorionic twins, unique complications 
106–10 
perinatal mortality 106 
preterm labour 122–3 
screening 111, 113 
support groups 115 
ultrasonography 48–9, 108 
multiple sclerosis (MS) 162 
myocardial infarction 156 
myomectomy scars 223 
myometrial cells, physiology 201, 202 
myosin 201 
National Childbirth Trust 17, 27 
National Health Service (NHS), introduction of 16 
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence 
(NICE) 26 
National Screening Committee 26 
nausea and vomiting 78–9 
328 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 329 04/03/2024 16:08
Index 
‘near miss’ reporting 228 hearing screening 296 
necrotizing enterocolitis (NEC) 41, 311–12 hip screening 296 
necrotizing fasciitis 280 Newborn Life Support (NLS) 295 
neonatal electroencephalography (EEG) 305 newborn resuscitation training 295 
neonatal encephalopathy 304–5 newborn transition 294–5 
neonatal fractures 306–7 nifedipine 
neonatal infections 174, 299–300 in hypertension 276 
case history 192 in pre-eclampsia 137 
chlamydia 187 preterm labour management 126–7 
early-onset 300 nipple discharge, blood-stained 288 
gonorrhoea 187–8 nipple pain 288 
Gram-negative 185–6 nitric oxide, inhaled (iNO) 301–2 
group B Streptococcus 184–5 nitrous oxide 220 
herpes simplex virus 186–7, 301 non-invasive prenatal testing (NIPT) 70 
human immunodeÿciency virus 301 non-proteinuric pregnancy-induced hypertension 
late-onset 300 132 
varicella zoster 182, 301 non-steroidal anti-in°ammatory drugs (NSAIDs) 127 
see also congenital infections nuchal translucency (NT) 24, 50, 69 
neonatal lupus 168 
neonatal seizures 303–4 obesity 7, 18 
neonates 293 associated complications 19 
blood spot testing 297 oblique lie 9, 90, 94 
cleft lip or palate 299 obstetric anal sphincter injuries (OASIs) 232 
clinical trials 314 aftercare 233 
dysmorphic features 302–3 complications 234 
hearing screening 296 repair 233 
heart murmurs 299 obstetric cholestasis 79 
hip screening 296 obstetric emergencies 251–2 
hypoglycaemia 297–8 amniotic °uid embolism 260–1 
hypospadias 299 case histories 266–7 
immediate care 211 collapsed/unresponsive patient 252–4 
jaundice 298–9 eclampsia 135, 162–3, 259–60 
localized neurological problems 306 haemorrhage 255–9, 260 
neurological function assessment 305–6 impacted head at caesarean section 265 
newborn examination 296 incidence 252 
newborn transition 294–5 prevention 252 
palliative care 313–14 sepsis 254–5 
preterm see preterm infants shoulder dystocia 261–2 
pulmonary hypertension 301–2 structured approach 253 
resuscitation training 295 thrombosis and thromboembolism 263 
routine care 295–6 umbilical cord prolapse 261, 262 
transient tachypnoea of the newborn 297 uterine inversion 212, 263–4 
neural tube defects 34 uterine rupture 223, 264–5 
case history 72–3 obstetric examination 7 
neurological disorders abdomen 8–10 
epilepsy 6, 159, 160–2 general medical examination 7–8 
headaches 162–3 maternal weight and height 7 
multiple sclerosis 162 in normal labour 205–6 
Neville Barnes forceps 240–1 oedema 11 
newborn see neonates pelvic examination 10–11 
newborn examination 296 re°exes 11 
blood spot testing 297 urinary examination 7 
 329 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 330 04/03/2024 16:08
Index 
obstetric history 2 
allergies 6–7 
dating the pregnancy 2 
drug history 6 
family history 6–7 
history template 12–13 
medical and surgical history 5–6 
in normal labour 205 
past gynaecological history 4–5 
past obstetric history 4 
social history 3–4 
obstetric palsy 277 
obstructive uropathies 37–8 
obturator foramen 194, 198 
occipital bone 198 
occipito-anterior (OA) position 199, 204 
occipito-frontal diameter 199, 200 
occipito-mental diameter 199, 200 
occipito-posterior (OP) position 199, 204, 214, 215, 216 
occipito-transverse (OT) position 199 
Ockenden review (2022) 17 
oedema 11, 80 
in pre-eclampsia 134, 135 
see also hydrops 
oestrogen 
action on the breast 285 
actions on the uterus 202 
oligohydramnios 35, 41, 52, 88 
case history 43 
causes 89 
renal agenesis 38 
twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome 107–8 
omphalocele (exomphalos) 35, 74 
case history 75 
operative delivery 231 
assisted vaginal birth 235–42 
caesarean section 242–8 
case history 248–9 
clinical risk management 248 
episiotomy 233–4 
perineal repair 231–3 
see also assisted vaginal birth; caesarean section; 
episiotomy 
ophthalmia neonatorum 188 
opiates 219–20 
opioid abuse 86 
ORACLE trials 128 
os pubis 194 
ovarian cysts 81 
oxytocin 
augmentation of contractions 213–14 
in cephalopelvic disproportion 214 
induction of labour 227 
in obstetric haemorrhage 260 
role in labour 201, 202 
role in lactation 286 
third stage of labour management 211 
oxytocin receptor antagonists 127 
pain relief 219 
for assisted delivery 238–9 
for caesarean section 244 
epidural anaesthesia 220–2 
inhalational analgesia 220 
non-pharmacological methods 219 
opiates 219–20 
perineal pain 271 
spinal anaesthesia 222 
palliative care 313–14 
pancreatitis 167 
parametritis 279 
parentcraft education 18 
parietal bones 198 
parity 
deÿnition 4 
relationship to birthweight 32 
partograms 208, 209 
patterns of abnormal labour 213 
parvovirus 182–3 
case history 192 
passive phase, second stage of labour 203 
past gynaecological history 4–5 
past obstetric history 4 
preterm birth 124 
patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) 310, 311 
physiological and clinical effects 312 
Pavlik harness 296 
pelvic dimensions 194, 195, 196 
pelvic examination 
digital 11 
speculum 10–11 
pelvic °oor 196, 197 
pelvic °oor exercises 273 
pelvic girdle pain 78 
pelvic in°ammatory disease 5 
pelvic inlet (brim) 194, 195 
pelvic kidney 37 
pelvic outlet 195–6 
pelvic shapes 196, 197 
pemphigoid gestationis 170 
peptic ulcer disease 167 
perinatal asphyxia 304 
perinatal death 289–90 
investigations 290 
330 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 331 04/03/2024 16:08
Index 
perinatal infections 173, 174 
case histories 192 
see also congenital infections; maternal infections; 
neonatal infections 
perinatal mortality 
historical background 16 
multiple pregnancy 106 
perineal body 197, 198 
perineal infections 271 
perineal pain 271 
perineal repair 231–3 
obstetric anal sphincter injury repair 233 
surgical technique 232–3 
perineal tears 212, 231 
bowel function 272 
classiÿcation 232 
complications 234 
postnatal analgesia 271 
risk reduction 232 
perineum, anatomy 197, 198 
peri-partum cardiomyopathy 157 
peritonitis 279 
periventricular haemorrhages 42 
periventricular leukomalacia 42, 312 
peroneal nerve palsy 277 
persistent fetal circulation 34 
persistent pulmonary hypertension of the newborn 
(PPHN) 301–2 
pethidine 219–20 
pH, fetal blood samples 218 
phaeochromocytoma 153 
phosphatidylcholine (lecithin) 34 
phototherapy 298 
physiological management, third stage of labour 
212 
physiology of labour 200–21 
cervix 201–2 
hormonal factors 202 
uterus 201 
pigmentation changes 169 
Pinard manoeuvre 92–3 
‘pinks,’ postnatal 282 
pituitary tumours 152 
place of birth 218–19 
placenta 
arteriovenous anastomosis 107 
chorionicity determination 104 
inspection of 212 
retention of 212 
reversed end-diastolic °ow 57 
third stage of labour 203, 211–12 
ultrasonography 50–1 
placenta accreta, ultrasonography 51 
placenta praevia 257–8 
risk after caesarean section 246 
ultrasonography 50–1 
placental abruption 124, 256–7 
placental growth factor (PlGF) 133 
placental infarction 32 
placental insufÿciency 32 
fetal growth restriction 140 
management 141–2 
pre-eclampsia 135 
prognosis 142 
placental mosaicism 67 
placental resistance, umbilical artery Doppler 56–7 
placental separation, signs of 211 
plasma volume 153 
Plasmodium species 177 
platelet count 21–2 
in pre-eclampsia 135 
platypelloid pelvis 196, 197 
pneumonia 157–8, 276 
aspiration 278 
warning signs 158 
pneumothorax, neonatal 297 
polycystic ovary syndrome 4 
polycythaemia, twin anaemia–polycythaemia 
sequence 108, 109 
polyhydramnios 36, 41, 52, 89 
case history 43–4 
preterm labour 123 
twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome 107–8 
polymorphic eruption of pregnancy 169 
position during labour 210 
assisted vaginal birth 239 
posterior fontanelle 198 
posterior urethral valves 38 
case history 43 
post-mortem examinations 289–90 
postnatal examination 275 
postnatal visits 274–5 
maternal health components 274 
NICE guidelines 274 
post-partum haemorrhage (PPH) 258–9 
case history 267, 291 
risk minimization in bleeding disorders 166 
secondary 276–7 
post-term pregnancy 94–5 
induction of labour 225 
Potter syndrome (renal agenesis) 38 
precipitous labour 203 
preconceptual counselling 1–2, 146 
in cardiac conditions 154, 155 
331 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 332 04/03/2024 16:08
Index 
preconceptual counselling (Contd) 
case histories 13–14, 171 
in chronic kidney disease 147 
cystic ÿbrosis 159 
in diabetes mellitus 149 
epilepsy 160 
important points 147 
medication changes 6 
pre-eclampsia 11, 131 
case histories 143–4 
and chronic kidney disease 148 
clinical presentation 135–6 
deÿnition 132 
and diabetes mellitus 150 
diagnosis 132–3 
incidence 132, 252 
induction of labour 225 
investigations 137 
management 136–7 
pathophysiology 134–5 
premature delivery of fetus 138 
recurrence risk 276 
risk factors 25, 133–4 
screening and prevention 137–8 
treatment 137 
pre-existing medical disorders 145 
connective tissue disease 167–9 
effects on fetal growth 32 
endocrine disorders 148–53 
see also diabetes mellitus; thyroid disease 
gastrointestinal disorders 166–7 
haematological disorders 163–6 
heart disease 153–7 
neurological disorders 159–63 
preconceptual counselling 146, 147 
renal disease 147–8 
respiratory disease 157–9 
skin disease 169 
thrombocytopenia 164–5 
pre-labour rupture of membranes (PROM) 225 
prenatal diagnosis 63–4 
amniocentesis 67, 68 
care after invasive tests 68 
case histories 72–6 
chorion villus sampling 65–8 
classiÿcation 64 
comparison of invasive tests 68 
cordocentesis 68 
Down syndrome and other aneuploidies 69–70 
magnetic resonance imaging 71 
new developments 70–2 
non-invasive testing 70 
pretest counselling 64–5 
presentation, fetal 9 
see also malpresentation 
presentation skills 11–12 
history template 12–13 
preterm birth rates 117–19 
preterm infants 307 
acquired brain injury 312 
borderline viability, decision making 307–8 
breastfeeding 309 
bronchopulmonary dysplasia 310–11 
case history 42 
circulatory instability 311 
counselling of parents 308, 315 
hypoglycaemia risk 36 
long-term outcomes 307–8 
necrotizing enterocolitis 41, 311–12 
neonatal management plans 309 
palliative care 313–14 
patent ductus arteriosus 311, 312 
persistent fetal circulation 34 
renal function 38 
respiratory distress syndrome 34, 42, 127, 310 
retinopathy of prematurity 313 
risk assessment 308 
stabilization process 309 
thermal control 38 
preterm labour (PTL) 
associated medical conditions 121 
case histories 130, 315 
causes 121–4 
delivery 128–9, 308 
disability risk 120 
explanation for 117 
management 126–8 
multiple pregnancies 105 
pre-eclampsia management 138 
prevention 125–6 
rate in England and Wales 122 
risk factors 25, 121, 124 
survival rates 119 
preterm premature rupture of membranes (PPROM) 
128, 225 
case history 130 
primary arrest of labour 213 
probiotics, NEC risk reduction 312 
progesterone 
action on the breast 285 
actions on the uterus 202 
prevention of preterm labour 125 
progestogens, in postnatal depression 283 
prolactin 285 
 332 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 333 04/03/2024 16:08
Index 
prolonged labour 203 
pronephros 37 
propylthiouracil 152 
prostaglandins 
induction of labour 227 
role in labour 201, 202 
proteinuria 132–3 
prurigo of pregnancy 169 
pruritic folliculitis of pregnancy 169–70 
pruritus 169–70 
psoriasis 169 
psychiatric disorders, post-partum 281 
anxiety disorders 284 
case history 291 
depressive illness 282–3 
pathophysiology 281 
puerperal psychosis 284 
screening 282 
pubic bone 194 
pubo-coccygeus muscle 198 
pudendal nerve 195 
puerperal disorders 
breast conditions 288–9 
case histories 291 
chest complications 277–8 
hypertension 275–6 
obstetric palsy 277 
psychiatric problems 281–4 
secondary post-partum haemorrhage 276–7 
symphysis pubis diastasis 277 
thromboembolic disease 277 
puerperal psychosis 284 
case history 291 
puerperal pyrexia 276, 277 
breast engorgement 288 
puerperal sepsis 278 
aetiology 278 
associated organisms 278 
clinical presentation 279–80 
investigations 279 
management 280–1 
prevention 279 
risk factors 278 
risk stratiÿcation 280 
puerperium 269 
contraception 289 
normal emotional and psychological changes 282 
physiological changes 269–70 
postnatal visits 274–5 
recovery after normal birth 270–3 
recovery from caesarean section 273–4 
signs and symptoms of serious conditions 275 
pulmonary embolism (PE) 83–4, 263, 276, 277 
diagnosis 85 
prevention 86, 87 
risk from caesarean section 247 
treatment 85–6 
pulmonary hypertension (PH) 
maternal 157 
neonates 301–2 
sickle cell disease 163 
pulmonary hypoplasia 128 
causes 35 
pulmonary surfactant 34, 294, 309 
administration techniques 310 
pushing 210 
pyelonephritis 82, 276 
pyrexia, puerperal 276, 277 
quadruple test, Down syndrome screening 69 
Quintero staging, TTTS 107–8 
recreational drug taking 4, 18, 86 
effect on birthweight 32 
rectal carcinoma 79 
red degeneration, ÿbroids 80–1 
re°exes 11 
relaxation, analgesic effect 219 
renal agenesis 38 
case history 315 
renal dysfunction see chronic kidney disease 
renal transplantation 148 
respiratory disease 157 
asthma 158 
cystic ÿbrosis 159 
infections 157–8, 174 
respiratory distress syndrome (RDS) 34, 42, 127, 310 
respiratory system 
fetal development 34–5 
newborn adaptation 294 
restitution, fetal head 204, 210 
resuscitation 
of fetus in labour 217–18 
maternal 253–4 
newborn 295 
retained products of conception 212, 276–7 
retinoids 169 
retinopathy of prematurity (ROP) 313 
retraction 201 
retroversion of the uterus 81 
rhesus blood group system 96 
rhesus disease 
aetiology 96–7 
delivery 100 
333 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 334 04/03/2024 16:08
Index 
rhesus disease (Contd) 
intrauterine transfusion 99–100 
management in a sensitized pregnant woman 98–9 
prevalence 97 
prevention of isoimmunization 98 
sensitizing events 97 
rhesus D-negative blood group 22 
genetics 96 
new developments 100 
non-invasive fetal blood group testing 71 
prevalence 97 
rheumatoid arthritis (RA) 168–9 
root-cause analysis 228 
rooting re°ex 286 
rotational forceps 240, 241 
Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists 
(RCOG) 26 
rubella 23, 183–4 
Rubin II manoeuvre 262 
Sabin–Feldman dye test 181 
sacroiliac joint 194 
sacrum 194 
sagittal suture 198 
salpingo-oophoritis 279 
Sarnat Scoring System, HIE 304 
screening, fetal 
ÿrst trimester 24 
multiple pregnancies 111, 113 
screening, maternal 
gestational diabetes mellitus 25–6 
infections 23 
mental health problems 282 
sickle cell disease 23 
syphilis 179–80 
thalassaemia 23 
screening, neonatal 
blood spot testing 297 
hearing 296 
hips 296 
screening tests, attributes of 64 
second-degree tears 232 
second stage of labour 203 
caesarean section 238, 265 
normal labour 203–5, 210–11 
poor progress 213, 216–17, 236 
seizures 
causes in pregnancy 162 
eclampsia 135 
neonatal 303–4 
see also epilepsy 
sepsis, maternal 173–4, 254–5 
incidence 252 
management 176 
puerperal 278–81 
risk factors 175 
risk stratiÿcation 280 
see also maternal infections 
sepsis, neonatal 185 
see also neonatal infections 
septate uterus 123 
septicaemic (septic, endotoxic) shock 279, 280 
shared care 18 
Shirodkar cerclage 126 
Short Report (1980) 16 
short stature, maternal 214 
shoulder dystocia 261–2 
clinical risk management 228 
incidence 252 
shoulder presentation 215, 224 
shoulders, normal delivery 210–11 
‘show’ 200, 202 
sickle cell disease (SCD) 163–4 
crisis management 164 
sickle cell screening 23 
Simpson, James Young 235 
Simpson forceps 240–1 
single-gene disorders, prenatal diagnosis 70 
skin 
fetal development 38 
maternal physiological changes 169 
skin disease 
pre-existing 169 
speciÿc dermatoses of pregnancy 169–70 
skull 
evolution of 118 
fetal 197–9 
slapped cheek syndrome (parvovirus) 183 
case history 192 
small for gestational age (SGA) 30–1, 139 
case history 61 
cerebroplacental ratio 59 
management 141 
Smellie, William 235 
smoking 3–4, 18, 86, 88 
effect on birthweight 32 
social history 3–4 
social induction of labour 226 
sodium valproate 159, 161 
soft markers for fetal abnormality 50 
soluble fms-like tyrosine kinase (sFlt-1) 133 
speculum examination 10–11 
spider naevi 169 
spinal anaesthesia 222 
334 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 335 04/03/2024 16:08
Index 
and bladder function 272 
spinal headache 220–1 
spontaneous rupture of membranes (SROM) 202 
stabilization process, preterm infants 309 
station zero 195 
sterilization 289 
stillbirth 289–90 
stillbirth certiÿcates 290 
stillbirth rates 106 
stress, relationship to preterm labour 121 
stress incontinence 272 
striae gravidarum 169 
stroke 162, 163, 259 
subarachnoid haemorrhage 162 
subchorionic haematoma 124 
submento-bregmatic diameter 199, 200 
suboccipito-bregmatic diameter 199, 200 
suboccipito-frontal diameter 199 
substance abuse 86, 88 
see also recreational drug taking 
sudden unexpected death in epilepsy (SUDEP) 160, 
161 
suicide 281 
superÿcial transverse perineal muscle 198 
surfactant 34, 294, 309 
administration techniques 310 
surgical history 5 
sutures 
fetal skull 197–8 
perineal repair 232–3 
symphysis pubis 194 
symphysis pubis diastasis 277 
symphysis pubis dysfunction 78 
symphysis–fundal height (SFH) 8, 9, 25, 29–30 
syphilis 23, 179–80, 300–1 
primary chancre 179 
systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) 13, 167–8 
T-cells, fetal development 39 
tachypnoea, transient, of the newborn 294, 297 
tears see perineal tears 
temporal bones 198 
Term Breech Trial 101 
termination of pregnancy, past history of 5 
testosterone, fetal production 39 
tetracyclines 169 
thalassaemia 22–3, 39, 164 
thanatophoric dysplasia 70 
therapeutic hypothermia (TH) 305 
thermal control, neonatal 38 
third-degree tears 232 
third stage of labour 203, 211 
active management 211, 212 
physiological management 212 
threatened miscarriage 95 
thrombocytopenia 21–2, 164–5 
case history 171 
causes in pregnancy 165 
thromboembolic disease 83–4, 276 
diagnosis 85 
incidence 252 
postnatal 277 
prevention 86, 87, 273 
risk assessment 87 
risk factors 84, 273 
sickle cell disease 163 
treatment 85–6 
thrombophilia 84 
thrombophlebitis 80 
thymus 39 
thyroid disease 151–2 
thyroid function assessment 152 
thyroid hormones, fetal production 39 
tocodynometer 53 
tocolysis 308 
tocolytics 126–7 
tokophobia 244 
tonsilitis 276 
topiramate 159 
total spinal anaesthesia 221 
toxic shock syndrome 174 
toxoplasmosis 180–1 
tracheo-oesophageal ÿstulae 36 
transabdominal cerclage 126 
transabdominal ultrasound 46 
see also ultrasound 
transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS) 
219 
transient tachypnoea of the newborn 294, 297 
transvaginal ultrasound 46 
in early pregnancy 47 
see also ultrasonography 
transverse lie 9, 90, 94 
second twins 114 
traumatic neuritis 277 
Treponema pallidum 179 
triplet pregnancies 115 
antenatal care 112 
gestational age distribution at delivery 105 
perinatal mortality 106 
see also multiple pregnancies 
trisomy 21 (Down syndrome) 
fetal growth restriction 31 
neonatal management 302–3 
335 
ALGrawanyObstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 336 04/03/2024 16:08
Index 
trisomy 21 (Down syndrome) (Contd) 
prenatal diagnosis 69–70, 71 
screening 24 
tubal ligation 289 
twin anaemia–polycythaemia sequence (TAPS) 108, 
109 
twin pregnancies 103, 113–15 
anomaly scan 113 
antenatal care 104–5, 110–13 
case histories 116 
chorion villus sampling 66 
classiÿcation 104 
complications 105–10 
delivery 113–15 
epidemiology 103–4 
fetal growth restriction 106 
gestational age distribution at delivery 105 
monochorionic monoamniotic 110, 111 
perinatal mortality 106, 289 
screening 111, 113 
support groups 115 
ultrasonography 48–9, 108–9, 113 
twin reversed arterial perfusion (TRAP) sequence 
109–10 
twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome (TTTS) 89, 106, 
107 
case history 116 
Quintero staging 107–8 
risk assessment 111 
treatment 108–9 
ulcerative colitis 166–7 
ultrasonography 45–7 
amniotic °uid assessment 52 
biophysical proÿle 56 
case history 61 
cervical length measurement 51, 124, 125 
Doppler investigations 46, 56–9 
Down syndrome screening 69 
in early pregnancy 47 
fetal abnormality diagnosis 49–50 
fetal heart views 50 
fetal well-being assessment 51, 52–9 
ÿrst-trimester scan 24 
gestational age determination 47–8 
guidance of invasive procedures 59 
historical background 16 
multiple pregnancies 48–9, 108, 113 
placenta 50–1 
principles of imaging 46 
recommended schedule 52 
safety in pregnancy 47 
second-trimester scan 25 
three- and four-dimensional 59, 71–2 
transvaginal 46 
ultrasound probes 46 
umbilical artery, Doppler waveforms 56–7, 61 
umbilical cord 
around fetal neck 210 
clamping 211, 212, 294, 295 
entanglement, twin pregnancies 111 
prolapse 261, 262 
unconjugated bilirubin 298 
unicornuate uterus 123 
unresponsive patient 252–4 
causes 254 
unstable lie 94 
urethra 198 
urge to push 210 
urinary incontinence 272, 277 
urinary retention 81, 271 
urinary tract, fetal development 37–8 
urinary tract infections (UTIs) 82, 174 
urine tests 7, 21 
for proteinuria 132–3 
urogenital diaphragm 198 
uterine anomalies 81, 123 
preterm labour 123–4 
uterine artery, Doppler ultrasound 58–9, 138 
uterine hyperstimulation 214, 218, 227 
uterine inversion 212, 263–4 
uterine involution 269–70 
uterine rupture 223, 264–5 
case history 266 
uterine scars, pre-existing 222–3, 227, 247 
uterus 
physiology of labour 201 
retroversion 81 
VACTERL 36 
vacuum extraction see ventouse delivery 
vaginal birth after caesarean (VBAC) 223, 247 
vaginal bleeding 95–6 
antepartum haemorrhage 32, 124, 256–8 
vaginal delivery 
breech presentation 92–4 
normal labour 202–12 
preterm 129 
twins 113–15 
vaginal examination 205–6 
variability, fetal heart rate 53, 54, 55 
varicella zoster immunoglobulin (VZIG) 182, 301 
336 Obstetrics by Ten Teachers.indb 337 04/03/2024 16:08
Index 
varicella zoster virus (chickenpox) 181–2, 301 
varicose veins 79–80 
vasa praevia 258 
VDRL (venereal diseases research laboratory) test 
180 
venous thromboembolism (VTE) 83–4, 263 
diagnosis 85 
prevention 86, 87 
risk assessment 87 
risk from caesarean section 247 
treatment 85–6 
ventilation–perfusion (VQ) scans 85 
ventouse delivery 
analgesia 239 
case history 249 
comparison with forceps delivery 237–8 
complications 242 
contraindications 236 
failure of 241–2 
historical background 235 
technique 240 
see also assisted vaginal birth 
ventouse extractor cups 239 
vernix 38 
vertex 199 
very preterm birth, deÿnition 307 
viability 
conÿrmation in early pregnancy 47 
preterm infants 307 
viral serology 64 
vitamin A, and bronchopulmonary dysplasia 310 
vitamin D deÿciency 25 
vitamin K, neonatal administration 211, 285 
von Willebrand disease 165–6 
warfarin 85 
water birth 219 
weight gain, 18 
weight measurement, maternal 7, 18 
whole exome sequencing 71 
Wolfÿan (mesonephric) duct 37 
Wood’s screw manoeuvres 262 
wound infections 174 
associated organisms 175 
337 
ALGrawany
