“The sea and land, and the peoples that span these liminal spaces are often treated 
in isolation, both in academic scholarship and in practice. This introductory text 
takes a widescreen, interdisciplinary approach to illuminating these interdepend￾ent socio-ecological processes, with keen attention to their equity implications.”
Dr. Kenny Broad, University of Miami
“Oceans and Society: An Introduction to Marine Studies places the relationship 
between people and the ocean at its heart. The book echoes calls for interdis￾ciplinary thinking, championing the development of innovative ways to better 
understand the relationships between people, ocean, and place, through useful 
case studies.”
Dr. Emma McKinley, Research Fellow, School of Earth and 
Environmental Sciences, Cardiff University & Chair of the 
Marine Social Sciences Network
“As our climate changes and global populations reach eight Billion, we must 
improve ocean management. This book sets an important foundation for ocean 
management, as it introduces the breadth of marine studies, and connects oceans 
and society.”
Dr. Quentin Hanich, Ocean Nexus Chair in Fisheries Gov￾ernance; Australian National Centre for Ocean Resources 
and Security (ANCORS), University of Wollongong
“The challenges faced by our oceans are complex, multi-faceted and inter-related. 
Future ocean stewardship will rely on interdisciplinary approaches. This book 
is a timely compilation which will help guide students from diverse disciplinary 
backgrounds to an appreciation of the benefits and opportunities associated with 
engaging with human dimensions approaches.”
Dr. Michelle Voyer, Senior Research Fellow Austral￾ian N ational Centre for Ocean Resources and Security 
( ANCORS) at University of Wollongong
“A must-read book for graduate students in the field of marine management. Un￾derstanding the ‘ocean-society’ intersection, from multiple perspectives and ap￾plied to multiple grand challenges, is essential to enable these next-generation 
marine managers to work collaboratively towards sustainable and just ocean 
futures.”
Dr. Megan Bailey, Associate Professor and Canada Re￾search Chair, Marine Affairs Program, Dalhousie University
“Oceans and Society is a valuable introduction to the human dimension of coastal 
and ocean issues, accessible to individuals with a variety of backgrounds united by 
their passion to sustain a healthy future for our ocean, coasts, and people.”
Professor Jack Barth, Executive Director, Marine Studies 
Initiative, Oregon State UniversityOceans and Society
This unique textbook presents an introduction to the interdisciplinary field of 
marine studies, exploring the dynamic relationship between people and the 
marine environment.
Emphasizing the human dimension of coastal and ocean issues, the book 
provides an innovative examination of the complex marine–human environment 
dynamics by drawing on social science and humanities approaches. Applying 
these interdisciplinary approaches, it addresses key challenges facing the marine 
environment, including changing climate, fisheries, aquaculture, m arine pollu￾tion, energy production, and management of areas beyond national jurisdiction. 
While leading with a human dimension approach to these challenges, the chap￾ters are all firmly grounded in foundational knowledge about coastal and ocean 
environments and processes. The textbook also includes examples of professional 
or academic areas of specialization within marine studies such as s ocial and envi￾ronmental justice, governance, global perspectives, traditional ecological knowl￾edge and management, entrepreneurship, community development, conservation, 
and the blue economy. Ultimately, the book provides the first cohesive resource 
on marine studies to educate students, train interdisciplinary marine leaders, in￾spire new knowledge about people and the sea, generate innovative solutions for 
sustainable oceans, and build capacity for a new generation of marine-focused 
professionals.
Oceans and Society is essential reading for students on marine studies courses, 
as well as those studying marine governance, policy, conservation, and law more 
broadly. It will also be of great interest to students, researchers, and professionals 
interested in applying interdisciplinary approaches to environmental challenges.
Ana K. Spalding is an Associate Professor of Marine and Coastal Policy at 
Oregon State University, and Research Associate at the Smithsonian Tropical 
Research Institute and Coiba Research Station – AIP in Panama.
Daniel O. Suman is a Professor of Marine Policy and Coastal Management at 
the University of Miami´s Rosenstiel School of Marine, Atmospheric, and Earth 
Science.Earthscan Oceans
Coral Reefs
Tourism, Conservation and Management
Edited by Bruce Prideaux and Anja Pabel
Marine Extremes
Ocean Safety, Marine Health and the Blue Economy
Edited by Erika Techera and Gundula Winter
Marine Policy
An Introduction to Governance and International Law of the Oceans
2nd Edition
Mark Zacharias and Jeff Ardon
Conflicts over Marine and Coastal Common Resources
Causes, Governance and Prevention
Karen A. Alexander
Marine and Fisheries Policies in Latin America
A Comparison of Selected Countries
Edited by Manuel Ruiz Muller, Rodrigo Oyandel and Bruno Monteferri
Oceans and Society
An Introduction to Marine Studies
Edited by A. K. Spalding and Daniel O. Suman
Transdisciplinary Marine Research
Bridging Science and Society
Edited by Sílvia Gómez and Vera Köpsel
For further details please visit the series page on the Routledge website: 
http://www.routledge.com/books/series/ECOCEOceans and Society
An Introduction to Marine Studies
Edited by 
Ana K. Spalding and 
Daniel O. SumanDesigned cover image: © Getty images
First published 2023
by Routledge
4 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RN
and by Routledge
605 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10158
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business
© 2023 selection and editorial matter, Ana K. Spalding and Daniel O. 
Suman; individual chapters, the contributors
The right of Ana K. Spalding and Daniel O. Suman to be identified 
as the authors of the editorial material, and of the authors for their 
individual chapters, has been asserted in accordance with sections 77 and 
78 of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced 
or utilised in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, 
now known or hereafter invented, including photocopying and recording, 
or in any information storage or retrieval system, without permission in 
writing from the publishers.
Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks 
or registered trademarks, and are used only for identification and 
explanation without intent to infringe.
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Spalding, Ana K., editor. | Suman, Daniel O. 1950– editor. 
Title: Oceans and society : an introduction to marine studies / Edited by 
Ana K. Spalding and Daniel O. Suman. 
Description: New York, NY : Routledge, 2023. | Includes bibliographical 
references and index. 
Identifiers: LCCN 2022037797 (print) | LCCN 2022037798 (ebook) | 
ISBN 9780367524883 (hardback) | ISBN 9780367524869 (paperback) | 
ISBN 9781003058151 (ebook) 
Subjects: LCSH: Marine ecology. | Marine resources. | 
Marine resources conservation. 
Classification: LCC QH541.5.S3 O233 2023 (print) | 
LCC QH541.5.S3 (ebook) | DDC 577.7—dc23/eng/20220831 
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2022037797
LC ebook record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2022037798
ISBN: 978-0-367-52488-3 (hbk)
ISBN: 978-0-367-52486-9 (pbk)
ISBN: 978-1-003-05815-1 (ebk)
DOI: 10.4324/9781003058151
Typeset in Goudy
by codeMantraTo our colleagues in Marine Studies/Marine Affairs and Policy 
who pioneered the Human Dimensions field.
To our students who are the future ocean leaders.
To Tutty and Rosita who have provided some calm during our 
writing and preparation of the book.Contents
Editors Bios xi
List of Contributors xiii
Foreword xv
Preface xvii
Acknowledgments xxi
PART I
Setting the Stage 1
1 An Introduction to Marine Studies 3
A. K. SPALDING
2 Human Dimension Approaches to Marine Studies 14
K. BIEDENWEG, S. CHISHOLM HATFIELD, AND A. K. SPALDING
3 The Ocean: An Introduction to the Marine Environment 24
K. GRORUD-COLVERT AND M. WARD
PART II
Grand Challenges 39
4 Wild Capture Fisheries: Processes, Technology, and Solutions 41
F. CONWAY AND L. CIANNELLI
5 Global Marine Aquaculture Development 59
J. D. STIEGLITZ, M. TOUCHTON, D. D. BENET TI, D. ROTHEN, 
A. CLARK-HUGHES, B. K. HAUS, A. ZANGRONIZ, AND D. O. SUMAN
6 Marine Pollution: Science, Art, and the Accumulations of Time 78
S. BR ANDER AND P. BETJEMANNx Contents
 7 Oceans and the Changing Climate 
 8 Marine Renewable Energy: Policy, People, and Prospects 
 9 Marine Areas beyond National Jurisdiction 
PART III
 10 Ocean Governance: Definitions, Framework, and Implementation 
 11 Stewardship and Conservation of the Marine Environment: 
 12 Social Justice in Coastal Spaces 
 13 Truth-Telling: Understanding Historical and Ongoing Impacts 
 14 Coastal Community Development 
 15 Marine Entrepreneurship 
 16 Measuring Progress toward a Blue Economy: A Critical 
 17 Conclusion: Marine Studies as an Interdisciplinary Approach 
Index Editors Bios
Ana K. Spalding
Dr. Spalding is an Associate Professor of Marine and Coastal Policy at Oregon 
State University, and Research Associate at the Smithsonian Tropical Re￾search Institute and Coiba Research Station – AIP in Panama. She has a PhD 
in Environmental Studies from the University of California, Santa Cruz, an 
MA in Marine Affairs and Policy from the University of Miami, and a BA in 
International Economics from the University of Richmond. She has published 
widely on the socio-environmental outcomes of lifestyle migration to Panama; 
on the linkages between land use and policy, property rights, and develop￾ment; and, more broadly, on the evolution of marine policy and conservation 
in Panama and the United States. She is also fascinated by interdisciplinarity 
and collaboration as an academic endeavor, where it no longer represents an 
abstract concept, but instead has become a critical framework for addressing 
global environmental threats. Her current research includes the study of adap￾tive capacity to changing ocean conditions in resource-dependent communi￾ties in California, science-policy engagement related to ocean acidification on 
the West Coast of the United States, and assessments of the social outcomes 
of marine protected areas.
Daniel O. Suman
Dr. Suman is a Professor of Marine Policy and Coastal Management at the Uni￾versity of Miami’s Rosenstiel School of Marine, Atmospheric, and Earth Sci￾ence. His research and project areas focus on coastal management, adaptation 
to climate change and sea level rise, governance of marine resources and space, 
management of mangroves and coastal wetlands, and marine protected areas – 
particularly in Latin America and the Caribbean, but also worldwide. Suman 
earned a PhD in Oceanography from the Scripps Institution of Oceanography 
(University of California, San Diego); a law degree (JD) from the University of 
California, Berkeley; an MA in International Education and Latin American 
Studies from Columbia University; and a BA from Middlebury College. At the 
University of Miami, he has taught courses for over 30 years in Environmental 
Law, Environmental Planning, Coastal Management, Coastal Law, and Water 
Resources Policy.Contributors
Laura Anderson
Local Ocean Seafoods, Newport, OR, USA
Daniel D. Benetti
University of Miami, Miami, FL, USA
Peter Betjemann
Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR, USA
Kelly Biedenweg
Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR, USA
Bradley Boovy
Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR, USA
Hilary S. Boudet
Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR USA
Susanne M. Brander
Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR, USA
Diane Brandt
Renewable Northwest, Corvallis, OR, USA
Samantha Chisholm Hatfield
Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR, USA
Lorenzo Ciannelli
Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR, USA and Stazione Zoologica 
Anton Dohrn, Ischia, Italy
Andrés M. Cisneros-Montemayor
Simon Fraser University, Vancouver, BC, Canada
Angela Clark-Hughes
University of Miami, Miami, FL, USA
Flaxen Conway
Oregon State University and Oregon Sea Grant, Corvallis, OR, USA
A. N. Doerr
Oregon State University, Newport, OR, USAxiv Contributors
Kirsten Grorud-Colvert
Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR, USA
Harriet Harden-Davies
Nippon Foundation – University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, Scotland, UK
Brian K. Haus
University of Miami, Miami, FL, USA
Caroline B. LaPorte
Little River Band of Ottawa Indians, Seminole Tribe of Florida and Univer￾sity of Miami, Miami, FL, USA
Marta Maria Maldonado
Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR, USA
Carrie Pomeroy
University of California, Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, CA, USA
Bryson Robertson
Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR, USA
Daniel Rothan
University of Miami, Miami, FL, USA
Jason Scorse
Center for the Blue Economy and Middlebury Institute of International 
Studies, Monterey, CA, USA
Inara Scott
Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR, USA
Manoj P. Shivlani
University of Miami, Miami, FL, USA
Ana K. Spalding
Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR, USA and Smithsonian Tropical 
Research Institute, Panama City, Panama
John D. Stieglitz
University of Miami, Miami, FL, USA
Daniel O. Suman
University of Miami, Miami, FL, USA
Michael Touchton
University of Miami, Miami, FL, USA
Melissa Ward
San Diego State University, San Diego, CA, USA and Oxford University, 
Oxford, UK
Benjamin J. Wickizer
Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR, USA
Ana Zangroniz
University of Florida/IFAS Extension, Miami, FL, USAForeword
Relationships among people and oceans are complicated. People rely on the 
oceans and are influenced by them. They derive well-being from coastal and 
ocean spaces. And they also affect coastal and ocean health. It’s not possible 
to fully understand the myriad connections among people and oceans through 
one disciplinary lens. The field of marine studies draws on multiple disciplines 
to better understand complex linkages among people and the oceans. The com￾prehensive multi-disciplinary approach at the core of the field of marine studies 
is critical to addressing some of society’s most challenging issues related to water 
quality, multi-use, energy development, coastal access, environmental justice, and 
many others.
As the field of marine studies has gained attention over the years, the need 
for a holistic, multi-disciplinary text has emerged. Ana K. Spalding and D aniel 
O. Suman’s Oceans and Society: An Introduction to Marine Studies fills that need. 
By drawing on multiple academic disciplines from across the social sciences and 
humanities, as well as traditional ecological knowledge, Oceans and Society equips 
students, coastal and ocean practitioners, and anyone else interested in the h uman 
dimensions of the oceans with valuable knowledge and practical tools to make 
sense of the way people relate to the coasts and oceans. This work demonstrates 
the importance of the social sciences and the power of the humanities to lend 
insights into how people think about and interact with coastal and ocean spaces.
As a university professor who has been teaching introductory marine stud￾ies for two decades, I know how beneficial it is for students to be able to draw 
on different disciplines and areas of expertise when tackling important – but 
 challenging  – issues like marine pollution, habitat decline, inequitable access, 
and climate change. I also recognize how difficult it can be to provide just the 
right amount of disciplinary depth and breadth so that students are adequately 
equipped to engage with complex coastal and ocean issues. By providing in one 
place important theories and tools from a variety of disciplines and valuable cases, 
like the harvesting of Manoomin (wild rice) by Indigenous communities for sub￾sistence and ceremony or the international governance of the Arctic Ocean, this 
book is a welcome addition to the field of marine studies.xvi Foreword
It is essential that current and future generations of coastal practitioners, policy 
makers, researchers, and coastal and ocean users approach complex coastal and 
ocean issues through a lens of multidisciplinarity. The field of marine studies in 
general, and this book in particular, prepares them to do just that.
Dr. Tracey Dalton
Professor of Marine Affairs
University of Rhode Island
Kingston, RI, USAPreface
Daniel and I, together, have over 60 years of experience conducting research, 
consulting, and teaching about the interactions between oceans and society. No￾tably, during this time our emphasis has been on “society” in all its dimensions 
(e.g., political, cultural, economic, legal, etc.) within the marine space. However, 
the path to becoming marine social scientists was far from clear. Daniel has a 
background in oceanography, law, Latin American studies, and education; I have 
degrees in environmental studies, marine affairs and policy, and economics; and 
we both share a deep connection to the ocean and curiosity about the people who 
rely on it (and we are both originally from Panama!). The latter, unfortunately, 
is not enough to secure a job nor does it provide clarity on the types of skills or 
knowledge needed to work with oceans and people. Indeed, before I met Daniel 
almost 20 years ago (Daniel was my MA and PhD supervisor), I had asked myself 
this question many times – how can I work on social issues, in marine areas, without 
pursuing a degree in marine biology? Since then, Daniel and I have actively collab￾orated on various projects related to coastal zone management, policy, tourism 
and sustainability, ocean conservation, and now on this book. Over the years we 
have often discussed challenges we faced while doing this work, such as funding 
(it tends to be less compared to funding available for our natural and physical 
science counterparts), expectations (often colleagues will expect us to translate 
or communicate the natural or physical science to the public, instead of recog￾nizing our work as generating its own type of information), perceptions (inclu￾sion of marine social scientists as research collaborators as a last minute add-on 
to a project to satisfy the funders), and marine-specific social science training 
(it is straightforward to pursue a degree in economics, anthropology, business ad￾ministration, etc.; yet not as easy to find opportunities for training in marine 
economics, marine anthropology, marine business, or other marine-focused social 
sciences). In response, we decided to put together this volume on what we are 
calling Marine Studies, an interdisciplinary field that centers the human dimen￾sion (social sciences and humanities) and is grounded in a solid understanding of 
the natural and physical processes that define oceans and coasts. It is our hope 
that the volume will contribute to current efforts to build capacity and foster a 
community of interdisciplinary thinkers who can overcome these challenges and 
become the next generation of oceans and society leaders.xviii Preface
The volume is designed in three parts to provide a deep and practical under￾standing of the complex social, cultural, historical, economic, and environmental 
issues faced by global coasts and oceans. Part I sets the stage and defines the field 
of Marine Studies; describes the basic, applied, and interdisciplinary fields that 
enable the study of the human dimension; and outlines the natural and physical 
processes that make the ocean a unique place. Part II is a survey of contemporary 
and emerging grand challenges faced by oceans and society, such as fisheries, aq￾uaculture, marine pollution, climate change, energy production, and the proposed 
framework for governance of the 60% of the ocean that is found in areas beyond 
national jurisdiction, aka “High Seas”. Notably, most chapters in this Part of the 
book are co-authored by a natural or physical scientist in partnership with a social 
science or humanities expert. This was intentionally done to invite readers to 
think critically about how we portray problems in the ocean – Is the problem that 
there are less fish in the sea? Or is the problem that human activity has led to fewer 
fish and is, in turn, negatively affecting those who rely on fishing for their livelihoods?
Finally, we recognize that readers will have different professional and academic 
interests and worldviews. Thus, Part III showcases a suite of applied approaches 
or perspectives to help address these grand challenges, such as ocean governance, 
conservation, social justice, traditional ecological knowledge, community devel￾opment, entrepreneurship, and development for the blue economy.
If you are an instructor wanting to use some or all of this volume in your classes 
in marine or environmental studies, we encourage you to think about the goal of 
each part of the book. While you may certainly pick and choose chapters from 
Parts II and III, we encourage you to carefully present all the content from Part I as 
a foundation for subsequent discussions of the grand challenges and approaches. 
This can provide students with some clarity on their disciplinary or interdiscipli￾nary identity, effectively building a community of Marine Studies scholars and fu￾ture practitioners. To work through the marine socio- environmental problems of 
Part II, we have added questions for reflection to each chapter as a starting point 
for class discussion. You may facilitate activities, such as think-pair-share, where 
students can talk with each other about the points they found most interesting 
about the chapter. We also realize that due to space limitations we were only able 
to include a few specific examples in each chapter. To overcome this, you might 
ask students to each bring a current event related to the chapter and critically as￾sess the social and environmental nature of the event. In our classes, for instance, 
we have engaged students by asking them to select one of the grand challenges 
and explore its many dimensions throughout the length of the term, with the 
expectation that they will produce a final project that reflects their interests and 
experiences. We have also developed case studies around some of these topics, in￾viting the whole class to represent a different approach or perspective, essentially 
replicating a real-world scenario where decision-making requires effective collab￾oration and communication across often conflicting interests.1
 Finally, to actively 
engage students to think about how their own personal vocation and interests 
might shape their future careers, in addition to questions for reflection, all the 
chapters in Part III include a short section on professional pathways that hints at Preface xix
the type of disciplinary specialization students might need to focus on to be more 
prepared for a given career direction. These professional pathways may appear 
generic. Certainly, for instance, to become a marine conservation practitioner a 
student may pursue a degree in marine biology, public policy, environmental ed￾ucation, etc. However, they would probably also want to focus on learning about 
the types of organizations that do conservation work and specifically tailor their 
coursework, assignments, and networking to building expertise on the topic.
If you are a student or practitioner reading this book, we invite you to read it 
critically and thoughtfully. You might ask yourself – What is the change I want to 
see for oceans and society, and how can the content of each chapter help me think about 
creative and innovative solutions? You may also notice that some of the topics are 
presented in more than one chapter. In fact, you may even notice that the same 
topic is addressed differently across chapters (e.g., the links between fisheries and 
aquaculture in providing food from the sea; or the implications of promoting ma￾rine renewable energy in ocean spaces that are already experiencing competing 
uses, such as fisheries, aquaculture, and conservation; or the role of international 
agencies in managing and regulating the ocean space). This, again, is intentional 
to reflect the interests, perspectives, and worldviews of a diverse society. Chapter 
authors have a range of disciplinary and professional experiences, expertise, and 
identities that are reflected in their writing. In this sense, we invite you to not 
just look at the content of the chapters but also read about the authors and think 
about their contributions to Marine Studies.
We have enjoyed the process of designing the structure of the book, inviting 
author contributions, and thinking deeply about how to best use this material to 
train the next generation of ocean leaders. Ultimately, we hope we have provided 
a tool that will inspire a new narrative for the ocean as a coupled natural–human 
system that calls for interdisciplinary thinking and holistic approaches to inno￾vative solutions. Increasingly, policymakers, resource managers, conservation 
organizations, and natural and physical scientists are finding that solutions to per￾vasive environmental problems, such as climate change, require this interdiscipli￾nary approach, including social science and humanities perspectives. Students of 
Marine Studies are ideally suited to fill this demand for future interdisciplinary 
marine-focused professionals.
Ana K. Spalding, Oregon State University and Smithsonian 
Tropical Research Institute
Daniel O. Suman, University of MiamiAcknowledgments
We thank the many people who have assisted us in the preparation of this book. 
First, we recognize the authors of the chapters who gave their time writing and 
revising the essays, as well as the anonymous external chapter reviewers. Taylor & 
Francis editorial assistants John Baddeley and Katie Stokes provided guidance 
regarding the many publishing details and were sensitive to delays caused by the 
pandemic. We thank Dr. Jack Barth and Dr. Kristen Milligan, Executive and 
Associate Director, respectively, of Oregon State University’s Marine Studies In￾itiative who provided enthusiastic support for this project, as well as partial fund￾ing for co-editor Spalding. Oregon State students Trisha Patterson and Ravyn 
Cervantes provided excellent assistance with copyediting. Co-editor Suman’s stu￾dents from the University of Miami’s Ocean Policy class and teaching assistant 
Johanna Mead provided constructive criticism and feedback for the chapters. We 
also recognize Mead’s assistance with the indexing. Finally, we thank our family 
and friends who offered us support and encouragement during book preparation.
Note
 1 You can find excellent case study materials in the UC Press journal titled Part I
Setting the Stage
Part I sets the stage for the rest of the book by introducing the field of marine studies, 
describing various human dimension disciplines, and introducing basic natural and 
physical processes that define the marine environment.
DOI: 10.4324/9781003058151-11 An Introduction to Marine 
Studies
A. K. Spalding
Introduction
Marine studies is an emerging interdisciplinary1
 field of study that explores the 
dynamic relationship between people and the marine environment. As the reach 
of anthropogenic activities expands from heavily populated coastal areas into re￾mote regions of the ocean, the marine environment has become a literal, as well 
as symbolic, last frontier for exploration and exploitation. At the same time, there 
is a growing awareness of the unequal outcomes and unjust practices associated 
with this expansion of ocean-based activities (e.g., Büscher et al., 2017; Camp￾bell & Gray, 2019; Fusco et al., 2022). Scientists, practitioners, and civil society 
have made it clear that social equity and, more specifically, ocean justice must ac￾company all thinking about the future of coastal communities, ocean industries, 
conservation, and the governance of ocean spaces and resources in areas beyond 
national jurisdiction. More than ever, unraveling these dynamics to better under￾stand how people affect the ocean and, in turn, how the ocean affects humans is 
essential. The field of marine studies is ideally suited to take on this challenge by 
engaging a suite of human dimensions approaches and tools (described in more 
detail in Chapter 2 of this volume) and applying these to real-world problems 
(marine-specific problems are presented in more detail in the chapters included 
in Part II of this book). This chapter specifically explores the evolution of marine 
studies as an interdisciplinary field. It then highlights the importance of adopting 
a marine studies approach by asking the question: Why should we care? And it 
ends with a discussion about ways in which interdisciplinary research and training 
can embrace the applied nature of this field, as well as support capacity building 
for the next generation of ocean and coastal professionals.
People and the Sea
The attraction to the ocean is deeply embedded into who we are as humans. From 
evolutionary science debates about Darwin’s writings on the origins of life to faith￾based representations in the Bible of the sea as simultaneously a limitless source 
of food and a dangerous life-threatening force, our connections to the ocean run 
deep and are inextricably linked to our existence. Depictions, interpretations, 
DOI: 10.4324/9781003058151-24 A. K. Spalding
and representations of the human relationship to the ocean abound in literature 
(e.g., Herman Melville’s Moby-Dick or Samuel Taylor Coleridge’s The Rime of the 
Ancient Mariner), art (e.g., Katsushika Hokusai’s The Great Wave off Kanagawa), 
and history (e.g., the Age of Exploration, known for European colonization of 
the Americas). Similarly, naturalists such as Charles Darwin and Edward Forbes, 
intrigued by the ocean and its creatures, developed their own relationship with 
the ocean – where scientists are observers, and the ocean is the observed – by 
systematically documenting and studying the ocean in all its complexities. In 
the purest example of interdependence, humans have long relied on food from 
the sea for their survival. Academics often describe these relationships through 
distinct disciplinary perspectives. For instance, anthropologists tell us about sea￾faring cultures of the Pacific (Hau‘ofa, 2008), political economists explain the 
role of neoliberal ideology on current uses of the ocean (e.g., Mansfield, 2004), 
fisheries biologists assess the health of fish stocks (e.g., Grorud-Colvert & Sponau￾gle, 2011), and oceanographers describe the relationship between ocean currents, 
fisheries resources, and climate change (e.g., Pinsky et al., 2018). But, as Singh 
et al. (2021) point out, will understanding the ocean in this fragmented way really 
lead to “the ocean we want”?
Importantly, it is us, as humans, who continue to socially construct2
 the ocean 
and have done so over time through our attitudes, beliefs, and actions. Humans 
have created what is known today as the Anthropocene ocean: a geographi￾cal space in which human activities are undeniably driving observed physical 
and environmental changes (Spalding & de Ycaza, 2020). Intricately linked as a 
tightly coupled natural–human system, these environmental changes are affect￾ing human societies that are, in turn, also experiencing rapid change. It becomes 
ever clearer that understanding, and making decisions based on, this dynamic 
relationship between people and nature has become one of the most challenging, 
yet critical, tasks of our time. So … what if, by recognizing the ocean as a socially 
constructed and dynamic space, scholars and practitioners were able to move 
 beyond disciplinary limitations to informing decision-making? What if, instead of 
working narrowly within academic and practical silos, scholars and practitioners 
adopted a more holistic and integrated approach to understanding the material 
(practical) and symbolic (socially constructed) drivers of change in the ocean, 
and made decisions accordingly?
In practice, humans are actively creating the Anthropocene ocean through 
policy, management, and behaviors that are, in turn, shaped by needs, culture, 
values, and unequal power structures. These actions result in persistent plastic 
pollution in the ocean (Jambeck et al., 2015), overexploitation of living marine 
resources (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, 2022), and 
rising sea levels and temperatures as a result of anthropogenic climate change, 
among others. Symbolically, or through narratives about the ocean, humans are 
also affecting the ocean by, for instance, supporting the dominant perception 
of the ocean as limitless or “too big to fail” (Lubchenco & Gaines, 2019) or by 
conceptualizing the ocean and its resources as “open for business” (Virdin et al., 
2020). Simply put, how we understand, perceive, and use the ocean matters. If we An Introduction to Marine Studies 5
care about the future of the ocean and its resources, we must act and think in 
more holistic, integrated, and sustainable ways.
It follows, then, that a holistic approach to scholarship and practice – one 
that explicitly and intentionally integrates politics with ecological outcomes, or 
links literary and historical accounts of travel with state-of-the-art oceanographic 
 observations – is a possible way forward. As Berkes points out in the preface to 
his 2015 book Coasts for People: Interdisciplinary Approaches to Coastal and Ma￾rine Resource Management: “Addressing the real problems of the world requires 
 crossing disciplinary boundaries and, ultimately, eliminating the divides between 
science and management, resource user and decision-maker, and different kinds 
of knowledge” (p. 12). While admittedly a lofty goal, marine studies seeks to do 
just that! The next sections of this chapter outline how this interdisciplinary 
field can help address the very real challenges faced by the Anthropocene Ocean 
through focusing on the human dimension of coastal and marine issues.
Marine Studies as an Interdisciplinary Field of Study
You may be wondering whether this interdisciplinary thinking is really new. For 
instance, is it not obvious that the economy affects fisheries? Or that how we 
feel about the ocean affects whether or not we are willing to support or respect 
 conservation regulations? The simple answer is that, in effect, it is not ground￾breaking; and yes, some academic disciplines have embraced interdisciplinarity 
since at least the middle of the 20th century (Sauer, 1956). For instance, geogra￾phers, human and cultural ecologists, and environmental studies scholars have 
long engaged in explorations of the relationship between people and nature. How￾ever, it is the intentional application of this thinking to the ocean that is, argu￾ably, novel. Certainly, the expectation that the information obtained from these 
interdisciplinary studies be used to solve real-world problems is new. Perhaps a key 
distinctive feature of marine studies as a field is that issues are framed f oremost by 
the human dimension – and that the human dimension is inclusive of h umanities, 
as well as disciplinary and interdisciplinary social sciences. By p utting people first, 
in all their diversity and complexity, marine studies scholarship is ideally suited 
to disentangle the uneven, and often unjust, outcomes of resource use. Specifi￾cally, it may provide insights into the social and political conditions that are more 
conducive to successful conservation outcomes, or it may even help discern the 
human drivers of and proposed solutions to climate change. This does not mean 
natural and physical science contributions, alone, are not important. Instead, it 
suggests the need for a shift in thinking toward considering people as an inextri￾cable part of the story of environmental change and associated solutions. While a 
traditional ecologist might focus on advancing knowledge about the life history of 
a given species based on ecological theories of evolution, an ecologist with train￾ing in marine studies might expand her focus on the life history of said species 
to explicitly consider the relationship between fish and associated human uses 
over time. A marine studies specialist might further look at the broader political 
economy, the culture, or even human migration patterns to understand why and 6 A. K. Spalding
how humans use certain fish species, or actions that might support the sustainable 
management of fisheries and the livelihoods of people dependent on living ma￾rine resources. Furthermore, marine studies often calls for collaborations across 
individuals who, together, form interdisciplinary research teams.
So, if not new, what are the intellectual origins of marine studies, and how does 
it differ from marine science? The “marine” aspect of the field is self-explanatory 
and encompasses all issues related to oceans (including the water column and 
seafloor) and coasts (spaces and uses along the broadly defined land–sea inter￾face). To understand the meaning of “studies”, consider environmental studies, a 
discipline that has existed since the 1970s. An inherently interdisciplinary field 
of study, environmental studies examines, understands, and addresses environ￾mental challenges from a range of perspectives, including social, political, and 
economic concerns – often using more than one perspective at a time. The field 
is grounded in human ecology, a school of thought proposed by Barrows in 1923 
that represented a critique of environmental determinism.3
 Subsequent scholar￾ship, known as cultural ecology, moved away from the idea that the relation￾ship between humans and the environment could be explained using ecological 
concepts and moved toward explanations of the evolution of culture and human 
civilizations, using culture and history as elements that also influence cultural 
change over time (Steward, 1955). For instance, Sauer’s (1956) work on fire and 
agriculture reinforced Barrows’ (1923) critique by recognizing the role of human 
activity in shaping environments into what he called “cultural landscapes”. This 
new thinking about people and the environment had closer ties to the social 
sciences, applying concepts from economics, history, sociology, and political 
 science to particular situations and environmental conditions. A more recent 
 critique of cultural ecology, related to its failure to understand or fully account 
for the complexities of human interactions with their environment, is known as 
political ecology. First used by Eric Wolf in 1972, political ecology was born from 
the recognition that in post-WWII societies, people and communities no longer 
lived in isolation from larger political or economic forces. Political ecology schol￾ars acknowledge the need to integrate broader social, political, and economic 
contexts into socio-environmental research.
Thus, drawing on this long tradition, environmental studies emerged from 
concepts that have evolved over time to include various human dimensions disci￾plines, and it applies that lens to relevant environmental problems. Importantly, 
the natural and social sciences work together to explore the causes of and iden￾tify solutions to complex environmental problems. In sum, environmental studies 
scholars acknowledge that environmental degradation is inextricably linked to 
the human condition and is often characterized by unequal or unjust outcomes 
for vulnerable communities. The inclusion of this human dimension is, indeed, 
what differentiates the environmental studies from environmental science. While 
environmental scientists acknowledge the interactions between people and the 
environment, they often focus primarily on the scientific drivers of and answers 
to environmental problems.
Currently, almost a century after the emergence of the field of human ecology, 
we are living in a time when converging climate, public health, economic, and An Introduction to Marine Studies 7
racial justice crises, brought to a head in 2020 with the Covid-19 pandemic, have 
highlighted that failures of collective and public policies around health and the 
environment have perpetuated individual and collective suffering. In 2018, more 
than 1 billion people around the world were living in poverty (i.e., living on less 
than $3.20 per day), most of them in Sub-Saharan Africa (World Bank, n.d.). 
Furthermore, an estimated 25% of assessed animal and plant species are threat￾ened (Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem 
Services, 2019). Thus, the legacy of interdisciplinary thinking around people and 
the environment, as applied to the grand challenges facing society, is, arguably, 
more important and relevant than ever.
While the interdisciplinary nature of environmental or marine studies is not 
new, it is, unfortunately, far from widespread – likely because this type of research 
is harder to conduct, assess, and fund (Nature, 2015). Within the marine space, in 
particular, this integration of disciplines and application to real-world problems lags 
behind interdisciplinary efforts in terrestrial areas. An exploration of the reasons 
for this is beyond the purview of this chapter. But suffice it to say that the interdis￾ciplinary perspectives on marine grand challenges presented in Part II of this book, 
and the various human dimensions approaches highlighted in Part III, are impor￾tant reminders of a much-needed shift in thinking toward inclusive science that 
goes beyond the use of increasingly complex and sophisticated tools for describing 
and modeling ocean conditions. Indeed, such a shift could be responsive to calls 
for environmental justice and equity and the solutions-oriented science needed to 
achieve an ocean space that reflects the diversity of needs and interests of marine 
actors, knowledge-holders, industry, and government (Singh et al., 2021).
Finally, you may have heard the ideas described above as falling under the 
purview of disciplines other than marine studies. Other names typically used to 
describe interdisciplinary approaches to marine issues include maritime studies, 
marine social science, marine or blue humanities, marine affairs, among others. 
Indeed, these are all terms broadly used to refer to the study of people and the 
ocean. While the term marine studies is used here as an all-encompassing term, it 
is important to also acknowledge the many historical and current traditions that 
have influenced and inform the various chapters of this book.
Changing Oceans and Societies: Why Should We Care?
We have hinted at the challenges faced by the ocean and the people who depend 
on it. These include climate change, pervasive plastic pollution, questions around 
conventional exploitation of fossil fuels and increased knowledge about renewable 
sources of energy from the ocean, food from the sea (wild-caught and farmed), and 
global negotiations around resource management in ocean areas beyond national 
jurisdiction (further described in Part II of this book). The pervasiveness of these 
challenges suggests that the time to change our approach to finding solutions is 
now. Three points make this a unique moment for finding solutions for people 
and the sea.
First, physically and environmentally, the imprint of humans is ever-present. 
The Anthropocene ocean puts us, as humans, closer than ever to being affected 8 A. K. Spalding
by and having the opportunity to shape ocean futures (Biermann, 2021). For in￾stance, technology has allowed us to explore further and deeper into the ocean 
than ever before, while also increasing our ability to predict future ocean con￾ditions and, thus, reduce risk at sea. Furthermore, recent natural and associated 
social disasters (e.g., the 2004 Indian Ocean Tsunami, recurring heat waves across 
Europe, wildfires in Australia and most of the US West Coast in 2020 and 2022, 
and the global health crisis from the Covid-19 pandemic) have become regular 
reminders that we are highly dependent on a functioning natural, social, and 
political environment.
Second, related climate and global health crises have exposed significant flaws 
in how we understand and address society’s problems, emphasizing the vulnera￾bility of certain sectors of society and the need to simultaneously consider cross￾cutting issues. You may consider, for example, the link between fisheries, n utrition, 
poverty, and gender. Global wild-capture fisheries plateaued in the 1980s (Pauly, 
2008), and climate change is predicted to further affect their availability and 
distribution (Pinsky et al., 2018). Nutrition and food security continue to be a 
high priority on the sustainable development agenda; in 2017, some 815 million 
people around the world went to bed hungry, and about 2 billion people lacked 
key micronutrients (Development Initiatives, 2017). Closely related to nutrition, 
in 2015 about 10% of the world’s population lived in extreme poverty, meaning 
that they lacked access to basic needs such as health, sanitation, and education, 
among others. For the first time since the 1990s, that number increased as a re￾sult of the Covid-19 crisis (Lakner et al., 2021). Studies show that these changes 
in fisheries, nutrition, and poverty disproportionately affect women around the 
world. If we consider post-harvest processing, women represent 50% of the global 
fisheries workforce (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, 
2016). However, the nature of their involvement suggests they receive lower re￾turns than men, in part due to engagement in less profitable segments of the value 
chain, gendered divisions of labor, and patterns of access to and ownership of 
assets (WorldFish, 2016). The value of securing gender equality has been exten￾sively studied, effectively demonstrating that supporting women’s engagement in 
productive activities, such as fishing, has the potential to improve nutrition and 
other development indicators through their contributions to the overall wellbe￾ing of the household (WorldFish, 2016). As with poverty, the Covid-19 crisis has 
rolled back recent gains for women’s rights and equality (UN Women, 2020), and 
negatively affected the fishing industry as a whole (Bennett et al., 2020). Applying 
lessons from recent efforts to support women and girls is more important than 
ever, and it offers an opportunity to engage more broadly across sectors to address 
these intersecting challenges.
Third, from a policy and governance perspective, the complex nature of the 
problems faced by people and the ocean means that solutions increasingly require 
both social and ecological information to make better resource management and 
development decisions. The ocean has only recently emerged as a critical element 
of the global development agenda, creating opportunities for action. In 2015, the 
ocean secured its own Sustainable Development Goal, SDG 14: Life Under Water, An Introduction to Marine Studies 9
within the UN’s 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (United N ations, 
2015); and scholars and practitioners are increasingly working on emphasizing 
the intersecting goals and benefits across all 17 SDGs (e.g., links between sustain￾able fisheries and poverty reduction [WorldFish, 2016]). Additionally, the decade 
that started in 2020 has, in a short time, seen the emergence of global efforts such 
as the High-Level Panel for a Sustainable Ocean Economy, as well as a variety 
of national and regional-level efforts. Indeed, the UN has declared this the UN 
Decade of Ocean Science for Sustainable Development. These actions allow for 
increased attention to the natural, social, and physical aspects of the ocean to be 
placed on the global agenda and have the potential to raise important questions 
and hold global and national institutions accountable for addressing the intersec￾tional nature of our ocean’s grand challenges.
How Does a Marine Studies Approach Help Address Ocean 
and Society Problems?
To provide a deep and practical understanding of the complex social, cultural, 
historical, political, and economic character of the marine environment, it is 
 necessary to center human dimensions research, training, and capacity building. 
This training must be grounded in a solid understanding of marine natural and 
physical processes. The interdisciplinary perspective of a marine studies approach 
can be applied to real-world problems such as climate change, fisheries, aquacul￾ture, pollution, energy production, governance, and biodiversity loss. Furthermore, 
this approach provides the skills and creates opportunities for future professionals 
to engage in a diversity of careers related to social and environmental justice, 
policy, entrepreneurship, community development, support for Indigenous rights, 
and conservation.
Marine Studies Research
Social science research and a humanities approach to the study of the marine en￾vironment has traditionally been organized around distinct disciplines, instead of 
by its shared focus on the ocean and associated activities. Analogous research on 
land use, food, and agriculture, in contrast, has enjoyed a community of scholar￾ship built on shared study sites, themes, topics, theories, methods, and approaches. 
However, this is changing for the marine space. For instance, the Manifesto for 
the Marine Social Sciences (Bavinck & Verrips, 2020), generated at the Centre 
for Maritime Research’s 2019 MARE conference, is the first attempt at identifying 
marine and coastal topics that are relevant to social scientists. In the Manifesto, 
the authors identified urgent marine social science topics, suggestions for further 
research, and thoughts on how to apply new methodologies and approaches to 
the study of marine issues. The resulting vision for marine social sciences in￾cludes an expansion of theory and applied research opportunities, as well as 
marine-based thematic focal areas such as ocean politics, regional perspectives, 
gender and fisheries, and sustainable blue growth. Importantly, there is a need to 10 A. K. Spalding
further connect the social sciences, the humanities, and the natural and physical 
sciences. This is often limited by challenges such as the inclusion of social science 
as an afterthought to a project, a relative lack of funding for environmental social 
science and humanities, and the differences in jargon between natural and social 
scientists (Spalding & Biedenweg, 2017). However, the interdisciplinary nature 
of marine studies research may help to overcome these challenges and facilitate 
integration by centering the importance of understanding the environmental and 
physical characteristics of the ocean (see Chapter 3 of this volume). In other 
words, marine studies research can help to understand the broad social and envi￾ronmental context of marine issues, with a vision to identify holistic and viable 
solutions to the most pressing problems faced by people and the sea.
Interdisciplinary Training and Workforce Capacity Building
The vision for marine studies research outlined above requires appropriate train￾ing and capacity building. A key critique of interdisciplinarity is that it focuses on 
breadth (knowing a little about many things) versus depth (knowing a lot about a 
few things). However, in the context of marine studies, breadth of knowledge might 
be an asset – especially if accompanied by an understanding of the type of social 
science or humanities expertise that is needed to address a given problem (if it’s not 
your expertise, you can always call on someone with knowledge in that field! Indeed, 
collaboration is a key element of marine studies), the type of natural or physical 
science that would be most useful for a given issue, and the social and governance 
context within which said issue is occurring (International Ocean Institute, 2018). 
Chapter 2 (Human Dimension Approaches to Marine Studies) and Chapter 3 (The 
Ocean – An Introduction to the Marine Environment) in this volume offer this foun￾dational knowledge, while subsequent chapters in Part II illustrate how that knowl￾edge is applied to key socio-environmental issues. Furthermore, research shows that 
while disciplinary knowledge can be valuable, other capacities such as the ability to 
work collaboratively, tolerance and reflexivity, trust, and the ability to balance power 
dynamics within groups are essential elements of interdisciplinary training and ca￾pacity building for the marine workforce of the future (Blythe & Cvitanovic, 2020).
Conclusion: A Field Evolved
This chapter shows how marine studies has evolved to integrate humanities, 
natural, and social science disciplinary approaches in the context of real-world 
problems. Through marine studies research, training, and capacity building we 
can prepare future interdisciplinary marine leaders, inspire new knowledge about 
people and the sea, generate innovative solutions for sustainable ocean futures, 
and build capacity for a new generation of marine-focused professionals. Environ￾mental careers are diverse, wide ranging, and rapidly growing! Chapters in Part 
III of this volume provide examples of how marine studies training can be used to 
address social justice, understand governance and decision-making, incorporate An Introduction to Marine Studies 11
and support Indigenous rights and knowledge, build marine-themed businesses, 
work with coastal communities, or focus on conservation. Importantly, marine 
studies lays the foundation for you to learn more about the links between people 
and the sea and invites students to embrace interdisciplinarity and align research 
and training with pressing environmental and societal needs.
Notes
 1 Rosenfield (1992) defines multidisciplinary and interdisciplinarity as the spaces in 
 2 Social construction is a sociological theory that suggests that knowledge of or about 
 3 Environmental determinism is a highly debated and critiqued geographical concept 
References
Andrews, T. (2012). What is social constructionism? Grounded Theory Review, 11(1). http://
groundedtheoryreview.com/2012/06/01/what-is-social-constructionism/
Barrows, H. (1923). Geography as human ecology. Annals of the Association of American 
Geographers, 13(1), 1–14. https://doi.org/10.1080/00045602309356882
Bavinck, M., & Verrips, J. (2020). Manifesto for the marine social sciences. Maritime 
Studies, 19(2), 121–123. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40152-020-00179-x
Bennett, N. J., Finkbeiner, E. M., Ban, N. C., Belhabib, D., Jupiter, S. D., Kittinger, J. N., 
Mangubhai, S., Scholtens, J., Gill, D., & Christie, P. (2020). The COVID-19 pandemic, 
small-scale fisheries and coastal fishing communities. Coastal Management, 48(4), 
336–347. https://doi.org/10.1080/08920753.2020.1766937
Berkes, F. (2015). Coasts for people: Interdisciplinary approaches to coastal and marine 
resource management. Routledge. https://doi.org/10.4324/9781315771038
Biermann, F. (2021). The future of ‘environmental’ policy in the Anthropocene: Time for a 
paradigm shift. Environmental Politics, 30(1–2), 61–80. https://doi.org/10.1080/09644016.
2020.1846958
Blythe, J., & Cvitanovic, C. (2020). Five organizational features that enable successful 
interdisciplinary marine research. Frontiers in Marine Science, 7. https://doi.org/10.3389/
fmars.2020.539111
Büscher, B., Fletcher, R., Brockington, D., Sandbrook, C., Adams, W. M., Campbell, 
L., Corson, C., Dressler, W., Duffy, R., Gray, N., Holmes, G., Kelly, A., Lunstrum, E., 
Ramutsindela, M., & Shanker, K. (2017). Half-earth or whole earth? Radical ideas 
for conservation, and their implications. Oryx, 51(3), 407–410. https://doi.org/10.1017/
S003060531600122812 A. K. Spalding
Campbell, L. M., & Gray, N. J. (2019). Area expansion versus effective and equitable 
 management in international marine protected areas goals and targets. Marine Policy, 
100, 192–199. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpol.2018.11.030
Development Initiatives. (2017). Global nutrition report 2017: Nourishing the SDGs. https://
globalnutritionreport.org/documents/822/Global_Nutrition_Report_2017.pdf
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. (2016). The state of world fisher￾ies and aquaculture 2016: Contributing to food security and nutrition for all. Retrieved July 
14, 2022 from https://www.fao.org/3/i5555e/i5555e.pdf
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. (2022). The state of world 
fisheries and aquaculture 2022. Towards blue transformation. Retrieved July 19, 2022 from 
https://www.fao.org/documents/card/en/c/cc0461en/
Fusco, L. M., Knott, C., Cisneros-Montemayor, A. M., Singh, G. G., & Spalding, A. K. 
(2022). Blueing business as usual in the ocean: Blue economies, oil, and climate justice. 
Political Geography, 98, 102670. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.polgeo.2022.102670
Grorud-Colvert, K., & Sponaugle, S. (2011). Variability in water temperature affects 
trait-mediated survival of a newly settled coral reef fish. Oecologia, 165(3), 675–686. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00442-010-1748-4
Hau‘Ofa, E. (2008). We are the ocean. In We Are the Ocean. University of Hawaii Press.
Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services. 
(2019). Summary for policymakers of the global assessment report on biodiversity and 
ecosystem services (summary for policy makers). IPBES Plenary at its seventh session 
(IPBES 7, Paris, 2019). Zenodo. https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3553579
International Ocean Institute. (2018). The future of ocean governance and capacity develop￾ment. Brill. https://doi.org/10.1163/9789004380271
Jambeck, J. R., Geyer, R., Wilcox, C., Siegler, T. R., Perryman, M., Andrady, A., Narayan, 
R., & Law, K. L. (2015). Plastic waste inputs from land into the ocean. Science, 347(6223), 
768–771. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1260352
Lakner, C., Yonzan, N., Mahler, D. G., Aguilar, R. A. C., & Wu, H. (2021). Updated esti￾mates of the impact of COVID-19 on global poverty: Looking back at 2020 and the outlook for 
2021. World Bank. Retrieved July 14, 2022 from https://blogs.worldbank.org/opendata/
updated-estimates-impact-covid-19-global-poverty-looking-back-2020-and-outlook-2021
Livingstone, D. N. (2011). Environmental determinism. In J. A. Agnew & D. N. Livingstone 
(Eds.), The Sage handbook of geographical knowledge (pp. 368–380). Sage Publications.
Lubchenco, J., & Gaines, S. D. (2019). A new narrative for the ocean. Science, 364(6444), 
911–911. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aay2241.
Mansfield, B. (2004). Neoliberalism in the oceans: “Rationalization,” property rights, and 
the commons question. Geoforum, 35(3), 313–326. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.geoforum.
2003.05.002
Nature. (2015). Why interdisciplinary research matters. Nature, 525, 305. https://doi.
org/10.1038/525305a
Pauly, D. (2008). Global fisheries: A brief review. Journal of Biological Research- Thessaloniki, 
9, 3–9.
Pinsky, M. L., Reygondeau, G., Caddell, R., Palacios-Abrantes, J., Spijkers, J., & Cheung, 
W. W. (2018). Preparing ocean governance for species on the move. Science, 360(6394), 
1189–1191. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aat2360
Rosenfield, P. L. (1992). The potential of transdisciplinary research for sustaining and 
extending linkages between the health and social sciences. Social Science & Medicine, 
35(11), 1343–1357. https://doi.org/10.1016/0277-9536(92)90038-RAn Introduction to Marine Studies 13
Sauer, C. O. (1956). The education of a geographer. Annals of the Association of American 
Geographers, 46(3), 287–299. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-8306.1956.tb01510.x
Singh, G. G., Harden-Davies, H., Allison, E. H., Cisneros-Montemayor, A. M., Swartz, W., 
Crosman, K. M., & Ota, Y. (2021). Will understanding the ocean lead to “the ocean we 
want”? Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 118(5). https://doi.org/10.1073/
pnas.2100205118
Spalding, A. K., & Biedenweg, K. (2017). Socializing the coast: Engaging the social science 
of tropical coastal research. Estuarine, Coastal and Shelf Science, 187, 1–8. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.ecss.2017.01.002
Spalding, A. K., & de Ycaza, R. (2020). Navigating shifting regimes of ocean governance: 
From UNCLOS to sustainable development goal 14. Environment and Society, 11(1), 
5–26. https://doi.org/10.3167/ares.2020.110102
Steward, J. H. (1955). Theory of culture change: The methodology of multilinear evolution. 
University of Illinois Press.
United Nations. (2015). Transforming our world: The 2030 agenda for sustainable devel￾opment (A/Res/70/1). https://sdgs.un.org/sites/default/files/publications/21252030%20
Agenda%20for%20Sustainable%20Development%20web.pdf
UN Women. (2020). COVID-19 and its economic toll on women: The story behind the 
numbers. Retrieved July 14, 2022 from https://www.unwomen.org/en/news/stories/2020/9/
feature-covid-19-economic-impacts-on-women
Virdin, J., Vegh, T., Jouffray, J. -B., Blasiak, R., Mason, S., Österblom, H., Vermeer, D., 
Wachtmeister, H., & Werner, N. (2021). The Ocean 100: Transnational corporations 
in the ocean economy. Science Advances, 7(3), eabc8041. https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.
abc8041
Wolf, E. (1972). Ownership and political ecology. Anthropological Quarterly, 45(3), 
201–205. https://doi.org/10.2307/3316532
World Bank. (n.d.). Poverty and inequality platform. Retrieved July 21, 2022, from https://
pip.worldbank.org/home
WorldFish. (2016). Why gender equality matters in fisheries and aquaculture. Retrieved 
July 14, 2022 from https://www.worldfishcenter.org/pages/why-gender-equality-matters￾fisheries-aquaculture/2 Human Dimension Approaches 
to Marine Studies
K. Biedenweg, S. Chisholm Hatfield, 
and A. K. Spalding
Introduction
People interact with the ocean in many ways. Some earn a living by spending 
weeks at sea to commercially fish for species like halibut or salmon; some like 
to walk along the shore to observe wildlife and contemplate the expansiveness 
of the earth; a few design complex machines to capture wave energy that will 
support human societies; and many live lives so entwined with the ebbs and flows 
of tidal and marine life cycles they may not distinguish between the marine and 
human system. Although our interactions with the ocean are similar to our inter￾actions with dry land, they are also unique. To date, the majority of humans are 
unable to live in or on the open ocean itself; yet we still affect it and are highly 
intrigued by it. In fact, the grand challenges introduced in Part II (i.e., fishing, 
aquaculture, pollution, climate change, energy production, and resource use in 
Areas Beyond National Jurisdiction [ABNJ]) are inherently human challenges, 
created by and affecting humans. The unique character of interactions between 
people and the marine environment suggests a need to better understand the 
social processes that influence, and are in turn influenced by, the marine system. 
The approaches we might use to study these social processes are broadly known 
as human dimensions.
The human dimension of marine studies refers to all the ways that we un￾derstand the past, present, and future of human interactions with the marine 
 environment. Social science disciplines, for example, contribute to this under￾standing using a scientific approach to identify patterns and trends in human–
ocean interactions. Disciplinary fields include psychology (the study of the 
human mind and behavior), sociology (the study of human society), and political 
science (the study of politics and power at national and international scales). The 
humanities, in contrast, use interpretive or non-scientific approaches to study and 
find meaning in human society and culture. Such disciplines include history, lit￾erature, philosophy, languages, religion, and the arts. Some fields, such as anthro￾pology, have traditionally drawn from the methods of both the social sciences 
and the humanities, hence why a broadly defined human dimension approach 
activates our knowledge of both. For example, we might combine our understand￾ing of historical uses of fish with our understanding of current market values for 
DOI: 10.4324/9781003058151-3Human Dimension Approaches to Marine Studies 15
fish to establish appropriate fishery policies. In this way, we think of the human 
dimensions of marine studies as scientific, analytical, interpretive, applied, and 
interdisciplinary.
We divide this chapter into three sections: social sciences, interdisciplinary 
social sciences, and humanities. We also provide insights to a field that is a crit￾ical component of marine studies but does not always fit well within Western 
scientific categories, which is Traditional Ecological Knowledge (TEK). We want 
to emphasize, however, that these sections are not critical distinctions, nor en￾tirely agreed upon by all human dimension specialists. Rather, the groupings are 
meant to help you wrap your head around the diversity of human dimension fields 
and how they inform our ways of knowing about oceans and society. Moreover, 
the disciplines we describe do not represent an exhaustive list of the fields that 
inform the human dimensions of marine studies. In fact, there are more than we 
can adequately explore here. Yet we hope this introduction showcases how these 
disciplines inform marine studies and sets you up to engage with the rest of this 
book more fully.
What Is Traditional Ecological Knowledge?
TEK is a sub-discipline of ecology and retains strong methodology compo￾nents used in anthropology, such as ethnography. TEK refers to the rich 
and longstanding knowledge held by traditional Indigenous communities 
about the ecosystems with which they have interacted, in some cases, for 
over hundreds of thousands of years. TEK is a Western term created to de￾scribe Native Indigenous Science and practices relating to environmental 
behaviors, and thus each Tribe has their own definition based on cultural 
adherences and Knowledge. TEK differs from other knowledges, like Farm￾ers or Fishermen’s Ecological Knowledge, in that it is usually at least four 
generations’ worth of information orally passed down and applied to nat￾ural resource issues; indeed, it can comprise up to 12 or more generations’ 
worth of Indigenous Knowledge. It is often associated with anthropology, 
but the study itself achieved recognition during the 1970s when ecologists 
expanded on anthropological methods of examining the environmental 
systems and Indigenous Science(s) of Native American and First Nations 
peoples. TEK is typically documented through stories, imagery, songs, and 
beliefs that are tied to cultural tenets, which are linked to a Tribe’s direct 
relationship with natural resources. It is unlike Western science, which 
generally refers only to knowledge that is written, vetted collectively, and 
is holistic rather than based in taxonomic categorization. That said, TEK 
is a critical and important human dimension of marine studies because of 
its expansive history, the ethnographic information it provides, and the 16 K. Biedenweg et al.
detailed descriptions of the interactions between humans and the environ￾ment. For example, Eastern African spiritual and religious practices and 
social taboos inform how people manage natural resources such as fisheries 
(Mathooko, 2005). Native fishermen have used their empirical knowledge, 
developed over millennia (Erlandson et al., 2009; Nelson, 2008), of tidal cy￾cles, microclimates, and biological phenomena to inform when they would 
remove their gear from spawning grounds to ensure reproduction and, thus, 
long-term subsistence opportunities (Hoagland, 2017; Reynolds et al., 2013).
The Basic Social Sciences
Here, we dive into some of the social sciences that you may already be familiar 
with and explain how they can directly help us understand the interactions be￾tween humans and the marine system (see Table 2.1). Specifically, we showcase 
how social science disciplines could help us better understand and potentially 
address three of the six grand challenges highlighted in Part II of this book: fish￾eries, renewable energy, and pollution.
For instance, sociology, the study of how human societies are structured, develop, 
and function, includes many relevant subfields covered in this book, including 
ethnic studies, environmental justice, and community development. The breadth 
of theory in these fields can help us understand why it is that primarily minority 
groups throughout United States work in fishery processing, how the placement of 
a tidal energy turbine may disproportionately impact households in one commu￾nity over another, and how failing infrastructure resulting from systemic neglect 
of stormwater and sewage systems in poor communities leads to ocean pollution 
that is, in turn, blamed on those disadvantaged communities. While marine 
issues are historically understudied from a sociological perspective, Longo and 
Clark (2016) make a compelling argument about the important role of marine 
sociology as an emerging area of study. For example, sociologists developed the 
concept of social metabolism to explore how society’s drive to commodify fisheries 
resources ultimately creates a divide (or metabolic rift) between people and the 
resources upon which they depend (Clausen and Clark, 2005; Longo et al., 2015).
Anthropology is the study of human societies and their cultures. Anthropology 
helps us understand, for instance, cultural beliefs that influence when and what 
species can be fished, historical and culturally relevant sources of energy that 
could spur innovation in the much-needed transition to renewable energy, and 
the cultural drivers or responses to plastic waste and other forms of pollution. Cul￾tural and social anthropologists usually spend extensive time in one community 
to conduct their research through a process called ethnography, whereas archae￾ologists (a subfield of anthropology) often spend their time in the field looking for 
relics and artifacts of prior human societies. A 1981 review of the anthropology 
of fishing described how anthropologists can use their studies to explore fisher￾ies, life on ships, and marine archaeology (Acheson, 1981). While many marine Human Dimension Approaches to Marine Studies 17
archaeologists focus on shipwrecks to understand humans’ historical experiences 
with the oceans, others have found human-made monuments they believe date 
back thousands of years to a time when the oceans were lower than today.
Psychology, the study of the human mind and behavior, is the foundation for 
understanding how people learn and make decisions. In marine studies, psy￾chology can help us understand key aspects of ocean literacy (what people know 
about the ocean and their influence on it) (National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
 Administration, 2020) and why people engage in ocean stewardship (specific be￾haviors intended to care for the ocean) (United National Global Compact, 2020). 
Psychology is one of the fields that can help us understand reasons why artisanal 
fishers choose certain gear types for fishing (e.g., beach seines vs. hook and line), 
public attitudes toward renewable energy, and the reasons why people do or do not 
use plastic straws that are known to pollute waterways. A recent article summariz￾ing psychological research on plastic pollution, for example, described that visual 
imagery triggers emotions that help people form memories and motivate behavio￾ral change (Pahl et al., 2017). The authors of the study suggest that graphic images 
on plastic products, such as those found on cigarette packages, could substantially 
reduce the purchase and use of plastics that result in ocean pollution.
Political science is the theory and practice of government and politics, includ￾ing the distribution of power and application of processes to make decisions. 
While human actions may negatively impact the marine environment, in the 
 Anthropocene – a proposed geological epoch in which human activity is under￾stood to be the dominant driver of environmental change (Lewis and Maslin, 
2015) – we are also tasked with deciding how it will be managed. The field of po￾litical science can help us understand how international laws, such as the United 
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS), interact with national 
laws and local policies to determine who has rights to use, access, and distribute 
marine resources or spaces. It also helps clarify how cross-boundary issues, such 
as migratory living marine resources (e.g., tuna), are regulated and managed in￾dividually by nations or collaboratively across nations and regions; how conflicts 
over the use of and access to resources and spaces in the ocean are resolved; and 
how governance regimes are shaped over time. For instance, using a global envi￾ronmental politics approach, Spalding and deYcaza (2020) suggest that ocean gov￾ernance has evolved from a process that sought to establish jurisdictional zones 
on the water, to a critical element of the global sustainable development agenda. 
In other words, political science shows us where and how people, the ocean, and 
its resources are situated within global environmental politics.
Possibly the most commonly recognized social science is economics. This dis￾cipline focuses on studying the production and distribution of limited goods and 
services. In the marine space, it can help us understand the market forces that 
influence whether commercial fishing fleets target halibut versus tuna, whether 
marine energy is a financially viable alternative to energy derived from oil and 
gas, and the costs of pollution clean-up versus pollution prevention. For example, 
economists might study how a growing marine renewable energy sector will result 
in job creation, job displacement, and the creation of new supply chains that cap￾ture expenditures (Kerr et al., 2014).18 K. Biedenweg et al.
e niran ms iegnellahd cnarf gg onidnatsrednr uuo oe ttubirtnoo cs tserddn aas cnoisnemin damuf hs odlee fiomt sahs tnoitseumple q
sied
ax
u
E
ts
 1.e 2lbaT
seierhisF ygrne EelbawneeR noiutlolP
ygoolicoS n e igagns Epu
?
or
ng
l G
isse
aic
cor
o
 P
t S
h
a
si
h
F
W d etcamp
?en
t I
irb
s
u
o
l T
e M
ad
l B
i
l
f a T
s Wi
t o
ei
n
tin
e m
u
e
m
ca
om
le P
t C
h
a
y t
h
b
W
?
s 
yl
m
tn
et
er
s yr S
effi
eta
s D e
w
it
m
in
r ot
u m
g Sn
om
ilia
e C
o F
cne
w D
ufln
o
I
H
ygoloporthAn e cn
?
eu
de
fl
h
n
s
s Ifil
at Is Fi
eel B
h
aru
d Wn
tlu
n a
t C
eh
ah
W
W t naveley Rllarutlul, Ca
?
ci
y
r
g
o
re
tsie H
n f E
r
s o
et W
ecru
a
o
h
S
W t c
c 
a
i
mp
ten
n I
eig
o
p
itul
d E
l
n
on P
ic at
a
e
e
n
cs O
e
e
n G
?nio
o
a
ut
w D
m
lo
u
v
oH
H
E
ygolohycsP
s eni
s 
e
reh
h S
s
c
i
a
?
l F
e
e
an
e B
n
s
a
d Li
si
n
tr
o U
k a
o A
e t
o
s
o
y D
ooh
. H
C
s
h
v
W e lbawenet Ruobs Aedutitic Atlbue Pr
y?
t A
gre
a
n
h
E
W e saercel Dls Wi
?s
e
w
i
a
g
r
e
t
tar
c Si
th S
tsal
ca
f P
ertu
e o
t O
e Us
a
h
h
t
W
ecneicl SaciitloP s thige Rhh tsilbats
?
s E
seri
w
e
a
h
t L
is F
a
o
h
t
W t n
?
d 
r
e
e
m
n
h
po
, a
t
l
s
ev
ei
h O
g
c
en D
o
a
lon
h E
g i
h
ti
c
n
e
i
t w
g
c
a
y T
a
g
g
r
n
r
e
e E
e
t
n
n
r
y I
s A
le Eb
eh
ro
a
t
we
o T
ct A
ne
w D
a
f R
o
h
o
H
W e cneufl
f 
n
n o
s I
o
e
i
u
ta
sy Is
igti
rad
d M
n
nn a
?
u
n
oB
io
-
oi
s
t
ut
so
n
ll
o Cr
e
o
ver
 P
n
w D
e P
aec
oH
ht
O
scinomocE e cneuflns Iecrot F
?
e
ch
k
t
ra
a C
t M
an
a
u
h
T
W y gr
?
e
y
n
g
e E
ren
lba
le E
w
b
e
a
n
w
e
e
f R
ne
t o
R￾s
n
o
o
e C
o N
h
e t
s t
r
e
a
o
omp
w D oH
C
r 
?
e
n
h
oi
ig
tn
p H
eve
U
r
-n
n P
a
o
e
i
ln C
tullo
oit
f P
ull
t o
o
s
f P
o
t o
e C
s
h
o
n t
e C
ah
h
T
Is t
yhpagroeG ?shi Fsreshi Fo DreehW e ta
t, 
l 
i
c
a
r
e
c
p
i
j
g
o
or
r
o
y P
l
p
o
p
c
t A
gre
s
d E
oe M
n
n
le E
n aa
b
h
a
m
e t
w
u
d B
en
luo
r a Re
g Hnir
e W
e
?
d
s
o
is
or
r
e f
n
t
e
ti
o
ac
h
S
C
F
W
e reh
r
e T
n 
e 
a m
s A
r
u
e
d A
it
n
e H
, a
i
s
n
e
um
n
h
oi
o T
om
tull
s t
n C
o
n
y P
re
d b
t
a
t
m
a
u
l P
?
h H
e
s
t
t
c
a
c
a
i
a
ci
mp
ta
p
h
I
pS
mI
W
ygoolc ElacitiolP
s 
r e
ci
d
m
?
i
s
s
a
n
n
e 
n
i
o
a
s C
h
y
h
d t
r D
o 
w
n
e
t C
t D
a
s a
w
e
l L
k
o
r
e
f P
a
n
a
r
e
u
t
n
t
x
o
l
i
y M
t E
u
e o
l C
r
ta
c
e
n
h
a
n
e
s
h
r
a
u
o W
co
n
L
I
n Fi
et
fl
nI
i
T e cne
y 
u
g
fl
re
n 
n
n
i
s I
a
r
me
o
e El
t
b
c
a
a
s R
w
l F
e
e
ci
a
n
o
noit
e f R
e Vs
a
t o
d N
oh
ne
n
mp
d W
l a
o
n
a
l
b
e
, a
d?
o
v
s
r
e
t
t Gl
a
e D
c
e
ej
h
a
o
n
h
r
h
t
P
U
W y l
e 
g 
t
n
n
n
i
i
a
r
p
a
n
e M
o
idom
l eve
cn
er
e
d D
om P
ufl
n
n
al
r
s I
l Is
m f
n
l
o
a
i
si
ta
m
r
)?
u
d N
n S
S
o
D
s T
e
n i
IS
e
p
o
o
i
 (
o
l
t
s
w D
e
u
e
v
l
t
e
l
a
o
D
t
oH
P
S
htale HclibuP t 
?
ne
e 
m
t
r
e
x
h
e E
e 
o A
h
g T
h
h
n
o t
t t
e W
ita
c
d t
eff
s o
e
n E
t
y A
h
ul
t o
l
e
f T
n
oh P
h
h o
e
t T
dn
t
s
l
e
i
a
a
e F
h
e
ep
rA
T
H
D
h tla
?
e
e
ic H
nirb
l
u
bu
d T
l P
n
aie
w Wi
tntoe Ph
f a Ne
e t
s o
r
t
t A
ca
ah
mpI
W o hWs 
r 
e
e
it
h
i num
ig h H
om
ti
C
s w
t 
a
r
e
o
r
ppu
e An
S
i
e 
r
W
a
n a
n M
?nio
C
e i
utl
w 
v
l
i
o
oH
L
P
nt me
s
p
ie
o
d
le
tu
veD
S
e tubirt
n 
n
y 
a
o
t
m
s C
i n
u
u
eir
m
d H
?t
e
n
n
h
om
si
g a
l C
em
n F
n
a
i
p
c
e
o
a
b
w C
oo L
lle
vel
o
t
W
eD
H
e 
n 
s 
l b
u
a
co
w
ion i
e
t
s F
n
a
?s
e
e
e
uc
e R
i
i
d
t
c
in
ne
ni
e E
u
g
r
s
l A
a
a
m
erc
an
n M
n
om
oi
l C
t
s ot
o I
a
a
n
y t
ts
n
e
a
r
a
o
et
mt
n
sev
s a W
le C
t I
n
y a
b
h
a
ig
r I
r
w M
g
e
i e
r
n
e
l
h
n
u
oH
T
E
V
t 
d 
s
etubirtsi
ho Is Mo
n Do
d W
i
n
tul
e a
l
b
o
? 
e P
o
t
l
y I
ni
e G
r
h
a
d b
w Is M
s t
et
s
c
o
a
rc
A
mp
o
I
HHuman Dimension Approaches to Marine Studies 19
Interdisciplinary Social Sciences
While most universities have departments that match the descriptions of the so￾cial science fields listed in the previous section, the reality is that many social 
scientists use theories and methods from several disciplines. This happens to such 
an extent that we can identify consistent interdisciplinary social sciences. For ex￾ample, when economic theories are integrated with ideas from business, the knowl￾edge can inform our understanding of marine entrepreneurship. This, in turn, is 
informed by other interdisciplinary fields like business administration which in￾cludes accounting, marketing, finance, human resource management, and many 
other concentrations that apply the knowledge of psychology (human behavior), 
sociology (institutions and human interactions), and economics (distribution and 
production of goods and services) to promote healthy marine-focused businesses 
associated with activities such as fisheries, renewable energy, or pollution control. 
Examples of marine entrepreneurship can include swim and clothing companies 
that use post-recycled materials and focus on ocean-friendly themes and designs, 
reef-safe sunscreen businesses, and local and sustainable seafood restaurants. 
While not all ocean-related businesses will include a sustainability component 
(indeed, many large marine-based enterprises are extractive and destructive in 
nature), several have emerged from an interest in and commitment to ocean con￾servation and often draw from interdisciplinary social science knowledge areas by 
supporting local employment opportunities and other benefits to the local envi￾ronment and communities.
Another common interdisciplinary field is geography, the study of how peo￾ple relate to place and space. Because people, place, and space are all affected 
by politics, the economy, culture, climate, and other environmental variables, it 
is inherently interdisciplinary. Indeed, different branches or subfields within ge￾ography include physical, environmental, and human foci. Importantly, the way 
geographers explore these multiple dimensions represents a unique contribution 
to the understanding of people and the sea. Geographers, for instance, explore 
fishing activity in the context of Marine Spatial Planning, a process that visu￾alizes the diversity of ocean uses, often using maps developed with ocean users, 
within a policy and governance framework for a given geographic space (Karnad 
and St. Martin, 2020). Much as a city planner might refer to land-use maps to 
establish zoning laws, marine spatial planning maps and supporting documents 
are frequently used to inform the establishment of new marine protected areas or 
other ocean use classifications.
Another example is a field that emerged from elements of anthropology and 
geography, called political ecology, that uses critical interdisciplinary methods to 
explore the political, economic, and social factors associated with environmen￾tal issues. Political ecologists acknowledge that interactions between people and 
the marine environment are driven by power dynamics within human and po￾litical systems, which can be based on socio-demographic categories like race, 
ethnicity, and socio-economic status. They look at the interactions between 
international, national, communal, and family-level institutions to understand 20 K. Biedenweg et al.
how human–nature relationships became what they are. In the context of marine 
studies, political ecologists can explore the extent to which local fisheries markets 
are impacted simultaneously by cultural beliefs and international trade regula￾tions, how global and national factors influence the development of renewable 
energy projects, and how local and international tourism and migration influence 
localized marine pollution. Susan Stonich’s research in the Honduran Bay Islands 
(1999), for example, explored how increasing tourism and immigration impacted 
the Bay Islands of Honduras. She found that international tourism not only was 
increasing median household income for Bay Islanders but also increased hous￾ing costs. Moreover, the housing development that was stimulated by foreigners 
retiring to the islands negatively impacted the health of barrier reefs surrounding 
the islands due to the lack of local regulations that would require reef-friendly 
construction practices.
Public health is both an interdisciplinary social science, from a research per￾spective, and an application of various social sciences to real-world human health 
scenarios, such as the global COVID-19 pandemic. Scientists who inform public 
health might study the extent to which fisheries contribute to the daily caloric 
intake of social groups, how adoption of marine renewable energy might improve 
air quality through a reduction of CO2 emissions, and how specific types of pollu￾tion might impact our ability to eat healthy seafood. For instance, a consortium 
of global scientists found that fish contribute key micronutrients, such as calcium, 
iron, zinc, and vitamin A, in countries that are most at risk for human malnutri￾tion due to lacking these nutrients (Hicks et al., 2019). And in Washington State 
in the USA, public health officials realized that the allowed level of industrial 
pollution to the Puget Sound was disproportionately exposing communities with 
diets high in fish (mostly Native Americans) to carcinogenic compounds (Polissar 
et al., 2012). The latter study resulted in a reconsideration for how much pollution 
should be allowed to enter public waterways and an adjustment of a public health 
measure called the fish consumption rate.
Finally, development studies is another interdisciplinary field that integrates 
political, sociological, economic, and geographic perspectives, among others, to 
better understand economic and social development in the global south. The 
Wellbeing in Developing Countries (WeD) research program based in the UK, for 
example, has identified that a better framework for evaluating the success of fish￾eries in developing countries would consider the fishers’ material wellbeing (the 
gear, natural environment, and food that the person can count on), their rela￾tional wellbeing (how they interact with government institutions, cultural norms, 
and family), and their subjective wellbeing (how they think they are doing) (Coul￾thard, 2013). This three-dimensional measure of fishery success represents a more 
holistic understanding of the human dimensions of fisheries compared to singular 
measures often grounded in exclusively capitalist values, such as income from a 
day’s labor or the number of fish caught. Similarly, development studies can help 
us understand the holistic impacts of new marine renewable energy infrastructure 
on different communities in the developing world and on the uneven distribution 
of marine pollution across the globe.Human Dimension Approaches to Marine Studies 21
The Humanities
Most people know the sea as much through the humanities as through science. 
The humanities study narratives and representations of ideas and events, based on 
histories, philosophies, and use of language to understand the human experience. 
We like to think of the humanities as approaches to the creation of meaning of 
the human experience. History, for example, interprets events through time that 
have shaped our current context. Depending on where you live, history lessons 
may place more focus on events associated with land, but marine studies also have 
fascinating histories that give context to the world we find ourselves in today. We 
read histories of ocean exploration, science, and naval warfare. Indeed, historians 
explore not only the sea’s influence on our culture development but also cultural 
influences on how we have come to understand the ocean itself.
Within the humanities, the visual and performing arts are important lenses for 
the study of marine issues. Imagine your favorite ocean-related painting, sculp￾ture, play, or movie. What ideas about the marine environment did it instill in 
you? How did it make you feel? Visual and performing arts help us create meaning 
and contemplate the world around us, often in very new ways. Finding Nemo, The 
Meg, and 20,000 Leagues Under the Sea are completely different genres of movies 
(look them up if you’re not familiar!), but each leaves us with both emotional and 
cognitive reactions to the ocean. As Steinberg (2001) reminds us in his book, The 
Social Construction of the Ocean, our knowledge and understanding of the oceans 
is deeply tied to the human experience.
Lastly, philosophy and religion explore morality and norms in society, affecting 
how we may interact with or understand the marine environment. From Indig￾enous spirituality guided by reciprocity with the natural world, to the Quran 
and the Bible, most major world philosophies speak to human–ocean interac￾tions and provide norms to guide our behaviors. Indeed, we see how documents 
like the Pope’s 2015 Encyclical (Francis, 2015) have influenced Catholic ideals 
of human responsibilities toward the environment, particularly as they relate to 
climate change. Lynn White’s renowned 1967 essay, “The Historical Roots of our 
Ecological Crisis”, published in the journal Science, also appeals to the “moral 
imperative” as an alternative to science and technology in addressing pressing 
environmental issues.
Human Dimension Methods and Products
The differences within and between the social sciences and humanities are of￾ten based on the ways that information is collected, analyzed, and shared. For 
instance, some social scientists use interviews with key informants to collect data 
on the causes of pollution. These interviews will result in written notes or audio 
recordings that are then qualitatively analyzed for themes. These themes are usu￾ally shared in longer written documents. Other social scientists, however, might 
use quantitative assessments, such as economic analyses of market values, to cal￾culate the costs of renewable energy. These quantitative analyses are more likely 22 K. Biedenweg et al.
to be displayed in tables and graphs populated by numbers and dollar figures. 
Policy analyses may collect data from various texts and also analyze them for 
important themes and contributions that might be summarized in a written doc￾ument meant for publication. Visual arts result in physical objects made from any 
number of materials. And the performing arts may not have any tangible product 
at all; instead, it might leave a memory you associate with watching a wonderful 
musical. These different products may sometimes make it difficult to integrate 
the human dimensions with the ecological dimensions of the ocean, but they are 
all equally important in understanding marine studies. You might say that the 
human dimensions are as complex as the humans we are trying to understand.
Putting Them All Together
Although we described several human dimension fields as though they were dis￾tinct, the reality is that they overlap substantially. As discussed in Chapter 1, the 
field of marine studies is inherently interdisciplinary and the human dimensions, 
as described in this chapter, represent the various social disciplines within it. 
We would not think about ocean literacy on its own, generally. We would think 
about how ocean literacy should inform policy development to improve renewable 
energy, and how we can use art to amplify existing knowledge from history and 
marine ecology to enhance ocean literacy. It then becomes obvious that there 
are many ways to contribute to the marine problems of our time through a degree 
related to the human dimensions of marine studies. Each social science or hu￾manities field provides a specific contribution to our understanding of humans 
and oceans. And the combination of all these fields provides a broader, more 
holistic picture of marine studies. The rest of the book will dive deeper into these 
current issues and how the human dimension approach can be applied to build 
our knowledge and develop future marine-related careers.
References
Acheson, J. M. (1981). Anthropology of fishing. Annual Review of Anthropology, 275–316. 
https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.an.10.100181.001423
Clausen, R., & Clark, B. (2005). The metabolic rift and marine ecology: An analysis 
of the ocean crisis within capitalist production. Organization & Environment, 18(4),
422–444. https://doi.org/10.1177/1086026605281187
Coulthard, S. (2013). What does the debate around social wellbeing have to offer sustain￾able fisheries? Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability, 4(3), 358–363. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.cosust.2012.06.001
Erlandson, J. M., Rick, T. C., & Braje, T. J. (2009). Fishing up the food web? 12,000 years of 
maritime subsistence and adaptive adjustments on California’s channel islands. Pacific 
Science, 63(4), 711–724. https://doi.org/10.2984/049.063.0411
Francis, P. (2015). Laudato Si’: On Care for Our Common Home [Encyclical].
Hicks, C. C., Cohen, P. J., Graham, N. A. J., Nash, K. L., Allison, E. H., D’Lima, C., Mills, 
D. J., Roscher, M., Thilsted, S. H., Thorne-Lyman, A. L., & MacNeil, M. A. (2019). Human Dimension Approaches to Marine Studies 23
Harnessing global fisheries to tackle micronutrient deficiencies. Nature, 574, 95–98. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-019-1592-6
Hoagland, S. J. (2017). Integrating traditional ecological knowledge with western sci￾ence for optimal natural resource management. IK: Other Ways of Knowing, 3(1), 1–15. 
https://doi.org/10.18113/P8ik359744
Karnad, D., & St. Martin, K. (2020). Assembling marine spatial planning in the global 
south: International agencies and the fate of fishing communities in India. Maritime 
Studies, 19(3), 375–387. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40152-020-00164-4
Kerra, L. W., Colton, J., Conway, F., Hulle, A., Johnson, K., Jude, S., Kannen, A., Mac￾Dougall, S., McLachlan, C., Potts, T., & Vergunst, J. (2013). Establishing an agenda for 
social studies research in marine renewable energy. Energy Policy, 67, 694–702. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2013.11.063
Lewis, S. L., & Maslin, M. A. (2015). Defining the anthropocene. Nature, 519(7542), 
171–180. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature14258
Longo, S. B., & Clark, B. (2016). An ocean of troubles: Advancing marine sociology. Social 
Problems, 63(4), 463–479. https://doi.org10.1093/SOCPRO/SPW023
Longo, S. B., Clausen, R., & Clark, B. (2015). The tragedy of the commodity: Oceans, fisher￾ies, and aquaculture. Rutgers University Press.
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. (2020). Ocean literacy: The 
essential principles and fundamental concepts of ocean sciences for learners of all ages. 
https://oceanliteracy.unesco.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/09/OceanLiteracyGuide_
V3_2020-8x11-1.pdf
Mathooko, J. M. (2005). Application of traditional ecological knowledge in the 
management and sustainability of fisheries in East Africa: a long-neglected strategy? 
Hydrobiologia, 537, 1–6. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10750-004-2788-8
Nelson, M. K. (Ed.). (2008). Original instructions: Indigenous teachings for a sustainable 
future. Simon and Schuster.
Pahl, S., Wyles, K. J., & Thompson, R. C. (2017). Channeling passion for the ocean 
towards plastic pollution. Nature Human Behaviour, 1, 697–699. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41562-017-0204-4
Polissar, N. L., Neradilek, M., Aravkin, A. Y., Danaher, P., & Kalat, J. (2012). Statistical 
analysis of national and Washington State fish consumption data. Prep. Wash. State. 
Dep. Ecol.
Reynolds, N. D., & Romano, M. D. (2013). Traditional ecological knowledge: 
Reconstructing historical run timing and spawning distribution of Eulachon through 
tribal oral history. Journal of Northwest Anthropology, 47(1), 47–70.
Spalding, A. K., & de Ycaza, R. (2020). Navigating shifting regimes of ocean governance: 
From UNCLOS to sustainable development goal 14. Environment and Society,  11(1), 
5–26. https://doi.org/10.3167/ares.2020.110102
Steinberg, P. E. (2001). The social construction of the ocean (Vol. 78). Cambridge University 
Press.
Stonich, S. (1999). The other side of paradise: Tourism, conservation, and development in the 
Bay Islands. Cognizant LLC.3 The Ocean
An Introduction to the Marine 
Environment
K. Grorud-Colvert and M. Ward
Introduction
Seen from space, the earth is a blue planet. The ocean covers 71% of the plan￾et’s surface (Reid, 2016), making the earth unique throughout our solar system. 
The ocean forms the foundation for life on our planet and sustains life in many 
ways. Traditionally, the earth was considered to have multiple “oceans”. Here, 
we explore the fact that it can be considered a single global ocean, with effec￾tively no lines or barriers subdividing it. The ocean’s five basins – the Arctic, 
Pacific, Indian, Southern, and Atlantic Basins – are biologically, chemically, 
physically, and politically connected (Laffoley et al., 2020). This global ocean 
drives the earth’s essential cycles, and its underlying chemistry, biology, and 
physics produce the patterns in marine resources upon which human commu￾nities have come to rely, linking together places, species, and peoples across the 
world.
The ocean sustains humanity by providing resources, supporting human 
health and livelihoods, and underpinning cultural identity through a unique set 
of environmental processes that we describe in this chapter. We also acknowl￾edge the dual reality that certain groups and policies have had disproportionate 
impacts on the ocean through exploitation, overuse, and other unsustainable 
practices. We look toward policy, management, and local-to-global leadership 
to foster ocean-based solutions, with the goal of stopping, decreasing, and even 
reversing these impacts and inequities through creative approaches. Although 
humans serve as drivers of change, receivers of that change, and mediators 
of solutions, in this chapter we center the ocean itself and its processes. This 
ocean-based understanding, which you will continue to cover in other, more 
specialized courses, is the foundation for the particularities of the human di￾mensions of the marine environment. Inquiry into this holistic system is what 
we call marine studies.
This chapter focuses on the marine environment and is by no means 
comprehensive – the ocean is vast. Volumes have been written on each of the 
topics in this chapter. This summary gives a 3,000-foot overview of the marine 
environment, enabling readers to learn more about ocean systems and humanity’s 
interactions with them.
DOI: 10.4324/9781003058151-4The Ocean: An Introduction to the Marine Environment 25
The Ocean Drives Essential Earth System Cycles
The ocean works on a planetary level to make life on earth possible. For 
 example, life requires water, and the oceans contain 97% of the water on earth 
(Baumgartner et al., 1975). Life also requires oxygen, and the microscopic plants 
(“phytoplankton”) that teem through the upper layers of the ocean are photo￾synthetic powerhouses, producing over half of the earth’s atmospheric oxygen 
 (Sekerci & Petrovskii, 2015). Oxygen produced by these phytoplankton diffuses 
from the ocean water across the sea surface and into the atmosphere, where it is 
cycled into the total oxygen budget of the planet (Laffoley et al., 2020).
Temperature Regulation
Earth’s proximity to the sun makes life as we know it possible. However, without 
the ocean, earth would be much hotter and much less hospitable. Solar radiation 
does not reach the planet evenly given its axial tilt and seasonal cycles, requiring 
heat transport in order to support life. Without this heat transport, the poles 
would be unbearably cold while the equator unbearably hot. Water has a higher 
capacity to hold heat than air does – the ocean can absorb as much as 97% of 
the solar radiation that hits the earth’s surface (Bigg et al., 2003). As a result, 
the ocean provides the essential service of transporting and redistributing heat 
around the globe, driving and sustaining a myriad of earth system cycles including 
both weather (short-term changes in atmospheric conditions) and climate (long￾term weather patterns in a region measured over years and decades).
Ocean Circulation
The ocean stores and moves heat via a conveyor-belt-like system called thermo￾haline circulation, which is driven by the fact that cold, salty water is denser 
than warm freshwater. The poles receive less direct sunlight due to the round 
shape of our planet, leading to colder temperatures, which in turn produce colder 
water. The cold, dense water then sinks, and can take upwards of 1,000 years to 
journey along the ocean basins to the tropics and back to the poles on this deep 
ocean conveyor belt. As the water moves toward the tropics, it slowly warms and 
becomes less dense. As a result, when paired with the right physical conditions, 
these deep waters rise to the surface, bringing with them nutrients that were pre￾viously inaccessible to organisms living in the shallow, light-penetrating “photic 
zone”. These nutrients fuel rich communities of marine life across the globe.
Water Cycling
The ocean’s exchange of heat, gasses, and water with the atmosphere plays a key 
role in the water or hydrologic cycle (Bigg et al., 2003). Heating of surface waters 
along the equator leads to greater evaporation, and subsequently greater humidity, 
precipitation, and formation of storms. These storms are then carried away from 26 K. Grorud-Colvert and M. Ward
the equator and around the globe by an intricate system of winds. As water evap￾orates from the ocean, it is cycled such that 78% of all rain on the earth falls on 
the ocean (Baumgartner et al., 1975). The evaporated water also falls as rain on 
land and returns to the ocean via rivers, groundwater flow, and melting ice sheets 
and glaciers (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [IPCC], 2019).
Nutrient Cycling
In addition to transporting heat, the ocean transports and cycles essential nu￾trients. Nutrients can enter the ocean from the land or through deposition from 
the atmosphere. The nutrients – such as nitrogen, phosphorus, silica, and iron 
– ultimately sink deep into the water, where eventually they may be brought 
to the surface by deep water upwelling. Coastal upwelling occurs when winds 
blow nearly parallel to a coastline, and the force of the wind, combined with 
the earth’s rotational force (called the Coriolis effect), pushes surface waters 
offshore and deeper, colder, nutrient-rich waters are pulled up to replace them 
(see Figure 3.1). This regular pulse of nutrient-rich water into coastal zones cre￾ates highly productive ecosystems. It allows marine plants (including phyto￾plankton) to use these fresh nutrients for photosynthesis and forms the basis for 
marine food webs.
Figure 3.1 Coastal upwelling.The Ocean: An Introduction to the Marine Environment 27
Carbon Cycling
The process of photosynthesis by marine plants (including phytoplankton) also 
absorbs CO2. Over 50% of carbon fixation on our planet is accomplished by 
marine plants (Falkowski & Raven, 2013). This process sequesters carbon –
 another benefit the ocean provides as part of the global carbon cycle (see 
Figure 3.2). The ocean is a biological pump that removes CO2 from the atmos￾phere and transfers and stores carbon during this process. When marine plants 
die, or are eaten by marine animals that die, they sink toward the ocean floor. 
This sinking brings organic carbon and nutrients from the surface ocean into 
deeper, aphotic zones, where bacteria, zooplankton, and other heterotrophic 
organisms can consume them. In addition to supporting life in the deep ocean, 
a fraction of this sinking, carbon-based material is also deposited in the sed￾iments of coastal and deep seas. This carbon becomes buried in ocean sedi￾ments, removing carbon from the atmosphere on geological timescales, and 
providing an invaluable service to our climate. However, this process is being 
disrupted by excess levels of atmospheric carbon as the ocean removes at least 
1 megaton of human-made CO2 from the atmosphere every hour (Sabine et al., 
2004) and has absorbed an estimated one-third of the CO2 emitted since the 
Industrial Revolution (Gattuso et al., 2015; IPCC, 2019). It is the largest store 
of carbon on earth.
Figure 3.2 Ocean carbon cycle.28 K. Grorud-Colvert and M. Ward
The Ocean Supports a Diversity of Marine Life
Life in the ocean is incredibly diverse. Scientists estimate there are about 2.2 
million multi-celled species (eukaryotes) that live in the ocean, everything from 
snails to seagrass to squid to corals to whales. Yet about 91% of those species 
are still undiscovered by science (Mora et al., 2011). Nonetheless, the species we 
have discovered exhibit a range of adaptations that make them well-suited to 
life underwater in the ocean habitats they occupy. For example, mobile organ￾isms, such as finfish and marine mammals, have evolved advanced body types 
and prey detection capabilities such as echolocation which allow them to thrive 
across wide expanses of ocean. Conversely, stationary (sessile) organisms have 
evolved to take advantage of food delivered by passing currents through filtration 
or tentacle-like appendages. A vast diversity of organisms and survival strategies 
exist in the ocean’s fluid environment, and a growing number of scientific dis￾coveries provide information about these species. Much less is known about the 
diversity of single-celled organisms (prokaryotes), such as bacteria and viruses, 
which make up the majority of life in the ocean by weight (Louca et al., 2019). 
Estimates of the number of microbial species in the ocean vary widely because it 
is mind-boggling to quantify; the number of species could range between 1 × 106
and 1 × 1027 (Louca et al., 2019; Mora et al., 2011).
Because the ocean is fluid and subsequently more open to movement by or￾ganisms, many populations of marine species have very large distributions and 
connect many different regions and ecosystems with their movements. Species 
contribute to ocean connectivity in many ways. Some may be widespread because 
they spend their entire life as plankton, carried by ocean currents. Others may 
spend their later life on the ocean floor but as plankton are transported away 
from their parents by ocean currents while they are very young. They may be 
widely distributed because they can swim great distances as adults. Regardless, 
populations of marine species are much more broadly distributed than terrestrial 
species as a whole (Gagné et al., 2020). This has many consequences, for exam￾ple, it presents a challenge when managing fisheries that do not respect political 
boundaries and move in and out of country’s waters, each with their own set 
of national rules and regulations for catch. One country’s fishery may hinge on 
another country’s adequate fishery management because the stock comes from 
upstream waters that are not their own.
The Ocean Bears the Brunt of Human Activities
For generations, humanity has relied on what seemed to be the ocean´s unlimited 
bounty. The idea that the ocean is “too big to fail” – resources are unlimited and 
resilient – seemingly persists to this day as more intense and unsustainable uses of 
the ocean continue to increase (Lubchenco & Gaines, 2019). Accelerated climate 
change, caused by humans, is reworking our earth systems, including those sup￾ported by the ocean. This section summarizes four main earth system processes 
and how they are affected by growing environmental disruption.The Ocean: An Introduction to the Marine Environment 29
The Climate Is Affected
There is no doubt that climate change is occurring, and we will continue to see 
its effects at an accelerating pace (Masson-Delmotte et al., 2019). Here is just part 
of the laundry list of anthropogenic impacts currently affecting the earth climate 
system:
 – It is estimated that humans had caused warming of approximately 1.0°C by 
 – We are seeing seasonal changes in sea ice that are likely unprecedented based 
 – The global average sea level has risen between 16 and 21 cm in the last 120 
 – Oxygen concentrations in the upper 1,000 m of the ocean have decreased 
 – Marine heat waves have doubled in frequency and have become longer- 
 – The ocean has absorbed approximately 30% of anthropogenic CO
Biodiversity Is Affected
All of these impacts from climate change also affect the biology of ocean organ￾isms and the biodiversity that the ocean supports. For example, since the 1870s 
about half of the live coral cover on earth has been lost; this loss is continuing 
and accelerating in recent decades due to the effects of climate change (IPBES, 
2019; IPCC, 2019). However, climate change is only the second largest impact 
on marine biodiversity; overexploitation of marine resources, primarily through 
fishing, is the single greatest contributor to the decline in biodiversity in the 
ocean (IPBES, 2019; Rogers et al., 2020). Adding to these impacts are those from 
land- and sea-based pollution and changes in land and sea use, including coastal 30 K. Grorud-Colvert and M. Ward
development (IPBES, 2019). Moreover, these impacts do not typically occur in a 
vacuum but are cumulative; combined stress of myriad impacts is affecting at least 
66% of the ocean’s area (Halpern et al., 2015).
It is difficult to confirm how many marine species have become extinct over 
the past 500 years; at present 20 extinct marine species are known, but this is 
likely an underestimate because some marine organisms have not been observed 
for decades and may already be extinct (McCauley et al., 2015). Ocean species at 
risk of extinction or globally threatened include 25% of sharks, rays, and marine 
mammals (Dulvy et al., 2014; International Union for the Conservation of Na￾ture, 2019). Populations of large wild species, such as tuna and other vertebrates, 
have declined over the last 50 years (IPBES, 2019), and since 1970 oceanic sharks 
and rays have declined globally by 71% (Pacoureau et al., 2021).
Even as species decline, stressors continue, including coastal development, use 
of biological resources, pollution, effects of transportation, invasive species, climate 
change, and other human disturbances (Rogers et al., 2020). More than 1 mil￾lion square kilometers of the ocean floor are subject to bottom trawling each year 
(Amoroso et al., 2018). Deep sea mining is becoming more prevalent due to the 
increasing demand for raw materials and decreasing terrestrial resources (Miller 
et al., 2018) – the impacts are projected to be extremely severe (Niner et al., 2018).
Resources Are Affected
The loss in biodiversity also hints at the subsequent decrease in the productivity 
that it supports. Changes in the abundance and distribution of species that act 
as key resources to human populations also occur. The ranges of many marine 
species are projected to shift at the global scale by 2055, with an average increase 
of 30–70% of species moving to high latitudes and up to 40% of species moving 
out of tropical latitudes (Cheung et al., 2010). Predictions indicate that the largest 
decreases in animal biomass due to climate change will be at the middle latitudes, 
where many nations currently depend on seafood and fisheries (Lotze et al., 2019).
Overfishing has also compromised ocean resources. A massive increase in the 
size of the global fishing fleet from 1.7 to 3.7 million vessels occurred between 
1950 and 2015 (Rousseau et al., 2019). While improved technology has led to 
exponential increases in fishing effort, catch per unit effort (CPUE) is declin￾ing due to depleted stocks of fish (Rogers et al., 2020). A conservative estimate 
suggests that unassessed fisheries produce 23% of the global fish catch (Costello 
et al., 2012), highlighting the issue of Illegal, Unreported, and Unregulated (IUU) 
fishing and the reality that many projections for fisheries may underestimate the 
true impact of global fishing.
People Are Affected
The impacts from climate change, overfishing, pollution, and other anthropo￾genic stressors accumulate over time, posing immense risks to human popula￾tions. For example, the low-lying coastal zones most in danger of sea level rise The Ocean: An Introduction to the Marine Environment 31
are currently home to 680 million people (nearly 10% of the global population in 
2010), and of those, 65 million people live in small island developing states (SIDS) 
(IPCC, 2019).
A decrease in the availability of resources upon which humans rely also 
compromises our food security, health, and well-being (Österblom et al., 2020). 
Additionally, impacts are often distributed unequally – across place, time, and 
segments of society. Impacts based on the depletion and disruption to global cli￾mate, biodiversity, the natural functioning of ecosystems, and the contributions 
that nature makes to people are projected to be greatest in areas of the world with 
many of the most disadvantaged communities in the world (IPBES, 2019).
A Functioning Ocean Sustains Humanity
The total value of key assets provided by the ocean is estimated to be US $24 
trillion annually, and the services that derive from these assets may add an addi￾tional $1.5 trillion to $6 trillion per year (Hoegh-Guldberg, 2015; Lillebø et al., 
2017; Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development [OECD], 2016). 
However, some ocean services transcend economics, and monetary evaluations 
should not supersede the non-monetary and non-material benefits the ocean pro￾vides (Allison et al., 2020). These benefits, often referred to as nature’s contribu￾tions to people or ecosystem services (Allison et al., 2020; Millennium Ecosystem 
Assessment, 2005) can be categorized in four types: Supporting, Regulating, Pro￾visioning, and Cultural. Below we discuss what the ocean provides within each 
of these categories.
Supporting
The ocean’s ecosystem services support life on the planet and all of the resulting 
benefits this biodiversity provides. All of the earth system processes discussed 
above fit the definition of supporting services. The ocean cycles carbon, nutrients, 
and water at the global level. These nutrients fuel primary production, which in 
turn fuels global food webs and transfers biological energy across the earth. For￾mation of foundational habitats, such as coral reefs, kelp forests, oyster reefs, and 
seagrass meadows, is another supporting service the ocean provides. For example, 
coral reef habitats support approximately 25% of the species in the ocean, with 
some 830,000 multi-cellular species estimated on coral reefs worldwide (Fisher 
et al., 2015). All of these foundational habitats support biodiversity by providing 
protection for the early life stages of marine species in nursery grounds, and also 
at other key life stages (Stuchtey et al., 2020).
Productive areas of high biodiversity can help to sustain surrounding marine 
environments, as well. For instance, they can export adult or larval animals to 
neighboring habitats (“spillover effect”), or act as storehouses of genetic diversity 
from the genetic library of these many species, contributing to improved resil￾ience to changing ocean conditions (Blasiak et al., 2020). These areas are prime 
candidates for consideration as fully to highly protected MPAs when the other 32 K. Grorud-Colvert and M. Ward
social and ecological enabling conditions are in place (Grorud-Colvert et al., 
2021; Jones et al., 2018).
Regulating
Ocean services are vital to life on earth, via carbon sequestration and storage, 
temperature moderation, and balancing of extreme weather events. As water 
flows from land into the ocean, coastal habitats are an important source of wa￾ter purification. For example, mangrove forests, wetlands, and oyster reefs can 
filter out pollutants and excess nutrients and trap sediments, leading to clearer 
and cleaner nearshore waters. These coastal habitats are also excellent examples 
of first-line defense against storm surges; they not only decrease the impacts of 
storm-surge waves on erosion and property damage but also prevent significant 
economic losses from large storms, such as hurricanes (Del Valle et al., 2020). 
Worldwide, coastal habitats provide protection for hundreds of millions of people 
(Stuchtey et al., 2020).
Provisioning
The ocean is a provider of food, medicines, biochemicals, and genetic resources, 
all deriving from its rich biodiversity. Food from the sea is an important source of 
protein and key nutrients – such as omega-3 fatty acids and iodine – for more than 
3.3 billion people (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, 
2020). This food provisioning is truly global; coral reefs alone benefit people from 
more than 100 countries by providing food and livelihoods (Masson-Delmotte 
et al., 2019). Some of these livelihoods are built on more than extraction of these 
marine species. Biodiverse places and habitats are significant attractions for tour￾ism; another benefit from coral reefs – tourists visiting reefs globally contribute 
US $11.5 billion to the global economy (Masson-Delmotte et al., 2019). In fact, 
the global economy depends on the ocean through the livelihoods it supports. It 
provides jobs for hundreds of millions of people working in fishing, mariculture 
and aquaculture, shipping and ports, tourism, offshore energy, pharmaceuticals 
and cosmetics, and other industries (Stuchtey et al., 2020; Teh & Sumaila, 2013).
The ocean is also a source of many products that we use in our daily lives. 
Over 34,000 marine natural products have been discovered (MarinLit, 2020) – 
including marine drugs, nutraceuticals, cosmetics, aquaculture and new food 
products, and bulk chemicals (Blasiak et al., 2020). These products are made pos￾sible by the vast genetic and organismal diversity found in the ocean (think of 
those 2.2 m illion species of eukaryotes alone). Medicines may be found in unusual 
places. For example, Remdesivir, an antiviral that is derived from sea sponges, 
was approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration on May 1, 2020, as a 
treatment for the COVID-19 coronavirus (Taglialatela-Scafati, 2021). Not only 
does the ocean directly provide goods and services, but it also provides a means 
for their transportation across the globe. Around 90% of the world’s goods are 
shipped on the ocean (Stuchtey et al., 2020).The Ocean: An Introduction to the Marine Environment 33
Cultural
When thinking about ecosystem services, it can be tempting to try and ascribe 
monetary value to them. Indeed, we started off this section with an estimate of 
the trillions of dollars’ worth of assets the ocean provides. However, there will al￾ways be key services from the ocean that transcend economics. Many of these are 
the cultural benefits, spanning spiritual, recreational, educational, aesthetic, and 
inspirational ways people interact with the ocean via their identities, activities, 
and ways of knowing.
Billions of people living along the coast ground their cultural and spiritual lives 
in the ocean (Stuchtey et al., 2020), not to mention all those who hold histor￾ical, aspirational, or artistic connections with the ocean without living near it. 
Many people relate to the sense of freedom, adventure, and awe that the ocean 
inspires (Allison et al., 2020). These and other cultural services are integrally 
connected with human values and behavior and influenced by social, economic, 
and political contexts (Millennium Ecosystem Assessment, 2005). Some marine 
species have been important to Indigenous peoples since time immemorial, and 
many species today bring personal enjoyment and subsistence to a diversity of 
peoples and communities. The ocean’s habitats are important for both livelihoods 
and recreation. Cultural services represent many associated human value systems, 
underscoring the need to recognize local, Indigenous, and traditional knowledge, 
as well as academic knowledge of its functions and benefits (Allison et al., 2020).
Paths forward also require protecting these cultural services – peoples’ ways of 
life and their health and well-being. Ecosystem services must be framed as such to 
underscore the interconnectedness of the ocean and people (Allison et al., 2020). 
Diverse stakeholders and rights-holders provide a full picture of needs and values 
and can support equitable distribution of the benefits the ocean provides (Öster￾blom et al., 2020). The ocean of the future can be a place of prosperity for all, 
only if changes are undertaken equitably and inclusively. Material and monetary 
benefits from the ocean should not occur at the expense of the non-monetary and 
non-material benefits (Allison et al., 2020). Those who have benefited from the 
unsustainable use of the oceans since the start of industrialization bear differen￾tial responsibility to act; deliberate attention must be paid to benefits for women 
and others who are underserved and underrepresented (Österblom et al., 2020).
Conclusion
The ocean has always supported humanity and must continue to do so at even 
greater levels, and with more equitably distributed benefits. There is no single ap￾proach for sustaining a healthy, biodiverse, productive ocean. However, key to do￾ing so is developing a solid understanding of the natural and physical processes of 
the ocean system, such as those described early in this chapter. While subsequent 
chapters in this volume focus on the human dimension, there is an opportunity 
to integrate the variety of people’s perspectives, expertise, lived experiences, lev￾erage points, and differential capacities to support change with this knowledge of 34 K. Grorud-Colvert and M. Ward
the marine environment. These opportunities for integration and interdiscipli￾narity are a major focus of this book.
Questions for Reflection
 1. How are humans affected by the following earth systems and how have 
a. Hydrologic cycle
b. Nutrient cycling
c. Temperature regulation
d. Carbon cycle
 2. Nature’s contributions to people are extensive. What are some cultural 
References
Allison, E. H., Kurien, J., & Ota, Y. (2020). The human relationship with our ocean 
planet. World Resources Institute. https://www.oceanpanel.org/blue-papers/Human -
RelationshipwithOurOceanPlanet
Amoroso, R. O., Pitcher, C. R., Rijnsdorp, A. D., McConnaughey, R. A., Parma, A. M., 
Suuronen, P., Eigaard, O. R., Bastardie, F., Hintzen, N. T., Althaus, F., Baird, S. J., Black, 
J., Buhl-Mortensen, L., Campbell, A. B., Catarino, R., Collie, J., Cowan, J. H., Durholtz, 
D., Engstrom, N., … Jennings, S. (2018). Bottom trawl fishing footprints on the world’s 
continental shelves. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 115(43), E10275–
E10282. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1802379115
Baumgartner, A., & Reichel, E. (1975). The world water balance: Mean annual global, con￾tinental and maritime precipitation, evaporation and run-off. Elsevier Scientific Publishing 
Company.
Bigg, G. R., Jickells, T. D., Liss, P. S., & Osborn, T. J. (2003). The role of the oceans in 
climate. International Journal of Climatology, 23(10), 1127–1159. https://doi.org/10.1002/
joc.926
Blasiak, R., Wynberg, R., Grorud-Colvert, K., Thambisetty, S., Bandarra, N. M., Canário, 
A. V. M., da Silva, J., Duarte, C. M., Jaspars, M., Rogers, A., Sink, K., & Wabnitz, C. C. 
C. (2020). The ocean genome and future prospects for conservation and equity. Nature 
Sustainability, 3(8), 588–596. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41893-020-0522-9
Cheung, W. W. L., Lam, V. W. Y., Sarmiento, J. L., Kearney, K., Watson, R., Zeller, D., 
& Pauly, D. (2010). Large-scale redistribution of maximum fisheries catch potential in 
the global ocean under climate change. Global Change Biology, 16(1), 24–35. https://doi.
org/10.1111/j.1365-2486.2009.01995.x
Costello, C., Ovando, D., Hilborn, R., Gaines, S. D., Deschenes, O., & Lester, S. E. 
(2012). Status and solutions for the world’s unassessed fisheries. Science, 338(6106), 
517–520. https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/science.1223389https://www.science.org/
doi/10.1126/science.1223389
Del Valle, A., Eriksson, M., Ishizawa, O. A., & Miranda, J. J. (2020). Mangroves pro￾tect coastal economic activity from hurricanes. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences, 117(1), 265–270. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1911617116The Ocean: An Introduction to the Marine Environment 35
Dulvy, N. K., Fowler, S. L., Musick, J. A., Cavanagh, R. D., Kyne, P. M., Harrison, L. R., 
Carlson, J. K., Davidson, L. N., Fordham, S. V., Francis, M. P., Pollock, C. M., Simpfen￾dorfer, C. A., Burgess, G. H., Carpenter, K. E., Compagno, L. J., Ebert, D. A., Gibson, C., 
Heupel, M. R., Livingstone, S. R., … White, W. T. (2014). Extinction risk and conserva￾tion of the world’s sharks and rays. ELife, 3, e00590. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.00590
Falkowski, P. G., & Raven, J. A. (2013). Aquatic photosynthesis. Princeton University Press. 
https://press.princeton.edu/books/paperback/9780691115511/aquatic-photosynthesis
Fisher, R., O’Leary, R. A., Low-Choy, S., Mengersen, K., Knowlton, N., Brainard, R. E., & 
Caley, M. J. (2015). Species richness on coral reefs and the pursuit of convergent global 
estimates. Current Biology, 25(4), 500–505. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2014.12.022
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. (2020). The state of world fish￾eries and aquaculture 2020: Sustainability in action. FAO, Rome. https://doi.org/10.4060/
ca9229en
Gagné, T. O., Reygondeau, G., Jenkins, C. N., Sexton, J. O., Bograd, S. J., Hazen, E. L., & 
Van Houtan, K. S. (2020). Towards a global understanding of the drivers of marine and 
terrestrial biodiversity. PLOS ONE, 15(2). https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0228065
Gattuso, J.-P., Magnan, A., Billé, R., Cheung, W. W. L., Howes, E. L., Joos, F., Allemand, D., 
Bopp, L., Cooley, S. R., Eakin, C. M., Hoegh-Guldberg, O., Kelly, R. P., Pörtner, H.-O., Rog￾ers, A. D., Baxter, J. M., Laffoley, D., Osborn, D., Rankovic, A., Rochette, J., … Turley, C. 
(2015). Contrasting futures for ocean and society from different anthropogenic CO2 emis￾sions scenarios. Science, 349(6243). https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/science.aac4722
Grorud-Colvert, K., Sullivan-Stack, J., Roberts, C., Constant, V., Horta e Costa, B., Pike, 
E. P., Kingston, N., Laffoley, D., Sala, E., Claudet, J., Friedlander, A. M., Gill, D. A., 
Lester, S. E., Day, J. C., Gonçalves, E. J., Ahmadia, G. N., Rand, M., Villagomez, A., 
Ban, N. C., … Lubchenco, J. (2021). The MPA guide: A framework to achieve global 
goals for the ocean. Science, 373(6560), eabf0861. https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/
science.abf0861
Halpern, B. S., Frazier, M., Potapenko, J., Casey, K. S., Koenig, K., Longo, C., Lowndes, 
J. S., Rockwood, R. C., Selig, E. R., Selkoe, K. A., & Walbridge, S. (2015). Spatial and 
temporal changes in cumulative human impacts on the world’s ocean. Nature Commu￾nications, 6(1), 7615. https://www.nature.com/articles/ncomms8615
Hoegh-Guldberg, O. (2015). Reviving the ocean economy: The case for action -2015. World 
Wide Fund for Nature, Gland, Switzerland.
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. (2019). IPCC Special Report on the Ocean 
and Cryosphere in a Changing Climate. Geneva, Switzerland: [H.-O. Pörtner, D. C. 
 Roberts, V. Masson-Delmotte, P. Zhai, M. Tignor, E. Poloczanska, K. Mintenbeck, A. 
Alegría, M. Nicolai, A. Okem, J. Petzold, B. Rama, N.M. Weyer (Eds.)]. https://doi.
org/10.1017/9781009157964
Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services. 
(2019). Global assessment report on biodiversity and ecosystem services of the Intergovern￾mental Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services. IPBES secretariat, 
Bonn, Germany: E. S. Brondizio, J. Settele, S. Díaz, and H. T. Ngo (Eds.). https://doi.
org/10.5281/zenodo.3831673
International Union for the Conservation of Nature. (2019). The IUCN red list of threat￾ened species. Gland, Switzerland.
Jones, K. R., Klein, C. J., Halpern, B. S., Venter, O., Grantham, H., Kuempel, C. D., Shum￾way, N., Friedlander, A. M., Possingham, H. P., & Watson, J. E. M. (2018). The location 
and protection status of Earth’s diminishing marine wilderness. Current Biology, 28(15), 
2506–2512.e3. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2018.06.01036 K. Grorud-Colvert and M. Ward
Kroeker, K. J., Kordas, R. L., Crim, R. N., & Singh, G. G. (2010). Meta-analysis reveals 
negative yet variable effects of ocean acidification on marine organisms. Ecology Letters, 
13(11), 1419–1434. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1461-0248.2010.01518.x
Laffoley, D., Baxter, J. M., Amon, D. J., Claudet, J., Hall-Spencer, J. M., Grorud-Colvert, 
K., Levin, L. A., Reid, P. C., Rogers, A. D., Taylor, M. L., Woodall, L. C., & A ndersen, 
N. F. (2020). Evolving the narrative for protecting a rapidly changing ocean, post￾COVID-19. Aquatic Conservation: Marine and Freshwater Ecosystems, n/a(n/a), 1–23. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/aqc.3512
Lillebø, A. I., Pita, C., Garcia Rodrigues, J., Ramos, S., & Villasante, S. (2017). How can 
marine ecosystem services support the Blue Growth agenda? Marine Policy, 81, 132–142. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpol.2017.03.008
Lotze, H. K., Tittensor, D. P., Bryndum-Buchholz, A., Eddy, T. D., Cheung, W. W. L., 
Galbraith, E. D., Barange, M., Barrier, N., Bianchi, D., Blanchard, J. L., Bopp, L., 
 Büchner, M., Bulman, C. M., Carozza, D. A., Christensen, V., Coll, M., Dunne, J. P., Ful￾ton, E. A., Jennings, S., … Worm, B. (2019). Global ensemble projections reveal trophic 
amplification of ocean biomass declines with climate change. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences, 116(26), 12907–12912. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1900194116
Louca, S., Mazel, F., Doebeli, M., & Parfrey, L. W. (2019). A census-based estimate of 
Earth’s bacterial and archaeal diversity. PLOS Biology, 17(2), e3000106. https://doi.
org/10.1371/journal.pbio.3000106
Lubchenco, J., & Gaines, S. D. (2019). A new narrative for the ocean. Science, 364(6444), 
911–911. https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/science.aay2241
MarinLit. (2020). A database of marine natural products literature. http:// pubs.rsc.org/
marinlit/
Masson-Delmotte, V., Zhai, P., Portner, H., Roberts, D., Skea, J., Shukla, P. R.,… & Water￾field, T. (2019). Global warming at 1.5 degrees C: An IPCC Special Report. Intergovern￾mental Panel on Climate Change. https://www.ipcc.ch/sr15/
McCauley, D. J., Pinsky, M. L., Palumbi, S. R., Estes, J. A., Joyce, F. H., & Warner, R. R. 
(2015). Marine defaunation: Animal loss in the global ocean. Science, 347(6219). https://
www.science.org/doi/10.1126/science.1255641
Millennium Ecosystem Assessment. (2005). Ecosystems and human well-being: Synthesis 
report. Island Press.
Miller, K. A., Thompson, K. F., Johnston, P., & Santillo, D. (2018). An overview of sea￾bed mining including the current state of development, environmental impacts, and 
knowledge gaps. Frontiers in Marine Science, 4. https://doi.org/10.3389/fmars.2017.00418
Mora, C., Tittensor, D. P., Adl, S., Simpson, A. G. B., & Worm, B. (2011). How many 
species are there on earth and in the ocean? PLOS Biology, 9(8), e1001127. https://doi.
org/10.1371/journal.pbio.1001127
Niner, H. J., Ardron, J. A., Escobar, E. G., Gianni, M., Jaeckel, A., Jones, D. O. B., Levin, 
L. A., Smith, C. R., Thiele, T., Turner, P. J., Van Dover, C. L., Watling, L., & Gjerde, 
K. M. (2018). Deep-sea mining with no net loss of biodiversity - An impossible aim. 
Frontiers in Marine Science, 5. https://doi.org/10.3389/fmars.2018.00053
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development. (2016). The ocean economy in 
2030. OECD Publishing.
Österblom, H., Wabnitz, C., Tladi, D., Allison, E., Arnaud-Haond, S., Bebbington, J., 
Bennett, N., Blasiak, R., Boonstra, W., Choudhury, A., Cisneros-Montemayor, A., 
Daw, T., Fabinyi, M., Franz, N., Harden-Davies, H., Kleiber, D., Lopes, P., McDougall, 
C., Resosudarmo, B., & Selim, S. (2020). Towards ocean equity. High Level Panel for a 
 Sustainable Ocean Economy.The Ocean: An Introduction to the Marine Environment 37
Pacoureau, N., Rigby, C. L., Kyne, P. M., Sherley, R. B., Winker, H., Carlson, J. K., Ford￾ham, S. V., Barreto, R., Fernando, D., Francis, M. P., Jabado, R. W., Herman, K. B., 
Liu, K.-M., Marshall, A. D., Pollom, R. A., Romanov, E. V., Simpfendorfer, C. A., Yin, 
J. S., Kindsvater, H. K., & Dulvy, N. K. (2021). Half a century of global decline in 
oceanic sharks and rays. Nature, 589(7843), 567–571. https://www.nature.com/articles/
s41586-020-03173-9
Reid, P. C. (2016). Ocean warming: Setting the scene. In D. Laffoley & J. M. Baxter (Eds.), 
Explaining ocean warming: Causes, scale, effects and consequences (pp. 17–45). IUCN, 
Gland, Switzerland.
Rogers, A., Aburto-Oropeza, O., Appeltans, W., Assis, J., Ballance, L., Cury, P., D uarte, C., 
Favoretto, F., Kumagai, J., Lovelock, C., Miloslavich, P., Niamir, A., Obura, D., O’Leary, 
B., Reygondeau, G., Roberts, C., Sadovy, Y., Sutton, T., Tittensor, D., & V elarde, E. 
(2020). Critical habitats and biodiversity: Inventory, thresholds and governance. https://
www.researchgate.net/publication/341219468_Critical_Habitats_and_Biodiversity_ 
Inventory_Thresholds_and_Governance
Rousseau, Y., Watson, R. A., Blanchard, J. L., & Fulton, E. A. (2019). Evolution of global 
marine fishing fleets and the response of fished resources. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences, 116(25), 12238–12243. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.182034411
Sabine, C. L., Feely, R. A., Gruber, N., Key, R. M., Lee, K., Bullister, J. L., Wanninkhof, R., 
Wong, C. S., Wallace, D. W. R., Tilbrook, B., Millero, F. J., Peng, T.-H., Kozyr, A., Ono, 
T., & Rios, A. F. (2004). The oceanic sink for anthropogenic CO2. Science, 305(5682), 
367–371. https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/science.1097403
Sekerci, Y., & Petrovskii, S. (2015). Mathematical modelling of plankton–oxygen dy￾namics under the climate change. Bulletin of Mathematical Biology, 77(12), 2325–2353. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11538-015-0126-0
Smale, D. A., Wernberg, T., Oliver, E. C. J., Thomsen, M., Harvey, B. P., Straub, S. C., 
Burrows, M. T., Alexander, L. V., Benthuysen, J. A., Donat, M. G., Feng, M., Hobday, 
A. J., Holbrook, N. J., Perkins-Kirkpatrick, S. E., Scannell, H. A., Sen Gupta, A., Payne, 
B. L., & Moore, P. J. (2019). Marine heatwaves threaten global biodiversity and the 
provision of ecosystem services. Nature Climate Change, 9(4), 306–312. https://doi.
org/10.1038/s41558-019-0412-1
Stuchtey, M. R., Vincent, A., Merkl, A., Bucher, M., Haugan, P. M., Lubchenco, J., & 
Pangestu, M. E. (2020). Ocean solutions that benefit people, nature, and the economy
(High Level Panel for a Sustainable Ocean Economy). World Resources Institute. www.
oceanpanel.org/ocean-solutions
Taglialatela-Scafati, O. (2021). New hopes for drugs against COVID-19 come from the sea. 
Marine Drugs, 19(2), 104. https://doi.org/10.3390/md19020104
Teh, L. C. L., & Sumaila, U. R. (2013). Contribution of marine fisheries to worldwide em￾ployment. Fish and Fisheries, 14(1), 77–88. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-2979.2011.00450.xPart II
Grand Challenges
Part II introduces six contemporary topics, or “Grand Challenges,” faced by the Ocean 
and the people who depend on it: fisheries, aquaculture, pollution, climate change, 
marine renewable energy, and governance in areas beyond national jurisdiction. Each 
chapter presents an integrated human, natural, and physical science perspective on the 
six topics.
DOI: 10.4324/9781003058151-54 Wild Capture Fisheries
Processes, Technology, 
and Solutions
F. Conway and L. Ciannelli
Wild capture fisheries may appear to be simple endeavors at first glance. 
 Nevertheless, fishery systems across the globe are extremely complex and cover 
subsistence, recreational, and commercial fisheries. Often these fishery sectors 
i nteract or overlap. This chapter focuses largely on commercial fisheries.
Commercial fisheries in the Global North and South might share species or 
harvest methods, but they differ significantly. Artisanal or small-scale fisheries 
in Bangladesh are quite different from “developed-world” fisheries in Scotland or 
other countries with a long history of commercial harvest and access to scientific 
information and technological advances. This chapter will focus largely on the 
Global North.
Integrated and thoughtful approaches to fisheries can be truly complex. 
Management must consider the amounts of various living marine resources, where 
fish are caught and sold, and who the fishers are, as well as the ultimate consum￾ers. Important questions center on the sustainability of the capture, as well as the 
equitable allocation and use of resources and generated revenue. Fisheries must be 
considered as a coupled natural–human (CNH) system. This chapter provides a 
quick glimpse into this topic.
We pose several questions. How might one really know about seafood and the 
marine environment?1
 How does what one believes they know influence one’s per￾ception of seafood-related stakeholders2
 and how they engage with and manage 
marine living resources? Does taking a coupled systems approach to the fisheries 
lead to creative and thoughtful ways to improve resource use and conservation? 
This chapter addresses these questions. We believe that knowledge about people 
cannot exist without knowledge of marine living resources and their habitats. 
Conversely, knowledge about the sea and its resources is incomplete without 
knowledge of the involved actors.
This chapter begins with a brief mention of the scope of fisheries, followed by 
an introduction of the CNH dimension of fisheries, and finally, presents an over￾view of some traditional and novel challenges that impact the resources and well￾being of connected coastal communities. Three case studies illustrate processes, 
technologies, and solutions, and how fishing sectors (stakeholders and communi￾ties) cooperate with managers and scientists to solve problems and identify oppor￾tunities that address new challenges.
DOI: 10.4324/9781003058151-642 F. Conway and L. Ciannelli
Fisheries Provide Meals, Jobs, and Much More
For many people, seafood – captured and cultivated – may mean little more than 
a meal. Seafood is indeed an important source of food. Global per-capita human 
consumption of wild-caught and farmed living marine resources has more than 
doubled since the 1960s (from 9.1 to 20.5 kg/yr), mostly from increased aquacul￾ture production. About 87% of all fisheries production (wild-caught and farmed) 
is used for human consumption.
The economical and nutritional benefits of seafood capture are illustrated by 
recent US and global statistics. In the US, the total harvest of wild seafood was 
4.5 million metric tons in 2017, valued at US$5.4 billion (National Marine Fish￾eries Service [NMFS], 2018). Table 4.1 provides a summary of the most harvested 
species by weight in the US.
Globally, about 85 million metric tons of wild seafood were landed in 2018 
(Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations [FAO], 2020). Fin￾fish constitute 85.5% of the global catch and are composed of small pelagic fish 
(anchovies and sardines), gadids (walleye pollock, cod, haddock), and scombrids 
(tuna, mackerel). Invertebrate species (squids, crabs, shrimps) include the remain￾der (FAO, 2020).
Fisheries also provide jobs. Worldwide, more than 40 million workers are em￾ployed in the commercial seafood sector. This does not account for secondary 
employment, such as seafood marketing. In the US, 168,000 people are directly 
employed by fisheries, and when considering seafood imports and the entire chain 
of seafood production from harvest to retail, the number increases to 1,200,000 
people (NMFS, 2018).
Seafood global harvest has remained constant since the mid-1980s and may in￾crease slightly during the next few decades as some stocks rebuild and previously 
underexploited stocks are targeted. In 2017, the percentage of fish and inverte￾brate stocks harvested at or below biologically sustainable levels was 65.8%. This 
has steadily decreased from 90% in the early and mid-1970s. Despite increasing 
fishing efforts, some bright spots exist. For example, fishing pressure on many 
Table 4.1 The most harvested fish species in the US in 2017 (NMFS, 2018)
Species Where Harvested Metric Tons and Percentage of 
Total Landings
Walleye Pollock (Gadus 
chalcogrammus)
Bering Sea and Gulf 
of Alaska
1.5 million metric tons or 33% of 
total landings
Atlantic Menhaden 
(Brevoortia tyrannus)
Western Atlantic and 
Gulf of Mexico
641,000 metric tons or 15% of total 
landings
Pacific Hake (Merluccius 
productus)
US West Coast 351,000 metric tons or 8% of total 
landings
Pacific Cod (Gadus 
macrocephalus)
Gulf of Alaska and 
Bering Sea
300,000 metric tons or 6.7% of 
total landings
Pink Salmon 
(Oncorhynchus gorbuscha)
Alaska 225,000 metric tons or 5% of total 
landingsWild Capture Fisheries: Processes, Technology, and Solutions 43
intensely managed fish stocks has decreased, and their biomass has increased, 
underscoring the importance of developing and implementing successful policies 
for the conservation and sustainable use of marine resources.
Other factors, such as technological advances in distribution, processing and 
waste reduction, expansion of markets, and awareness of health benefits from 
seafood consumption, also play important roles. Nevertheless, great variations 
exist throughout the world. African countries have the lowest per-capita con￾sumption at about 10 kg/yr, despite more than 15% of global landings originat￾ing from that continent’s Exclusive Economic Zones (EEZs). Regions such as 
Russia, Japan, Western Europe, and North America have the highest per-capita 
seafood consumption. These disparities in capture and consumption of sea￾food raise concerns for global food security and underscore the need for poli￾cies aimed at equitable distribution of economic and health benefits of marine 
resources.
Fisheries Are a Coupled Natural–Human System
Seafood capture is tightly linked with the human systems that depend on it for 
nutrition, jobs, recreation, and cultural activities. Just like captured seafood in￾fluences human economies and cultural activities, humans impact populations 
of living marine resources and their habitats, primarily through commercial and 
recreational harvests, as well as through coastal and ocean development. These 
two-way interactions between seafood and humans constitute the building blocks 
of a CNH system.
Several natural processes affect the production of wild capture fisheries in 
the ocean. First, fish production is linked to primary production of the ocean. 
The most productive areas of the ocean are the coastal waters over the con￾tinental shelves and the eastern boundaries coastal upwelling systems of the 
ocean (Chavez & Messié, 2009). About 20 million metric tons of wild seafood, 
or 20% of the global catch, are annually harvested from coastal upwelling ar￾eas, despite occupying <1% of the global ocean surface (Pauly & Christensen, 
1995). Apex and mid-food web predators can also affect the available biomass 
of harvested fish via predator–prey interactions. Lastly, processes that depend 
on the size of the targeted populations (e.g., disease transmission, food limita￾tion) can also affect fish abundance. This density-dependent control (DingsØr 
et al., 2007) is an important mechanism that many models utilize for managing 
fish populations. From an ecological perspective, mortality is affected by pre￾dation and starvation, and is highest during early life stages when individuals 
are vulnerable to starvation, physiological stress, and a wide range of predators 
(Bailey & Houde, 1989).
Climate also impacts fisheries. One major climate driver of fisheries production 
is the El Niño–Southern Oscillation (ENSO), defined as the difference in sea 
level pressure between the Western and Eastern Pacific regions (Timmermann 
et al., 2018). During positive phases of ENSO, the strong equatorial easterly trade 
winds decrease in intensity or reverse in direction, causing a reduction of the 44 F. Conway and L. Ciannelli
tropical upwelling, and consequently strong reductions of primary productivity 
throughout the Eastern Tropical Pacific. Low primary production impacts the 
availability of Peruvian anchoveta – the most harvested marine fish species on 
earth. Other commercially important species, such as sardines and jack mackerel, 
of the Eastern Tropical Pacific are also negatively impacted during ENSO events. 
Strong El Niño phases (1992, 1998, 2015) have caused noticeable reductions of 
global harvest.
A general principle of fisheries production is linked to the life history of the 
species; short-lived species can quickly rebound from heavy declines, while long￾lived species will take longer to rebound from low stock size. However, long-lived 
species reproduce multiple times during their life cycle and thus can endure short 
periods of unfavorable environmental variability better than short-lived species, 
which only reproduce once or few times during their life cycle and are therefore 
more susceptible to environmental variations. These basic principles are used to 
manage fish populations. However, uncertainties related to assessment of stock 
status, the effect of density-dependent dynamics, trophic interactions, and cli￾mate and environmental variability present challenges for fisheries management. 
Additional difficulties for management are synergistic effects between natural 
variability (i.e., linked with climate or local environmental variability) and hu￾man harvest (Brander, 2010).
The history of fishery science and the development of new fisheries are closely 
related to technological developments. From the fisheries perspective, techno￾logical advances are exemplified by larger and better-equipped vessels and fish￾ing gear that increase catch efficiency, as well as those that reduce bycatch and 
increase maritime safety. From the fishery science perspective, new technologies 
provide new and more data for better assessment of the resources, habitats, and 
oceanographic conditions (e.g., acoustic surveys, autonomous vehicles, new en￾vironmental sensors, GPS). Development of faster computing power allows for 
more sophisticated tactical and strategic models for fisheries management. The 
history of many fisheries worldwide reflects this duality of technology, as a driver 
for depletion and a catalyst for management and conservation. The latter half of 
the 20th century was characterized by a rapid development of new vessels and 
gear, which allowed fleets to fish more intensely, further from shore, and in deeper 
waters (Frank et al., 2018). An exponential decline of large predators worldwide 
occurred as a result of fisheries harvest from the 1950s to the 1980s (Myers & 
Worm, 2003). From that point on, the global harvest has leveled off. Slight in￾creases of global catch in recent years may be a promising indication that new 
technologies, coupled with practical management and policies, are yielding the 
desired effects (FAO, 2020).
The development of commercial fisheries and fishery science and technology 
is guided by governance (policy and management). Policies created to balance 
the conservation and use of fishery resources have evolved during the past dec￾ades, and throughout much of the world sustainability has become the goal (FAO, 
1995; 2015). Box 4.1 describes fishery legislation in the US that has evolved to 
become ever more sustainable.Wild Capture Fisheries: Processes, Technology, and Solutions 45
BOX 4.1 US Fisheries Policy and Management
The Magnuson–Stevens Fisheries Conservation and Management Act 
(MSFCMA), approved in 1976 and significantly modified in 1996, is the 
main tool for managing fisheries within the US. Prior to the MSFCMA, 
unregulated fishing 12 miles offshore by foreign fleets raised concerns (We￾ber, 2002). Additionally, the 1970s began to experience a paradigm shift, 
which initiated a move away from a belief in the ocean’s limitless bounty 
(Weber, 2002). US jurisdiction was extended to 200 nautical miles, and 
eight regional fishery management councils were created.
Three major revisions have occurred since the initial implementation of 
the MSFCMA: The Sustainable Fisheries Act of 1996 and the Reauthor￾ization Acts of 2006 and 2007 (NMFS, 2019). Fundamental goals of the 
MSFCMA and of subsequent management strategies are to maintain sus￾tainable and healthy fisheries, prevent fishery collapses, reduce bycatch, and 
support the rebuilding of depleted stocks – without causing undue harm to 
fishing communities. Thus, the Act attempts to balance conservation and 
sustainable use of fishery resources.
Humans do not manage the fish. Rather, they manage the intersection of fish 
and people. It is helpful to start with some clarification of terms. Although rec￾reational fishing is an important economic activity in much of the world, we use 
the terms “fishing” or “fishing industry” to refer to the commercial harvest of wild 
capture fisheries.
The commercial fishing industry looks quite different around the world, even 
in the Global North. We draw on several examples for comparative purposes: 
Artisanal fishing in Italy (Box 4.2), Greenland fisheries (Box 4.5), and ground￾fish fisheries on the US West Coast (discussed in depth later in the chapter). 
Nevertheless, some similarities exist. Most fishing occurs near coastal communi￾ties (geographic communities). Fishing businesses, often called “the fishing com￾munities” (communities of interest or occupation), are comprised of individuals 
who operate at a business level (often based on family ties). These fishing com￾munities share their own values and perceptions while being part of the larger 
fishing industry and community of place (Conway et al., 2002). Local, state, and 
national institutions influence fishing communities, profoundly impacting the 
ecological, social, cultural, and political dynamics, resilience, and community 
wellbeing.
Known and Novel Challenges
Throughout the world, fisheries face both known and novel challenges. Some 
challenges result from environmental changes and uncertainties, while others 46 F. Conway and L. Ciannelli
stem from the increasing demand for seafood, advances in technologies, and 
the difficulties of enforcing distance-water fisheries on the high seas. Address￾ing these challenges with adaptive and sustainable approaches must guide the 
fishery sector.
Known Challenges
Challenges in the natural dimension affecting wild capture fisheries’ CNH sys￾tems include declining fish stocks due to overexploitation and changing environ￾mental conditions (Frank et al., 2016), bycatch of depleted species, and habitat 
degradation through coastal developments and bottom trawling. Some of these 
impacts can be remediated through implementation of policies allowing for the 
rebuilding of depleted stocks and restoration of degraded habitats. For example, 
area and seasonal closures, limits on effort and catch, and marine protected areas 
are successful strategies for rebuilding many stocks and preserving essential fish 
habitats. Bycatch reduction gears have drastically limited the harvest of seabirds, 
sea turtles, marine mammals, and other depleted stocks. Restoration of man￾grove forests, seagrass beds, and coral reefs helps to improve nursery and foraging 
grounds for many marine resources.
The human dimension presents known challenges, as well. Global seafood 
markets are a known human dimension challenge. Over 90% of seafood con￾sumed in the US is imported (Greenberg, 2014). At the same time, much of the 
seafood harvested in the US is marketed globally. Thus, trade issues or the recent 
global pandemic can greatly impact seafood harvesters and processors (White 
et al., 2020). The US has attempted to use trade embargos on the import of sea￾food products (e.g., on Mexican tuna imports) to encourage nations to adopt less 
harmful fishing practices that have resulted in legal claims and heightened inter￾national tensions.
Conflicts commonly arise between different fishery sectors regarding allocation 
of the catch and coastal dockage space. Classic conflicts often occur between 
industrial fishing fleets and small-scale (artisanal) fisheries (e.g., in Peru/Chile – 
Arellano & Swartzman, 2010), recreational fishers and small-scale fishers (e.g., on 
Ischia Island, Italy – Box 4.2; Figure 4.1), as well as between small-scale fishers and 
coastal tourism developments (e.g., in the Florida Keys – Schittone, 2001).
BOX 4.2 Artisanal Fishery of Ischia, Italy – Conflicts between 
Artisanal Fisheries and Tourism
Artisanal fisheries dominate the entire Italian fishing fleet; as of 2019 there 
were 11,984 licensed fishing vessels, 67.9% of which were composed of small Wild Capture Fisheries: Processes, Technology, and Solutions 47
vessels (<12 m in length), operating within a few miles from shore. While 
the number of larger vessels has declined by nearly 20% during the last 20 
years, small fishing boats have remained nearly constant. About 175,000 
metric tons of fish were landed in 2019, producing an income of about 900 
million euros. Small fishing vessels produced 12% of the landings and 17% 
of the revenue (Ministry of Forestry and Agriculture [Italy], 2020).
Italian artisanal fisheries are threatened by several factors: overfishing, 
illegal fishing, pollution, coastal development, climate change, and com￾peting interests and uses of coastal habitats. The artisanal fishery in Is￾chia Island, seaward of Naples, exemplifies these issues. An author of this 
chapter (Lorenzo Ciannelli) was born and raised on Ischia and grew up 
experiencing first-hand the relationships between a flourishing tourism in￾dustry and a dwindling artisanal fishery. The island’s artisanal industry is 
very diversified and utilizes fixed bottom trammel nets for the capture of 
Mediterranean hake, shelf flatfish, Norway lobster, and red prawns, and 
pelagic nets for the capture of medium and large pelagic, such as tunas, 
bonito, dolphinfish, amberjack, and swordfish (Silvestri, 2003). While tech￾nology has certainly contributed to the development of faster, motorized, 
well-equipped, and safer vessels, day-to-day operations linked to the capture 
(when, where, and how-to) and marketing of the fish have not changed, as 
they are rooted in traditions that are centuries old and orally transmitted 
between generations. For example, visual navigation via alignment of land￾marks (churches, trees, promontories) is the primary way by which fisher￾men locate productive habitats and avoid obstacles for their nets. Trammel 
nets are hand-dropped daily in the afternoon and retrieved the following 
morning. Fishermen return to the docks by late morning to sell their catch 
directly to local consumers.
Ischia’s beautiful shorelines, green mountains, delicious food, hot springs, 
and ancient buildings and streets make the island a popular tourist destina￾tion. The tourism industry began to develop in Ischia in the 1950s, and the 
livelihoods of increasing numbers of local people have become dependent 
on tourism. Tourism in Ischia generates an estimated 250 million euros 
annually and employs nearly 7,000 people, many of whom are young. These 
numbers vastly exceed those involved in local artisanal fishing. Tourism 
is vital to the local communities. However, it demands space and uses of 
coastal habitats – demands that may threaten the very livelihoods of the 
local fishing industry (Figure 4.1). This situation raises questions about fair 
valuation and equitable allocation of ecosystem services. These themes are 
not unique to Ischia and exemplify the complex, multifaceted nature of ar￾tisanal fisheries and conflicts with tourism’s increasing demands on coastal 
resources.48 F. Conway and L. Ciannelli
Figure 4.1 Image of the bay in the Lacco Ameno municipality on Ischia Island, Italy. 
The image shows many anchored recreational vessels. Excessive mooring 
and anchoring in these coastal habitats have negative impacts on the eco￾systems, by dragging anchors and chains over bottom habitats. Small fish￾ing vessels compete for space with larger numbers of recreational vessels. 
Photo credit: L. Ciannelli.
The US has had limited access to commercial harvest of fish for several dec￾ades. A range of access-related management rules for commercial fisheries extends 
from some simple restricted permit programs and limited-entry systems to more 
detailed transferable-quota programs, commonly called “catch shares” (Pooley, 
1998) (Box 4.3). Limited entry refers to regulations that cap the total number of 
fishers, fishing vessels, or equipment in a fishery (Rettig & Ginter, 1978). Catch 
share management strategies allocate a specific portion of the total allowable 
catch to individuals, cooperatives, or communities.
BOX 4.3 Catch Shares
Catch shares in the US are a form of rights-based management – not a full 
property right, but rather a revocable privilege to land an assigned per￾centage of the total quota. Each catch share recipient must cease fishing 
upon reaching the allocation (Morrison, 2019). Catch share programs use Wild Capture Fisheries: Processes, Technology, and Solutions 49
individual allocations, as well as allocations to groups and entities. These 
include Individual Transferable Quotas (ITQs), granted to both individuals 
and entities, such as processors (Fina, 2011; Matulich, 2009), fishers organ￾ized as corporations and limited liability corporations, fishing cooperatives, 
and fishing communities.
Broadly speaking, catch shares have resulted in consolidation, changed the dy￾namics between fishers and supply chains, altered the employment structure of 
crews, increased financial barriers, and, therefore, reduced entry opportunities 
and resulted in disproportionate losses of fishing rights for small vessels and com￾munities (Carothers, 2010). These fishery management tools may improve safety 
(Pfeiffer & Gratz, 2016) but also result in a loss of access, exposure, and opportu￾nity for younger generations (Cramer et al., 2018; McCay et al., 1995). This may 
be one factor causing “the graying of the fleet” (Box 4.4).
BOX 4.4 Graying of Fisheries
In many countries the average age of fishers is increasing. Iceland has seen 
increases in the average age of fishermen to 60 years old (Nielsen et al., 
2017). East Coast, West Coast, and Alaska fishing communities in the US 
are also experiencing this reality. The need to better understand the con￾cept of graying has been increasingly recognized in recent years (Cramer 
et al., 2018; Donkersloot & Carothers, 2016; Ringer et al., 2018; White, 
2015). A 2014 study by Russell et al. interviewed participants in the US 
fishing industry on the West Coast from Seattle, Washington, to Monterey, 
California, concluding the existence of graying of the fleet. One concern is 
that as fishermen retire and leave the industry, the majority of catch rights 
once held by the community will evaporate, causing a loss of individual 
and community income, identity, and sustainability. Commercial fishing 
is central to promotion of social relationships and cultural values (Cramer 
et al., 2018; Donkersloot & Carothers, 2016). A decrease in the entry of 
young people into the fishing sector would alter many social and cultural 
aspects that are the heart and soul of coastal communities.
Novel Challenges
New challenges are appearing that we have yet to fully understand, and therefore, 
have implemented limited management actions to address. For example, global 
warming and a changing climate alter species distribution (Pinsky et al., 2013). 
Range shifts of marine fish are now impacting coastal fishing communities (Rog￾ers et al., 2019). Fish species can adapt to global warming by shifting their spatial 50 F. Conway and L. Ciannelli
distribution, leading to a redistribution of global catches, with loss at the tropics 
and gains at higher latitudes (Cheung et al., 2010). However, as illustrated in the 
case of the Greenland fisheries (Box 4.5), uncertainty surrounds these processes, 
in part due to questions of how productivity of fish – and their predators and food 
sources – will change with global warming. Fish and marine invertebrates have 
complex life cycles and multiple life stages, and the fitness of the entire popula￾tion depends on the most sensitive life stages when faced with climate variabil￾ity (Ciannelli et al., 2014a). Typically, early life stages (eggs, larvae, and juvenile 
stages) are most sensitive to changing environmental conditions. Of all stages in a 
species life cycle (Dahlke et al., 2018), these are the least sampled and understood. 
Additional challenges include the impact of ocean acidification and deoxygena￾tion on fish and invertebrate populations (Keller et al., 2017). These factors will 
produce winners and losers, possibly depending on sensitive life history stages.
BOX 4.5 Greenland Fisheries – Managing Fisheries during Climate 
Change
Fisheries are an important economic and cultural resource for Greenland, 
accounting for more than 90% of its exports (FAO, 2004). Greenland’s wa￾ters extend 200 nautical miles from shore and are divided into east, west, 
and south regions. In each region, commercial fisheries are managed as 
offshore and coastal fisheries. The coastal fleet includes vessels less than 
75 gross tonnage (GT) operating within three nautical miles from the 
coast. The offshore fleet of larger boats (>75 GT) operates beyond three 
miles. Over 1,700 small boats (of less than 6 m) fish in coastal areas. In 
recent years, the coastal fleet has landed more than half of all cod caught 
in Greenland, as well as doubled the halibut caught by the offshore fleet 
(FAO, 2004). Economically and culturally, coastal fleets are the drivers of 
Greenland fisheries.
The most important coastal fisheries include halibut, shrimp, cod, 
capelin, and lumpfish. Offshore fisheries land shrimp, halibut, cod, redfish, 
and pelagic species, such as herring, mackerel, blue whiting, and capelin. 
Cod fisheries exemplify the common development cycle. Developed in 
the mid-1950s, they peaked a decade later. However, in the early 1990s 
the west and south Greenland fisheries collapsed due to a combination 
of overfishing and adverse climatic conditions (Bonanomi et al., 2015). 
Since 2000, the cod landings have increased, mostly in the east, although 
not to 1960 levels. Currently, halibut also show signs of overfishing, as 
evidenced by decreased size at age class, as well as age at maturity. Con￾cerns also surround the inshore Greenland halibut fishery exceeding the 
total allowed catch (TAC) and the impact of trawling on benthic habitats 
(Long & Jones, 2021).Wild Capture Fisheries: Processes, Technology, and Solutions 51
Greenland fisheries are projected to grow in the coming years as some 
commercially harvested species shift their ranges northward, and fish popu￾lations located at the northern edge of their distribution range increase pro￾ductivity. The Greenland government has expanded the ability to harvest, 
assess, and manage its fisheries in the changing Arctic (Ministry for Foreign 
Affairs, 2020). However, while climate change may improve the fisheries of 
the most mobile species (e.g., mackerel and capelin) due to range shifts, it 
also presents many uncertainties. How global warming and ice melting will 
affect local ocean productivity is a significant unknown (Meire et al., 2017). 
Even for pelagic species, great uncertainty surrounds the multitude of pro￾cesses that affect their distribution. Will fishery managers be able to effec￾tively regulate the increasing fishing effort as fish biomass changes with the 
warming climate? Can Greenland successfully control illegal fishing?
New challenges also affect local economies (Magel et al., 2020). The global 
pandemic has certainly impacted fishing communities and the fishery sector. Ex￾amples include outbreaks at seafood processing plants (Global Seafood Alliance, 
2020) and limits to global markets (particularly China) during the peak season for 
the crab fishery. It is unclear how fishing fleets will adapt to these kinds of novel 
changes (Selden et al., 2020), but many scenarios are possible. More extreme 
weather events brought by climate change can create hardships for small-vessel 
fleets, while larger vessels are able to adapt by staying out longer, fishing in more 
distant regions, or coping with the delays in other ways (Kuonen et al., 2019).
Scientists still do not know the full extent to which species can adapt to 
changes in water temperature and other oceanographic conditions. In the face 
of these uncertainties, a wise course of action is to provide opportunities for ad￾aptation of wild populations, and therefore, conserve the diversity of strategies 
that species exhibit (Schindler et al., 2010). Uncertainty and unknowns lead 
to challenges for science, practice, and governance. Creativity and flexibility in 
ocean governance will be increasingly important because of the complexity, the 
cumulative impacts of challenges like global climate change (e.g., shifting species 
distribution, ocean acidification, and hypoxia), emerging market incentives (e.g., 
third-party certification and traceability), pollution (e.g., microplastic impacts in 
wild and cultivated seafood), and the multiple interests (marine renewable energy, 
fiber optic cables, shipping, and tourism) in marine space. The coupled system 
(CNH) approach that considers the vulnerability, resilience, and adaptive capac￾ity of the entire marine system can lead to creative and thoughtful ways to respond 
(Cinner & Barnes, 2019).
Novel Approaches
The study of the CNH system of wild capture fisheries requires interdisciplinary 
and transdisciplinary investigative approaches, given the multifaceted nature of 52 F. Conway and L. Ciannelli
the system and the strong connection between the resource and its users (Ciannelli 
et al., 2014b). An interdisciplinary approach to research includes multiple disci￾plines and strives to develop new investigative tools to address the problem (Pater￾son et al., 2010). This is necessary, but not sufficient, because we also must consider 
different types of knowledge and uses that relate to this system (Beaudreau & 
Levin, 2014). Strong engagement of all resource users is also necessary to ensure 
that the investigative approach includes different types of knowledge (e.g., local 
ecological and experiential knowledge), and that research questions and possible 
management solutions are relevant to a variety of stakeholders.
US West Coast Groundfish
We close this chapter with a discussion of the US West Coast Groundfish fishery 
that provides a multi-decadal example of novel (current and future) challenges 
and approaches to a complex fisheries system.
About 500,000 metric tons of wild fish and invertebrates are caught and sold 
annually on the US Pacific Coast from California to Washington. This catch 
accounts for about $1 billion in sales and creates more than 230,000 jobs related 
to seafood capture, processing, and consumption (NMFS, 2018). A large fraction 
by weight (38%) of the wild catch is groundfish, a complex of over 90 species of 
fish that spend most of their life cycles near or on the seabed. For management 
purposes, groundfish are grouped into four main categories: rockfish (mostly of 
the genus Sebastes, nearly 60 species), flatfish (20 species), cartilaginous fish (skate 
and sharks), and groundfish (such as sablefish, Pacific hake or whiting, cabezon, 
and lingcod).
Commercial fishing vessels utilizing bottom or midwater trawl gear catch most 
of the groundfish. Other vessels operate using fixed gear (longline, pots) or hook 
and line (particularly close to shore). In the Pacific Coast region, about 30 vessels 
operate midwater trawls targeting Pacific hake, and another 70 vessels capture 
groundfish using bottom trawls (Figure 4.2). The number of bottom trawlers has 
decreased substantially over time. By 2019 only half the number of vessels were 
operating, as compared to two decades earlier, and only one-quarter the number 
that were operating in the late 1980s (NMFS, n.d.). Major policy changes dis￾cussed in Box 4.1 have led to fleet consolidation.
The history of the US West Coast non-whiting groundfish fishery resembles 
that of other commercial fisheries in the US and abroad (see Greenland, Box 4.5). 
Fisheries start with an initial development and expansion phase, undergo a pe￾riod of sustained high catch followed by a steady decline, and then move into a 
period of reconstruction. Environmental and climate variability adds uncertainty 
(Figure 4.3).
After the adoption of the 200-mile US Fishery Conservation Zone, the partici￾pation of fishing nations (Russia, China, Japan) continued to occur through joint 
venture systems. However, by the early 1980s, foreign fisheries were no longer able 
to participate due to the overcapitalization and increasing capacity of the US do￾mestic fleet. The NMFS determined that US fishing vessels possessed such great Wild Capture Fisheries: Processes, Technology, and Solutions 53
Figure 4.2 US fishing vessels in Newport, Oregon, that operate bottom trawl gear. Photo 
credit: L. Ciannelli.
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
1980 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030
Landings and Revenue
Year
Landings (1000 MT)
Revenue (M)
Non-whiting groundfish
Figure 4.3 Landings (thousands of metric tons) and revenue (millions of dollars) of 
non-whiting groundfish in the US West Coast bottom and midwater trawl fish￾ery. Data on landings and revenue are from the Pacific Fishery Information 
Network (PacFIN, https://reports.psmfc.org/pacfin/f?p=501:1000:162045408817
02::NO:::). Revenue data are expressed in December 2019 US dollars adjusted 
for inflation using the seasonally adjusted Consumer Price Index for All Ur￾ban Consumers from the US Bureau of Labor Statistics (https://beta.bls.gov/
dataViewer/view/timeseries/CUSR0000SA0).54 F. Conway and L. Ciannelli
fishing potential that there was no room for foreign vessels in this fishery. The 
groundfish harvest continued to rise and peaked in the early 1980s (Figure 4.3). 
By the early 2000s, nine species of groundfish were declared overfished (seven 
types of rockfish, lingcod, Pacific hake). The US Secretary of Commerce issued 
an official “disaster declaration” for the West Coast groundfish fishery in 2000 
(Conway & Shaw, 2008).
During this difficult period, fishery scientists and managers created plans to 
rebuild eight different stocks of important groundfish species. Quotas were drasti￾cally reduced, and nets were modified to minimize contact with benthic habitat. 
Major spatial restrictions (area closures called Rockfish Conservation Areas or 
RCAs) were designed to prohibit trawlers from the core depth zone with highest 
density of adults of the overfished groundfish stocks. The goal of these measures 
was to relieve fishing pressure on those stocks and commence rebuilding. A 2006 
amendment to the Pacific Coast Groundfish Fishery Management Plan desig￾nated areas as Essential Fish Habitat (EFH), strengthening the RCAs.
Since the 2000 disaster declaration, improved fisheries science, industry com￾pliance, innovative technological and regulatory advances, and improved recruit￾ment resulted in the recovery of most of the formerly depleted stocks. Rebuilding 
of this groundfish fishery appears to have been successful. With the lifting of 
some regulatory restrictions, new opportunities may exist for groundfish harvest – 
 although shifting market demands may present new challenges.
Conclusion
Natural and social scientists, managers, and industry practitioners together must 
address biological, environmental, economic, and social challenges in collabora￾tive teams that not only include different disciplines but also recognize different 
types of knowledge. Scientists must be comfortable working with managers and 
stakeholders to collectively develop research priorities and incorporate local eco￾logical knowledge into scientific understanding. NOAA has recently developed 
new priorities for addressing the impacts of climate change on marine fisheries. 
Agency scientists cannot do this alone, however, due to time limitations and their 
immediate tactical needs (e.g., completing surveys, conducting stock assessments) 
that continuously obviate deeper evaluation of the data and climate models/
scenarios. Survey data tend to be underutilized, and many fishery management 
agencies must coordinate with academic teams to enhance the utility of existing 
information and promote innovation through targeted research. Research part￾nerships with agencies are mutually beneficial because they expose students and 
early career scientists from academia to unique professional and research opportu￾nities (e.g., internships at agency labs, seagoing opportunities on research vessels). 
New areas of investment in research and education promote convergence train￾ing: graduate education that merges across disciplines and provides experiential 
learning opportunities for students to prepare them for diverse career pathways 
(Ciannelli et al., 2014b). Teams of students can work collaboratively to address 
applied problems developed by stakeholders and academics, such as bioeconomic Wild Capture Fisheries: Processes, Technology, and Solutions 55
impacts of species range shifts (Magel et al., 2020), evaluation of socio-ecological 
success of marine reserves (Wilson et al., 2021), and communication of uncer￾tainty in marine weather forecasts (Kuonen et al., 2019).
Questions for Reflection
 1. Are wild capture fisheries more than just food?
 2. What are some of the natural, human, and technological challenges facing 
 3. What are some of the similarities and differences of wild capture fisheries 
 4. What are the educational needs to sustainably manage fisheries?
Notes
 1 Ocean currents, temperatures, habitats, and their relationships.
 2 Stakeholders include seafood harvesters or growers, seafood businesses, and the coastal 
References
Arellano, C. E., & Swartzman, G. (2010). The Peruvian fishery: Changes in patterns 
and distribution over time. Fisheries Research, 101(3), 133–145. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
fishres.2009.08.007
Bailey, K. M., & Houde, E. D. (1989). Predation on eggs and larvae of marine fishes and the 
recruitment problem. In J. H. S. Blaxter & A. J. Southward (Eds.), Advances in marine biol￾ogy (Vol. 25, pp. 1–83). Academic Press. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0065–2881(08)60187-X
Beaudreau, A. H., & Levin, P. S. (2014). Advancing the use of local ecological knowl￾edge for assessing data-poor species in coastal ecosystems. Ecological Applications, 24(2), 
244–256. https://doi.org/10.1890/13–0817.1
Bonanomi, S., Pellissier, L., Therkildsen, N. O., Hedeholm, R. B., Retzel, A., Meldrup, D., 
Olsen, S. M., Nielsen, A., Pampoulie, C., Hemmer-Hansen, J., Wisz, M. S., Grønkjær, 
P., & Nielsen, E. E. (2015). Archived DNA reveals fisheries and climate induced col￾lapse of a major fishery. Scientific Reports, 5(1), 1–8. https://doi.org/10.1038/srep15395
Brander, K. (2010). Impacts of climate change on fisheries. Journal of Marine Systems, 
79(3–4), 389–402. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmarsys.2008.12.015
Carothers, C., Lew, D. K., & Sepez, J. (2010). Fishing rights and small communities: Alaska 
halibut IFQ transfer patterns. Ocean Coastal Management, 53(9), 518–523. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.ocecoaman.2010.04.014
Chavez, F. P., & Messié, M. (2009). A comparison of eastern boundary upwelling ecosystems. 
Progress in oceanography, 83(1–4), 80–96. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pocean.2009.07.032
Cheung, W. W. L., Lam, V. W. Y., Sarmiento, J. L., Kearney, K., Watson, R. E. G., Zeller, 
D., & Pauly, D. (2010). Large-scale redistribution of maximum fisheries catch potential 
in the global ocean under climate change. Global Change Biology, 16(1), 24–35. https://
doi.org/10.1111/j.1365–2486.2009.01995.x56 F. Conway and L. Ciannelli
Ciannelli, L., Bailey, K., & Olsen, E. M. (2014a). Evolutionary and ecological constraints 
of fish spawning habitats. ICES Journal of Marine Science, 72(2), 285–296. https://doi.
org/10.1093/icesjms/fsu145
Ciannelli, L., Hunsicker, M., Beaudreau, A., Bailey, K., Crowder, L. B., Finley, C., Webb, 
C., Reynolds, J., Sagmiller, K., Anderies, J. M., Hawthorne, D., Parrish, J., Heppell, 
S., Conway, F., & Chigbu, P. (2014b). Transdisciplinary graduate education in marine 
resource science and management. ICES Journal of Marine Science, 71(5), 1047–1051. 
https://doi.org/10.1093/icesjms/fsu067
Cinner, J. E., & Barnes, M. L. (2019). Social dimensions of resilience in social-ecological 
systems. One Earth, 1(1), 51–56. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.oneear.2019.08.003
Conway, F. D. L., Gilden, J., & Zvonkovic, A. (2002). Communication, power and innova￾tion in fishing families and communities. Fisheries, 27(10), 20–29.
Conway, F., & Shaw, W. (2008). Socioeconomic lessons learned from the response to the 
federally declared West Coast groundfish disaster. Fisheries, 33(6), 269–277. https://doi.
org/10.1577/1548–8446-33.6.269
Cramer, L. A., Flathers, C., Caracciolo, D., Russell, S. M., & Conway, F. (2018). Graying 
of the fleet: Perceived impacts on coastal resilience and local policy. Marine Policy, 96, 
27–35. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpol.2018.07.012
Dahlke, F. T., Butzin, M., Nahrgang, J., Puvanendran, V., Mortensen, A., Pörtner, H. -O., 
& Storch, D. (2018). Northern cod species face spawning habitat losses if global warming 
exceeds 1.5°C. Science Advances, 4(11), eaas8821. https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.aas8821
DingsØr, G. E., Ciannelli, L., Chan, K. -S., Ottersen, G., & Stenseth, C. N. (2007). D ensity 
dependence and density independence during the early life stages of four marine fish 
stocks. Ecology, 88(3), 625–634. https://doi.org/10.1890/05–1782
Donkersloot, R., & Carothers, C. (2016). The graying of the Alaskan fishing fleet. 
Environment: Science and Policy for Sustainable Development, 58(3), 30–42. https://doi.
org/10.1080/00139157.2016.1162011
Fina, M. (2011). Evolution of catch share management: Lessons from catch share management 
in the North Pacific. Fisheries, 36(4), 164–177. https://doi.org/10.1080/03632415.2011.564509
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. (1995). Code of conduct for 
responsible fisheries. www.fao.org/3/a-v9878e.pdf
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. (2004). Fishery country profile - 
Greenland. https://www.fao.org/fishery/docs/DOCUMENT/fcp/en/FI_CP_GL.pdf
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. (2015). Voluntary guidelines for 
securing sustainable small-scale fisheries in the context of food security and poverty eradica￾tion. www.fao.org/3/a-i4356en.pdf).
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. (2020). The state of world fish￾eries and aquaculture 2020. Sustainability in action. https://doi.org/10.4060/ca9229en
Frank, K. T., Petrie, B., Leggett, W. C., & Boyce, D. G. (2016). Large scale, synchronous 
variability of marine fish populations driven by commercial exploitation. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences, 113(29), 8248–8253. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1602325113
Frank, K. T., Petrie, B., Leggett, W. C., & Boyce, D. G. (2018). Exploitation drives an 
ontogenetic-like deepening in marine fish. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences, 115(25), 6422–6427. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1802096115
Global Seafood Alliance. (2020, June 3). Crisis response: How is the seafood supply chain 
responding to the COVID-19 pandemic? [Video]. YouTube. https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=c52DAIy9Phw
Greenberg, P. (2014). American catch: The fight for our local seafood. Penguin Press.
Keller, A. A., Ciannelli, L., Wakefield, W. W., Simon, V., Barth, J. A., & Pierce, S. D. 
(2017). Species-specific responses of demersal fishes to near-bottom oxygen levels within Wild Capture Fisheries: Processes, Technology, and Solutions 57
the California Current large marine ecosystem. Marine Ecology Progress Series, 568, 
151–173. https://doi.org/10.3354/meps12066
Kuonen, J., Conway, F., & Strub, T. (2019). Relating ocean condition forecasts to the 
process of end-user decision making: A case study of the Oregon commercial fishing 
community. Marine Technology Society Journal, 53(1), 53–66. https://doi.org/10.4031/
MTSJ.53.1.1
Long, S., & Jones P. J. (2021). Greenland’s offshore Greenland halibut fishery and role of 
the Marine Stewardship Council certification: A governance case study. Marine Policy, 
127, 104095. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpol.2020.104095
Magel, C. L., Lee, E. M. J., Strawn, A. M., Swieca, K., & Jensen, A. D. (2020). Connecting 
crabs, currents, and coastal communities: Examining the impacts of changing ocean 
conditions on the distribution of U.S. West Coast Dungeness crab commercial catch. 
Frontiers in Marine Science, 7, 401. https://doi.org/10.3389/fmars.2020.00401
Matulich, S. C. (2009). The value of individual processing quota in the Alaska red king 
crab fishery: A preliminary analysis. Marine Resource Economics, 24(2), 187–193. https://
doi.org/10.1086/mre.24.2.42731379
McCay, B. J., Creed, C. F., Finlayson, A. C., Apostle, R., & Mikalsen, K. (1995). Individual 
transferable quotas (ITQs) in Canadian and US fisheries. Ocean & Coastal Manage￾ment, 28(1–3), 85–115. https://doi.org/10.1016/0964–5691(95)00068-2
Meire, L., Mortensen, J., Meire, P., Juul-Pedersen, T., Sejr, M. K., Rysgaard, S., Nygaard, R., 
Huybrechts, P., & Meysman, F. J. R. (2017). Marine-terminating glaciers sustain high 
productivity in Greenland fjords. Global Change Biology, 23(12), 5344–5357. https://doi.
org/10.1111/gcb.13801
Ministry of Forestry and Agriculture (Italy). (2020). Annual report on the efforts made by 
Italy in 2019 to achieve a sustainable balance between fishing capacity and fishing opportuni￾ties in compliance with art 22 Reg. (CE) n.1380/2013.
Ministry for Foreign Affairs (Government of Iceland). (2020, December 20). Greenland 
and Iceland in the New Arctic: Recommendations of the Greenland Committee appointed by 
the Minister for Foreign Affairs and International Development Co-operation. https://www.
government.is/library/01-Ministries/Ministry-for-Foreign-Affairs/PDF-skjol/Greenland￾Iceland-rafraen20–01-21.pdf
Morrison, W. (2019, April 8). National Marine Fishery Service’s catch share policy. NMFS. 
https://media.fisheries.noaa.gov/dam-migration/01–121.pdf
Myers, R. A., & Worm, B. (2003). Rapid worldwide depletion of predatory fish communi￾ties. Nature, 423(6937), 280–283. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature01610
National Marine Fisheries Service. (n.d.). Fisheye: Fisheries economic explorer. https://data￾explorer.northwestscience.fisheries.noaa.gov/fisheye/
National Marine Fisheries Service. (2018). Fisheries economics of the United States, 2016
(NMFS-F/SPO-18). U.S. Dept. of Commerce & NOAA. https://www.fisheries.noaa.gov/
resource/document/fisheries-economics-united-states-report-2016
National Marine Fisheries Service. (2019). Laws & policies: Magnuson-Stevens Act. https://
www.fisheries.noaa.gov/topic/laws-policies#magnuson-stevens-act
Nielsen, M., Nielsen, A. H. R., Waldo, S., Blomquist, J., Asche, F., Bergesen, O., Viðarsson, 
J. R., Sigurðardóttir, S., & Sveinþórsdóttir, R. (2017). Employment and salary of Nordic 
coastal fishermen. Nordisk Ministerråd. https://doi.org/10.6027/TN2017–558
Paterson, B., Isaacs, M., Hara, M., Jarre, A., & Moloney, C. L. (2010). Transdisciplinary 
co-operation for an ecosystem approach to fisheries: A case study from the South African 
sardine fishery. Marine Policy, 34(4), 782–794. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpol.2010.01.019
Pauly, D., & Christensen, V. (1995). Primary production required to sustain global fisher￾ies. Nature, 374(6519), 255–257. https://doi.org/10.1038/374255a058 F. Conway and L. Ciannelli
Pfeiffer, L., & Gratz, T. (2016). The effect of rights-based fisheries management on risk 
taking and fishing safety. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 113(10), 2615–
2620. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1509456113
Pinsky, M. L., Worm, B., Fogarty, M. J., Sarmiento, J. L., & Levin, S. A. (2013). Marine 
taxa track local climate velocities. Science, 341(6151), 1239–1242. https://doi.org/10.1126/
science.1239352
Pooley, S. G. (1998). Issues and options in designing and implementing limited access pro￾grams in marine fisheries (NOAA-TM-NMFS-SWFSC-252). U.S. Dept. of Commerce & 
NOAA. https://repository.library.noaa.gov/view/noaa/3047/noaa_3047_DS1.pdf
Rettig, R. B., & Ginter, J. J. C. (Eds.). (1978). Limited entry as a fishery management tool.
University of Washington Press.
Ringer, D., Carothers, C., Donkersloot, R., Coleman, J., & Cullenberg, P. (2018). For 
generations to come? The privatization paradigm and shifting social baselines in Ko￾diak, Alaska’s commercial fisheries. Marine Policy, 98, 97–103. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
marpol.2018.09.009
Rogers, L. A., Griffin, R., Young, T., Fuller, E., St. Martin, K., & Pinsky, M. L. (2019). 
Shifting habitats expose fishing communities to risk under climate change. Nature 
 Climate Change, 9(7), 512–516. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41558-019-0503-z
Russell, S., Sparks, K., Arias-Arthur, A., & Varney, A. (2014). Pacific Coast groundfish trawl 
fishery social study. Northwest Fisheries Science Center. https://www.fisheries.noaa.gov/
west-coast/socioeconomics/west-coast-groundfish-trawl-fishery-social-study
Schindler, D. E., Hilborn, R., Chasco, B., Boatright, C. P., Quinn, T. P., Rogers, L. A., 
& W ebster, M. S. (2010). Population diversity and the portfolio effect in an exploited 
species. Nature, 465(7298), 609–612. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature09060
Schittone, J. (2001). Tourism vs. commercial fishers: Development and changing use of 
Key West and Stock Island, Florida. Ocean & Coastal Management, 44(1–2), 15–37. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0964–5691(00)00078-8
Selden, R. L., Thorson, J. T., Samhouri, J. F., Bograd, S. J., Brodie, S., Carroll, G., Haltuch, 
M. A., Hazen, E. L., Holsman, K. K., Pinsky, M. L., Tolimieri, N., & Willis-Norton, E. 
(2020). Coupled changes in biomass and distribution drive trends in availability of fish 
stocks to US West Coast ports. ICES Journal of Marine Science, 77(1), 188–199. https://
doi.org/10.1093/icesjms/fsz211
Silvestri, G. (2003). Lacco Ameno tuna and other fishing on the Island of Ischia. Imagaenaria.
Timmermann, A., An, S.-I., Kug, J.-S., Jin, F. -F., Cai, W., Capotondi, A., Cobb, K. M., 
Lengaigne, M., McPhaden, M. J., Stuecker, M. F., Stein, K., Wittenberg, A. T., Yun, K.-
S., Bayr, T., Chen, H.-C., Chikamoto, Y., Dewitte, B., Dommenget, D., Grothe, P. … 
Zhang, X. (2018). El Niño–Southern Oscillation complexity. Nature, 559, 535–545. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-018-0252–6.
US Bureau of Labor Statistics. (2022, April 18). Occupational outlook handbook. https://
www.bls.gov/ooh/math/mathematicians-and-statisticians.htm
Weber, M. L. (2002). From abundance to scarcity: A history of U.S. marine fisheries policy. 
Island Press.
Wilson, M. N., Laufer, A. E., Howard, E. M., & Wong-Ala, J. A. (2021). Lessons from the 
trenches: Students’ perspectives of their own marine transdisciplinary education. Fron￾tiers in Marine Science, 7, 592368. https://doi.org/10.3389/fmars.2020.592368
White, C. S. (2015). Getting into fishing: Recruitment and social resilience in North Nor￾folk’s ‘cromer crab’ fishery, UK. Sociologia Ruralis, 55(3), 291–308. https://doi.org/10.1111/
soru.12101
White, E. R., Froehlich, H. E., Gephart, J. A., Cottrell, R. S., Branch, T. A., Bejarano, R. 
A., & Baum, J. K. (2020). Early effects of COVID-19 on US fisheries and seafood con￾sumption. Fish and Fisheries, 22(1), 232–239. https://doi.org/10.1111/faf.125255 Global Marine Aquaculture 
Development
J. D. Stieglitz, M. Touchton, D. D. Benetti, 
D. Rothen, A. Clark-Hughes, B. K. Haus, 
A. Zangroniz, and D. O. Suman
Continued global population growth has focused attention on improving the 
 production, efficiency, and sustainability of food production systems to provide for 
food security. Capture fisheries are the last remaining industrialized animal pro￾tein production system still operating in a hunter-gatherer procurement strategy, 
while aquaculture represents a farming alternative whose growth can be attrib￾uted to several inherent advantages compared to capture fisheries. Aquaculture, 
or fish farming, has emerged as one of the most promising forms of food produc￾tion for both animal and plant products and is located in both marine and coastal 
environments and inland waters.
Aquaculture currently provides about half the global aquatic animal produc￾tion and produces more fish for human consumption than capture fisheries. The 
development of this rapidly growing activity faces several challenges, as well as 
many opportunities. While aquatic animals are a significant food source for bil￾lions of people, wild-caught (capture) production has plateaued and may decline 
in the coming decades. The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United 
Nations (FAO, 2022) estimates that in 2019 about 35.4% of global fish stocks were 
overfished (i.e., fished at biologically unsustainable levels), while 57.3% were fished 
sustainably. Capture fisheries offer little room for growth; only 7.2% of stocks are 
underfished (FAO, 2022). Climate change will exacerbate this trend, alter ranges 
of many stocks, and lead to uncertain ecosystem effects. Coastal wetland losses, 
as well as degradation of tropical coral reefs and coastal water quality, all adversely 
impact the quality and quantity of wild-caught species.
Residents of coastal communities may be particularly vulnerable to the decreas￾ing availability of captured aquatic resources. For generations, communities have 
depended upon healthy and easily accessible local seafood. As these resources 
diminish in supply and safety, food security for residents of coastal communities 
may become more tenuous. Poverty levels in small coastal communities are high, 
particularly in developing countries, and any threat to food supply could have 
grave impacts on community livelihoods and well-being.
FAO (2022) reported that the 2020 global production of fisheries was 
177.8  million tons. Of this total, capture fisheries contributed about 51% while aq￾uaculture production accounted for 49%. However, since a portion (~20.4 million 
tons) of capture fisheries is utilized for non-food products, such as fishmeal and fish 
DOI: 10.4324/9781003058151-760 J. D. Stieglitz et al.
oil for animal feeds, aquaculture provided 56% of seafood consumed by humans 
in 2020, compared to 44% from capture fisheries. The contribution from aquacul￾ture production has steadily increased over the past four decades, while capture 
fisheries (marine and inland) have remained relatively constant (Table 5.1). Over 
20 million people are directly engaged in aquaculture operations, compared with 
almost 60 million in capture fisheries (FAO, 2022). Asian countries dominate 
farming of aquatic animals and are responsible for about 89% of total production; 
China’s share alone is almost 60%, and India, Bangladesh, Indonesia, Thailand, 
and Vietnam are significant producers.
We must distinguish between marine/coastal and inland farming activities, 
which generally represent marine species vs. freshwater species. The marine/
coastal production of aquatic animals in 2020 was about 33.1 million tons, or only 
about 37.8%. Both aquaculture sectors (marine/coastal and inland) have experi￾enced high growth in past decades (Table 5.2). Inland aquaculture utilizes a vari￾ety of techniques from tanks, earthen ponds, in-pond raceways, and net pens in 
inland water bodies, as well as integrated paddy rice-fish culture. Finfish dominate 
inland aquaculture production, particularly carp, tilapia, and catfish. Cultivation 
of marine species occurs in coastal ponds, lagoons, and tanks or in the open 
ocean (Figure 5.1). Mariculture operations may use floating or submersible net 
pens, lines, or rafts and often depend on seedstock that is produced in nurseries 
on land. Asian countries together with Latin American nations dominate coastal 
aquaculture activities.
Table 5.2 indicates the categories of aquatic animals (finfish, crustaceans, mol￾lusks) grown in marine/coastal operations. Mollusks (oysters, scallops, mussels, 
clams) dominate in live weight with similar contributions of finfish (Atlantic 
salmon and others) and crustaceans (shrimp, prawns, crabs). Asian countries 
contribute 87% of finfish production, 89% of crustacean production, and 92% of 
mollusk production (FAO, 2022). We address the growth of Atlantic salmon and 
shrimp cultivation later in the chapter.
Table 5.1 World fisheries and aquaculture production in millions of tons live weight 
(FAO, 2022)
1990s 2000s 2010s 2020
CAPTURE
Inland 7.1 9.3 11.3 11.5
Marine/Coastal 81.9 81.6 79.8 78.8
Total Capture 88.9 90.9 91.0 90.3
AQUACULTURE
Inland 12.6 25.6 44.7 54.4
Marine/Coastal 9.2 17.9 26.8 33.1
Total Farmed 21.8 43.4 71.5 87.5
TOTAL GLOBAL FISHERIES 110.7 134.3 162.6 177.8
AND AQUACULTUREGlobal Marine Aquaculture Development 61
Figure 5.1 Net pen used for offshore aquaculture production of cobia (Rachycentron 
canadum) at an offshore aquaculture farm off the coast of Panama. Photo 
credit: J. Stieglitz.
Table 5.2 Global inland and marine/coastal aquaculture production in thousands of 
tons live weight in 2020 (FAO, 2022)
Category Inland Marine/Coastal Total
Finfish 49,120 8,341 57,461
Crustaceans 4,477 6,760 11,237
Mollusks 193 17,548 17,741
Other Aquatic Animals 594 469 1,062
Total 54,384 33,117 87,501
The rapid growth of global aquaculture in past decades is estimated to be 6.7% 
from 1990 to 2020 (FAO, 2022). Yet, concerns remain over balancing this growth 
with associated socio-environmental impacts. The question is no longer whether 
aquaculture is necessary but, rather, how to ensure sustainability.
Aquaculture has a bright future, and if growth trends continue, it will surpass 
the sum of capture fisheries production worldwide. By 2030, aquaculture should 
produce 106 million tons live weight, an increase of 21% over 2020 values (FAO, 
2022). However, FAO predicts that growth rates will decelerate in the coming 
decade as countries increase their environmental oversight of farming activities.62 J. D. Stieglitz et al.
Challenges and Advances
The growth in marine aquaculture development has resulted in many benefits – 
notably, increased consumer access to seafood – but growth has sometimes come 
at a cost. Balancing economic viability and environmental sustainability remains 
challenging. Utilization of technical advances, improved understanding of pro￾duction hurdles, and implementation of sustainable measures to overcome chal￾lenges all facilitate marine aquaculture’s role as leading producer of the world’s 
seafood supply. The following sections discuss some of the primary challenges 
and advances.
Technical
Technical challenges are either biologically or otherwise associated with the 
engineering of growing and harvesting systems. From a biological standpoint, a 
principal challenge is identification of reliable sources of healthy, high-quality 
seedstock used for stocking grow-out systems. Major marine species groups, such 
as bivalves, crustaceans, fish, and macroalgae, all face species-specific technical 
challenges. Overcoming these requires research and development to resolve the 
biological and physiological demands of the species’ life stages. Other challenges 
are associated with engineering aspects of grow-out systems for large-scale produc￾tion. Technical developments are often difficult to implement because aquacul￾ture enterprises range from large corporations with global operations to countless 
small-scale local farms. Such diversity presents social, economic, regulatory, and 
political complexities that can make large-scale adoption of technical advances 
difficult (Kumar et al., 2018).
Technical advances include increased efficiency and reduction of total environ￾mental impact (Boyd et al., 2020; Lovatelli et al., 2013; Price et al., 2015). Inno￾vations also occur on both the supply and demand sides (Kumar & Engle, 2016). 
Recent developments in genetics; animal health and welfare and disease control; 
life-cycle closure of many high-value species; improvements in recirculating aq￾uaculture systems (RAS); improved feed efficiencies and new feed ingredients; 
and engineering technologies for open-ocean and land-based systems are all sig￾nificant. These innovations offer the potential to improve the overall production 
efficiency of marine aquaculture.
Great progress has been made in domestication of major species, such as shrimp, 
tilapia, and salmon (Teletchea, 2015), leading to the availability of high-quality, 
genetically selected, improved seedstock. However, despite advances, the seed￾stock for many marine species is still sourced from the wild broodstock, leading to 
high variability in quality and overall aquaculture performance, reduced produc￾tion efficiencies, and environmental impacts.
Land-based marine systems, such as RAS, coastal ponds, “flow-through”-type 
systems, as well as near-shore coastal net pens, are viable options for many com￾mercially produced marine fish and crustaceans. However, in their current form 
these production systems cannot meet the expected demand of 40–50 million Global Marine Aquaculture Development 63
metric tons of additional seafood that aquaculture must supply by 2030 to meet 
the world’s projected demand (World Bank, 2013). Effectively satisfying the pro￾jected seafood demand requires improvements in production efficiencies across 
multiple criteria (e.g., biological, economic, environmental, and operational). The 
open ocean environment, characterized by strong currents and deep water, per￾mits greater assimilative waste capacity, representing one of the most promising 
frontiers for technical advancement in marine aquaculture (Benetti et al., 2010; 
Buck & Langan, 2017). Improved economic viability and environmental sustain￾ability are inextricably tied to technical advances in the field.
Economic
Global marine aquaculture also faces numerous economic challenges because it is 
essentially a practice of refining relatively low-cost raw materials into higher value 
products. This refining process exists for both fed (fish, shrimp) and unfed (mac￾roalgae, mollusks) species, with the primary difference that the latter typically 
utilize freely accessible inputs for growth. Profitability is achieved when the mar￾gins between production costs and revenue from outputs reach a point of overall 
economic viability. Numerous complexities associated with these basic principles 
can be tied to the fact that marine aquaculture and the seafood industry are global 
enterprises. Raw ingredients, equipment, seedstock, and other critical elements 
necessary to support individual farming operations are sourced globally. This com￾plex supply chain leads to economic hurdles outside the control of any single oper￾ation. The global economy’s tumultuous nature can lead to a farm being profitable 
one day, then losing money the next, simply because of currency exchange rates on 
the supply or demand side. Understanding the nuances of the value-chain is criti￾cal to distinguishing successful aquaculture ventures from failures. Well-informed 
producers attempt to minimize the risk of these economic uncertainties, often 
leading to eventual vertical integration1
 of aquaculture businesses (Olson & Crid￾dle, 2008). By controlling many of the variables in the production process, opera￾tors attempt to minimize risk as much as possible. Such practices are not unique to 
marine aquaculture, yet the inherent factors associated with growing a live product 
for market adds a significant layer of complexity. Small-scale producers can be par￾ticularly vulnerable to financial risks given their narrow profit margins. Advances, 
including use of disease-resistant and specific pathogen-free seedstock, improved 
understanding of animal welfare and life support requirements, progress in animal 
health, and implementation of best management practices have all led to more 
sustainable marine aquaculture operations.
Marine aquaculture possesses many inherent economic advantages over 
wild-harvest seafood operations. Benefits stem from the availability of fresh aqua￾culture products on regular schedules, while wild harvest depends on the success 
or failure of a particular fishing season. Additionally, farm-raised seafood has a 
known history that can be easily traced, certified, and delivered to the consumer. 
Increasing awareness of human health and nutrition has led many consumers 
to seek seafood options that can be certified as free from certain contaminants. 64 J. D. Stieglitz et al.
Aquaculture can deliver these products through careful management of the entire 
production process and selection of feed inputs. Additionally, aquaculture per￾mits high-demand seafood to be produced closer to markets, thereby potentially 
reducing the overall carbon footprint associated with global seafood production. 
As consumers increasingly understand aquaculture’s benefits, the sector’s growth 
should not directly compete with commercial wild-catch fisheries.
Environmental
Ocean aquaculture illustrates a classic case of “tragedy of the commons”, whereby 
ocean space – a common-pool resource – is developed in what is deemed to be 
the most profitable manner regardless of the environmental impacts (e.g., water 
pollution, invasive species introductions, diseases, habitat degradation). Examples 
repeat across the major species sectors of marine aquaculture, including salmon 
and shrimp aquaculture. The key to achieving sustainability is identification of 
methods, species, systems, and management practices that allow for an appropri￾ate balance of environmental protection and economic viability. In recent dec￾ades as the industry has matured, operations that have achieved this balance are 
those that typically attract the greatest investment. Even operations once deemed 
“traditional” and unable to improve sustainability indicators, such as pond-based 
marine shrimp and fish production, have seen significant improvements in overall 
operating efficiencies, profitability, social acceptance, and environmental sustain￾ability (Boyd et al., 2020).
Legal/Regulatory
The ocean presents attractive investment options for aquaculture, often to the ex￾clusion of equity and sustainability (Jouffray et al., 2020). Regulatory structures 
that grant licenses to aquaculture activities are viewed by some as privatization of 
a common-pool resource. Thus, perceptions of traditional users, particularly fish￾ers, toward ocean aquaculture are often negative. Transparent and participatory 
governance from global to local levels is critical for addressing concerns about sus￾tainability and equity. Marine spatial planning (ocean zoning) is one anticipatory 
planning technique that could assist the development of rational regulation of the 
suite of anthropogenic ocean activities, including aquaculture (Lester et al., 2018).
In many countries ocean aquaculture operations face numerous legal and reg￾ulatory obstacles. Framework legislation is essential for delegating institutional 
authority and responsibilities and clearly enunciating principles and objectives 
for this sector. Legislation should mandate the promulgation of regulations and 
development of a national aquaculture plan that establishes operational guide￾lines, permitting structures, and parameters for site selection; sets requirements 
for monitoring for disease, water quality, and escapees; and develops attractive 
parameters for leases. A country cannot expect to create a welcoming environ￾ment for investors without clear, well-structured legislation and implementing 
regulations. The permitting process itself may present significant disincentives for 
ocean aquaculture activities. A developer may have to obtain numerous permits Global Marine Aquaculture Development 65
from various agencies, confront high transactional costs in terms of time and 
money, and face an extremely high burden of proof that the activity will not cause 
significant environmental impacts. The result could be an environment creating 
uncertainty and disincentives for potential investors. Ocean aquaculture in the 
US is plagued by regulatory difficulties (Box 5.1).
BOX 5.1 Regulatory Challenges for US Ocean Aquaculture
Open ocean aquaculture in the US is illustrative of some of the complex￾ities and challenges facing this sector (Lester et al., 2018). The Gulf of 
Mexico exemplifies the conflict among branches of the federal government 
over authority for ocean aquaculture. At least five federal agencies have 
permitting authority over different aspects of ocean aquaculture, and no 
streamlined coordinated permitting system currently exists. The current 
situation (July 2022) is one of great uncertainty for aquaculture investors. 
The Executive Branch has taken steps to facilitate ocean aquaculture. In 
2016 the Gulf of Mexico Regional Fisheries Management Council adopted 
an Open Ocean Aquaculture Fisheries Management Plan (NMFS) that 
was subsequently approved by the NOAA Fisheries. Executive Order 13921 
(May 7, 2020) attempted to promote US ocean aquaculture by mandating 
a streamlined permitting process that NMFS would coordinate, the crea￾tion of Aquaculture Opportunity Areas where farms would be located, and 
rapid environmental review. Commercial fishing and environmental groups 
challenged the authority of the NMFS under the Magnuson–Stevens Fish￾ery Conservation and Management Act to regulate aquaculture activities 
and were ultimately successful in the US Circuit Court of Appeals (Gulf 
Fishermens Association v. NMFS) in August 2020. Legislation (Advancing 
the Quality and Understanding of American Aquaculture Act/AQUAA 
Act – S.3100) that would establish the regulatory framework for open ocean 
aquaculture has been introduced in Congress with bipartisan support, but 
the proposal has failed to advance in numerous sessions. By 2022, the ab￾sence of a consistent message from the three governmental branches left 
US open ocean aquaculture development in limbo. Nevertheless, despite 
the absence of a predictable regulatory framework, one net pen farm in the 
eastern Gulf of Mexico (Ocean Era, LLC) obtained all required permits and 
should begin operations to grow Almaco jack in late 2022.
Case Studies of Two Marine Species: Shrimp and Atlantic 
Salmon
Shrimp and Atlantic salmon are two stories of seafood farming that have entered 
Western markets and are among the largest farmed marine species. Both have expe￾rienced rapid growth and exhibit increasingly more sustainable social and environ￾mental practices; however, there are still severe social and environmental impacts.66 J. D. Stieglitz et al.
Shrimp Aquaculture
Two decades after World War II, Japanese fishery scientists succeeded in raising 
commercial quantities of kuruma shrimp, Penaeus japonicus, in captivity. Several 
years later, Filipino scientists introduced aquaculture techniques for giant black 
tiger shrimp, Penaeus monodon, and shrimp aquaculture began its rapid spread 
through Southeast Asia. By the 1970s, the boom in shrimp farming was the proof 
that the “Blue Revolution”2
 could boost production of seafood. Shrimp aquaculture 
operations expanded rapidly throughout many tropical developing countries that 
viewed high investment returns and expanding export markets for the product as 
stimuli for national development. By 2018, production surpassed 6.5 million tons of 
farmed shrimp (P. vannamei and P. monodon) with about 75% of production from 
Asia and 25% from Latin America (FAO, 2022). Post-larvae introduced to grow￾out ponds are obtained from the wild (extensive, artisanal operations) or produced 
in hatcheries (semi-intensive or intensive operations). Shrimp is a gourmet export 
product providing significant returns for domestic and foreign investors, while typ￾ically offering little benefit for food security in producing countries.
Today, 12 of the top shrimp farming countries (Vietnam, China, Bangladesh, 
Ecuador, Indonesia, Myanmar, India, Mexico, Philippines, Thailand, Brazil, and 
Honduras) house almost 97% of the pond area (Boyd & McNevin, 2018), and all 
have experienced associated high rates of mangrove loss. Many of the extensive 
shrimp farms were built in mangrove ecosystems during the boom period, causing 
significant mangrove destruction. By 2001, aquaculture was responsible for 52% 
of global mangrove loss, while shrimp farming itself accounted for 38% of losses 
(Warne, 2011). Numerous incentives explain the historical siting of shrimp ponds 
in mangroves. Wild larvae (“seed”) for stocking ponds were collected in mangrove 
channels and estuaries. Brackish water could be easily pumped from tidal chan￾nels; alternatively, water simply filled the ponds during high tides. Wastewater 
from ponds could be discharged into mangrove tidal channels. Transport of feed 
and shrimp harvest by boat was a feasible option. Most importantly, land was 
cheap, available, and usually publicly owned. Governments often undervalued 
mangrove ecosystem services and granted inexpensive concessions for use of the 
land and water (or failed to enforce prohibitions on removing mangroves).
Many governments and international financial institutions (e.g., World 
Bank, Asian Development Bank, Inter-American Development Bank) lacked 
appreciation of the ecosystem benefits of mangrove ecosystems and prioritized 
short-term economic gain, thus encouraging conversion of coastal wetlands to 
shrimp aquaculture ponds. A third of international fisheries assistance to the 
Philippines (approximately $1 billion) supported aquaculture projects. Primavera 
(2000) suggested that aquaculture was responsible for perhaps half of that coun￾try’s mangrove losses. Governments granted concessions to develop mangrove 
forests through conversion to shrimp ponds for extended periods of time at low 
rents (Primavera, 2005). Armitage (2002) noted that governments and multilat￾eral financial institutions, allied with well-connected entrepreneurs, facilitated 
construction of shrimp aquaculture ponds at the expense of traditional users of Global Marine Aquaculture Development 67
common-pool resources. The privatization or extended leasing of common-pool 
resources undermined community-based property rights and resource access and 
led to marginalization of numerous traditional mangrove users. Essentially, a 
 multi-use public resource (mangrove forests) had become a single-use private asset 
(shrimp ponds). Shrimp ponds located in mangrove areas have also been respon￾sible for serious social conflicts between pond operators and traditional users of 
mangrove ecosystems, including small-scale fishers, crab and clam collectors, and 
small-scale wood harvesters, many of whom live in extreme poverty. Shrimp pond 
operators have often blocked access routes on which traditional users depend to 
access public resources, sometimes leading to violent confrontations between lo￾cal community members and shrimp pond guards.
The troubling situation of shrimp aquaculture has improved in recent decades 
due to several factors (Ashton, 2008). A growing number of operations depend on 
farm-raised broodstock and hatchery post-larvae – decreasing the dependency on 
wild caught larvae, as well as improving efficiency. There is an increased recog￾nition that mangrove areas are suboptimal for shrimp pond location, and ponds 
are increasingly being built further inland. Other technological advances, such as 
the installation of recycled/closed water circulation systems, continuous aeration, 
improved artificial feeds with reduced percentages of fishmeal components, and 
the decreased use of antibiotics, have all lightened the ecological footprint of 
shrimp farms.
Vietnam and Indonesia have pioneered silvofishery models that integrate shrimp 
aquaculture into mangrove areas and embrace multiple uses of mangroves along 
with shrimp culture (Ahmed et al., 2018). The Mangroves and Markets (MAM) 
Project in Vietnam, supported by SNV Netherlands Development O rganization, 
encourages a traditional type of shrimp pond that requires a minimum of 50% of 
mangrove cover. Shrimp produced from this program also receive certification 
that recognizes less harmful shrimp aquaculture techniques (SNV Netherlands 
Development Organization, n.d.).
Many countries have passed new legislation and adopted regulations that pro￾hibit new concessions of shrimp ponds in mangroves. Implementation of these 
prohibitions can often be a challenge, however. Campaigns of international and 
domestic NGOs, as well as organized opposition from mangrove user groups, 
have also exerted pressure on governments and consumers (Suman, 2019). While 
mangrove and coastal wetlands protection continue to face serious challenges 
worldwide, recognition of the important role of mangrove biomass and sediments 
as sinks for CO2 (blue carbon) is increasingly appreciated by the international 
community (Ahmed et al., 2018; Nellemann et al., 2009).
Certification programs involving collaboration of the industry and NGOs, de￾scribed further below, also reduce the adverse environmental and social impacts 
of shrimp farming through consumer choice. In 1999 the Network of Aquaculture 
Centres in Asia-Pacific partnered with the World Bank, WWF, and later UNEP 
to form the Consortium on Shrimp Farming and the Environment – subsequently 
developing the International Principles for Responsible Shrimp Farming (FAO/
NACA/UNEP/WB/WWF, 2006). The development of codes of best practice (i.e., 68 J. D. Stieglitz et al.
Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries (FAO, 2011a) and Technical Guidelines on 
Aquaculture Certification (FAO, 2011b)), through collaborations of international 
organizations, academics, NGOs, and the industry itself, also evidences the posi￾tive evolution of this industry, success in the increasing siting of ponds away from 
mangroves, and the termination of support from international lending institu￾tions (Ashton, 2008).
Atlantic Salmon Farming
Salmon farming began in the 1960s with the raising of juvenile Atlantic salmon 
(Salmo salar) in net pens in Norwegian fjords. Atlantic salmon was an ideal spe￾cies for cultivation because of its large, nutrient-rich eggs and the ease with which 
it spawned and grew in captivity. In the early 1970s researchers began to conduct 
genetic-based selection of salmon from Norwegian rivers. This produced salmon 
varieties with high growth rates and distinct biologies, unofficially called “Salmo 
domesticus” (Greenberg, 2010; Gross, 1998). Norway maintains dominance in this 
sector today. Norwegian aquaculture industries exported their net pen farming 
methods and genetic stock to other cold-water regions with deep-water estuar￾ies and fjords (southern Chile; the Maritime Provinces and British Columbia in 
Canada; Scotland), and production of farmed salmon exploded. Salmon farming 
typically involves two stages: (1) hatching from eggs and raising in freshwater 
tanks, and (2) transfer of juvenile salmon to net pens in the sea where they grow 
on pelletized feed and are harvested after several years.
Global production of farmed Atlantic salmon has increased ten times over 
since 1990, and by 2020, the global production was 2.72 million tons (FAO, 2022; 
Iversen et al., 2020). Five major producing countries accounted for over 95% of the 
farmed salmon production in 2015 (Norway, 55.3%; Chile, 25.4%; Scotland, 7.6%; 
Canada, 6%; Faroe Islands, 3.3%) (Iversen et al., 2020).
This fast-growing industry has experienced several environmental and social 
challenges. Atlantic salmon (S. salar) is native to the North Atlantic. Neverthe￾less, it has been introduced to Pacific areas (British Columbia, Canada, as well as 
southern Chile). Concern surrounds salmon escapees from net pens and their po￾tential to compete with native species of fish, as well as the impact of antibiotics 
and other aquaculture therapeutants.
The high densities of farmed salmon have degraded water quality in numer￾ous areas because of fish feces and unconsumed feed. Fjords or nearshore chan￾nels where cages are located have experienced reduced dissolved oxygen and 
algal blooms (eutrophication) (Salgado et al., 2015). Complaints by environmen￾tal groups and fishers often mention the inability of government authorities to 
 monitor farm operations and determine carrying capacities (Salgado et al., 2015). 
Concerns also center on the use of lower trophic-level pelagic species (e.g., ancho￾vies, herring, and sardines) that are reduced to fish meal and fish oil – both impor￾tant components of feed for terrestrial and aquatic animal feeds, including salmon.
With increasing densities of farmed salmon, parasitic sea lice have become 
a rising problem in areas where salmon are farmed. Infestations of sea lice can Global Marine Aquaculture Development 69
reduce fish growth, increase fish mortality, and cause substantial financial losses 
for farms. Abolofia et al. (2018) estimate that the potential biomass growth lost 
per production cycle can range from 3.62 to 16.55% of farm revenue. In addition, 
the sea lice infestations may spill over to wild fish populations. Due to a stagger￾ing outbreak of infectious salmon anemia (ISA) viral disease in Chile beginning 
in 2007, salmon aquaculture failed to show growth from 2009 to 2012 (Abolofia 
et al., 2018; Asche et al., 2009). The Chilean salmon industry has recovered since 
the ISA disease outbreak due to important new knowledge and adaptive manage￾ment (Alvial et al., 2012).
Marine concessions to salmon farming companies have caused spatial conflicts, 
particularly due to the displacement of fishers and what is often viewed as the pri￾vatization of a public resource. In southern Chile, artisanal fishers and Indigenous 
peoples consider that salmon farms have blocked their access to their traditional 
fishing areas (Salgado et al., 2015).
Much progress has been made in the past decade to reduce ecosystem impacts 
and increase efficiency. NGO campaigns and increased public awareness of prob￾lems emanating from salmon farms have led to the development of certification 
programs for “sustainable farms” and best management practices. The Aquaculture 
Stewardship Council developed an initial standard for salmon aquaculture in 2012, 
subsequently revised in 2017 (Aquaculture Stewardship Council [ASC], 2017), fo￾cusing on habitat protection, disease management, fish feed, introduction and man￾agement of non-native and genetically modified species, and social responsibility.
Technological advances have made salmon farming more economically efficient 
and more environmentally friendly (Kumar et al., 2018). Improved feed formula￾tions produce more efficient feed conversion rates, and innovative feeding systems 
reduce feed waste. Advances in aquafeed nutrition have significantly reduced the 
amount of fish meal and oil in feeds for salmon and other carnivorous marine fish 
aquaculture species (Bendiksen et al., 2011; Jackson & Shepherd, 2012; Tacon & 
Metian, 2008) to the point where salmon aquaculture is a net producer of fish oil 
and protein (Aas et al., 2019; Crampton et al., 2010; Ytrestøyl et al., 2015).
Sea lice removal has improved with utilization of cleaner fish that eat sea lice, as 
well as warm water and freshwater treatments. Antibiotic usage has declined dra￾matically in recent years with improved biosecurity measures (Morrison & Saksida, 
2013); this trend should continue with technical advances and improved farming 
practices (Bravo, 2012). Genetic selection is increasing yields and improving overall 
production efficiencies. Improved management requiring better spacing and im￾plementation of carrying capacity standards attempt to minimize water pollution.
Closed-system salmon farming operations are increasing around the world. 
Some of these technologies may be placed in the water, while others are land￾based, consisting of large RAS operations that have begun to raise salmon from 
egg to market size entirely in land-based tank systems (Kramer, 2015). While land￾based salmon farming faces capital cost challenges, salmon RAS technologies 
may reduce water pollution, permit faster growth, eliminate conflicts over marine 
space, and produce salmon that earn the highest marks for sustainability (Kramer, 
2015; The Explorer, n.d.).70 J. D. Stieglitz et al.
Opportunities for the Future
The future is bright for the global marine aquaculture industry, with continuous 
progress being made in many areas. Opportunities exist for improving overall 
operating efficiencies, sustainability, and economic viability of new and existing 
operations. Some of the most promising opportunities follow.
Integrated Multi-Trophic Aquaculture (IMTA)
Most marine aquaculture systems utilize a single trophic level approach, whereby a 
single species of one trophic level is grown in isolation with little attention paid to 
upstream or downstream utilization of nutrient inputs used. Alternatively, IMTA 
combines culture of species in different trophic levels with complementary eco￾system functions, such as top trophic level salmon that require feed, lower trophic 
level seaweed that extract nutrients from seawater, and filter feeders (mussels, oys￾ters, sea urchins, sea cucumbers) that consume particulate matter from uncon￾sumed fed and fish feces – illustrated by Cooke Aquaculture IMTA in the Bay of 
Fundy, New Brunswick, Canada (Chopin, 2013; Granada et al., 2016; Greenberg, 
2010). Research has shown that when conducted properly, IMTA techniques can 
recycle 35–100% of nutrients from fed aquaculture operations (Troell et al., 2009). 
IMTA represents a promising opportunity for improving the sustainability and 
economic viability of marine aquaculture and may even play a role in climate 
change mitigation (Duarte et al., 2017).
Restorative Aquaculture
Coastal aquaculture faces significant political and social acceptance challenges 
in many areas based on concerns over potential nutrient enrichment (“eutrophi￾cation”) of coastal waters (Primavera, 2006; Ridler et al., 2007). In the US alone, 
65% of the estuaries and coastal waters are severely degraded from excessive nu￾trient inputs. The eutrophication that plagues these waters leads to other negative 
conditions, such as harmful algal blooms (HABs) and low oxygen (“hypoxic”) 
conditions that can kill seagrasses and fish. Use of sustainable culture of seaweeds 
and bivalves can extract nutrients from waters and restore the environment to a 
state in which wild species can thrive. This type of farming is known as “restor￾ative aquaculture” (Alleway et al., 2019; Gentry et al., 2020; Theuerkauf et al., 
2019). Additionally, by relieving pressure on capture fisheries, it allows coastal 
communities to remain economically productive, thereby increasing resiliency 
during periods of economic downturn and climate change.
Open Ocean Aquaculture
The open ocean or “offshore” environment represents one of the most promising 
areas for marine aquaculture development. Recent assessments indicate that sus￾tainable marine aquaculture in only a fraction of the world’s oceans could supply Global Marine Aquaculture Development 71
Figure 5.2 Almaco jack (Seriola rivoliana) in an ocean net pen at a farming operation off 
the coast of Kona, Hawaii. Photo credit: J. Stieglitz.
the world’s seafood demand, compared to the vast areas of the sea utilized to 
support wild-catch fisheries (Costello et al., 2020; Gentry et al., 2017). Offshore 
aquaculture efforts have focused on marine finfish and to a smaller extent on 
some macroalgae species. Technological advances in engineering of net pens 
and mooring systems to withstand the difficulties associated with location far 
offshore, as well as automation and artificial intelligence, combine to improve 
the operating efficiencies, environmental sustainability, and overall profitability 
(Figure 5.2).
Certification Programs
Certification of seafood products attempts to promote sustainable production and 
responsible farming by minimizing the adverse environmental and social impacts 
from aquaculture operations (Bush et al., 2013; FAO, 2011b). As a market-based 
tool, certification sets environmental, social, and safety standards for the industry, 
audits compliance, and labels products so that consumers can make value choices. 
Certification schemes compete for seafood suppliers that comply with standards 
via third-party certification, buyers that distribute to consumers, and consortia of 
environmental groups, academics, and international organizations that approve 
science-based standards. Certification has gained widest acceptance in Europe 72 J. D. Stieglitz et al.
and North America, and although the percentage of world aquaculture produc￾tion that is certified is small (4.6%), its coverage is growing.
The FAO approved its Technical Guidelines on Aquaculture Certification in 2011, 
establishing the framework for numerous certification programs. The FAO estab￾lished an institutional procedure for certification programs: setting the standards, 
developing an accreditation system to assess a specific aquaculture process, and 
third-party certification of an aquaculture activity. FAO guidelines focus on four 
substantive criteria: animal health and welfare, food safety, environmental integ￾rity, and socio-economic aspects.
Aquaculture certification is currently led by the Aquaculture Stewardship 
Council (ASC), the Global Aquaculture Alliance, the Aquaculture Certification 
Council (ACC), and the GLOBAL G.A.P. (Good Agricultural Practices) organ￾ization. The ASC standards are consistent with the FAO aquaculture guidelines. 
ASC issues certifications (assessed via third parties) for farms, suppliers, and 
products (ASC, n.d.). The Global Aquaculture Alliance (GAA, 2020) also co￾ordinates a comprehensive third-party aquaculture certification program for the 
four stages of production (hatcheries, farms, feed, and processing plants) (GAA, 
2020). GAA’s Best Aquaculture Practices (BAPs) are seafood-specific certification 
programs that address FAO’s four substantive criteria.
Certification programs are definite steps toward sustainable and responsible 
aquaculture operations, but they do have limitations (Parkes et al., 2010). Ques￾tions always remain about the accuracy of information. Consumers and distrib￾utors may be confused by contradictory information from different certification 
schemes. Sustainability is often narrowly defined and based on site-specific op￾erations, ignoring cumulative and regional impacts from numerous fish farms on 
water quality and coastal habitats. Second, it is difficult for stakeholders in the 
Global South to participate (funds, language, communications, managerial capac￾ity), and suppliers must bear many costs of certification programs (Mutersbaugh 
et al., 2005). Third, social issues (working conditions, worker rights, salaries) are 
difficult to certify, and reliance on national labor laws is not effective. Finally, 
small-scale producers may also experience great challenges to participate in cer￾tification programs.
Conclusions – Moving Forward
Coastal communities depend upon healthy, easily accessible, local seafood. Food 
security is threatened as these resources diminish in supply and safety due to 
overfishing, climate change, and environmental degradation. Human health 
concerns related to consumption of seafood from polluted coastal w aters have 
led to increasing seafood imports to offset the lack of locally available prod￾ucts. As a result, many coastal communities are vulnerable to increases of non￾communicable diseases as their diets shift from locally available seafood to 
imported, less nutritious, more heavily processed food sources (Hicks et al., 2019; 
Savage et al., 2019). Sustainable marine aquaculture will play a critical role in 
addressing these issues.Global Marine Aquaculture Development 73
Aquaculture has emerged as the key to meeting the world’s increasing demand 
for seafood. Even with improved fishery management, capture fisheries are inca￾pable of satisfying seafood demand. In many cases, farm-raised seafood is of higher 
quality than wild-caught seafood both in terms of nutritional composition as well 
as freshness. Combined with advances in seafood traceability and consumer 
 education, these factors have led many to seek sustainable marine aquaculture 
products to satisfy their seafood intake. These trends are expected to increase in 
the coming decades, providing abundant growth opportunities. When conducted 
in a responsible and sustainable manner, aquaculture offers great potential to en￾hance food security, improve coastal water quality, and build resilience in coastal 
communities. Through the advances detailed in this chapter, as well as resolution 
of public policy, economic, and social equity issues, marine aquaculture will con￾tinue its sustainable expansion to meet future seafood demand.
Questions for Reflection
 1. What are the principal technical, economic, and regulatory challenges asso
 2. In what ways can marine aquaculture help fill the gap between global supply 
 3. What have been some of the socio-environmental impacts of shrimp and 
 4. What are some of the limitations of aquaculture certification programs?
Notes
 1 Vertical integration is the combination, in one business enterprise, of several stages of 
 2 Blue Revolution refers to the significant growth in global aquaculture production.
References
Aas, T. S., Ytrestøyl, T., & Åsgård, T. (2019). Utilization of feed resources in the produc￾tion of Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar) in Norway: An update for 2016. Aquaculture 
Reports, 15, 100216. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aqrep.2019.100216
Abolofia, J., Asche, F., & Wilen, J. E. (2017). The cost of lice: Quantifying impacts of 
parasitic sea lice on farmed salmon. Marine Resource Economics, 32(3). http://dx.doi.
org/10.1086/691981
Ahmed, N., Thompson, S., & Glaser, M. (2018). Integrated mangrove-shrimp cultivation: 
Potential for blue carbon sequestration. Ambio, 47(4), 441–452. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s13280-017-0946-2
Alleway, H. K., Gillies, C. L., Bishop, M. J., Gentry, R. R., Theuerkauf, S. J., & Jones, R. 
(2019). The ecosystem services of marine aquaculture: Valuing benefits to people and 
nature. Bioscience, 69(1), 59–68. https://doi.org/10.1093/biosci/biy137
Alvial, A., Kibenge, F., Forster, J., Burgos, J. M., Ibarra, R., & St-Hilaire, S. (2012). The 
recovery of the Chilean salmon industry: The ISA crisis and its consequences and lessons. 
Global Aquaculture Alliance, 85.74 J. D. Stieglitz et al.
Armitage, D. L. (2002). Socio-institutional dynamics and the political ecology of man￾grove forest conservation in Central Sulawesi, Indonesia. Global Environmental Change, 
12(3), 203–217. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0959-3780(02)00023-7
Aquaculture Stewardship Council. (n.d.). About the ASC. https://www.asc-aqua.org/
what-we-do/about-us/about-the-asc/
Aquaculture Stewardship Council. (2017, April). ASC salmon standard v1.1. https://www.
asc-aqua.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/07/ASC-Salmon-Standard_v1.1.pdf
Asche, F., Hansen, H., Tveteras, R., & Tveteras, S. (2009). The salmon disease crisis in Chile. 
Marine Resource Economics, 24(4), 405–411. https://doi.org/10.1086/mre.24.4.42629664
Ashton, E. C. (2008). The impact of shrimp farming on mangrove ecosystems. CAB Re￾views: Perspectives in Agriculture, Veterinary Science, Nutrition and Natural Resources, 
3(003). https://doi.org/10.1079/PAVSNNR20083003
Bendiksen, E. Å., Johnsen, C. A., Olsen, H. J., & Jobling, M. (2011). Sustainable aq uafeeds: 
Progress towards reduced reliance upon marine ingredients in diets for farmed Atlan￾tic salmon (Salmo salar L.). Aquaculture, 314(1–4), 132–139. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
aquaculture.2011.01.040
Benetti, D. D., Benetti, G. I., Rivera, J. A., Sardenberg, B., & O’Hanlon, B. (2010). Site 
selection criteria for open ocean aquaculture. Marine Technology Society Journal, 44(3), 
22–35. https://doi.org/10.4031/MTSJ.44.3.11
Boyd, C. E., D’Abramo, L. R., Glencross, B. D., Huyben, D. C., Juarez, L. M., Lockwood, 
G. S., McNevin, A. A., Tacon, A. G. J., Teletchea, F., Tomasso Jr., J. R., Tucker, C. S., 
& Valenti, W. C. (2020). Achieving sustainable aquaculture: Historical and current 
perspectives and future needs and challenges. Journal of the World Aquaculture Society, 
51(3), 578–633. https://doi.org/10.1111/jwas.12714
Boyd, C. E., & McNevin, A. A. (2018). Land use in shrimp aquaculture. World Aquacul￾ture, 49(1), 28–34.
Bravo, S. (2012). Environmental impacts and management of veterinary medicines in 
aquaculture: The case of salmon aquaculture in Chile. In M. G. Bondad-Reantaso, J. R. 
Arthur, & R. P. Subasinghe (Eds.), Improving biosecurity through prudent and responsible 
use of veterinary medicines in aquatic food production (FAO Fisheries and Aquaculture 
Technical Paper No. 547, pp. 11–24). FAO.
Buck, B. H., & Langan, R. (2017). Aquaculture perspective of multi-use sites in the open 
ocean: The untapped potential for marine resources in the anthropocene. Springer Nature. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-51159-7
Bush, S. R., Belton, B., Hall, D., Vandergeest, P., Murray, F. J., Ponte, S., Oosterveer, 
P., Islam, M. S., Mol, A. P. J., Hatanaka, M., Kruijssen, F., Ha, T. T. T., Little, D. C., & 
Kusumawati, R. (2013). Certify sustainable aquaculture? Science, 341(6150), 1067–1068. 
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1237314
Chopin, T., MacDonald, B., Robinson, S., Cross, S., Pearce, C., Knowler, D., Noce, A., 
Reid, G., Cooper, A., Speare, D., Burridge, L., Crawford, C., Sawhney, M., Ang, K. 
P., Backman, C., & Hutchinson, M. (2013). The Canadian integrated multi-trophic 
aquaculture network (CIMTAN) - A network for a new era of ecosystem responsible 
aquaculture. Fisheries, 38(7), 297–308. https://doi.org/10.1080/03632415.2013.791285
Costello, C., Cao, L., Gelcich, S., Cisneros-Mata, M.Á., Free, C. M., Froehlich, H. E., 
Golden, C. D., Ishimura, G., Maier, J., Macadam-Somer, I., Mangin, T., Melnychuk, 
M. C., Miyahara, M., de Moor, C. L., Naylor, R., Nøstbakken, L., Ojea, E., O’Reilly, 
E., Parma, A. M. … Lubchenco, J. (2020). The future of food from the sea. Nature, 
588(7836), 95–100. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-2616-yGlobal Marine Aquaculture Development 75
Crampton, V. O., Nanton, D. A., Ruohonen, K., Skjervold, P. O., & El-Mowafi, A. (2010). 
Demonstration of salmon farming as a net producer of fish protein and oil. Aquaculture 
Nutrition, 16(4), 437–446. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2095.2010.00780.x
Duarte, C. M., Wu, J., Xiao, X., Bruhn, A., & Krause-Jensen, D. (2017). Can seaweed farm￾ing play a role in climate change mitigation and adaptation? Frontiers in Marine Science, 
4, 100. https://doi.org/10.3389/fmars.2017.00100
FAO/NACA/UNEP/WB/WWF. (2006). International principles for responsible shrimp farming. 
Network of Aquaculture Centres in Asia-Pacific (NACA). https://enaca.org/?id=542#:~:text-
=The%20International%20Principles%20for%20Responsible%20Shrimp%20Farming%20
provide, for%20a%20more%20sustainable%20development%20of%20shrimp%20farming.
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. (2011a). Code of conduct for 
responsible fisheries. https://www.fao.org/3/i1900e/i1900e00.htm
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. (2011b). Technical guidelines 
on aquaculture certification. https://www.fao.org/publications/card/en/c/0ec15d4a-6295-
51a5-af16-5c724c62de25/
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. (2022). The state of world fish￾eries and aquaculture 2022. https://doi.org/10.4060/cc0461en
Gentry, R. R., Alleway, H. K., Bishop, M. J., Gillies, C. L., Waters, T., & Jones R. (2020). 
Exploring the potential for marine aquaculture to contribute to ecosystem services. 
Reviews in Aquaculture, 12(2), 499–512. https://doi.org/10.1111/raq.12328
Gentry, R. R., Froehlich, H. E., Grimm, D., Kareiva, P., Parke, M., Rust, M., Gaines, S. D., 
& Halpern, B. S. (2017). Mapping the global potential for marine aquaculture. Nature 
Ecology & Evolution, 1(9), 1317–1324. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41559-017-0257-9
Global Aquaculture Alliance. (2020). Best aquaculture practices. https://www.bapcertifi￾cation.org
Granada, L., Sousa, N., Lopes, S., & Lemos, M. F. L. (2016). Is integrated multitrophic 
aquaculture the solution to the sectors’ major challenges? – A review. Reviews in 
Aquaculture, 8(3), 283–300. https://doi.org/10.1111/raq.12093
Greenberg, P. (2010). Four fish: The future of the last wild food. Penguin Books.
Gross, M. R. (1998). One species with two biologies: Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar) in 
the wild and in aquaculture. Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences, 55(S1), 
131–144. https://doi.org/10.1139/d98-024
Hicks, C. C., Cohen, P. J., Graham, N. A. J., Nash, K. L., Allison, E. H., D’Lima, C., Mills, 
D. J., Roscher, M., Thilsted, S. H., Thorne-Lyman, A. L., & MacNeil, M. A. (2019). 
Harnessing global fisheries to tackle micronutrient deficiencies. Nature, 574, 95–98. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-019-1592-6
Iversen A., Asche, F., Hermansen, Ø., & Nystøyl, R. (2020). Production cost and com￾petitiveness in major salmon farming countries 2003–2018. Aquaculture, 522, 735089. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aquaculture.2020.735089
Jackson, A., & Shepherd, J. (2012). The future of fishmeal and fish oil. In Second interna￾tional congress on seafood technology on sustainable, innovative, and healthy Seafood (Vol. 
189) (pp. 189–221). https://www.fao.org/3/i2534e/i2534e.pdf#page=199
Jouffray, J. -B, Blasiak, R., Norström, A. V., Österblom, H., & Nyström, M. (2020). The 
blue acceleration: The trajectory of human expansion into the ocean. One Earth, 2(1), 
43–54. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.oneear.2019.12.016
Kramer, L. (2015, October 14). Land-based salmon aquaculture: A future with potential. 
SeaFood Source. Retrieved July 18, 2022 from https://www.seafoodsource.com/news/
aquaculture/land-based-salmon-aquaculture-a-future-with-potential76 J. D. Stieglitz et al.
Kumar, G. & Engle, C. R. (2016). Technological advances that led to growth of shrimp, 
salmon, and tilapia farming. Reviews in Fisheries Science & Aquaculture, 24(2), 136–152. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/23308249.2015.1112357
Kumar, G., Engle, C., & Tucker, C. (2018). Factors driving aquaculture technology adop￾tion. Journal of the World Aquaculture Society, 49(3), 447–476. https://doi.org/10.1111/
jwas.12514
Lester, S. E., Gentry, R. R., Kappel, C. V., White, C., & Gaines, S. D. (2018). Offshore 
aquaculture in the United States: Untapped potential in need of smart policy. Pro￾ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 115(28), 7162–7165. https://doi.org/10.1073/
pnas.1808737115
Lovatelli, A., Aguilar-Manjarrez, J., & Soto, D. (2013). Expanding mariculture farther 
offshore. Technical, environmental, spatial and governance challenges. FAO Technical 
Workshop, Orbetello, Italy, March 22–25, 2010 (No. 24). FAO Library.
Morrison, D. B., & Saksida, S. (2013). Trends in antimicrobial use in Marine Harvest 
Canada farmed salmon production in British Columbia (2003–2011). The Canadian 
 Veterinary Journal, 54(12), 1160–1163. https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24293677
Mutersbaugh, T., Klooster, D., Renard, M. -C., & Taylor, P. (2005). Certifying rural spaces: 
Quality-certified products and rural governance. Journal of Rural Studies, 21, 381–388. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jrurstud.2005.10.003
Nellemann, C., Corcoran, E., Duarte, C. M., Valdés, L., De Young, C., Fonseca, L., & 
Grimsditch, G. (Eds.) (2009). Blue carbon: The role of healthy oceans in binding carbon: A 
rapid response assessment. UNEP/Earthprint.
Olson, T. K., & Criddle, K. R. (2008). Industrial evolution: A case study of Chilean 
salmon aquaculture. Aquaculture Economics & Management, 12(2), 89–106. https://doi.
org/10.1080/13657300802110687
Parkes, G., Young, J. A., Walmsley, S. F., Abel, R., Harman, J., Horvat, P., Lem, A., Mac￾Farlane, A., Mens, M., & Nolan, C. (2010). Behind the signs: A global review of fish 
sustainability information schemes. Reviews in Fisheries Science, 18(4), 344–356. https://
doi.org/10.1080/10641262.2010.516374
Price, C., Black, K. D., Hargrave, B. T., & Morris Jr., J. A. (2015). Marine cage culture and 
the environment: Effects on water quality and primary production. Aquaculture Envi￾ronment Interactions, 6(2), 151–174. https://doi.org/10.3354/aei00122
Primavera, J. H. (2000). Development and conservation of Philippine mangroves: 
Institutional issues. Ecological Economics, 35(1), 91–106. https://doi.org/10.1016/
S0921-8009(00)00170-1
Primavera, J. H. (2005). Mangroves, fishponds, and the quest for sustainability. Science, 
310(5745), 57–59. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1115179
Primavera, J. H. (2006). Overcoming the impacts of aquaculture on the coastal 
zone. Ocean & Coastal Management, 49(9–10), 531–545. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.ocecoaman.2006.06.018
Ridler, N., Wowchuk, M., Robinson, B., Barrington, K., Chopin, T., Robinson, S., Page, F., 
Reid, G., Szemerda, M., Sewuster, J., & Boyne-Travis, S. (2007). Integrated multi-trophic 
aquaculture (IMTA): A potential strategic choice for farmers. Aquaculture Economics & 
Management, 11(1), 99–110. https://doi.org/10.1080/13657300701202767
Salgado, H., Bailey, J., Tiller, R., & Ellis, J. (2015). Stakeholder perceptions of the impacts 
from salmon aquaculture in the Chilean Patagonia. Ocean and Coastal Management, 
118(Part B), 189–204. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ocecoaman.2015.07.016
Savage, A., McIver, L., & Schubert, L. (2020). Review: The nexus of climate change, food 
and nutrition security and diet-related non-communicable diseases in Pacific Island Global Marine Aquaculture Development 77
countries and territories. Climate and Development, 12(2), 120–133. https://doi.org/10.
1080/17565529.2019.1605284
SNV Netherlands Development Organization. (n.d.). MAM-II: Scaling up ecosystem-based 
adaptation in the Mekong Delta. https://snv.org/project/mam-ii-scaling-ecosystem-based￾adaptation-mekong-delta
Suman, D. (2019). Mangrove management: Challenges and guidelines. In G. M. E. Perillo, 
E. Wolanski, D. R. Cahoon, & C. S. Hopkinson (Eds.), Coastal wetlands: An integrated 
ecosystem approach (pp. 1055–1079). Elsevier.
Tacon, A. G., & Metian, M. (2008). Global overview on the use of fish meal and fish 
oil in industrially compounded aquafeeds: Trends and future prospects. Aquaculture, 
285(1–4), 146–158. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aquaculture.2008.08.015
Teletchea, F. (2015). Domestication of marine fish species: Update and perspectives. Journal 
of Marine Science and Engineering, 3(4), 1227–1243. https://doi.org/10.3390/jmse3041227
The Explorer. (n.d.). Closed-system salmon farming protects the environment. https://www.
theexplorer.no/solutions/marine-donut---paving-the-way-for-sustainable-fishfarming/
Theuerkauf, S. J., Morris Jr., J. A., Waters, T. J., Wickliffe, L. C., Alleway, H. K., & Jones, R. 
C. (2019). A global spatial analysis reveals where marine aquaculture can benefit nature 
and people. PloS One, 14(10), e0222282. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0222282
Troell, M., Joyce, A., Chopin, T., Neori, A., Buschmann, A. H., & Fang, J. -G. (2009). Eco￾logical engineering in aquaculture — Potential for integrated multi-trophic aq uaculture 
(IMTA) in marine offshore systems. Aquaculture, 297(1–4), 1–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
aquaculture.2009.09.010
Warne, K. (2011). Let them eat shrimp: The tragic disappearance of the rainforests of the sea. 
Island Press.
World Bank. (2013). Fish to 2030: Prospects for fisheries and aquaculture (Agriculture and 
Environmental Services Discussion Paper, No. 3). https://openknowledge.worldbank.
org/handle/10986/17579
Ytrestøyl, T., Aas, T. S., & Åsgård, T. (2015). Utilisation of feed resources in production 
of Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar) in Norway. Aquaculture, 448, 365–374. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.aquaculture.2015.06.0236 Marine Pollution
Science, Art, and the 
Accumulations of Time
S. Brander and P. Betjemann
The history of art and literature reveals that humans have long represented the 
oceans as seemingly boundless, large enough and deep enough to withstand any 
disturbance. As ocean temperatures rise and waters acidify – the effects of climate 
change – we now know that the ocean is not “boundless, endless, and sublime – the 
image of Eternity”, as one 19th-century poet wrote. But the belief in the ocean’s 
unaffectable immensity has had a very long shadow. As recently as 1974, Scientific 
American published an article by the deep-sea explorer Willard N. Bascom, who 
argued that waste disposal in the ocean, if “thoughtfully controlled”, was a plausible 
way for humans to get rid of pollutants (Bascom, 1974). Twelve years later, Edward 
Goldberg of Scripps Institution of Oceanography concluded that “the waste capac￾ity of US coastal waters is not now fully used” (Goldberg, 1986). This perspective 
is difficult to comprehend today. Yet individuals, industries, and nations continue 
to dispose of waste in the ocean, both intentionally and unwittingly. The most 
recent estimate of microplastic accumulation on the seafloor stands at 14 million 
tons (Barrett et al., 2020). The gradual sloughing off of microscopic debris from the 
surfaces of modern life is slow, and at a small enough visual scale to generally go 
unnoticed. Collective accumulation far removed from our homes and backyards 
often remains out of sight and out of mind, particularly for those privileged enough, 
socioeconomically, to contribute the most to this growing environmental tragedy.
This essay discusses how we arrived at a condition whereby the world’s oceans 
have been subtly, insidiously, and invisibly contaminated, at a scale that few peo￾ple today can appreciate. The factors that have brought us to this place are lit￾erary as well as chemical, artistic as well as technological, and cultural as well as 
industrial. The construction of the ocean as a boundless immensity has informed 
behaviors that urgently require rethinking. We move between science, literature, 
and the visual arts to historicize the issues at stake while looking toward the 
future. Marine pollution is a particularly complex problem, one that begs to be 
addressed not just in terms of specific behavioral changes – finding alternatives to 
individual yogurt cups and other plastic products, for instance – but in terms of a 
deeper network of assumptions and constructions that must be interrogated and 
transformed. We begin with the deep history of both pollution and the structures 
of thinking about the ocean that make it particularly vulnerable to silent, invis￾ible forms of damage.
DOI: 10.4324/9781003058151-8Marine Pollution: Science, Art, and the Accumulations of Time 79
Oceans Without History
We often think of the 19th-century Industrial Revolution as the origin of 
 anthropogenic pollution. In fact, we have been introducing pollutants into our 
surroundings for many centuries. Evidence from ice cores collected in Green￾land, which span across the Greek and Roman, Medieval, and Renaissance eras 
(500–3,000 years ago), shows that high levels of lead and silver – metals that are 
naturally present in rock but toxic in larger quantities – appear as the result of 
mining and smelting. While the use of metals declined somewhat in the next 
millennium, scientists suggest that excessive lead mining may have contributed 
to widespread toxicity and could have precipitated the fall of the Roman empire 
(Hong et al., 1994).
Long before combustion engines were invented in the 19th century, humans 
began irreversibly altering the planet. The last 150 years, however, have dramat￾ically accelerated anthropogenic environmental impacts. Since 1830, we have 
witnessed the advent of electricity, the rise of the Industrial Revolution, “better 
living through chemistry”, and an exponential increase in the need for products 
that enhance the speed and convenience with which we live our lives – all ac￾companied by an equally rapid increase in the need to find locations to dispose 
of the refuse from our modern lives. Early in the Industrial Revolution, towns 
in Europe were so ensconced in soot and smoke produced by factories that the 
peppered moth, a species with white coloring speckled with black spots, evolved 
a darker variant that was better camouflaged in England’s smoke-stained towns 
(Hooper, 2002; Mosley, 2013). By the early 1900s, the whiter variant was difficult 
to find. Later, in the post–World War II era, magazines such as Life, Good House￾keeping, and Time boasted of the ease of living when we rely on advanced chem￾icals designed by scientists. Products were synthesized to control pests, keep our 
homes clean, reduce the time spent on housework, and replace all manner of nat￾ural or traditional materials. For example, DDT pesticide was added to children’s 
wallpaper glue as part of a larger project to seal the pristine interiors preferred in 
the post–World War II era from the outside world, and to serve as protection from 
insect-borne diseases (Epstein, 2014) (Figure 6.1). Around the same time, innu￾merable products began to be made of the miracle material, plastic, which did not 
break down, rust, or mold. Plastic was easy to wash – and even easier to toss in the 
garbage, which in Western countries was conveniently carted off each week to a 
landfill far from sight.
Chemicals popularized in the 1940s aimed to create cleaner, disease-free envi￾ronments, but became their own sources of toxicity, ultimately harmful to humans 
and wildlife. DDT in agricultural runoff poisoned marine estuaries; in 1967, one 
study found concentrations of DDT as high as 32 pounds per acre in a salt marsh 
on Long Island (Woodwell et al., 1967). The manufacture of DDT produced its 
own waste, and scientists estimate that as many as half a million barrels of both 
DDT and acid sludge byproduct from its production were intentionally disposed 
and still remain across nearly 3,000 km2
 of the ocean seafloor off Southern Cali￾fornia (Kivenson et al., 2019). Even as DDT was being manufactured and sprayed 80 S. Brander and P. Betjemann
Figure 6.1 “DDT Is Good for Me-e-e!”, Time Magazine, June 30, 1947. Image credit: 
Science History Institute, Philadelphia. https://digital.sciencehistory.org/
works/1831ck18w.Marine Pollution: Science, Art, and the Accumulations of Time 81
in large quantities in the 1950s, under the guise of protecting public health, a post￾war boom in petroleum extraction fueled the plastics industry, setting the stage 
for the accumulation of macroplastics, as well as microplastic fragments in the 
oceans – a significant problem whose scale and impacts we are only now coming 
to appreciate.
Invisible to the naked eye when sunk to the deep ocean floor, reduced to tiny 
plastic particles difficult to match back to the item from which they came, or 
slowly accumulating in fish, shorebirds, and the tiny plankton that fuel food webs, 
these pollutants enter a marine environment that for ages appeared capable of 
absorbing every kind of human disturbance into its apparently infinite vastness. 
Almost everyone who has stood by the sea has had the profound experience of its 
scale, power, and human-minimizing extent. In the Romantic era (c. 1789–1860) 
many writers turned to the ocean as a supreme example of an environment that 
was beyond the turbulent nature of human affairs. Romanticism, understood as 
a specific aesthetic movement rather than a general feeling, describes a period of 
expression in Western art and literature that celebrated nature both as an alter￾native to the early Industrial Revolution and as a model for the “natural rights” 
of individual humans in the age of democratic revolutions against monarchical 
rule and aristocratic privilege. Thus, the specific forms of pollution that developed 
in the mid-20th century, with profound impacts on the oceans, actually have a 
deeper history in ways of thinking about the marine environment that developed 
much earlier. A powerful example of how the marine environment centered these 
concerns is afforded by the so-called “Apostrophe to the Ocean” in Lord Byron’s 
long narrative poem, Childe Harold’s Pilgrimage (Byron, 1816–1817). This poem 
is about the wandering of a displaced young man, the prototypical Romantic 
protagonist, who seeks respite from the concerns of the world. In the “Apostrophe 
to the Ocean” section – an “apostrophe”, in literature, refers to writing that ad￾dresses or personifies a non-human entity – Harold celebrates how human history 
and human life have no impact on the sea, which he finds comforting. “Roll on, 
thou deep and dark blue Ocean”, he exclaims, “ten thousand fleets sweep over 
thee in vain”. In these lines, the passage of innumerable navies over the water 
leaves no trace. Humans, Byron believes, may “mark … the earth with ruin”, but 
our “control stops with the shore”. The “Apostrophe to the Ocean” addresses the 
sea as a place entirely removed from and unimpacted by human society. It is the 
image of eternity, a mirror of God, rather than life on earth, an environment 
of invisibility and inscrutability, a “fathomless” depth, and – preeminently and 
finally – a place separate and “alone”.
The view of the ocean presented in Childe Harold’s Pilgrimage reappears again 
and again in the history of literature and art, with the consistent feature that 
the ocean appears large enough to absorb all manner of violence, inequity, and 
pollution. Nathaniel Hawthorne’s poem “The Ocean”, published in 1825, likely 
reflected on the death of his father, a ship’s captain, on a voyage. Hawthorne 
harbored a great deal of guilt about his father’s side of the family; his great-great 
grandfather was a judge at the Salem witchcraft trials, and therefore responsible 
for the murders of innocent women presumed to be witches, while his father died 82 S. Brander and P. Betjemann
on a mercantile voyage to Dutch Suriname, a plantation colony where export 
goods – sugar, cotton, and indigo – were produced by enslaved Africans under a 
regime of cruelty that was one of the most violent in the colonies. But “guilt” and 
“care”, in the poem, are terrestrial concerns, entirely absorbed under the “fury” 
of the ocean’s waves. For Hawthorne, the ocean constitutes an antidote, an al￾ternative, a place elsewhere: Its “solitudes” are “blest”, and “there is purity” and 
“peaceful sleep”. Existing outside of history, the ocean constitutes a timeless realm 
in which the Romantic self idealistically transcends all that is troubling.
BOX 6.1 Nathaniel Hawthorne, The Ocean (1825)
The Ocean has its silent caves,
Deep, quiet, and alone;
Though there be fury on the waves,
Beneath them there is none.
The awful spirits of the deep
Hold their communion there;
And there are those for whom we weep,
The young, the bright, the fair.
Calmly the wearied seamen rest
Beneath their own blue sea.
The ocean solitudes are blest,
For there is purity.
The earth has guilt, the earth has care,
Unquiet are its graves;
But peaceful sleep is ever there,
Beneath the dark blue waves.
The history of art and literature presents hundreds of examples of “ahistorical” 
oceans – those not polluted by acts of human degradation. Fiction is also re￾plete with examples. Herman Melville’s Moby-Dick (1851) opens with the novel’s 
 narrator – a melancholic, world-weary figure, just as in Childe Harold’s Pilgrimage – 
asserting that it is “high time to get to sea” in order to escape the oppressive na￾ture of commercial and industrial life in New York City; he tells us that thousands 
of his fellow city-dwellers, normally “tied to counters, nailed to benches, [and] 
clinched to desks”, can be found on any given Sabbath day standing on the sea￾shore and indulging their escapist “ocean reveries” (Melville, 1993, p. 3).
It is not a long leap from these examples to those drawn from the history of 
visual art. The reflective quality of water served many painters as a surface on 
which the glory of heavens could be revealed. A painting like Frederic Church’s 
Syria by the Sea (1873), for instance, powerfully contrasts the ruins of human his￾tory with the setting sun, whose reflection on the limpid waters of the bay suggests Marine Pollution: Science, Art, and the Accumulations of Time 83
Figure 6.2 Frederic Edwin Church, Syria by the Sea, 1873. Oil on canvas. 56ʺ × 85ʺ. De￾troit Institute of Arts, USA. Gift of Mrs. James F. Joy. Image: © Detroit Insti￾tute of Arts/Bridgeman Images.
a perennial cycle of days and seasons that outlasts and transcends the rise and fall 
of civilizations (Figure 6.2).
Even a painting not about a literal ocean can carry such meanings. Casper Da￾vid Friedrich’s Wanderer Above the Sea of Fog (c. 1818) presents the clouds below the 
solitary mountain hiker as an ocean, signified not just by the sea described in the 
title but by the wave-like forms of the fogs and mists, and the island-like appear￾ance of the peaks and spires. One of the most famous expressions of Romanticism, 
the Wanderer – like Childe Harold’s Pilgrimage and Moby-Dick – presents a solitary 
male figure interested in transcending or escaping the limitations of everyday life 
(Figure 6.3). In the line of literary and visual expression represented by this paint￾ing, marine environments, whether real or metaphorical, lift human beings (par￾ticularly men) out of history and its violence, oppressions, and banalities.
“The Sea Is History”: A New Narrative for Marine 
Environments
With the publication of Rachel Carson’s Silent Spring in 1962, the influence of hu￾man activities on the natural environment burst into view for the general public. 
Her poetic yet scientifically accurate description of DDT’s and other pesticides’ 
impacts captured readers and conveyed an urgency that had not been felt before. 
Carson owned the moment, using her experience as a scientist to push back against 84 S. Brander and P. Betjemann
Figure 6.3 Caspar David Friedrich, Der Wanderer über dem Nebelmeer (The Wanderer 
Above the Sea of Fog), c. 1818. Oil on canvas. 37.3ʺ × 29.4ʺ. Hamburger Kun￾sthalle, G ermany. Image courtesy of Hamburger Kunsthalle/Art Resource.
the unregulated production of chemicals for use in agriculture and insect control. 
Silent Spring focused on the ways in which water transports chemicals across 
the chains of life it supports – from the small-as-dust green cells of the drift￾ing plant plankton, through the tiny water fleas to the fishes that strain 
plankton from the water and are in turn eaten by other fishes or by birds, 
mink, raccoons – in an endless cyclic transfer of materials from life to life.
(Carson, 2002, p. 46)Marine Pollution: Science, Art, and the Accumulations of Time 85
Although the book turned Carson’s attention to more terrestrial processes than 
her prior works, her emphasis on water as the fundamental link in the chain 
emerged from what she defined in The Sea Around Us as the essential relationship 
between humans and the 70% of the earth that is water. The title is connective, 
describing the oceans as a scientifically approachable environment “around us” 
rather than an incomprehensible mystery projected out there. More particularly, 
the title refers to the ways in which the sea defines and shapes – and is shaped 
and defined by – solid masses, including the moon with its tidal influence, sedi￾ments deposited on the ocean floor, or a volcanic island born from eruptions and 
sea-level change. Throughout her career, Carson approached water not as the 
medium for what Melville called the “ungraspable phantom of life” (1993, p.3), but 
as the medium that connects all forms of life and matter within a network that is 
simultaneously marine, astronomical, chemical, terrestrial, and human. Points of 
interface and interconnections always drew her eye, as in her book The Edge of the 
Sea (1955), which opens not by projecting a fathomless, ahistorical profundity but 
by issuing a very different kind of invitation.
When we go down to the low tide line … we enter a world that is as old as the 
earth itself … For us as living creatures, it has special meaning as an area in 
or near which some entity that could be distinguished as Life first drifted in 
shallow waters – reproducing, evolving, yielding that endlessly variety stream 
of living things that has surged through time and space to occupy the earth.
(Carson, 1998, p. xii)
Carson’s emphasis on water and the seashore as the building blocks of history 
made her acutely aware of how toxic chemicals like DDT migrated through food 
chains and ecological networks. Hers was not the only voice sounding the alarm. 
In just a few decades, Western societies had become accustomed to a life of con￾venience, with little thought as to where the products used daily were being dis￾posed of or whether there were unintended side effects. In the US images were 
broadcast nationwide of rivers on fire in Pennsylvania and Ohio due to slicks 
resulting from oil pollution (Figure 6.4).
The environmental movement of the 1960s was ignited by such images and 
by other realizations that the use of a chemical (DDT) in homes could be con￾tributing to the demise of bald-headed eagles, pelicans, and fish species, such as 
Atlantic salmon, and that without proper oversight, chemicals used for human 
benefit could also cause damage to our children and our livelihoods. These de￾velopments led to the eventual establishment of the Environmental Protection 
Agency (EPA) in the early 1970s, and to the strengthening of the role of the 
Federal Drug Administration (FDA) in the United States. In Europe, the Lon￾don and Oslo Conventions, both convened in 1972, sought to regulate the de￾liberate disposal of wastes from vessels, aircraft, and ocean platforms. In 1972, 
the US Congress passed the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act 
(MPRSA), effectively regulating the dumping of “any material which would ad￾versely affect human health, welfare, or amenities, or the marine environment, 86 S. Brander and P. Betjemann
Figure 6.4 Cuyahoga River Fire, November 1, 1952. (Fire hoses being used to push back 
flammable oil pollution on the river’s surface.) Gelatin silver print. 6.5ʺ × 8.5ʺ. 
Courtesy of Cleveland Public Library.
ecological systems, or economic potentialities” (Marine Protection, Research, and 
Sanctuaries Act, 1972). This included everything from radioactive waste, which 
was knowingly dumped in the ocean at that time, to petroleum products, con￾struction materials, and raw sewage. Shortly thereafter, the first report of plastic 
pellets detected in the ocean, off the east coast of North America in the Sargasso 
Sea, was published (Carpenter & Smith, 1972). The momentum that was building 
for considering the way unmitigated technological advances were impacting the 
planet became far stronger.
While the impacts of modern life in homes, backyards, and factories were be￾ginning to be understood, Carson’s literary and scientific intervention – to coun￾ter the older narrative of a mysterious watery realm immune from impact and 
meaningful precisely to the degree that it was unknown, unknowable, and oth￾erwise untouchable – required other kinds of innovations to publicize. Some of 
these innovations were technological. A new era of ocean discovery was initiated 
in the 1960s with the invention of submarines, such as Alvin, one of the first deep 
ocean submersibles in the world. Previously, it was impossible to thoroughly ex￾plore what some have called the “fathomless” depths of the oceans. In 1965 Alvin
completed a 6,000 foot (1,800 meter) manned dive, and since then it has made Marine Pollution: Science, Art, and the Accumulations of Time 87
nearly 5,000 dives worldwide. Alvin and vessels like it have received numerous 
upgrades over the decades (Twombly et al., 2014), but the original body remains 
the same – and without this invention we would know very little about deep-sea 
hydrothermal vents (or, for that matter, about famous shipwrecks, such as the 
Titanic).
Over the past 50 years, oceanographers and writers like Sylvia Earle and Carl 
Safina have depended on modern technologies – including submersibles, SCUBA 
gear, and undersea research stations like Aquarius – to bring both scientific and 
poetic nuance to marine ecosystems (Earle, 2010; Safina, 1997). Remarkable 
discoveries have captured the intricacy of marine ecosystems – like worms and 
crabs that can live at over 700°F (Ramirez-Llodra et al., 2007) – even as stunning 
descriptions of the undersea environment, previously only glimpsed at shallow 
depths through goggles, have brought technicolor visibility to the seafloor’s 
 “unlooked-on bed” (Rossetti, n.d.). Seussian and almost other-worldly images of 
deep-sea worms and mysterious bioluminescent fish began to appear in magazines, 
textbooks, films, and popular writings. Ocean profundity – in that root sense 
of the word associated with the depths – no longer needs to be understood as a 
projection of fathomlessness. Indeed, one of the most recent descents in a vessel 
similar to the Alvin, operated by Victor Vescovo, reached the bottom of the Mari￾ana Trench, the deepest area of the oceans. He accomplished this deepest dive to 
date (35,849 feet) in 2019 (Morelle, 2019).
Side-by-side with these technological innovations, writers and artists have 
challenged the still-seductive narrative of a depthless, all-absorbing, and 
 history-less sea. Adrienne Rich’s poem “Diving Into the Wreck” (Rich, 1973), in 
which SCUBA diving operates as a metaphor, opens with the narrator donning 
a wetsuit (“the body-armor of black rubber”) and her diving gear; before she de￾scends, she “read[s] the book of myths, and load[s] the camera”. Once she reaches 
the wreck, however, things change. The ocean life she encounters dissociates her 
from her daily life and brings her closer to actual history than the “book of myths” 
ever could. For Rich, a feminist poet, the anthropomorphized wreck appears as 
a metaphor for a history – whether that of patriarchal culture itself, or of a prior 
female self within it – that she will no longer read through received ideas (the 
“myths”) but will directly encounter as a scuttled past. Facing “the wreck and 
not the story of the wreck”, Rich uses the undersea environment not to escape 
history, but much more powerfully to encounter and de-romanticize it. The ocean 
environment, made available by SCUBA, appears not outside history but instead 
as the wreck of history.
Rich was not thinking about microplastics, DDT barrels, or medical waste 
when she described the wreck of history sunk in the ocean. But her poem chan￾nels the reader away from marine Romanticism and toward concepts that are 
applicable to concerns about marine pollution.
Other writers offer similar challenges to readers steeped in traditional think￾ing about the sea. When a poet like Derek Walcott, a Caribbean writer en￾gaged with the relationship between African traditions and colonial forms in 
his native St. Lucia, stands on the shore, he does not see the “ocean reveries” 88 S. Brander and P. Betjemann
described in Moby-Dick. Rather than boundlessness, Walcott sees the terrific 
violence of African bondage. In his 1978 poem “The Sea is History”, he writes, 
“the packed cries, / the shit, the moaning” of the thousands of slave ships that 
transported enslaved people across the Atlantic (Walcott, 2014, p. 253). The 
luxury of marine escapism and the purity of an all-absorbing ocean does not 
exist for Walcott, and thus, his poem contains imagery quite unlike that in 
the works of Byron, Hawthorne, or Friedrich. The surface of Walcott’s ocean 
presents “heaving oil, heavy as chaos”. Rivers have “scum” on their “drying lip”. 
The unmet promises of “emancipation” vanish and wither “as the sea’s lace dries 
in the sun” (pp. 253–255). Just as Adrienne Rich dons a mask and SCUBA 
gear to explore the wreck of history, Walcott invites readers to “strop on these 
goggles” to look directly at the past (p. 254). “Strop”, rather than “strap”, is an 
intentional usage: In the same sense that a razor is stropped (sharpened), goggles 
are Walcott’s incisive edge into history, the tool he offers us for seeing history as 
it is reflected in the seas – seas that were the scene of the horrors of the transo￾ceanic journey between Africa and the Americas that transported people to the 
plantations on which they were enslaved. Seeing the ocean as a place of peace 
is a form of privilege.
Marine history, seen through the lenses offered by Rich and Walcott, in￾volves gendered and racialized forms of violence. Their interventions, restoring 
history to the scene of sea-gazing, may help us see forms of environmental 
violence, as well. As new ways of seeing what we are at stake of losing have 
developed, our awareness of the impacts of modern life on marine ecosystems 
has increased – as has interest in protecting the ocean. A survey conducted in 
2018 of over 30,000 people in 21 different countries found that public percep￾tion of threats to the marine environment is at an all-time high, with 70% of 
respondents believing that the ocean is in danger due to human activities, such 
as pollution, overfishing, climate change, and biodiversity loss. The availabil￾ity of technology has benefited us in many ways, increasing our knowledge of 
ecosystems that until a few decades ago we had no way of exploring, but it also 
reveals the side effects of progress; one of the many discoveries of Vescovo’s 
deepest dive in 2019 were the plastic items scattered along the ocean’s deepest 
crevices, along with synthetic particles, such as nylon, polyethylene, rayon, and 
other fibers found in every organism sampled from the Mariana Trench (Jamie￾son et al., 2019).
Stropping on goggles is more important than ever. We are now more than 20 
years into the new century, surrounded by an enormous expanse of salty water 
teeming with marine creatures that many know relatively little about. Not enough 
people are aware, for example, that tiny organisms, phytoplankton, produce over 
half the oxygen necessary to sustain the planet, and that climate change is oc￾curring so rapidly that warming conditions may affect mixing in such a way that 
fewer nutrients will be available in the surface layer – the level to which sunlight 
is able to reach to allow photosynthesis to take place in these organisms. Global 
warming is also increasing the frequency of harmful algal blooms (HABs), which 
release biotoxins resulting in toxicity to shellfish, fish, and other marine animals Marine Pollution: Science, Art, and the Accumulations of Time 89
(Gittings et al., 2018). Other effects of climate change, such as ocean acidification 
and hypoxia (reduced concentration of oxygen in warmer waters), contribute to 
this altered state of phytoplankton (Turley et al., 2010). While great attention 
is paid when large oil spills occur (Abbriano et al., 2011) that cause immediate 
visible damage to ecosystems and sensitive wildlife (Paine et al., 1996), our daily 
use of smaller amounts of fuel – for cars, airplanes, and industrial purposes – has 
caused global ocean temperatures to increase 1°F on average over the past 100 
years. Nineteen of the warmest years on record have occurred since 2000, and 
2020 was tied with 2016 for the warmest year yet (Green & Jacobs, 2021), threat￾ening the tiny oceanic organisms that can be described as the “other lung of 
planet earth” (McRae, 2020).
As phytoplankton drifting on the surface layers of the ocean have begun 
to suffer from an early case of emphysema due to climate change, the ocean 
has been ravaged by more direct forms of pollution during the 20th and 21st 
 centuries. Ocean acidification and warming temperatures can be described as 
pollutant effects because these phenomena are caused by the use and burning 
of fossil fuels. Traditionally, however, pollution is thought of as the introduc￾tion of synthetic chemicals produced by humans – including pesticides; ex￾cess nutrients from agriculture (Howarth, 2008); industrial compounds like 
plasticizers and fluorinated chemicals that magically make our clothing wrin￾kle and stain-free; and pharmaceuticals that tend to find their way out of our 
medicine cabinets and into waterways (Brander, 2022). This chemical cocktail 
affects wildlife while also compromising human health (Colborn et al., 1996). 
Much of our knowledge about these environmental impacts depends on the 
insights made by conservationists and scientists of Carson’s era – namely, that 
products promoting a better way of life for many (protecting humans from 
disease-bearing insects, such as mosquitoes; promoting the growth of crops; 
improving health through medication) also have a negative impact on oceanic 
and inland water bodies, through the chains of aqueous transport described 
in Silent Spring and based on the kinds of interconnectedness detailed in The 
Sea Around Us.
Many contaminants found in runoff (liberated from lands via stormwater run￾off, or that enter coastal areas or estuaries in the form of effluents from wastewater 
treatment plants) are persistent in that they bind to sediments or are harbored in 
the fatty tissues of animals, including humans. Some are broken down by sunlight 
and hydrolysis. However, a unique pollutant type that is both highly persistent 
and capable of traveling long distances – into the depths of the ocean and to 
remote polar locations – is also a three-dimensional object which other chemicals 
and living organisms can adsorb or adhere to: Plastics.
The Mongoose and the Bottle: Global Plastics
Plastics originated in the mid-19th century. In the 1840s, Charles Goodyear and 
Thomas Hancock independently took out patents in the US and the UK, re￾spectively, for “vulcanized” rubber. Western factories began producing tires for 90 S. Brander and P. Betjemann
bicycles, and later for cars and trucks, launching a plastic revolution that deep￾ened over the next century. Another early plastic, called “Parkesine” (invented by 
Alexander Parkes), was displayed in 1862 at the international exhibition in Lon￾don. It was made from cellulose and used to make molds for printing, buttons, and 
combs. We really began producing plastics en masse in the early 1900s. What or￾ganics chemists know as “polyoxybenzylmethylenglycolanhydride” was presented 
to the public as “Bakelite”. Developed in 1909, Bakelite depended upon a phenol 
formaldehyde resin that, when combined with wood flour as a filler, could be used 
to make radio cases, sunglasses, toys, jewelry, rotary phones, bowling balls, and 
handles on pots and pans. Soon to follow were many other “thermoset” plastics, 
Bakelite’s sisters polystyrene (1929), polyester (1930), polyvinylchloride (PVC) and 
polyethylene (1933), and nylon (1935). During World War II, oil companies in￾vested in factories to convert crude oil into plastic, resulting in an overload of pol￾ymers once peaceful times resumed. The problem of too much plastic was solved, 
from the industrial point of view, with the invention of Tupperware (1948). Tup￾perware products were inexpensive, durable, and versatile. Parents were happy to 
have toys and cups for their kids that did not break or shatter, and oil companies 
had another outlet for their products (Gilbert, 2016).
If the romanticization of the oceans, historically speaking, involves their unaf￾fectable vastness and unreachable horizons, a correlative perception fueling ma￾rine pollution involves the false projection of an “away” for plastics. Most people 
are aware that plastics do not biodegrade, but they trust that they are recycled. 
In truth, recycling rates have always been relatively flat (around 9–10%) and 
remain so because many plastics are difficult to recycle and because countries 
lack economic incentives to recycle or reuse most items (Jambeck et al., 2015). 
Western culture has invented and mass-produced a non-biodegradable material 
that is far less expensive to make than reuse. Oceanic gyres, including the North 
Pacific gyre, also known as the Great Pacific Garbage Patch, are a daily reminder 
of our disposable culture (LeBreton et al., 2018). A plastic Miss Piggy driving a 
small pink corvette from a Happy Meal™ eaten in 1986 may outlive your great 
grandchildren.
It is now trendy to limit one’s plastic use, and some percentage of the public has 
finally grasped that the plastic problem cannot be wished away by occasionally 
remembering to toss one’s single-use plastic water bottle into the correctly labeled 
bin. As of 2020, the US harbors just 4% of the world’s population while creating 
17% of total global plastic waste (Borrelle et al., 2020). In effect, each Ameri￾can contributes over four times their global share of plastic pollution, an amount 
comparable to our greenhouse gas footprint. More visible evidence, in the form of 
“macro” plastics, is accumulating, and many bans on single-use items now exist. 
“Bioplastics” have also become a popular replacement. Manufactured from corn, 
soy, or avocado pits, these straws, cups, and lids are advertised as being com￾postable. But research shows that these biologically derived plastics can be just 
as harmful to the environment (Robbins, 2020). Composting them successfully 
requires specialized facilities. Regardless of the impression that some may have Marine Pollution: Science, Art, and the Accumulations of Time 91
and of prominent movements led by environmental groups to reduce reliance on 
single-use plastics, the production of plastics continues to increase exponentially 
(Jambeck et al., 2015).
The fact that nearly all US states with bans on single-use plastic are along ei￾ther coast of North America (National Conference of State Legislatures, 2021) – 
and that countries with large swaths of coastline are the first to cry foul when 
plastic begins to wash ashore – is no accident. People seem to be more moti￾vated to protect habitat associated with water than with land (Nichols, 2014), 
and an image of a turtle with a straw stuck in its nose gets far more press than 
microplastics being used as mulch on farmland in Kansas. In the same opening 
passages of Moby-Dick that describe the inherent orientation of humans to the 
oceans, Melville suggests that water represents a “chief element” of visual art 
and visual appreciation; watercourses and waterways represent what he calls the 
“magic stream” of art, drawing the eye with a sort of magnetic power (Melville, 
1993, p. 3). Even so, and with an increasing number of images helping us see the 
accumulation of plastics in marine and coastal regions, the gravity of the situa￾tion remains difficult to convey. We have reached a point at which scientists are 
calling for a redefinition of the carbon cycle due to the sheer amount of plastic 
(which contains carbon) now residing on the ocean floor, floating in the water 
column, and carried by the wind (Zhu, 2021). By 2050, plastics are predicted 
to comprise 15–20% of our carbon footprint. Plastics are dangerous to wildlife 
(Thompson et al., 2009) and are even embedded in human tissues to such a 
degree that scientists have coined a new term – “plasticenta” – to describe the 
microplastics contaminating the organ that nourishes unborn babies (Ragusa 
et al., 2021). Craig Santos Perez, an Indigenous Chamoru poet from Guam, writes 
of the points where plastics, human birth and life, and ocean devastation inter￾sect. In “The Age of Plastics”, he describes the plastic probe of an ultrasound 
machine visualizing the embryo in “my wife’s belly”, the “inflatable tub” in which 
she labors, the plastic chemicals in her placenta, and the plastic pacifier that his 
daughter sucks (Perez, 2018). Perez connects all those plasticized points along a 
developmental trajectory of life in which food and plastics become inseparable, 
as life and plastics, birth and death, become permanently interfused in a com￾plex and painful meditation. Perez moves from the plastic-mediated birth of his 
daughter to the darkly ironic and tragic vision of how plastic never dies. The title 
of the poem captures its irony; the “age of plastics” represents the origins of life 
in a modern content, but the “age of plastics” is ultimately ageless, never-ending, 
eternally durable and devastating to the “paradise / of the Pacific gyre” in which 
Perez’s homeland is located.
The time for change has arrived, and the past decade has brought with it 
what marine scientist Jane Lubchenco calls “a new narrative for the ocean” 
(Lubchenco & Gaines, 2019). The term “narrative”, in this call to action, mat￾ters; the traditional story of the ocean, told in literature and art, represents a 
threat inextricably linked to physical pollutants. We know now that the ocean is 
best understood not as an “ungraspable phantom”, to recall Melville’s language, 92 S. Brander and P. Betjemann
but as a real, physical environment subject to the ravages of history and the dep￾osition of its byproducts. Modern life has damaged it over time, perhaps irrevers￾ibly; too often, we treat its waters as an unacknowledged waste dump rather than 
honoring them as the beating heart of our planet. Today, instead of assuming 
that the ocean is too big to fail, we must acknowledge that it is too big to ignore 
(Lubchenco & Gaines, 2019). To do so requires a comprehensive understanding 
of a problem that is simultaneously oriented to the stories we tell and the actions 
we take.
Scientists have revealed the extent and insidiousness of marine pollution. 
Literature scholars have revealed the assumptions about oceanic purity made by 
Romantic-era writers. A comprehensive approach to grappling with the destruc￾tion of the marine ecosystems requires that we study not just what we are doing, 
but the long history of narratives about the oceans that have led us to this point. 
We must also engage in acts of both rethinking our actions and rewriting our 
marine stories. Even as scientists have revealed the polluted condition of marine 
and terrestrial ecosystems under modern systems of production and consumption, 
literary scholars have challenged the assumption of oceanic timelessness and in￾vincibility by interpreting how contemporary poetry depicts “ocean waste in ways 
that necessarily encompass [the] histories and agencies of the more-than-human 
world” (Bloomfield, 2019).
As in many efforts having to do with conservation and climate change, 
younger activists and writers are particularly adept at translating science into 
action and awareness. Dozens of poems and lyrical passages about ocean plastics 
can be found on blogs, websites, and digital classroom projects. Compelling work 
has also been published in more traditional venues. In “Giving a Mongoose a 
Plastic Bottle”, 16-year-old poet Uma Menon describes a mongoose wrestling a 
bottle as a metaphor for the more general struggle of animal life against plastic 
pollution. In the first half of the poem, Menon transitions from a single event in 
a particular geography (in Menon’s “motherland”, India, she witnesses the mon￾goose) to the accumulation of plastic products in a global geography: “Plastic 
across the oceans, across/ rice fields, across a cardboard/ building where a forest 
once breathed.” Most of the poem’s short lines are enjambed, a technique in 
which a reader is required to proceed to the next line to complete each gram￾matical phrase. Enjambment produces a feeling of breathlessness in this poem, 
capturing the suffocating extent of a world in which the mongoose may choke 
on the bottle and – just as the poetic lines blur and spread into one another – 
plastics are spread across the lands and the seas of the world. The final line of 
the poem – “&&&)” – represents a cry of despair at the extent and scope of the 
problem. The poet has carried the reader from her own motherland to the circu￾latory systems in which plastics persist in the environment of everyone’s moth￾erland, the earth itself. Oceans, rice fields, forests, and deserts come together at 
the apparent conclusion of this poem – which is not, in fact, a conclusion, but 
an invitation to the reader to fill in the “&&&” with their own points of origin, 
places of observation, and observed ecological niches. None of those, Menon 
tells us, is secure from the danger of suffocation.Marine Pollution: Science, Art, and the Accumulations of Time 93
BOX 6.2 Uma Menon, Giving a Mongoose a Plastic Bottle (2019). 
(Poem reprinted with permission from Mawenzi House 
Publishers Ltd).
In my motherland, I see
a mongoose sinking
its warrior teeth into plastic trash.
The sunlight reflects its struggle,
plastic across the oceans, across
rice fields, across a cardboard
building where a forest
once breathed. This land
gave me a life & I’ve
given it bottle caps. Warning:
Choking Hazard-mongoose
can’t read. Immune to snake
venom, susceptible to plastic
bottles. The lake has closed
its eyes-closed its eyes &
swallowed brown water, sprinkled
with plastic bags. Warning:
To avoid danger of suffocation,
keep this plastic bag away
from babies & children (& lakes
& oceans & mongooses
& hornbills & turtles &
peacocks & rice fields
& forests & deserts &
&&&)
We must accept Menon’s invitation to adopt a global perspective. As has hap￾pened with climate change, the areas of the world most highly impacted by plastic 
pollution are often the poorest and most vulnerable to exploitation by nations 
that produce an outsized portion of nonrenewable plastic waste. In the UK, for 
example, enough plastic to fill two double-decker buses is tossed in the waste bin 
every 30 seconds. This plastic used to be primarily shipped to China for sorting 
and supposed recycling, but it was impossible to do this in a mutually beneficial or 
profitable manner. Plastic is now shipped to countries such as Malaysia in South￾east Asia – which refused to accept large shipments of plastic from the UK and 
the US in 2020 (Malaysia returns 42 containers of ‘illegal’ plastic waste to UK, 
2020). There is simply a lack of global consensus on where to put our plastic pol￾lution. Ocean currents are driving plastic debris to remote areas of the world, such 
as the isolated Cocos Keeling Islands in the Indian Ocean (Lavers et al., 2019). 94 S. Brander and P. Betjemann
Only a few hundred people occupy the area, but accumulated piles of microplastic 
debris (<5 mm in size) in the form of degraded toothbrushes, plastic bags, and 
straws weigh nearly 240 tons as of 2019. The pollution of some areas of the world 
for the benefit of others may be understood as a form of colonialism – the use of 
lands outside one country to stockpile unwanted goods or waste products. A par￾ticularly insidious example of this colonialist mindset blames the countries forced 
to accept unusable plastics for financial or political reasons; poorer countries with 
large swaths of coastline, such as the Philippines, Indonesia, and a number of 
African nations, have been accused of mismanaging their waste and contributing 
disproportionately to polluting the ocean (Liboiron, 2018).
In fact, Western habits may be rendering the land and homes of others un￾usable and uninhabitable. Many people have become aware that atoll nations, 
such as Kiribati, the Maldives, Tuvalu, and the Marshall Islands, are experiencing 
sea-level rise that threaten their very existence. A plastics analogue is now being 
chronicled by filmmakers, photographers, poets, scientists, and journalists. Art￾ists have begun using imagery from the Pacific Ocean, for example from Japan, 
to contrast the original intent of these paintings with the plastic inundation of 
modern times (Figure 6.5). Their collective work – research on physical envi￾ronments with the power of visual and written media to shape how we see the 
world – may be having an effect. The United Nations has begun work toward 
a binding global agreement to reduce plastic pollution similar to the 2015 Paris 
Climate Agreement (Bergmann et al., 2022). Countries such as the US have in￾troduced legislation to reduce plastic production and frame economic incentives 
Figure 6.5 Russ White, The Great Trash Wave (after Hokusai), 6-color screenprint, ed. of 
25, 18 × 24ʺ, 2014. Image courtesy of the artist.Marine Pollution: Science, Art, and the Accumulations of Time 95
for recapture and reuse. A resurgence in the visceral concern for marine envi￾ronmental impacts may be becoming apparent as we enter the third decade of 
the 21st century. However, a new narrative for the ocean must replace the old to 
challenge that “book of myths” that Adrienne Rich identifies in her poem. “The 
thing I came for”, writes Rich, is “the wreck itself and not the story of the wreck/ 
the thing itself and not the myth/… the evidence of damage/ worn by salt and 
spray into this threadbare beauty”.
Questions for Reflection
 1. What types of anthropogenic pollution were occurring before the Industrial 
 2. Can you suggest why must people today believe that the ocean is in danger 
 3. What do you consider to be the greatest hurdles to reach a global agreement 
References
Abbriano, R., Carranza, M. M., Hogle, S. L., Levin, R. A., Netburn, A. N., Seto, K. L., 
Snyder, S. M., & Franks, P. J. S. (2011). Deepwater Horizon oil spill: A review of plank￾tonic response. Oceanography, 24(3), 294–301. https://www.jstor.org/stable/24861323
Barrett, J., Chase, Z., Zhang, J., Banaszak Holl, M. M., Willis, K., Williams, A., Hard￾esty, B. D., & Wilcox, C. (2020). Microplastic pollution in deep-sea sediments from the 
Great Australian Bight. Frontiers in Marine Science, 7, 576170. https://doi.org/10.3389/
fmars.2020.576170
Bascom, W. (1974). The disposal of waste in the ocean. Scientific American, 231(2), 16–25. 
https://www.jstor.org/stable/24950139
Bergmann, M., Almroth, B. C., Brander, S. M., Dey, T., Green, D. S., Gundogdu, S., 
Krieger, A., Wagner, M., & Walker, T. R. (2022). A global plastic treaty must cap pro￾duction. Science, 376(6592), 469–470. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.abq0082
Bloomfield, M. (2019). Widening gyre: A poetics of ocean plastics. Configurations, 27(4), 
501–523. https://doi.org/10.1353/con.2019.0033
Borrelle, S. B., Ringma, J., Law, K. L., Monnahan, C. C., Lebreton, L., McGivern, A., 
Murphy, E., Jambeck, J., Leonard, G. H., Hilleary, M. A., Eriksen, M., Possingham, H. 
P., De Frond, H., Gerber, L. R., Polidoro, B., Tahir, A., Bernard, M., Mallos, N., Barnes, 
M., & Rochman, C. M. (2020). Predicted growth in plastic waste exceeds efforts to 
mitigate plastic pollution. Science, 369(6510), 1515–1518. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.
aba3656
Brander, S. M. (2022). Rethinking our chemical legacy and reclaiming our planet. One 
Earth, 5(4), 316–319. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.oneear.2022.03.020
Byron, G. G. (1816–1817). Childe Harold´s pilgrimage. In The Works of Lord Byron Includ￾ing Several Poems now First Collected Together with an Original Biography (Vol. 1) (pp. 
13–29). M. Thomas & J. Maxwell, printer.96 S. Brander and P. Betjemann
Carpenter, E. J., & Smith Jr., K. L. (1972). Plastics on the Sargasso Sea surface. Science, 
175(4027), 1240–1241. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.175.4027.1240
Carson, R. (1998). The edge of the sea. Mariner Books (Original work published 1955).
Carson, R. (2002). Silent spring. Houghton Mifflin (Original work published 1962).
Carson, R. (2018). The sea around us. Oxford University Press (Original work published 
1951).
Colborn, T., Dumanoski, D., & Meyers, J. P. (1996). Our stolen future: Are we threatening 
our fertility, intelligence and survival? – a scientific detective story. Dutton Adult.
Earle, S. A. (2010). The world is blue: How our fate and the ocean’s are one. National 
Geographic Books.
Epstein, L. (2014). Fifty years since Silent Spring. Annual Review of Phytopathology, 52(1), 
377–402. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-phyto-102313-045900
Gilbert, M. (2016). Brydson’s plastics materials. Butterworth-Heinemann.
Gittings, J. A., Raitsos, D. E., Krokos, G., & Hoteit, I. (2018). Impacts of warming on phy￾toplankton abundance and phenology in a typical tropical marine ecosystem. Scientific 
Reports, 8(1), 2240. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-20560-5
Goldberg, E. D. (1986). The assimilative capacity of the oceans for wastes. In C. S. Giam 
& H. J.-M. Dou (Eds.), Strategies and advanced techniques for marine pollution studies: 
Mediterranean Sea (pp. 1–8). NATO ASI Series. Springer.
Green, T., & Jacobs, P. (2021, March 17). 2020 tied for warmest year on record, NASA 
analysis shows. NASA. https://www.nasa.gov/press-release/2020-tied-for-warmest-year￾on-record-nasa-analysis-shows.
Hawthorne, N. (n.d.). The Ocean. Poetry Foundation (Original work published 1825). 
https://www.poetryfoundation.org/poems/57286/the-ocean
Hong, S., Candelone, J.-P., Patterson, C. C., & Boutron, C. F. (1994). Greenland ice e vidence 
of hemispheric lead pollution two millennia ago by Greek and Roman civilizations. Sci￾ence, 265(5180), 1841–1843. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.265.5180.1841
Hooper, J. (2002). Of moths and men: An evolutionary tale. W.W. Norton & Company.
Howarth, R. W. (2008). Coastal nitrogen pollution: A review of sources and trends glob￾ally and regionally. Harmful Algae, 8(1), 14–20. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.hal.2008.08.015
Jambeck, J. R., Geyer, R., Wilcox, C., Siegler, T. R., Perryman, M., Andrady, A., Narayan, 
R., & Law, K. L. (2015). Plastic waste inputs from land into the ocean. Science, 347(6223), 
768–771. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1260352
Jamieson, A. J., Brooks, L. S. R., Reid, W. D. K., Piertney, S. B., Narayanaswamy, B. E., & 
Linley, T. D. (2019). Microplastics and synthetic particles ingested by deep-sea amphi￾pods in six of the deepest marine ecosystems on Earth. Royal Society Open Science, 6(2),
180667. https://doi.org/10.1098/rsos.180667
Kivenson, V., Lemkau, K. L., Pizarro, O., Yoerger, D. R., Kaiser, C., Nelson, R. K., 
Carmichael, C., Paul, B. G., Reddy, C. M., & Valentine, D. L. (2019). Ocean dumping 
of containerized DDT waste was a sloppy process. Environmental Science & Technology, 
53(6), 2971–2980. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.8b05859
Lavers, J. L., Dicks, L., Dicks, M. R., & Finger, A. (2019). Significant plastic accumulation 
on the Cocos (Keeling) Islands, Australia. Scientific Reports, 9(7102), 1–9. https://doi.
org/10.1038/s41598-019-43375-4
Lebreton, L., Slat, B., Ferrari, F., Sainte-Rose, B., Aitken, J., Marthouse, R, Hajbane, 
S., Cunsolo, S., Schwarz, A., Levivier, A., Nobl, K., Debeljak, P., Maral, H., 
 Schoeneich-Argent, R., Brambini, R., & Reisser, J. (2018). Evidence that the Great 
 Pacific Garbage Patch is rapidly accumulating plastic. Scientific Reports, 8, 4666. https://
doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-22939-wMarine Pollution: Science, Art, and the Accumulations of Time 97
Liboiron, M. (2018, December 21). How plastic is a function of colonialism. Teen Vogue. 
https://www.teenvogue.com/story/how-plastic-is-a-function-of-colonialism
Lubchenco, J., & Gaines, S. D. (2019). A new narrative for the ocean. Science, 364(6444), 
911. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aay2241
Malaysia returns 42 containers of ‘illegal’ plastic waste to UK. (2020, January 20). BBC 
News. Retrieved June 21, 2022, from https://www.bbc.com/news/uk-51176312
Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act, Public Law 92–532 (1972). https://
www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/COMPS-1680/pdf/COMPS-1680.pdf
McRae, G. (2020, April 16). Will climate change threaten earth’s other lung? The Revela￾tor. https://therevelator.org/phytoplankton-climate-change/
Melville, H. (1993). Moby-Dick; or, the whale. Wordsworth Classics (Original work 
published 1851).
Menon, U. (2019, September 30). Giving a mongoose a plastic bottle. Skipping Stones 31. 
https://www.skippingstones.org/wp/2019/09/30/poetry-by-uma-menon-16-florida/
Morelle, R. (2019, May 13). Mariana Trench: Deepest-ever sub dive finds plastic bag. BBC 
News. https://www.bbc.com/news/science-environment-48230157
Mosley, S. (2013). The chimney of the world: A history of smoke pollution in Victorian and 
Edwardian Manchester. Routledge.
National Conference of State Legislatures. (2021, February 2). State Plastic Bag Legisla￾tion. https://www.ncsl.org/research/environment-and-natural-resources/plastic-bag￾legislation.aspx
Nichols, W. J. (2014). Blue mind: The surprising science that shows how being near, in, on, or 
under water can make you happier, healthier, more connected, and better at what you do. 
Little Brown.
Paine, R. T., Ruesink, J. L., Sun, A., Soulanille, E. L., Wonham, M. J., Harley, C. D. G., 
Brumbaugh, D. R., & Secord, D. L. (1996). Trouble on oiled waters: Lessons from the 
Exxon Valdez oil spill. Annual Review of Ecology & Systematics, 27, 197–235. https://www.
jstor.org/stable/2097234
Perez, C. S. (2018, November 1). The age of plastic. The Margins: Asian American Writers’ 
Workshop. https://aaww.org/the-age-of-plastic/
Ragusa, A., Svelato, A., Santacroce, C., Catalano, P., Notarstefano, V., Carnevali, O., 
Papa, F., Rongioletti, M. C. A., Baiocco, F., Draghi, S., D’Amore, E., Rinaldo, D., Matta, 
M., & Giorgini, E. (2021). Plasticenta: First evidence of microplastics in human placenta. 
Environment International, 146, 106274. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envint.2020.106274
Ramirez-Llodra, E., Shank, T. M., & German, C. R. (2007). Biodiversity and biogeography 
of hydrothermal vent species: Thirty years of discovery and investigations. Oceanogra￾phy, 20(1), 30–41. https://www.jstor.org/stable/24859973
Rich, A. (1973). Diving into the wreck. Diving Into the Wreck: Poems, 1971–1972. W.W. 
Norton & Co.
Robbins, J. (2020, August 31). Why bioplastics will not solve the world’s plastics problem.
Yale Environment 360. https://e360.yale.edu/features/why-bioplastics-will-not-solve￾the-worlds-plastics-problem
Rossetti, C. G. (n.d.). By the sea. (Original work published 1858). http://famouspoetsand￾poems.com/poets/christina_rossetti/poems/16473
Safina, C. (1997). Song for the blue ocean: Encounters along the world’s coasts and beneath 
the seas. Holt Paperbacks.
Thompson, R. C., Swan, S. H., Moore, C. J., & vom Saal, F. S. (2009). Our plastic age. 
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 364(1526), 1973–
1976. https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2009.005498 S. Brander and P. Betjemann
Turley, C., Eby, M., Ridgwell, A. J., Schmidt, D. N., Findlay, H. S., Brownlee, C., Rie￾besell, U., Fabry, V. J., Feely, R. A., & Gattuso, J.-P. (2010). The societal challenge of 
ocean acidification. Marine Pollution Bulletin, 60(6), 787–792. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
marpolbul.2010.05.006
Twombly, M., Scalamogna, A., & Stegmaier, A. (2014). The evolution of Alvin. 
National Geographic. https://www.nationalgeographic.com/news-features/evolution-of￾alvin/?sf3188984=1
Walcott, D. (2014). The sea is history. In G. Maxwell, (Ed.), The poetry of Derek Walcott, 
1948–2013. Farrar, Straus, and Giroux (Original work published 1978).
Woodwell, G. M., Wurster Jr., C. F., & Isaacson, P. A. (1967). DDT residues in an east 
coast estuary: A case of biological concentration of a persistent insecticide. Science, 
156(3776), 821–824. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.156.3776.821
Zhu, X. (2021). The plastic cycle–an unknown branch of the carbon cycle. Frontiers in 
Marine Science, 7, 609243. https://doi.org/10.3389/fmars.2020.6092437 Oceans and the Changing 
Climate
D. O. Suman
A recent comprehensive study by a high-level international organization, the Inter￾governmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), presented The Special Report on 
the Oceans and Cryosphere in Changing Climate (Intergovernmental Panel on Cli￾mate Change [IPCC], 2019) that examines the latest projections of impacts to the 
ocean environment depending on different behaviors of the global community dur￾ing the 21st century. The most optimistic scenario assumes low emissions of green￾house gases (GHG), high mitigation actions,1
 and a two-thirds chance of limiting 
global warming to warming to less than 2°C by 2100. The most pessimistic scenario 
assumes high GHG emissions and an absence of policies to combat climate change.
Atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2) concentrations in 2021 were 416 ppm, com￾pared with preindustrial concentrations of 280 ppm. Predicted concentrations in 
2100 range between less than 400 ppm and close to 1,000 ppm for the optimistic 
and pessimistic scenarios, respectively. Increased concentrations of atmospheric 
CO2 and other GHG will lead to higher atmospheric and surface seawater tem￾peratures. Compared with the baseline period of 1986–2005, the global mean 
sea surface temperature is projected to increase between 0.7°C and 3°C by 2100, 
depending on the responses of the global community.
Human activities causing increases in atmospheric GHG include fossil fuel 
combustion, biomass burning, and deforestation, among others. Ultimately, our 
actions are responsible for significant physical and chemical changes to the ocean 
system that have great implications for people who use coastal and marine liv￾ing resources and space. The geographical ranges of some species may shift, and 
others may experience changes in growth and reproduction or become locally 
extinct. Population changes may impact the food web and, of course, industrial 
and artisanal fishers. Coastal communities are already experiencing exposure to 
rising sea levels and more intense storms, causing damage to life and property.
In response to these human-driven changes in the ocean system, governments 
and resource users must mitigate the cause of the problem and adapt to the 
changing circumstances. Mitigation, as defined in the footnote, refers to actions 
that reduce stressors such as, in this case, increasing emissions of GHG to the 
atmosphere. Adaptation involves actions that reduce the adverse impacts of the 
changes. Both mitigation and adaptation actions may be felt differently by various 
DOI: 10.4324/9781003058151-9100 D. O. Suman
social sectors or user groups. In other words, the impact of the actions may not be 
distributed equally across society and may enhance inequalities.
This chapter examines important changes to the ocean system resulting from 
climate change: (1) rising sea levels, (2) changes in oceanic conditions (sea surface 
temperatures, currents) that affect the availability of fishery resources, and (3) 
the increasing acidity of seawater (ocean acidification). These changes threaten 
human livelihoods and wellbeing. This chapter also illustrates ways people are 
adapting to these environmental changes, often resulting in winners and los￾ers. Addressing climate change impacts in coastal and marine areas presents 
 decision-makers with both great challenges and opportunities.
Sea Level Rise (SLR)
Higher atmospheric temperatures are melting portions of the polar ice caps, the 
Greenland ice sheet, and high-altitude glaciers. Ice melt, in addition to thermal 
expansion of seawater, will lead to higher sea levels and flooding of low-lying 
coastal areas. The global mean sea surface elevation has already risen some 1.4 
mm/yr (0.8–2.0 mm/yr) between 1901 and 1990. Predictions for global sea level 
rise by 2100 range between 0.43 and 0.84 meters relative to 1986–2005 levels. 
Sea level rise is site-specific, however, and regions may differ ±30% of the global 
average depending on local conditions, such as glacial rebound, subsidence, local 
hydrology, loss of coastal wetlands, and ocean currents. Evidence also suggests 
that higher surface seawater temperatures lead to increases in the intensity and 
frequency of tropical hurricanes and typhoons, particularly intense storms of Cat￾egories 4 and 5. Storm surges associated with tropical storms, when compounded 
with SLR and high tides, expose coastal areas to greater flooding risks.
Human Dimensions of SLR
Rising seas resulting from global climate change are already having great impacts 
on the people who inhabit coastal areas. Properties and critical infrastructure 
may be damaged or lost to coastal erosion and flooding, leading to high financial 
losses or even loss of life. Social demographics may change in various ways as some 
peoples are displaced and search for alternative livelihoods. SLR may also cause 
loss or reduction of ecosystem services that intact coastal environments provide 
(storm protection, biodiversity). In this sense, SLR compounds other drivers that 
threaten ecosystem services (urbanization, coastal sprawl, habitat loss, pollution).
About half of the world’s population lives in coastal areas and is potentially at 
risk from coastal flooding. Large coastal urban areas present major concerns due 
to population and essential infrastructure and real estate assets. Nicholls et al. 
(2007) ranked coastal cities most exposed to coastal flooding in 2007 and 2070 in 
terms of exposed population and assets. Considering exposed populations, 15 of 
the top 20 cities were located in Asia, 3 in Africa, and 2 in the US (Miami and 
New York). Miami placed ninth on the list with exposed populations of 2,003,000 
(2007) and 4,795,000 (2070). However, when examining assets exposed to coastal 
flooding, Miami placed first with exposed assets of $416 billion (2007) and $3.5 Oceans and the Changing Climate 101
trillion (2070). The top five cities in exposed assets were Miami (USA), Guang￾zhou (China), New York-Newark (USA), Kolkata (India), and Shanghai (China), 
in descending order. Miami has recently been identified as the most economically 
vulnerable city to SLR in the world, according to the US National Climate As￾sessment (Melillo et al., 2014). Box 7.1 details the vulnerabilities that Miami faces 
in light of SLR.
BOX 7.1 The Case of Miami: The Human Dimensions of SLR
Miami is a key example of an urban area highly vulnerable to flooding, 
resulting from SLR coupled with tropical storms. Miami’s geography in￾creases its exposure to sea level rise and flooding. Miami’s highest eleva￾tions of about nine meters above sea level are found along a fossilized coral 
ridge. However, over 95% of land in Miami is less than six meters (about 20 
feet) above sea level (Weiss et al., 2011). Porous and permeable limestone 
bedrock underlies the entire region, so rising seas also increase groundwa￾ter levels. Most of the coastal ecosystems (mangrove forests and seagrass 
beds) in the northern half of the county have been degraded or removed 
during 120 years of urban development, reducing nature-based protections. 
Moreover, Southeast Florida lies in an extremely active hurricane zone. 
The average return period for a hurricane strike (Categories 1–5) in Miami 
Beach is five years, while the return period for a strong hurricane (Category 
3–5) is 18 years (Malmstadt, 2019; National Hurricane Center, 2019). Sea 
levels in South Florida are estimated to have already increased some 20 cm 
since the 1930s (Zervas, 2009) and, as sea level rise accelerates, high tides 
and storm surges will be superimposed on higher tidal base levels (Sweet 
et al., 2017). Miami already experiences flooding of streets during high-tide 
events or “king tides” (“sunny day flooding”), and these events will become 
ever more frequent. Using US Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) esti￾mates for SLR, the Union of Concerned Scientists predicted that streets in 
Miami Beach will flood 380 times per year by 2045 (Union of Concerned 
Scientists, 2017).
Potential property losses in Miami from flooding are astronomical due to 
the combination of increased storm intensity (Patricola & Werner, 2018), 
sea level rise, rapid coastal development, and population increases. A sea 
level rise of 0.5 meters by 2070 without adaptation measures could threaten 
assets valued at $3.5 trillion and displace 300,000 persons in Miami (Hauer 
et al., 2016; Treuer et al., 2018).
Climate gentrification occurs when affluent persons purchase properties 
at higher elevations currently occupied by lower-income residents. There is 
evidence that climate gentrification has already begun in Miami (Keenan 
et al., 2018). Real estate prices have increased faster in higher elevation 102 D. O. Suman
neighborhoods than those at lower elevations. Real estate located at higher 
elevations in mainland Miami neighborhoods that feature low-income 
communities of color (Little Haiti, North Wynwood, Little River) are being 
targeted by speculators and investors promoting projects for higher-income 
residents who may wish to escape low-lying coastal areas vulnerable to 
flooding (Bolstad, 2017).
Miami faces an uncertain future with limited options due to its porous 
limestone substrate, low elevation, high hurricane risk, limited space to re￾treat to higher ground, high costs involved in adaptation measures, abun￾dance of climate deniers, and the lack of political will to invest today in 
protections that future generations will enjoy (Molinaroli et al., 2019).
Besides the high vulnerability of many urban coastal areas, such as Miami, to 
SLR and flooding, many smaller coastal communities throughout the world are 
already being displaced due to SLR. Often, residents of these communities are 
among the most socially vulnerable populations. Several US coastal communi￾ties present dramatic examples of vulnerability to impacts from sea level rise and 
coastal erosion.
Coastal wetlands and barrier islands in southern Louisiana are disappearing 
due to sea level rise, erosion from hurricane storm surges, and reduced deposi￾tion of Mississippi River sediments resulting from USACE flood control and 
levee projects. Isle de Jean Charles, home to members of the United Houma 
Nation tribe and the Biloxi-Chitimacha Confederation of Muskogees Inc., once 
had an extension of 22,000 acres, while only 320 acres remain today. In 2016, 
the US Department of Housing and Urban Development awarded the State 
of Louisiana $48.3 million in resettlement funds (Louisiana Office of Com￾munity Development, 2020). The resettlement effort has been rocky, however. 
Although Louisiana purchased land for resettlement, in 2019 the community 
rejected the offer because the members considered that the state’s planning pro￾cess was culturally insensitive; in addition, many people simply did not want to 
move (Dermansky, 2019). The situation for “the country’s first climate refugees” 
has yet to be resolved.
Many native Alaskan villages are also experiencing the impacts of climate 
change (Environmental Protection Agency, 2016). As air and sea temperatures 
increase, sea ice and permafrost melt and storms intensify, leading to increased 
coastal erosion. Numerous communities have been forced to retreat and, in some 
cases, relocate. One Yupík Eskimo community, Newtok, has contemplated reloca￾tion for almost two decades as coastal erosion and flooding have caused contami￾nation of drinking water, damage to the wastewater treatment system, and loss of 
the dock and shoreline structures. Shishmaref, an Iñpuiat community, voted to 
relocate from their barrier island three times during the past decades. The high Oceans and the Changing Climate 103
costs of relocation and limited financial assistance available from the federal gov￾ernment are constant challenges for these communities (Martin, 2018).
The “climate refugee” issue is perhaps the starkest for local-lying Pacific Island 
nations and other small island developing states (SIDS). Clearly, there is a need to 
resolve these issues, as perhaps 143 million persons may be displaced from climate 
change impacts by 2050 (McDonnell, 2018). Rising sea levels threaten the Mar￾shall Islands that have elevations of less than two meters (about 6.5 feet) above 
sea level, and tidal flooding occurs monthly. As a trust territory of the US, Mar￾shallese may immigrate freely to the US. Uncertainty remains, however, about 
a fund allocated by the US Congress to support relocation to the US mainland 
(Davenport & Haner, 2015). Relocation scenarios are more uncertain for other 
Pacific Islander climate refugees. New Zealand denied the request for asylum from 
a Kiribati man based on his claim as a “climate refugee”. His appeal to the UN 
Human Rights Committee was rejected on the basis that he was not in “immedi￾ate danger”. The Committee did suggest, however, that people fleeing immediate 
danger could not be forced to return to their homes (Lyons, 2020; People urgently 
fleeing climate crisis, 2020). This non-binding opinion from the UN may be an 
important signal for nations’ obligations under international law (the 1951 Con￾vention relating to the Status of Refugees and its 1968 Protocol) and may open 
the door to protection for climate refugees. Flooding, coastal erosion, and sea level 
rise create “immediate danger” and “serious threats to the lives” of many persons 
living in low-lying coastal regions throughout the world. However, many ques￾tions remain regarding whether countries will recognize climate refugees under 
international refugee law and who will pay for relocation.
Adaptive Responses to SLR
The range of adaptive responses to SLR is extensive (National Research Council, 
2007; Pilkey & Cooper, 2014; Pilkey et al., 2016). The ultimate decision regarding 
the mix of adaptive strategies depends on numerous factors: geography of the 
shoreline (elevation, subsidence, groundwater level, wave energy), comparative 
costs and funding sources, sense of urgency, political will to invest today in meas￾ures benefiting future generations, scientific and technological capabilities, social 
equity, and legislative mandates, among others.
Decisions to remain in place, defend infrastructure, and fight against nature 
may be costly, exacerbate coastal erosion, cause great environmental impact, and 
ultimately be unsuccessful. Shoreline armoring via the construction of seawalls, 
bulkheads, riprap, groins, and breakwaters is a common measure. Beach nourish￾ment, although a softer alternative with added recreational benefits, is expensive, 
often temporary, and not without its own environmental impacts.
Nature-based solutions, such as the creation, restoration, or protection of man￾grove forests and salt marshes, seagrass beds, or oyster beds, may be applicable 
on some sheltered shores, and may also provide environmental benefits of new 
habitats and increased marine biodiversity. Nature-based alternatives might be 104 D. O. Suman
integrated into hardened shoreline structures. Other adaptation measures may 
include flood-proofing, floating homes, stricter construction standards, elevation 
of roads and buildings, floodgates, and pumps to remove flood waters.
The ideal strategy is managed retreat away from areas vulnerable to SLR and 
flooding. Nevertheless, the high costs of retreat, the challenges of proactive 
planning, the cultural aversion to relocation, and the potential displacement of 
low-income communities residing in higher elevation locations (climate gentrifi￾cation) are all obstacles. Box 7.2 describes Miami´s initial efforts to adapt to SLR 
and coastal flooding.
BOX 7.2 The Case of Miami – Adaptation Measures
Local initiatives to address the threat of SLR began in 2010 with the 
formation of the Southeast Florida Regional Climate Change Compact 
(SFRCCC) signed by local government leaders from the four-county re￾gion. In October 2012, the SFRCCC released its Regional Climate Action 
Plan with 110 action items that local governments could adopt to promote 
resilience under the threats presented by climate change. Miami-Dade 
County and, particularly, the City of Miami Beach have initiated numer￾ous planning measures to respond to climate change – including identi￾fication of critical infrastructure (roads, bridges, wastewater treatment 
plants, stormwater drains, seawalls, emergency services, etc.) and adoption 
of means to protect them, as well as revisions to building codes and county 
comprehensive plans. The City of Miami Beach has perhaps been the most 
proactive in adopting measures that address sea level rise. These include 
raised roads in some low-lying neighborhoods highly vulnerable to flooding, 
higher seawalls, revised building standards that mandate higher elevations 
for buildings’ finished floors, and hundreds of one-way stormwater pumps on 
streets that flood during king tides.
The US federal and state governments have been relatively absent from 
the flooding threats in Southeast Florida (except for the National Flood In￾surance Program and beach nourishment projects). However, in 2020 the US￾ACE released a $4.6 billion proposal (Miami-Dade Back Bay Coastal Storm 
Risk Management Study) calling for construction of a flood wall through 
central Miami-Dade County and flood gates that would close three rivers 
during storm surges. The proposal drew sharp criticism because the flood wall 
would divide neighborhoods, use eminent domain to purchase hundreds of 
properties, and fill in more areas of Biscayne Bay (United States Army Corps 
of Engineers, 2020). Critiques of the Draft Environmental Impact Statement 
released in 2020 pointed to the need to rely more on nature-based solutions, 
particularly increased restoration of mangrove forests and seagrass beds. 
County commissioners formally rejected the proposal in August 2021 and 
proposed to cooperate in the development of a more acceptable plan.Oceans and the Changing Climate 105
Changing Climate and Fisheries
Climate change impacts fishery resources on numerous levels – from physiologi￾cal changes at the cell level to broad ecosystem shifts. All have the potential to 
significantly affect the fish populations from the community to global levels, and 
subsequently, the fishing sectors that depend on these resources.
Physiological changes occur at the organism level due to changes in s eawater 
temperature and dissolved oxygen. Individuals may reach an oxygen- and 
 capacity-limited thermal tolerance (OCLT), particularly in their larval or spawn￾ing stages; larvae have high metabolic rates and lower energy reserves, while egg 
tissue requires an ample supply of oxygen. Above certain temperature limits ox￾ygen supply capacity becomes limiting, and hypoxemia develops. This appears 
to be the case with Gadus morhua (Atlantic cod) in the North Sea where larvae 
and adult spawners demonstrate sensitivity to winter warming. Cod recruitment 
in the North Sea correlates with cooler seawater temperatures (Pörtner et al., 
2010). Furthermore, Muñoz et al. (2015) report evidence of the upper limits on 
thermal tolerance for Pacific salmon that is thought to be the result of a mismatch 
between oxygen supply and demand. Tissues require increased amounts of oxygen 
at higher temperatures, resulting in increased heart rates that reach a maximum 
limit. Estimates of catastrophic losses of Pacific salmon by 2100 in western North 
America range from 17% at average projections for increased temperature, to 98% 
for maximum warming scenarios. Cheung et al. (2013) predict an additional im￾pact of these physiological changes caused by reduced oxygen supply: maximum 
body weight of fish may shrink between 14 and 24% from 2000 to 2050 under a 
high-emissions scenario.
Changes may also occur at the ecosystem level due to different physiological 
responses of organisms at various levels of the food web. The increased mortality 
of North Sea cod (G. morhua) in early life stages may be due to a mismatch in the 
timing of the thermal window of its larval food. The climate sensitivity of one 
species may induce changes in food web interactions. For example, a decrease in 
abundance of copepods (Calanus species) with warmer temperatures correlates 
with the timing of decreased G. morhua stocks in the North Sea, suggesting that 
the reduced availability of juvenile cod’s food source results in decreased cod 
recruitment.
Additional evidence comes from the Northeast US continental shelf, where 
the abundant cooler water habitat (5–15°C) appears to be contracting, resulting 
in a decrease of the thermal habitat of two zooplankton species that are prey 
for Atlantic cod larvae and juveniles in Georges Bank and the eastern Gulf of 
Maine. Friedland et al. (2013) suggested that the decreased availability of zoo￾plankton prey due to warmer temperatures may affect the feeding and growth of 
larval and juvenile cod and may influence cod recruitment in those regions.
Temperature appears to be the forcing factor for fish population shifts pole￾ward from their historic ranges. Populations follow shifts in their food sources or 
move into waters that are metabolically more favorable. Numerous examples of 
poleward shifts exist, and they are most noticeable at the northern and southern 
range limits of various populations.106 D. O. Suman
Models developed by Pörtner and Peck (2010) suggest that, by 2050, some pe￾lagic and demersal species may move poleward some 600 km (haddock and Atlan￾tic cod) and 223 km (flatfish). Faraday (2015) also reported that cod stocks found 
north to Greenland and south to North Carolina appear to be shifting north￾ward in the northwest Atlantic. Rijnsdorp et al. (2009) observed increases in the 
northern range limits of species common near the Iberian Peninsula (Lusitanian 
species, such as anchovy, sprat, and horse mackerel). Boreal species (Atlantic 
cod and plaice) show increased abundance at their northern limit and decreased 
abundance at their southern limit. These researchers suggest that this shift is 
due to higher production or survival of pelagic eggs or larval stages or perhaps to 
changes in the quantity and quality of nursery habitats.
The American lobster (Homarus americanus) shows a similar poleward shift. 
The inshore lobster fishery operates from Maine to New Jersey (USA), while the 
offshore fishery ranges from Maine to North Carolina. During the past decade the 
southernmost range has moved 43 km northward, and Gulf of Maine stocks also 
appear to be moving northward (Faraday, 2015).
Globally, we can expect high levels of species invasions in the Arctic and South￾ern Ocean regions. Local extinctions will occur in the tropics and semi-enclosed 
seas. Areas of highest species turnover are the subpolar regions of the Southern 
Ocean and the Arctic. Models of Cheung et al. (2009) estimate that 83% of fish 
species will show a poleward shift, with a median poleward displacement of almost 
300 km by the timeframe of 2040–2060, compared to ranges during 2001–2005.
Human Dimensions of Fishery Changes
These changes in fish populations and ranges present great implications for fish￾ing businesses and communities. Warmer seawater temperatures will cause the 
poleward migration of some species and will also result in local extinctions of 
other populations, particularly in the tropics. These migrations will favor nations 
and communities whose fisheries are blessed with increased stocks and potential 
new target species. But nations with decreased net primary production, decreased 
catch, and loss of target species will experience adverse social and economic im￾pacts. The social impacts for disadvantaged nations and fishing sectors may in￾clude increased levels of poverty, loss of cultural traditions and livelihoods, loss of 
social capital, and emigration away from fishing centers (Ojea et al., 2020). The 
potential relocation of fishing fleets and processing plants, changing exports and 
seafood prices, and decreased profits from the fishing sectors all present severe 
financial challenges to disadvantaged nations and communities. The predictions 
are dire; climate change may reduce global fisheries revenue by $10 billion/yr 
(Gaines et al., 2018).
Barange et al. (2014) linked models of physical, biological, and human responses 
to climate change in 67 Exclusive Economic Zones, noting increased productiv￾ity at high latitudes and decreased productivity at low and mid-latitudes. Their 
models predict increased fisheries biomass in Iceland, Norway, the Kuroshio Cur￾rent, and the Gulf of Guinea. Meanwhile, they expect decreases in the Canary Oceans and the Changing Climate 107
Current, the California Current, and the Humboldt Current. Linking productiv￾ity to nations’ economic dependency on fisheries, they identify areas of greatest 
concern to be nations that are highly dependent on fisheries and will experience 
decreased productivity due to climate change. Areas of greatest concern are in 
South and Southeast Asia, Southwest Africa (Nigeria to Namibia), and Peru. 
South Asia is the most vulnerable region, given its poor fisheries regulation and 
high population growth.
Models of Blasiak et al. (2017) examine some 147 nations and consider expo￾sure to high sea surface temperatures, their sensitivity (number of fishers, fish 
landings, and exports), as well as their adaptive capacities (governance, GDP, gov￾ernment subsidies, social indices) to conclude that seven of the ten most vulner￾able nations are SIDS, such as Kiribati, Micronesia, Solomon Islands, Maldives, 
Vanuatu, Samoa, and Tuvalu.
The poleward displacement of fish stocks has already begun to present fishery 
management challenges that will only increase. Stocks may move from one fish￾ery management jurisdiction to another within one nation, or into a neighboring 
nation. Faraday and Bigford (2019) note that the Loligo squid population appears 
to be shifting northward from New York/New Jersey waters to Rhode Island. That 
resource, however, is still managed by the Mid-Atlantic Fishery Management 
Council rather than the New England Fishery Management Council. Thus, fish￾ery management regions or international borders may present barriers to fishers’ 
adaptation.
Adaptive Responses
Mitigation or reduction of GHG emissions is essential for reducing the impacts 
to fisheries mentioned above. In addition, fisheries management must be en￾hanced to ensure sustainability and modified to be more flexible and incorpo￾rate the climate-induced migrations (Faraday & Bigford, 2019; Gaines et al., 
2018). This rarely occurs, as fishery management today generally ignores the 
dynamic spatial distributions of fish stocks caused by climate change. Rather, 
allocations are usually based on historical spatial distributions. Fishery legis￾lation must be revised to expressly recognize climate change and require stock 
assessments that include climate change predictions. For example, in the US, 
the Magnuson–Stevens Act (MSA) sets out ten National Standards (N.S.) 
that must guide fishery management plans. Although N.S. 2 requires that fish￾ery management plans be based on the “best scientific information available”, 
the N.S. fail to mention climate change. Some groups recommend the amend￾ment of the MSA to include N.S. 11, which would require fishery management 
plans to include proactive adaptive measures to account for climate change 
(Carter, 2019).
Many types of adaptation are possible, depending on the species and their loca￾tions. As ranges of stock shift poleward, authorities must reconsider spatial fishery 
management and, where necessary, formalize new effective agreements to man￾age transboundary stocks. In some instances, it may be advantageous to create 108 D. O. Suman
new institutions, while in others, regional fishery authorities must foster flexible 
management strategies as the stocks migrate. These management authorities must 
collaborate and develop procedures for joint monitoring of oceanic conditions, 
assessing stocks, and sharing or transferring management of fish stocks. The crit￾ical geographical areas for stocks will be their leading and retreating edges, and 
these must be managed conservatively to avoid overfishing. Initial research in 
this area indicates the critical importance of integrating climate change into sus￾tainable fisheries management. Researchers from the US National Marine Fisher￾ies Service and Fisheries and Ocean Canada have developed models to evaluate 
the international management system for Pacific hake, based on climate-related 
movements of the stock (Jacobsen et al., 2022). Their models indicate decreased 
catches and increased catch variability with the incorporation of spatial dynam￾ics. Therefore, sustainable fisheries management requires not only the use of 
historic catch, but also the incorporation of climate-driven spatial data to avoid 
overfishing and disruption to the fish stocks.
Decision-making must also consider equity to shareholders or fishers with per￾mits in areas with declining stocks. For example, disadvantaged fishers will have 
to adapt to new situations, perhaps by being granted flexible fishing licenses that 
allow them to shift their efforts to new species that are sufficiently abundant for 
harvest. Perhaps permits could be regional, rather than species-specific. Provi￾sions must also be adopted to grant financial assistance and access to credit for 
displaced fishers. Attention should also be given to the disproportionate impact 
on certain fishing sectors; industrial fishing vessels have greater mobility to follow 
stocks, while small-scale fishers lack this advantage.
In some cases, existing marine protected areas (MPAs) and marine reserves 
may be relocated to protect new spawning aggregation sites or critical areas. In 
other cases, designation of new MPAs may be appropriate to minimize conflicts 
between resource users or protect new migration corridors or leading migratory 
edges.
Catch diversification, development of value-added products, promotion of fish￾ing cooperatives, increased access to climate information, and the identification 
of new markets may reduce fishers’ vulnerability. However, the existing and new 
challenges faced by capture fisheries point to the increasingly attractive option of 
sustainable ocean aquaculture.
Ocean Acidification
The atmospheric concentration of CO2 in 2021 was over 416 ppm, a level 50% 
greater than that of preindustrial times. The ocean is believed to be a sink for 
approximately 25% of total anthropogenic CO2 (Doney et al., 2020). As CO2
dissolves in seawater, it alters the carbonate–bicarbonate equilibrium, causing a 
decrease in the saturation states of aragonite and calcite, forms of CaCO3 that 
are precipitated from seawater by marine organisms to construct shells and skele￾tons. The surface ocean pH is estimated to have decreased globally by an average 
of ~0.1 pH units from preindustrial times, or today about 0.002 units/yr (Doney Oceans and the Changing Climate 109
et al., 2020; Ekstrom et al., 2015; Hall-Spencer & Harvey, 2019), a phenomenon 
known as ocean acidification (OA). The IPCC report (2019) suggests with high 
certainty that by 2081–2100, pH values of surface open ocean waters will drop be￾tween 0.036–0.042 and 0.287–0.291 pH units compared to 2006–2015, depending 
on the scenario. Although this appears to be a small decrease, it can have severe 
impacts on certain marine organisms.
More acidic seawater and reduction in the aragonite saturation state translate 
into increased difficulty in construction of calcium carbonate shells and skele￾tons by bivalves (oysters, scallops, mussels, clams, abalone), scleractinian tropical 
corals (hard corals), and planktonic pteropods, as well as crustose coralline algae 
that form pavements on rocks in the photic zone. Although species vulnerabilities 
vary, generally the larval stages of shellfish appear to be more sensitive to OA, 
thus adversely affecting recruitment. In addition, thermal stress from increasing 
temperatures is thought to exacerbate impacts of OA.
In the tropics, OA may lead to decreases in ecosystem diversity, species rich￾ness, and spatial heterogeneity (Hall-Spencer & Harvey, 2019). OA is a factor 
that will lead to significant declines in the health of coral reefs. Net calcifica￾tion of hard corals declines with decreased aragonite accretion and increasing 
bioerosion. The result will be a decrease in complexity of the coral reef, lowered 
taxonomic diversity and species richness, and less complex reef structure. Coral 
diversity is depressed, and macroalgae abundance increasingly limits the recruit￾ment of juvenile corals. OA also leads to increasing dominance of non-calcified 
species (soft corals and anemones over hard corals), decreases in crustose coral￾line algae with proliferation of turf algae, and reduction in size and abundance of 
calcified animals (sea urchins).
Changes in coral community structure associated with OA can lead to in￾direct effects on reef-associated invertebrates and fish communities, as well as 
altered trophic interactions. For example, reduction in calcareous herbivores 
(sea urchins) contributes to the overgrowth of weedy turf algae. It is difficult, 
however, to isolate coral reef declines due solely to OA because of the cumula￾tive impact of additional stressors, such as ocean warming, coral bleaching, and 
coral diseases.
Human Dimensions of OA
OA will have increasing significant impacts on the harvest of shellfish and crabs. 
Of great concern in North America are fisheries and port communities depend￾ent on Dungeness crab, Red King crab, and Pacific oyster. Estimates of global 
economic losses to shellfish production by 2100 from OA amount to $6 billion 
($1 billion Europe; $400 million USA) (Doney et al., 2020). Narita et al. (2012) 
suggest that global losses in mollusk production due to OA may reach $100 billion 
by 2100. Because aquaculture produces more than 90% of global shellfish harvest, 
and cupped oysters (Crassostrea spp.) contribute about 30% of the global mollusk 
production, this activity is particularly vulnerable to OA, as described in Box 7.3 
(Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, 2020).110 D. O. Suman
BOX 7.3 Pacific Northwest Oyster Cultivation and OA
In the US, oysters are the most important cultivated marine species by 
value, accounting for a value of $186 million. In the Pacific Northwest 
(USA), shellfish farming specializes in culture of the Pacific oyster (Cras￾sostrea gigas), stocked by hatcheries that produce between 40 and 60 billion 
oyster larvae/yr. OA has already impacted the oyster aquaculture industry 
in that region, causing economic losses of $110 million and directly jeop￾ardizing 3,200 jobs (Ekstrom et al., 2015). Strong upwelling events of seawa￾ter undersaturated with aragonite occurred in 2006–2008 with pH values 
around 7.6 at hatchery intakes. The lowered aragonite saturation state of 
inflowing water and the survival of larval groups were highly correlated 
(Barton et al., 2015). Only 25% of the 2007 season’s normal production sur￾vived, and poor shell integrity of surviving hatchery-reared C. gigas larvae 
increased their vulnerability to parasites and diseases. It is believed that 
the increased atmospheric CO2 concentrations exacerbated the intensity 
and duration of the upwelled acidic waters (CO2 enriched) and contributed 
to shoaling of the Pacific Northwest saturation horizon. With increasing 
concentrations of atmospheric CO2 in the future, this acidification trend is 
expected to continue.
Since the 2006–2008 event, Washington shellfish hatcheries have 
formed partnerships with the University of Washington and NOAA’s 
Ocean Acidification Program (mandated by federal law and established in 
2011) to monitor seawater carbonate parameters, implement early warning 
systems, and optimize water treatment systems that could reduce exposure 
of oyster larvae to low pH waters.
While the Pacific Northwest and southern Alaska are areas featuring high ex￾posure to OA, as well as high sensitivity of commercially important species to 
acidic waters, other areas in the US (Gulf of Mexico, mid-Atlantic, and New 
England) also show high vulnerability to OA because of local amplifiers (coastal 
eutrophication and high river discharge) that lower pH (Ekstrom et al., 2015). 
Mid-Atlantic and New England areas are socially vulnerable because of their high 
economic dependence on shellfish farming, while Gulf of Mexico sites show high 
vulnerability due to low political engagement, poor utilization of scientific infor￾mation, and lack of alternative employment opportunities – all factors that limit 
the ability to adapt.
Tropical coral reefs occupy less than 0.1% of the ocean floor, yet they provide 
habitat for about 25% of known marine species and have among the highest bi￾odiversity of any marine ecosystem; perhaps 1–10 million species live in or near 
coral reefs (Hoegh-Guldberg et al., 2017). Coral reefs face multiple threats from 
pollution, diseases, bleaching caused by increasing seawater temperatures, and 
OA. Degradation of this important ecosystem has serious impacts for coastal 
communities and some 500 million people in 90 countries that depend on coral Oceans and the Changing Climate 111
reef ecosystems for fisheries and food security, shoreline protection, and recreation 
and tourism. Estimates of the economic value of goods and services offered by 
coral reefs reach $375 billion/yr (Hoegh-Guldberg et al., 2017).
Adaptive Responses
OA calls for implementation of vigorous adaptation strategies that are often 
site-specific. Adaptation measures for shellfish aquaculture operations include 
adjusting the chemical composition of inflow water and real-time monitoring of 
seawater chemical characteristics. Potentially, selective breeding of oyster brood￾stock may identify lines that are less sensitive to decreased pH. Measures should 
be adopted to reduce exposure to low pH water and control for factors that am￾plify impacts of OA and result in more acidic waters, particularly reduction of 
nutrient loading (eutrophication). Increased diversity of harvested species (par￾ticularly seaweed cultivation that may be favored by OA) may reduce social vul￾nerability. Partnerships between the shellfish industry and research institutions, 
as illustrated in the Pacific Northwest oyster case, increase access to scientific 
information and expertise that can help reduce impacts.
Coral reef ecosystems are in a more precarious situation as they face multiple 
threats from increased seawater temperature, bleaching, diseases, direct anthro￾pogenic physical impacts, and pollution. The rapid rate of environmental change 
appears to be faster than possible coral evolution and acclimation to new condi￾tions. Reduction of nutrients and other pollutants that stress corals, decrease pH, 
and reduce their resilience to climate change is essential. Improved fishery man￾agement and integrated coastal management initiatives are general recommenda￾tions that may help ensure the continued health of reef ecosystems. In addition, 
current research efforts are focusing on identification of coral genotypes that are 
best able to withstand increased temperatures, followed by selective breeding and 
restoration by means of coral gardens that provide stock to restore damaged reefs 
(Drury & Lirman, 2021; Lirman & Schopmeyer, 2016).
Conclusion
The changing climate is already causing significant impacts on ocean and coastal 
environments, and also on the people and communities that depend upon these 
resources and environments for their livelihoods and wellbeing. Even if the global 
community were to embrace measures to curb emissions of GHG today, SLR 
and OA impacts will continue into the future because of past emissions of GHG 
(IPCC, 2022). This chapter has examined the enormous human dimensions of 
several of these anthropogenic changes and examined some possible avenues that 
can be taken to adapt to these changes. Successfully meeting these challenges 
will require great political will, costly investments, integration of the best availa￾ble science into decision-making, implementation of adaptive management strat￾egies, and incorporation of climate change into all areas of ocean and coastal 
management. Adaptation to the changing climate is clearly one of the greatest 
challenges future generations of ocean and coastal managers will face.112 D. O. Suman
Questions for Reflection
 1. What are the relationships between exposure and vulnerability? Much of the 
 2. Can you suggest any possible adaptive measures for:
• 
• Groundfish fishers in the Gulf of Maine facing increasing SST?
• 
• 
• USFWS concern regarding the future of polar bears in the Arctic?
• Ocean Wind Farms in Scotland?
Note
 1 
References
Barange, M., Merino, G., Blanchard, J. L., Scholtens, J., Harle, J., Allison, E. H., Allen, 
J. I., Holt, J. & Jennings, S. (2014). Impacts of climate change on marine ecosystem 
 production in societies dependent on fisheries. Nature Climate Change, 4, 211–216. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/nclimate2119
Barton, A., Waldbusser, G. G., Feely, R. A., Weisberg, S. B., Newton, J. A., Hales, B., 
Cudd, S., Eudeline, B., Langdon, C. J., Jefferds, I., King, T., Suhrbier, A., & McLaughlin, 
K. (2015). Impacts of coastal acidification on the Pacific Northwest shellfish i ndustry 
and adaptation strategies implemented in response. Oceanography, 28(2), 146–159. 
https://doi.org/10.5670/oceanog.2015.38
Blasiak, R., Spijkers, J., Tokunaga, K., Pittman, J., Yagi, N., & Österblom, H. (2017). 
Climate change and marine fisheries: Least developed countries top global index of 
vulnerability. PLoS ONE, 12(6), e0179632. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0179632
Bolstad, E. (2017, May 1). High ground is becoming hot property as sea level rises. Scientific 
American ClimateWire. https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/high-ground-is￾becoming-hot-property-as-sea-level-rises/
Carter, A. (2019). A national standard for climate-ready fisheries. Center for American Progress. 
https://www.americanprogress.org/article/national-standard-climate-ready-fisheries/
Cheung, W. W. L., Lam, V. W. Y., Sarmiento, J. L., Kearney, K., Watson, R., & Pauly, D. 
(2009). Projecting global marine biodiversity impacts under climate change scenarios. 
Fish and Fisheries, 10, 235–251. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-2979.2008.00315.x
Cheung, W. W. L., Sarmiento, J. L., Dunne, J., Frölicher, T. L., Lam, V. W. Y., Palomares, 
M. L. D., Watson, R., & Pauly, D. (2013). Shrinking of fishes exacerbates impacts of Oceans and the Changing Climate 113
global ocean changes on marine ecosystems. Nature Climate Change, 3, 254–258. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/nclimate1691
Davenport, C., & Haner, J. (2015, December 1). The Marshall Islands are disappearing. 
New York Times. https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2015/12/02/world/The-Marshall￾Islands-Are-Disappearing.html?searchResultPosition=1
Dermansky, J. (2019, January 11). Isle de Jean Charles Tribe turns down funds to relocate first 
US “climate refugees” as Louisiana buys land anyway. DeSmog. https://www.desmogblog.
com/2019/01/11/isle-de-jean-charles-tribe-turns-down-funds-relocate-climate-refugees￾louisiana.
Doney, S. C., Busch, D. S., Cooley, S. R., & Kroeker, K. J. (2020). The impacts of ocean 
acidification on marine ecosystems and reliant human communities. Annual Review 
of Environment and Resources, 45, 83–112. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-environ￾012320-083019
Drury, C., & Lirman, D. (2021). Genotype by environment interactions in coral bleaching. 
Proc. Royal Soc. B., 288(1946), 20210177. https://doi.org/10.1098/rspb.2021.0177
Ekstrom, J. A., Suatoni, L., Cooley, S. R., Pendleton, L. H., Waldbusser, G. G., Cinner, 
J. E., Ritter, J., Langdon, C., van Hooidonk, R., Gledhill, D., Wellman, K., Beck, M. 
W., Brander, L. M., Rittschof, D., Doherty, C., Edwards, P. E. T., & Portela, R. (2015). 
Vulnerability and adaptation of US shellfisheries to ocean acidification. Nature Climate 
Change, 5, 207–214. https://doi.org/10.1038/NCLIMATE2508
Environmental Protection Agency. (2016). Adapting to climate change: Alaska. https://
www.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2016-07/documents/alaska_fact_sheet.pdf
Faraday, S. E. (2015). Moving targets: fisheries management in New England in the midst 
of climate change. In R. S. Abate (Ed.), Climate change impacts on ocean and coastal 
law: US and international perspectives (pp. 73–90). Oxford University Press. https://doi.
org/10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199368747.001.0001
Faraday, S. E., & Bigford, T. E. (2019). Fisheries and climate change: Legal and manage￾ment implications. Fisheries, 44(6), 270–275. https://doi.org/10.1002/fsh.10263
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. (2020). The state of world 
fisheries and aquaculture 2020. Sustainability in action. United Nations. https://doi.
org/10.4060/ca9229en.
Friedland, K. D., Kane, J., Hare, J. A., Lough, R. G., Fratantoni, P. S., Fogarty, M. J., 
& Nye, J. A. (2013). Thermal habitat constraints on zooplankton species associated 
with Atlantic cod (Gadus morhua) on the US Northeast Continental Shelf. Progress in 
Oceanography, 116, 1–13. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pocean.2013.05.011
Gaines, S. D., Costello, C., Owashi, B., Mangin, T., Bone, J., Molinos, J. G., Burden, 
M., Dennis, H., Halpern, B. S., Kappel, C. V., Kleisner, K. M., & Ovando, D. (2018). 
Improved fisheries management could offset many negative effects of climate change. 
Science Advances, 4(8), eaao1378. https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.aao1378
Hall-Spencer, J. M., & Harvey, B. P. (2019). Ocean acidification impacts on coastal eco￾system services due to habitat degradation. Emerging Topics in Life Sciences, 3, 197–206. 
https://doi.org/10.1042/ETLS20180117
Hauer, M. E., Evans, J. M., & Mishra, D. R. (2016). Millions projected to be at risk from 
sea-level rise in the continental United States. Nature Climate Change, 6, 691–695. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/NCLIMATE2961
Hoegh-Guldberg, O., Poloczanska, E. S., Skirving, W., & Dove, S. (2017). Coral reef eco￾systems under climate change and ocean acidification. Frontiers in Marine Science, 4, 
158. https://doi.org/10.3389/fmars.2017.00158114 D. O. Suman
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. (2019). Summary for Policymakers. In: 
IPCC Special Report on the Ocean and Cryosphere in a Changing Climate. [H. -O. Pörtner, 
D. C. Roberts, V. Masson-Delmotte, P. Zhai, M. Tignor, E. Poloczanska, K. Mintenbeck, 
A. Alegría, M. Nicolai, A. Okem, J. Petzold, B. Rama, N. M. Weyer (Eds.)]. Geneva, 
Switzerland. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009157964.
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. (2022). Synthesis report of the IPCC Sixth 
Assessment Report (AR6): Summary for policymakers. United Nations. https://www.ipcc.
ch/report/sixth-assessment-report-cycle/
Jacobsen, N. S., Marshall, K. N., Berger, A. M., Grandin, C., & Taylor, I. G. (2022). 
Climate-mediated stock redistribution causes increased risk and challenges for fisheries 
management. ICES Journal of Marine Science, 79(4), 1120–1132. https://doi.org/10.1093/
icesjms/fsac029
Keenan, J. M., Hills, T., & Gumber, A. (2018). Climate gentrification, from theory to 
empiricism in Miami-Dade County, Florida. Environmental Research Letters, 13(5). 
https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/1748-9326/aabb32/pdf.
Lirman, D., & Schopmeyer, S. (2016). Ecological solutions to reef degradation: Optimizing 
coral reef restoration in the Caribbean and Western Atlantic. PeerJ, 4, e2597. https://
doi.org/10.7717/peerj.2597
Louisiana Office of Community Development. (2020). Resettlement of Isle de Jean Charles: 
Background and overview. US Department of Housing and Urban Development. http://
isledejeancharles.la.gov/sites/default/files/public/IDJC-Background-and-Overview-6-20_
web.pdf
Lyons, K. (2020, January 20). Climate refugees can’t be returned home, says landmark UN 
human rights ruling. The Guardian. https://www.theguardian.com/world/2020/jan/20/
climate-refugees-cant-be-returned-home-says-landmark-un-human-rights-ruling
Malmstadt, J. C., Elsner, J. B., & Jagger, T. H. (2019). Risk of strong hurricane winds 
to Florida cities. J. Applied Meteorology and Climatology, 49(10), 2121–2132. https://doi.
org/10.1175/2010JAMC2420.1
Martin, A. (2018, October 18). An Alaskan village is falling into the sea. Washington is 
looking the other way. The World: Public Radio International. https://www.pri.org/
stories/2018-10-22/alaskan-village-falling-sea-washington-looking-other-way
McDonnell, T. (2018, June 20). The refugees the world barely pays attention to. National Public 
Radio. https://www.npr.org/sections/goatsandsoda/2018/06/20/621782275/the-refugees￾that-the-world-barely-pays-attention-to
Melillo, J. M., Richmond, T. T. C., & Yohe, G. W. (Eds.) (2014). Climate change impacts 
in the United States: The third national climate assessment. US Global Change Research 
Program. https://doi.org/10.7930/J0Z31WJ2
Molinaroli, E., Guerzoni, S., & Suman, D. (2019). Do the adaptations of Venice and 
Miami to Sea Level Rise offer lessons for other vulnerable coastal cities? Environmental 
Management, 64(4), 391–415. https:doi.org/10.1007/s00267-019-01198-z
Muñoz, N. J., Farrell, A. P., Heath, J. W., & Neff, B. D. (2015). Adaptive potential of 
a Pacific salmon challenged by climate change. Nature Climate Change, 5, 163–166. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/nclimate2473
Narita, D., Rehdanz, K., & Tol, R. S. J. (2012). Economic costs of ocean acidification: 
A look into the impacts on global shellfish production. Climatic Change, 113, 1049–
1063. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10584-011-0383-3
National Hurricane Center. (2019). Estimated return period in years for hurricanes passing 
within 50 nautical miles of various locations on the US coast. https://www.nhc.noaa.gov/
climo/#cp100.Oceans and the Changing Climate 115
National Research Council. (2007). Mitigating shore erosion along sheltered coasts. National 
Academies Press.
Nicholls, R. J., Hanson, S., Herweijer, C., Patmore, N., Hallegatte, S., Corfee-Morlot, J., 
Chateau, J., & Muir-Wood, R. (2007). Ranking of the world’s cities most exposed to coastal 
flooding today and in the future (OECD Environment Working Paper No. 1). https://doi.
org/10.1787/011766488208
Ojea, E., Lester, S. E, & Salgueiro-Otero, D. (2020). Adaptation of fishing communities to 
climate-driven shifts in target species. One Earth, 2(6), 544–556. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
oneear.2020.05.012
Patricola, C. M., & Wehner, M. F. (2018). Anthropogenic influences on major tropical 
cyclone events. Nature, 563, 339–346. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-018-0673-2
People urgently fleeing climate crisis cannot be sent home, UN rules. (2020, January 20). 
BBC News. Retrieved May 6, 2022, from https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-51179931
Pilkey, O. H., & Cooper, A. G. (2014). The last beach. Duke University Press.
Pilkey, O. H., Pilkey-Jarvis, L., & Pilkey, K. C. (2016). Retreat from a rising sea. Columbia 
University Press.
Pörtner, H. O., & Peck, M. A. (2010). Climate change effects on fish and fisheries: towards 
a cause-and-effect understanding. Journal of Fish Biology, 77(8), 1745–1779. https://doi.
org/10.1111/j.1095-8649.2010.02783.x
Rijnsdorp, A. D., Peck, M. A., Engelhard, G. H., Möllmann, C., & Pinnegar, J. K. (2009). 
Resolving the effect of climate change on fish populations. ICES Journal of Marine 
Science, 66(7), 1570–1583. https://doi.org/10.1093/icesjms/fsp056
Sweet, W., Kopp, R., Weaver, C., Obeysekera, J., Horton, R., Thieler, E. R., & Zervas, C. 
(2017). Global and regional sea level rise scenarios for the United States (NOAA T echnical 
Report NOS CO-OPS 083). NOAA/NOS Center for Operational Oceanographic 
Products and Services. https://tidesandcurrents.noaa.gov/publications/techrpt83_
Global_and_Regional_SLR_Scenarios_for_the_US_final.pdf
Treuer, G., Broad, K., & Meter, R. (2018). Using simulations to forecast homeowner 
response to sea level rise in South Florida: Will they stay or will they go? Global Climate 
Change, 48, 108–118. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2017.10.008
Union of Concerned Scientists. (2017). Encroaching tides in Miami-Dade County, Florida. 
UCS Fact Sheet, pp. 1–10. https://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/attach/2016/04/ 
miamidade-sea-level-rise-tidal-flooding-fact-sheet.pdf
United States Army Corps of Engineers (USACE). (2020). Miami-Dade back bay coastal 
storm risk management draft integrated feasibility report and programmatic environmental 
impact statement. https://usace.contentdm.oclc.org/utils/getfile/collection/p16021coll7/
id/14453
Weiss J. L., Overpeck, J. T., & Strauss, B. (2011). Implications of recent sea level rise 
science for low-elevation areas of coastal cities of the conterminous USA. Climate 
Change, 105, 635–645. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10584-011-0024-x
Zervas, C. (2009). Sea level variations of the United States 1854–2006 (NOAA Technical 
Report NOS CO-OPS 053). NOAA. https://tidesandcurrents.noaa.gov/publications/
Tech_rpt_53.pdf8 Marine Renewable Energy
Policy, People, and Prospects
B. J. Wickizer, D. Brandt, B. Robertson, 
and H. S. Boudet
The ocean’s ability to provide a myriad of resources has made it fundamental 
to human societies across history. Beyond sustenance from fishing, chief among 
these resources during the past century has been energy. Before 1990, marine 
energy resources were almost exclusively fossil fuel based, namely, offshore oil 
and natural gas extraction. Even today, more than a quarter of global oil and gas 
production occurs offshore (US Energy Information Administration, 2016). Over 
the next 20 years, worldwide offshore oil extraction is projected to remain steady, 
while offshore natural gas extraction is expected to grow by 50% (International 
Energy Agency [IEA], 2018).
Yet, this offshore oil and gas production has not come without costs. Off￾shore oil and gas activities have resulted in substantial accidents and spills. 
The United States alone has experienced 45 significant oil spills (more than 
10,000 barrels) in the past 50 years (National Oceanic and Atmospheric Ad￾ministration, 2017), with several (e.g., Santa Barbara oil spill, Exxon Valdez, BP 
Horizon) leading to significant environmental impacts and associated policy 
changes. Moreover, the growing climate crisis – and contributions from fossil 
fuel combustion – has led us to seek alternative renewable energy sources, both 
onshore and offshore.
Beginning in the early 1990s, marine renewable energy resources – offshore 
winds, waves, tides, and currents – began to emerge as viable technology al￾ternatives that not only presented fewer risks to the ocean environment and 
its assets, but also produced negligible greenhouse gas emissions (see Box 8.1). 
Marine renewables may also enhance electricity grid resilience and complement 
existing intermittent renewable sources. In addition, they can provide more 
cost-effective, sustainable electricity to isolated coastal communities. Although 
it may seem counterintuitive, offshore fossil fuel operations are poised to benefit 
from marine renewables, and vice versa. For example, marine renewables are 
capable of supplying power to electrify oil and gas rig operations (IEA, 2018), 
while natural gas generators’ quick ramping ability can complement variable 
marine renewable generation (Lee et al., 2012). Moreover, oil and gas firms have 
ventured into the marine renewable energy space to diversify their portfolios, 
hedge against fossil fuel price volatility, and adapt to changing market and pol￾icy landscapes.
DOI: 10.4324/9781003058151-10Marine Renewable Energy: Policy, People, and Prospects 117
BOX 8.1 Orsted Case Study
Perhaps the most notable example of an offshore oil and gas firm enter￾ing the offshore wind space is the Dutch firm Dansk Olie og Naturgas 
(DONG). DONG was founded in 1972 and managed oil and gas resources 
in the North Sea. In the early 2000s, DONG became involved in electricity 
markets and offshore wind. In 2017, it divested itself from all oil and gas 
holdings to focus exclusively on renewable projects, renaming itself Orsted. 
Orsted now has more operational offshore wind capacity globally than any 
other company. It has taken a keen interest in the fledgling US market, and 
as of 2020, it was responsible for 30% of the planned or operational offshore 
wind projects on the US Atlantic Coast (Musial et al., 2020), including the 
United States’ only operational wind farm.
The experience that oil and gas firms possess operating in the marine 
context could be a boon for offshore wind. As wind technology continues 
to advance, supply chains become more mature, the regulatory environ￾ment assumes more structure, and costs continue to decline, more oil and 
gas firms are likely to enter the offshore wind arena. The level of interest of 
oil and gas firms may also hinge on how aggressively decarbonization poli￾cies are pursued. In the case that decarbonization is prioritized, offshore oil 
extraction is predicted to decline by 2030 and beyond (IEA, 2018), making 
offshore wind potentially even more attractive.
In this chapter, we review the development and proliferation of marine renew￾able energy, detail the function and status of various technologies, highlight re￾lated public perceptions, and examine relevant policies.
Marine Renewable Energy
The wealth of energy resources in the ocean is immense and is, quite possibly, the 
linchpin energy resource for future sustainable economic growth. Estimates sug￾gest that the worldwide offshore wind resource could theoretically provide up to 
420,000 terawatt-hours (TWh) of energy annually (IEA, 2019), while worldwide 
wave and tidal resources could theoretically generate 29,500 TWh (Huckerby 
et al., 2017) and 25,880 TWh (Neill et al., 2018) annually, respectively. For perspec￾tive, worldwide energy consumption in 2019 amounted to 158,839 TWh (Global 
Change Data Lab, n.d.); thus, the theoretical energy potential of offshore wind, 
wave, and tidal resources is 264%, 19%, and 16% of present energy consumption, 
respectively. As of 2019, offshore wind had reached 27 gigawatts (GW) of installed 
capacity globally (Musial et al., 2020), and marine hydrokinetic energy (i.e., wave, 
tidal, and current) had reached less than 1 GW of global installed capacity (IEA, 
2018). Here we differentiate between traditional energy stocks (reserves of oil and 
gas) and renewable energy flows (wind, waves, currents, etc.). Another way to 118 B. J. Wickizer et al.
think of this differentiation is as two different energy “currencies” – one is a cur￾rency of fuel, while the other is electricity.
Offshore Wind
While considered relatively new within the marine energy technology realm, the 
development and growth of the offshore wind industry is staggering, and it is 
considered the most mature marine renewable technology. The first offshore wind 
farm, Vindeby Offshore Wind, was developed off the coast of Denmark in 1991. It 
featured eleven 450-kilowatt (kW) turbines, or ~5 megawatts (MW) of installed 
capacity.
Compared to onshore wind, offshore wind generally enjoys greater consistency 
and higher wind speeds, making it more productive. Additionally, prime offshore 
wind areas are often proximate to areas of high electricity demand, unlike many 
onshore wind areas, thus reducing necessary grid infrastructure investments and 
transmission energy losses. Fewer restrictions on footprint area and turbine height 
also generally exist for offshore wind (IEA, 2018).
Although offshore wind installations do not utilize valuable terrestrial land, 
the ocean has a significant number of stakeholders competing for space, neces￾sitating collaborative development approaches. Offshore wind development has 
potential implications for fishing, marine protected areas, shipping, and coastal 
aesthetics, among other uses, so coordination is essential. The most notable direct 
environmental impacts related to offshore wind are mortality and aversion behav￾ior in birds and bats, as well as auditory disruption and displacement of marine 
mammals and sea turtles from construction operations (Bailey et al., 2014). Im￾pacts and conflicts can be reduced if appropriate siting and mitigation measures 
are pursued, although this requires substantial upfront research and outreach.
Offshore wind farms are predominantly seafloor-mounted and feature a three￾bladed horizontal axis turbine. Initial offshore wind installations utilized modified 
terrestrial wind components. Yet, as turbines moved offshore over the past 30 
years, the opportunity to increase the scale of the tower, blades, and rated capac￾ity expanded greatly (Figure 8.1). GE is currently testing the Haliade-X 12 MW 
turbine – a single turbine that is 260 m tall and boasts an impressive capacity 
factor of 63%. The capacity factor compares how much energy was generated to 
the maximum that could have been generated over a specified period if the system 
ran at full electrical output capacity or power.
The next development domain for offshore wind is in deeper water – at depths 
beyond the ability to mount the turbine to the seafloor directly – utilizing floating 
platforms. The benefits of deepwater offshore wind are significant. Offshore winds 
are stronger and more consistent, leading to increased system capacity factors and 
allowing for increased turbine capacities (i.e., fewer physical turbines for the same 
energy output). Floating offshore wind farms are nascent, but first-of-a-kind pro￾jects have been developed in Scotland (Equinor, n.d.) and Portugal (Energias de 
Portugal, 2018). The world’s first floating offshore wind project, HyWind in Scot￾land, features five 6 MW turbines, all using single, very deep, spar-type subsurface Marine Renewable Energy: Policy, People, and Prospects 119
Figure 8.1 Wind turbine height and energy output. Credit: Image by Josh Bauer, NREL.
floating platforms. In Portugal, the Windfloat project features three 8.4 MW tur￾bines but relies on a tri-pontoon, semi-submersible platform design.
Europe contains the vast majority of presently installed offshore wind capacity. 
The UK has the strongest offshore wind market, comprising 36% of the world’s 
installed offshore capacity alone (Global Wind Energy Council, n.d.). Germany 
and China have the second and third most installed offshore wind, with 29% 
and 15% of installed capacity, respectively. Currently, the United States has only 
one commercial offshore wind farm – Deepwater Wind, off Block Island, Rhode 
 Island – that has a modest capacity of 30 MW. However, as of 2020, 14 projects 
were in the permitting phase and slated to be operational in the next five years 
(Musial et al., 2020). Once realized, these projects will provide approximately 
6,500 MW of additional capacity.
Offshore Wind Growth and Costs
Despite offshore wind’s presently limited footprint, some estimates suggest that its 
installed capacity will grow to 90 GW in the next decade – a more than three￾fold increase from current capacity (IEA, 2018). Offshore wind prices presently 
exceed those of select other renewables, with prices in 2016, on average, 150% 
more than onshore wind and 50% more than solar photovoltaic, with respect to 
levelized cost of energy (LCOE) (IEA, 2018). LCOE measures the lifetime costs 
of a generation source relative to the energy it will produce during its lifespan. 
However, advancements in turbine technology, access to areas further offshore, 
larger wind farms and economies of scale, more advantageous financing, more 
mature logistics and supply chains, industry experience, and market competition 
are all driving offshore wind costs down (Energy Sector Management Assistance 120 B. J. Wickizer et al.
Program, 2019). In 2018, offshore wind’s global weighted average LCOE was 
$0.127 per kilowatt-hour, which represented more than a 20% decline from 2010 
(International Renewable Energy Agency, 2019). In fact, in the UK in 2019 the 
lowest historic offshore wind contract price ($0.049/kWh) was secured, represent￾ing a 30% cost decline from the next most recent auction in 2017 (Energy Sector 
Management Assistance Program, 2019). Offshore wind prices are projected to 
continue declining, with the global LCOE potentially decreasing 30%–60% by 
2030 and 45%–75% by 2050 (International Renewable Energy Agency, 2019). Off￾shore wind in parts of Europe is already price-competitive with fossil fuel sources, 
and if price reduction trends are realized, this parity will be solidified on a global 
scale in the coming decades.
Emerging Marine Renewable Energy Technologies
Energy from waves, currents, and tides – referred to collectively as marine hy￾drokinetic energy – represents a promising, but largely untapped, resource. Tidal 
technology is in the early deployment phase, while wave energy is closer to the 
development phase (see Box 8.2). Other marine energy sources also exist, such as 
ocean thermal energy conversion and marine salinity gradients, which utilize dif￾ferences in temperature and in salt concentrations, respectively. However, these 
technologies are even more immature than marine hydrokinetics.
BOX 8.2 Wave Energy Test Sites Case Study
While offshore wind and tidal energy generation projects are in commer￾cial or final near-commercial stages, the commercial wave energy sector is 
still nascent. Rather than focusing efforts on individual project develop￾ment, the wave energy sector has focused on the development of dedicated 
technology testing sites. These pre-permitted, well resourced, and central￾ized locations provide technology developers with a low-risk opportunity 
to test technologies and further research and development to ensure cost 
reductions, reliability increases, and improved understanding. The Euro￾pean Marine Energy Center, the Wave Energy Test Site, and PacWave are 
the dominant global testing sites.
The European Marine Energy Center (EMEC) in Scotland’s Orkney Is￾lands has been testing wave energy technologies since 2003 and is the lo￾cation of more full-scale and scaled wave energy converters than any other 
site globally. EMEC operates two testing locations north of Scotland: a full 
energetic, open ocean site at Billia Croo and a more sheltered testing site at 
Scapa Flow. The Billia Croo site consists of five cabled berths, between 50 
and 70 m, each with up to 11 kilovolts of electrical capacity.
The Wave Energy Test Site (WETS) sits on the Marine Corps Base Ha￾waii in Oahu. The WETS was first developed in 2003 to test point-absorber Marine Renewable Energy: Policy, People, and Prospects 121
devices designed by Ocean Power Technologies. Given the warm climate, 
clear ocean, and lower natural wave energy resources, the WETS is often 
touted as the ideal location for first sea trials of any wave energy conversion 
technology – before graduating to fully energetic locations like EMEC or 
PacWave. Since 2003, WETS has greatly expanded to include three berths 
at varying depths and exposure to open ocean conditions.
PacWave is sited 10 km off the coast of Newport, Oregon, and is being 
developed by Oregon State University on behalf of the US Department 
of Energy. The PacWave site is extremely energetic during winter months, 
allowing for survivability and resiliency testing, and has very benign sum￾mer months, allowing for shorter initial deployment tests. PacWave will be 
commissioned in 2023 and features two locations – a fully pre-permitted, 
grid-connected South site and a non-grid-connected North Site. The Pac￾Wave South site features five berths with a rated capacity of 4 MW per 
site (20 MW total) and sits in approximately 60 m of water. PacWave will 
provide WEC technology developers with the final system tests prior to 
development of commercial-scale projects.
Wave Energy Converters
Wave energy is broadly classified as the kinetic and potential energy associated 
with the movement of ocean waves – primarily based on the height and wave 
period (time difference between two subsequent wave crests) of the waves. In 
contrast to other renewable energy technologies, wave energy conversion (WEC) 
technology concepts vary widely in their form and generation mechanism. This is 
driven by the multiple potential and kinetic energy resources available in waves. 
The energy content of the wave energy resource depends on two p arameters – 
 significant wave height and wave energy period. This is in direct contrast to 
other renewable resources, which are categorized by a single parameter: wind 
(wind speed), solar (irradiation), tidal (water velocity), etc. As a result of the dual 
 dependency, the opportunities and variables to consider when building WEC 
technologies are inherently larger and more complex.
In the broadest sense, WECs can be classed as oscillating water columns, ter￾minators, attenuators, or point absorbers. Oscillating water columns (shown in 
Figure 8.2d) with the air turbine utilize the surge (forward/backward) and heave 
(up/down) motions of the water surface, within an enclosed air volume, to com￾press air and drive an air turbine. The Pico OWC and the Islay Limpet OWC – 
both of which are now decommissioned – harnessed wave energy and generated 
electricity this way for over a decade. Both Pico and Limpet were shore-mounted, 
yet newer projects, such as the Ocean Energy Limited OE35 buoy deployed off 
Hawaii in 2020, are floating systems.
Terminators are identified by their long wave crest parallel dimensions, such 
as the Pelamis-type system shown in Figure 8.2b. In general, these systems are 122 B. J. Wickizer et al.
Figure 8.2 (top left 2a; top right 2b; bottom left 2c; bottom right 2d): Variety of Wave En￾ergy Conversion (WEC) designs. Credit: Images courtesy of the Pacific Institute 
for Climate Solutions’ Wave Energy: A Primer for British Columbia report.
sufficiently large scale so that portions of the WEC are in different parts of the 
wave profile (peak vs. tough) and can harness the kinetic energy from the asso￾ciated out-of-phase motions. Attenuators feature long wave crest perpendicular 
dimensions and focus on the kinetic and potential energy associated with the 
wave particle velocities and the forward–backward surge of these water particles 
in shallower water regions, as shown by the “flap-type” system in Figure 8.2c. 
Finally, point absorbers are small compared to the wavelength and harness the 
kinetic and potential energy associated with relative displacement between a sur￾face float, driven by water elevation changes, and a relatively static subsurface 
heave plate or the seafloor; this concept is visually shown in Figure 8.2a.
The future development of wave energy will be driven by several social, tech￾nical, and economic factors; however, the scale and locational value aspects of 
the resource are unique and provide a different “service” to the grid. Wave energy 
benefits from being available in all the world’s oceans – which cover 70% of the 
planet – and, as a result, these resources are nearby growing coastal urban centers. 
As the demand for electricity grows in urban coastal cities, wave energy’s prox￾imity is incredibly valuable, offering distinctive promise in comparison to other 
renewables that require long transmission lines, with associated power losses, to 
transmit the electricity to customers from remote terrestrial locations.Marine Renewable Energy: Policy, People, and Prospects 123
As with all energy extraction or conversion technologies, environmental risks 
and impacts are inherent. The International Energy Association’s Ocean Energy 
Systems Environmental State of the Science report (Copping & Hemery, 2020) 
provides a living database and an up-to-date review of global environmentally 
 focused marine energy research to help ensure responsible development of these 
resources, and, thus far, it indicates very limited impacts. As a nascent sector, 
wave energy requires more deployment time to fully characterize the environ￾mental risks and full-life-cycle costs and benefits – all necessary precursors to 
large-scale development.
Tidal and In-Stream Energy Converters
Tidal and In-Stream Energy Converters (TISEC) harness the kinetic energy in 
the ocean’s moving tidal currents, which are driven by the gravitational forces 
of astronomical bodies. As the celestial bodies rotate around the world, gravita￾tional attraction “pulls” the global oceans and creates temporal variation in water 
depths. As this “bulge” moves around the world, there is a tremendous movement 
of water from one region to another and a significant, energy-dense renewable 
energy flow.
Various archetypes of tidal energy devices are being designed, developed, and 
tested. Broadly speaking, tidal technologies can be categorized as barrages, la￾goons, or in-stream. Tidal barrages are the oldest of tidal technologies and involve 
forcing all the tidally fluctuating water through a “barrage”, or wall, of turbines. 
As the tide ebbs and flows, the barrage generates electricity. Tidal barrages exist 
in Korea, Canada, and Russia, while the Rance Tidal Station in France has been 
operating on this principle since 1966. Tidal lagoons involve the construction of 
large retaining walls across a bay or coastal inlet and “gates” to hold the water 
in/out until the maximum water head (elevation) differential is achieved. Wa￾ter is then directed through low-head turbines and electricity is generated. Both 
barrages and lagoons require very specific location geography and conditions for 
project development.
The dominant tidal converter archetypes deployed are in-stream technologies, 
which build on knowledge from both the ship propulsion and the wind indus￾tries. Most feature a horizontal axis nacelle with three or four active blades. Un￾derstanding that energy associated with moving water is tied to the density of 
the fluid, tidal energy has ~1000× more energy per unit volume than air and, as 
such, tidal energy technologies feature significantly shorter blades to account for 
the increased loading. In-stream devices are further categorized as either seafloor 
mounted or floating. The MeyGen project in Scotland is currently the world’s larg￾est tidal energy plant, featuring four seafloor-mounted 1.5 MW three-bladed hori￾zontal axis turbines (see Box 8.3). In the floating arena, the Orbital M arine Power 
02 features two 1 MW turbines deployed off a floating central spar – allowing for 
ease of installation, removal, and maintenance of the turbine. A new and inter￾esting concept, diverging from the horizontal axis theme and focusing on lower 
speed water velocities, is an underwater kite being developed by Minesto, which 
utilizes the lift around the water foils to drive a motor and generator system.124 B. J. Wickizer et al.
BOX 8.3 MeyGen Case Study
The MeyGen tidal energy project, located two kilometers offshore between 
Scotland’s northernmost coast and the island of Stroma, completed its first 
phase of development in April 2018, with the installation of four 1.5 MW 
tidal turbines in some of the fastest flowing waters in the UK. As of June 
2019, it had exported 17 GWh to the grid (Short, 2020). Future phases 
include installation of another 51 turbines and a subsea power hub that 
would allow multiple turbines to connect to a single transmission cable, 
limiting disruption to the marine environment and infrastructure costs. 
The first phase of development included environmental monitoring equip￾ment to assess the turbine interactions with the marine environment. It is 
the largest global planned tidal stream project with a permit to produce up 
to 398 MW and a current grid capacity of 252 MW. After the first stage of 
completion, it is meeting the electricity needs of 2,600 homes.
One of the only commercial multi-turbine array tidal energy projects, 
the project aims to prove the commercial viability of tidal energy and 
supports the Scottish government’s desire to increase its use of renewable 
sources to reduce carbon emissions. Scotland, known for its strong wave 
and tidal resources, is also host to the European Marine Energy Centre, 
offering momentum to Scotland’s wave and tidal energy development. The 
limited distribution infrastructure in Scotland presents a current challenge 
to w ider-spread use of tidal energy.
Tidal energy has several valuable attributes. The electricity generated from 
tidal power is almost perfectly predictable – unlike the vast majority of renewa￾ble energy flows – which has significant benefit and value to the electricity grid. 
Tidal resources are also often proximate to urban demand centers and can provide 
valuable local generation. However, tidal resources are generally more localized 
compared to wave resources and not broadly available to all countries with coast￾lines. As with wave energy, the impact of tidal devices on the environment is still 
an active research area. The limited deployments undertaken at global testing 
sites have shown minimal environmental impacts, providing confidence for future 
deployments (Copping & Hemery, 2020).
Marine Hydrokinetic Growth and Costs
Marine hydrokinetic energy installed capacity is projected to grow to 5 GW by 
2030 and 21 GW by 2040 (IEA, 2018). Thus, marine hydrokinetics’ projected ca￾pacity in 2040 will be roughly equal to offshore wind’s installed capacity in 2020. 
The global LCOE for tidal and wave energy is presently $0.44 kWh and $0.50 
kWh, respectively. Hence, marine hydrokinetics overall are not currently cost￾competitive with other energy technologies, although select marine hydrokinetic Marine Renewable Energy: Policy, People, and Prospects 125
projects do exist that provide comparatively lower cost energy because of the 
uniquely favorable conditions associated with their locations. Cost declines sim￾ilar to those of offshore wind can be expected as the technology matures, econo￾mies of scale become more favorable, the technology becomes more proven, better 
financing is available, supply chains become solidified, and firms gain experience.
Public Perceptions of Marine Renewable Energy Development
Public support is critical to the success of energy development, particularly in 
democratic settings (Ansolabehere & Konisky, 2014; Boudet, 2019; Carley et al., 
2020). Examples abound of entire industries (Renn & Marshall, 2016) and specific 
projects (Firestone et al., 2012a) that have been stymied due to public opposition. 
Thus, it is important to continually assess and understand public perceptions, 
as well as to engage affected stakeholders in the development process (Conway 
et al., 2010).
The public generally reports limited familiarity with energy technologies 
(Spence et al., 2015; Thomas et al., 2017), including marine renewable energy 
technologies (Wiersma & Devine-Wright, 2014). Early studies of public percep￾tions thus linked opposition to a lack of information; educational efforts were 
stressed to build public acceptance (Slovic, 1987). Scholars and practitioners fo￾cused on overcoming not-in-my-backyard (NIMBY) attitudes, or the idea that 
people oppose an energy project due to its proximity for reasons of selfishness, ig￾norance, or irrationality (Dear, 1992; Schively, 2007). Similarly, studies on renew￾able energy technologies highlighted the “social gap” between generalized public 
support for renewables and opposition to specific projects (Bell et al., 2005, 2013; 
Walker, 1995). Indeed, concern about public opposition to onshore projects was 
one driver of offshore proposals, which were viewed as “a problem-free alternative 
to siting onshore” (Haggett, 2011, p. 503).
More recent research, however, has largely debunked the idea of NIMBYism 
(Rand & Hoen, 2017; Wüstenhagen et al., 2007). Scholars have increasingly fo￾cused on justice in facility siting, in terms of both the distribution of risks and 
benefits and the procedures for public engagement. A growing recognition that 
people, due to limited time and resources, often use mental shortcuts (Ho et al., 
2019) – such as ideological predispositions, environmental and altruistic values 
(Jacquet, 2012), media coverage (Vasi et al., 2015), and elite cues (Clarke et al., 
2015) – to filter information and form opinions about new energy technolo￾gies has led scholars to abandon suggestions of purely educational efforts and 
instead e ncourage more meaningful public engagement and involvement in 
 decision-making (Arnstein, 1969; Batel, 2020; Devine-Wright, 2005).
Moreover, offshore siting of marine renewable energy projects has not proven 
problem-free (Boudet & Ortolano, 2010; Firestone & Kempton, 2007; Haggett, 
2011; Wiersma & Devine-Wright, 2014). Visual impacts, ignorance of local con￾text and place attachments among affected stakeholders, disconnects between 
local impacts and global benefits, distant and multinational ownership, and in￾adequate public engagement processes can doom offshore projects, too (Haggett, 126 B. J. Wickizer et al.
2011). Perhaps the best example of this is the Cape Wind project off the coast 
of Cape Cod, Massachusetts, which was initiated in 2001 and dissolved in 2015. 
Ultimately, a small but powerful group of local citizens was able to stymie the pro￾ject through permit contestation and litigation. Moreover, local officials, Native 
American tribes, fishermen, and other stakeholders levied numerous concerns. 
Cape Wind illustrates the importance of prioritizing stakeholder preferences early 
within project development. Additionally, technological advances since Cape 
Wind have facilitated superior siting opportunities by allowing projects to be lo￾cated in deeper water, potentially reducing aesthetic concerns and other conflicts. 
In fact, the Vineyard Wind project, scheduled to be operational by 2023 after 
beginning construction in late 2021, is slated to be located in the same general 
area as Cape Wind was, though further offshore and with larger, but fewer, tur￾bines. Drawing on a framework developed by Boudet (2019), we review some of 
the main drivers of public perceptions of energy, namely, aspects of the technol￾ogy proposed, the people affected, the place in which a project is proposed, and 
the process by which decisions are made.
Technology
Perceptions of the risks and benefits associated with a technology or project are im￾portant drivers of attitudes and actions (Slovic, 1987; Stoutenborough et al., 2015). 
Slovic (1987) highlighted the role of two different factors in shaping risk perceptions: (1) 
“Dread” risk – relating to a technology’s uncontrollability, catastrophic potential, fatal 
consequences, involuntariness, high risk to future generations and inequitable distri￾bution of costs and benefits – and (2) “unknown” risk – relating to how a technology’s 
risks may be unobservable, new, delayed, and unknown to science. The more dread 
inspired by a technology and the more unknown its risks, the higher public risk percep￾tions will be. Other aspects shaping public perceptions of offshore energy development 
include its costs, its effect on energy prices, the scale of its footprint, and its ecological 
and aesthetic impacts.
Looking specifically at marine energy, offshore oil and gas development began 
in the Gulf of Mexico in the 1930s. Its relatively easy transition from onshore to 
offshore in the Gulf benefited from an established onshore industry, for which 
the risks and benefits were known (Freudenburg & Gramling, 1993). Despite this 
relatively easy transition, it was public outcry about an oil spill from offshore 
development in Santa Barbara, California, in 1969 that is widely viewed as one 
of the main triggers of the modern environmental movement, highlighting the 
role of focusing events, like accidents, in shaping public perceptions of energy 
development (Freudenburg & Gramling, 1994; Molotch, 1970). Though offshore 
production continues in the United States, it has been limited in California, and 
the Trump administration’s attempts to open other offshore areas have largely 
been rebuffed, even in Republican-leaning states (Konisky & Woods, 2018).
The offshore wind sector has not enjoyed such a swift transition from land to 
sea. The risk of a spoiled viewshed, lack of tangible benefits for proximate com￾munities, and concerns about relative cost compared to other energy resources Marine Renewable Energy: Policy, People, and Prospects 127
emerged early as public concerns about offshore wind (Haggett, 2011). Despite 
surveys showing high support for wind energy among the US public (Rand & 
Hoen, 2017), as of this writing, only one functioning 30 MW offshore installa￾tion exists at Block Island, Rhode Island, though recent research indicates that 
resident support for the project has only increased since its launch (Russell et al., 
2020). In contrast, Europe has been much more aggressive in its pursuit of off￾shore wind development, reaching over 20 GW of offshore capacity recently, and 
driving innovation and cost declines in the sector (IEA, 2019), which may in turn 
contribute to increased public support for the technology.
In contrast to oil and wind, no onshore energy equivalent exists for wave and 
tidal energy. Surveys indicate positive opinions of these technologies, especially 
compared to fossil fuel sources (Hazboun & Boudet, 2020), despite limited fa￾miliarity and concerns about impacts to viewsheds and marine life (Boudet
et al., 2020; Conway et al., 2010; Dreyer et al., 2017; Wiersma & Devine-Wright, 
2014). Perceived benefits include carbon mitigation, as well as potential contri￾butions to energy independence, security, and local jobs and revenue creation 
(Boudet et al., 2020; Conway et al., 2010; Dreyer et al., 2017; Wiersma & Devine￾Wright, 2014).
People
Sociodemographic factors (age, gender, ethnicity, income, education, and p olitical 
ideology) have been routinely tested in terms of how they shape public percep￾tions of energy technologies. Reviewing the literature on offshore renewables, 
Wiersma and Devine-Wright (2014) found that younger people, those with higher 
income or education, and women expressed more positive attitudes, though some 
types of ocean users (e.g., frequent beach goers, fishermen, and tourist-focused 
business owners) expressed concerns. Environmental values also play a role (Kerr 
et al., 2014), particularly views on climate change, as does trust in developers and 
regulators (Simas et al., 2012). Compared to renewables, oil and gas development 
is more politically polarizing, with conservatives generally more supportive and 
liberals more opposed (Hazboun & Boudet, 2020).
Beyond the individual, community-level factors can also play a role. For ex￾ample, the embeddedness of the oil industry in the livelihoods of Louisianans 
helped facilitate its offshore transition (Freudenburg & Gramling, 1994). Elite 
cues (e.g., from elected officials, business leaders) and perceptions of what other 
people think also shape attitudes, both positively and negatively (Crowe, 2020; 
Sokoloski et al., 2018).
Place
The place in which a project is proposed – the landscape, physical infrastruc￾ture, existing economy, and institutions – also shapes public perceptions and at￾titudes. The landscape itself can shape visual impacts from offshore development 
(Freudenburg & Gramling, 1994). Moreover, projects proposed in places that are 128 B. J. Wickizer et al.
important to local populations due to natural amenities or commercial activity 
will often face opposition (Giordono et al., 2018; Hall & Lazarus, 2015). At an 
individual level, positive emotional connections to a specific location can cre￾ate “place attachment”. If this location is then threatened by a proposed energy 
development, those attached to it are likely to take action to protect it (Devine￾Wright & Howes, 2010; McLachlan, 2009). In addition, past experiences with en￾ergy industries, particularly extractive industries, and compatibility with existing 
industries and regulations can shape views of new proposals (Fornahl et al., 2012; 
Olson-Hazboun et al., 2018). In other words, how a project is viewed depends on 
where it is proposed.
Process
Aspects of the process by which decisions are made about a development – in 
terms of public engagement, transparency, economic involvement, and fairness 
– are also key in determining public perceptions (Firestone et al., 2018, 2012b; 
Haggett, 2008). Building public trust in developers and regulators through a 
fair, open, and transparent process can be particularly important when devel￾opers come from outside the local community, which is highly likely given the 
scale and expense of offshore development (Firestone et al., 2012b; Wüstenhagen 
et al., 2007). At the same time, meaningful engagement and participation requires 
developers and government officials to give up some level of authority, control, 
and power – which can prove difficult.
Marine Renewable Energy Policy
Marine renewable technologies are subject to a variety of policy and governance 
regimes. Establishing a clear, streamlined regulatory environment that provides 
reliability and efficiency, while also balancing stakeholder concerns and providing 
effective oversight, is critical for the success of marine renewable energy. In fact, 
regulatory inexperience and disorganization have been implicated in certain early 
project failures, and policymakers and regulators have endeavored to make policy 
changes based on these early lessons.
Law of the Sea
The bedrock policy for marine activities and sovereignty is the United Nations 
1982 Law of the Sea Convention (LOSC) that governs the rights of sovereign 
states to control the waters adjacent to their coasts, including commercially de￾veloping marine energy. The two most significant dictates for marine renewables 
that the LOSC provides are related to territorial seas and exclusive economic 
zones.
The LOSC outlines that coastal nation-states have essentially exclusive rights 
to control activities, apply laws, and use resources within the territorial sea that 
extends 12 nautical miles from its low-water line. The LOSC also stipulates that Marine Renewable Energy: Policy, People, and Prospects 129
coastal nations may claim an exclusive economic zone extending 200 nautical 
miles into the sea from the low-water line, in which they have the right to con￾serve, exploit, and manage the living and non-living resources present in the 
water, as well as the seabed and subsurface. Though outside of the scope of the 
LOSC, countries whose governance involves shared authority between the fed￾eral and regional levels may extend marine renewable energy development and 
leasing jurisdiction to subnational governments. Additionally, even in the case 
that a project is located within federal jurisdictional waters, approval or comment 
from subnational authorities may be necessary in relation to the laying of under￾sea cable to connect the project to the grid.
Zoning and Leasing
A fundamental policy issue for marine renewable energy is determining what 
areas within a nation’s jurisdictional waters are available for development, and 
how that development will be sanctioned. The development of zoning regimes 
and structured leases allows regulators to better control and plan for marine re￾newable development and reduce uncertainty. Countries generally have a single 
agency that is responsible for overseeing marine renewable leases; however, other 
permits and approvals are often required from non-leasing agencies. Leasing 
agencies may be responsible for coordination between other relevant permitting 
agencies, though the amount of coordination undertaken by leasing agencies 
varies. The development of leasing policy structures has been an iterative process 
in many countries, and leasing authority has often been re-designated to differ￾ent agencies.
Marine renewable leases are often allotted through competitive auctions. One 
consideration for auctions is whether they are structured around providing leases 
to the highest bidders or structured around providing leases to companies offering 
the lowest bids to provide power. The former prioritizes maximizing revenue roy￾alties, while the latter prioritizes wind power competitiveness and electricity cost 
savings. In addition to issuing leases, leasing authorities may be responsible for 
overseeing revenue collection related to energy production royalties.
Perhaps the most important aspect of leasing is determining what areas should 
be leased through planning and zoning. Marine renewable energy project zon￾ing policies vary widely: from open-door policies that allow project developers 
to apply for a lease in a desired location, to leasing authorities designating broad 
zones determined to be generally suitable for development, to leasing authorities 
identifying specific project locations and dictating precise project requirements 
(Fitch-Roy, 2016). Open-door policies were common early on with offshore wind 
development; however, the current predominant approach is designating large 
areas zoned for development. The reason for this movement toward zoned man￾agement is likely due to difficulties with early offshore wind projects that offered 
the lesson that putting in more diligence upfront and identifying lease areas that 
avoided major conflicts or stakeholder opposition was likely to render better out￾comes in the long run.130 B. J. Wickizer et al.
Balancing Uses
The ocean and coastal environments are associated with a myriad of uses and 
values. In some cases, these uses and values can coexist without issue; how￾ever, in other cases, conflicts may arise. Marine Spatial Planning (MSP) is an 
approach to navigating uses and values in an attempt to manage the marine 
environment in pursuit of specific objectives, often determined through polit￾ical processes, and preserve its assets for various stakeholders and beneficiaries 
(O’Hagan, 2020).
Although still young in comparison to land use planning, approximately 
70 countries presently employ MSP approaches, and marine renewable energy 
projects are one of the features of MSP efforts. Ideally, MSP allows decision 
makers to see the forest through the trees and foster a more holistic, rather 
than piecemeal, approach to determining the appropriateness and compatibil￾ity of ocean uses, taking into consideration not only what uses are occurring 
in the present, but also considering what may occur in the future. Stakeholder 
participation and transparency are essential characteristics of MSP approaches, 
although participation can assume different forms, some of which may be more 
genuine or meaningful than others. MSP is only as effective as the criteria 
used to inform it, and MSPs often have limited scopes that are focused on 
only one or two uses or sectors (Jones et al., 2016). If certain stakeholders are 
not included early on or certain uses or impacts are not meaningfully consid￾ered, then the management decisions informed by MSP efforts may not be as 
effectual or legitimate. MSP has been used in conjunction with marine re￾newable energy zonal management to delineate areas for development. Two 
of the primary potential benefits of MSP for marine renewable energy are the 
streamlining of the regulatory approval process and avoidance of contentious 
siting (Ryan et al., 2019).
Requirements for environmental review and permitting are a ubiquitous fea￾ture of marine renewable energy project approval. Most countries require envi￾ronmental impact assessments to evaluate potential impacts of planned projects 
(United Nations Environment Programme, 2018). Generally, these assessments 
are necessary when significant environmental damage could be associated with 
a project. However, in many cases, particularly in the European Union and the 
United States, project developers and regulators can perform more cursory re￾views prior to performing a full environmental impacts statement, potentially 
avoiding a full review if a project meets certain criteria for minimal environ￾mental impacts. Environmental impact statement statutes primarily provide 
transparency. Even in the case that environmental impacts are anticipated, per￾mitting agencies generally retain discretion to approve projects. Most statutes 
also stipulate requirements for some degree of public participation in the review 
process, although the forms this takes vary. As mentioned above, it behooves 
project developers and regulators to consider various marine uses and potential 
stakeholder opposition in selecting project locations, as it is likely to ease the 
environmental review process.Marine Renewable Energy: Policy, People, and Prospects 131
Policy and Marine Renewable Energy Growth
Offshore wind occupies a steadfast position as a competitor in the energy market 
at this point. However, its growth, as well as the level of development and deploy￾ment of marine hydrokinetic energy, is tied to future energy policies. The EU’s 
legally binding goal of a 20% renewable energy share of total energy consump￾tion and its cap-and-trade regime have created favorable conditions for marine 
renewable development in Europe. Furthermore, in 2018 the European Union 
agreed upon a goal of 32% renewable energy share. Europe also provided renew￾able sources with priority in connecting to the grid. These types of favorable 
policies are an important piece of why offshore wind has experienced outsized 
success in Europe.
The United States does not have a federal renewable energy standard. Moreo￾ver, the Obama administration’s Clean Power Plan, which was expected to foster 
additional renewable energy growth, was replaced with the less robust Afforda￾ble Clean Energy Rule by the Trump administration. The United States is not 
the only nation to experience energy policy backsliding. For example, though 
Australia implemented carbon pricing in 2011, this policy was short-lived and 
repealed in 2014. However, 29 US states have some form of renewable portfo￾lio standard (RPS), providing binding targets for renewable energy share. Of the 
states with RPSs, 16 are coastal, and seven of these states have an eventual goal 
of 100% renewable energy or zero emissions from the electricity sector. The Biden 
administration has signaled an interest in catalyzing renewable energy growth, 
including articulating a goal of deploying 30 GW of offshore wind energy by 2030 
(Exec. Order No. 14008, 2021). Thus, although there are many encouraging pol￾icy instruments supporting marine renewable energy development in a variety of 
places, the long-term existence of these policies can be tenuous, particularly as 
political winds shift between administrations, and policy reversals are likely to 
have consequences for the trajectory of future marine energy deployment.
Another question related to marine renewable energy’s future growth is the 
ability to access the grid, particularly as project locations move further offshore, 
as well as achieve necessary grid upgrades. Grid infrastructure inadequacies have 
already proven to be a limiting factor in maximizing the benefits of offshore wind 
in certain locations. Some countries have undertaken strategic planning efforts 
to coordinate grid upgrades with project development. Determining who pays for 
grid upgrades and if costs will be distributed across all who benefit is an important 
aspect of grid management, with implications for marine renewable development. 
Ensuring grid access and upgrades is not only important for maximizing marine 
renewable energy’s possibilities, but also for reducing perceived risks, potentially 
catalyzing greater investment and development.
Conclusion
The world’s present energy paradigm has been characterized as a hybrid regime, oc￾cupying a space between our historic fossil-fuel-based conventional energy paradigm 132 B. J. Wickizer et al.
and a future sustainable energy paradigm based on renewable energy and energy 
efficiency. In the coming decades, the growth of marine renewable energy will be 
bound more broadly to energy policies and the movement toward a sustainable en￾ergy regime. If decarbonization is prioritized and additional policy commitments 
foster renewable energy procurement, it will accelerate marine renewable deploy￾ment. Although offshore wind and marine hydrokinetics are slated to grow by 2030 
and beyond under current policies, if meaningful global decarbonization policies 
are pursued, global offshore wind capacity is predicted to grow an additional 81% 
by 2030 and an additional 117% by 2040; global marine hydrokinetic capacity is 
predicted to grow an additional 40% by 2030 and an additional 62% by 2040 (IEA, 
2018). Thus, the timeline for realizing marine renewable energy growth and com￾petitiveness, and bringing a sustainable blue economy to fruition, depends largely 
on the vigor with which decarbonization policies are pursued more generally.
Questions for Reflection
 1. How have technological innovations affected marine renewable energy 
 2. Which marine renewable energy technology is the most mature? Why might 
 3. Why is siting important in the development of marine renewable energy 
 4. What role can policy play in accelerating marine renewable energy 
 5. Could the increasing development of renewable ocean energy be a factor 
References
Ansolabehere, S., & Konisky, D. M. (2014). Cheap and clean: How Americans think about 
energy in the age of global warming. MIT Press.
Arnstein, S. R. (1969). A ladder of citizen participation. Journal of the American Institute of 
Planners, 35(4), 216–224. https://doi.org/10.1080/01944366908977225
Bailey, H., Brookes, K. L., & Thompson, P. M. (2014). Assessing environmental im￾pacts of offshore wind farms: Lessons learned and recommendations for the future. 
Aquatic Biosystems, 10(1), 1–13. Retrieved July 1, 2022 from https://aquaticbiosystems. 
biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/2046-9063-10-8
Batel, S. (2020). Research on the social acceptance of renewable energy technologies: 
Past, present and future. Energy Research & Social Science, 68, 101544. https://doi.
org.10.1016/j.erss.2020.101544
Bell, D., Gray, T., & Haggett, C. (2005). The ‘social gap’ in wind farm siting decisions: 
Explanations and policy responses. Environmental Politics, 14(4), 460–477. https://doi.
org/10.1080/09644010500175833
Bell, D., Gray, T., Haggett, C., & Swaffield, J. (2013). Re-visiting the ‘social gap’: Public 
opinion and relations of power in the local politics of wind energy. Environmental 
Politics, 22(1), 115–135. https://doi.org/10.1080/09644016.2013.755793Marine Renewable Energy: Policy, People, and Prospects 133
Boudet, H. S. (2019). Public perceptions of and responses to new energy technologies. 
Nature Energy, 4(6), 446–455. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41560-019-0399-x
Boudet, H. S., Brandt, D., Stelmach, G., & Hazboun, S. (2020). West Coast perceptions of 
wave energy. Pacific Marine Energy Center. https://ir.library.oregonstate.edu/concern/
technical_reports/pr76f9588
Boudet, H. S., & Ortolano, L. (2010). A tale of two sitings: Contentious politics in lique￾fied natural gas facility siting in California. Journal of Planning Education and Research, 
30(1), 5–21. https://doi.org/10.1177/0739456X10373079
Carley, S., Konisky, D. M., Atiq, Z., & Land, N. (2020). Energy infrastructure, NIMBYism, 
and public opinion: A systematic literature review of three decades of empirical survey lit￾erature. Environmental Research Letters, 15(9), 093007. https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/
ab875d
Clarke, C. E., Hart, P. E., Schuldt, J. P., Evensen, D. T., Boudet, H. S., Jacquet, J. B., & 
Stedman, R. C. (2015). Public opinion on energy development: The interplay of issue 
framing, top-of-mind associations, and political ideology. Energy Policy, 81, 131–140. 
https://doi.org./10.1016/j.enpol.2015.02.019
Conway, F., Stevenson, J., Hunter, D., Stefanovich, M., Campbell, H., Covell, Z., & Yin, 
Y. (2010). Ocean space, ocean place: The human dimensions of wave energy in Oregon. 
Oceanography, 23(2), 82–91. https://www.jstor.org/stable/24860714
Copping, A. E., & Hemery, L. G. (Eds.). (2020). OES-environmental 2020 state of the science 
report: Environmental effects of marine renewable energy development around the world. 
Ocean Energy Systems. Retrieved July 1, 2022 from https://www.ocean-energy-systems.
org/news/oes-environmental-2020-state-of-the-science-report
Crowe, J. A. (2020). The effect of partisan cues on support for solar and wind energy in 
the United States. Social Science Quarterly, 101(4), 1461–1474. https://doi.org/10.1111/
ssqu.12799
Dear, M. (1992). Understanding and overcoming the NIMBY syndrome. Journal of the Amer￾ican Planning Association, 58(3), 288–300. https://doi.org/10.1080/01944369208975808
Devine-Wright, P. (2005). Beyond NIMBYism: Towards an integrated framework for un￾derstanding public perceptions of wind energy. Wind Energy, 8(2), 125–139. https://doi.
org/10.1002/we.124
Devine-Wright, P., & Howes, Y. (2010). Disruption to place attachment and the protection 
of restorative environments: A wind energy case study. Journal of Environmental Psy￾chology, 30(3), 271–280. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvp.2010.01.008
Dreyer, S. J., Polis, H. J., & Jenkins, L. D. (2017). Changing tides: Acceptability, support, 
and perceptions of tidal energy in the United States. Energy Research & Social Science, 
29, 72–83. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.erss.2017.04.013
Energias de Portugal. (2018). Windfloat Atlantic. https://www.edp.com/en/innovation/
windfloat
Energy Sector Management Assistance Program. (2019). Going global: Expanding off￾shore wind to emerging markets. https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/bitstream/han￾dle/10986/32801/Going-Global-Expanding-Offshore-Wind-To-Emerging-Markets.
pdf?sequence=5&isAllowed=y
Equinor. (n.d.). The future of offshore wind is afloat. https://www.equinor.com/en/what￾we-do/floating-wind.html
Firestone, J., Hoen, B., Rand, J., Elliott, D., Hübner, G., & Pohl, J. (2018). Reconsidering 
barriers to wind power projects: Community engagement, developer transparency and 
place. Journal of Environmental Policy & Planning, 20(3), 370–386. https://doi.org/10.1080/
1523908X.2017.1418656134 B. J. Wickizer et al.
Firestone, J., & Kempton, W. (2007). Public opinion about large offshore wind power: Under￾lying factors. Energy Policy, 35(3), 1584–1598. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2006.04.010
Firestone, J., Kempton, W., Lilley, M. B., & Samoteskul, K. (2012a). Public acceptance of 
offshore wind power across regions and through time. Journal of Environmental Planning 
and Management, 55(10), 1369–1386. https://doi.org/10.1080/09640568.2012.682782
Firestone, J., Kempton, W., Lilley, M. B., & Samoteskul, K. (2012b). Public acceptance of 
offshore wind power: Does perceived fairness of process matter? Journal of Environmen￾tal Planning and Management, 55(10), 1387–1402. https://doi.org/10.1080/09640568.2012.
688658
Fitch-Roy, O. (2016). An offshore wind union? Diversity and convergence in European 
offshore wind governance. Climate Policy, 16(5), 586–605. https://doi.org/10.1080/1469
3062.2015.1117958
Fornahl, D., Hassink, R., Klaerding, C., Mossig, I., & Schröder, H. (2012). From the old path 
of shipbuilding onto the new path of offshore wind energy? The case of northern Ger￾many. European Planning Studies, 20(5), 835–855. http://hdl.handle.net/10419/120052
Freudenburg, W. R., & Gramling, R. (1993). Socioenvironmental factors and development 
policy: Understanding opposition and support for offshore oil. Sociological Forum, 8(3), 
341–364. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01115049
Freudenburg, W. R., & Gramling, R. (1994). Oil in troubled waters: Perceptions, politics, and 
the battle over offshore drilling. SUNY Press.
Giordono, L. S., Boudet, H. S., Karmazina, A., Taylor, C. L., & Steel, B. S. (2018). 
Opposition “overblown”? Community response to wind energy siting in the western 
United States. Energy Research & Social Science, 43, 119–131. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
erss.2018.05.016
Global Change Data Lab. (n.d.) Global direct primary energy consumption. Our world in 
data. https://ourworldindata.org/grapher/global-primary-energy?time=earliest.latest
Global Wind Energy Council. (n.d.) Offshore Wind Power. https://gwec.net/global-figures/
global-offshore/
Haggett, C. (2008). Over the sea and far away? A consideration of the planning, politics 
and public perception of offshore wind farms. Journal of Environmental Policy & Planning, 
10(3), 289–306. https://doi.org/10.1080/15239080802242787
Haggett, C. (2011). Understanding public responses to offshore wind power. Energy Policy, 
39(2), 503–510. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2010.10.014
Hall, D. M., & Lazarus, E. D. (2015). Deep waters: Lessons from community meetings 
about offshore wind resource development in the US. Marine Policy, 57, 9–17. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.marpol.2015.03.004
Hazboun, S. O., & Boudet, H. S. (2020). Public preferences in a shifting energy future: 
Comparing public views of eight energy sources in North America’s Pacific Northwest. 
Energies, 13(8), 1940. https://doi.org/10.3390/en13081940
Ho, S. S., Leong, A. D., Looi, J., Chen, L., Pang, N., & Tandoc Jr., E. (2019). Science liter￾acy or value predisposition? A meta-analysis of factors predicting public perceptions of 
benefits, risks, and acceptance of nuclear energy. Environmental Communication, 13(4), 
457–471. https://doi.org/10.1080/17524032.2017.1394891
Huckerby, J., Jeffrey, H., de Andres, A., & Finlay, L. (2017). An international vision for ocean 
energy. Ocean Energy Systems. https://www.ocean-energy-systems.org/publications/oes￾vision-strategy/
International Energy Agency. (2018). Offshore Energy Outlook 2018. https://www.iea.org/
reports/offshore-energy-outlook-2018
International Energy Agency. (2019). Offshore Wind Outlook 2019. https://www.iea.org/
reports/offshore-wind-outlook-2019Marine Renewable Energy: Policy, People, and Prospects 135
International Renewable Energy Agency. (2019). Future of Wind: Deployment, Investment, 
Technology, Grid Integration and Socio-Economic Aspects. https://www.irena.org/-/media/
Files/IRENA/Agency/Publication/2019/Oct/IRENA_Future_of_wind_2019.pdf
Jacquet, J. B. (2012). Landowner attitudes toward natural gas and wind farm develop￾ment in northern Pennsylvania. Energy Policy, 50, 677–688. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
enpol.2012.08.011
Jones, P. J., Lieberknecht, L. M., & Qiu, W. (2016). Marine spatial planning in reality: 
Introduction to case studies and discussion of findings. Marine Policy, 71, 256–264. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpol.2016.04.026
Kerr, S., Watts, L., Colton, J., Conway, F., Hull, A., Johnson, K., Jude, S., Kannen, A., 
MacDougall, S., McLachlan, C., Potts, T., & Vegunst, J. (2014). Establishing an agenda 
for social studies research in marine renewable energy. Energy Policy, 67, 694–702. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2013.11.063
Konisky, D. M., & Woods, N. D. (2018). Environmental federalism and the Trump pres￾idency: A preliminary assessment. Publius: The Journal of Federalism, 48(3), 345–371. 
https://doi.org/10.1093/publius/pjy009
Lee, A., Zinaman, O., & Logan, J. (2012). Opportunities for synergy between natural gas 
and renewable energy in the electric power and transportation sectors (Report No. NREL/ 
TP-6A50–56324). National Renewable Energy Laboratory. https://www.nrel.gov/docs/
fy13osti/56324.pdf
McLachlan, C. (2009). ‘You don’t do a chemistry experiment in your best china’: Symbolic 
interpretations of place and technology in a wave energy case. Energy Policy, 37(12), 
5342–5350. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2009.07.057
Molotch, H. (1970). Oil in Santa Barbara and power in America. Sociological Inquiry, 
40(1), 131–144. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1475-682X.1970.tb00990.x
Musial, W., Beiter, P., Spitsen, P., Nunemaker, J., Gevorgian, V., Cooperman, A., Ham￾mond, R., & Shields, M. (2020). 2019 offshore wind technology data update (Report No. 
NREL/ TP-5000–77411). National Renewable Energy Laboratory. https://www.nrel.gov/
docs/fy21osti/77411.pdf
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. (2017, April 5). Largest oil spills af￾fecting US waters since 1969. https://response.restoration.noaa.gov/oil-and-chemical￾spills/oil-spills/largest-oil-spills-affecting-us-waters-1969.html
Neill, S. P, Angeloudis, A., Robins, P. E., Walkington, I., Ward, S. L., Masters, I., Lewis, M. 
J., Piano, M., Avdis, A., Piggott, M. D., Aggidis, G., Evans, P., Adcock, T. A. A., Židonis, 
A., Ahmadian, R., & Falconer, R. (2018). Tidal range energy resource and optimization 
– Past perspectives and future challenges. Renewable Energy, 127, 763–778. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.renene.2018.05.007
O’Hagan, A. M. (2020). Marine spatial planning and marine renewable energy. In A.E. 
Copping & L.G. Hemery (Eds.), OES-Environmental 2020 state of the science report: 
Environmental effects of marine renewable energy development around the world (pp. 214–
241). Ocean Energy Systems. https://doi.org/10.2172/1633204
Olson-Hazboun, S. K., Howe, P. D., & Leiserowitz, A. (2018). The influence of extractive 
activities on public support for renewable energy policy. Energy Policy, 123, 117–126. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2018.08.044
Rand, J., & Hoen, B. (2017). Thirty years of North American wind energy acceptance 
research: What have we learned? Energy Research & Social Science, 29, 135–148. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.erss.2017.05.019
Renn, O., & Marshall, J. P. (2016). Coal, nuclear and renewable energy policies in Ger￾many: From the 1950s to the “Energiewende”. Energy Policy, 99, 224–232. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.enpol.2016.05.004136 B. J. Wickizer et al.
Russell, A., Firestone, J., Bidwell, D., & Gardner, M. (2020). Place meaning and consist￾ency with offshore wind: An island and coastal tale. Renewable and Sustainable Energy 
Reviews, 132, 110044. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2020.110044
Ryan, K., Bates, A., Gopnik, M., Danylchuk, A., & Jordaan, A. (2019). Stakeholder perspec￾tives on the value of marine spatial planning towards advancing offshore wind in the 
US. Coastal Management, 47(3), 269–291. https://doi.org/10.1080/08920753.2019.1596675
Schively, C. (2007). Understanding the NIMBY and LULU phenomena: Reassessing our 
knowledge base and informing future research. Journal of Planning Literature, 21(3), 
255–266. https://doi.org/10.1177/0885412206295845
Short, A. (2020). Industrial policy support for tidal technology in the UK: An international 
comparison. University of Exeter.
Simas, T., Muñoz-Arjona, E., Huertas-Olivares, C., de Groot, J., Stokes, C., Bailey, I., Ma￾gagna, D., Conley, D., Greaves, D., Marina, D., Torre-Enciso, Y., Sundberg, J., O’Hagan, 
A., & Holmes, B. (2012, October 17). Understanding the role of stakeholders in the wave 
energy consenting process: Engagement and sensitivities [Paper presentation]. International 
Conference on Ocean Energy, Dublin, Ireland. https://tethys.pnnl.gov/publications/
understanding-role-stakeholders-wave-energy-consenting-process-engagement
Slovic, P. (1987). Perception of risk. Science, 236(4799), 280–285. https://doi.org/10.1126/
science.3563507
Sokoloski, R., Markowitz, E. M., & Bidwell, D. (2018). Public estimates of support for off￾shore wind energy: False consensus, pluralistic ignorance, and partisan effects. Energy 
Policy, 112, 45–55. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2017.10.005
Spence, A., Demski, C., Butler, C., Parkhill, K., & Pidgeon, N. (2015). Public perceptions 
of demand-side management and a smarter energy future. Nature Climate Change, 5(6), 
550–554. https://doi.org/10.1038/nclimate2610
Stoutenborough, J. W., Vedlitz, A., & Liu, X. (2015). The influence of specific risk per￾ceptions on public policy support: An examination of energy policy. The ANNALS 
of the American Academy of Political and Social Science, 658(1), 102–120. https://doi.
org/10.1177/0002716214556472
Thomas, M., Pidgeon, N., Evensen, D., Partridge, T., Hasell, A., Enders, C., Herr Hart￾horn, B., & Bradshaw, M. (2017). Public perceptions of hydraulic fracturing for shale 
gas and oil in the United States and Canada. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate 
Change, 8(3), e450. https://doi.org/10.1002/wcc.450
United Nations Environment Programme. (2018). Assessing environmental impacts – A 
global review of legislation. UNEP.
US Energy Information Administration. (2016, October 25). Offshore production nearly 
30% of global crude oil output in 2015. https://www.eia.gov/todayinenergy/detail.
php?id=28492#
Vasi, I. B., Walker, E. T., Johnson, J. S., & Tan, H. F. (2015). “No fracking way!” Documen￾tary film, discursive opportunity, and local opposition against hydraulic fracturing in 
the United States, 2010 to 2013. American Sociological Review, 80(5), 934–959. https://
doi.org/10.1177/0003122415598534
Walker, G. (1995). Renewable energy and the public. Land Use Policy, 12(1), 49–59. https://
doi.org/10.1016/0264-8377(95)90074-C
Wiersma, B., & Devine-Wright, P. (2014). Public engagement with offshore renewable en￾ergy: A critical review. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate Change, 5(4), 493–507. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/wcc.282
Wüstenhagen, R., Wolsink, M., & Bürer, M. J. (2007). Social acceptance of renewable 
energy innovation: An introduction to the concept. Energy policy, 35(5), 2683–2691. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2006.12.0019 Marine Areas beyond National 
Jurisdiction
H. Harden-Davies
Introduction
More than two-thirds of the ocean lies in marine areas beyond national jurisdic￾tion (ABNJ). These deep and remote spaces of global ocean commons are shared 
by all but owned by no one. They are also connected to humans, directly or indi￾rectly, in several ways. Marine environments in ABNJ span the sea surface of the 
open ocean, through the water column to the deep seabed. They include diverse 
habitats (such as the ocean twilight zone, deep-sea trenches, abyssal plains, hydro￾thermal vents, and coral reefs) that support rich assemblages of marine life, as yet 
unexplored by science (Ramirez-Llodra et al., 2010, 2011). Myriad ecosystems of 
ABNJ underpin vital planetary support functions, such as climate regulation and 
nutrient recycling, and are connected to coastal areas through oceanic currents 
(Rogers et al., 2014) and the movements of marine species (Popova et al., 2019). 
Several marine species traverse ocean ABNJ and coastal areas, representing a 
source of scientific, economic, and cultural importance for humans (Mulalap 
et al., 2020; Popova et al., 2019; Vierros et al., 2020). Cultural activities or artifacts 
of human navigation in marine ABNJ underpin diverse cultural connections be￾tween humans worldwide and this vast open space.
Goods are traded and transported via shipping on the sea surface (11 billion 
tons of maritime trade in 2018) (United Nations Conference on Trade and De￾velopment, 2019), while information flows through submarine cables that zigzag 
the seafloor. Seabed minerals, including polymetallic nodules, cobalt crust, and 
seafloor metallic sulfides, are being explored (Levin et al., 2020a). Fisheries are 
a source of revenue for many nation-states (hereafter “States”) (Bell et al., 2021; 
Haas et al., 2021), and genetic resources are a topic of growing interest for scientific 
research and development (Blasiak et al., 2020; Rogers et al., 2021). Yet questions 
remain regarding the sustainability of these activities, who benefits from these 
resources, and how the responsibilities associated with their use are implemented 
in practice. These questions are especially pertinent at a time of increasing inter￾est in the blue economy worldwide and growing scrutiny on the equitability of 
resource use (Cisneros-Montemayor et al., 2021).
Marine environments in ABNJ, and the biodiversity that they support, 
are threatened by human activities that cause them harm. Examples include 
DOI: 10.4324/9781003058151-11138 H. Harden-Davies
destructive, unsustainable, and illegal fisheries practices, as well as pollution and 
dumping or discard from vessels (Wright et al., 2018). Climate change–related im￾pacts of ocean acidification, warming, and deoxygenation represent confounding 
impacts that contribute to the uncertain future of marine biodiversity in ABNJ 
(Levin & Le Bris, 2015). The exploration for seabed minerals now underway raises 
concerns of the environmental impacts of seabed mining (Levin et al., 2020a, 
2020b). Potential future activities, such as offshore aquaculture, geoengineering, 
or the development of “floating cities”, represent further concerns of potential 
environmental damage. Addressing the cumulative impacts of these activities re￾mains a major challenge for ocean governance (Hassanali, 2021).
The international ocean governance framework divides marine ABNJ into two 
maritime zones: (i) the water column, or “high seas”, and (ii) the international 
seabed or “the Area”. The water column and seabed are connected ecologically 
and physically, yet there are differences in the legal frameworks. For example, 
high seas governance is strongly influenced by the principle of freedom of the 
high seas, whereas the international seabed Area and its mineral resources are the 
common heritage of mankind. These principles have different historical and ide￾ological roots: the principle of freedom of the high seas emerged hundreds of years 
ago and is linked to the primacy of mercantile and military interests, while the 
common heritage of mankind principle emerged during the mid-1960s in support 
of sharing the benefits from the global ocean commons (Jaeckel, 2020; Vadrot 
et al., 2022).1
 The practical application of these principles, and the drawbacks 
of having different legal regimes for an interconnected ocean environment, are 
ongoing topics of lively international debate.
The limitations of the existing international ocean governance framework, in 
relation to the conservation and sustainable use of marine biodiversity in ABNJ, 
are well known (Ardron et al., 2014; Warner, 2014; Wright et al., 2018). There are 
several sectoral and regional organizations, yet coordination remains challenging. 
Gaps also exist for marine protected areas, environmental impact assessments, 
and marine genetic resources in ABNJ, as well as capacity-building and the trans￾fer of marine technology (Humphries & Harden-Davies, 2020). Consequently, 
international concern regarding marine biodiversity of ABNJ has prompted the 
United Nations to develop a new treaty: “a new international legally binding in￾strument for the conservation and sustainable use of marine biological diversity of 
areas beyond national jurisdiction under the United Nations Convention on the 
Law of the Sea (UNCLOS)” (United Nations [UN], 2019).
Equity considerations are increasingly prominent in the literature and inter￾national debates concerning marine ABNJ (Österblom et al., 2020). All States 
have the right to access marine ABNJ, and the resources of marine ABNJ are, in 
principle, open to and shared by all – conditional on responsibilities laid down 
by UNCLOS (Section 2). Yet, in practice, few have the capacity to access marine 
ABNJ and fulfill associated responsibilities to protect and preserve the marine 
environment. For example, the high technological requirements to explore ocean 
ABNJ can be met by just a few States (Blasiak et al., 2020; Rogers et al., 2021). 
Consequently, the benefits and burdens are not shared by all. This conundrum Marine Areas beyond National Jurisdiction 139
raises questions about how the benefits and burdens of conserving and sustainably 
using marine resources from ABNJ are shared – and how the balance between 
rights and responsibilities in the global ocean commons plays out in practice.
Understanding these issues requires expertise from several disciplinary areas, 
including, for example, the natural sciences, to understand the marine environ￾ments in ABNJ and inform biodiversity conservation and sustainable use meas￾ures; and the social sciences and humanities, to understand the legal frameworks, 
the historical development, the power dynamics at play, as well as the complex 
social and cultural dimensions that underlie human connections with ABNJ. It is 
not possible to provide a comprehensive discussion of all such perspectives in this 
chapter. Rather, the aim is to provide a high-level introduction to marine ABNJ 
in a way that is accessible to diverse disciplinary backgrounds and stimulates fur￾ther study into the human dimensions of this vast global ocean commons.
This chapter explores the relationship between humans and marine ABNJ, 
introducing the governance of marine ABNJ, outlining perspectives on human 
connections with marine ABNJ, and introducing the development of the new 
treaty for marine biodiversity beyond national jurisdiction (BBNJ agreement). 
Finally, the conclusion offers reflections on emerging and future issues for the 
governance of marine ABNJ and identifies research gaps relating to human di￾mensions of marine ABNJ.
Marine Areas beyond National Jurisdiction
Marine ABNJ cover almost half of the Earth’s surface. Marine ABNJ do not in￾clude other areas beyond national jurisdiction, such as outer space and Antarc￾tica, which have separate international legal frameworks (Berkman, 2010). “High 
seas” refers to the water column beyond national jurisdiction, measured as 200 
nautical miles from a State’s territorial sea baseline, i.e., beyond the exclusive 
economic zone.2
 “The Area” refers to the seabed and subsoil beyond the limits of 
national jurisdiction,3
 i.e., beyond the continental shelf (normally 200 nautical 
miles from the territorial sea baseline). International agreement on the establish￾ment of these maritime zones required decades of negotiation, following centuries 
of differing views on the limits of State control over the ocean. Understanding 
the historical development provides important context to contemporary chal￾lenges facing the governance of marine ABNJ. In this section, the development 
of the international regimes for the high seas and the Area is briefly outlined, 
before turning to examine key elements of the governance framework for marine 
ABNJ today.
Deliberations on the limits of State control of marine spaces and the level of 
freedom in shared ocean spaces can be traced back several hundred years and are 
anchored in the context of maritime powers of the 15th, 16th, and 17th centu￾ries exerting influence and promoting mercantile and military interests (Treves, 
2015a, 2015b). Some of the earliest triggers for the scholarly debate concerning 
the freedom of the high seas included a Papal bull Inter Caetera issued in 1492 by 
Pope Alexander VI, and a treaty concluded at Tordesillas the following year that 140 H. Harden-Davies
divided the Atlantic between Portugal (to the east) and Spain (to the west). The 
opposition to this idea stimulated foundational scholarship on the idea of freedom 
of the seas, including Mare Liberum (“free seas”), published in 1609 by the Dutch 
author Hugo Grotius, arguing the notion of “freedom of the seas” on the basis 
that the sea could not be occupied or defended by humans; and the conflicting 
Mare Clausum (“closed seas”), published in 1635 by English author John Selden, 
disputing this argument on the basis that the sea could be controlled by States 
as illustrated by navigation and fishing activities (Treves, 2015a). A pragmatic 
compromise known as the “cannon shot rule” became commonplace throughout 
the 18th century, predicated on the understanding that, regardless of whether 
marine areas could be possessed, a coastal State could nevertheless exert power 
and claim possession as far as a cannon would carry (the distance depended on 
available technology).
Consequently, the idea of dividing the seas into State-controlled “territorial 
seas” and shared “high seas” became commonplace throughout the 19th and early 
20th centuries. At the same time, the notion of freedom of the high seas, par￾ticularly for navigation, was reinforced by State practice in relation to shipping 
and trade. However, recognized limits of the territorial sea varied from 3 to 200 
nautical miles. Several attempts were made to formalize the limits of national ju￾risdiction throughout the 20th century, including during the first (24 February–27 
April 1958), second (16 March–26 April 1960), and third (1973–1982) sessions 
of the United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea, during which time 
UNCLOS was negotiated. Yet it was not until the adoption of UNCLOS in 1982, 
following almost three decades of negotiation, that international agreement was 
reached on the limits of State jurisdiction, and the high seas and the Area were 
formally designated.
During the UNCLOS negotiations, the principle of “common heritage of man￾kind” emerged. It is widely credited to Maltese Ambassador Arvid Pardo tabling 
the idea during a speech at the United Nations in 1967. In many ways the an￾tithesis of “freedom of the high seas”, the common heritage of mankind asserted 
that all States should benefit from the mineral resources of the seabed (which 
were expected to generate wealth); activities in the international seabed Area 
should be for peaceful purposes; and the interests of future generations should be 
considered (Jaeckel, 2020).
UNCLOS also formally established freedoms of the high seas for navigation, 
overflight, laying submarine cables, constructing artificial islands, fishing, and sci￾entific research.4
 These freedoms are not absolute but conditional on responsibili￾ties (Freestone, 2009), including to protect and preserve the marine environment 
and conserve and manage the living resources of the high seas.5
In considering the factors that played into the adoption of UNCLOS – 
 including the eventual agreement on the extent of State jurisdiction and the de￾cision to designate the seabed and the water column as separate maritime zones 
– the geopolitical context was crucial (Vadrot et al., 2022). The UNCLOS negoti￾ations occurred in the aftermath of the Second World War, at a time of significant 
geopolitical change with several newly independent States seeking to establish Marine Areas beyond National Jurisdiction 141
control over their territories and resources. The emergence of the common her￾itage of mankind principle is an example of a change in approach for the global 
ocean; it is emblematic of the resistance to the prevailing practice of behaving 
solely in national interests, and it favors the prioritization of equity considerations 
for both current and future generations. In practice, however, the evolution and 
implementation of the common heritage of mankind principle remains a lively 
topic of debate (Jaeckel, 2020; Vadrot et al., 2022).
Although UNCLOS is regarded as the “constitution” for the ocean, the devel￾opment of the international framework for the governance of ocean areas beyond 
national jurisdiction did not end with the adoption of UNCLOS in 1982. Already, 
two implementing agreements have been developed under UNCLOS – both of 
which are directly relevant to marine ABNJ. The 1994 Agreement relating to the 
Implementation of Part XI of UNCLOS focused on governance arrangements for 
mineral resources in the Area, including softening the provisions concerning as￾sociated marine technology transfer. It was only with this agreement that several 
developed States signed UNCLOS, making it possible for UNCLOS to enter into 
force in 1994. The 1995 UNCLOS Implementing Agreement relating to the Con￾servation and Management of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish 
Stocks concerned fisheries and became foundational to high-seas fisheries man￾agement (Gjerde et al., 2019). A third agreement (the BBNJ agreement) is now 
being negotiated to further implement UNCLOS obligations for marine ABNJ, 
including but not limited to the protection of the marine environment and the 
transfer of marine technology, as well as to fill gaps left by UNCLOS, including 
for marine genetic resources (Section 4).
In addition to these agreements, there are several other legal instruments, 
frameworks, and organizations that play a role in managing activities in ABNJ. 
Some are sectoral and global, others are regional; some have regulatory power, 
others do not (Wright et al., 2018). It is not within the scope of this chapter to 
explore them all, but some illustrative examples are provided in Table 9.1.
Yet there are persisting questions surrounding the sustainability of human ac￾tivities in ABNJ, and who benefits from them. Environmental impacts of shipping 
include greenhouse gas emissions, air and ocean noise pollution, invasive spe￾cies introduced by ship ballast water, and chemical pollution. There are concerns 
Table 9.1 Examples of international organizations with authority in ABNJ
Sector Organization
Shipping International Maritime Organization (IMO)
Seabed minerals International Seabed Authority (ISA)
Marine scientific research Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission of 
UNESCO (IOC)
Fisheries UN Food and Agriculture Organization; Regional 
Fisheries Management Organizations
Cetaceans International Whaling Commission
Environmental Protection UN Regional Seas Programs142 H. Harden-Davies
that seabed mining activities could damage the marine environment, including 
through the impact of sediment plumes in the water column, and persisting ques￾tions relating to how benefits are shared and with whom (Jaeckel, 2020; Levin 
et al., 2020a). Overfishing in the high seas and the use of destructive fishing prac￾tices has caused declines in the diversity and abundance of marine species (Dunn 
et al., 2018). Transparency issues remain a concern in high-seas fishing and supply 
chains, heightened by growing interest in developing new fisheries in the deep 
ocean (Wright et al., 2020) and persisting problems of illegal, unreported, and 
unregulated fishing (Carmine et al., 2020).
This brief summary is intended to demonstrate that the governance of marine 
ABNJ has a long and complex history that is intricately linked to the role of the 
ocean in trade, colonial history, and conflict. UNCLOS was not envisioned to 
be static, nor to operate in isolation, but rather to provide a framework for im￾plementation. The balance between national and common interests in marine 
ABNJ remains a topic of discussion internationally and can be seen in several 
contemporary ocean law and policy developments, including a new BBNJ agree￾ment (Section 4).
Human Connections with Marine ABNJ
The high seas are often referred to as “out of sight, out of mind”. Some people 
might see the high seas from an airplane window, catching a glimpse of the seem￾ingly endless ocean, while others might experience the high seas from the deck of 
a ship or sailboat. Far fewer will travel beneath the waves into the depths of the 
high seas. Yet despite the remote nature of the high seas, humans are connected 
to marine ABNJ in several ways. The following discussion offers illustrative ex￾amples of the various cultural, ecological, economic, social, and spiritual connec￾tions between humans and the high seas.
Ecological connections are based on the movements of oceans and oceanic 
species. Ocean currents act as great conveyor belts, moving nutrients and oxygen 
and distributing temperature around the planet. These currents help to regulate 
climate and sequester carbon, and they form the basis of complex webs of ocean 
life that underpin ecosystem resilience and services (Popova et al., 2019). Species 
of marine organisms move and migrate around the ocean, connecting the high 
seas with coastal areas and their human inhabitants. Several marine species that 
spend part of their life cycles in the high seas are important for human societies. 
An estimated 900 highly migratory species of fish, turtles, cetaceans, and seabirds 
are of cultural, social, spiritual, and/or economic significance to local commu￾nities and Indigenous Peoples (Mulalap et al., 2020; Vierros et al., 2020). Some 
species are important sources of revenue for local communities reliant on wildlife 
tourism (Spiteri et al., 2021).
Partly due to recognition of the high ecological importance of marine ABNJ, 
there are growing calls to increase protection for high seas ecosystems (Gjerde 
et al., 2016). Badman et al. (2016) identify illustrative examples of places of pos￾sible “Outstanding Universal Value” in marine ABNJ, such as: The Lost City Marine Areas beyond National Jurisdiction 143
Hydrothermal Field on the Mid-Atlantic Ridge, in which hydrothermal vents 800 
m below the surface rise up from the seabed to heights of 60 m; the Sargasso 
Sea in the western Atlantic, the only pelagic ecosystem bordered by floating al￾gae; and the Costa Rica Thermal Dome, a wind-driven upwelling system in the 
eastern tropical Pacific Ocean that supports high biological productivity as well 
as spawning, feeding, and migration of endangered and commercially valuable 
marine species.
There are also several cultural connections between humans and marine 
ABNJ. Cultural heritage can be considered tangible (e.g., objects, sunken vessels, 
human remains)6
 and/or intangible (e.g., customs, traditions, art).7
 Historical voy￾ages across the open ocean give the high seas a place in many human cultures, 
inspiring art, literature, and music. Some aspects of human cultural heritage are 
celebrated and kept alive through contemporary marine activities, such as off￾shore sailing and traditional navigation. Others are commemorated, as in me￾morializing the loss of life at sea. Recognizing and respecting the significance 
of such human connections with marine ABNJ is emerging as an issue within 
ocean governance. For example, the strong cultural connections of Pacific Island 
peoples to the open ocean ABNJ, anchored in ancestral voyaging history and 
passed down through traditional knowledge practices, have been highlighted at 
the United Nations in the context of developing the BBNJ agreement (Mulalap 
et al., 2020; Vierros et al., 2020).
Preserving cultural heritage through the protection of archaeologically and 
historically significant objects at sea, including in the Area, is part of the frame￾work established by UNCLOS for the protection and preservation of the marine 
environment and is of recognized importance for both present and future gener￾ations (UNCLOS Articles 303(1) and 149). One example is the shipwreck of the 
Titanic, which has been afforded protections as a site of underwater cultural her￾itage. Yet, there are gaps. For example, a proposal has been made by Turner et al. 
(2020) to memorialize the victims of the slave trade across the Atlantic “Middle 
Passage” and to ensure that activities, such as seabed mining, are sensitive to the 
historic and contemporary cultural significance of this area as the final resting 
place of approximately 1.8 million victims of slavery (Turner et al., 2020). They 
propose such measures as memorial ribbons on UN maps of the region, to show 
respect and recognize cultural significance. Improving protection for intangible 
and tangible aspects of cultural heritage, as well as preserving natural ecosystems 
in marine ABNJ, is an area for further work (Badman et al., 2016).
In addition to the cultural, ecological, spiritual, and social connections illus￾trated above, there are also economic connections through the exploitation of 
living resources (such as fisheries) and non-living ones (such as minerals). Al￾though ocean ABNJ are, in principle, open to all, in practice just a few powerful 
actors have the capacity to access ABNJ and exploit the resources. Few States 
have the scientific capacity to access the high seas or utilize marine genetic re￾sources for such activities as developing or commercializing new biotechnologies 
or pharmaceutical products (Rabone et al., 2019; Rogers et al., 2021). Similar con￾cerns surround the equitability of benefit-sharing from seabed mining (Jaeckel, 144 H. Harden-Davies
2020). Furthermore, there are questions pertaining to who benefits from high seas 
fishing, partly because it is heavily reliant on subsidies, and also because high seas 
primarily supply high-end markets (Carmine et al., 2020), rather than meet basic 
nutritional needs of coastal communities or contribute to global food security 
(Schiller et al., 2018). Worse, there are serious concerns of human rights abuses at 
sea, including human trafficking and slavery aboard fishing vessels (Tickler et al., 
2018). In-depth examination of these issues is beyond the scope of this chapter.
Given that inequitable exploitation of marine resources exacerbates inequal￾ities through either the absence of benefits flowing to marginalized groups, or 
unfair shouldering of the burdens of resource use (Spiteri et al., 2021), the equita￾ble sharing of benefits from the high seas is a topic of growing importance. The 
complex interconnections between marine ABNJ and the lives, livelihoods, and 
wellbeing of humans, especially ocean-dependent communities and marginalized 
groups, is an area in need of further research.
A New Treaty for Biodiversity beyond National Jurisdiction
The development of a new international, legally binding instrument for the conser￾vation and sustainable use of marine biodiversity of ABNJ under UNCLOS (BBNJ 
agreement) has emerged within the international community as a response to the 
challenges facing the high seas. While the BBNJ agreement is not the only way to ad￾dress these challenges, it is widely expected to fill gaps in the governance framework 
for marine ABNJ and strengthen the implementation of UNCLOS – particularly in 
relation to the protection and preservation of the marine environment in marine 
ABNJ, as well as capacity building, and technology transfer. According to The Pre￾amble of President’s draft text of the BBNJ agreement (UN, 2019), States:
• Recognize the “need for the comprehensive global regime to better address 
the conservation and sustainable use of BBNJ”.
• Desire to promote sustainable development.
• Desire to act as stewards of the ocean in ABNJ on behalf of present and 
future generations.
The development of the BBNJ agreement has taken almost two decades thus far 
and is still in progress at the time of writing (which was February 2021). The long 
timeframe reflects the complexity and challenges posed by these international nego￾tiations (Humphries & Harden-Davies, 2020; Tiller et al., 2019; Vadrot et al., 2022). 
The following sections briefly summarize the historical development of the BBNJ 
agreement before introducing the key issues that the negotiations are addressing.
Brief History of BBNJ Process
In 2004 the United Nations General Assembly (UNGA) established the Ad Hoc 
Open-ended Informal Working Group to study issues related to the conserva￾tion and sustainable use of marine biological diversity beyond areas of national Marine Areas beyond National Jurisdiction 145
jurisdiction (“BBNJ Working Group”). Nine meetings of the BBNJ Working 
Group were held between 2006 and 2015, with additional intersessional work￾shops. Early discussions focused on identifying gaps in the international ocean 
governance framework, including marine genetic resources, marine protected ar￾eas, governance principles such as the ecosystem and precautionary approach, 
and weaknesses in cooperation and coordination between existing international 
organizations and frameworks (Wright et al., 2018). The 2011 meeting was a 
breakthrough. A compromise position was reached, which subsequently led to the 
establishment of an intergovernmental negotiating process for a “Package Deal” 
of elements to address the conservation and sustainable use of marine biodiversity 
in ABNJ, “in particular, together and as a whole”:
• Marine genetic resources, including questions on the sharing of benefits
• Area-based management tools, including marine protected areas
• Environmental impact assessments
• Capacity building and the transfer of marine technology
Momentum to establish a negotiation process for a new treaty began to build dur￾ing the meetings and intersessional workshops of 2013 and 2014.
In 2015, the Working Group recommended the establishment of a Preparatory 
Committee (PrepCom) to negotiate an international legally binding instrument. 
Reaching this decision required overcoming obstacles, such as disagreement on 
the mandate of the PrepCom and opposition to a legally binding instrument 
(Wright et al., 2018). The UNGA adopted Resolution 69/2928
 establishing the 
Preparatory Committee (PrepCom) that held four sessions in 2016 and 2017. The 
outcome of these sessions was substantive recommendations on the elements of 
the Draft Text of a BBNJ agreement. In 2017 the UNGA adopted Resolution 
72/249 convening an intergovernmental conference “to elaborate the text of an 
[ILBI] on the conservation and sustainable use of marine biological diversity of 
[ABNJ], with a view to developing the instrument as soon as possible”.9
Three sessions of the intergovernmental conference were held in 2018 and 
2019,10 for formal negotiations to take place (Tiller et al., 2019). The fourth (and 
supposedly final) session of the intergovernmental conference was scheduled 
for March 2020 but was postponed to the earliest possible date to be decided 
by UNGA, due to the COVID-19 pandemic.11 At the time of writing, the final 
session was scheduled for 2022.12 Intersessional work occurred between the third 
and fourth sessions of the intergovernmental conference, which included online 
discussion fora where delegations exchanged views.
As the negotiations are taking place within the arena of the United Nations 
General Assembly, participation is open to all Member States of the United Na￾tions, members of the specialized agencies, and parties to UNCLOS, in accord￾ance with UNGA Resolution 72/249. The highly technical nature of the issues 
involved in the negotiations is particularly challenging for smaller delegations. 
State groupings are one of the ways that delegations who are like-minded on cer￾tain issues can work together. (Examples include the African Group, the Alliance 146 H. Harden-Davies
of Small Island States, and the Pacific Small Island Developing States.) Some 
observer organizations are also permitted to participate. The widespread interest 
in the BBNJ negotiations is illustrated by the emergence of publications on this 
topic from natural scientists, lawyers, international relations scholars, and politi￾cal scientists (Tessnow-von Wysocki & Vadrot, 2020).
Overview of the BBNJ Agreement
The BBNJ agreement covers four key elements in addition to some cross-cutting 
issues. The revised draft text of the agreement (UN, 2019) contains 70 draft ar￾ticles and two Annexes. The following discussion briefly introduces each of the 
elements in the BBNJ agreement and key issues in the negotiations.
Marine Genetic Resources, Including Questions on Benefit Sharing
Marine genetic resources have been one of the more contentious issues of the 
package of elements in the BBNJ agreement (Harden-Davies & Gjerde, 2019). 
Predicated on the understanding that the genetic libraries of marine organisms 
could be utilized in scientific research and development to yield new knowledge, 
products, and processes, concern over the equitable sharing of benefits from ma￾rine genetic resources of ABNJ has grown. Because few countries possess the sci￾entific and technological capacity to access the high seas and sample marine life, 
much of the debate has focused on increasing scientific and technological capac￾ity in developing nations, as well as accessing the outcomes of scientific research. 
Equally prominent in the debate have been questions of sharing in the outcomes 
of commercialization, such as financial revenues and other benefits known broadly 
as “monetary” benefits. Yet the debate has encountered challenges in defining 
marine genetic resources and the benefits to be derived, as well as the applicable 
principles and the mechanisms through which benefits might be shared. Against 
this backdrop, “marine genetic resources, including questions on the sharing of 
benefits” have been a difficult topic in the BBNJ negotiations.
The revised draft text of the BBNJ agreement (UN, 2019) addresses this issue 
in Part II. The objectives include contributing to conservation and sustainable 
use of biodiversity and promoting both scientific research and innovation, as well 
as capacity building and technology transfer. This Part includes draft provisions 
relating to scope of application, activities involving marine genetic resources, tra￾ditional knowledge, fair and equitable benefit sharing, intellectual property rights, 
and monitoring.
Area-Based Management Tools, Including Marine Protected Areas
Area-based management tools are important measures for the conservation and 
sustainable use of marine biodiversity. Processes already exist to establish sec￾toral measures, such as fisheries closures, sites of environmental interest in the 
international seabed Area, and Particularly Sensitive Sea Areas in the context 
of shipping. Yet at present there is no mechanism to establish marine protected Marine Areas beyond National Jurisdiction 147
areas in the high seas. The revised draft text of the BBNJ agreement (UN, 2019) 
addresses this issue in Part III. The objectives broadly include enhancing coopera￾tion and coordination in the use of area-based management tools and establishing 
a comprehensive system of area-based management tools, including marine pro￾tected areas, among others. This Part currently includes draft provisions relating 
to international cooperation and coordination, identification of areas requiring 
protection, procedural aspects of proposals for the establishment of area-based 
management tools, consultation on and assessment of proposals, decision- making, 
implementation, and monitoring and review.
Environmental Impact Assessments
Although UNCLOS (Article 206) establishes an obligation for States to assess 
the effects of activities that may cause significant and harmful changes to the ma￾rine environment, the implementation of this obligation faces challenges. Gaps 
include absences of coherent principles and approaches to undertake such assess￾ments, mechanisms to consider cumulative impacts, and frameworks to monitor 
compliance. In the revised draft text of the BBNJ agreement (UN, 2019) this 
issue is addressed in Part IV and includes draft provisions relating to the obliga￾tion to conduct environmental impact assessments: the relationship with other 
relevant legal instruments, frameworks and bodies; thresholds and criteria for 
environmental impact assessments; cumulative impacts; transboundary impacts; 
areas identified as ecologically or biologically significant or vulnerable; strategic 
environmental assessments; lists of activities requiring (or not requiring) environ￾mental impact assessments; screening of activities; the scope of environmental 
impact assessments; the assessment and evaluation of environmental impacts; 
the mitigation, prevention, and management of potential adverse effects; public 
notification and consultation; preparation and content of environmental impact 
assessment reports; publication, consideration, and review of assessment reports; 
and decision-making, monitoring, reporting, and review.
Capacity Building and Technology Transfer
Capacity building and the transfer of marine technology are important to ensure 
that all States are able to fully participate in the implementation of the BBNJ 
agreement – to realize their rights, as well as fulfill their responsibilities under the 
agreement (Vierros & Harden-Davies, 2020). This could include scientific capac￾ity to investigate and monitor BBNJ, to benefit from marine genetic resources, to 
designate area-based management tools, or to undertake environmental impact 
assessments. The concept also extends to technologies to monitor the human 
activities in marine ABNJ, including the monitoring, control, and surveillance 
of marine protected areas. It could also encompass legal capacity for developing 
national policy, as well as legal and regulatory frameworks for the implementation 
of the BBNJ agreement. Part V of the revised draft text of the BBNJ agreement 
(UN, 2019) addresses this issue and includes provisions related to cooperation, 
modalities, types of capacity building, monitoring, and review.148 H. Harden-Davies
Conclusion
This chapter provides a general introduction to marine ABNJ and outlines the 
key issues involved in international negotiations for marine biodiversity. While 
impossible to examine in detail the governance of specific resources, such as fish￾eries or mineral resources in marine ABNJ (a helpful introduction to these topics 
can be found in Wright et al., 2018), it has sought to highlight that humans are 
connected to marine ABNJ in several ways. Marine ABNJ include biologically di￾verse ecosystems that are important for humanity as sources of services, resources, 
knowledge, and cultural heritage. The limitations of the existing governance 
framework to address the interconnected nature of marine ABNJ and to conserve 
and sustainably use marine biodiversity have prompted the UN to develop a new 
treaty, the BBNJ agreement.
The development of the BBNJ agreement is the latest in a long succession of 
international deliberations concerning marine ABNJ and the balance between 
rights and responsibilities of States in the global ocean. The establishment of 
UNCLOS spanned almost three decades and was partially influenced by one 
principle that had existed for hundreds of years (the freedom of the high seas) 
and one that emerged in the mid-1960s (the common heritage of mankind). The 
historical context behind these principles is an important foundation to under￾stand their role in ocean governance and why, for example, the idea of com￾mon heritage is considered applicable to the exploration of mineral resources 
of marine ABNJ, but not to other resources, such as fisheries. That UNCLOS 
did not enter into force until the adoption of the 1994 Implementing Agree￾ment is illustrative of the pivotal role of marine ABNJ in international ocean 
governance. Yet even now, questions of equity and fairness persist regarding the 
benefits and burdens of marine ABNJ. Although all States, in principle, have 
the right to access and use the resources of ABNJ, in practice, not all States have 
the capacity to do so.
This chapter suggests that several perspectives are useful to fully understand 
the governance of marine ABNJ, including the physical and ecological charac￾teristics of ocean ecosystems; the geopolitical, economic, and philosophical issues 
that influence international law and policy over time; and the cultural and soci￾ological factors that shape human connections with the ocean. A rich literature 
already exists on marine ABNJ, yet much remains to be explored in a variety 
of research disciplines in ocean studies. Areas that would benefit from further 
interdisciplinary research include social and cultural values of marine ABNJ; 
intangible and tangible aspects of cultural heritage in ABNJ; balancing rights 
and responsibilities in marine ABNJ; and voice and representation in decision￾making, including the interests of current and future generations.
Questions for Reflection
 1. In what ways are humans connected with marine areas beyond national Marine Areas beyond National Jurisdiction 149
 2. What are the challenges facing marine areas beyond national jurisdiction?
 3. How might a new international legal instrument address the challenges 
 4. To what extent are the benefits from marine areas beyond national jurisdic
 5. What is the relationship between the future BBNJ international agreement 
 6. What is the applicability to the ABNJ of the legal regimes of “freedom of the 
Notes
 1 
 2 
 3 
 4 UNCLOS Article 87.
 5 UNCLOS Articles 116–119, 192.
 6 See 1972 World Heritage Convention, and 2001 UNESCO Convention. Underwater 
 7 See, for example, the 2003 UNESCO Convention for the Safeguarding of the Intan
 8 UNGA Resolution 69/292 of 19 June 2015 on Development of an international legally 
 9 UNGA Resolution 72/249, International legally binding instrument under the United 
 10 The first session was convened from 4 to 17 September 2018; the second session, from 
 11 United Nations General Assembly Decision A/74/L.41 Draft Decision Submitted by 
 12 The official source of information on the intergovernmental conference is https://150 H. Harden-Davies
References
Ardron, J. A., Rayfuse, R., Gjerde, K., & Warner, R. (2014). The sustainable use and con￾servation of biodiversity in ABNJ: What can be achieved using existing international 
agreements? Marine Policy, 49, 98–108. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpol.2014.02.011
Badman, T., Douvere, F., Freestone, D., & Laffoley, D. (2016). World heritage in the high 
seas: An idea whose time has come. UNESCO.
Bell, J. D., Senina, I., Adams, T., Aumont, O., Calmettes, B., Clark, S., Dessert, M, G ehlen, 
M., Gorgues, T., Hampton, J., Hanich, Q., Harden-Davies, H., Hare, S. R., Holmes, 
G., Lehodey, P., Lengaigne, M., Mansfield, W., Menkes, C., Nicol, S. … Williams, P. 
(2021). Pathways to sustaining tuna-dependent Pacific Island economies during climate 
change. Nature Sustainability, 4(10), 900–910. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41893-021-00745-z
Berkman, P. A. (2010). Biodiversity stewardship in international spaces. Systematics & 
Biodiversity, 8(3), 311–320. https://doi.org/10.1080/14772000.2010.512623
Blasiak, R., Wynberg, R., Grorud-Colvert, K., Thambisetty, S., Bandarra, N. M., Canário, 
A. V. M., da Silva, J., Duarte, C. M., Jaspers, M., Rogers, A., Sink. K., & Wabnitz, C. 
C. (2020). The ocean genome and future prospects for conservation and equity. Nature 
Sustainability, 3(8), 588–596. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41893-020-0522-9
Carmine, G., Mayorga, J., Miller, N. A., Park, J., Halpin, P. N., Ortuño Crespo, G., Österb￾lom, H., Sala, E., & Jacquet, J. (2020). Who is the high seas fishing industry? One Earth, 
3(6), 730–738. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.oneear.2020.11.017
Cisneros-Montemayor, A. M., Moreno-Báez, M., Reygondeau, G., Cheung, W. W., Cros￾man, K. M., González-Espinosa, P. C., Lam, V. W., Oyinlola, M. A., Singh, G. G., Swartz, 
W., & Zheng, C. W. (2021). Enabling conditions for an equitable and sustainable blue 
economy. Nature, 591(7850), 396–401. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-021-03327-3
Dunn, D. C., Jablonicky, C., Crespo, G. O., McCauley, D. J., Kroodsma, D. A., Boerder, K., 
Gjerde, K. M., & Halpin, P. N. (2018). Empowering high seas governance with satellite 
vessel tracking data. Fish and Fisheries, 19(4), 729–739. https://doi.org/10.1111/faf.12285
Freestone, D. (2009). Modern principles of high seas governance: The legal underpin￾nings. Environmental Policy and Law, 39(1), 44–49.
Gjerde, K. M., Clark, N. A., & Harden-Davies, H. R. (2019). Building a platform for the 
future: The relationship of the expected new agreement for marine biodiversity in areas 
beyond national jurisdiction and the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea. Ocean 
Yearbook Online, 33(1), 1–44. https://doi.org/10.1163/9789004395633_002
Gjerde, K. M., Reeve, L. L. N., Harden-Davies, H., Ardron, J., Dolan, R., Durussel, C., 
Earle, S., Jimenez, J. A., Kalas, P., Laffoley, D., Oral, N., Page, R., Ribeiro, M. C., 
 Rochette, J., Spadone, A., Thiele, T., Thomas, H. L., Wagner, D., Warner, R. M. … 
Wright, G. (2016). Protecting Earth’s last conservation frontier: Scientific, management 
and legal priorities for MPAs beyond national boundaries. Aquatic Conservation: Ma￾rine and Freshwater Ecosystems, 26, 45–60. https://doi.org/10.1002/aqc.2646
Haas, B., Haward, M., McGee, J., & Fleming, A. (2021). Regional fisheries management 
organizations and the new biodiversity agreement: Challenge or opportunity? Fish and 
Fisheries, 22(1), 226–231. https://doi.org/10.1111/faf.12511
Harden-Davies, H. R., & Gjerde, K. M. (2019). Building scientific and technological 
capacity: A role for benefit-sharing in the conservation and sustainable use of m arine 
biodiversity beyond national jurisdiction. Ocean Yearbook Online, 33(1), 377–400. 
https://doi.org/10.1163/9789004395633_015
Hassanali, K. (2021). Internationalization of EIA in a new marine biodiversity agreement 
under the Law of the Sea Convention: A proposal for a tiered approach to review and Marine Areas beyond National Jurisdiction 151
decision-making. Environmental Impact Assessment Review, 87, 106554. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.eiar.2021.106554
Humphries, F., & Harden-Davies, H. (2020). Practical policy solutions for the final 
stage of BBNJ treaty negotiations. Marine Policy, 122, 104214. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
marpol.2020.104214
Jaeckel, A. (2020). Benefitting from the common heritage of humankind: From expec￾tation to reality. The International Journal of Marine and Coastal Law, 35(4), 660–681. 
https://doi.org/10.1163/15718085-BJA10032
Levin, L. A., Amon, D. J., & Lily, H. (2020a). Challenges to the sustainability of 
deep-seabed mining. Nature Sustainability, 3(10), 784–794. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41893-020-0558-x
Levin, L. A., & Le Bris, N. (2015). The deep ocean under climate change. Science, 
350(6262), 766–768. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aad0126
Levin, L. A., Wei, C. L., Dunn, D. C., Amon, D. J., Ashford, O. S., Cheung, W. W., 
Colaço, A., Dominguez-Carrió, C., Escobar, E. G., Harden-Davies, H. R., Drazen, J. C., 
Ismail, K., Jones, D. O., Johnson, D. E., Le, J. T., Lejzerowicz, F., Mitarai, S., Morato, T., 
Mulsow, S. … Yasuhara, M. (2020b). Climate change considerations are fundamental to 
management of deep-sea resource extraction. Global Change Biology, 26(9), 4664–4678. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/gcb.15223
Mulalap, C. Y., Frere, T., Huffer, E., Hviding, E., Paul, K., Smith, A., & Vierros, M. K. 
(2020). Traditional knowledge and the BBNJ instrument. Marine Policy, 122, 104103. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpol.2020.104103
Österblom, H., Wabnitz, C. C., Tladi, D., Allison, E., Arnaud-Haond, S., Bebbington, J., 
Bennett, N., Blasiak, R., Boonstra, W. J., Choudhury, A., Cisneros-Montemayor, A. M., 
Daw, T., Fabinyi, M., Franz, N., Harden-Davies, H., Kleiber, D. L., Lopes, P., McDougall, 
C., Resosudarmo, B. P., & Selim, S. A. (2020). Towards ocean equity. World Resources 
Institute. https://www.oceanpanel.org/blue-papers/towards-ocean-equity.
Popova, E., Vousden, D., Sauer, W. H. H., Mohammed, E. Y., Allain, V., Downey-Breedt, 
N., Fletcher, R., Gjerde, K. M., Halpin, P. N., Kelly, S., Obura, D., Pecl, G., Roberts, M., 
Raitsos, D. E., Rogers, A., Samoilys, M., Sumaila, U. R., Tracey, S., & Yool, A. (2019). 
Ecological connectivity between the areas beyond national jurisdiction and coastal 
waters: Safeguarding interests of coastal communities in developing countries. Marine 
Policy, 104, 90–102. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpol.2019.02.050
Rabone, M., Horton, T., Harden-Davies, H., Zajderman, S., Appeltans, W., Droege, G., 
Brandt, A., Pardo-Lopez, L., Dahlgren, T. G., Glover, A. G., & Horton, T. (2019). Ac￾cess to marine genetic resources (MGR): Raising awareness of best practice through a 
new agreement for biodiversity beyond national jurisdiction (BBNJ). Frontiers in Marine 
Science, 6, 520. https://doi.org/10.3389/fmars.2019.00520
Ramirez-Llodra, E., Brandt, A., Danovaro, R., De Mol, B., Escobar, E., German, C. R., 
Levin, L. A., Martinez Arbizu, P., Menot, L., Buhl-Mortensen, P., Narayanaswamy, B. 
E., Smith, C. R., Tittensor, D. P., Tyler, P. A., Vanreusel, A., & Vecchione, M. (2010). 
Deep, diverse and definitely different: Unique attributes of the world’s largest ecosystem. 
Biogeosciences, 7(9), 2851–2899. https://doi.org/10.5194/bg-7-2851-2010
Ramirez-Llodra, E., Tyler, P. A., Baker, M. C., Bergstad, O. A., Clark, M. R., Escobar, E., 
Levin, L. A., Menot, L., Rowden, A. A., Smith, C. R., & Van Dover, C. L. (2011). Man 
and the last great wilderness: Human impact on the deep sea. PLoS ONE, 6(8), e22588. 
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0022588
Rogers, A., Sumaila, U., Hussain, S., & Baulcomb, C. (2014). The high seas and us: Under￾standing the value of high seas ecosystems. Global Ocean Commission.152 H. Harden-Davies
Rogers, A. D., Baco, A., Escobar-Briones, E., Currie, D., Gjerde, K., Gobin, J., Jaspars, M., 
Levin, L., Linse, K., Rabone, M., Ramirez-Llodra, E., Sellanes, J., Shank, T. M., Sink, K., 
Snelgrove, P. V., Taylor, M. L., Wagner, D., & Harden-Davies, H. (2021). Marine genetic 
resources in areas beyond national jurisdiction: Promoting marine scientific research 
and enabling equitable benefit sharing. Frontiers in Marine Science, 8, 844. https://doi.
org/10.3389/fmars.2021.667274
Schiller, L., Bailey, M., Jacquet, J., & Sala, E. (2018). High seas fisheries play a negligi￾ble role in addressing global food security. Science Advances, 4(8), eaat8351. https://doi.
org/10.1126/sciadv.aat8351
Spiteri C., Senechal, T., Hazin, C., Hampton, S., Greyling, L., & Boteler, B. (2021). Study 
on the socio-economic importance of areas beyond national jurisdiction in the Southeast 
Atlantic Region. STRONG High Seas Project. https://publications.iass-potsdam.de/rest/
items/item_6001046_4/component/file_6001047/content
Tessnow-von Wysocki, I., & Vadrot, A. B. (2020). The voice of science on marine biodi￾versity negotiations: A systematic literature review. Frontiers in Marine Science, 7(1044), 
614282. https://doi.org/10.3389/fmars.2020.614282
Tickler, D., Meeuwig, J. J., Bryant, K., David, F., Forrest, J. A., Gordon, E., Larsen, J. J., Oh, 
B., Pauly, D., Sumaila, U. R., & Zeller, D. (2018). Modern slavery and the race to fish. 
Nature Communications, 9(1), 4643. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-07118-9
Tiller, R., De Santo, E., Mendenhall, E., & Nyman, E. (2019). The once and future treaty: 
Towards a new regime for biodiversity in areas beyond national jurisdiction. Marine 
Policy, 99, 239–242. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpol.2018.10.046
Treves, T. (2015a). Historical development of the law of the sea. In D. R. Rothwell, A. G. 
Oude Elferink, K. N. Scott, & T. Stephens (Eds.), The oxford handbook of the law of the 
sea (pp. 1–24). Oxford University Press.
Treves, T. (2015b). Law and science in the jurisprudence of the International Tribunal for 
the Law of the Sea. In H. N. Scheiber, J. Kraska, & M-S. Kwon (Eds.), Science, technol￾ogy, and new challenges to ocean law: A law of the sea institute publication (pp. 13–26). 
Brill/Nijhoff. https://doi.org/10.1163/9789004299610_003
Turner, P. J., Cannon, S., DeLand, S., Delgado, J. P., Eltis, D., Halpin, P. N., Kanu, M. I., 
Sussman, C. S., Varmer, O., & Van Dover, C. L. (2020). Memorializing the middle pas￾sage on the Atlantic seabed in areas beyond national jurisdiction. Marine Policy, 122, 
104254. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpol.2020.104254
United Nations. (1982, December 10). United Nations convention on the law of the sea. 
https://www.un.org/depts/los/convention_agreements/texts/unclos/unclos_e.pdf
United Nations. (2019, November 18). Revised draft text of an agreement under the United 
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea on the conservation and sustainable use of marine 
biological diversity of areas beyond national jurisdiction. Intergovernmental conference on an 
international legally binding instrument under the United Nations Convention on the Law of 
the Sea on the conservation and sustainable use of marine biological diversity of areas beyond 
national jurisdiction (fourth session, New York, 23 March – 3 April 2020) (UN doc A/
CONF.232/2020/3). UNGA. https://undocs.org/en/a/conf.232/2020/3
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development. (2019). Review of maritime 
transport (UNCTAD/RMT/2019/Corr.1). United Nations. https://unece.org/fileadmin/
DAM/cefact/cf_forums/2019_UK/PPT_L_L-UNCTAD-RMT.pdf
Vadrot, A. B. M., Langlet, A., & Tessnow-von Wysocki, I. (2022). Who owns marine 
biodiversity? Contesting the world order through the ‘common heritage of humankind’ 
principle. Environmental Politics, 31(2), 226–250. https://doi.org/10.1080/09644016.2021.
1911442Marine Areas beyond National Jurisdiction 153
Vierros, M. K., & Harden-Davies, H. (2020). Capacity building and technology transfer for 
improving governance of marine areas both beyond and within national jurisdiction. 
Marine Policy, 122, 104158. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpol.2020.104158
Vierros, M. K., Harrison, A. L., Sloat, M. R., Crespo, G. O., Moore, J. W., Dunn, D. 
C., Ota, Y., Cisneros-Montemayor, A. M., Shillinger, G. L., Watson, T. K., & Govan, 
H. (2020). Considering indigenous peoples and local communities in governance 
of the global ocean commons. Marine Policy, 119, 104039. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
marpol.2020.104039
Warner, R. M. (2014). Conserving marine biodiversity in the global marine commons: 
Co-evolution and interaction with the Law of the Sea. Frontiers in Marine Science, 1. 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fmars.2014.00006
Wright, G., Gjerde, K., Finkelstein, A., & Currie, D. (2020). Fishing in the twilight zone: 
Illuminating governance challenges at the next fisheries frontier. Institute for Sustainable 
Development and International Relations (IDDRI).
Wright, G., Rochette, J., Gjerde, K. M., & Seeger, I. (2018). The long and winding road: 
Negotiating a treaty for the conservation and sustainable use of marine biodiversity in areas 
beyond national jurisdiction. Institute for Sustainable Development and International 
Relations (IDDRI).DOI: 10.4324/9781003058151-12
Part III
Approaches to the Grand 
Challenges
Part III includes examples of applied approaches to addressing the “Grand Challenges” 
described in Part II. These approaches are interdisciplinary and showcase professional 
pathways for the next generation of marine studies professionals.10 Ocean Governance
Definitions, Framework, and 
Implementation
I. Scott and A. K. Spalding
Introduction
In July 2020, Ecuador raised public concerns about an enormous fleet of foreign 
fishing vessels gathered in international waters close to the Galapagos Islands, a 
region prized for its rich biodiversity and significant population of threatened spe￾cies, including sharks and manta rays (Solano & Torchia, 2020). Just a few miles 
away, the islands and waters around the Galapagos Islands have been deemed a 
UNESCO World Heritage Site, which means they are subject to special protec￾tion and conservation, as agreed to by hundreds of countries. Yet, according to 
the governor of the Galapagos Archipelago, overfishing in the area bordering 
protected waters has led to decreasing populations of vulnerable species year upon 
year. What can be done about the species that cross this invisible border into un￾protected waters, or the impact to protected stocks from illegal fishing?
Meanwhile, also in 2020, in a region of Northern Siberia, an oil tank owned by 
a Russian mining company spilled over 150,000 barrels of oil into a lake near the 
Arctic Ocean (Kramer, 2020). The oil tank was damaged by melting permafrost, 
caused by the steadily warming climate in the far north, where rates of warming 
are estimated to be up to three times the global average (Khurshudyan & Freed￾man, 2020). Observers have suggested that oil has made its way into a river that 
flows into the Arctic, though the company that owns the oil tank has denied such 
accounts (Osborn & Balmforth, 2020). The Arctic is uniquely vulnerable to im￾pacts from oil spills, as little is known about the ecosystem in general, and many 
countries, including the United States, have only limited infrastructure available 
in the region to respond to an oil spill in a timely fashion (Nunez, 2014). Can the 
Arctic Ocean be protected in the face of these rapid changing conditions?
These real-life events illustrate some key concepts that we discuss in this chap￾ter and the importance of studying ocean governance. The ocean operates in 
multiple dimensions, many of which often require international cooperation. 
The ocean, its resources, and the human communities that depend on it are also 
facing unprecedented threats from global climate change and unsustainable fish￾ing practices, both of which span international boundaries, in addition to other 
growing demands on ocean spaces and resources such as offshore aquaculture, 
marine renewable energy, deep sea mining, and oil and gas development. The 
DOI: 10.4324/9781003058151-13158 I. Scott and A. K. Spalding
extent and nature of the ocean suggests that rules of use designed for terres￾trial areas may not necessarily apply. As with other so-called “wicked problems”,1
ocean governance is challenging in part because of the scale of the ocean and 
its related economic and social systems, the difficulty of finding an effective solu￾tion to governance issues, and the interconnected and simultaneous nature of 
problems impacting the ocean such as climate change, poverty, and development 
(Head & Alford, 2013).
In this context, key elements of ocean governance we will discuss in this 
chapter include legal frameworks, approaches to the implementation of these 
frameworks, and related actors and institutions. While an in-depth socio-cultural 
perspective on the relationships between people and the ocean is beyond the 
scope of this chapter, we feel it is important to emphasize that current systems 
of ocean governance are inextricably linked to culture, society, economics, and 
politics. With more than one-third of the world’s population residing within 100 
kilometers from the coast, and often depending on coastal resources for survival, 
it is critical to keep this in mind as you read the rest of this chapter.
So far, we have explained why creating a system of rules and regulations 
around the relationships between people and the ocean is important, and we 
have hinted at the interacting social and environmental factors that influence 
this system. In the remaining sections we provide a definition of the terms used 
in this chapter, differentiating between policy, management, law, and governance, 
with an emphasis on legal frameworks and governance processes. We introduce 
the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) and other key 
principles of international law, which represent the primary legal framework for 
global ocean governance. And we discuss the governance approaches, processes, 
and institutions that exist to implement UNCLOS and associated policies at the 
international and national levels. The chapter ends with insights to the types of 
professional pathways you may want to pursue in order to develop a future career 
in ocean governance.
Defining the Field: Policy, Management, Law, and Governance 
of the Ocean
Before diving into the legal framework for ocean governance and the approaches 
and actors involved in its implementation, we point out some key differences be￾tween the terms policy, management, law, and governance, which are often used 
interchangeably to refer to the set of rules and regulations that determine the 
use and distribution of, and access to, ocean resources and spaces. In an applied 
context, understanding the differences between these terms is crucial to their ef￾fective design and implementation, and may also guide you toward appropriate 
training and practical experiences that might facilitate a future career in ocean 
governance.
We define domestic or national policy as the set of guiding principles that outline 
the intentions of a national or regional government, or similar organization, to￾ward a given issue. Policy may also include the set of rules that determine how Ocean Governance: Definitions, Framework, and Implementation 159
organizations (public or private) are run, with the intention of structuring behav￾iors, internal actions, and interactions beyond the organization. In a government 
setting, it is usually referred to as public policy, which includes statutes, laws, reg￾ulations, executive decisions, and government programs. Policy can, therefore, be 
understood as the blueprint for action that informs and guides behavior, as it relates 
to an institution’s approach to an issue. Zacharias (2014) further describes policy 
as the “motivation behind the law” or a way to set “strategic direction, intent, and 
objectives to address problems that are often complex and controversial” (p. 90).
Resource management extends policies into the realm of implementation and 
action. In a government setting, management decisions are often made at high 
administrative levels, ideally through processes of public consultation and careful 
consideration of scientific input, while implementation and enforcement on the 
ground is led by technical staff and authorized enforcement officers. Management 
is often perceived to be guided mostly by the natural and physical sciences. How￾ever, in the sense that it is informed by public policies that should themselves be 
informed by the public interest, resource management is increasingly recognized 
as a process that is, instead, guided by human needs and perceptions and driven 
by cultural and political processes (Levine et al., 2015). In other words, manage￾ment actions are informed by science, influenced by policies and politics, enforced 
through laws, and typically represent a critical piece of the broader governance 
system.
Laws are similar to policies, especially in the international context, because 
they represent government intentions for how to address an issue. Laws, however, 
are generally more specific in that they describe rules for behavior that can be reg￾ulated and enforced by officials, who also have the authority to establish and issue 
fines and punishments for violations. Legal systems also typically establish proce￾dures for settling disputes between stakeholders, who may include public entities, 
private entities (nongovernmental organizations or businesses), and individual 
citizens. Depending on the legal and political system of a country, power may 
be divided among different branches of government with regard to the creation, 
execution, and interpretation of law, and authority for creating and enforcing laws 
may rest more or less with a central (versus regional or local) government. In the 
United States, for example, the central (federal) government shares power with 
state governments, each of which can separately pass laws within their areas of 
authority. In China, on the other hand, only the central government is authorized 
to make laws, while local or regional governments may only create administrative 
rules or regulations (Zhang, 2014). In the context of the ocean, the law to be 
applied in any given situation may include national law (the law of an individual 
nation, applied to matters over which it has jurisdiction) or a mix of national and 
international law (which we discuss in more detail below).
Lastly, as understood by political scientists, governance is often closely linked to 
governments and what they do (Kjær, 2004). Ocean governance can be broadly 
defined as the collection of policies and associated norms and institutional ar￾rangements, management actions, and laws linked to the global ocean (Miles, 
1999). However, it is important to keep in mind that governance is NOT limited 160 I. Scott and A. K. Spalding
to the government! Indeed, while governance outcomes are often determined 
by the actions and behaviors of those in power, which we often perceive to be 
the government, we must also keep in mind that governments are influenced by 
the economy, constituent needs and interests, international relations, and the 
best available science. Beyond the purview of governments, governance actions 
and outcomes can also be moderated by market-based approaches, self-regulation, 
moral imperatives, culture and tradition, and other influences around a given 
issue (Spalding & deYcaza 2020).
The Law of the Sea
Sovereign nations or countries use the ocean for a variety of purposes, including 
travel, food harvest, religious and cultural traditions, recreation, and shipping. 
Due to connectivity in the ocean, what happens in one corner of the ocean im￾pacts waters thousands of miles away. Plastics and waste move across national 
borders, as do fish, whales, and free-floating plants. Minerals and other resources 
in and below the sea floor cannot be extracted by everyone yet may be outside ter￾ritorial boundaries that would define national ownership. The cultural tradition 
of one nation, such as whaling, may violate the laws or moral tradition of another. 
Awareness of these potential conflicts made it essential for sovereign nations to 
find a way to create common expectations for how they use, share, and ensure 
access to the ocean and ocean resources. Importantly, by definition, sovereign na￾tions are not subject to the control of another nation. Although there are bodies 
that adjudicate disputes under international agreements, like the International 
Court of Justice, there is no higher authority, court, or police that can enforce
those decisions. Ultimately, ocean governance relies heavily on voluntary coop￾eration and compliance with international law.
Sources of Law in the Sea
International law derives from three primary sources: conventions (treaties), cus￾toms, and generally accepted principles of law. These principles are applied by in￾ternational tribunals, and may also form the basis of informal dispute resolution 
or diplomatic negotiations between nations. Principles of international law also 
provide a foundation for agreements between private parties, including commer￾cial contracts.
Conventions are agreements among nations, while protocols are more specific 
agreements under the umbrella of a convention. They may be bilateral (between 
two parties) or multilateral (more than two parties). Conventions are entered 
into voluntarily, but they may include a mechanism for enforcement of the terms 
of the agreement. The International Court of Justice (ICJ), for example, is the 
United Nations’ (UN) tribunal for settling disputes among member nations and 
parties to UN conventions. Importantly, the ICJ only has authority to settle a dis￾pute if both parties to the dispute have consented to its jurisdiction (International 
Court of Justice, 2020).Ocean Governance: Definitions, Framework, and Implementation 161
The 1982 United Nations Law of the Sea Convention (UNCLOS) is the most 
important written agreement addressing the governance of the oceans. It is some￾times referred to as a “constitution for the oceans”. To be clear, UNCLOS was 
built on a number of preceding events and agreements (Sohn et al., 2010). In 1956, 
based on growing concerns over competing national claims for jurisdiction over a 
variety of oceanic resources, the first United Nations Conference on the Law of 
the Sea (UNCLOS I) was held in Geneva, Switzerland. That conference resulted 
in a series of conventions regarding the shared use of and rules for national juris￾diction over certain portions of the oceans. Subsequent conferences ( UNCLOS II 
and III) were held from 1958 until 1982, culminating in the 1982 agreement we 
now generally refer to as UNCLOS. While the United States ratified the 1958 
conventions and participated in the negotiations of the 1982 convention, it did 
not sign the convention and has not ratified it (Song, 2005).
Customary law derives from customs, practices, and norms established over time, 
particularly those practices that states have demonstrated, through prior actions 
and decisions that they believe have the force of law. Customary law may or may 
not be formally added to a nation’s official legal codes and may not exist in a single 
written form. A number of customary international legal principles known as the 
law of the sea existed prior to UNCLOS and formed the basis of many of the writ￾ten provisions of the convention. The core of this body of customary international 
law is the concept of the “freedom of the seas”, a doctrine dated to the 17th century 
that provides that all nations have the right to freely use the oceans – other than 
a limited strip of water adjacent to the shore, which might be claimed by a coastal 
nation – for transportation, fishing, and travel (United Nations, 2020).
Customary law is more difficult to determine and enforce than rules that derive 
from conventions. Under the freedom of the seas doctrine, the extent to which a 
country can claim jurisdiction over the ocean beyond its coastline could be dis￾puted. Historically, these so-called territorial waters were limited to the distance 
a cannonball could travel from land – approximately three miles (Baty, 1928) – 
but not all nations agreed to this limitation. Under UNCLOS, jurisdictional 
rights are separately and specifically defined for the territorial sea (12 nautical 
miles from the baseline), the contiguous zone (24 nautical miles from the base￾line, or 12 nautical miles from the territorial sea), and the Exclusive Economic 
Zone (EEZ) (200 nautical miles from the baseline); and nations exercise different 
rights within each zone (see next section for further description of these zones). 
While customary law may have evolved from unwritten norms and rules, it may 
also include specific codified principles. Most notably, key provisions of UNCLOS 
have become accepted as customary law, including by the United States. For this 
reason, though the United States has not ratified UNCLOS, it does accept as 
binding most of its provisions.2
The final source of international law is principles of law that are generally rec￾ognized and accepted by nations around the world (Grant, 2010). These principles 
of law include notions such as fairness and justice, or good faith – difficult con￾cepts to narrow down to a black-and-white rule – but which do inform the way 
that disputes are settled between parties.162 I. Scott and A. K. Spalding
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS)
UNCLOS is a broad, multilateral treaty that includes over 300 articles and nine 
annexes. Delving into the specifics of these hundreds of provisions is clearly 
beyond the scope of this chapter. Instead, we provide here a few of the key 
concepts of UNCLOS, in order to illustrate some of the general rules for ocean 
governance.
Central to UNCLOS are provisions determining who controls or has jurisdic￾tion over particular ocean space and the seabed, and what rights non- jurisdictional 
countries have to use or move across jurisdictional waters. As noted above, under 
the freedom of the seas rule, territorial waters – those waters over which the 
coastal country had jurisdiction and control – extended approximately three 
miles from shore. Under UNCLOS, these territorial waters extend for 12 nautical 
miles from the coastal baseline. The baseline is the “low-water line along the coast 
as marked on large-scale charts officially recognized by the coastal state” (UN￾CLOS, Art. 5). Within its territorial seas, a nation has the sovereign right over 
the water and the seabed and can enforce its national laws and control the use 
of resources. However, foreign vessels must be allowed “innocent passage”3
 across 
territorial waters.
A second key concept of UNCLOS is the Exclusive Economic Zone, or EEZ, 
which extends 200 nautical miles from a nation’s baseline (Tuerk, 2012). Within 
the EEZ, a nation has the exclusive right to use, exploit, and sustainably manage 
resources in the water and in the seabed and subsoil. A nation may further extend 
the right to exploit the resources of the seabed to the limit of the continental 
shelf, though not beyond 350 nautical miles. The determination of the limits of 
the continental shelf is neither simple nor uncontroversial; in the Arctic, over￾lapping claims to the continental shelf are an essential component of the bur￾geoning dispute in the region over rights to mineral and other seabed and subsoil 
resources.
Beyond the EEZ, the waters of the ocean are considered “high seas” and there￾fore not “owned” by any nation; these areas and resources are often considered a 
“global commons” or “common resources of mankind”. UNCLOS also provides 
that the seabed and subsoil beyond the jurisdiction of any nation – identified as 
“the Area” in UNCLOS – are the “common heritage of mankind” (UNCLOS, 
Art. 136). While this principle is not specifically defined, a variety of other provi￾sions of UNCLOS with regard to the Area suggest that resources in the Area are 
to be shared equitably and the needs of landlocked nations are to be considered 
(UNCLOS, Art. 140–145). In addition, the environment in the Area is to be 
preserved and protected (UNCLOS, Art. 145). In 2018, for the first time since its 
ratification, delegates initiated negotiations for a new legally binding instrument 
under UNCLOS for the conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity in areas 
beyond national jurisdiction (ABNJ).
UNCLOS has a number of other important provisions, including the right to fly 
aircraft over the high seas, special rules for determining baselines of archipelagic Ocean Governance: Definitions, Framework, and Implementation 163
states, and methods for dispute resolution. UNCLOS also addresses pollution and 
dumping, both from land-based sources and at sea, and creates special responsi￾bilities for signatories of the convention to work together for the preservation and 
conservation of marine resources.
Climate change poses a number of unique challenges to the operation and 
administration of UNCLOS. Perhaps the most straightforward is the impact of 
rising sea levels, which are increasing faster and higher than previously pre￾dicted, and threaten to inundate low-lying areas and render uninhabitable land 
now occupied by millions (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 2019; 
Kulp & Straus, 2019). Because the jurisdictional provisions of UNCLOS depend 
on the determination of a nation’s baseline, changes in low-water lines may re￾sult in a significant loss of jurisdictional territory for coastal nations (Telesetsky, 
2019). How shall we address the situation of a nation that is entirely submerged 
by rising seas? Can baselines be “fixed”, or must they accurately reflect changing 
coastlines?
While UNCLOS is the overarching mechanism in international legal gov￾ernance related specifically to the oceans, a variety of other agreements also play 
significant roles in setting expectations and objectives for the shared use of the 
oceans and related activities (see Table 10.1).
Table 10.1 International agreements for the shared use of the ocean and related 
activities
CBD Convention on Biological Diversity; framework to preserve, share, and 
sustain biodiversity.
UNFCCC United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change; 
created a framework for stabilizing greenhouse gas emissions to 
limit damaging climate change. 
MARPOL The International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from 
Ships; addresses prevention of pollution (accidental or purposeful) 
from ships.
UNEP Regional 
Seas
United Nations Environmental Program’s Regional Seas Program 
is a collection of regional agreements and action plans for 
conservation of marine and coastal environments. 
RFMOs Regional management organizations; international organization 
of nations with shared interest in regional management of fish 
stocks. Some focus on a specific stock, others look more broadly at 
the ecosystem. 
SIDS/AOSIS Small Island Developing States are a group within the United 
Nations of small and low-lying island nations facing unique 
environmental and economic risks; the Association of Small 
Island States is a member organization that pools resources and 
negotiates on behalf of members. 
Convention 
on Wetlands 
(Ramsar) 
Convention on Wetlands; creates a framework for the conservation 
and sustainable use of wetlands. 164 I. Scott and A. K. Spalding
Case Study: International Whaling
Few issues illustrate the challenges of international law better than the case 
of the commercial hunting of whales. The International Commission on 
Whaling (ICW), established as part of the International Convention for the 
Regulation of Whaling (ICRW), passed a moratorium on commercial whal￾ing in 1986 (Smith, 2014). Several members of the ICW formally objected 
to the moratorium, including Japan and Norway (Kobayashi, 2006). While 
it formally ceased commercial whaling, Japan continued to take whales for 
what it called “scientific research” in the Southern Ocean near Antarctica. 
In 2014, the International Court of Justice found Japan’s hunting did not 
qualify as research, and instead constituted a violation of the ICRW (Wold, 
2020). In 2018, Japan announced its intention to withdraw from the ICRW, 
and in 2019, it resumed commercial whaling in its EEZ. Although no longer 
a party to the ICRW, Japan is still a party to a number of international agree￾ments, including UNCLOS and CITES, which require it to manage whale 
populations for conservation, and restrict hunting of certain endangered spe￾cies of whales (Sand, 2008). Yet Japan appears to have no intention of com￾plying with these treaties, as it has not consulted with the ICW regarding 
its resumption of commercial whaling, prepared environmental assessments 
of the impact of its whaling program on threatened whale species, or shared 
information about its program with its international partners (Wold, 2020). 
Meanwhile, Norway, which has not left the IWC, resumed commercial 
whaling in 1993 based on its formal objection to the moratorium, and even 
increased its catch in 2020. However, Norway has received only muted criti￾cism of its whaling program, even while it exports some of its catch to Japan.
Implementing the Law of the Sea: Governance 
Approaches and Actors
Through UNCLOS, the international community successfully developed a set of 
rules and regulations about the use and management of the ocean, using both spa￾tial (e.g., jurisdiction) and functional (e.g., pollution and conservation) approaches. 
Over time, these approaches expanded to explicitly link ocean governance with 
the 2030 Global Sustainable Development Agenda. The implementation of those 
rules and regulations is shared by governance actors (or institutions of govern￾ance), including international agencies, individual countries, environmental non￾government organizations, and, to varying degrees, a broadly defined civil society.
Governance Approaches
Spatial Governance
The spatial governance approach refers to the establishment of the previously 
defined jurisdictional zones in ocean and coastal spaces. These zones essentially Ocean Governance: Definitions, Framework, and Implementation 165
determine what can and cannot be done by whom and where. For instance, 
internal waters, territorial seas, international straits, and archipelagic waters are 
considered areas under national sovereignty, or in other words, areas over which 
countries have rights and responsibilities similar to those on land. The contigu￾ous zone, EEZ, and continental shelf are considered to be areas under national 
 jurisdiction. This means that country actions are guided primarily by the ability to 
exercise rights over and to gain access to resources (e.g., fisheries management), as 
well as by a shared responsibility to collaborate with other countries over r esource 
management and conservation according to the parameters of international law 
(Spalding & deYcaza, 2020).
Functional Governance
Jurisdictional zones provide clarity on individual and shared rights and respon￾sibilities in space. However, these do not necessarily match up with ecologically 
defined zones (ecosystems, species ranges, etc.). Thus, in parallel to establishing 
jurisdictional zones, international law also created governance mechanisms to 
address issues that defy borders, such as fisheries management (which is crucial for 
species like tuna that move across jurisdictional lines), pollution, climate change, 
and conservation. This is what we call functional governance. Under the func￾tional governance approach, countries or groups of countries align over shared in￾terests. To do so, they must enter into negotiations to secure international treaties 
and agreements, including but not limited to UNCLOS (see Table 10.1).
Governance Related to the 2030 Sustainable Development Agenda
Toward the end of the first decade of the new millennium, international agencies 
increasingly identified ocean governance as a sustainable development concern.4
Indeed, in 2015, in the context of the United Nations 2030 Agenda for Sustain￾able Development and its 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), the ocean 
and related issues became a cross-cutting issue in development discussions such as 
poverty reduction and food security. Specifically, ocean-related actions and coali￾tions formed around SDG 14, which is designed to conserve and sustainably use 
the oceans, seas, and marine resources. Additionally, recent initiatives focused 
on a sustainable ocean future include the annual UN Ocean Conference and the 
Our Ocean Conference, both of which increasingly call for voluntary commit￾ments toward sustainable development in the ocean from governments, industry, 
and civil society.
The Blue Economy
Last, and certainly not least, we include the Blue Economy as an emerging, 
market-based governance approach. While not a traditional mechanism for gov￾ernance per se, the Blue Economy, defined here as an approach that promotes 
economic growth through investment in marine-based industries, and fosters sus￾tainable development, supports healthy marine ecosystems (Silver et al., 2015), 166 I. Scott and A. K. Spalding
has permeated government, industry, and some civil society attitudes and percep￾tions of the ocean. While driven primarily by private capital interests in the ocean 
(Campbell et al., 2016), the Blue Economy draws on the spatial approach to gov￾ernance by relying on clear property rights to marine space, expands on the func￾tional approach by incorporating new uses that cross jurisdictional boundaries, 
and – at least as originally defined by Silver et al. (2015) – is focused on sustain￾ability. In practice, this translates into the development of national-level policies 
that promote Blue Economy industries, such as aquaculture, marine renewable (or 
conventional) energy, transportation and logistics, and tourism, among others. 
Some of these policies rely on existing ocean governance approaches described 
previously, whereas others guide or influence market-based management of spaces 
and resources. Studies on the impacts of Blue Economy–inspired governance are 
relatively new and beg the question of whether and how equitable distribution of 
benefits for all ocean stakeholders can be maintained in the context of histori￾cally dominant economic sectors such as oil and gas.
Actors of Environmental Governance
A diversity of actors plays a crucial role in shaping and implementing ocean gov￾ernance. Here we describe the key international, national, intergovernmental, in￾dustry, and civil society actors engaged in ocean issues. Multi-party conventions, 
like UNCLOS, and other mechanisms used for functional ocean governance, 
such as bi- or multilateral agreements, directly involve the most traditional actors 
of ocean governance: international institutions and sovereign nations. However, 
other actors, such as environmental NGOs, philanthropies, Indigenous and other 
local coastal communities, academia, and industry, play key roles in generating 
information, building community around ocean issues, and representing a diver￾sity of stakeholders (Spalding & deYcaza, 2020).
The most recognized international institution for ocean governance is the 
United Nations System. Notably, the UN hosts UNCLOS and includes several 
other agencies, commissions, programs, and committees that oversee maritime 
concerns, oceanographic research, environment and development issues, and re￾gional organizations. Some well-known UN agencies include the United Nations 
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) and its Intergovern￾mental Oceanographic Commission (IOC), the UN Food and Agriculture Organ￾ization (FAO), and the International Maritime Organization (IMO), among others.
Nation states or countries, including sovereign Indigenous nations, also play an 
important role in ocean governance. First, they determine governance and man￾agement rules within their jurisdiction, putting into practice rules established by 
UNCLOS and other international agreements to which they subscribe. Nations 
also implement these international commitments, both within their own borders 
and through engagement with other members of the international community. 
And finally, they support mediation, communication, and engagement about 
ocean issues internally between national and local governments, as well as across 
different sectors of society.Ocean Governance: Definitions, Framework, and Implementation 167
Additional actors involved in ocean governance include organizations whose 
role in governance may not be specific to the design of rules and regulations, but 
are instead more focused on influencing policy, generating the scientific informa￾tion necessary to design those rules and regulations, or building the awareness 
and community around issues related to the ocean. These include intergovern￾mental organizations that are comprised of government and civil society organ￾izations (e.g., International Union for Conservation of Nature – IUCN), science 
for decision-making organizations (e.g., the International Council for the Explo￾ration of the Sea – ICES), and other thematic (e.g., Interamerican Tropical Tuna 
Commission – IATTC) or regional (e.g., European Commission of the European 
Union – EC of EU) organizations.
Finally, civil society and industry actors play a critical role in representing public 
and private interests. Ocean-related civil society actors typically include nongov￾ernmental organizations (NGOs) such as The Nature Conservancy and Conser￾vation International; philanthropies such as the Pew Charitable Trust and the 
Ocean Foundation; and Indigenous communities and other local communities. 
Civil society actors tend to focus on concerns related to site-specific sustainable 
development and livelihoods at both local and international scales and can some￾times also support coalition-building among diverse actors. In contrast, industry 
represents private business interests in activities such as energy production and 
transportation. These actors most often are concerned with access to resources 
and the generation of capital gains from the use and production of ocean resources.
In sum, these actors influence ocean governance by designing, implementing, 
and overseeing policies; developing science to influence policies; and representing 
public and private interests. Although each of the actors effectively has their own 
role, they also interact with each other in various national, regional, and interna￾tional fora, together comprising the ocean governance landscape of today.
Case Study: As the Ice Melts, What Becomes of the Arctic Ocean?
Climate change, increasing ocean temperatures, and resulting loss of sea 
ice are leading to a changing Arctic. Most visibly, the loss of sea ice means 
that key shipping routes through the Arctic, including the Northern Sea 
Route and Northwest Passage, are becoming available for more days dur￾ing the year, and new routes are emerging. Recent studies suggest that the 
Arctic may be entirely ice-free in September by 2050 (SIMIP Community, 
2020), suggesting that a new trans-Arctic passage cutting directly across the 
North Pole will likely become available in the near term (Bennett, 2019). 
Arctic routes will grow increasingly less expensive than other options, par￾ticularly as alternative routes such as the Suez or Panama Canal reach ca￾pacity (Khon et al., 2010). But, unless there is a large-scale commitment to 
decarbonizing shipping, they will also create more emissions and pollutants 168 I. Scott and A. K. Spalding
(Gallucci, 2018), including black carbon from the heavy fuel oil used to 
power ocean tankers, threatening delicate Arctic ecosystems (Cho, 2016).
Other changes are coming for the Arctic itself: As climate change raises 
the temperature of the ocean, fish species migrate northward, raising the 
possibility of new fisheries in the Arctic Ocean (Rayfuse, 2019). The de￾crease in ice cover will also make sections of the Arctic seabed available for 
oil, gas, and mineral exploitation (Willaert, 2020). But who controls these 
potential fisheries, should they develop? Who controls the Arctic seabed? 
And how do we limit pollution in this ecologically sensitive area?
Governance of the Arctic is enormously complex. Five nations (Canada, 
Denmark [via Greenland], Russia, Norway, and the United States) claim part 
of the Arctic Ocean as their territorial waters – some of which conflict. Can￾ada, for example, claims that portions of the Northwest Passage fall within its 
territorial waters, while the United States claims that these waters are “high 
seas” and not subject to Canadian control (Schlanger, 2019). Under UN￾CLOS, four of the Arctic coastal nations (not including the United States, 
which has not ratified UNCLOS) have formally claimed rights to develop 
and exploit the seabed to the limits of an extended continental shelf – again 
overlapping in some areas – also leading to conflict over who will control 
mining, and oil and gas extraction in those areas (Skaridov, 2020). Multi￾ple nongovernmental actors are also at work in the Arctic, including pri￾vate companies, such as multinational fossil fuel corporations, mining, and 
fishing companies (Nordea, 2017), and nonprofit conservation groups such 
as Oceana (Arctic NGO Forum, 2020). A group of Arctic nations, Arctic 
Indigenous people, and residents of the Arctic also participate in the Arctic 
Council, an intergovernmental forum that works to promote “cooperation, 
coordination, and interaction” among participants (Arctic Council, 2021).
Beyond jurisdictional claims, the non-jurisdictional areas of the Arctic 
Ocean also present challenges. As noted above, under UNCLOS, areas of 
the Arctic that are beyond the jurisdiction of any single state are part of the 
“common heritage of mankind” (UNCLOS, Art. 136–137) and states have 
a responsibility to carry out activities in those areas “for the benefit of man￾kind” (UNCLOS, Art. 140(1)). Moreover, Article 192 of UNCLOS provides 
that “States have the obligation to protect and preserve the marine environ￾ment”. Following a functional approach to governance, other international 
agreements, including the International Convention for the Prevention of 
Pollution from Ships (MARPOL), and more general agreements regarding 
environmental protection, such as the Convention on International Trade 
in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES), also apply to pro￾vide some protection to Arctic waters (Molenaar, 2007). Yet international 
law does not forbid fishing, deep sea mining, or oil and gas extraction in the 
Arctic, and does not provide a clear path to limiting developing fisheries, 
the use of heavy fuel oil, or resource extraction in sensitive ecological areas.Ocean Governance: Definitions, Framework, and Implementation 169
The world still has limited knowledge and understanding of the Arctic 
ecosystem, so application of the precautionary principle5
 and an ecosystems 
management6
 approach is essential to protecting the pristine waters of the 
Arctic (De Lucia, 2020). In a hopeful sign of early commitment to this 
approach, the five Arctic coastal nations plus four additional non-Arctic 
nations (China, Iceland, Japan, and Korea) and the European Union ne￾gotiated the Central Arctic Ocean Fisheries Agreement (CAOFA), which 
prevents unregulated fishing in the Central Arctic Ocean. The CAOFA, 
which entered into force in March 2019, also creates responsibility for par￾ties to work together to facilitate research and monitoring of potential new 
fisheries (Department of State, 2019). Another promising development 
which would affect the Arctic and other ocean and coastal issues is the 
draft Agreement under the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea 
on the Conservation and Sustainable Use of Marine Biological Diversity of Ar￾eas Beyond National Jurisdiction, better known as biodiversity beyond na￾tional jurisdiction (BBNJ). While the precise language of the BBNJ is still 
being negotiated, the goal of the agreement is for the parties to take on 
affirmative duties to build the resilience of the ecosystem and help protect 
it against the adverse effects of climate change (Craig, 2020).
Conclusion
As has been documented from the earliest human civilizations, societies organize 
around a set of rules, regulations, processes, and institutions, as well as agreed￾upon moral and ethical values. In turn, how these societies interact with the 
natural world is also based on a set of agreements about the use, distribution 
of, and access to nature and its resources. In the case of the ocean, it is our re￾lationship to these resources and spaces, as mediated by technology (e.g., boats, 
fishing gear, oil platforms, etc.) and nature itself, that has influenced those rules 
and regulations. We can think of the ocean as a socially constructed space that 
people use to transport and trade, as a resource base, or as a place of enjoyment 
and reflection. This way of thinking guided the approach to governing the ocean 
outlined in this chapter.
Here we have shown how humans simultaneously rely on ocean resources, 
contribute to their demise through unsustainable behaviors, and are tasked with 
developing ways to secure their long-term viability and health. UNCLOS repre￾sents a critical international legal tool that has informed and guided subsequent 
treaties and domestic regulations. Whether and how UNCLOS, and associated 
sources of and approaches to law in the sea, are able to keep up with the com￾plex issues facing our global ocean remains to be seen. It is clear, however, that 
elevating ocean concerns to the UN Sustainable Development platform is an im￾portant step in considering the ocean and its resources as a partner in addressing 
some of the grand environmental challenges of our time.170 I. Scott and A. K. Spalding
Professional Pathways
Students interested in a career in ocean governance can follow a variety of paths. 
Those who are interested in the scientific application of resource conservation 
and management may focus on studying marine biology, oceanography, or en￾gineering. Experts in these fields conduct research at universities and in private 
laboratories, studying topics ranging from the way pollution impacts marine 
organisms to the impacts of changing ocean currents on fisheries. They might 
work for governments developing management plans for protected ocean waters 
or study the best ways to protect endangered species, like whales and sharks, or 
fragile coral reefs. They may also work in industry, developing technology for 
shipping or fossil fuel extraction, or for NGOs or conservation groups.
For those interested in the law and policy side of governance, careers may in￾clude a variety of ways in which the human element of ocean governance is stud￾ied and managed. Policy analysts can come from a variety of disciplines, including 
economics, finance, psychology, political science, and law. They analyze, make 
recommendations, and develop ways to implement policies, and work for govern￾ments, NGOs, or businesses. Those interested in the law could pursue work in 
private firms advising clients on compliance with maritime law and regulations re￾lated to the ocean, or could advise governments on compliance with, or the crea￾tion and negotiation of new domestic laws and international conventions. Lawyers 
and policy experts may also work internationally for organizations like the United 
Nations, or in diplomatic positions as representatives of their home nation.
Questions for Reflection
 1. What makes ocean and coastal spaces unique? And why do they require this 
 2. What are the major sources of law in the sea?
 3. How do interactions between actors of environmental governance influence 
 4. Given what you know about the current state of the environment, is the 
 5. If you had the power to design a sustainable ocean governance regime, who 
 6. How accountable do you think international organizations are to ensuring 
Notes
 1 A wicked problem, as it relates to the environment (and in the context of this book, Ocean Governance: Definitions, Framework, and Implementation 171
 2 For more information on this subject, see William Gallo, “Why Hasn’t the US Signed 
 3 Innocent passage generally refers to the right of a vessel to pass through the territo
 4 Sustainable development is understood as that which upholds human needs, as well 
 5 The precautionary principle, which has been applied in a wide variety of environ
 6 An ecosystems management approach “is a strategy for the integrated management 
References
Arctic Council. (2021). About the Arctic Council. Retrieved April 4, 2021 from https://
arctic-council.org/en/about/
Arctic NGO Forum. (2020). Partners. Retrieved September 20, 2020 from http://www. 
arcticngoforum.org/partners.aspx
Balint, P. J., Stewart, R. E., Desai, A., & Walters, L. C. (2011). Wicked environmental prob￾lems: Managing uncertainty and conflict. Island Press.
Baty, T. (1928). The three mile limit. American Journal of International Law, 22(3), 503–
537. https://doi.org/10.2307/2188741
Bennett, M. (2019, May 8). The arctic shipping route no one’s talking about. The Maritime 
Executive. https://www.maritime-executive.com/editorials/the-arctic-shipping-route-no￾one-s-talking-about
Campbell, L. M., Gray, N. J., Fairbanks, L., Silver, J. J., Gruby, R. L., Dubik, B. A., & 
Basurto, X. (2016). Global oceans governance: New and emerging issues. Annual 
 Review of Environment and Resources, 41(1), 517–543. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev￾environ-102014-021121.
Cho, R. (2016, March 22). The damaging effects of black carbon. State of the Planet. 
Retrieved September 20, 2020 from https://blogs.ei.columbia.edu/2016/03/22/
the-damaging-effects-of-black-carbon/
Craig, R. K. (2020). The new United Nations high seas treaty: A primer. Natural Resources 
& Environment, 34(4), 48–50.
De Lucia, V. (2020). The BBNJ negotiations and ecosystem governance in the arctic. 
Marine Policy, Forthcoming. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpol.2019.103756172 I. Scott and A. K. Spalding
De Tolve, R. (2012). At what cost? America’s UNCLOS allergy in the time of lawfare. 
Naval Law Review, 61, 1–16.
Department of State. (2019). The United States ratifies central Arctic Ocean fisheries 
agreement. Retrieved September 20, 2020 from https://translations.state.gov/2019/08/27/
the-united-states-ratifies-central-arctic-ocean-fisheries-agreement/
Gallo, William. (2016, June 26). Why hasn’t the US signed the law of the sea treaty? 
Voice of America. https://www.voanews.com/usa/why-hasnt-us-signed-law-sea-treaty#:~:-
text=The%20U.S.%20has%20not%20accepted, linked%20the%20issue%20to%20China
Gallucci, M. (2018, September 26). As the arctic melts, the northern sea route opens for 
business. Wired. https://www.wired.com/story/as-the-arctic-melts-the-fabled-northwest￾passage-opens-for-cargo-ships/
Grant, J. (2010). International law essentials. Dundee University Press.
Head, B., & Alford, J. (2013). Wicked problems: Implications for public policy and 
management. Administration and Society, 47(6), 711–739. https://doi.org/10.1177/
0095399713481601
International Court of Justice. (2020). https://www.icj-cij.org/en
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. (2019). Summary for Policymakers. In H. 
-O. Pörtner, D. C. Roberts, V. Masson-Delmotte, P. Zhai, M. Tignor, E. Poloczanska, 
K. Mintenbeck, A. Alegría, M. Nicolai, A. Okem, J. Petzold, B. Rama, N. M. Weyer 
(Eds.), IPCC Special report on the ocean and cryosphere in a changing climate. https://doi.
org/10.1017/9781009157964
Kramer, A. (2020, June 9). Major fuel spill in Russia’s north spreads toward Arctic ocean. 
New York Times. https://www.nytimes.com/2020/06/09/world/europe/russia-arctic-oil￾spill.html
Khon, V. C., Mohkov, I. I., Latif, M., & Semeov, V. A. (2010). Perspectives of northern 
sea route and northwest passage in the twenty-first century. Climate Change, 100(3), 
757–768. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10584-009-9683-2
Khurshudyan, I., & Freedman, A. (2020, July 28). An oil spill in Russia’s Arctic exposes 
risks for Moscow’s Far North plans. Washington Post. https://www.washingtonpost.com/
climate-environment/2020/07/28/an-oil-spill-russias-arctic-exposes-problems-moscows￾big-plans-far-north/?arc404=true
Kjær, A. M. (2004). Governance. Polity Press.
Kobayashi, L. (2006). Lifting the international whaling commission’s moratorium on 
commercial whaling as the most effective global regulation of whaling. Environs, 29(2), 
177–219. [Juris Doctoral Dissertation, UC Davis]. h ttps://environs.law.ucdavis.edu/ 
volumes/29/2/kobayashi.pdf.
Kulp, S., & Strauss, B. (2019). New elevation data triple estimates of global vulnerability 
to sea-level rise and coastal flooding. Nature Communication, 10, 4844. https://doi.
org/10.1038/s41467-019-12808-z
Levine, A. S., Richmond, L., & Lopez-Carr, D. (2015). Marine resource management: 
Culture, livelihoods, and governance. Applied Geography, 59, 56–59. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.apgeog.2015.01.016
Miles, E. L. (1999). The concept of ocean governance: Evolution toward the 21st century 
and the principle of sustainable ocean use. Coastal Management, 27(1), 1–30. https://doi.
org/10.1080/089207599263875
Molenaar, E. (2007). Managing biodiversity in areas beyond national jurisdiction. In￾ternational Journal of Marine and Coastal Law, 22(1), 89–124. https://doi.org/10.1163/
157180807781475263Ocean Governance: Definitions, Framework, and Implementation 173
Nordea. (2017). Analyses of key companies having business operations in the Arctic. Retrieved 
September 20, 2020 from https://insights.nordea.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/02/
Analyses-of-Key-Companies-having-Business-Operating-In-the-Arctic_0.pdf
Nunez, C. (2014, April 24). What happens when oil spills in the Arctic? National 
Geographic. https://www.nationalgeographic.com/news/energy/2014/04/140423-national￾research-council-on-oil-spills-in-arctic/#close
Osborn, A., & Balmforth, T. (2020, July 10). Russia’s Nornickel fights cover-up accusations 
over Arctic oil spill. Reuters. https://www.reuters.com/article/us-russia-pollution-insight/
russias-nornickel-fights-cover-up-accusations-over-arctic-oil-spill-idUSKBN24B0QH
Rayfuse, R. (2019). The role of law in the regulation of fishing activities in the Central 
Arctic Ocean. Marine Policy, 110, 103562. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpol.2019.103562
Sand, P. (2008). Japan’s ‘research whaling’ in the Antarctic Southern Ocean and the 
North Pacific Ocean in the face of the endangered species convention (CITES). Review 
of European Community & International Environmental Law, 17(1), 56–71. https://doi.
org/10.1111/j.1467-9388.2008.00587.x
Schlanger, Z. (2019, June 27). The US is picking a fight with Canada over a thawing 
Arctic shipping route. Quartz. https://qz.com/1653831/the-us-is-picking-a-fight-with￾canada-over-an-arctic-shipping-route/
Silver, J. J., Gray, N. J., Campbell, L. M., Fairbanks, L. W., & Gruby, R. L. (2015). Blue 
economy and competing discourses in international oceans governance. The Journal of 
Environment & Development, 24(2), 135–160. https://doi.org/10.1177/1070496515580797
SIMIP Community. (2020). Arctic sea ice in CMIP6. Geophysical Research Letters, 47(10), 
e2019GL086749. https://doi.org/10.1029/2019GL086749.
Skaridov, A. (2020). The sea bed in the high north—How to address conflict? In C. Banet, 
(Ed.), The law of the sea bed (pp.104–124). Brill.
Smith, J. (2014). Evolving to conservation? The international court’s decision in the Aus￾tralia/Japan whaling case. Ocean Development & International Law, 45(4), 301–327. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/00908320.2014.957965
Sohn, L. B., Juras, K. G., Noyes, J. E., & Franckx, E. (2010). Law of the sea in a nutshell (2nd 
ed.). West Publishing.
Solano, G., & Torchia, C. (2020, July 30). 260 Chinese boats fish near Galapagos; 
Ecuador on alert. Washington Post. https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/the_
americas/260-chinese-boats-fish-near-galapagos-ecuador-on-alert/2020/07/30/01b0d98e￾d29f-11ea-826b-cc394d824e35_story.html
Song, Y. (2005). Declarations and statements with respect to the 1982 UNCLOS: 
Potential legal disputes between the United States and China after U.S. accession to 
the convention. Ocean Development & International Law, 36(3), 261–289. https://doi.
org/10.1080/00908320591004405
Spalding, A. K., & DeYcaza, R. (2020). Navigating shifting regimes of ocean governance: 
From UNCLOS to Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 14. Environment and Society: 
Advances in Research. https://doi.org/10.3167/ares.2020.110102
Telesetsky, A. (2019). Managing marine resources: Can the law of the sea treaty adapt 
to climate change? In P. Harris, (Ed.), Climate change and ocean governance: Politics 
and policy for threatened seas (pp.325–339). Cambridge University Press. https://doi.
org/10.1017/9781108502238.020
Treves, T. (n. d.) Introductory Note: 1958 Geneva Convention on the Law of the Sea. Audio￾visual Library of International Law. Retrieved September 20, 2020 from https://legal. un.
org/avl/ha/gclos/gclos.html#:~:text=The%20Conventions%20and%20Protocol%20are, 174 I. Scott and A. K. Spalding
February%20to%2027%20April%201958.&text=It%20had%20its%20precedents%20in, 
of%20the%20League%20of%20Nations
Tuerk, H. (2012). Reflections on the contemporary Law of the Sea. Martinus Nijhoff 
Publishers.
United Nations. (2020). Oceans and the Law of the Sea. Retrieved September 20, 2020 
from https://www.un.org/en/sections/issues-depth/oceans-and-law-sea/#:~:text=The%20
oceans%20had%20long%20been, all%20and%20belonged%20to%20none
Willaert, K. (2020). Crafting the perfect deep sea mining legislation: A patchwork of na￾tional laws. Marine Policy, 119, 104055. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpol.2020.104055
Wold, C. (2020). Japan’s resumption of commercial whaling and its duty to cooperate with 
the international whaling commission. Journal of Environmental Law & Litigation, 35, 
87–142.
Zacharias, M. (2014). Marine policy: An introduction to governance and international law of 
the oceans. Routledge. https://doi.org/10.4324/9780203095256
Zhang, L. (2014). A guide to Chinese legal research: Who makes what? Library of Con￾gress, Law Library Blog. Retrieved September 20, 2020 from https://blogs.loc.gov/
law/2014/01/a-guide-to-chinese-legal-research-who-makes-what/11 Stewardship and Conservation 
of the Marine Environment
Marine Protected Areas
M. Shivlani and D. O. Suman
The global ocean faces serious problems. Over a third of marine resources are har￾vested unsustainably, and another 60% are at maximum sustainable levels (Food 
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, 2020). Many fishing fleets 
are overcapitalized, resulting in excessive fishing effort. Improved technologies 
permit more efficient capture and at ever greater depths. Marine biodiversity is 
under threat, and many large marine animal populations have been driven to low 
levels (Sala & Knowlton, 2006). Existing and new sources of marine pollution 
continue to degrade water quality and adversely impact marine living resources. 
In short, the human footprint on the global ocean is ubiquitous and growing 
(Halpern et al., 2019). Conserving areas of the ocean as Marine Protected A reas 
(MPAs) has gained international recognition as one solution to the ocean’s 
problems.
A central aspect of understanding MPAs is through their formal definition and 
how they can be distinguished from the surrounding seascape. The International 
Union for the Conservation of Nature (IUCN) defines a protected area as “a 
clearly defined geographical space, recognized, dedicated and managed, through 
legal or other effective means, to achieve the long-term conservation of nature 
with associated ecosystem services and cultural values” (Dudley, 2008). The 
IUCN recognizes six MPA categories, ranging from strict nature reserves that are 
established primarily for scientific research/monitoring or wilderness protection, 
to managed resource protection areas established mainly for sustainable use (Day 
et al., 2019).
Recently, The MPA Guide (n.d.), developed by a consortium of international 
organizations, scientists, and environmental groups, redefined existing language, 
clearly recognizing that the overarching purpose of an MPA is conservation of 
nature. MPAs’ level of protection and the resources covered vary based on the ob￾jective of the designation. The MPA Guide classifies Level of Protection into four 
categories: Fully Protected, Highly Protected, Lightly Protected, and Minimally 
Protected. These categories define the level of extraction or destructive activities 
that are allowed. For example, a Fully Protected MPA would prohibit destructive 
activities and extraction of marine resources; these MPAs have also been referred 
to as “no-take MPAs” or “marine reserves”. At the other extreme, a Minimally 
Protected MPA would allow extensive extraction of marine resources.
DOI: 10.4324/9781003058151-14176 M. Shivlani and D. O. Suman
In addition, The MPA Guide categorizes areas by their Stage of Establishment: 
Proposed; Designated by legal or regulatory means; Implemented with defined 
boundaries, objectives, and management strategies; and Actively Managed with 
enforceable rules, monitoring, evaluation, and adaptive management. A matrix 
of Level of Protection vs. Stage of Establishment should theoretically lead to con￾servation outcomes that we will discuss further in this chapter. The strongest 
conservation outcomes should result from Fully Protected MPAs that are Actively 
Managed. Other marine-managed areas, referred to as OECM (Other Effective 
Area-Based Conservation Measures), may offer conservation benefits although 
conservation is not their primary objective. Examples of OECM include military 
restriction areas, buffer zones around aquaculture or ocean energy facilities, or 
marine transportation routes.
Although MPAs are an important conservation tool, alone they cannot 
achieve optimal conservation objectives and must be implemented as part of an 
integrated approach comprised of coastal and marine zone management and ma￾rine spatial planning (marine zoning) that addresses ecosystem-based manage￾ment (Fraschetti et al., 2011; Halpern et al., 2010). In addition, MPAs may lead to 
numerous wellbeing outcomes in economic, social, and governance dimensions, 
as we will discuss (Ban et al., 2019).
History of MPAs
Humans have a long history of managing the marine environment for conserva￾tion objectives, exemplified by customary marine tenure systems established by 
seafaring communities in the western Pacific Ocean (Cinner, 2005; Cinner & 
Aswani, 2007; Wells et al., 2016). The modern MPA movement initially mirrored 
park enclosure systems – also known as fortress conservation – established by 
 European states (including in their colonies), mainly for the purposes of marine 
resource conservation and habitat protection (Blaustein, 2007; Brockington, 
2002; Wells et al., 2016).
Recreational demand for MPAs grew out of the invention and proliferation of 
SCUBA and snorkeling in the post–World War II era (Wells et al., 2016). This 
was coupled with an increasing concern for the stress on coastal and marine re￾sources resulting from damaging fishing activities, pollution, and development, 
which researchers like Jacques Cousteau identified as long-term threats to the 
ocean (Cicin-Sain & Knecht, 2000). In 1960, the State of Florida (USA), for ex￾ample, established one of the first underwater parks, John Pennekamp Underwa￾ter Coral Reef State Park, due to the threat of uncontrolled hard-coral harvest in 
the coral reefs of the Upper Florida Keys (Florida Department of Environmental 
Protection, 2019).
The watershed designation occurred in 1975 when Australia established the 
Great Barrier Reef Marine Park (GBRMP), which became the largest MPA in the 
world (344,000 km2
) (Wells et al., 2016). While it would take over a decade for 
similarly large MPAs to become established elsewhere, the GBRMP established 
various principles that are still applicable today, including ecosystem protection 
(later, ecosystem-based management) and zoning based on compatible uses by Stewardship and Conservation of the Marine Environment 177
habitat type and vulnerability. In 1990, the US Congress designated the Florida 
Keys National Marine Sanctuary, which supported large-scale zoning and no-take 
marine reserves as part of an ecosystem-based approach to coral reef manage￾ment. Other large MPAs were established via the National Marine Sanctuary 
Act in the US throughout the 1990s, designated to protect a variety of resources 
and with a focus on ecosystem protection (National Academy of Public Admin￾istration, 2000).
By the early 21st century, international organizations and agreements recog￾nized the lack of representation and overall failure in protecting a meaningful 
percentage of the world’s oceans (Humphreys & Clark, 2020). Member States of 
the Convention on Biological Diversity agreed to the 2010 Aichi Targets, whose 
Target 11 called for the establishment of MPAs in 10% of the world’s coastal and 
marine areas. Regional initiatives such as the Caribbean Challenge set up targets 
for individual states to achieve a 20% target of MPA designation within their 
jurisdictional boundaries. Also, in 2015 the United Nations General Assembly 
(UNGA) finalized 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) to be achieved by 
the year 2030 to ensure a sustainable future for humanity. SDG 14 (Life Below 
Water) consists of ten targets to conserve the world ocean, and Target 14.5 calls 
for the protection of 10% of global coastal and marine areas by the year 2020 
(United Nations, 2015). The push to protect ever-wider areas of the ocean con￾tinues to grow. A campaign to protect 30% of the world’s oceans by 2030 is now 
supported by over 70 nations and is a goal of the Post-2020 Global Biodiversity 
Framework being negotiated under the Convention on Biological Diversity. In 
January 2021, US President Joe Biden issued Executive Order 14008, which set 
a goal to preserve 30% of US lands and waters by 2030. This campaign is often 
referred to as “30 by 30”.
To address these and other national and international initiatives, nations 
worked unilaterally and, in some cases, via international agreements to increase 
the total percentage of MPAs. While the drive to increase MPA coverage did not 
reach the proposed SDG target of 10% by the year 2020, the call did lead to a 
protection of 6.4% of the world ocean, including 2.6% that is fully protected and 
3.8% that is partially protected (Marine Conservation Institute, 2020). Part of the 
reason for the growth in MPA coverage in the 21st century was the rise of Very 
Large MPAs (VLMPAs), which are MPAs greater than 100,000 km2
. Overall, 
VLMPAs comprise two-thirds of total MPA area in the ocean, and while these 
offer ecological benefits, such as ecosystem integrity and function, biodiversity 
protection, and ecological spillover potential, critics have argued that VLMPAs 
provide a false sense of progress while protecting fewer representative areas, that 
the large remote areas are often established at the neglect of protecting smaller 
nearshore ones, and that these designations do little to address global stressors 
(O’Leary et al., 2018).
Another related, significant initiative that commenced in the 2010s was the 
2017 UNGA resolution and subsequent progress toward the development of a 
global treaty under the umbrella of the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea 
(UNCLOS) to protect and manage biodiversity in areas beyond national jurisdic￾tion (ABNJ) (De Santo et al., 2020). The high seas comprise about two-thirds of 178 M. Shivlani and D. O. Suman
the world’s ocean, and this area is afforded some protection via several fisheries 
agreements, pollution and mining regimes, as well as limited efforts in establish￾ing MPAs in the Northwest Atlantic and the Southern Ocean.
Ecological Dimensions of MPAs
The conservation outcomes and effectiveness of MPAs relate to their design, 
which in turn should be dependent on the ecological characteristics of a given lo￾cation. The key ecological dimensions of importance to MPAs are: siting/location 
and size, connectivity, spillover effects, and larval export. To appreciate the po￾tential that MPAs offer as a management tool, it is important to review their eco￾logical dimensions, especially as these relate to the ecological and fishery benefits 
that well-designed and managed MPAs produce. Ecological theory establishes the 
tenets for MPA function, contending that biodiversity protection and ecologi￾cal integrity will have positive effects on ecosystem function and resilience (and 
hence, sustainability in the face of ecological disturbances) (Claudet et al., 2011).
Location
By setting aside areas, especially Fully Protected MPAs, where no extractive ac￾tivities are allowed, biodiversity and ecological relationships can be protected 
where they remain intact or be allowed to recover where they have been dis￾rupted. Recovery over time can lead to a functional and more resilient ecosystem 
that is better able to withstand disturbances than an altered ecosystem (Worm 
et al., 2006). Generally, a positive relationship exists between biodiversity and 
ecosystem function; ecosystem resiliency is tied to functional redundancy and 
intact trophic levels. These are often the very components that are rendered vul￾nerable due to anthropogenic impacts, such as overfishing. Well-designed and 
implemented MPAs can thus restore and protect biodiversity (Worm et al., 2006).
Considerable heterogeneity exists between ocean areas, and certain ecosystems 
are more biodiverse or productive than others (Roff & Zacharias, 2011). Ecosys￾tems, like coral reefs, present unique characteristics that result in higher levels of 
biodiversity or production, as do other discrete sites, such as ecological hotspots, 
endemism centers, and aggregation sites (Claudet et al., 2011; Edgar et al., 2008). 
Spawning aggregation sites, for example, serve as sources for larval production 
and “reseed” sinks across a region, comprising a metapopulation; if such sites are 
exhausted (via serial overfishing), the associated populations dependent on the 
sites may eventually be eliminated (Grüss et al., 2014). These are examples of 
ocean ecosystems that are high-priority MPA sites.
Connectivity
Considerable connectivity occurs across ocean areas, such that ecosystems are 
invariably connected to each other across horizontal and vertical, permeable 
boundaries. An important component of ecological theory concerns connectivity Stewardship and Conservation of the Marine Environment 179
and relates to the size and/or number of protected sites required to fully protect 
biodiversity and ensure ecosystem function (Claudet et al., 2011). Species-area 
relationships dictate that protected areas should be large enough to contain all 
the species that characterize that area (habitat), but within marine environments, 
the mobility of species varies considerably even when they might occur together 
within the same habitat (Grüss et al., 2011). For example, Caribbean spiny lobster 
(Panulirus argus) has a pelagic larval duration (PLD) of up to nine months, such 
that a phyllosoma (larva) hatched in the water column in the western Caribbean 
may settle in shallow water habitats off southern Florida (Kough et al., 2013). 
Also, some species, such as the spiny lobster, change habitat preferences over their 
lifespans, switching from pelagic to demersal phases based on life history stage. 
Yet there are other species, such as salmonids or certain reef fish, that migrate on 
a seasonal basis for spawning or other purposes, greatly expanding their ranges 
for part of a year/season. Finally, there are wholly pelagic species, such as tuna, 
that occupy large ranges across entire ocean basins. These examples suggest that 
MPA networks may present better solutions than a single MPA. Establishment 
of MPA networks requires identification and protection of habitats that serve as 
stations for these species at their most vulnerable life history stage (Food and 
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, 2011; Grüss et al. 2011). MPA 
networks can cover large expanses of the ocean if well-designed, i.e., if based on 
the species’ ranges, movement patterns, and other ecological relationships that 
affect mobility. Networks may also protect certain areas that serve as sources for 
species export and others that are sinks via species import (Cowen et al., 2006).
Spillover
Another ecological aspect of MPA theory is species’ net movement outside the 
MPA through a process known as ecological spillover (Di Lorenzo et al., 2016). 
Factors driving spillover include density-dependent movements resulting from 
density-related conditions (Grüss et al., 2011). Movements into open areas result￾ing from effective MPA establishment are related to greater intra-specific compe￾tition, increased prey shortages, and lack of suitable habitat (for refuge, courtship, 
etc.), due to increases in both total population and population density. The net 
effect expected is a gradient of higher species abundance within the MPA to de￾creasing totals farther away from the MPA (Goñi et al., 2011).
Larval Export
MPAs may confer what is referred to as larval subsidy, resulting from greater tar￾get species and larger average sizes of individuals within MPAs that can result in 
higher larval production to repopulate open areas outside the MPA. However, 
successful larval subsidy, like fisheries spillover, is subject to several factors, in￾cluding variability in recruitment and settlement and questions of whether re￾cruits end up in open areas (Goñi et al., 2011). Larval export may benefit regional 
fisheries and biodiversity.180 M. Shivlani and D. O. Suman
The potential conservation outcomes for MPAs are many and include: greater 
abundance and size of species previously exploited, increased biodiversity and 
habitat recovery, and enhanced reproductive output due to larger body size of 
many species. As a result, MPAs may improve or restore ecological indicators and 
provide ecosystem “insurance”, or resilience, in the event of disruptions (ecologi￾cal, physical, or anthropogenic).
Economic Dimensions of MPAs
Whether they are established for ecosystem protection, fisheries management, or 
ecotourism, research suggests that MPAs provide economic value through the 
sustained delivery of ecosystem services. Ecosystem protection results in ecosys￾tem service benefits, including sustainable fisheries (provisioning services), habi￾tat protection (supporting services), primary production (regulating services), and 
tourism (cultural services) (Leenhardt et al., 2015). Fisheries management refers 
to the spillover and larval subsidy and insurance policies that MPAs provide in 
the form of fishery catches, livelihoods, and coastal community health. Ecotour￾ism in MPAs, as a cultural service, provides income to local communities and 
industries (including fisheries) and helps to divert pressure from extractive uses 
when marine reserves are established to accommodate divers’ and snorkelers’ de￾mands for larger-sized species, higher biodiversity, and unfished habitat.
In economic terms, MPAs provide market and non-market benefits, the for￾mer of which can be measured via market transactions, while the latter cannot 
(and thus require non-market valuation methods) (Davis et al., 2019). By contrast, 
MPAs also incur costs related to establishment, compliance, and maintenance. 
The total economic value is the difference between the total benefits and to￾tal costs associated with MPA establishment. Different types of use and non-use 
values incorporate total economic value. Use values are comprised of direct use, 
indirect use, and option value. Direct use refers to those outputs or services used 
directly, such as fisheries or tourism-related activities. An MPA may produce indi￾rect use benefits via ecosystem function, such as ecosystem resilience. Option value
is the combined, future direct and indirect use. Non-use values consist of those 
values that conserve resources for future generations (bequest value) and those 
that are related to the knowledge that a resource may continue to exist (existence 
value), such as the protection of endangered species.
The beneficiaries of the economic value provided by MPAs are businesses that 
rely on higher or less variable catches that fisheries spillover can offer; tourism op￾erators who benefit from a higher demand for services due to MPA establishment 
and related biodiversity changes; consumers who benefit from a higher supply and 
quality of fisheries and tourism-related resources due to MPA establishment; and 
local communities that enjoy increases in public revenues via fees or taxes due to 
greater economic activity following MPA establishment (Davis et al., 2019).
While MPAs provide benefits, the restrictions on resource access and use may 
negatively affect some stakeholders and thus be socially problematic. Operational 
costs associated with MPAs relate to establishment, maintenance, and compliance 
costs (see Box 11.1). In fact, the main factor associated with MPA success is adequate Stewardship and Conservation of the Marine Environment 181
staff capacity (Gill et al., 2017), indicating the importance of building, training, and 
maintaining a strong staff presence for interpretation, monitoring, and compliance 
purposes. Also important from an economic cost perspective is the relationship be￾tween MPA size, distance from the coast, and the MPA country’s development sta￾tus and cost per unit area (Balmford et al., 2004). Generally, costs for MPAs tend to 
decrease in a nonlinear manner per unit area protected, suggesting that larger, more 
remote MPAs may provide the best return on investment in terms of establishment 
and maintenance costs (Edgar et al., 2014; McCrea-Strub et al., 2011).
BOX 11.1 Funding for MPAs
Established in 1979, Bonaire National Marine Park (BNMP) includes all 
the waters surrounding the Caribbean Island of Bonaire from high wa￾ter to 60 m water depth. The park is a well-known dive destination with 
high-quality coral reefs, many of which are accessible from shore. BNMP is 
also considered to be a model in the Caribbean for effective MPA manage￾ment. Anchoring anywhere in the park is prohibited, and mooring buoys 
are abundant. In large part, the effective management in BNMP stems from 
its funding mechanism. Implementation of a fee system for SCUBA divers 
began in 1992 and, as a result, the park became largely self-financing that 
year. The fees support park maintenance, research and monitoring, educa￾tional activities, and law enforcement. The original diver fee was $10 per 
year. The Bonaire government approved a new fee structure in 2019. Today 
the “Nature Fee” costs $45 per year for SCUBA divers and $25 per year for 
other water activities. It is possible to pay the Nature Fee online and pur￾chase the required “Nature Tag”. In recent years, the number of cruise ship 
visitors has grown, and controversy surrounds visitors’ payment of the Na￾ture Fee. Cruise ship visitors who SCUBA dive must pay the fee. However, 
passengers are exempt from the non-SCUBA activity fee.
Social Dimensions of MPAs
Over the past three decades, studies in the social dimensions of MPAs have found 
that MPAs can provide ecological and economic benefits and yet be rejected by 
coastal communities and stakeholders (Christie, 2004; Suman et al., 1999). This is 
because numerous social issues often remain unresolved prior to MPA implemen￾tation, including the use of local ecological knowledge in MPA design, imbalanced 
distributional benefits, opacity in the planning process, lack of meaningful partic￾ipation (especially engagement with those stakeholders who stand to lose access 
rights or areas), and the lack of establishment of effective conflict resolution mech￾anisms. The sense of distrust and the perceived illegitimacy of the planning process 
surrounding the designated MPA may hinder maintenance, monitoring, and com￾pliance; increase distrust (erode social capital); and endanger the long-term sus￾tainability of the MPA. Effectively, MPAs are spatial management tools developed 182 M. Shivlani and D. O. Suman
to address the status of marine resources by managing uses and behaviors to address 
societal goals such as food security, sustainable livelihoods, and distributional bene￾fits; the long-term sustainability of MPAs can only be ensured if these societal goals 
are effectively addressed to modify uses and behaviors (Pomeroy et al., 2007).
A common concern among communities, particularly fishery stakeholders, is 
that MPAs are often implemented without meaningful consultation with local 
ecological knowledge related to high-value areas, use areas, and areas representing 
conflict (Christie, 2004; Pita et al., 2011). Other MPA skeptics perceive that the 
process is closed to them and is a means to decrease or eliminate their presence 
(Suman et al., 1999). Studies have demonstrated that when channels of dialogue 
and consultation are opened to stakeholder input throughout the MPA process, 
while certain groups may still not consider the outcomes to be beneficial, percep￾tions concerning the validity of the process and its legitimacy increase (Dalton, 
2005; Shivlani et al., 2008). (See Box 11.2.)
BOX 11.2 Stakeholder Involvement in MPA Formation
Designated by the US Congress in 1990, the Florida Keys National Ma￾rine Sanctuary (FKNMS) is one of the largest MPAs administered by the 
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA); the actual 
area is 7,800 km2
. Several years of contentious debate surrounded the release 
of the Final Sanctuary Management Plan in 1997. NOAA had proposed a 
large no-take marine reserve in the extreme western region of the FKNMS, 
called the Dry Tortugas Replenishment Reserve. However, NOAA opted to 
postpone creation of this no-take reserve due to the extreme opposition from 
organized commercial and recreational fishers who argued the closure would 
impact their economies and, moreover, that the boundaries were incorrect.
NOAA returned to this issue several years later, adopting a well￾orchestrated participatory management strategy called “Tortugas 2000” 
(Delaney, 2003). First, the agency changed the name of the no-take area 
to “Dry Tortugas Ecological Reserve” (DTER) to lessen debate about the 
effectiveness of spillover results. NOAA formed a working group of 25 rep￾resentatives of various target fisheries (shrimp, finfish, crabs, lobster), mem￾bers of the Sanctuary Advisory Council, as well as federal and state officials 
exercising authority in the FKNMS. The group was charged with defining 
the boundaries of the DTER. Representatives noted specific areas in the 
Dry Tortugas region that were extremely important to their fishing oper￾ations and, subsequently, in May 1999 reached consensus on boundaries 
of the DTER that would not have extreme adverse impacts on any of the 
fishing interests. The outcome was the designation of the no-take Tortugas 
Ecological Reserve (comprising two sectors: Tortugas North and Tortugas 
South) that together limit extractive activities over 635 km2
 of high-quality 
marine habitat (coral reefs, seagrass beds, hardbottom).Stewardship and Conservation of the Marine Environment 183
Another aspect of the social dimensions of MPAs relates to the post￾implementation stage. Unfortunately, due to a combination of inadequate ca￾pacity and funding, imbalances in distributional benefits, and lack of effective 
conflict resolution mechanisms, MPAs can and do sometimes fail after enjoying 
initial success. These so-called “paper parks” remain on the books and may even 
count toward percentage targets, but they do not contribute toward any mean￾ingful conservation outcomes because they are not actively managed (Watson 
et al., 2014). While capacity remains a key factor in determining MPA success 
(Gill et al., 2017), continued stakeholder engagement, socioeconomic monitoring, 
and outreach and education also affect MPA outcomes (Pomeroy et al., 2007).
Governance Dimensions of MPAs
MPA governance dimensions that comprise these mechanisms are best exempli￾fied as top-down approaches, bottom-up approaches, hybrid approaches that uti￾lize both top-down and bottom-up approaches, and community-based approaches 
(Jones et al., 2019). Governance by itself refers to how societies reach decisions, 
and this involves a continuous negotiation between different stakeholders con￾cerning legal and customary norms and economic influences. All approaches 
utilized to establish and manage MPAs require good governance characterized 
by transparency, participation, and respect for the stakeholders and communities 
affected by the decisions (World Bank, 2006). The United Nations Environment 
Programme (UNEP) states that good governance must be inclusive and promote 
stewardship with a focus on economic and social benefits and environmental im￾provements, and the governance structure must adapt to changing circumstances 
(Jones et al., 2019).
Top-down approaches are centralized, and decisions are government-driven 
(Vann, 2010). Bottom-up approaches are decentralized, and decisions are devolved 
to the local level (Bown et al., 2013). Community-based approaches involve gov￾ernance at the local level under either formal or informal collective-management 
agreements. In these arrangements, communities may wholly manage MPAs and 
their resources with minimal central government oversight. Hybrid approaches 
incorporate elements of top-down and community-based approaches as discussed 
below. They also allow for a certain level of decentralization, and decision-making 
may be hierarchically organized (Gaymer et al., 2014; see Box 11.3.).
BOX 11.3 Community Participation in MPA Management
Brazil created a category of protected area in 2000 called Extractive Re￾serves (RESEX) that today are administered by the Chico Mendes Institute 
for Biodiversity Conservation (ICMBio). The objective of these reserves is 
promotion of sustainable use of natural resources and protection of tradi￾tional livelihoods. Brazil has designated over 90 Extractive Reserves, about 184 M. Shivlani and D. O. Suman
one-quarter of which are marine and coastal. Canavieiras is a 1,006 km2
marine Extractive Reserve located in Bahia State (East-central Brazil) that 
was created in 2006. About 85% of the reserve is marine, while a coastal 
mangrove forest forms the remainder. Canavieiras is managed by a Deliber￾ative Council presided over by a representative of ICMBio. The Council is 
a good example of co-management, with council members representing the 
national environmental agencies, municipal governments, the state univer￾sity, tourism businesses, environmental groups, and numerous subsistence 
farmers and artisanal fishing organizations. Only recognized community 
organizations receive traditional use rights to extract natural resources 
(mangrove wood, marine resources) and engage in tourist-support activities 
inside the reserve under strictly defined rules that guarantee sustainable 
use. The reserve supports livelihoods of an estimated 1,300 families.
Coiba National Park in the Pacific Ocean near southwest Panama pro￾tects a total of 2,701 km2
: marine waters (2,165 km2
) and insular lands (536 
km2
) that include the island of Coiba, a former penal colony, and some 38 
smaller islands. The park’s marine and terrestrial habitats feature high biodi￾versity and marine and terrestrial endemism, as well as numerous threatened 
species. Created by Panamanian law in 2004, UNESCO inscribed Coiba 
National Park as a natural World Heritage Site the following year. Coiba is 
an important component of the Eastern Tropical Pacific Marine Corridor, 
which is formed of the oceanic areas of Panama, Costa Rica, Colombia, and 
Ecuador. Although it composes part of the Ministry of the Environment’s 
National System of Protected Areas, the park is managed by means of an 
innovative governance model with coordination and participation of both 
authorities and stakeholders. The Coiba Directive Council is the ultimate 
authority over the national park and has members representing national and 
local authorities, environmental NGOs, universities and scientific research 
institutions, and the productive sector. Some areas of the park are no-take 
marine reserves, while others allow for highly regulated fishing that provides 
an important source of income for several nearby coastal communities.
Top-down approaches concentrate decision-making power within the central 
government, and these tend to work best in the cases where there are national 
MPAs (i.e., those located in an exclusive economic zone, or EEZ) or MPAs in 
ABNJ (i.e., those located in the high seas and overseen by international regimes 
that have multilateral representation) (Jones et al., 2019; Petra, 2012). For exam￾ple, the US has established a series of VLMPAs that encompass the entire EEZs 
surrounding its Pacific Ocean territories, and these are managed by the federal 
government under the Department of Commerce (with input from territorial gov￾ernments). Parties to the OSPAR Convention, a UN Regional Seas Programme 
that oversees maritime and coastal activities in the Northeast Atlantic Ocean, Stewardship and Conservation of the Marine Environment 185
have established a series of MPAs in ABNJ over the past decade, and they jointly 
coordinate MPA management activities (mainly research and monitoring).
Bottom-up approaches rely on local governments and institutions to manage 
MPAs, and these succeed in areas where centralized approaches may be too weak, 
far away, or otherwise non-responsive to local needs (Bown et al., 2013). Bottom￾up approaches also are advantageous where there is an underlying tradition of 
decentralization. In the US, local and state agencies manage local MPAs that 
are located totally within their respective jurisdictional boundaries. In several 
cases, however, a scalar approach may be required to achieve full protection (Dietz 
et al., 2003). This requires coordination between local and centralized authorities, 
such as is exercised between the California Coastal Commission (a state agency) 
and NOAA (a federal agency) to jointly manage the Channel Islands National 
Marine Sanctuary off Southern California.
Community-based approaches, which range from consultative to fully 
community-based management, are those in which communities self-organize to 
manage MPAs with minimal governmental oversight (Bown et al., 2013). These 
approaches work well in situations similar to those of bottom-up approaches, but 
community-based approaches elevate community-level initiatives and regulations 
over those implemented by a governmental entity. These approaches have been 
utilized successfully in areas that have a long history of self-organization at the 
local level, especially in coastal developing states, as well as in areas that lack 
effective government capacity. The Philippines, for example, has numerous lo￾cal MPAs that are co-managed, with assistance from local governments or non￾governmental organizations. The Locally Managed Marine Areas (LMMA) 
Network is an NGO that promotes and informs community-based MPA manage￾ment in Southeast Asia, the Pacific, and the Americas. These and other, related 
national and international efforts seek to reestablish past practices, such as cus￾tomary marine tenure or strengthening community capacity, empowering local 
entities to conserve and manage their own resources (Bown et al., 2013).
MPA Design and Planning
MPA design is invariably influenced by numerous factors, including ecological re￾quirements, economic impacts, social equity considerations, governance capacity, 
and political will, but design should be grounded by the MPA’s primary objectives 
(Day et al., 2019; Salm et al., 2000). Once an MPA has been designed to meet 
its objectives, the next step in MPA implementation is MPA planning. Effective 
planning should employ an adaptive, long-term strategy, devised to set a direction 
for MPA growth and maturation toward objective completion, as well as opera￾tional tactics, consisting of ongoing operations and actions in support of effective 
MPA implementation and maintenance.
The first step in MPA planning is site characterization, including a full assess￾ment of the MPA, its biophysical conditions, ecological attributes, social setting, 
and economic sectors. Stakeholder and community engagement and participa￾tion should be prioritized throughout the planning process, commencing with site 186 M. Shivlani and D. O. Suman
characterization, and the emphasis should be on the inclusion of all stakeholders 
to obtain local ecological knowledge, identify use areas, and assess MPA-related 
impacts. Engagement permits planners to identify the most effective modes of 
dialogue, learn of any conflict issues, build trust between stakeholders, and deter￾mine means to implement conflict resolution mechanisms.
The primary strategic document for an MPA is its management plan, consist￾ing of the MPA characterization, goals and objectives, and proposed actions to be 
taken (zoning, outreach and education, public use, enforcement) to achieve the 
MPA goals and objectives. The management plan is not a tactical document iden￾tifying daily operations, nor should the management plan be a static document, as 
both ecological and socioeconomic environments are dynamic and may require 
strategic changes. For example, the 2019 Florida Keys National Marine Sanctuary 
Habitat Restoration Blueprint revised the Sanctuary’s management plan, empha￾sizing a greater focus on resource rehabilitation and recovery, especially concern￾ing the long-term decline of the region’s coral reef ecosystem.
MPA planning must include an outreach and education effort that continues 
past the planning stage to provide the necessary information to stakeholders to 
build and reinforce support; provide updates on management goals, objectives, 
and activities; and dispel any inaccuracies or counter-narratives that may oth￾erwise engender opposition. MPA advocates, such as non-governmental organ￾izations, government-funded advisory groups, and citizens’ groups, can all play 
important, supporting roles in broadcasting critical MPA information to others 
and, especially, to specific stakeholders who may otherwise be unreceptive to 
management agency sources.
Another critical aspect of MPA planning is the creation of monitoring and com￾pliance strategies. Monitoring MPA trends and outcomes is the best way to determine 
the degree to which the MPA is in fact effective, and to identify deficiencies. Compli￾ance refers to the extent to which stakeholders obey MPA rules. Enforcement is used 
when rules are broken with prior knowledge and cause major impacts. Thus, within 
an MPA, compliance can be used to estimate the level and type of rule breaking, and 
enforcement measures can be applied appropriately to address these infractions.
MPA Effectiveness
Ongoing discussions about global conservation targets raise questions about how 
to assess and measure the effectiveness of existing areas. MPA effectiveness, itself 
a vast field of study, is subject to how effectiveness is defined, and it can refer to 
whether an MPA (1) meets its defined objectives, (2) provides expected or ancillary 
benefits to other MPAs and the overall region as a node in an MPA network, (3) is 
not a “paper park” (i.e., it has the necessary governance, funding, compliance, and 
enforcement required to prevent violations), or (4) has gained stakeholder accept￾ance. We suggest three areas to measure MPA effectiveness: (1) the overall effec￾tiveness of MPAs as a global management tool, (2) the effectiveness of individual 
MPAs relative to their goals and objectives, and (3) the perceived effectiveness 
of individual MPAs relative to stakeholder knowledge, attitudes, and perceptions.Stewardship and Conservation of the Marine Environment 187
As of 2020, just over 7.5% of the world’s coasts and ocean was designated as 
MPAs, and less than half of that total was set aside as no-take marine reserves 
(Marine Conservation Institute, 2020). Perhaps an even greater indictment than 
the global shortfall is that the vast majority of the total MPA coverage is con￾tained in a few VLMPAs. These nation-sized MPAs are not representative, as 
most are located in the Pacific Ocean (with the exception of the Chagos MPA in 
the Indian Ocean, the OSPAR MPA network in the Northeast Atlantic Ocean, 
and the South Orkney Islands MPA and Ross Sea MPA in the Southern Ocean). 
Several have also come under criticism for having employed a fortress conserva￾tion approach, where native (often underrepresented) communities have been 
marginalized in the implementation process. Thus, while global initiatives, such 
as the Aichi Targets and SDG 14 goals call for greater coverage, the areas pro￾tected must be effectively managed, established through democratic principles 
(such as open and full participation), and accepted by stakeholders.
MPAs must also meet their stated goals and objectives to be considered effec￾tive, and this requires a clear and targeted design, an open and comprehensive 
planning process, and consistent monitoring to identify trends and outcomes 
that may require changes in management strategies. MPAs cannot be expected to 
achieve their objectives without an adaptive framework, especially considering the 
rapidly changing climate. For example, coral reef MPAs may require enhanced res￾toration efforts in areas where more frequent, warm water episodes have worsened 
coral bleaching, disease, and mortality. Similarly, fishery spillover may be affected 
by changes in the mean temperature at which target species are concentrated 
such that target species may migrate completely out of a warming MPA. There 
are no preestablished protocols on how to address these types of unprecedented, 
climate-induced changes, but MPAs accounting for the likelihood of such change 
can integrate adaptations to remain effective into the foreseeable future.
Finally, the social aspects of MPA effectiveness are the most important. MPAs, 
after all, represent a social agreement decided upon by stakeholders to alter human 
behavior and attitudes. If stakeholders feel alienated by the MPA, whether due to 
misinformation, lack of expected revenue, or changes in distributional benefits, 
an MPA may be subject to long-term failure resulting from a lack of support and 
compliance. An MPA must measure effectiveness not solely in terms of ecolog￾ical success but also by stakeholder engagement, acceptance, and support. This 
requires the MPA management agency proponents to provide vehicles to receive 
stakeholder input and criticism (via advisory bodies), act on stakeholder concerns 
where these warrant changes in management strategy, and partner with stake￾holders in monitoring MPA trends and arriving at mutually acceptable solutions.
Conclusion
MPAs are excellent, flexible, place-based conservation tools that are increasingly 
adopted throughout the world for fishery management (spillover of adults, larval 
export, larger and more abundant fish, increased biomass) and protection of bi￾odiversity. Recognition has grown of the importance in siting MPAs in areas of 188 M. Shivlani and D. O. Suman
enhanced biological importance (high biodiversity, spawning aggregation sites) 
and configuring them in ecologically meaningful networks. MPAs may lead to 
many positive wellbeing outcomes, as well. The socioeconomic and governance 
aspects of MPAs are of utmost importance, but research in these areas is lacking. 
Local communities and marine resource users must be involved in MPA creation 
and management. Emerging areas in the science of MPAs concern their relevance 
in times of climate change that is altering environmental conditions and causing 
geographical shifts in species of interest. The creation and management of MPAs 
on the high seas (areas beyond national jurisdiction) present additional challenges.
Professional Pathways
Numerous professional opportunities exist in marine conservation and MPA are￾nas. Many marine policy graduates find employment at local, state/provincial, or 
national MPAs with responsibilities related to education and outreach, scientific 
research and monitoring, and enforcement. Environmental and conservation or￾ganizations offer other possibilities in support of marine conservation projects 
and campaigns, lobbying decision-makers for increasing support of conservation 
policies. Many business ventures (tourism, diving, fishing) leverage MPAs as part 
of their attractions, employing professionals trained in marine science and policy. 
Academic research groups often address a variety of questions related to MPA 
ecological benefits, size and location, socioeconomic impacts, governance models, 
and public perceptions.
Questions for Reflection
 1. Even if the international community agrees to a goal of protecting 30% 
 2. What implications might global climate change (sea level rise, changing 
 3. Do you think that it is generally easier to manage a MPA or a terrestrial pro
 4. How can marine resource users, such as fishers, become part of MPA plan
 5. What factors would you consider in designing an MPA?
 6. Make arguments in favor of and against allowing tourism (fishing, diving) in 
 7. What are “paper parks” and how can these be avoided when establishing 
 8. Is fortress conservation a suitable approach to establish MPAs? Why or Stewardship and Conservation of the Marine Environment 189
 9. Restricted-entry zones, such as areas around petroleum platforms, ocean wind 
 10. If an MPA is established on the high seas, who would manage it?
References
Balmford, A., Gravestock, P., Hockley, N., McClean, C. J., & Roberts, C. M. (2004). 
The worldwide costs of marine protected areas. Proceedings of the National Academy 
of Sciences of the United States of America, 101(26), 9694–9697. https://doi.org/10.1073/
pnas.0403239101
Ban, N. C., Gurney, G. G., Marshall, N. A., Whitney, C. K., Mills, M., Gelcich, S., 
Bennett, N. J., Meehan, M. C., Butler, C., Ban, S., Tran, T. C., Cox, M. E., & Breslow, 
S. J. (2019). Well-being outcomes of marine protected areas. Nature Sustainability, 2(6), 
524–532. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41893-019-0306-2
Blaustein, R. J. (2007). Protected areas and equity concerns. BioScience, 57(3), 216–221. 
https://doi.org/10.1641/B570303
Bown, N., Gray, T. S., & Stead, S. M. (2013). Contested forms of governance in marine 
protected areas: A study of co-management and adaptive co-management. Routledge.
Brockington, D. (2002). Fortress conservation: The preservation of the Mkomazi game reserve, 
Tanzania. Indiana University Press.
Christie, P. (2004). Marine protected areas as biological successes and social failures in 
Southeast Asia. American Fisheries Society Symposium, 42, 155–164.
Cicin-Sain, B., & Knecht, R. (2000). The future of US ocean policy: Choices for the new 
century. Island Press.
Cinner, J. (2005). Socioeconomic factors influencing customary marine tenure in the 
Indo-Pacific. Ecology and Society, 10(1), 36. https://www.jstor.org/stable/26267728
Cinner, J. E., & Aswani, S. (2007). Integrating customary management into marine 
conservation. Biological Conservation, 140(3–4), 201–216. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
biocon.2007.08.008
Claudet, J., Guidetti, P., Mouillot, D., Shears, N. T., & Micheli, F. (2011). Ecological effects 
of marine protected areas: Conservation, restoration, and functioning. In J. Claudet 
(Ed.), Marine protected areas: A multidisciplinary approach (pp. 37–71). Cambridge 
University Press.
Cowen, R. K., Paris, C. B., & Srinivasan, A. (2006). Scaling of connectivity in marine 
populations. Science, 311(5760), 522–527. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1122039
Dalton, T. M. (2005). Beyond biogeography: A framework for involving the public in plan￾ning of US marine protected areas. Conservation Biology, 19(5), 1392–1401. https://doi.
org/10.1111/j.1523-1739.2005.00116.x
Davis, K. J., Vianna, G. M., Meeuwig, J. J., Meekan, M. G., & Pannell, D. J. (2019). 
Estimating the economic benefits and costs of highly protected marine protected areas. 
Ecosphere, 10(10), e02879. https://doi.org/10.1002/ecs2.2879
Day, J., Dudley, N., Hockings, M., Holmes, G., Laffoley, D., Stolton, S., Wells, S., & 
Wenzel, L. (Eds.). (2019). Guidelines for applying the IUCN protected area management 
categories to marine protected areas (2nd ed.). IUCN.
Delaney, J. M. (2003). Community capacity building in the designation of the Tortugas 
Ecological Reserve. Gulf and Caribbean Research, 14(2), 163–169. https://doi.org/10.18785/
gcr.1402.13190 M. Shivlani and D. O. Suman
De Santo, E. M., Mendenhall, E., Nyman, E., & Tiller, R. (2020). Stuck in the middle 
with you (and not much time left): The third intergovernmental conference on biodi￾versity beyond national jurisdiction. Marine Policy, 117, 103957. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
marpol.2020.103957
Dietz, T., Ostrom, E., & Stern, P. C. (2003). The struggle to govern the commons. Science, 
302(5652), 1907–1912. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1091015
Di Lorenzo, M., Claudet, J., & Guidetti, P. (2016). Spillover from marine protected areas 
to adjacent fisheries has an ecological and a fishery component. Journal for Nature 
Conservation, 32, 62–66. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jnc.2016.04.004
Dudley, N. (Ed.). (2008). Guidelines for applying protected area management categories. 
IUCN.
Edgar, G. J., Langhammer, P. F., Allen, G., Brooks, T. M., Brodie, J., Crosse, W., De Silva, 
N., Fishpool, L. D., Foster, M. N., Knox, D. H., McCosker, J. E., McManus, R., Millar, 
A. J., & Mugo, R. (2008). Key biodiversity areas as globally significant target sites for the 
conservation of marine biological diversity. Aquatic Conservation: Marine and Freshwa￾ter Ecosystems, 18(6), 969–983. https://doi.org/10.1002/aqc.902
Edgar, G. J., Stuart-Smith, R. D., Willis, T. J., Kininmonth, S., Baker, S. C., Banks, S., 
Barrett, N. S., Becerro, M. A., Bernard, A. T., Berkhout, J., Buxton, C. D., Campbell, 
S. J., Cooper, A. T., Davey, M., Edgar, S. C., Försterra, G., Galván, D. E., Irigoyen, A. 
J., Kushner, D. J. … Thomson, R. J. (2014). Global conservation outcomes depend on 
marine protected areas with five key features. Nature, 506(7487), 216–220. https://doi.
org/10.1038/nature13022
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. (2011). Fisheries manage￾ment. 4. Marine protected areas and fisheries. FAO Technical Guidelines for Responsible 
Fisheries. Retrieved July 6, 2022 from https://www.fao.org/3/i2090e/i2090e.pdf
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. (2020). The State of World 
Fisheries and Aquaculture 2020: Sustainability in Action. https://doi.org/10.4060/ca9229en
Florida Department of Environmental Protection. (2019, February 15). John Pennekamp 
Coral Reef State Park: Approved Unit Management Plan. DRP/FDEP. Retrieved July 6, 
2022 from https://floridadep.gov/sites/default/files/JPCRSP_02.15.2019%20 Approved%20
UMP.pdf
Fraschetti, S., Claudet, J., & Grorud-Colvert, K. (2011). Transitioning from single- sector 
management to ecosystem-based management: What can marine protected areas offer? 
In J. Claudet (Ed.), Marine protected areas: A multidisciplinary approach (pp. 11–36). 
Cambridge University Press.
Gaymer, C. F., Stadel, A. V., Ban, N. C., Cárcamo, P., Ierna, J., & Lieberknecht, L. M. 
(2014). Merging top-down and bottom-up approaches in marine protected areas 
 planning: Experiences from around the globe. Aquatic Conservation: Marine and 
Freshwater Ecosystems, 24(S2), 128–144. https://doi.org/10.1002/aqc.2508
Gill, D. A., Mascia, M. B., Ahmadia, G. N., Glew, L., Lester, S. E., Barnes, M., Craigie, I., 
Darling, E. S., Free, C. M., Geldmann, J., Holst, S., Jensen, O. P., White, A. T., Basurto, 
X., Coad, L., Gates, R. D., Guannel, G., Mumby, P. J., Thomas, H. … Fox, H. E. (2017). 
Capacity shortfalls hinder the performance of marine protected areas globally. Nature,
543(7647), 665–669. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature21708
Goñi, R., Badalamenti, F., & Tupper, M. H. (2011). Fisheries – Effects of marine protected 
areas on local fisheries: Evidence from empirical studies. In J. Claudet (Ed.), Marine 
protected areas: A multidisciplinary approach (pp. 72–98). Cambridge University Press.
Grüss, A., Kaplan, D. M., Guénette, S., Roberts, C. M., & Botsford, L. W. (2011). Conse￾quences of adult and juvenile movement for marine protected areas. Biological Conser￾vation, 144(2), 692–702. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biocon.2010.12.015Stewardship and Conservation of the Marine Environment 191
Grüss, A., Robinson, J., Heppell, S. S., Heppell, S. A., & Semmens, B. X. (2014). 
 Conservation and fisheries effects of spawning aggregation marine protected areas: 
What we know, where we should go, and what we need to get there. ICES Journal of 
Marine Science, 71(7), 1515–1534. https://doi.org/10.1093/icesjms/fsu038
Halpern, B. S., Frazier, M., Afflerbach, J., Lowndes, J. S., Micheli, F., O’Hara, C., 
Scarborough, C., & Selkoe, K. A. (2019). Recent pace of change in human impact on 
the world’s ocean. Scientific Reports, 9(1), 1–8. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-47201-9
Halpern, B. S., Lester, S. E., & McLeod, K. L. (2010). Placing marine protected areas 
onto the ecosystem-based management seascape. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences, 107(43), 18312–18317. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0908503107
Humphreys, J., & Clark, R. W. (2020). A critical history of marine protected areas, In J. 
Humphreys & R. W. Clark (Eds.), Marine protected areas: Science, policy, and manage￾ment (pp. 1–12). Elsevier.
Jones, P. J. S., Murray, R. H., & Vestergaard, O. (2019). Enabling effective and equitable 
marine protected areas: Guidance on combining governance approaches (Regional Seas 
Reports and Studies No. 203). Ecosystems Division/UNEP. Retrieved July 6, 2022 from 
https://apo.org.au/sites/default/files/resource-files/2019-04/apo-nid228726.pdf
Kough, A. S., Paris, C. B., & Butler IV, M. J. (2013). Larval connectivity and the interna￾tional management of fisheries. PLoS One, 8(6), e64970. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.
pone.0064970
Leenhardt, P., Low, N., Pascal, N., Micheli, F., & Claudet, J. (2015). The role of marine 
protected areas in providing ecosystem services. In A. Belgrano, G. Woodward, & U. 
Jacob (Eds.), Aquatic Functional Biodiversity (pp. 211–239). Academic Press.
Marine Conservation Institute. (2020). The marine protected atlas. https://mpatlas.org/
McCrea-Strub, A., Zeller, D., Sumaila, U. R., Nelson, J., Balmford, A., & Pauly, D. (2011). 
Understanding the cost of establishing marine protected areas. Marine Policy, 35(1), 
1–9. https://doi/10.1016/j.marpol.2010.07.001
National Academy of Public Administration. (2000). Protecting Our National Marine 
Sanctuaries: A Report by the Center for the Economy and Environment. Retrieved July 6, 
2022 from https://montereybay.noaa.gov/research/techreports/trnapa2000.html
O’Leary, B. C., Ban, N. C., Fernandez, M., Friedlander, A. M., García-Borboroglu, P., Golbuu, 
Y., Guidetti, P., Harris, J. M., Hawkins, J. P., Langlois, T., McCauley, D. J., Pikitch, E. K., 
Richmond, R. H., & Roberts, C. M. (2018). Addressing criticisms of large-scale marine 
protected areas. Bioscience, 68(5), 359–370. https://doi.org/10.1093/biosci/biy021
Petra, D. (2012). Marine protected areas in areas beyond national jurisdiction. 
The International Journal of Marine and Coastal Law, 27(2), 291–350. https://doi.
org/10.1163/157180812X637975
Pita, C., Pierce, G. J., Theodossiou, I., & Macpherson, K. (2011). An overview of commer￾cial fishers’ attitudes towards marine protected areas. Hydrobiologia, 670(1), 289–306. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10750-011-0665-9
Pomeroy, R. S., Mascia, M. B., & Pollnac, R. B. (2007). Marine protected areas: The social di￾mension. In FAO expert workshop on marine protected areas and fisheries management: Review 
of issues and considerations (pp. 149–275). FAO. Retrieved July 6, 2022 from http://citese￾erx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.120.4804&rep=rep1&type=pdf#page=157
Roff, J. C., & Zacharias, M. (2011). Marine conservation ecology. Earthscan.
Sala, E., & Knowlton, N., (2006). Global marine biodiversity trends. Annual 
Review of Environmental Resources, 31(1), 93–122. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.
energy.31.020105.100235
Salm, R. V., Clark, J. R., & Siirila, E. (2000). Marine and coastal protected areas: A guide for 
planners and managers. IUCN.192 M. Shivlani and D. O. Suman
Shivlani, M., Leeworthy, V. R., Murray, T. J., Suman, D. O., & Tonioli, F. (2008). Knowledge, 
attitudes and perceptions of management strategies and regulations of the Florida Keys 
 National Marine Sanctuary by commercial fishers, dive operators, and environmental group 
members: A baseline characterization and 10-year comparison. ONMS/NOS/NOAA/
DOC. http://hdl.handle.net/1834/20077
Suman, D. O., Shivlani, M., & Milon, J. W. (1999). Perceptions and attitudes regarding 
marine reserves: A comparison of stakeholder groups in the Florida Keys National 
Marine Sanctuary. Ocean & Coastal Management, 42(12), 1019–1040. https://doi.
org/10.1016/S0964-5691(99)00062-9
The MPA Guide. (n.d.). Retrieved July 20, 2022, from https://mpa-guide.protectedplanet.net/
United Nations. (2015). Transforming Our World: The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable 
Development (A/Res/70/1). Retrieved July 6, 2022 from https://sdgs.un.org/sites/default/
files/publications/21252030%20Agenda%20for%20Sustainable%20Development%20
web.pdf
Vann, A. (2010). Marine protected areas: Federal legal authority. In F. B. Mayr (Ed.), 
Marine protected areas (pp. 25–50). Nova Science Publishers, Inc.
Watson, J. E., Dudley, N., Segan, D. B., & Hockings, M. (2014). The performance 
and potential of protected areas. Nature, 515(7525), 67–73. https://doi.org/10.1038/
nature13947
Wells, S., Ray, G. C., Gjerde, K. M., White, A. T., Muthiga, N., Bezaury Creel, J. E., 
Causey, B. D., McCormick-Ray, J., Salm, R., Gubbay, S., Kelleher, G., & Reti, J. (2016). 
Building the future of MPAs–lessons from history. Aquatic Conservation: Marine and 
Freshwater Ecosystems, 26, 101–125. https://doi.org/10.1002/aqc.2680
World Bank. (2006). Scaling up marine management: The role of marine protected areas.
http://hdl.handle.net/10986/8152
Worm, B., Barbier, E. B., Beaumont, N., Duffy, J. E., Folke, C., Halpern, B. S., Jackson, J. 
B., Lotze, H. K., Micheli, F., Palumbi, S. R., Sala, E., Selkoe, K. A., Stachowicz, J. J., & 
Watson, R. (2006). Impacts of biodiversity loss on ocean ecosystem services. Science,
314(5800), 787–790. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.113229412 Social Justice in Coastal Spaces
M. M. Maldonado and B. Boovy
Social science fields like environmental sociology have centered the inextrica￾ble linkages and interdependencies between humans and the biophysical envi￾ronment since the 1970s (Catton & Dunlap, 1978, 1980). Since then, increasing 
numbers of natural science and resource management fields have come to recog￾nize the connections between the natural and social worlds. Marine scientists, as 
well, increasingly acknowledge that the world’s oceans and coasts are “peopled 
seascapes”, that is, people (and social concerns, values, and practices) are integral 
to marine environments (Bennett, 2019; Shackeroff et al., 2009).
Humans use, interact with, manage, attribute, and add different kinds of value 
to marine environments. Humans also shape and become part of marine en￾vironments, for example, when they recreate at the beach or build oceanfront 
houses whose economic value is determined precisely by their location and views. 
Coastal locations and ocean vistas not only provide attractive settings for tourists 
and residents; they are also abiding sources of creative and artistic inspiration. 
Additionally, humans rely on marine environments for income and work, such as 
those involved in fishing and seafood processing industries. We do not just live, 
work, and play in marine environments. We consume marine resources both lit￾erally and figuratively. We eat the fish and develop coastal cuisines and a taste for 
seafood. We celebrate special occasions at seafood restaurants. We go for walks at 
the beach with our significant others and dogs. We tell stories about the sea, and 
in that process, the marine environment becomes part of our cultural imaginary, 
linked to our individual and collective memories, histories, and identities. Those 
cultural imaginaries, in turn, mediate our relationship to coastal spaces.
Human dimensions research has attended to a wide range of human experi￾ences, including culture, policy and governance, health, and economics (Barreto 
et al., 2020; Christie et al., 2017; Levine et al., 2015). Here, we present an approach 
to marine studies that engages conceptual tools from the humanities and social 
sciences to call for a nuanced understanding of the terms “human” and “social” 
that recognizes people’s embeddedness in historically specific and geographically 
contingent social relations of power. We explore key concepts and questions that 
pertain to the critical study of social relations of power in coastal spaces. Our 
discussion offers a foundation and opportunities for reflection on how to develop 
an orientation toward marine studies that is informed by a commitment to social 
DOI: 10.4324/9781003058151-15194 M. M. Maldonado and B. Boovy
justice. We do not regard such an orientation as specific to a particular area or 
application of marine science or policymaking. Rather, it is pertinent across fields. 
We conclude by discussing how collaborations between marine sciences and crit￾ical liberal arts, social sciences, and humanities can lead to research and applied 
projects that derive the broadest social impacts, and that join marine and coastal 
health and vitality concerns with social justice concerns.
Foundational Concepts
Throughout this chapter, we use the terms power and oppression as foundational 
analytic categories that are central to any discussion of social justice in marine 
studies. We define these terms to also allow readers to begin making the invisible 
visible for themselves. Power and oppression point to social processes that tend 
to be elusive. A shared vocabulary is also important for the kinds of translational 
work across disciplines that marine studies students are increasingly called to per￾form. This brief overview of key terms helps readers to build a conceptual toolkit 
that will enable them to engage marine studies through a critical lens attentive 
to social justice. We then provide an example of how people can incorporate 
analyses of social relations of power into their work, referencing examples from 
our own research into demographic changes in the seafood processing industry. 
Our research illustrates the many ways in which social categories, such as race, 
class, gender, and ability, shape not only marine and coastal communities but also 
our own perspectives on what we study. We conclude with a call for increased and 
sustained multidisciplinary collaborations, as well as the hope that readers will 
continue learning about movements for social and environmental justice that 
intersect with the study of oceans and society.
When power and oppression are named, there is a tendency to first consider 
individuals as actors who exercise power over others. We follow van Dijk (1995) in 
focusing our attention on “social power” as opposed to “individual power”. Young 
(2009) suggests that power and oppression do not merely, or even primarily, refer 
to the dominance of a single individual or ruling group, as popular understand￾ings of these terms tend to suggest. Rather, when we refer to structural oppression, 
we are speaking of
the vast and deep injustices some groups suffer as a consequence of often 
unconscious assumptions and reactions of well-meaning people in ordinary 
interactions, media and cultural stereotypes, and structural features of bu￾reaucratic hierarchies and market mechanisms – in short, the normal pro￾cesses of everyday life.
(p. 56)
These dynamics can be elusive to the casual observer – sometimes even to the 
well-trained social scientist who might not focus on questions of power. In this way, 
power and oppression are reduced to individual acts of discrimination on the inter￾personal level: racist or sexist epithets, acts of violence, segregation, or exclusion.Social Justice in Coastal Spaces 195
Related terms include “diversity”, “inclusivity”, “tolerance”, and “acceptance”. 
Although these terms have become very common in social justice–oriented re￾search and engagement, in some cases they have come to suggest a watered-down 
analysis of social relations that imagines all people and groups to be on an equal 
playing field (Ahmed, 2012). These terms form part of some well-worn analogies 
of US culture, including the “melting pot”, “different but equal”, and the “self￾made man”. By failing to consider how power and oppression infuse our sociali￾zation and everyday interactions – from the gender roles we learn in our families 
to whether we have access to education, stable housing, health care, a secure food 
supply, and other necessities – we imagine that all social groups have the same 
opportunities in life. In fact, social relations are relations of power, shaped by his￾tories and ongoing processes of racialization, gendering, class stratification, ideas 
about ability, and other social and cultural processes.
An important first step to becoming critically aware of power, and learning 
how to name and locate it, is to interrogate everyday social arrangements. Power 
often works to obscure the realities of oppression and systemic inequity, taking 
the shape of familiar narratives. In the United States, those narratives include 
the myths of meritocracy, equal opportunity, and colorblindness, among others. 
Power often also gets embedded in “business as usual”, rendered invisible as it 
becomes part of the everyday practices of institutions and communities. We do 
not need to look far to begin to discern the day-to-day workings of power and 
oppression – the political nature of everyday life.1
 Critical approaches to inquiry 
and knowledge production often begin with understanding our own positionality. 
By positionality, we mean how the social categories that we inhabit as individuals 
position us in relation to power, within the structure and culture of our society. 
What is our social location? How does the history of the place and people we 
come from condition our interaction in society and with others who do not share 
the same origins or experiences? How can a deep understanding of our stories and 
social locations help us become critical of systemic power and oppression? What 
social relations and processes remain invisible to us based on our social location, 
and how we have learned to interact with others? How do our social locations 
prevent us from perceiving systemic power and oppression?
Social Relations of Power
The key argument is that the study of the human dimensions of marine envi￾ronments must center an analysis of social relations of power. Humans are mem￾bers of many social categories. Sociologists define a social category as a collection 
of people who have certain characteristics or traits in common, but generally 
have no connection beyond that. This differentiates social categories from social 
groups, which are collections of people with shared characteristics who interact 
and acknowledge their connections to each other. Power is embedded in the so￾cial categories we inhabit because social positions are both relational and hierar￾chical. The meaning and value associated with different positions within a social 
category are determined in relation to one another. Additionally, different social 196 M. M. Maldonado and B. Boovy
positions are valued more or less, or are granted more or less access to resources 
and advantages relative to one another.
Social relations of power have several key characteristics. First, they are histor￾ically specific and dynamic. Second, they are geographically contingent, meaning 
that, while shaped by large-scale (global and national) forces, they also tend to 
take on different inflections in specific spaces and places. Space thus constitutes 
one tangible canvas upon which social relations of power become traceable. We 
draw from critical geographer Massey’s (2005) conceptualization of space as so￾cially constituted, relational, and always under construction. Space is both con￾stitutive of and constituted by social relations of power. In other words, space is 
political. Anchored in this framework, we approach coastal spaces not simply as a 
natural backdrop, or a collection of geographic and marine features and resources. 
Instead, we attend empirically to how coasts – those spaces where land meets the 
sea or the ocean – are produced and shaped by humans and by the power relations 
among them. We also seek to understand how coasts, in turn, produce and repro￾duce (or allow interruption of) social relations of power.
Another key characteristic of social relations of power is that they are mutually 
imbricated and mutually shaping. Humans embody and give life to multiple so￾cial relations of power simultaneously, and power and oppression operate through 
multiple categories and relations at once. You might have heard of this as “inter￾sectionality”, which we discuss in more detail below.
Finally, history has shown us that where there is power, there is resistance. 
Power is not absolute; there is always the potential to interrogate, interrupt, and 
intervene, individually and collectively, for social change.
Analyzing Social Relations of Power
We briefly consider some specific social categories and relations of power that 
ought to be centered in the study of coastal spaces and offer additional resources 
for further engagement and reflection.
Race/Ethnicity
Simply put, race refers to physical differences that groups and cultures consider or 
treat as socially significant. Ethnicity, on the other hand, refers to shared cultural 
elements, such as language, ancestry, practices, and beliefs. Race and ethnicity 
are often connected in people’s minds and are sometimes even used interchange￾ably. For this reason, we refer to “ethno-racial groups”. The United States is a 
racialized society2
 in that its institutions, culture, and the distribution of wealth 
and resources have long been and continue to be shaped by race. In the post–
Civil Rights era of the United States, an ideology of colorblindness has become 
predominant. There is a tendency for people to not see race, and/or to explain 
racial phenomena in non-racial terms (Bonilla-Silva, 2017). The casual observer 
might imagine that race is absent or irrelevant in coastal communities. How￾ever, coastal communities, like all geographically bound communities, are always Social Justice in Coastal Spaces 197
already racialized. Communities that are racially homogeneous (for example, all￾white communities) are imbued with racial meaning, content, and politics be￾cause spatial segregation and displacement are racialized phenomena. All-white 
communities are socially produced as such, with sociopolitical implications.
Given broad demographic trends in the United States, many coastal commu￾nities are becoming increasingly diverse ethno-racially. For example, the state of 
Oregon (in the Pacific Northwest United States) and other coastal regions of the 
United States have seen remarkable growth of Latino populations (both immi￾grant and US-born) in the past few decades. Latino individuals and their families 
embody particular cultural identities, values, and practices – and engage, relate 
to, and use marine resources in particular ways. To the extent that spaces are 
produced by the relationships among those who inhabit them, coastal community 
identities are in flux, and demographic change entails the potential for changes 
in identity and politics. Latinos and other non-white groups who live in coastal 
communities also fill jobs in specific coastal industries, like seafood processing 
and restaurants. Research that attends to social justice in coastal spaces must con￾sider the racialized histories of place, as well as the racialized dynamics unfolding 
in the present, even if they might be invisibilized by normative presumptions of 
whiteness or by perceptions of racial homogeneity or de-raciality.
In our initial research in the Coos Bay area of the Southern Oregon Coast, we 
suspected that Latinos might be part of the local seafood processing workforce.3
This was based on preliminary conversations with several non-Latino white resi￾dents of Coos Bay, whose anecdotal perception was that Latinos were beginning 
to move into Coos Bay and were possibly taking jobs in seafood processing. Our 
research revealed that, in fact, Latinos had lived in the area and had been work￾ing in seafood processing for several generations. Why had their presence for such 
extended time been mostly unnoticed by white individuals from the community? 
Research has documented how white and non-white segments of rural communi￾ties tend to exist in parallel worlds (Chávez, 2005; Nelson & Hiemstra, 2008). The 
timing of circulation in public spaces of different ethno-racial segments of com￾munity might be different, and there are typically few, if any, instances of mean￾ingful interaction across ethno-racial lines. Segments of community are thus 
invisible to one another in their particularities, needs, and contributions. This 
is just one example of the ways in which coastal spaces are routinely racialized.
Gender
Just as the United States is a racialized society, so, too, is US society stratified in 
relation to gender.4
 The binary division of gender into female/male and feminine/
masculine represents a dominant Western understanding of gender that has his￾torically assigned different social roles to people socialized into the categories of 
woman and man. Of course, these conventional notions of binary gender roles 
do not hold, in many cases, when we observe actual social relations of power. For 
one, binary gender fails to capture the complex workings of systemic power and 
oppression, of which binary gender is but one example – what Butler (2006) refers 198 M. M. Maldonado and B. Boovy
to as “one tactic among many … in the service of expanding and rationalizing 
the masculinist domain” (p. 19). The binary logic that organizes gender roles in 
dominant society serves not only to maintain and naturalize social phenomena, 
such as a gendered division of labor and the gender–wage gap, but also excludes 
the multiplicity and complexity of gender expression.
To say that gender is a social construct, however, does not diminish its impact in 
everyday social practices and interactions, from the way spaces are designed (e.g., 
bathrooms and dressing rooms) to what jobs and roles we assume are appropriate 
for women in contrast to jobs that we tend to think are best reserved for men. 
Indeed, it is difficult to think of any aspect of US society that is not structured in 
part by binary gender. Binary gender shapes the kinds of tasks we associate with 
the conventional roles of woman and man. Dominant understandings of the role of 
women in US society have been tied to reproductive labor, that is, the kinds of work 
and everyday tasks that make it possible for societies to reproduce themselves – 
such as food preparation, health care, childcare, and other kinds of work that 
have come to be associated with the domestic sphere. By contrast, the gender 
binary also dictates masculine gender norms, where men’s roles are associated with 
productive labor or wage work. In concrete terms, we see this in what social sci￾entists refer to as “occupational segregation by gender”, a phenomenon that per￾sists despite the increasing numbers of women in the US workforce over the past 
several decades (Cohen, 2013; Hegeswich & Hartmann, 2014; Mastracci, 2005). 
Moreover, as other studies have shown (Cohen & Huffman, 2003), women’s labor 
is consistently valued less than men’s in the labor market, as evidenced by lower 
wages. Additionally, race and ethnicity in conjunction with gender norms further 
exacerbate occupational segregation and devaluing of jobs that are typically oc￾cupied by women of color (Mintz & Krymkowski, 2010; Reskin & Cassirer, 2012).
The US labor force has changed considerably over the past several decades, 
and coastal spaces are no exception. We can observe how gender norms structure 
society, and at the same time notice changes in how people interact with those 
norms. Historically, men have worked in fishing, crabbing, and other activities 
related to catching seafood, while women have found more work in seafood pro￾cessing, as well as the associated activities of food preparation in the home. Our 
research in Coos Bay revealed that the gender makeup of the seafood processing 
force has changed over time, with more men entering the industry. Nevertheless, 
we also saw trends that suggest that seafood processing is considered a source of 
supplemental income due to the seasonality of the work and the presumption that 
it is primarily women’s work. Here, we can consider how binary gender stereotypes 
continue to influence people’s perceptions of who performs what kinds of jobs in 
coastal and maritime economies.
Socioeconomic Class
Class is a much-debated concept in the social sciences and humanities. Scholars 
have defined it in a multiplicity of ways in connection to different theoretical 
frameworks. While there is little consensus around a single definition, by returning Social Justice in Coastal Spaces 199
to space as the canvas upon which power becomes tangible and observable, we 
can identify some class-related dynamics that routinely shape coasts. Some of 
the class content of coasts is relatively easy to ascertain. For example, we know 
that coastal real estate is highly coveted and valued in economic terms. Homes 
in certain coastal areas come with a hefty price tag, as do lodging accommoda￾tions that give visitors ocean views and/or beach access. Further, many coastal 
communities that were at some point dependent on fishing have experienced 
economic transformation and demographic shifts, becoming whiter and more 
affluent through gentrification, often under the auspices of “waterfront revital￾ization”. Sharp contrasts are perhaps the easiest spatial/physical manifestations 
of class dynamics in coastal spaces. In Coos Bay, Oregon, for example, an inter￾esting class contrast in housing is apparent. On the one hand, there is a dearth 
of affordable housing in the area, as well as a high rate of homelessness. Mean￾while, existing condos and apartment complexes, and a handful of luxurious 
homes, are devoted to recreational tourism through the Airbnb market. These 
class contrasts, though all too often presumed normal, represent the tension be￾tween possession and dispossession, wealth and poverty, as connected relational 
class processes on the coast.
At the macro level, coasts are shaped and animated by class dynamics of invest￾ment and disinvestment, as well as development and underdevelopment. For in￾stance, some critical geographers refer to “ocean grabbing” (Bennett et al., 2015), 
a term used to describe actions, policies, or initiatives that deprive small-scale 
fishers of resources, dispossess vulnerable populations of coastal lands, and/or un￾dermine historical access to areas of the sea. This phenomenon constitutes an 
example of power-imbued coastal transformation – a simultaneously classed and 
racialized spatial dynamic. Ocean grabbing is not always readily legible as such, 
because it often occurs through legal institutional practices, and even through 
policies and practices developed in response to ecological concerns.
However, coasts are not all the same; different coasts have different characteris￾tics and historical and present-day uses, so we can see different class articulations 
and dynamics in different places. For example, examining the dynamics of class 
might require more nuanced exploration of the “working” aspects of “working 
waterfronts”, that is, detailed exploration of what different kinds of work happen 
in a setting, who the workers are, and how wages and conditions vary across the 
board (see Doyle et al., 2018). Whether we work, the work we do, the general level 
of prestige associated with employment, the wages we earn, and the conditions 
we face in jobs are partly what places us within classed hierarchies and relation￾ships. What types of occupations and jobs are associated with different coastal 
and marine spaces? Also, as noted earlier, class intersects with gender and race/
ethnicity. Occupations and jobs within the coastal economy, as elsewhere, are 
typically segmented by race and gender. Men and women and people from differ￾ent ethno-racial groups tend to work in different jobs, associated with different 
levels of wages and job conditions. People of color – women, especially – tend to 
be concentrated in the lowest-paid and most precarious jobs. Articulations of race 
and immigrant illegality in the United States create additional vulnerabilities for 200 M. M. Maldonado and B. Boovy
unauthorized immigrant workers, resulting in even more precarious conditions 
and the baked-in potential for exploitation of a racialized and gendered workforce.
The need to pay attention to the intersections of class with other relations of 
power becomes clear if one examines research on natural disasters in coastal ar￾eas. One consistent finding of this literature, in the United States and across the 
globe, is that the impacts of natural disasters are not equally distributed across the 
population. The poor tend to be most heavily impacted. Precarity and poverty in 
US coastal areas cut across racial lines; there are poor people of all races in coastal 
communities. Yet, given the intersectional nature of power, poor people of color – 
and, in particular, poor women of color, along with gender-nonconforming and 
nonbinary people of color – are especially vulnerable, and it is more difficult for 
them to recover from the devastation caused by natural disasters. Sociopolitical 
relations and arrangements, in this way, exacerbate impacts for some. This has 
been abundantly documented in the US Gulf Coast region following Hurricane 
Katrina (Gault et al., 2005; Rodríguez & Dynes, 2007).
Intersectionality
The three categories outlined above do not represent the totality of social rela￾tions of power. Just as race, gender, and class overlap and interlock, so do other 
social categories and relations structure access to resources and opportunity, and 
are integral to the social production of advantage and disadvantage. For example, 
when we speak of the social and cultural biases that limit access to the natural and 
built environments, we refer to ableism as a system of oppression that creates and 
sustains inequities in relation to physical, psychological, or developmental impair￾ments. Here, too, differences in bodies are interpellated into a larger cultural and 
social system that disadvantages people defined as divergent from a presumed set 
of socially and culturally constructed norms about bodies and minds. Disability 
studies scholars (Swain et al., 2013) refer to disabling environments and the ways 
in which society “enables” certain bodies to move in society without difficulty. 
For example, are places of work in fisheries and the seafood processing industry 
accessible? What norms about ability and the body inform how equipment is de￾signed and organized in processing plants? How do the tasks and work processes 
of fishers and seafood processors impact workers’ bodies, from sore backs and feet 
after long days of standing, to injuries on their hands from knives and crab shells?
We can interrogate the ways in which many other social categories shape our 
relationship to power. For example, sexual orientation, religious affiliation, lan￾guage and racialized notions of linguistic ability, national origin, and citizenship, 
to name a few, might shape human interaction with and within coastal and ma￾rine environments in particular places. The concept of “intersectionality”, first de￾veloped by Black feminist scholars (Crenshaw, 1993), helps us name the dynamic 
of interlocking systems of power and oppression that constitute social relations 
of power (Carastathis, 2016; Cho et al., 2013; May, 2015). In reflecting on how 
to develop and apply a social justice approach to marine studies, students should 
not regard the social relations of power we define and center here as discrete Social Justice in Coastal Spaces 201
categories, but rather should focus on the relationships among these categories that 
shape and are shaped by systems of power and oppression. Box 12.1 includes sev￾eral case studies that are helpful in exploring and understanding the importance 
of an intersectional lens when considering coastal communities.
BOX 12.1 Coastal Change across the Globe
The social dimensions of power discussed in this chapter combine with 
historical, geographic, and ecological change to impact communities differ￾ently. Coastal communities are also resourceful in different ways in their re￾sponses to phenomena, such as hurricanes, sea level rise, and, most recently, 
the COVID-19 pandemic. The resources below are from a range of sources, 
from research reports to media coverage. As you read, pay close attention 
to where authors bridge perspectives from humanities, social sciences, and 
natural sciences to address human dimensions.
• “Small-Scale Fisheries in Southeast Asia See Harsh Impacts of 
COVID-19” illustrates the vulnerability of artisanal fisheries to im￾pacts from the pandemic (reduced demand, collapse of prices, lock￾down measures). https://seagrant.uconn.edu/wp-content/uploads/
sites/1985/2021/06/wracklines-S-2021-Small-Scale-article.pdf
• “America’s Sordid Legacy on Race and Disaster Recovery” describes 
the vulnerability of people of color to environmental disasters and 
hazards via the case of Hurricane Maria in Puerto Rico. https://www.
americanprogress.org/issues/race/news/2018/04/05/448999/
americas-sordid-legacy-race-disaster-recovery/
• “Gender Matters in Coastal Livelihood Programs in Indonesia” cri￾tiques investments in coastal community development projects that fail 
to empower women. https://theconversation.com/gender-matters-in￾coastal-livelihood-programs-in-indonesia-127747
• “On the Louisiana Coast, an Indigenous Community Loses Homes 
to Climate Change” illustrates the vulnerability of a poor indigenous 
coastal community to coastal erosion. https://www.scientificamerican.
com/article/on-the-louisiana-coast-an-indigenous-community-loses￾homes-to-erosion1/
• “Decades After Clashing with the Klan, a Thriving Vietnamese 
Community in Texas” chronicles the Vietnamese immigrant fishing 
community’s struggle against racism and anti-immigrant sentiment. 
https://www.npr.org/2018/11/25/669857481/decades-after-clashing-with￾the-klan-a-thriving-vietnamese-community-in-texas
In our research on the Oregon coast, for example, intersectionality helps us 
understand the different experiences, challenges, and opportunities facing people 202 M. M. Maldonado and B. Boovy
from various ethno-racial groups who are part of the seafood processing work￾force. Although all workers in the seafood processing industry face vulnerabili￾ties associated with seasonal and precarious work, Latino workers face the added 
vulnerability that results from widespread racialized narratives that dehumanize 
them and disable them from developing a sense of belonging in community. Some 
segments of the Latino population face further disadvantages from racialized im￾migration policies that restrict their job options and their ability to circulate freely 
and without fear in community contexts. While there is much economic need in 
the Coos Bay region, race and ethnicity function to deepen vulnerability and also 
to shape the coping mechanisms and resilience of different groups. For instance, 
we found that livelihood strategies and networks vary across ethno-racial groups 
in Coos Bay. Latino households routinely rely on extended family networks to 
deal with many of the challenges associated with the seasonality and precarity of 
work, and, additionally, have developed strategies that enable them to cope when 
work in seafood processing is scarce or not available. White workers in our study 
seemed to either lack access or not rely on similar strategies.
The Need for Multidisciplinary Collaborations
The terms and concepts we highlight might be novel, but this is not surprising. 
The siloing of disciplines within academic contexts often means that students 
of the natural and physical sciences have limited opportunities to engage in the 
social sciences and the humanities, let alone study power as a routine feature of 
social and cultural life. Furthermore, questions of sociocultural values and social 
justice are often presumed to be extraneous to the natural or physical sciences, 
fields that are supposedly about facts. Those other fields – in particular, critical 
interdisciplinary fields such as ethnic studies, women and gender studies, queer 
studies, and disability studies – are the ones that most often deal with social justice 
issues. In the sciences, studies outside the core curriculum are often minimal and 
intended to fulfill general education requirements. This structural characteristic 
of academic contexts has consequences for all involved in knowledge production, 
and for the sciences’ ability to ensure engagement of a broad public with scientific 
concerns, securing the broadest impacts of scientific research and innovation.
Increasingly, grant agencies and entities that promote and support scientific re￾search expect scientists to attend to the social dimensions of the issues they study. 
Along with intellectual merit, solid “broader impacts” rationales are routinely 
expected in research and application projects sponsored in the United States by 
the National Science Foundation (NSF) and entities like the National Oceanic 
and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA). Further, NSF has recently also called 
for a “convergence research approach” that considers technical and social issues 
simultaneously through multidisciplinary team development. Therein lies part 
of the promise and potential of multidisciplinary collaborations linking marine 
sciences with the critical social sciences and the humanities.
Scholars who work in critical fields, such as ethnic studies and women and gen￾der studies, are particularly well-equipped to collaborate with marine scientists in Social Justice in Coastal Spaces 203
the study of social relations of power in coastal spaces, for several reasons. First, 
their approach to research starts from the premise that all knowledge systems are 
rooted in social relations of power. This, in turn, entails a questioning of the pos￾sibility of objectivity/neutrality that is central to the natural sciences and main￾stream social science. While it might appear that these contradictory assumptions 
make collaboration across disciplines impossible, acknowledging the foundational 
assumptions of our respective fields enables open and honest discussion of the im￾plicit values in how research questions are framed, how data is collected, and how 
findings are interpreted. It requires intentionality on the part of all those involved 
in multidisciplinary research projects to engage in that conversation.
Beyond producing sound projects that are capable of securing funding, there 
are other important reasons for the concerned scientist to pursue research and 
scholarship that is critical and attentive to power dynamics. Just as marine studies 
researchers are always embedded in the social and cultural networks that com￾prise marine environments, so, too, do they approach their research questions 
from a multiplicity of backgrounds and experiences. In marine studies, this means 
adopting and developing a critical perspective on the systems and institutions 
that mediate our engagement with marine environments, ecologies, and species. 
To begin to interrogate these systems, we can use some of the same observational 
tools that we apply in research, but we must also reflect critically on our social lo￾cation. This means acknowledging how we, ourselves, are implicated in systems of 
power and oppression, and questioning conventional claims of objectivity in our 
research and study of marine environments. We all bring our own set of biases, 
preconceptions, stereotypes, and modes of interacting with others to our work as 
marine studies practitioners. Recognizing how we are implicated in social rela￾tions of power is a critical first step in transforming marine studies and developing 
a social justice orientation in our work.
Often, when we begin to take stock of how we are implicated in systems of 
power and oppression, we might feel as though social injustice is simply too wide￾spread to do anything about it. In our work, it is not uncommon for students 
to confront feelings of anger, betrayal, sadness, guilt, detachment, disbelief, and 
frustration, and these feelings will likely vary depending on lived experience and 
social location. Although these feelings are an important part of the process of 
developing a social justice orientation in marine studies, they are not the process 
itself. We encourage readers to acknowledge these feelings and build a community 
of peers and friends with whom to communicate and discuss feelings. Neverthe￾less, remember that the focus is on the social relations of power. Although our 
individual feelings are not insignificant, it is important not to get weighed down 
by them or allow them to dissuade readers from engaging in this critical work.
Coastal communities around the world have mobilized to confront the chal￾lenges of social inequality and injustice. The work of residents in these com￾munities illustrates how everyday people can resist and act effectively against 
pervasive and systemic injustice. In many cases, their efforts have been success￾ful. Box 12.2 presents references to several recent movements for social justice in 
coastal communities.204 M. M. Maldonado and B. Boovy
BOX 12.2 Movements for Social Justice in Coastal Spaces
Las playas son del pueblo (Beaches Are for the People) – As privatization of 
coastal properties makes public access increasingly difficult, Puerto Ricans 
organize to defend beach access and turtle nesting habitats.
• #PlayasPalPueblo – hashtag used by the movement on social media 
platforms
• “Tension Rises in Rincón Due to Police Force and Construction on 
Beach” –https://www.latinorebels.com/2021/07/27/tensionrisesinrincon/
• “Protestors Resist Militarized Gentrification of Public Beaches in Puerto 
Rico” –https://www.commondreams.org/views/2021/08/13/protestors￾resist-militarized-gentrification-public-beaches-puerto-rico
• “‘The beaches belong to the people’: Inside Puerto Rico’s anti-gentrification 
protests” – https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2022/jul/23/puerto￾rico-beach-anti-gentrification-protests?CMP=Share_AndroidApp_
Other
Indigenous/First Nations fishing rights – These cases illustrate Indigenous 
Peoples’ struggles to protect their fishing rights guaranteed by tradition, 
treaties, constitutions, or the courts.
• Northwest Indian Fisheries Commission – https://nwifc.org
• “The Long, Expensive Fight for First Nations’ Fishing Rights” – 
https://www.hakaimagazine.com/news/the-long-expensive-fight￾for-first-nations-fishing-rights/
• “Historic Court Ruling Upholds Sami Rights in Sweden” – https://www. 
culturalsurvival.org/news/historic-court-ruling-upholds-sami-rights￾sweden
Movement against slavery and human trafficking in the seafood processing 
and fishing industries – These websites illustrate human rights violations 
that occur on industrial fishing vessels and in seafood processing plants 
throughout the world.
• Slave Free Sees – http://www.slavefreeseas.org
• “Forced Labor and Human Trafficking in Fisheries” – https://www.ilo.
org/global/topics/forced-labour/policy-areas/fisheries/lang--en/index.
htm
• “Tun Lin Was Trapped for 11 Years on a Slave Ship. Now He’s Fight￾ing to End Slavery” – https://www.globalcitizen.org/en/content/slavery￾in-thai-fishing-industrySocial Justice in Coastal Spaces 205
Conclusion
Developing a social justice orientation toward marine studies does bring with it 
certain challenges. First, the need for an approach oriented toward social justice is 
not self-evident. Often, critical approaches are considered add-ons to degree pro￾grams in the natural sciences, rather than being foundational to the ways students 
are taught to think about their discipline. Developing an approach informed by 
social justice also requires reaching out to people in different fields and to individ￾uals and communities outside of universities. Moreover, it can be challenging to 
think relationally and consider that focusing on the human dimensions of marine 
studies is not an opportunity to map humans as data points, or an end in itself. In￾stead, our discussion of social relations of power is intended to generate discussion 
and reflection on how marine studies as a field and an approach to learning about 
marine systems is always embedded in historical, social, and cultural contexts. 
Moreover, the questions that we raise here are intended to encourage readers to 
think of their engagement with marine studies as an opportunity to transform 
the field and advance social justice through one’s work as a student, researcher, 
policymaker, scientist, artist, or in whatever path pursued.
Many scientists now acknowledge the complexities of pursuing their work in 
sociocultural contexts imbued with power. National and international organiza￾tions have emerged that call for acknowledgment of the power implications of 
scientific work. For example, Science for the People organizes scientists, activists, 
students, and scholars to address the connections between science and power in 
research institutions, universities, and communities. Similarly, the stated mission 
of Free Radicals is to “create a more socially just, equitable, and accountable sci￾ence” (Free Radicals, n.d.). These organizations engage their members and the 
public in dialogues about connections and disconnections between science and 
social justice, both past and present. Recently, Scientific American published a 
cover story by sociologist Aldon Morris titled “The Power of Social Justice Move￾ments”, which focuses on the history of racial justice movements. Morris (2021) 
ends the piece with a call to scholars to “face the challenge of keeping pace with 
social justice movements as they develop” and to “do more … to illuminate the 
paths that movements should traverse in their journeys to liberate humanity”. 
Will the sciences concerned with marine and coastal spaces keep up with this 
historic call?
Professional Pathways
Students interested in working at the juncture of social justice concerns and 
coastal spaces can pursue studies combining ocean sciences or marine studies 
with co-majors, minors, or certificates in critical interdisciplinary fields such as 
Ethnic Studies, Indigenous Studies, and Women’s Gender and Sexuality Studies. 
These fields may have other names across academic institutions. However, the 206 M. M. Maldonado and B. Boovy
key is to identify interdisciplinary units that take a critical approach to space, 
natural resources, environment, and to race/ethnicity, gender, and other social re￾lations of power, as we outline in this chapter. This sort of interdisciplinary train￾ing equips students to consider issues of inequity and power along with specific 
coastal contexts and/or natural resource issues; and provides a critical lens, an an￾alytical framework, and methodological approaches that are relevant and can be 
applied in any work setting. Many workplaces with a focus on oceans and coasts, 
and/or on natural resources more broadly, have increasingly come to recognize 
the importance of bringing on board personnel who are trained and equipped 
to engage questions of social and cultural difference and power. Students of ours 
(Maldonado and Boovy) who have combined academic work in ocean sciences 
and/or marine studies fields with work in Ethnic Studies and/or Women’s, Gender, 
and Sexuality Studies have gone on to take jobs with entities such as NOAA, 
non-governmental organizations focused on marine conservation, community re￾source centers and non-profits, and as academics doing research and teaching at 
various universities.
Questions for Reflection
 1. What communities and commitments motivate your engagement with ma
 2. How does the work you do align with, call into question, or challenge power 
 3. What does an approach to marine studies that prioritizes social justice look 
 4. What learned assumptions within your field or discipline might be in tension 
 5. How does a social justice–oriented approach shift our understanding of some 
 6. Who is active and visible in the fields represented by marine studies? Who 
Notes
 1 Throughout this chapter, we use the term 
 2 Race and ethnicity are features of the modern world system, not just the United States. 
 3 For a helpful map along with images of the Coos Bay/North Bend area, see: https://Social Justice in Coastal Spaces 207
 4 Gender, like race/ethnicity and other social relations of power, is integral to how 
References
Ahmed, S. (2012). On being included: Racism and diversity in institutional life. Duke 
University Press.
Bacchetta, P., Maira S., & Winant, H. (Eds.). (2019). Global raciality: Empire, postcolonial￾ity, decoloniality. Routledge.
Barreto, G. C., Di Domenico, M., & Medeiros, R. P. (2020). Human dimensions of marine 
protected areas and small-scale fisheries management: A review of the interpretations. 
Marine Policy, 119, 104040. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpol.2020.104040
Bennett, N. J. (2019). Marine social science for the peopled seas. Coastal Management,
47(2), 244–252. https://doi.org/10.1080/08920753.2019.1564958
Bennett, N. J., Govan, H., & Satterfield, T. (2015). Ocean grabbing. Marine Policy, 57, 
61–68. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpol.2015.03.026
Bonilla-Silva, E. (2017). Racism without racists: Color-blind racism and the persistence of 
racial inequality in America (5th ed.). Rowman and Littlefield.
Butler, J. (2006). Gender trouble: Feminism and the subversion of identity. Routledge. (Orig￾inal work published 1990) https://doi.org/10.4324/9780203824979
Carastathis, A. (2016). Intersectionality: Origins, contestations, horizons. University of 
Nebraska Press.
Catton, W. R., Jr., & Dunlap, R. E. (1978). Environmental sociology: A new paradigm. The 
American Sociologist, 13(1), 41–49. https://doi.org/10.1177/000276428002400103
Catton, W. R., Jr., & Dunlap, R. E. (1980). A new ecological paradigm for post￾exuberant sociology. American Behavioral Scientist, 24(1), 15–47. https://doi.org/10.1177/
000276428002400103
Chávez, S. (2005). Community, ethnicity, and class in a changing rural California town. 
Rural Sociology, 70(3), 314–335. https://doi.org/10.1526/0036011054831224
Christie, P., Bennett, N. J., Gray, N. J., Wilhelm, T. A., Lewis, N. A., Parks, J., Ban, N. 
C., Gruby, R. L., Gordon, L., Day, J., Taei, S., & Friedlander, A. M. (2017). Why people 
matter in ocean governance: Incorporating human dimensions into large-scale marine 
protected areas. Marine Policy, 84, 273–284. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpol.2017.08.002
Cho, S., Crenshaw, K. W., & McCall, L. (2013). Toward a field of intersectionality studies: 
Theory, applications, and praxis. Signs, 38(4), 785–810. https://doi.org/10.1086/669608
Cohen, P. N. (2013). The persistence of workplace gender segregation in the US. Sociology 
Compass, 7(11), 889–899. https://doi.org/10.1111/soc4.12083
Cohen, P. N., & Huffman, M. L. (2003). Occupational segregation and the devaluation 
of women’s work across U.S. labor markets. Social Forces, 81(3), 881–908. https://www.
jstor.org/stable/3598179
Crenshaw, K. (1993). Mapping the margins: Intersectionality, identity politics, and 
violence against women of color. Stanford Law Review, 43(6), 1241–1299.
Doyle, J., Boovy, B., Maldonado, M. M., & Conway, F. D. (2018). Understanding the 
working in working waterfronts: The hidden faces of the industries that make up 
the working waterfront. In L. Price & N. Narchi (Eds.), Coastal heritage and cultural 
resilience (pp. 223–242). Springer.208 M. M. Maldonado and B. Boovy
Free Radicals. (n.d.). Mission. https://freerads.org/mission/
Gault, B., Hartmann, H., Jones-DeWeever, A., Werschkul, M., & Williams, E. (2005, 
October). The women of New Orleans and the Gulf Coast: Multiple disadvantages and 
key assets for recovery part I: Poverty, race, gender and class. (IWPR # D464). Insti￾tute for Women’s Policy Research. Retrieved July 7, 2022 from https://katrinareader. 
cwsworkshop.org/sites/katrinareader.org/files/iwpr.pdf
Hegeswich, A., & Hartmann, H. (2014). Occupational segregation and the gender wage gap: 
A job half done. Institute for Women’s Policy Research. https://hdl.handle.net/1813/79410
Levine, A. S., Richmond, L., & Lopez-Carr, D. (2015). Marine resource management: 
Culture, livelihoods, and governance. Applied Geography, 59, 56–59. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.apgeog.2015.01.016
Massey, D. (2005). For space. Sage.
Mastracci, S. H. (2005). Persistent problems demand consistent solutions: Evaluating 
policies to mitigate occupational segregation by gender. Review of Radical Political 
Economics, 37(1), 23–38. https://doi.org/10.1177/0486613404272326
May, V. (2015). Pursuing Intersectionality, unsettling dominant imaginaries. Routledge.
Mintz, B., & Krymkowski, D. H. (2010). The intersections of race/ethnicity and gender in 
occupational segregation: Changes over time in the contemporary United States. Inter￾national Journal of Sociology, 40(4), 31–58. https://doi.org/10.2753/IJS0020-7659400402
Morris, A. (2021, February 3). From civil rights to Black Lives Matter. Scientific American. 
https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/from-civil-rights-to-black-lives-matter1/
Nelson, L., & Hiemstra, N. (2008). Latino immigrants and the renegotiation of place and 
belonging in small town America. Social & Cultural Geography, 9(3), 319–342. https://
doi.org/10.1080/14649360801990538
Reskin, B., & Cassirer, N. (2012). Occupational segregation by gender, race, and ethnicity. 
Sociological Focus, 29(3), 231–243. https://doi.org/10.1080/00380237.1996.10570642
Rodríguez, H., & Dynes, R. R. (2007). Finding and framing Katrina: The social construc￾tion of disaster. In D. L. Brunsma, D. Overfelt, & J. S. Picou (Eds.), The sociology of 
Katrina: Perspectives on a modern catastrophe (pp. 23–33). Rowman & Littlefield.
Runyan, A. S., & Peterson, V. S. (2018). Global gender issues in the new millennium (4th 
ed.). Routledge.
Shackeroff, J. M., Hazen, E. L., & Crowder, L. B. (2009). The oceans as peopled 
seascapes. In K. McLeod & H. Leslie (Eds.), Ecosystem-Based management for the oceans
(pp. 33–54). Island Press.
Swain, J., French, S., Barnes, C., & Thomas, C. (2013). Introduction. In J. Swain, S. 
French, C. Barnes, & C. Thomas (Eds.), Disabling barriers – enabling environments
(pp. xvii–xxi). Sage.
Van Dijk, T. A. (1995). Discourse, power, and access. In C. R. Caldas-Coulthard & M. 
Coulthard (Eds.), Texts and practices: Readings in critical discourse analysis (pp. 84–104). 
Routledge.
Winant, H. (2002). The world is a ghetto: Race and democracy since World War II. Basic 
Books.
Young, I. M. (2009). Five faces of oppression. In G. L. Henderson & M. Waterstone (Eds.), 
Geographic thought: A praxis perspective (pp. 55–71). Taylor & Francis. (Original work 
published 1990)13 Truth-Telling
Understanding Historical and 
Ongoing Impacts to Traditional 
Ecological Knowledge (TEK)
C. B. LaPorte
Introduction
We start this chapter, which is focused on traditional ecological knowledge 
(TEK), with a comparison of worldviews. It is difficult to address shared issues if 
we do not have a foundational understanding of where we come from and how 
we got here. Here is a place that is wrought with oppression, with tension, with 
uncertainty, and with urgent concern for our shared space going forward. Here is 
a place that bears the wounds of settler-violence and requires healing. Healing 
does not occur without truth-telling. To that end, this chapter will endeavor to 
address what TEK is, what it is not, and, most importantly, the historical context 
in which it managed to survive in all of its forms. This is less a discussion on 
the scientific impacts of TEK or on the ways in which TEK is beneficial to occu￾pied spaces facing climate change impacts (specifically around coastal areas), and 
more a story of resistance. In particular, this is a story of resistance against and 
resourcefulness around the ways in which federal Indian law and environmental 
policy has impacted, supported, or abrogated TEK altogether.
A discussion of this resistance is best chronicled by remembering creation sto￾ries and oral tradition, as Indigenous worldviews are shared and shaped by stories 
and language. The role of creation stories is to act as a pathway for various cul￾tures to transmit original values and fundamental teachings. While the stories 
are as varied as are the Indigenous cultures globally and within the United States, 
these stories are valid expressions of instructional living. They do more than give 
us a starting place. They provide us with a lens and a reminder of who we are, 
where we come from, and, most importantly, the ways in which we set ourselves 
about the critical work of belonging and of remembering.
Many Indigenous cultures do not treat land as a resource, do not treat water 
only for its use to humans or corporations, and do not view animals or plants as 
being less-than. Land, water, and non-human plants and animals are kin. This 
worldview is rooted in numerous creation stories. We can contrast this directly 
with Anglo-Christian-centric worldviews, in which we are told to have dominion 
and to subdue, and where morality is conflated with hierarchy, rule, and oppres￾sion. In the story of Skywoman, non-human agency not only predates the exist￾ence of land but also precipitates it. We start with these two stories because they 
DOI: 10.4324/9781003058151-16210 C. B. LaPorte
provide a valid contrast to consider, one that is extensively chronicled in Robin 
Wall Kimmerer’s 2013 work, Braiding Sweetgrass: Indigenous Wisdom, Scientific 
Knowledge, and the Teachings of Plants.
The point to be made is that an Indigenous worldview is antithetical to that of 
the settler. While you read this chapter, you should seek out the creation stories 
and oral traditions of the people who originally inhabited the land you work or 
live on and think critically about your own worldview and its impact on Indige￾nous people.
What Is TEK?
Traditional ecological knowledge, sometimes called “Indigenous knowledge”, is 
the “knowledge, practice, and beliefs concerning the relationship of living beings 
to one another and to the physical environment, which is held by [Indigenous 
peoples] with a direct dependence on local resources” (Berkes, 1993 as cited in 
Kimmerer, 2002, pp. 432–433). It arises when humans and their non-human kin￾ship (including land, water, plants, and animals) are interconnected (Kimmerer, 
2002). This interconnectedness is a belief system, a worldview rooted in spiritual￾ity, in culture, and in language. It is tethered to individual Indigenous worldviews. 
What is distinctive about it, as compared to other observational sciences whose 
principles can be extrapolated to fit the needs of the global community, is that it is 
unique to place and also intergenerational. It is deeply personal to the caretakers 
of a specific place. It does not reduce land, water, or non-humans to objects or 
specimens to be studied, but it is still a systematic cyclical observation of nature 
over a period of time (Kimmerer, 2002). TEK is fluid and not fixed (United States 
Caucus of the Traditional Ecological Knowledge Task Team, 2021). In its simplest 
form, it is a story: The story of the relationship between the Earth and her Indig￾enous inhabitants.
BOX 13.1 Case Study: Anishinaabe and Manoomin, a Treaty 
between People and Creator
Manoomin (good berry, or wild rice) is essential to Anishinaabe and 
Ojibwe culture, and Tribes have been respectfully harvesting it for thou￾sands of years. Its use for subsistence and ceremony cannot be understated 
and is even central to migration prophecies of Ojibwe people.
As the prophecies foretold, however, the bands were reunited several 
generations later at Manitoulin Island, forming a union known as 
the Three Fires Confederacy that remains to this day. In the time of 
the Third Fire, they found the place foretold in prophecy, ‘where the 
food grows on the water’, and established their new homelands in the Understanding Historical and Ongoing Impacts to TEK 211
country of wild rice. The people lived well for a long time under the 
care of maples and birches, sturgeon and beaver, eagle and loon. The 
spiritual teachings that had guided them kept the people strong and 
together they flourished in the bosom of their nonhuman relatives.
(Kimmerer, 2013)
The process of harvesting Manoomin is TEK, but not only because of the 
observational benefits derived from years of this practice. It is TEK because 
the practice itself is ceremony. Harvesting Manoomin is rooted in grati￾tude. The practice centers on an understanding that you will not take more 
than you need and that you will harvest in a way that does not disturb the 
life process of the plant.
You bring in the wind; you bring in the motions of everything, the 
heat, sun, all that, you sing about that. When you dance it, you’re 
asking the plant to give up its fruit, so you dance on it gentle. Good 
dancers, traditional Indian dancers, they don’t stomp their feet on the 
ground. They’re real light when they dance. Just like we dance rice, 
because we don’t want to break the kernels. You got to get the husk off 
without breaking the kernels, so you got to dance real light. You got to 
be related, thinking in your mind and your body and that’s when we 
sing that song.
(Fred Ackley, Jr., The Ways, 2019)
This practice of only taking what was needed, rather than harvesting all that 
there was, seemed foreign and lazy to settlers who first encountered Ojibwe 
people (Kimmerer, 2013). Land itself under a Western worldview is merely 
a commodity. This is one of the biggest threats to Manoomin. A recent re￾port from the Great Lakes Indian Fish and Wildlife Commission found that 
Manoomin was extremely vulnerable to climate change. Specifically, many 
Tribal members noted the decrease of Manoomin in the region due to the 
installation of dams, brown spot infestation, changes in water levels, stronger 
and more frequent weather events, pollution, and competition from invasive 
species (Great Lakes Indian Fish & Wildlife Commission, 2018).
Oil pipelines and copper-nickel mines constitute a particular threat to 
Manoomin in the region. In response, the White Earth Band of Ojibwe 
passed laws recognizing the “Rights of Manoomin” and establishing an en￾forcement mechanism. It was the first Tribal law to pass and grant legal 
status for a plant or animal species (Douglas, 2021).
Manoomin, or wild rice, within all the Chippewa ceded territories pos￾sesses inherent rights to exist, flourish, regenerate, and evolve, as well 
as inherent rights to restoration, recovery, and preservation.
(1855 Treaty Authority, Resolution 2018–2005, White Earth Band of 
Ojibwe)212 C. B. LaPorte
These rights include the right to clean water, the right to a natural environ￾ment free from industrial pollutants, the right to a healthy, stable climate 
free from human-caused climate change impacts, the right to be free from 
patenting, and the right to be free from contamination by genetically engi￾neered organisms (Stopline3, 2019).
In August 2021, Manoomin brought suit as a lead plaintiff in a Tribal 
court case (Douglas, 2021) seeking to stop Enbridge from pumping up to 5 
billion gallons of ground and surface water for construction and alleges the 
Minnesota Department of Natural Resources has violated multiple treaty 
rights as well as the rights of Manoomin by allowing the extractive indus￾tries to persist despite the clear impacts (Douglas, 2021).
BOX 13.2 Case Study: The Guna Peoples and Sea Turtles
The Guna-Yala Comarca in Panama was established as a semi-autonomous 
Indigenous territory in 1954 and today has a population of over 35,000 
persons residing on some 400 coralline islands and the Caribbean main￾land in northeastern Panama. Bab Igar (Way of the Great Father) is the 
Guna cultural and spiritual framework that guides collective and individual 
 decision-making (Apgar et al., 2015). All material things (plants, animals, 
rocks, people) have an essential spirit called burba that is interconnected.
The Guna people call May “Yauk Nii”, the Month of the Hawksbill Sea 
Turtle, because during that time there is significant nesting of sea turtles 
on the beaches of the Guna-Yala Comarca. Traditionally, the Guna did not 
kill the turtles, and local rules prohibited harvesting more than half of the 
turtle eggs. Guna believe that turtles were humans who were punished by 
Bab Dummad, the Great Father or Creator. Persons who killed sea turtles 
would risk contracting tuberculosis because the turtles’ spirits would invade 
the person’s burba (Ventocilla et al., 1995). Others believe that, in revenge, 
a turtle’s spirit will drag the fishermen’s boat out to sea.
In 2012 the Guna General Congress declared that leatherback sea tur￾tles could not be hunted, exploited, or sold at any point during their life 
cycle, to protect and conserve this endangered species that is symbolic in 
Guna culture. Some Guna communities have been especially active in the 
promotion of sea turtle traditions and have created linkages to conserva￾tion efforts. The community of Armila has declared itself to be a Sacred 
Sea Turtle Sanctuary (Yauk Galu) and monitors sea turtle nesting. In May, 
Armila celebrates a sea turtle festival to promote sea turtle conservation 
and strengthen cultural traditions of music, dance, storytelling, and crea￾tion of molas (an article of women’s clothing). The Armila community has 
created the Yauk Galu Foundation to support their efforts (United Nations 
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, 2018).Understanding Historical and Ongoing Impacts to TEK 213
What Is TEK Not?
Pan-Indigenous
Traditional ecological knowledge is not pan-Indigenous. In the United States 
alone there are 574 federally recognized Tribes and over 60 state-recognized Tribes – 
each with their own languages, customs, traditions, ways of being and knowing, 
and “significance of place”. To this point, it bears noting that not all Tribes or other 
Indigenous peoples occupy their ancestral homelands. One need only look to the 
Tribes forcibly removed West to reservations as a result of violent colonial forces 
and an insatiable greed for Native land. What traditional ecological knowledge can 
be present in communities who no longer occupy their homelands? If language is 
tied to land and land tied to TEK, this is a question for settlers and beneficiaries of 
settler-violence to address. It is a question whose answer requires redress. Regardless, 
it is necessary to understand that TEK varies from community to community, that 
it can change with time, and that it is relative to place, as all stories are.
Limited to Addressing a Specific Problem
TEK is a way of life. It is not merely a scientific solution to a problem. TEK is a way 
of interacting with the land, water, and non-human kinship (including plants and 
animals) in a way that is not hierarchical (Kimmerer, 2002). It is a collection of 
observations that one often makes over the course of a relationship. This means 
that TEK cannot be separated from the individual and distinct worldviews of 
which it is a manifestation. To simply uplift TEK in the environmental justice or 
climate spaces but ignore Indigeneity, to still promote and uphold colonial world￾views and privileges in all other contexts, is another form of settler-violence. It is 
necessary to constantly approach and reassess this work from an anti-oppression 
lens that centers decolonization.
Whole or Safe
The problem with talking about TEK as merely a solution is the assumption that 
it remains wholly intact despite ongoing efforts to eradicate Indigenous people 
from their lands and to systematically, intentionally, and violently strip Indige￾nous people of what it means to be Indigenous. Thinking of TEK as whole or safe 
ignores the fact that it is under constant threat. TEK is often rooted in language, 
story, and ceremony (Kimmerer, 2002). But in the United States, Indigeneity has 
been deeply disrupted by ongoing colonization and genocide. The next section 
of this chapter provides a brief overview of the relationship between the United 
States and Tribes, a relationship that is predicated on extreme oppression.
Foundational Knowledge
Three of the four case studies provided in this chapter are geographically based 
in what is now considered the United States – and the United States’ relationship 
with Tribal Nations is rooted in genocide. Thus, it is necessary to understand the 214 C. B. LaPorte
historical context within which TEK exists and resists. It is necessary to learn about 
this history because it is our shared responsibility to provide redress. But we also 
cannot expect Tribal Nations or Indigenous peoples to provide non- Native com￾munities with the solutions to climate change when settler-violence intentionally 
sought out and systematically destroyed much of this knowledge. Indigenous ways 
of being and knowing were viewed as inferior, savage, primitive, or uncivilized, 
and in many spaces that thinking remains prevalent. They were certainly not 
favored by social or natural sciences. Much of our languages, ceremonies, stories, 
kinship, and clanship were stolen. And while there are certainly ongoing efforts, 
generationally, to restore Indigenous worldviews within Tribal communities or for 
individual Indigenous people living outside of Indian country, it would be naïve 
to imagine these worldviews as uninterrupted or fully intact. Simply put, settler￾violence has produced consequences. These consequences were felt first and most 
acutely in Indigenous communities, but because we all live in shared spaces, the 
destruction of stewardship has impacted communities beyond those of the original 
inhabitants. Climate change, after all, is a threat to everyone.
Historical Relationship between the United States 
and Indian Nations
Most academic and legal scholars agree that several distinct eras of federal Indian law 
and policy provide context for the relationship between Tribes and the United States, 
at least in a general sense. These eras coincide with marked shifts in policy, and those 
policies influence the treatment of and ramifications for Native people. The follow￾ing is a brief discussion of those eras, with an expanded focus on assimilation.
Pre-contact
This era is generally known as the one that ended in 1492 (Pevar, 2012). We 
document the end of this era with the arrival of Christopher Columbus. Plenty of 
scholars rightfully critique this demarcation, as Columbus more accurately arrived 
in what is now Puerto Rico, and his contact with North American Tribes as they 
have come to be defined was nil. Indigenous ways of life and being flourished in 
this early era, uninterrupted by the genocidal impact of settler arrival.
Tribal Independence
This era (1492–1787) is best defined by the arrival of other sovereigns (in particu￾lar, the British, the French, and the Spanish) and the interactions between these 
colonizing nations and the Indigenous people of North America. It is also marked 
by increasing tension among Native people and their oppressors (Pevar, 2012). 
Particularly oppressive was the iron fist of Christianity, whose believers increas￾ingly connected their views of Native people as non-human with their right to 
Indian land. Settler diseases had a major impact on Native populations as settlers 
began to occupy North America at alarmingly high rates. The prevailing mindset 
of this era was that Indians were an impediment to America’s future.Understanding Historical and Ongoing Impacts to TEK 215
The Necessity of Sovereignty
Between the years of 1787 and 1828, the founders of the United States re￾alized that their mere existence on the land did not equate to sovereignty – 
 something that is very much needed to govern oneself. Other sovereigns on 
US soil engaged in the practice of treaty-making with Tribes who were seen as 
independent nations, so the colonists followed suit. The first treaty signed by 
the United States after the adoption of its new constitution was with an Indian 
Tribe: The Delaware Indians (Pevar, 2012). Laws were passed to protect Indig￾enous sovereignty rights, particularly because that sovereignty established the 
basis for the United States’ own sovereignty. Few of those laws, however, were 
enforced (Pevar, 2012).
Removal and “Relocation”
From 1828 to 1887, the United States engaged in the explicit policy of removal. 
Andrew Jackson, a one-man genocidal think-tank, and his Congress passed the 
Indian Removal Act in 1830. The result was the violent, forced, and deadly 
 removal of many Indian tribes westward. Many treaties were signed and broken 
during this period, but in 1871, Congress passed a law that prohibited federal 
agents from making any new treaties with Indian tribes (Pevar, 2012).
Assimilation and Allotment
Between 1887 and 1934, the federal policy toward Indian people was shaped by 
two efforts: (1) take Indian lands for settlement by whites, and (2) take Indi￾ans, specifically children, and assimilate them into white society. As a result, the 
 General Allotment Act (commonly referred to as the Dawes Act) was passed. The 
overall goal of the Dawes Act was “to extinguish tribal sovereignty, erase reserva￾tion boundaries, and force the assimilation of Indians into society at large” (US 
Supreme Court, 1992). Indians had no desire to become white because they were 
already Indians. Additionally, the allotments they received, upon which they 
were to farm and ranch, were not suitable for agriculture. Due to impoverishment, 
many Indians were forced to sell their allotments to settlers, and others lost their 
land to foreclosures. Of the nearly 150 million acres of land that Tribes owned in 
1887, by the time the Dawes Act was repealed in 1934, less than 50 million acres 
remained (Pevar, 2012).
Devastatingly, on March 3, 1819, Congress passed the Civilization Fund Act. 
This Act authorized the President of the United States to “improve the habits and 
conditions of such Indians practicable” so as to “employ capable persons of good 
moral character”. The fund paid missionaries and other church organizations and 
leaders to conspire with the federal government for the sole purpose of creat￾ing schools in Indian country to assimilate Native children into white Anglo￾Christian society. The explicit federal policy was to “kill the Indian, save the 
man”, as if what was Native was not human. The United States has a particularly 
sordid history of defining humanity by its proximity to whiteness.216 C. B. LaPorte
By 1887, the federal government had established over 200 schools in an in￾tentional and genocidal effort to strip Native people of what made them Native 
(Pevar, 2012). To “civilize” Native children, those in the employ of these institu￾tions punished Native children for speaking their Native languages, refused them 
access to their siblings, gave them Christian names, and would not allow them to 
practice their traditions, customs, ceremonies, or religions (Pevar, 2012). Children 
were forced into unpaid labor, required to partake in Anglo-Christian religious 
practices, and were often punished by means of severe isolationist tactics (Pevar, 
2012). Native children in these government-run schools were physically beaten, 
raped, and killed (Pevar, 2012). All of this violence was sanctioned by the state.
Indian Reorganization
Federal policy toward Tribes shifted in 1930 and trended toward basic human￾ity. The Meriam Report, published in 1928, documented reservation life (Pevar, 
2012; Brookings Institution & Institute for Government Research, 1928). Hearing 
about the oppressive conditions under which Natives were living prompted public 
criticism of the federal government’s treatment of Natives. In June 1934, Con￾gress passed the Indian Reorganization Act (IRA) to “rehabilitate the Indian’s 
economic life and to give him a chance to develop the initiative destroyed by 
a century of oppression and paternalism” (US House of Representatives, 1934). 
The IRA was enacted to restore Tribal governments through various provisions 
to protect Tribal land and encourage Tribes to adopt their own constitutions. The 
IRA, though well-meaning, was paternalistic. Tribes were not consulted in its 
development, and it promoted a Western version of Tribal government that did 
not equate to traditional Tribal governance (Pevar, 2012).
Termination
In 1953, the treatment of Tribes and Native people in the United States began to 
center on complete integration of Natives into white society. Also paternalistic 
in nature, the idea was that integration was in the best interests of the Natives. 
A primary goal of this legislation was to save money. By terminating the federal 
government’s trust relationship with certain Tribes, all federal benefits and ser￾vices could cease. Between 1953 and1966, Congress terminated its trust relation￾ship with 109 Tribes. Another policy of this era was to remove Native people from 
reservations to urban areas by providing incentives, like job training and housing 
assistance (Pevar, 2012).
Era of Self-Determination
As of 1968, the official federal policy of the US government toward Indian tribes 
has been one of self-determination (Pevar, 2012). As enacted, it is not perfect, but 
the general goal of supporting Tribal sovereignty (or Tribal inherent authority to 
self-govern) has been a welcome change from the policy of termination.Understanding Historical and Ongoing Impacts to TEK 217
How Has This Historical and Ongoing 
Context Impacted TEK?
The impact of the historical and ongoing relationship between the United States 
as a colonizing government and Tribal Nations as the colonized has been detri￾mental to TEK. While it is true that TEK exists and resists the impacts of geno￾cide, it is necessary to discuss the effects of federal policies and acts to understand 
what needs to be healed.
Simply put, the process of making Indians not Indian was detrimental to 
the land. If Native people are the original caretakers of their ancestral home￾lands, removal of Native people from the land and from themselves constitutes 
 settler-state violence against land. All of these policies have resulted in distrust; 
historical trauma; loss of language, culture, and tradition; loss of generations; loss 
of land; and loss of traditional food. The loss of Indigeneity has been the impact 
of these policies, which directly impacts TEK.
We can clearly see this impact when we consider the removal of Native people from 
their ancestral lands. Without connection to a place of cultural significance, what can 
be said for an impacted Tribe’s TEK? Another example is boarding schools: The loss 
of language and cultural teachings, in addition to the physical removal of entire gen￾erations of children from their Tribes, clearly impacts TEK. To provide some context 
to boarding schools, recall that the Civilization Fund Act, passed in 1819, encouraged 
“benevolent societies” (i.e., religious institutions), via state funding, to provide educa￾tion for American Indians and Alaska Natives to assimilate and civilize them into 
white society (Native American Rights Fund [NARF], 2019). The process of civilizing 
Native children was an act of genocide that persisted into the 1980s (NARF, 2019). 
Native children were forcibly removed from their homes and sent to schools, often￾times very far from their Tribal communities (NARF, 2019). These children suffered 
unspeakable violence in the forms of sexual and physical abuse, murder, and inten￾tional removal of their identities as Indigenous people. Their names were changed to 
Christian names, they were punished for speaking their language or practicing their 
ceremonies, they were separated from sibling groups, forced to practice Christianity, 
and their hair was cut. Entire generations of children were removed over a sustained 
period of time. Canada had a similar process. As of November 2021, efforts (led by 
Indigenous activism, and often in direct opposition to the messaging of power sources 
such as the Catholic Church and two world sovereigns) are underway in both coun￾tries to address the murders that occurred at these schools and the repatriation of 
remains. Of course, these efforts only received mainstream media attention when, in 
the summer of 2021, the first mass grave was discovered at Kamloops Indian Residen￾tial School in British Columbia. The bodies of 215 children, lost to their parents, their 
families, and their communities, were found callously discarded beneath the school 
(Austen, 2021). It is worth noting that Kamloops continued to operate until the late 
1970s (Austen, 2021). The link between TEK and these institutions should be rela￾tively clear. Just as with other cultural practices and traditions, boarding schools cut 
off transmission of TEK from generation to generation by prohibiting and punishing 
children for their Indigeneity, which is a necessary component of TEK.218 C. B. LaPorte
What Legal Frameworks Seek to Protect Indigenous TEK and 
Traditional Relationships with Land and Water within the 
United States, and Why Do They Inevitably Fail?
Types of Laws Specific to the United States
Treaties
Many people are unaware that there are three distinct sovereigns in the United 
States: the federal government, the individual states, and Indian tribes (Article I, 
Section 8 of the US Constitution). Most are additionally unaware that the United 
States’ own sovereignty is predicated upon Tribal sovereignty, as discussed in a 
previous section. What is clear, however, is that while treaty law is the law of the 
land in the United States, it is rarely upheld.
Treaties were originally viewed as contracts. Many treaties contain the phrase 
‘contracting parties’ and specify that each party must agree to the terms of 
the treaty for it to be valid.
(Deloria, 1988)
Regarding TEK, we see the impact of the continuous and blatant abrogation of 
treaties in relation to upholding Tribal rights to whaling (as in the case of the 
Makah Tribe of the US Pacific Northwest), Manoomin (wild rice), and fishing 
rights. We also see how the practice of ignoring treaties results in a deprioritiza￾tion of consultations with Tribal communities over proposed permitting; the TEK 
within these groups continues to go ignored in favor of private or governmental 
interests (which are detrimental to land, water, and non-human kin).
BOX 13.3 Case Study: Makah Whaling – Subsistence Hunting and 
Treaty Rights vs. the Marine Mammal Protection Act
The thunderbird brought us the whale and fed us.
(Patrick DePoe in Rust, 2019)
The Makah Tribe of the Pacific Northwest traditionally occupied the north￾west border of the Olympic Peninsula, until 300,000 acres of their land 
were ceded to the United States under the 1855 Treaty of Neah Bay (Rust, 
2019). Part of the uniqueness of this treaty is that it expressly reserved the 
Tribe’s right to practice whaling in their traditional waters (Rust, 2019).
[T]he right of taking fish and of whaling and sealing or sealing at usual 
and accustomed grounds and stations is further secured to said Indians 
in common with all citizens of the United States.
(The Treaty of Neah Bay, 1855)Understanding Historical and Ongoing Impacts to TEK 219
The Makah Tribe has been practicing whaling for over 2,000 years, as 
is central to their culture, but they stopped in the 1930s after observing 
through their TEK that the population of the gray whale had been signif￾icantly reduced by the American capitalist whaling industry (Rust, 2019).
In the 1970s, the US Congress passed the Endangered Species Act 
(ESA) and the Marine Mammal Protection Act (MMPA), which drasti￾cally impacted the ways in which the Makah people could exercise their 
treaty rights (despite the absence of clear congressional intent for either 
act to supersede these rights). The gray whale was listed as endangered, 
and then as threatened, under the ESA. By the mid-1990s the gray whale 
population had significantly recovered, and in 1995, the Tribe notified the 
United States of its intent to resume its cultural practice (Eligon, 2019). In 
1999, the Tribe was able to successfully hunt a gray whale for the first time 
since the 1930s (Eligon, 2019). Following the hunt, however, anti-treaty 
and animal rights activists launched a series of bigoted attacks against 
the Makah. In one such example, the Sea Shepherd Conservation Soci￾ety posted their ship in Neah Bay and sounded a horn for the entirety of 
a Makah community celebration (Hopper, 2019). Through the combined 
efforts of anti-treaty activists, animal rights activists, and far-right congres￾sional members, the Makah were ordered to suspend whaling by the Ninth 
Circuit Court of Appeals in Metcalf v. Daley (The Last Real Indians, 2020). 
The Court held that the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administra￾tion’s (NOAA) National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS) would have to 
complete a new environmental assessment before the Tribe could resume 
its 2,000-year-old practice (The Last Real Indians, 2020). A subsequent suit 
was filed by a similar cohort in 2002 in Anderson v. Evans, where the Court 
held that the environmental assessment needed in Metcalf v. Daley was no 
longer sufficient and that an Environmental Impact Statement would need 
to be filed (National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, 2021). 
Perhaps most damaging was the Court’s holding that the MMPA applied 
to the Makah’s treaty-reserved rights. This was unusual, considering Con￾gress’s determination that nothing in the 1994 amendments to the MMPA 
“alters or is intended to alter any treaty between the United States and one 
or more Indian tribes” (Last Real Indians, 2020; Public Law, 1994).
As a result of this ruling, the Tribe had to apply for a waiver under the 
MMPA to resume treaty-based hunting of gray whales for ceremonial and sub￾sistence purposes in the Tribe’s traditional fishing area. In 2005, the Tribe did 
just that – and to this day remains in the process of acquiring the waiver it 
filed 16 years ago (National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, 2021).
As of September of 2021, an administrative law judge issued a recom￾mendation to the US Department of Commerce stating that the Makah 
Tribe should be granted a waiver under the MMPA (Mark, 2021). The final 
decision rests with NMFS (Mark, 2021).220 C. B. LaPorte
Lesser Laws
One of the first acts of Congress was the Northwest Ordinance of 1787 (reaffirmed 
in 1789), which states, “The utmost good faith shall always be observed towards 
Indians; their land and property shall never be taken without their consent.” Of 
course, the Northwest Ordinance of 1787 encompasses far more than the several 
lines dedicated to American Indians, but the entirety of the phrase quoted here is 
important for the legal obligations established by the terms of art used. For exam￾ple, the phrase “utmost good faith” has a specific legal meaning, as does “consent”. 
Both are contract terms, meaning that a breach by the US government, or a failure 
to assure consent prior to taking land and property, should be problematic. Yet, 
the language of the treaty has been ignored with no ramifications for the United 
States. Some scholars have argued that the genocidal violence against American 
Indians that occurred within the United States was an intended consequence 
of this language, and that “dispossession with gratitude” of Indian land was the 
preferred policy because it allowed “US Americans to enjoy the benefits of terri￾torial expansion at minimal expense, their consciences soothed and their sense 
of themselves as exceptional, nourished by the fantasy that Indians endorsed their 
claim to have acted with ‘utmost good faith’” (Ostler, 2016). We discuss this here 
to understand that where there are laws specific to Indian country, they are often 
not enforced, are overly paternalistic, or were enacted or executed in bad faith.
Readers should also understand that the relationship between federally recog￾nized Tribes and the United States is legally characterized as that of trustee and 
ward. This characterization has led to rampant paternalism under the guise of 
federal policy for the benefit of Native people. It is also necessary to know that 
because Congress has plenary power over Indian country, it has the ability to 
establish what constitutes Indian country (as it has done since the founding of 
the United States). Of course, exercising this power can be exclusionary and can 
impact communities in disparate ways. For example, though there are 229 feder￾ally recognized Tribes in Alaska, the federal definition of Indian country is only 
applicable to the Metlakatla. Thus, the protections that apply to Indian country 
leave out nearly half of all federally recognized Tribes.
Several of the case studies presented in this chapter discuss the impacts of 
relevant US environmental laws on Tribal rights, culture, and sovereignty (e.g., 
the Marine Mammal Protection Act and the case of the Makah Tribe whaling, 
and the case of the Miccosukee Tribe in South Florida and the Clean Water Act).
BOX 13.4 Case Study: The Federal Clean Water Act and the 404 
Assumption
The Miccosukee and Seminole Tribes’ cultural, spiritual, and traditional 
practices are dependent on a healthy Everglades ecosystem. Using tradi￾tional teachings like those found in Betty Mae Jumper’s 1994 text, Legend of 
the Seminoles, and through language and the passing of oral traditions, both Understanding Historical and Ongoing Impacts to TEK 221
Tribes have significant TEK and use it in conjunction with other advance￾ments. For example, the Miccosukee Community and the Miccosukee 
Environmental Protection Agency (MEPA) have been documenting tra￾ditional ecological knowledge as well as peer-reviewed data that centers on 
the overall environmental health of the Everglades (Love the Everglades, 
2017). As a sovereign, the Tribe is able to – and does – create policies that 
positively impact the Everglades’ ecosystem.
This practice is important not just for its Tribal TEK, which is cul￾turally rooted and based in kinship with the Everglades, but also for the 
 Nation-to-Nation relationship that the Miccosukee Tribe rightfully expects 
as a federally recognized Tribe. Tribal sovereignty, however, is perpetually 
under attack, and even the federal Clean Water Act of 1972 creates colo￾nial and paternalistic problems for that sovereignty.
The best way it could be for the environment was how the creator 
originally intended it to be. But the white man came and thought he 
knew better.
(Betty Osceola in The Swamp, MacLowry, 2019)
The Clean Water Act establishes the basic structure for regulating dis￾charge of pollutants into US waterways, as well as surface water quality 
standards. This legislation expressly authorizes the Environmental Protec￾tion Agency (EPA) to treat Tribes as states for the purposes of grants, water 
quality standards, clean lakes, nonpoint source management, and more. 
Importantly, the EPA has agency policy that directly speaks to the necessity 
of consultation with the Tribes. Given the Nation-to-Nation relationship 
of Tribes and the US government, consultation on permitting is obligatory.
The US government previously ceded 90,000 acres of wetlands to the Sem￾inole and Miccosukee Tribes around the same time that both Tribes acquired 
federal recognition (Schulman, 2020). Under this previous schematic, if an 
individual wished to dredge and fill in the Everglades, that individual would 
be required to apply for a permit from the US Army Corps of Engineers, 
which maintained oversight of wetland development (Schulman, 2020).
However, the Clean Water Act also has a provision for a process known as 
the 404 Assumption, which can be found in section 404(g). A 404 assump￾tion permits US states to petition for control of federally protected land for 
leasing and permitting. In the Everglades, an already threatened wetland, 
opening these protected spaces to drilling, fracking, or development will in￾evitably lead to further degradation of the water quality and the habitat. For 
the Tribes, the impact of these potential activities cannot be understated.
The tribe is deeply appalled about the loss of culturally sensitive sites 
and the potential destruction of the Miccosukee way of life. This way 
of life is integrally entwined within the Florida Everglades
(Miccosukee Tribe of Florida, Schulman, 2020)222 C. B. LaPorte
The lack of consultation has been appalling. The Tribe stated,
The Miccosukee, along with several other affected tribes, have engaged 
in limited government-to-government consultation with the EPA and 
Army Corps of Engineers regarding the State of Florida’s application 
for overall assumption. However, but when the Miccosukee requested 
specific consultation on this critical interpretation, we were denied.
(Williams, 2020)
Alongside advocacy groups arguing that the state assumption over these 
lands will result in a significant decrease in oversight to favor development, 
the Tribe argues that the impact to the wetlands will directly impact the 
quality of water, biodiversity, and existing wildlife habitats – all three of 
which have already been detrimentally impacted by increased human 
 migration to the area.
The Plenary Authority of Congress
Congress has plenary authority over Indian tribes under the US Constitution. 
This means that Congress has the ability to terminate a Tribe’s sovereign status, 
ending the trust relationship and legal obligations with that individual Tribe. In 
this way, laws that are specific or relevant to Tribal land interests and protections 
become expendable.
International Human Rights Law
In theory, international human rights law is a legal framework that anticipates 
the whole of a people: their cultural, social, economic, and political rights, and, 
in some instances, their Indigeneity. The United Nations Declaration on the 
Rights of Indigenous People (UNDRIP) contains 46 articles, at least six of which 
explicitly state that Indigenous peoples have specific rights to their traditional 
homelands:
• Article 10 states that Indigenous people shall not be forcibly removed from 
their lands.
• Article 20 provides that Indigenous people have the right to engage freely 
in their traditional and economic activities, and that if deprived, they are 
entitled to just and fair redress.
• Article 24 declares Indigenous people the right to their traditional medicines.
• Article 25 states they have the right to maintain their distinctive spiritual 
relationship with their traditionally owned or otherwise occupied and used 
lands, territories, and coastal seas.
• Article 26 provides that Indigenous people have the right to the lands, ter￾ritories, and resources which they originally owned, occupied, or otherwise 
used; andUnderstanding Historical and Ongoing Impacts to TEK 223
• Article 29 states that Indigenous people have the right to the conservation 
and protection of the environment and the productive capacity of their lands 
(United Nations, 2007).
Where international human rights law falls short is in implementation. To be 
blunt, UNDRIP has no teeth because it lacks an enforcement mechanism. It 
is not legally binding on states and does not impose any legal obligations on 
governments. In the United States, this reality is particularly relevant. While 
UN-based advocacy often results in additional awareness around a particular 
issue and memorializes Tribes’ engagement with the UN as sovereign bodies, 
best efforts result in shaming. It is not a coincidence that the only four orig￾inal non-signatories of UNDRIP were Australia, New Zealand, Canada, and 
the United States. All four have taken a similar approach to their Indigenous 
populations: genocide, massive land theft, assimilation/cultural genocide, and 
ongoing present-day occupation.
Intellectual Property Law
Arguments exist that TEK can (and should) be protected by intellectual prop￾erty law. But intellectual property law is rooted in profit, or, more specifically, in 
quantifiable losses that the owner of the intellectual property can prove. In that 
way, intellectual property law falls short because it is a Western construct, rooted 
in a Western worldview that prioritizes individual ownership and capital. Addi￾tionally, intellectual property law fails to consider generations past and future. It 
is difficult to have legal standing (a necessary component to bringing a lawsuit) if 
the person or persons intended to benefit from the protection are not in physical 
existence as pertains to Western concepts of being and owning. Furthermore, TEK 
is not individually oriented. It is collective and cannot belong to one person or 
one group – especially where regionally, Tribes share similar ways of being and 
knowing. To be clear, TEK is culture.
A Discussion on the Challenges Facing Social Justice 
Movements
It can be tempting to adopt TEK into mainstream spaces that address coastal areas 
and the impact of climate change without addressing the impact of settler- violence 
on the TEK and on the Indigenous communities who hold it. This amounts to a 
taking, and it frequently occurs in social justice movements. Sometimes we may 
think we can overcome the historical relevance of settler-violence through things 
like land acknowledgments, or through adding an Indigenous component to our 
work. Both approaches are inadequate. Land acknowledgments are ceremonial 
expressions of acknowledging the ancestral land of the Tribal nation we occupy, 
occasionally acknowledging the historical atrocities that occur, and almost always 
abrogating responsibility or complicity. They are rarely accompanied by an ac￾tion. More specifically, land acknowledgments fail to give land back.224 C. B. LaPorte
There can be, additionally, a rush to respond to urgent issues, and to do so 
by merging TEK with other scientific advancements absent an understanding of 
the historical violence and occupation that continues to impact TEK as it exists 
today. We cannot attempt to reconcile our treatment of land, water, and other 
non-human kin if we do not understand the reasons TEK has been historically 
degraded. The main reason is simple: TEK is rooted in Indigeneity.
In failing anti-oppression work, which is certainly applicable to marine and 
coastal climate advocacy spaces, we are often more interested in how to main￾tain power under the guise of addressing root causes of harm in our communities 
than we are in actually doing that work. Instead of understanding how oppression 
manifests even in well-meaning spaces, we focus on how well-meaning our space 
is. But rarely does a shift in power result, nor is there an understanding about 
what a power shift looks like. Most social justice movement spaces are adept at ac￾knowledging marginalized people, but most individuals who work in those move￾ments fail to acknowledge how oppression is often mirrored in those spaces and 
built into hierarchies of organizations, into the ways social justice spaces assess 
legislative priorities, or into how they leverage and acquire funding.
Finally, social justice movements are centered on reform and incremental 
change. Given that an Indigenous worldview is antithetical to a settler one, it 
is impossible to reform settler-created systems and expect Indigeneity to thrive. 
Indigenous governance and worldviews are not at all compatible with current 
systems in the United States. Reforms fall short because they fail to dismantle. 
Ever-present in reform are colonization, occupation, oppression, patriarchy, pater￾nalism, and hierarchy.
Conclusion
So, the question becomes, what is the role of the non-Indigenous person with 
regard to TEK? Naturally, the answer to this question is layered and depends on 
who, and when, you ask. There are, clearly, urgent needs that TEK can and does 
address. In those instances, TEK should be utilized. But it should not be co-opted, 
nor should it be elevated without meaningful moves toward decolonization. To do 
so would be an empty gesture reliant on the expenditure of Indigenous knowledge 
to address problems that an Indigenous worldview did not create. In that sense, 
part of the responsibility of non-Indigenous people is to engage in truth-telling 
with Indigenous communities. Whether that process manifests as formal truth 
and reconciliation, or through the process of ongoing education on the history 
of the treatment of Indigenous people on their homelands, is entirely up to each 
Indigenous community.
Additional roles can include supporting Tribal sovereignty, seeing the benefits 
of Indigenous governance for all, learning of, and helping to advocate for the 
priorities of Indigenous communities, and advocating for land-back movements. 
These are examples of places to begin, but they will not be sufficient to address 
historical and ongoing genocide, colonization, and occupation. Going forward, 
the hard work of decolonization is essential to TEK.Understanding Historical and Ongoing Impacts to TEK 225
Professional Pathways
Students interested in a career related to traditional ecological knowledge have 
the benefit of being able to pursue multiple paths. Some of these paths are met 
through conventional modes of study as mentioned in this chapter. Because 
Tribal governments are varied in terms of location (even from a purely geograph￾ical sense), students could study marine biology, engineering, political science, 
environmental science and resource management, biochemistry, botany, environ￾mental studies, aquatic and fishery sciences, law, and so on.
Students could work for Tribal governments in a variety of capacities. Because there 
are 574 federally recognized Tribes in the United States, there are plenty of opportu￾nities for students who are interested in a career related to TEK. Tribal governments 
have their own natural resources departments, offices of environmental management, 
their own historic preservation offices, their own legislative/executive/judicial bodies, 
etc. Additional opportunities include working within academia (particularly within 
Native studies programs or at Tribal colleges/universities), working for an NGO, and 
working for other governments (such as federal agencies or even Congress).
Questions for Reflection
 1. What makes TEK unique? How is it different from local knowledge? Who 
 2. Please carefully reflect on and consider the ways in which your everyday 
 3. Is the legal framework of settler-colonial nations antithetical to Indigenous 
 4. Who were the original inhabitants on the land you currently reside on? What 
 5. What is governance? Explain how Tribal sovereignty, particularly in the 
 6. What role does culture play in TEK (think about kinship systems, language, 
References
Apgar, M. J., Allen, W., Moore, K., & Ataria, J. (2015). Understanding adaptation and 
transformation through indigenous practice: The case of the Guna of Panama. Ecology 
and Society, 20(1), 45. http://dx.doi.org/10.5751/ES-07314-200145
Austen, I. (2021, May 28). ‘Horrible History’: Mass Grave of Indigenous Children Re￾ported in Canada. New York Times. https://www.nytimes.com/2021/05/28/world/canada/
kamloops-mass-grave-residential-schools.html226 C. B. LaPorte
Berkes, F. (1993). Traditional ecological knowledge in perspective. In T. J. Inglis (Ed.), 
Traditional ecological knowledge: Concepts and cases (pp. 1–9). Canadian Museum of 
 Nature and International Development Research Centre.
Brookings Institution, & Institute for Government Research. (1928). The problem of Indian 
administration. Johns Hopkins University Press.
Deloria, V. (1988). Custer died for your sins: An Indian manifesto. University of Oklahoma 
Press.
Douglas, J. (2021, September 2). Wild rice sues to stop oil pipeline. High Country News. 
https://www.hcn.org/articles/latest-justice-wild-rice-sues-to-stop-oil-pipeline#:~:-
text=It%20declared%20that%20within%20White, %2C%20recovery%2C%20and%20
preservation.%E2%80%9D
Eligon, J. (2019, November 14). A native Tribe wants to resume whaling. Whale defenders 
are divided. New York Times. https://www.nytimes.com/2019/11/14/us/whale-hunting￾native-americans.html
Great Lakes Indian Fish, & Wildlife Commission. (2018). Integrating Scientific and 
Traditional Ecological Knowledge. http://glifwc.org/ClimateChange/GLIFWC_ 
Climate_Change_Vulnerability_Assessment_Version1_April2018.pdf
Hopper, F. (2019, May 7). Makah one step closer to hunting whales: Animal rights ex￾tremists continue to oppose it. Indian Country Today. https://indiancountrytoday.com/
news/makah-one-step-closer-to-hunting-whales-animal-rights-extremists-continue-to￾oppose-it
Jumper, B. M. (1994). Legends of the seminoles. Pineapple Press.
Kimmerer, R. W. (2002). Weaving traditional ecological knowledge into biological 
education: A call to action. BioScience, 52(5), 432–438. https://doi.org/10.1641/
0006-3568(2002)052[0432:WTEKIB]2.0.CO;2
Kimmerer, R. W. (2013). Braiding Sweetgrass: Indigenous wisdom, scientific knowledge, and 
the teachings of plants. Milkweed Editions.
Love the Everglades. (2017). Miccosukee Tribe requests public comment on new non￾point source pollution plan. https://www.lovetheeverglades.org/blog/miccosukee-tribe￾requests-public-comment-on-new-nonpoint-source-pollution-plan
Maclowry, R. (2019). The American experience: The swamp [Film]. PBS Video.
Mark, J. (2021, September 29). A tribe has not hunted whales in decades. Now, it might 
have a chance — and animal rights groups aren’t happy. Washington Post. https://www.
washingtonpost.com/nation/2021/09/29/makah-whaling-judge-recommendation/
Native American Rights Fund. (2019, November). Trigger points: Current state of research 
on history, impacts, and healing related to the United States’ Indian industrial/boarding 
school policy. https://secureservercdn.net/198.71.233.187/ee8.a33.myftpupload.com/
wp-content/uploads/2019/12/trigger-points.pdf
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. (2021). Makah tribal whale hunt 
frequently asked questions. https://www.fisheries.noaa.gov/west-coast/makah-tribal￾whale-hunt-frequently-asked-questions.
Ostler, J. (2016). ‘Just and lawful war’ as genocidal war in the (United States) Northwest 
Ordinance and Northwest Territory, 1787–1832. Journal of Genocide Research, 18(1), 
1–20. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1080/14623528.2016.1120460
Pevar, S. L. (2012). The rights of Indians and Tribes. Oxford University Press.
Public Law No. 103–238, § 14, 108 Stat. 532, 558 (1994).
Resolution establishing rights of Manoomin, 1855 Treaty Authority. (2018, 
December 5). Retrieved July 21, 2022 from https://static1.squarespace.com/static/
58a3c10abebafb5c4b3293ac/t/5c3cdbc940ec9ab9b9ffde9d/1547492298497/1855+
Treaty+Authority+Resolution+for+2018-05+Rights+of+Manoomin+12-5-18.pdfUnderstanding Historical and Ongoing Impacts to TEK 227
Rust, S. (2019, December 1). A U.S. Tribe wants to resume whale hunting. Should it 
revive this tradition? Los Angeles Times. https://www.latimes.com/environment/
story/2019-12-01/whale-hunting-makah-tribe-tradition-washington-state
Schulman, S. (2020, December 24). Florida Tribes deeply appalled by wetlands 
deal. Indian Country Today. https://indiancountrytoday.com/news/florida-tribes￾deeply-appalled-by-wetlands-deal
Stopline3. (2019). White Earth Nation and 1855 Treaty Authority pass laws to protect the 
“Rights of Manoomin.” https://www.stopline3.org/news/rightsofmanoomin
The Ways. (2019). Manoomin. Retrieved June 29, 2022 from https://theways.org/story/ 
manoomin.html
Treaty of Neah Bay. (1855, January 31). https://goia.wa.gov/tribal-government/treaty￾neah-bay-1855
United Nations. (2007). United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, 
General Assembly Resolution No. 61/295, adopted on Sept. 13, 2007. https://www.
un.org/development/desa/indigenouspeoples/wp-content/uploads/sites/19/2018/11/ 
UNDRIP_E_web.pdf
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization. (2018). Community 
consent and participation. https://ich.unesco.org/doc/src/40082.pdf
United States Caucus of the Traditional Ecological Knowledge Task Team. (2021). Guid￾ance document on traditional ecological knowledge pursuant to the Great Lakes water 
quality agreement. https://www.bia.gov/sites/bia.gov/files/assets/bia/wstreg/Guidance_
Document_on_TEK_Pursuant_to_the_Great_Lakes_Water_Quality_Agreement.pdf
US House of Representatives. (1934). H.R. Report No. 1804, at 6.
US Supreme Court. (1992). County of Yakima v. Confederated Tribes and Bands of Yakima 
Indian Nation, 502 U.S. 251, 254.
The Last Real Indians. (2020, February 18). Makah whaling and the anti-treaty mobilization 
by chuck tanner. Retrieved June 3, 2021 from https://lastrealindians.com/news/2020/2/11/
makah-whaling-and-the-anti-treaty-mobilization.
Ventocilla, J., Herrera, H., & Núñez, V. (1995). Plants and animals in the life of the Kuna. 
University of Texas Press.
Williams, A. B. (2020). “Runaway train” policy change will hurt Florida’s environment, 
advocates say. News-Press. https://www.news-press.com/story/tech/science/environment/
2020/12/17/florida-native-americans-and-environmental-activists-decry-wetland￾permitting-shift/3925599001/14 Coastal Community 
Development
A. N. Doerr, C. Pomeroy, and F. Conway
Introduction
One might ask, “Why should we care – locally to globally – about coastal com￾munities? Are coastal communities more important than other communities?” 
Answering these questions requires some consideration. For instance, while the 
coastal landscape where these communities are located is understood to be the 
physical interface between the land and the sea, the ocean itself is also now con￾sidered a peopled seascape (Shackeroff et al., 2009).
One must also consider that there are coastal communities of place (geo￾graphic, e.g., Newport, Oregon or Gold Coast, Queensland) and coastal com￾munities of interest (occupation or activity, e.g., commercial fishing or tourism); 
and that coastal communities are interdependent ecologically, economically, and 
socially. Furthermore, coastal communities of place are often the fastest growing 
areas in the country. Situated at the land–sea interface, they play critically im￾portant roles in food systems, serving as a source of food and food security not 
only for local residents but also for larger regional or even nationwide populations. 
They also are at the forefront of climate threats, including threats to critical food 
systems. Similarly, coastal communities of interest are vital to coastal economies, 
and their role and requirements are important to consider when making ocean 
space use decisions. These kinds of connections capture our attention and play a 
role in marine policy and management – locally, nationally, and globally.
This chapter highlights community perspectives on the marine environment 
and is organized around the following three themes: considerations of coastal 
communities as a coupled natural–human system; understanding coastal com￾munity dynamics; and a discussion of the role of community engagement and 
partnerships in solving problems and harnessing opportunities along the coast.
A recurrent theme throughout this chapter is that places, people, and indus￾tries on the coast have always experienced change. However, climate change adds 
new challenges and requires new approaches and flexibility. The case studies pre￾sented here highlight the importance of community engagement and practical 
partnerships for developing and fortifying physical and social infrastructure, and 
the roles that people play in cooperatively discovering, learning, and innovating 
to work their way through emerging and chronic challenges and opportunities. In 
DOI: 10.4324/9781003058151-17Coastal Community Development 229
so doing, they strengthen their resilience, their adaptive capacity, and, ultimately, 
their wellbeing.
Coastal Communities as Coupled Natural–Human Systems
Coastal communities, located at the land–sea interface, must be viewed as a cou￾pled system composed of human and natural subsystems. The human system in￾cludes the people; the social, cultural, and economic relationships that connect 
them; and the formal and informal institutions that govern individual behavior 
and relationships in a given place. The natural system consists of the biophysical 
environment with its living (e.g., marine plants and animals) and non-living (e.g., 
substrate and water) components and the relationships among them. The human 
and natural subsystems are linked, or coupled, in many ways, so that events or 
changes in one have impacts throughout the system. Rather than being static or 
unchanging, coupled natural–human systems are dynamic, continually experi￾encing variability and change. This creates both opportunities and challenges, 
which in turn require adaptation, whether through incremental adjustment or 
wholesale change.
Coastal communities are typically engaged with and dependent on the ma￾rine environment in a variety of ways, such as for food production, livelihood, 
commerce, leisure, and spiritual pursuits. Together, these contribute to the so￾cial, cultural, psychological, economic, and physical wellbeing of individuals and 
communities. As such, they are affected by environmental and policy processes 
and events occurring at a larger scale. El Niño events, for example, are a broad￾scale oceanographic phenomenon that can disrupt the availability, distribution, 
and quality of fishery resources. These events can also lead to increased storm 
activity in some areas, causing coastal flooding or posing hazards to safety at 
sea. Coastal and marine management policies, likewise, are designed and imple￾mented through larger state, federal, and international governance systems that 
then play out in coastal communities.
Moreover, many coastal communities are interdependent with other coastal 
communities, often as a result of their connectedness to the sea. For example, 
fishermen based in a given coastal community may follow the fish up the coast, 
calling at other ports to land their catch and reprovision. They may count on 
access to other coastal communities for goods and services not available in their 
home port. Sometimes they are connected to other communities within a region 
through family networks. They might even be connected by social and cultural as￾sociations with coastal and marine environments, such as subsistence fishing and 
collecting, surfing, or recreational boating. As such, in addition to unique place￾based characteristics, coastal communities can also be thought of as a network of 
places linked by common values, interests, and needs. The connectedness among 
these communities can take a variety of forms: a “hub and spoke” arrangement, 
where one community serves as the center of activity that extends to several 
other communities (and back again); “point-to-point”, where multiple communi￾ties connect with one another; or some combination of the two. Whatever the 230 A. N. Doerr et al.
form, this structure is important for understanding, anticipating, and adapting to 
system dynamics and change.
Even as such interconnectedness can be conducive to adaptation and resil￾ience, there also can be tensions between communities of place and communities 
of interest. These tensions have become evident with increasingly variable and 
changing distributions of marine species due to climate change. In the state of 
California, along the west coast of the United States, shifting distributions of 
market squid have in turn led some fishery participants (a community of interest) 
to shift their effort from the fishery’s historic centers of activity (communities of 
place) in Central and Southern California (e.g., Monterey, Ventura, San Pedro) 
to Northern California (e.g., Eureka) and even into Oregon (Chavez et al., 2017). 
These tensions arise not only on the water in terms of access to this limited-entry 
fishery, but shoreside as well. More southerly communities and their working wa￾terfronts grapple with less (or less consistent) squid fishery activity, which trans￾lates into reduced demand for – and economic activity to support – infrastructure, 
goods, and services. At the same time, more northerly communities, in part, wel￾come the activity, as it bolsters the working waterfront and local economy; but it 
also contributes to tensions between incoming and established fisheries and work￾ing waterfront interests. Growing interest in expanded or new ocean and coastal 
uses, such as marine aquaculture and marine renewable energy, likewise provides 
examples of potential tensions among communities of interest and of place, with 
particular relevance to working waterfronts as well as ocean space.
Case Study: Navigating Working Waterfronts
There are urban waterfront cities, such as Stockholm, Sweden; Sydney, Aus￾tralia; or Miami, United States, where citizens and visitors alike recreate, 
live, and work (see Figure 14.1). As with coastal communities themselves, 
not all waterfronts are the same. Working waterfronts are central to many 
coastal communities of place and of interest. They provide key infrastruc￾ture (e.g., wharves, berthing, hoists) and goods and services (e.g., fuel, ice, 
vessel maintenance and repair) that enable people to access and interact 
with the marine environment. They are also places where cargo and sea￾food make landfall for local processing, distribution, and transport to other 
communities along the coast and beyond. As coastal communities have 
grown and changed, many working waterfronts have become gentrified, 
often by replacing infrastructure necessary for historical ocean-dependent 
uses with housing, retail, and related facilities. In addition, amid the grow￾ing interest in the blue economy, some coastal communities are grappling 
with decisions about how to accommodate the infrastructure needs of new 
ocean uses – such as ocean renewable energy production – along with ex￾isting needs of fisheries, commerce, and recreation.Coastal Community Development 231
Learning how to balance industries on the waterfront takes a commit￾ment to work together toward a common goal of community resilience. 
In the large and diverse US state of California, variability and change in 
the natural environment, ocean uses and their management, and coastal 
 communities have led to changes and challenges to the state’s working wa￾terfronts. This is especially true for those waterfronts that have historically 
supported commercial fisheries. In particular, the downsizing of many com￾mercial fisheries resulting from increased regulation, including restricted 
access, quotas, and time and area closures, has changed demand for and use 
of infrastructure, goods, and services at many ports. And although commer￾cial fisheries have some specific needs (e.g., fish unloading sites and hoists, 
gear repair worksites, docks for loading and unloading gear and equipment), 
other amenities such as well-maintained (i.e., dredged) navigation channels, 
berthing, fuel, and ice are needed by a variety of port users. As coastal com￾munities and port managers seek to adapt to changing conditions, they need 
information and understanding about the existing and potential infrastruc￾ture, goods, and services needs of both established and new ocean users. 
Collaborative efforts are helpful in building a complete understanding of 
such needs, through research to characterize working waterfronts, trends in 
fisheries and other uses, and associated waterfront requirements. Conven￾ing groups to discuss, validate, and develop information resources can be 
used to support decision-making. Such efforts in California’s North Coast 
and Santa Barbara Channel port communities established a b aseline (see 
Culver et al., 2007; Industrial Economics, Inc., 2012; Pomeroy et al., 2010) 
and continue to inform working waterfront decisions at ports throughout 
California. Similar conversations and collaborations are ongoing in coastal 
communities across the globe and are necessary for ensuring the effective 
support and continued resilience of working waterfronts.
Understanding Coastal Community Dynamics
When contemplating why and how one might seek to know and connect with 
coastal communities – and ultimately work to support their resilience and 
 adaptation – it is important to acknowledge that the words used to describe the 
work of supporting communities have changed over time. The term “community 
development” has historically been used to describe various processes or programs 
where members of the community work together to identify and solve common 
problems. By contrast, the term “economic development” has been used to de￾scribe programs or processes where members of government or industry utilize the 
resources available to stimulate sustained growth through the production of goods 
and services. In the 1970s academics and practitioners alike initiated a movement 
to take a more holistic approach, often referred to as “community economic devel￾opment”. Community economic development blended efforts to address tenacious 232 A. N. Doerr et al.
Figure 14.1 Working waterfront: Unloading Dungeness crab on the San Francisco wharf. 
Photo credit: C. Pomeroy.
economic issues (such as poverty, good jobs, and affordable housing and health 
care) with quality-of-life matters (Clay & Jones, 2009). The goal of this work was 
to improve community wellbeing, resilience, and adaptive capacity, terms that are 
more commonly used today.
Community wellbeing has been defined in many ways but typically refers to 
the combination of “social, economic, environmental, cultural, and political con￾ditions identified by individuals and their communities as essential for them to 
flourish and fulfill their potential” (Wiseman & Brasher, 2008, p. 358). In order 
for communities to flourish, particularly in a variable and changing system, they 
need to be resilient. A seminal paper by Holling (1973) focused on the ecological 
nature of resilience and defined it as a “measure of the persistence of systems and 
of their ability to absorb change and disturbance and still maintain the same re￾lationships between populations or state variables” (p. 14). Walker and Salt (2006, 
p. 2) further defined resilience as “the capacity of a system to experience shocks 
while retaining essentially the same function, structure, feedbacks, and therefore 
identity”. Sometimes coupled natural–human systems, including coastal com￾munities, are substantially disrupted, or even destroyed, necessitating reorganiza￾tion. It is important to include such disruptions or shocks along with growth and 
conservation because this provides a view of links among system organization, 
resilience, and other dynamics (Peterson, 2000). Social resilience, community re￾silience, and social–ecological resilience all can be considered in terms of: (1) the 
amount of disturbance a system can absorb and still retain the same structure and Coastal Community Development 233
function, (2) the degree to which the system is capable of self-organization, and 
(3) the degree to which the system can build and increase the capacity for learn￾ing and adaptation (Carpenter et al., 2001; Folke, 2006; Holling, 1973).
Adaptation and adaptive capacity are also key components to consider in any 
discussion of community development, wellbeing, or resilience. Adaptation can 
be defined as the decisions and actions taken to maintain the capacity of the 
social–ecological system to deal with change, all the while maintaining basic 
structure and function (Berkes et al., 2003; Nelson et al., 2007; Walker & Salt, 
2006). Adaptive capacity “refers to the preconditions that are necessary to ena￾ble adaptation” (Nelson et al., 2007, p. 397). Preconditions often include assets 
or types of capital – human (e.g., the knowledge and training associated with 
commercial fishing), social (e.g., close ties between individuals and businesses in 
a coastal community), political (e.g., the influence coastal industries, such as ser￾vice or fishing, have on decision-makers), financial (e.g., cash or wealth possessed 
by coastal individuals and industry), physical (e.g., dive boats and fishing vessels), 
and natural (e.g., coral reefs and robust fish stocks) – that individuals and groups 
possess (Nelson et al., 2007; Whitney et al., 2017).
Community development, resilience, adaptation, and adaptive capacity can, 
therefore, be seen as interconnected, core concepts that are related to a commu￾nity’s ability to embrace change and move forward to the future in the best way 
they view possible. That said, development, resilience, and adaptation may be 
equally important, but they may not look the same across the globe. Culture and 
context matter. Coastal communities differ widely around the world, both within 
and across communities. They can be large or small, rural, or urban, and have 
a predominant population of historically marginalized or favored communities. 
Thus, resilience in a fishing community in Bangladesh will likely be manifested, 
described, and achieved differently than in a fishing community in Australia. It is 
important to consider this in understanding and supporting a coastal communi￾ty’s ability to embrace change.
Community Engagement and Partnerships
Many of the challenges facing coastal communities are best addressed through 
cooperative efforts. While much work is spearheaded and done within the com￾munity, many communities invite and depend on the support of and partnerships 
with others outside of it. Individuals working at the crossroads among these groups 
are well situated to help advance these efforts. Solutions or paths forward are of￾ten relevant to communities of interest, regardless of geography, although there 
may be regional differences in implementation. Entities such as governmental and 
nongovernmental organizations, academia, industry, religious and culturally based 
groups, along with Tribal or Indigenous leadership play important building and 
bridging roles. It takes dedicated effort from many actors to ensure that coastal 
communities, whether of place or of interest, become and remain viable and vital.
While a number of organizations work with communities to address challenges 
and opportunities, university-based Extension1
 agents are well-placed to advance 234 A. N. Doerr et al.
community development and resilience efforts. University-based Extension pro￾grams use applied research, education, and outreach to inform, listen to, and 
engage with communities to identify challenges, opportunities, and information 
needs, as well as develop and implement strategies for addressing them. In the 
United States, Extension agents, sometimes called advisors, are often university￾trained experts in specific areas such as, but not limited to, natural resources (e.g., 
agriculture, fisheries, forestry), youth development, family health, and economics 
or marketing. Whatever their area of expertise, Extension agents are responsi￾ble for connecting research-based knowledge with local practitioners in industry, 
government, and community. Extension agents are continually learning and up￾dating their community outreach and engagement knowledge, skills, and abilities 
(see Table 14.1) and combining them with their expertise. They serve as nonpar￾tisan, neutral brokers of information who share resources and science, rather than 
as advocates for specific policies or policy outcomes.
Sea Grant Extension programs in the United States use this approach, with 
a particular focus on coastal communities and coastal community development 
and are funded by the federal government. At the national level, Sea Grant’s 
mission is to “enhance the practical use and conservation of coastal, marine and 
Great Lakes resources in order to create a sustainable economy and environment” 
(https://seagrant.noaa.gov/). There are Sea Grant educators, Extension agents and 
specialists, and researchers in every coastal state, as well as the Great Lakes states, 
Table 14.1 Community outreach and engagement knowledge, skills, and abilities
Knowledge Skills Abilities
Organizational Process 
knowledge such as theories 
and strategies associated 
with educational program 
design, conflict management, 
team building, cooperation, 
science communication, and 
facilitation. 
Natural Science Content 
knowledge such as fisheries, 
coastal hazards, pollution, 
harmful algal blooms, or other 
natural science topics.
Social Science Content 
knowledge such as economics, 
education, sociology, 
anthropology, geography, 
political science, or other 
social science disciplines. 
• Meeting or educational 
event or product design.
• Translating technical 
and scientific 
information into public 
narrative (and vice 
versa).
• Building consensus.
• Scenario planning.
• Fisheries management.
• Coastal hazards 
planning.
• Pollution and invasive 
species management.
• Cost–benefit analysis.
• Evaluation/research 
methods.
• Needs and impact 
assessment.
• Policy and planning.
• Stakeholder 
identification and 
engagement.
• Boundary-spanning 
and bridge-building.
• Program planning, 
management, and 
evaluation.
• Topical education 
and research.
• Citizen science, 
cooperative and 
collaborative 
research. 
• Tradeoff analysis 
and communication.
• Social/economic 
impact assessments.
• Identification 
of unintended 
consequences.Coastal Community Development 235
Puerto Rico, and Guam. Sea Grant Extension personnel are a direct link among 
researchers, decision-makers, and community members, facilitating the transfer 
of knowledge from researchers to practitioners (e.g., the commercial fishing in￾dustry, policymakers) and from practitioners to researchers. This work creates an 
environment that inspires co-discovery and co-learning, with new insights and 
technologies provided to stakeholders, and traditional and local (“on-the-water”) 
knowledge provided to researchers. As trusted neutral partners in learning, Ex￾tension agents are able to foster relationships among these different and highly 
diverse groups, encouraging iterative research and collaborative processes.
Extension work is not intended to be one-way, with the Extension agent pro￾viding information to the community or solving complex problems on its behalf. 
Rather, Extension agents learn from and work with community members and 
stakeholders to help the community build understanding and navigate complex 
issues, providing a neutral voice (and often, a location) in support of sometimes 
difficult conversations. Sea Grant Extension agents – whether they focus on aq￾uaculture, coastal hazards, fisheries, renewable energy, or any of the other multi￾tude of complex issues discussed in this text – are often called upon to facilitate 
conversations around scientific issues, management, or community economic de￾velopment, particularly when the issues are contentious, or when disparate voices 
need to be brought together in the process. When dealing with a limited resource, 
such as a community’s coastline, port space, or nearby fishing grounds, there may 
be multiple potential uses, users, values, and needs, and no way to accommodate 
all of them. However, in order to enable sustainable and equitable community 
resilience, it is important that community members and stakeholders have a voice 
in the decision-making process. Extension agents help to make this possible.
It is important to recognize that the role that Extension agents play in coastal 
community support is not exclusive to Extension. Many regions of the world do 
not have formal coastal and marine Extension programs, per se. They do, however, 
have people who serve as educational liaisons and relationship and/or knowledge 
bridge-builders. Think about who might play the role of a trusted neutral partner 
in learning within your region or country. How might one work (whether in a vol￾unteer or paid position) to inspire co-discovery and co-learning? Who might one 
work with to provide new information, insights, and technologies? How might 
one bring together scientific, local, and traditional knowledge to support coastal 
community development and wellbeing? Think about some coastal communities 
in a region or country you know or would like to work in: What organizations in 
this place might be connected to supporting these communities? To help with 
this, below we have included some examples of practical partnerships – efforts 
of co-discovery that led to important innovations or advancements in coastal 
communities.
Improving Conservation Efforts and Local Economies
Bonefish (Albula vulpes) are popular in sports fishing because of the difficulty of 
catching and landing the wary, strong, fast fish (see Figure 14.2). The recreational 236 A. N. Doerr et al.
bonefish industry is very important to the outlying Family Islands in the Baha￾mas, making up a large percentage of the service and tourism expenditures on 
some islands, and providing more than $100 million to the Bahamian economy 
(Sherman et al., 2018). Overfishing during the late 20th century led the Baha￾mian government to enact strict regulations on bonefish, prohibiting the com￾mercial buying or selling of these species. Although consumptive catch was not 
prohibited, the economic importance of the recreational fishery to the Family 
Islands (responsible for up to 80% of tourism expenditures in Andros, Bahamas, 
alone) resulted in fishing guides instituting a catch-and-release fishery (Fedler, 
2019). During the past 20 years, recreational fishing guides, anglers, and scien￾tists have worked together to develop and implement best handling practices for 
caught fish, helping to ensure their survival after they have been released (Ad￾ams & Cooke, 2015). This proactive partnership continues to advance our un￾derstanding of bonefish species and has led to a sustained interest in protecting 
coastal habitats in order to maintain these species.
Partnership in Gear Development
The gear used to catch marine species commercially and recreationally is con￾stantly evolving and improving. Over time, fishermen, Extension agents, and 
other members of the fishing industry have partnered to develop gear that is more 
efficient, easier to use, and more ecologically friendly (e.g., less damaging to the 
marine environment, or better at avoiding bycatch). Often, gear development is it￾erative and incremental, with smaller changes designed, tested, and implemented, 
Figure 14.2 A bonefish swims through the flats in the Bahamas. Joint management by 
resource users and managers had led to healthier habitats and bonefish popu￾lations. Photo credit: A. Shultz.Coastal Community Development 237
which gradually lead to accepted modifications. Other times, gear is developed 
with specific goals in mind – for example, to avoid “ghost fishing” if gear is lost, 
or to take advantage of new technologies. Regardless of how the process occurs, 
improving fishing gear is often a collaborative effort with managers, researchers, 
and the fishing community all playing important roles, bringing scientific and 
practical knowledge to bear on real-world problems and opportunities.
Fishermen, scientists, and decision-makers have worked effectively together 
toward improving efficiency and reducing bycatch in many fisheries. The Ore￾gon pink shrimp (Pandalus jordani) fishery provides an excellent example of such 
collaborative work. Although metal grate bycatch reduction devices (BRD) have 
been used for decades and are effective for significantly reducing bycatch, these 
devices cannot prevent the accidental catch of small fish while still allowing for 
the capture of pink shrimp. However, research has shown that fish respond to 
visual stimuli in a way that shrimp do not. This information was used to design a 
study to investigate the feasibility and effectiveness of adding pressure-activated 
LED lights to shrimp trawl nets. Working directly with fishermen and their gear 
during the fishing season, researchers investigated the impacts of adding LED 
lights at various locations along trawl nets. Results showed that LED lights added 
to the footropes dramatically decreased bycatch of small and juvenile fish without 
negatively impacting shrimp catch (Hannah et al., 2015; Oregon Department of 
Fish and Wildlife, 2019). Recognizing the benefits of this efficient and inexpen￾sive change, most Oregon pink shrimp vessels voluntarily adopted the use of LED 
lights in 2014; they were made mandatory in Oregon and Washington in 2018 
(Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife, 2019) (see Figure 14.3).
New Markets for Seafood
Seafood markets link local seafood producers to local, regional, and global com￾munities. Throughout the United States, there are communities that have an 
identity largely connected to a particular industry: mining towns, manufacturing 
towns, or lumber towns. The same is true for many coastal communities, where 
the fishing industry is central to their identity. While many of the practical part￾nerships that form in coastal communities revolve around communities of inter￾est, they can support communities of place as well – and often, communities of 
place and communities of interest along the coast are inextricably linked.
Despite similarities that may exist among fishing communities throughout the 
United States, the fishing industry itself is remarkably heterogeneous. Fishing op￾erations range widely from large trawlers with large crews (like the ones operating 
offshore Alaska) to small vessels with crews of just one or two people. These 
smaller operations comprise the vast majority of commercial fishing operations 
in the United States and globally. Fisheries use a plethora of gear types to target 
a wide range of species that may be sold live, fresh, or processed into a variety of 
seafood products. Aquaculture in the United States is also diverse, with opera￾tions ranging from small producers of boutique products such as dulse or caviar, to 
large-scale facilities such as nearshore oyster farms in Northern California and the 238 A. N. Doerr et al.
Pacific Northwest. This diversity, together with regulatory, operational, environ￾mental, social, and economic challenges, has led to growing interest in a varied 
mix of seafood marketing opportunities (Pomeroy et al., 2020). While the United 
States exports about 30% of its edible catch, the majority of the remaining 70% 
is consumed in restaurants or processed and sold in local retail stores (National 
Marine Fisheries Service, 2018). Realizing a potential opportunity to connect di￾rectly with local consumers, many in the fishing industry have been exploring 
Figure 14.3 A fisherman displays a pink shrimp net with a bycatch reduction device and 
escape hole clearly visible. On top of the net are pressure-activated LED lights, 
which the fishing community uses to further reduce bycatch of small fish. 
Photo credit: A. Doerr.Coastal Community Development 239
new markets for seafood, such as community-supported fisheries ( referred to as 
CSFs), dockside markets, a greater presence at farmers’ markets, and pathways to 
bring local seafood to grade schools, hospitals, and college campuses.
In California, fishermen and growers were increasingly interested in how these 
marketing options might help mitigate the many challenges they faced. Recog￾nizing this need, California Sea Grant Extension specialists sought to expand 
understanding of the ins and outs of various seafood marketing arrangements. 
Working in collaboration across the Sea Grant Extension network, the Exten￾sion specialists engaged with fishermen, seafood marketers, and others in several 
coastal communities to conduct field research with the goals of characterizing 
the different marketing options, the conditions required for establishing and 
maintaining them, and their implications for fishermen’s operations and the well￾being of both fishermen and fishing communities. They used their findings to 
develop a website called Market Your Catch (Culver et al., 2015), a clearinghouse 
for information resources and tools developed by several Sea Grant programs, 
and others. Consistent with Sea Grant’s role as a neutral broker of information, 
the website provides information about different types of markets and customers, 
key considerations for evaluating the feasibility and utility of a market type for 
each individual fisherman’s situation, and information on how to get started in or 
expand such seafood markets. Sea Grant Extension staff continue to share this 
information through workshops and presentations to fishing communities and 
others. Of particular interest is understanding the permits and licenses required, 
and the regulations that govern seafood direct marketing. As these vary by state 
and locality, Extension specialists have developed state-specific permit pages for 
the website that provide an overview of potential requirements and contact infor￾mation for relevant agencies. With the growing interest in and expansion of US 
aquaculture, the website is also being updated to provide analogous information 
to people involved in aquaculture.
Change and Working Waterfronts
Building on the California working waterfront case study described above, with 
renewed and growing interest in ocean renewable energy and mariculture, the 
conversation has shifted to supporting existing uses while accommodating new and 
expanded uses. As questions emerge about how these new uses might fit within – 
and affect – working waterfronts, Sea Grant Extension is engaging with existing 
and new users, port managers, state agencies, and others to build shared under￾standings of diverse working waterfront needs along with potential conflicts, com￾patibilities, and synergies between existing and new uses. For example, E xtension 
staff and colleagues are building on decades of community-based experience 
and knowledge in the Santa Barbara Channel region to develop StoryMaps and 
 related resources to capture the common and divergent waterfront and marine 
space needs of fisheries and aquaculture. Capturing and conveying this infor￾mation in ways that are accessible to the diverse groups involved requires un￾derstanding differences not only in how space is valued and used, but also in 
how people communicate those values and needs. The collection and translation 
of this information generated by commercial fishermen and aquaculturists will 240 A. N. Doerr et al.
enable them, along with port managers and decision-makers, to better understand 
one another and support better-informed decisions.
Conclusion
There are multiple pathways available to individuals who would like to support 
coastal communities directly or indirectly. These pathways, however, share im￾portant commonalities. When working in coastal communities, it is important 
to acknowledge that all of these communities – whether of place or of interest – 
are coupled natural–human systems, and that their vulnerability, resilience, 
 adaptive capacity, and wellbeing are dependent on recognizing these connec￾tions. Place-based and interest-based engagement are tried and true methods 
used by Extension agents. Why? Because, ultimately, continuous and cooperative 
learning and understanding are keys to addressing the tensions that can arise due 
to change; the marine environment has, and always will be, changing.
Coastal community development is not a one-time activity or process. Coastal 
communities are constantly changing: responding to environmental and demo￾graphic shifts, as well as changes in the economic and political landscapes within 
which they operate. Individuals seeking to work within these communities should 
be knowledgeable in recognizing and responding to these shifts, skilled at engag￾ing with people both positively and negatively impacted, and able to use their 
skills and knowledge to confront new challenges and embrace new opportunities.
Professional Pathways
There are many careers that directly or indirectly support building resiliency 
and adaptive capacity in coastal communities. Such careers may be found within 
local government, such as city planning, community management, or county fi￾nance. Additionally, many communities have Development or Services offices. 
Outside of government, a plethora of nonprofit organizations work within com￾munities to enhance both individual and collective capabilities. And there are 
careers through colleges and universities (like the Sea Grant Extension pro￾grams as mentioned in detail above) that connect community members, man￾agers, scientists, and educators, facilitating communication and collaboration to 
identify and address the particular challenges and opportunities coastal com￾munities face.
When one decides that they want to do professional work that supports coastal 
communities, they are committing themselves to building the knowledge, skills, 
and abilities to create or strengthen bridges between groups of people, between 
people and the marine environment, and between use and conservation of these 
places. The effort needed to fulfill this commitment might extend beyond their 
university training, as it is often not available through many traditional academic 
programs. Table 14.1 highlights a subset of knowledge types, along with associated 
skills and abilities, which are necessary or valuable to a career in community de￾velopment, outreach, and engagement.Coastal Community Development 241
Questions for Reflection
 1. Why is it important to consider both natural and social systems when work
 2. People who serve as educational liaisons and relationship and/or k nowledge 
 3. This chapter discusses several practical partnerships, where industry, 
 4. Describe the difference between communities of place and communi
 5. Why is it important to bring together scientific and practical knowledge to 
Note
 1 Extension typically involves some form of field-based educational training or exchange 
References
Adams, A. J., & Cooke, S. J. (2015). Advancing the science and management of flats fish￾eries for bonefish, tarpon, and permit. Environmental Biology of Fishes, 98, 2123–2131. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10641-015-0446-9.
Berkes, F., Colding, J., & Folke, C. (Eds.). (2003). Navigating social-ecological systems: Build￾ing resilience for complexity and change. Cambridge University Press.
Carpenter, S., Walker, B., Anderies, M., & Abel, N. (2001). From metaphor to measure￾ment: Resilience of what to what? Ecosystems, 4(8), 765–781. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10021-001-0045-9
Chavez, F. P., Costello, C., Aseltine-Neilson, D., Doremus, H., Field, J. C., Gaines, D. 
D., Hall-Arber, M., Mantua, N. J., McCovey, J., Pomeroy, C., Sievanen, L., Sydeman, 
W., & Wheeler, S. A. (2017). Readying California fisheries for climate change. California 
Ocean Science Trust. Retrieved June 30, 2022 from https://www.oceansciencetrust.org/
wp-content/uploads/2016/06/Climate-and-Fisheries_GuidanceDoc.pdf
Clay, R., & Jones, S. (2009). A brief history of community economic development. Journal 
of Affordable Housing & Community Development Law, 18(3), 257–267.
Culver, C., Richards, J., & Pomeroy, C. (2007). Commercial fisheries of the Santa Barbara 
Channel and associated infrastructure needs. Report to the Ventura Port District and the 
Santa Barbara Harbor District. California Sea Grant College.
Culver, C., Stroud, A., Pomeroy, C., Doyle, J., Von Harten, A., & Georgilas, N. (2015). 
Market Your Catch website. https://marketyourcatch.msi.ucsb.edu/242 A. N. Doerr et al.
Fedler, T. (2019). The 2018 economic impact of flats fishing in The Bahamas. The Bonefish 
and Tarpon Trust. Retrieved June 30, 2022 from https://www.bonefishtarpontrust.org/
downloads/research-reports/stories/bahamas-flats-economic-impact-report.pdf
Folke, C. (2006). Resilience: The emergence of a perspective for social – ecological sys￾tems analyses. Global Environmental Change, 16(3), 253–67. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
gloenvcha.2006.04.002
Hannah, R. W., Lomeli, M. J.M., & Jones, S. A. (2015). Tests of artificial light for bycatch 
reduction in an ocean shrimp (Pandalus jordani) trawl: Strong but opposite effects at 
the footrope and near the bycatch reduction device. Fisheries Research, 170, 60–67. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fishres.2015.05.010
Holling, C. S. (1973). Resilience and stability of ecological systems. Annual Review of 
Ecology and Systematics, 4, 1–23. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.es.04.110173.000245
Industrial Economics, Inc. (2012). Identification of outer Continental Shelf renewable energy 
space-use conflicts and analysis of potential mitigation measures. US Department of the 
Interior, Bureau of Ocean Energy Management: 414p.
Nelson, D., Adger, N., & Brown, K. (2007). Adaptation to environmental change: 
Contributions of a resilience framework. Annual Review of Environment and Resources, 
32(1), 395–419. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.energy.32.051807.090348
National Marine Fisheries Service. (2018). Fisheries of the United States, 2017 Report. 
Retrieved November 2, 2020 from https://www.fisheries.noaa.gov/resource/document/
fisheries-united-states-2017-report
Oakley, P., & Garforth, C. (1985). Guide to extension training (No. 11). Food & Agricul￾ture Organization of the United Nations. Retrieved June 30, 2022 from https://www.fao.
org/3/t0060e/t0060e.pdf
Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife. (2019). 30th annual (diamond edition) Oregon De￾partment of Fish and Wildlife Marine Resources Program pink shrimp review [Newsletter]. 
Retrieved November 2, 2020 from https://www.dfw.state.or.us/MRP/shellfish/commer￾cial/shrimp/docs/30th_APSR_2019.pdf
Peterson, G. (2000). Political ecology and ecological resilience: An integration of human 
and ecological dynamics. Ecological Economics, 35, 323–336. https://doi.org/10.1016/
S0921-8009(00)00217-2
Pomeroy, C., Rice, S., Culver, C., & Baker, V. (2020). Seafood direct marketing: 
Supporting critical decision making in Alaska and California. In J. Zelasney, A. Ford, 
L. W estlund, A. Ward, & O. Riego Peñarubia (Eds.), Securing sustainable small-scale 
fisheries: S howcasing applied practices in value chains, post-harvest operations and trade (pp. 
85–103). FAO Fisheries and Aquaculture Technical Paper No. 652. FAO. https://www.
fao.org/documents/card/en/c/cb0472en/
Pomeroy, C., Thomson, C, & Stevens, M. M. (2010). California’s North coast fishing 
communities: Historical perspective and recent trends. California Sea Grant and NOAA 
Fisheries Southwest Fisheries Science Center.
Shackeroff, J., Hazen, E., & Crowder, L. (2009). The oceans as peopled landscapes. In K. L. 
McLeod & H. M. Leslie (Eds.), Ecosystem-Based management for the oceans (pp. 33–51). 
Island Press.
Sherman, K. D., Shultz, A. D., Dahlgren, C. P., Thomas, C., Brooks, E., Brookes, A., 
Brumbaugh, D. R., Gittens, L., & Murchie, K. J. (2018). Contemporary and emerging 
fisheries in The Bahamas – Conservation and management challenges, achievements 
and future directions. Fisheries Management and Ecology, 25(5), 319–331. https://doi.
org/10.1111/fme.12299Coastal Community Development 243
Walker, B., & Salt, D. (2006) Resilience thinking: Sustaining ecosystems and people in a 
changing world. Island Press.
Whitney, C. K., Bennett, N. J., Ban, N. C., Allison, E. H., Armitage, D., Blythe, J. L., 
Burt, J. M., Cheung, W., Finkbeiner, E. M., Kaplan-Hallam, M., Perry, I., Turner, N. 
J., & Yumagulova, L. (2017). Adaptive capacity: From assessment to action in coastal 
social-ecological systems. Ecology and Society, 22(2), 22. https://doi.org/10.5751/
ES-09325-220222
Wiseman, J., & Brasher, K. (2008). Community wellbeing in an unwell world: Trends, 
challenges, and possibilities. Journal of Public Health Policy, 29(3), 353–366. https://doi.
org/10.1057/jphp.2008.1615 Marine Entrepreneurship
A. N. Doerr, L. Anderson, and J. Scorse
Introduction
According to the World Bank, the blue economy “is the sustainable use of ocean re￾sources for economic growth, improved livelihood and jobs, and ocean ecosystem health” 
(World Bank, 2017). In the context of climate change, increasing demand for ma￾rine products, and rapidly degrading marine ecosystems the world over, it is impor￾tant that humanity move away from the unsustainable use of ocean and coastal 
resources. The blue economy replaces fossil fuels with renewable energy, such as 
offshore wind power and wave and tidal energy systems. It promotes sustainable 
wild seafood harvest, carbon-neutral aquaculture production, and new seafood 
technologies (both plant- and cell-based) that supplement demand for food from 
the sea and have the potential to reduce overfishing that exceeds scientifically 
determined maximum sustainable yields (MSY) and degrades marine ecosystems. 
Additionally, the blue economy encourages coastal development that makes use 
of living shorelines to provide climate resilience, while also restoring coastal eco￾systems. Moreover, it provides opportunities for public recreation and ecotourism 
that educate people about ocean and coastal ecosystems. The blue economy both 
encourages and enables people to think creatively about jobs and career possibili￾ties centered on the sustainable and renewable use of ocean resources.
Approximately 40% of the world’s population and many of the world’s largest 
cities can be found within 100 km of the coast (Maul & Duedall, 2019). This con￾centration of human population along the coast will only accelerate in the coming 
decades (Environmental Protection Agency, 2017; Maul & Duedall, 2019). Steer￾ing ocean and coastal economic activity in the blue direction is the work of pol￾icymakers, regulators, educators, activists, consumers, community members, and 
entrepreneurs. Additionally, it is often the business sector that can promote rapid 
change and help communities adopt new technologies at scale. These changes 
will have major ramifications not only for income, employment, and equity, but 
also for the mental and physical health of much of the world’s population, since 
healthy waterways promote and support healthy humans (see, e.g., Korfmacher 
et al., 2015; Wheeler et al., 2012).
This transition to blue economic development and blue growth is going to re￾quire a new wave of entrepreneurs to discover innovative solutions to ocean and 
coastal resource needs and forge new industries. There is tremendous opportunity 
DOI: 10.4324/9781003058151-18Marine Entrepreneurship 245
in sectors as diverse as ocean energy systems, bioplastics, and new modes of sea￾food production. We strongly encourage students the world over to ride this new 
wave and help develop an equitable and sustainable blue economy for the 21st 
century that meets human needs while mitigating greenhouse gas emissions and 
restoring our most precious coastal ecosystems.
Opportunities for Marine-Based Entrepreneurship
Food from the Sea
Commercial Fishing
The oceans contain some of the most valuable natural capital on the planet: wild 
seafood. Commercial harvest of marine species dates back thousands of years, 
having increased rapidly in the early to mid-20th century, and remained relatively 
stable since the mid-1980s (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Na￾tions [FAO], 2020). Global catch has been level for the last 40 years while harvest 
and management methods continue to evolve. In this context, the future of com￾mercial fishing does not necessarily involve catching more fish, faster; rather it is 
about increasing value, reducing waste, and managing r esponsibly – all of which 
require innovation and entrepreneurship.
In many countries, including parts of Africa, Asia, Latin America, and the 
Western Pacific, small-scale fisherfolk and aquaculture farmers dominate the sea￾food industry (FAO, 2020). Artisanal fisheries are commonplace, with small boats 
launching directly from shore, bringing in daily catch to local markets for imme￾diate community consumption. In contrast, the vessels associated with industri￾alized fishing are typically much larger, technologically capable, and efficient at 
harvesting living marine resources.
Within both artisanal and industrial fishing, and the many sizes and scales of 
fishing in between, challenges with illegal, unreported, and unregulated (IUU) 
fishing still exist globally (Sumaila et al., 2020). While many fisheries throughout 
the world are sustainably harvested, proper management and new technologies 
will be needed to ensure wild-caught fisheries continue to prosper. Entrepreneur￾ial individuals may be at the forefront of supporting such fisheries, selectively 
harvesting popular and emerging species, and making use of the latest science, 
technology, or socioeconomic systems to catch and distribute food from the sea.
BOX 15.1 Defining Sustainable Seafood
Monterey Bay Aquarium’s Seafood Watch program, the Marine Steward￾ship Council (MSC), and FishWise all have developed rating systems based 
on environmental (and sometimes social) criteria that consumers, as well as 
retailers, may use to determine which fish to purchase. These rating systems 246 A. N. Doerr et al.
have helped usher in major shifts in the fishing industry across the world; 
this demand-side intervention has sent powerful signals up the su pply 
chain, resulting in the development of new markets and measurable im￾provements in many fisheries. But more work needs to be done since most 
seafood consumed in the world does not meet sustainability criteria (FAO, 
2020), and even these certification systems do not address all dimensions of 
the sustainability challenges. In addition, due to persistent and widespread 
fish mislabeling, “impostor fish” represent a sizable segment of the sea￾food supply chain, which fundamentally undermines sustainability efforts 
(Kroetz et al., 2020; Luque & Donlan, 2019).
Aquaculture
Although there is potential to increase the volume of wild-caught fish by target￾ing new species and improving harvest technologies (Costello et al., 2020), much 
of the increase in future seafood consumption will come from aquaculture (FAO, 
2020). Aquaculture currently comprises just more than half of the fish consumed 
by humans, much of it grown inland rather than in the ocean. The potential 
exists for expansion of both nearshore and offshore aquaculture for invertebrates 
(e.g., oysters, sea cucumbers), finfish (e.g., Atlantic salmon, snapper), and seaweeds 
(e.g., giant kelp, dulse); as well as sea ranching or “penning”, where juvenile fish 
are caught and then raised in ocean pens for harvest as adults. However, valid 
concerns associated with marine aquaculture, particularly for finfish, include the 
spread of disease to wild species and the environmental impacts of raising large 
numbers of fish in small spaces. With continued growth in the importance of aq￾uaculture, there is significant potential for the development of new technologies 
and practices to overcome these challenges and advance sustainable aquaculture.
BOX 15.2 Case Study of Aquaculture: Monterey Bay Seaweeds
Dr. Mike Graham is a busy man, and not only because he has eight children. 
He is a professor of phycology at Moss Landing Marine Lab on California’s 
Central Coast, where he primarily teaches courses on seaweeds, including 
their history and ecology, and is also the Vice President of the California 
Aquaculture Association (CAA). Never one to miss an opportunity to put 
theory into practice, in 2015 he embarked on a business venture to grow 
and market native Monterey Bay Seaweed to restaurants. The business is 
called Monterey Bay Seaweeds. He was not interested in mass-producing 
seaweed in large ocean-based farms, but instead, cultivating a niche prod￾uct that would attract the attention of top chefs and connoisseurs. First, 
though, he had to obtain a permit to remove sea water from the Monterey 
Bay National Marine Sanctuary (MBNMS).Marine Entrepreneurship 247
These seaweeds are grown on land in large tubs where the water is 
continuously circulated, and conditions can be precisely monitored and 
managed. His operation has the capacity to grow 1,000 lb of seaweed per 
year in a single eight-by-eight-ft area, surpassing production capabilities of 
other land-grown produce when comparing the necessary water and space 
requirements. After obtaining regulatory approval from the MBNMS, he 
began experimenting with different sea vegetable varieties, as well as a 
mixed system with the highly prized California abalone. Graham currently 
produces west coast dulse, sea lettuce, and ogo and ships them fresh around 
the country to some of the nation’s top chefs, who use these vegetables in 
everything from appetizers and entrees to desserts and cocktails. Some of 
the plants can grow up to 15% in one day. The water that is discharged 
back into the bay is cleaner when it leaves his facility than when it entered. 
Except for a small amount of electricity that he uses for water circulation, 
his production method is energy-free, requiring no inputs.
Graham has a grand vision for US aquaculture, and California more spe￾cifically. He views sustainability as the driving force for the industry, with 
numerous opportunities for local production, including all sorts of delicious 
niche products like his own. For example, in 2015, Monterey Bay Seaweeds’ 
popular dulse was profiled by Bon Appétit for its rich umami flavor, closely 
resembling bacon when fried. Next time you are in one of your favorite 
restaurants you may end up sampling some of his products as his reputation 
grows.
Seafood Markets
There are significant marine entrepreneurship opportunities in buying and 
selling seafood. In the United States, government figures estimate that in 2018 
there were 3,314 seafood processing and wholesale plants that employed 63,005 
people (National Marine Fisheries Service, 2020). China has one of the world’s 
largest seafood processing sectors, with close to 10,000 processing plants as of 
2014 (FAO, 2017). However, buyers vary in size from large, vertically integrated, 
 multinational seafood companies, all the way to small fishing cooperatives1
 and 
direct-to- consumer dock sales.2
 Food Hubs3
 and Food Aggregators also support 
small independent fishing businesses without the legal ties of a cooperative.
Purchasing, processing, packaging, and distribution of seafood are separate 
activities that can be carried out by multiple businesses, although these ac￾tivities are often vertically integrated within a single firm. Internationally, we 
have seen a consolidation in seafood processing, due in part to the high capi￾tal cost of infrastructure required for this business venture, including physical 
plants, docks, hoists, ice production, refrigeration, processing equipment, and 
trucks. For many wild-caught and farmed species, seafood processing has be￾come a global enterprise, with products caught in one country and processed 248 A. N. Doerr et al.
in another before being exported to yet another (Gephart et al., 2019). How￾ever, market disruptions, such as the global economic crisis of the late 2000s 
and the COVID-19 pandemic in the 2020s, have demonstrated the challenges 
with such a dispersed production chain, and alternative systems have emerged, 
including direct marketing of seafood and the development of local markets. 
There is strong evidence that such alternative processing and sale options will 
continue to be important and may provide opportunity for enterprising indi￾viduals (Stoll et al., 2021).
BOX 15.3 Case Study of Seafood Market Disruptors
As global population and wealth increase, demand for wild fish and farm￾raised varieties will remain strong. However, it would be wise to keep an 
eye on the industries described below. They are emerging now, poised for 
growth, and likely to challenge the traditional notion of seafood:
 1. Cell-based seafood production uses cells taken from live fish to grow 
 2. Sea vegetable aquaculture is also gaining momentum in the United 
 3. While not 100% seafood, there are many companies that are producMarine Entrepreneurship 249
For fishers and small-fish buyers in areas typically dominated by wholesalers, 
selling directly to consumers has been eased through the advancement of on￾line shopping sites, packaging improvements, and third-party shipping services. 
These marketing models have capitalized on cultural movements aimed at being 
knowledgeable about one’s food source, such as the “Locavore” and “Know your 
Farmer/Fisher” movements. An example of this might be a community-supported 
fishery (CSF), a program modeled after community-supported agriculture (CSA), 
where consumers pay fishers for products in advance. With a CSF, the consumer 
is effectively buying a subscription, or a share, and one or more fishers provide 
each consumer with his or her share of the catch on a prearranged schedule over 
a specified period. CSFs allow fishermen to distribute less-familiar products to cus￾tomers, which they may be hesitant to purchase at a restaurant or retail market. 
CSFs also provide smaller-scale fishers with the security of stable demand, while 
also allowing them to fish more sustainably by focusing on seasonally available or 
less-commonly caught species.
In other parts of the world, such as the Caribbean and Latin America, some 
species are caught by industrial fleets for processing, while other species are tar￾geted by artisanal fishers and sold via dock sales, at local markets, or through 
the integration of fishing, processing, and cooking at local fish stands or restau￾rants. In many small-scale and artisanal fisheries, women make up the bulk of the 
post-harvest workforce, playing crucial roles in processing and marketing (Gopal 
et al., 2020; Harper et al., 2020).
Boat, Gear, and Equipment Engineering and Design
Fishing-vessel and gear engineering, design, and building are also important 
elements of the industry. Boat owners are continually reinvesting in their op￾erations to improve efficiency and profitability. For example, fishing gear, like 
trawl nets, is continually redesigned for species selectivity and to minimize hab￾itat impacts. Boat owners are sometimes required to invest in new technologies, 
such as Automatic Identification System (AIS) and Vessel Monitoring System 
(VMS) satellite tracking systems, that keep them compliant with changing reg￾ulations, improve safety, protect the marine environment, and improve vessel 
monitoring requirements. The global emphasis on improving efficiency and 
sustainability in fisheries and aquaculture means there are countless opportu￾nities for developing new technologies, both terrestrial and marine, for these 
industries.
Ocean and Coastal Tourism and Recreation
Sustainable tourism has been defined by the United Nations World Tourism 
Organization as tourism that considers its impacts on environmental resources, 
socio-cultural systems, and economic conditions, while providing benefits to lo￾cal stakeholders and host nations (United Nations World Tourism Organization, 
2016). Ecotourism, which builds upon the sustainable tourism mindset by further 250 A. N. Doerr et al.
emphasizing greener travel and often a cultural or environmental education com￾ponent, has continued to grow in market share, and many consumers intention￾ally opt for sustainable or “green” travel and tourism opportunities. The growth 
in the sustainable tourism market provides many opportunities for socially and 
environmentally minded entrepreneurs.
A variety of businesses directly rely on or benefit from the ocean but are 
non-consumptive in nature. Common non-consumptive businesses include div￾ing and snorkeling companies, surf shops, whale watching tours, glass-bottom 
boat operators, and ocean recreation companies that rent kayaks, jet skis, and 
other marine vehicles. These ocean and coastal tourism industries are globally 
important, making up approximately 26% of the ocean’s US$1.5 trillion con￾tribution to the world economy (Organization for Economic Cooperation and 
Development, 2016). The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration 
(NOAA) estimates marine tourism and recreation industries in the United States 
employed more than 2 million people and added approximately $124 billion to 
the gross domestic product (GDP) in 2017 (National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration [NOAA], 2020).
Many of these businesses are small, independent operations, and estimates 
for most of the industry project strong economic growth (Organization for 
Economic Cooperation and Development, 2016). Small differences can set 
apart similar businesses – allowing, for example, multiple diving shops or 
kayak tour operations in the same region. Although these businesses are us￾ing the ocean in more passive ways, they are still likely to experience some 
impacts from climate and market changes. For instance, shifting ocean con￾ditions impact the behavior of marine mammals, affect the health of coral 
reefs, and can change typical current or wave patterns. Marine pollution can 
adversely impact these activities as well, potentially challenging the ability of 
a business to provide standard services, while regional or global changes to 
behavior, such as COVID-19, or market downturns, can significantly reduce 
demand for services.
It is important to note that not all of these non-consumptive industries have 
wholly benign impacts on the marine environment. Diving operations can inun￾date reefs with tourists and damage sensitive corals, and whale watching boats 
can harass and even sometimes directly injure whales. Stringent codes of conduct 
and enforcement measures are necessary to ensure that such industries do not 
contribute to ecosystem degradation, even if they are not engaged in extraction 
of marine resources.
There are also consumptive industries that cater primarily to coastal tourists. 
Charter fishing companies, which provide individuals an opportunity to fish in 
less-accessible areas or without purchasing their own gear, often operate both 
nearshore and offshore. Restaurants that provide local seafood, cooked using re￾gional recipes or ingredients, are a staple in many coastal areas. Extractive busi￾nesses may be especially sensitive to fluctuations in resource availability, although 
diversifying services and products can help these businesses weather both ex￾pected and unexpected variability.Marine Entrepreneurship 251
BOX 15.4 Case Study of Coastal Tourism: Local Ocean Seafoods 
Restaurant and Market
Local Ocean Seafoods (LOS) is a restaurant and fish market in Newport, 
Oregon, US, with an emphasis on local, seasonal catch; they purchase di￾rectly from about 60 boats. LOS buys and freezes large volumes of a given 
species during its peak season to offer local products year-round. Risks and 
benefits are inherent in this business’s buying model. There are increased 
logistical costs associated with offloading, storing, and transporting prod￾ucts, and an upfront depletion of cash flow required to build inventory. Ad￾ditionally, handling volumes of whole fish requires filleting space, specialty 
skills, and enhanced waste-management measures. However, this model 
also offers benefits, such as full traceability, the ability to tell the harvest 
story of the fish, and secured year-round inventory.
In March 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic had shuttered virtually every 
restaurant dining room in the nation. Markets for seafood froze up over￾night. The entire $100 billion seafood industry network, including harvest￾ers, processors, distributors, retailers, and restaurants, suffered a significant, 
sector-wide decline. This was largely the result of the closure and/or cur￾tailed operations of eating establishments, where two-thirds of Americans 
consume their seafood (NOAA, 2021).
In response to this disruption, LOS created a new market channel, 
DockBox – a weekly make-at-home seafood meal kit. DockBox allowed the 
company to continue to move frozen and fresh inventory and keep staff 
employed during dining room closures. The market response was favorable; 
within five months the initial local market was expanded to 60 miles in￾land, then 200 miles to the major urban center, and finally 350 miles to a 
popular recreation destination.
When the company could only legally provide takeout dining, DockBox 
accounted for over half the company sales, with upward of 300 units sold 
per week. It allowed the company to maintain its core niche: the valuable 
relationships with local fishers, as well as the connection to a loyal cus￾tomer base.
Ports as Blue Economy Incubators
Most of the goods consumed around the world travel to and from national ports. 
Traditionally, the maritime industry has not been especially innovative regarding 
sustainability, but this is beginning to change. In California, the ports of Los 
Angeles, Long Beach, and San Diego all have ambitious pollution reduction pro￾grams that are delivering very significant air quality benefits to the surrounding 
communities and are also innovators on the change to zero-emissions vehicles 
for transporting cargo (California Air Resources Board, 2018). The innovation 252 A. N. Doerr et al.
does not stop there, however; the Port of San Diego has an Aquaculture and 
Blue Technology incubator program that helps jumpstart new blue economy busi￾nesses in the region, including marine debris removal technology, bio-enhancing 
shoreline armoring technology, and a new approach to soil remediation in marine 
environments.
North of San Diego, the Port of Los Angeles’s AltaSea campus is nearing com￾pletion. This state-of-the-art facility will include workspace for many blue econ￾omy startups, a science center bringing together the region’s top marine talent, 
along with an education center open to the public, all situated on a historic pier 
with easy access to the deep ocean. These are examples of ports not only taking 
the needs of their adjacent frontline communities seriously (by taking steps to 
improve air quality) but helping to catalyze a whole new set of industries that 
can provide local employment opportunities – all while seeking solutions to the 
unique challenges plaguing marine environments.
Living Shorelines for Coastal Resilience
Even if humanity manages to significantly reduce greenhouse gas emissions and 
avert the more extreme future climate scenarios, the coming decades will still 
bring stronger, more frequent storms and sea level rise due to the CO2 that we 
have already emitted. Therefore, protecting our coastal infrastructure will be par￾amount (and expensive). In some areas, retreat from the coasts will be necessary, 
as adaptation costs will be too high. However, there will be many possibilities 
BOX 15.5 Case Study of Ports as Incubators: Ocean Cluster Houses
Ocean cluster houses drive innovation by providing small and new 
ocean-related businesses with private or shared office space, meeting rooms, 
access to technology, and other business services that cater to new venture 
creation. Co-location and intellectual synergy result in a high turnover of 
ideas and knowledge contribution.
The concept originated in Reykjavik, Iceland, and as of 2018, the Icelan￾dic Ocean Cluster House had more than 100 companies working at their 
offices (Den Hollander & Thorsteinsson, 2020). For example, one business 
is involved in fish processing for food consumption, while a related business 
is using fish organs for nutraceuticals, fish oils, and food supplements, and 
yet another is leathering the fish skins for apparel. The concept has sparked 
several spin-off organizations across North America and Europe.
The purpose of cluster houses is to create value by connecting entrepre￾neurs, businesses, and knowledge of the marine industries. Depending on 
its location, an ocean cluster can include leaders and newcomers in fish￾eries, aquaculture, defense, offshore resources, marine renewables, biore￾sources, shipping, and ocean technology.Marine Entrepreneurship 253
where smart planning can provide sufficient coastal resilience to protect property, 
improve public safety, and even enhance marine biodiversity.
This affirmative coastal future will require significant advances in the 
development of living shorelines – natural (and hybrid) infrastructure that 
makes use of dunes, sea grasses, wetlands, mangroves, reefs, and other ecolog￾ical systems to dampen climate impacts in coastal regions. These systems are 
already being built with great success around the world, but the industry is 
still in its infancy. Research at the Center for the Blue Economy in California 
suggests that living shorelines are already cost-competitive with traditional 
gray infrastructure, such as seawalls, and that the main impediment to their 
adoption is informational and political, rather than economic (Colgan & 
Newkirk, 2016). The technologies are new, and developers and municipalities 
do not have the types of detailed engineered specifications that exist for other 
forms of coastal armoring, making it difficult to compare the relative perfor￾mance of different systems and to build confidence in their durability. Devel￾opment of clear and transparent engineering standards for living shorelines is 
necessary, along with the accumulation of time-series data to document their 
functionality. Like most new technologies, living shorelines also benefit from 
peer effects – when neighbors see others nearby successfully implementing 
nature-based solutions to protect their property, they are much more likely to 
invest in their own.
Not only will the development of a robust living-shorelines industry help 
coastal communities effectively adapt to climate change, but ecosystems will 
 benefit greatly in the process, as these systems provide critical habitats for many 
marine species. Moreover, this coastal restoration industry will employ many 
types of workers, including laborers, natural scientists, and engineers.
There are likely some coastal regions that will require hardened gray infrastruc￾ture, and living shorelines alone will not suffice, but hybrid systems that combine 
the best of both approaches will likely be well-suited to most environments. This 
exciting new field can help us reorient our relationship with the shorelines in 
ways that benefit both humans and non-humans in a symbiotic manner, which 
is not only more aesthetically pleasing, but can also provide tangible health and 
environmental benefits.
Entrepreneurship, Business Development, and Risk
Beyond Business as Usual
Entrepreneurship, whether in the ocean and coastal sectors or elsewhere, shares 
many characteristics with standard business planning. Market identification 
and development is crucial for a successful business, as is a sound financial plan 
that accounts for upfront and long-term costs, capital investment, and human 
resources. Entrepreneurs, however, often take business creation a step further, de￾veloping unique products, innovating product delivery, or expanding the current 
market in unexpected ways.254 A. N. Doerr et al.
Our case studies highlight the entrepreneurial mindset. Monterey Bay Sea￾weeds, for example, identified a new market and developed a product to fit that 
niche; Local Oceans Seafoods encountered challenges with their standard busi￾ness model due to COVID-19, and identified an innovative way to deliver their 
product to both existing and new customers, expanding their customer base in 
the process of adapting to a change in external drivers. Even within existing mar￾kets, significant room exists for innovation and expansion: developing new gear 
types in fisheries or providing educational kayak tours instead of simply renting 
the gear to tourists.
As innovation and risk are often closely associated with entrepreneurship, 
it is especially important for entrepreneurs to have well-developed business 
plans. Such plans need to include clear market identification and potential for 
market development – in fact, such development may be a key component of 
the entrepreneurial nature of the business – as well as highly detailed finan￾cial plans that include supply networks, infrastructure, depreciation (which 
may be especially relevant in marine and coastal businesses), and investors/
investment potential. Relationships need to be built with potential customers. 
It can be helpful to identify potential staff or associates who strongly believe 
in the enterprise, because businesses may require some time before becoming 
financially successful.
Although finances are important for any new business, marine entrepreneur￾ship does not need to be commercial in nature. New educational programs or 
organizations (such as aquariums or ocean exploration camps), environmental or 
conservation nonprofits, and research institutions have all been developed by ma￾rine entrepreneurs.
Nature and Risks of Marine Industries
The marine environment is naturally in a state of flux throughout the year, with 
natural events, such as seasonal temperature change, upwelling, storm events, 
and species migrations affecting marine-based businesses. Anthropogenic climate 
change has increased the rate and severity of these changes in some locations and 
has led to greater uncertainty about future ocean conditions globally. In this last 
section of this chapter, we highlight some of the common attributes of marine 
environments that entrepreneurs and business owners should consider.
Species Variability
If a business is dependent on marine species, it must consider both annual and 
long-term shifts in resource availability. Fishing and whale-watching industries, 
for example, must contend with seasonal variability in their market species, as 
well as day-to-day uncertainties in the location and availability of the animals. 
This uncertainty is compounded by climate change, which can result in long￾term shifts in the location and behavior of marine species.Marine Entrepreneurship 255
Environmental Variability
Shifts in sea surface temperature (SST), pH, dissolved oxygen (DO) levels, sa￾linity, and the occurrence of marine heat waves, harmful algal blooms (HABs), 
or coral diseases can lead to prolonged or permanent changes in ocean ecosys￾tems. A business dependent on marine species must consider both annual and 
long-term shifts in environmental parameters that may affect resource health 
and availability. Of course, daily and seasonal weather patterns will affect any 
business that requires access to the ocean. Thus, storms, swells, wind, and 
wave height will also require careful consideration for the safety of workers and 
customers.
Seasonality
Many coastal towns are dependent on seasonal tourism. Seafood restaurants 
and charter fishing operations have high and low seasons and need to anticipate 
 visitation levels to ensure their good financial health, even when their customer 
base is low.
Property Rights
Ownership of marine resources may be limited or nonexistent in an ocean s etting, 
with access to fish, fishing grounds, dive sites, whales, and other marine mammals 
largely dependent on being in the right place at the right time – and possibly 
limited to the first vessel at that location on a given day.
Corrosion
Salt water is known for its deleterious qualities, and anything on or near the 
ocean will require continuous monitoring and upkeep. Physical capital and depre￾ciation are concerns in any business setting, but businesses dependent on seawater 
access must factor in extra funds for maintenance and repair.
Conclusion
The development of a blue economy for the 21st century is just getting underway, 
but already we are witnessing the emergence of new technologies and industries. 
To understand how important and exciting these advancements are, imagine 
coastal regions where:
 – All the power is generated cleanly by the wind, the waves, and the tides.
 – No fishers or coastal hotels ever have to worry about the scourge of potential 
oil spills.256 A. N. Doerr et al.
 – Residential and commercial properties are protected by restored dunes or 
 – The nearby port is powered exclusively by zero-emissions vehicles (ZEVs), 
 – Sustainable local food systems provide high-quality protein for coastal com
Humans have long had a complicated and often unhealthy relationship with 
Professional Pathways
Many of the technologies that will define this new blue economy have yet to be 
invented, perfected, and/or brought to scale. To prepare for these careers, students 
need to have both vision and interdisciplinary training. For instance, you might 
train as engineers, planners, biologists, business leaders, and policymakers who 
can set the right incentives and prioritize public investments to accelerate blue 
growth. However, entrepreneurial skills are not discipline-specific. Instead, they 
require creativity and a commitment to the ocean and to human wellbeing. While 
it is true that entrepreneurship can be risky, specific knowledge that might help 
prepare you for this career includes business planning and marketing, coupled with 
a solid understanding of the nature and character of the ocean and its resources.
Questions for Reflection
 1. How do trends in dietary preferences influence the development and markets 
 2. Offshore renewable energy has many potential benefits but may dispropor
 3. What policies should be put in place by cities to incentivize living shorelines? 
 4. As a coastal tourist, what types of sustainable and/or eco-friendly options Marine Entrepreneurship 257
Notes
 1 A fishing cooperative allows smaller fishers and fish buyers to pool resources in activi
 2 In most US states, individual fishers may purchase a license to sell their own catch 
 3 A food hub is a “business or organization that actively manages the aggregation, 
References
Barham, J., Tropp, D., Enterline, K., Farbman, J., Fisk, J., & Kiraly, S. (2012, April). 
Regional Food Hub resource guide. U.S. Dept. of Agriculture. http://dx.doi.org/10.9752/
MS046.04-2012
California Air Resources Board. (2018, September 26). CARB announces more than $200 
million in new funding for clean freight transportation. Retrieved January 16, 2021 from 
https://ww2.arb.ca.gov/news/carb-announces-more-200-million-new-funding-clean￾freight-transportation
Colgan, C. S., & Newkirk, S. G. (2016). Tradable permits for shoreline protection: Reshaping 
regulation under the Coastal Act for the era of sea level rise. Center for the Blue Economy. 
https://www.middlebury.edu/institute/sites/www.middlebury.edu.institute/files/
2018-10/10.12.18.Shoreline%20Tradable%20Permits%20Working%20Paper--
originalpublishdate--Sept.2016.pdf
Costello, C., Cao, L., Gelcich, S., Cisneros-Mata, M. Á., Free, C. M., Froehlich, H. E., 
Golden, C. D., Ishimura, G., Maier, J., Macadam-Somer, I., Mangin, T., Melnychuk, 
M. C., Miyahara, M., de Moor, C. L., Naylor, R., Nøstbakken, L., Ojea, E., O’Reilly, E., 
Parma, A. M. … Lubchenco, J. (2020). The future of food from the sea. Nature, 588, 
95–100. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-2616-y
Den Hollander, N., & Thorsteinsson, T. V. (2020). A systematic approach to analyze indus￾trial clusters: A case study of the Iceland ocean cluster (Publication No. TRITA ITM-EX 
2020:198) [Master’s Thesis, KTH Royal Institute of Technology]. DiVA Portal. http://
urn.kb.se/resolve?urn=urn%3Anbn%3Ase%3Akth%3Adiva-279730
Dundas, S. J., Levine, A. S., Lewison, R. L., Doerr, A. N., White, C., Galloway, A. W. 
E., Garza, C., Hazen, E. L., Padilla-Gamiño, J., Samhouri, J. F., Spalding, A., Stier, A., 
Hill, T., & White, J. W. (2020). Integrating oceans into climate policy: Any green new 
deal needs a splash of blue. Conservation Letters, 13(5), e12716. https://doi.org/10.1111/
conl.12716
Environmental Protection Agency. (2017). Climate impacts on coastal areas. Retrieved 
January 12, 2021 from https://19january2017snapshot.epa.gov/climate-impacts/ climate￾impacts-coastal-areas_.html#Overview ()258 A. N. Doerr et al.
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. (2017). Fishery and aquaculture 
country profiles: The People’s Republic of China. Retrieved August 24, 2021 from http://
www.fao.org/fishery/facp/CHN/en#CountrySector-PostHarvest
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. (2020). The state of world 
fisheries and aquaculture 2020. Sustainability in action. https://doi.org/10.4060/ca9229en
Gephart, J. A., Froehlich, H. E., & Branch, T. A. (2019). To create sustainable seafood in￾dustries, the United States needs a better accounting of imports and exports. Proceedings 
of the National Academy of Sciences, 116(19), 9142–9146. https://doi.org/10.1073/
pnas.1905650116
Gopal, N., Hapke, H. M., Kusakabe, K., Rajaratnam, S., & Williams, M. J. (2020). 
Expanding the horizons for women in fisheries and aquaculture. Gender, Technology and 
Development, 24(1), 1–9. https://doi.org/10.1080/09718524.2020.1736353
Harper, S., Adshade, M., Lam, V. W. Y., Pauly, D., & Sumaila, U. R. (2020). Valuing 
invisible catches: Estimating the global contribution by women to small-scale marine 
capture fisheries production. PLoS ONE, 15(3), e0228912. https://doi.org/10.1371/jour￾nal.pone.0228912
Korfmacher, K. S., Aviles, K., Cummings, B. J., Daniell, W., Erdmann, J., & Garrison, 
V. (2015). Health impact assessment of urban waterway decisions. International Jour￾nal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 12(1), 300–321. https://doi.org/10.3390/
ijerph120100300
Kroetz, K., Luque, G. M., Gephart, J. A., Jardine, S. L., Lee, P., Chicojay Moore, K., Cole, 
C., Steinkruger, A., & Donlan, C. J. (2020). Consequences of seafood mislabeling for 
marine populations and fisheries management. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences, 117(48), 30318–30323. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2003741117
Lamy, J. (2020, October 2). WSO’s Friend of the Sea certification matters for the plant-based 
seafood industry. Here’s why. Good Food Institute. Retrieved February 1, 2021 from 
https://gfi.org/blog/friend-of-the-sea-certification/
Lucas, A. (2020, December 1). Singapore issues first regulatory approval for lab-grown meat 
to Eat Just. CNBC. https://www.cnbc.com/2020/12/01/singapore-issues-first-regulatory￾approval-for-lab-grown-meat-to-eat-just.html
Luque, G. M., & Donlan, C. J. (2019). The characterization of seafood mislabeling: A 
global meta-analysis. Biological Conservation, 236, 556–570. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
biocon.2019.04.006.
Maul, G. A., & Duedall, I. W. (2019). Demography of coastal populations. In C. W. Finkl 
& C. Makowski (Eds.), Encyclopedia of coastal science. Encyclopedia of Earth Sciences 
Series. Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-93806-6_115
National Marine Fisheries Service. (2020). Fisheries of the United States, 2018 (Current fish￾ery statistics No. 2018). U.S. Department of Commerce. Retrieved February 1, 2021 from 
https://www.fisheries.noaa.gov/national/commercial-fishing/fisheries-united-states-2018
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. (2020). Fast facts: Tourism and 
recreation. Retrieved January 12, 2021 from https://coast.noaa.gov/states/fast-facts/ 
tourism-and-recreation.html#:~:text=Workers%20in%20the%20ocean%2Dbased, 
the%20national%20economy%20each%20year
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. (2021). NOAA fisheries updated i mpact 
assessment of the COVID-19 crisis on the U.S. commercial seafood and recreational for-hire/
charter industries. U.S. Department of Commerce. Retrieved February 1, 2021 from 
https://media.fisheries.noaa.gov/2021-01/Updated-COVID-19-Impact-Assessment.pdf
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development. (2016). The ocean economy in 
2030. OECD Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264251724-enMarine Entrepreneurship 259
Stoll J. S., Harrison, H. L., De Sousa, E., Callaway, D., Collier, M., Harrell, K., Jones, B., 
Kastlunger, J., Kramer, E., Kurian, S., Lovewell, M. A., Strobel, S., Sylvester, T., Tolley, 
B., Tomlinson, A., White, E. R., Young, T., & Loring, P. A. (2021). Alternative seafood 
networks during COVID-19: Implications for resilience and sustainability. Frontiers in 
Sustainable Food Systems, 5, 614368. https://doi.org/10.3389/fsufs.2021.614368
Sumaila, U. R., Zeller, D., Hood, L., Palomares, M. L. D., Li, Y., & Pauly, D. (2020). Illicit 
trade in marine fish catch and its effects on ecosystems and people worldwide. Science 
Advances, 6(9), eaaz3801. https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.aaz3801
United Nations World Tourism Organization. (2016). Measuring sustainable tourism: 
Developing a statistical framework for sustainable tourism. Retrieved January 26, 2021 
from https://webunwto.s3-eu-west-1.amazonaws.com/2019-08/mstoverviewrev1.pdf
Wheeler, B. W., White, M., Stahl-Timmins, W., & Depledge, M. H. (2012). Does living by 
the coast improve health and wellbeing? Health & Place, 18(5), 1198–1201. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.healthplace.2012.06.015.
World Bank. (2017). What is the blue economy? Retrieved August 12, 2021, from https://
www.worldbank.org/en/news/infographic/2017/06/06/blue-economy16 Measuring Progress toward a 
Blue Economy
A Critical Overview of 
Development Indicators
A. M. Cisneros-Montemayor
Introduction: Oceans, Indicators, and a Blue Economy
The oceans have been a crucial part of human culture, subsistence, and econ￾omies for millennia, and they are increasingly viewed as a new frontier in the 
context of modern economic growth and globalized markets (Organization for 
Economic Cooperation and Development [OECD], 2016; World Bank & United 
Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs [UNDESA], 2017). Oceans 
are estimated to contribute US$1.5 trillion per year to the global economy, sup￾porting hundreds of millions of jobs (OECD, 2016). In the future, investment in 
ocean sectors, like offshore wind energy, fisheries and aquaculture, mangrove res￾toration, and decarbonization of shipping, could provide an additional US$15.5 
trillion from 2020 to 2050, with economic returns estimated to be five times 
higher than investment costs (Konar & Ding, 2020).
Beyond financial projections, oceans are vitally important for human communi￾ties and livelihoods, including 200–300 million artisanal fishers and processors (90% 
of total employment related to oceans) (Teh et al., 2014), the provision of essential 
micronutrients to 2.1 billion people (Golden et al., 2016), and the maintenance of 
coastal Indigenous cultures (Cisneros-Montemayor et al., 2016). Many ocean policies 
do not take these social benefits into account (Voyer et al., 2018), and this is often 
due to development assumptions that are rarely stated but are reflected in the choice 
of progress objectives and indicators for ocean and coastal development. So, our 
choice of indicators – how and what we measure to keep track of policy outcomes – is 
really crucial, both as a transparent reflection of our development goals and assump￾tions, and as a way to make sure we are prioritizing what we intended to accomplish.
This chapter provides a critical review of development indicators as they relate 
to a Blue Economy approach, currently the most commonly used term in ocean 
development policy and one which ideally prioritizes social benefits and equity. 
The chapter begins by defining Blue Economy and how it differs from other ocean 
development approaches and describing the role of indicators in sustainable de￾velopment. The second section examines the particular challenges for tracking 
policy progress in ocean systems and uses the UN Sustainable Development Goal 
14 (Life Below Water) as an example. The third section discusses the process of 
considering and selecting indicators for a Blue Economy, including those related 
to social equity, environmental sustainability, and economic viability.
DOI: 10.4324/9781003058151-19Measuring Progress toward a Blue Economy 261
What Is a Blue Economy?
The term “Blue Economy” was first proposed by Small Island Developing States 
(SIDS) – a group of island nations with enormous marine territory relative to 
land area – to promote sustainable economic growth based on ocean resources, 
but specifically emphasizing that this growth be equitable and appropriate given 
local cultures, contexts, and development objectives (UNDESA, 2014). Based on 
that, here we define Blue Economy as the establishment of ocean sectors that are 
socially equitable, environmentally sustainable, and economically viable. Even 
though all three of these components are important, the prioritization of social 
equity is what sets a Blue Economy apart as a new and transformative approach 
(Cisneros-Montemayor et al., 2021; see Figure 16.1).
Since it was first proposed, the Blue Economy term has sometimes been used 
in quite different ways by different interest groups (Voyer et al., 2018), though the 
focus on social equity should ideally distinguish the Blue Economy from other re￾lated approaches (Cisneros-Montemayor et al., 2019). For example, “Blue Growth” 
refers to the economic expansion of the ocean economy (that is, any and all 
industries linked to marine and coastal areas; Colgan, 2016), with environmental 
sustainability implied but not always emphasized, and social equity even less so 
(Cisneros-Montemayor et al., 2019; Voyer et al., 2018). Another term, “Sustain￾able Ocean Economy”, explicitly emphasizes environmental sustainability, and 
increasingly addresses issues of social equity (see, for example, the “Blue Papers” of 
the High-Level Panel for a Sustainable Ocean Economy: https://www. oceanpanel.
org/blue-papers), although it still aims for expansion of ocean industries to in￾crease total financial benefits. As mentioned above, how we think about ocean 
development and its ultimate goals (e.g., environmental conservation, social well￾being, economic efficiency) will inform what indicators we choose.
What Are Development Indicators?
Simply put, an indicator is an observable characteristic that reflects the current 
state of a system or its components. Indicators can be direct – such as temperature 
as a reflection of thermal energy, or height as a reflection of size – or i ndirect – such 
as retail sales as a reflection of economic activity, or goals scored as a reflection 
of how good a soccer player is. Notice that each of these examples of indicators 
could have different units (e.g., °C or °F, centimeters or inches), and we must be 
aware that these may actually measure slightly different things (e.g., total sales or 
total value of sales). Most matters related to sustainable development – including 
the Blue Economy – are very complex and almost always need indirect indicators 
to gauge progress on the various overarching policy goals.
The challenges posed by this complexity have led to much research into in￾dicator design and selection, and there are hundreds of development indicators 
in use throughout the world at national and local levels (see Hass et al., 2002, 
for an excellent review). Many of these indicators are highly useful for local con￾texts, either directly or in modified ways (Elfes et al., 2014), although there are a 
number of pertinent critiques regarding their unstated assumptions and uncritical 262 A. M. Cisneros-Montemayor
application (see, for example, Bell & Morse, 2004; Merry, 2011). As an example, 
one of the most widely recognized and used development indicators is the United 
Nations Development Programme’s Human Development Index (HDI). (An in￾dex is an indicator that is re-scaled, say from 0 to 1, and usually represents an 
average or composite of several indicators.) The HDI is an indicator of human 
development comprising health, wealth, and education. Respectively, its three 
sub-indicators are national average life expectancy, income per capita, and years 
of schooling (United Nations Development Programme, 2020). Notice how, even 
if we agree that health, wealth, and education are key aspects of human well￾being, we could question if other aspects should also be included, whether the 
specific indicators we chose are appropriate (for example, average income does 
not capture inequality), or if national-level averages reflect local disparities within 
nations. This is not meant as a criticism of HDI, specifically, but it is important to 
think about these types of issues when using any indicators.
Context and Goals for a Blue Economy
In the context of a Blue Economy, it is important to recognize that oceans are a 
unique social–ecological system with very particular challenges for development 
that go beyond the general underlying tensions and tradeoffs in advancing so￾cial, ecological, and economic goals (Halpern et al., 2013). A unique challenge in 
ocean systems is that many living marine resources are very difficult to observe 
and measure directly. This means that basic information on species and ecosys￾tems, such as preferred habitats, food web relationships, and local abundances, 
must be inferred from a patchwork of field samples and estimations (Hilborn & 
Mangel, 1997). Ocean currents and species migrations and movement mean that 
pollution or other types of human impacts can quickly extend beyond points of 
origin, and again are difficult to track (Fabricius, 2005).
In terms of governance, ownership and tenure of marine areas and resources 
are much less well-defined than in terrestrial systems (Guggisberg, 2019), which 
can lead to increased conflicts over resources (Spijkers et al., 2018) and worsen so￾cial inequities and power dynamics (Vierros et al., 2020). In this sense, the oceans 
and ocean industries are outliers in modern market systems – which usually focus 
on private property and individual profits – because there is still a much stronger 
emphasis on the benefits of common resources, traditional uses, and freedom of 
movement (Seto & Campbell, 2019). Indeed, it has been specifically argued that 
Blue Economy approaches should not be used to impose legal and market systems 
that could disenfranchise and marginalize traditional ocean users like artisanal 
and subsistence fishers (Bennett et al., 2015; Seto & Campbell, 2019).
Given the complexity of ocean systems that a Blue Economy aims to address, a 
fundamental first step is determining which goals or objectives must be achieved. 
An entire literature exists that is devoted to best practices in eliciting, formulat￾ing, and agreeing upon these goals. In general terms, we must first recognize who 
will be affected by ocean development – like that envisioned by a Blue Economy 
– and fully involve them in a transparent policy process. To be clear, choosing Measuring Progress toward a Blue Economy 263
which indicators to use is only one part of a larger process that tries to include a 
diversity of perspectives to agree on goals, objectives, and the strategies needed to 
achieve them (Valentin & Spangenberg, 2000).
Goals, Targets, and Indicators in Ocean Policy
To ground the discussion above, we can use as an example the most prominent, 
current set of global ocean goals included within the UN Sustainable Devel￾opment Goals (SDGs). The SDGs comprise 17 goals and 169 individual targets 
which have been agreed upon by all UN member nations under the 2030 Agenda 
for Sustainable Development (United Nations [UN], 2015); the oceans are spe￾cifically addressed in SDG 14 (Life Below Water) and its targets. It is important 
to remember that SDG 14 does not equal a Blue Economy, and there are other 
examples of ocean policies, but it is discussed here as a concrete example of exist￾ing goals and indicators related to oceans. Furthermore, SDG 14 has been widely 
adopted by marine agencies in their own national ocean plans, so future Blue 
Economy plans will probably have to work within its commitments (Table 16.1).
Table 16.1 UN Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 14 and targets (UN, 2015). The associated 
indicators adopted by the UN (UN, 2017) are in italics
SDG 14: Life Below Water
14.1 By 2025, prevent and significantly reduce marine pollution of all kinds, in particular from land￾based activities, including marine debris and nutrient pollution.
14.1.1 Index of coastal eutrophication and floating plastic debris density.
14.2 By 2020, sustainably manage and protect marine and coastal ecosystems to avoid significant 
adverse impacts, including by strengthening their resilience, and take action for their restoration in 
order to achieve healthy and productive oceans.
14.2.1 Proportion of national exclusive economic zones managed using ecosystem-based approaches.
14.3 Minimize and address the impacts of ocean acidification, including through enhanced scientific 
cooperation at all levels.
14.3.1 Average marine acidity (pH) measured at agreed suite of representative sampling stations.
14.4 By 2020, effectively regulate harvesting and end overfishing, illegal, unreported, and unregulated 
fishing and destructive fishing practices and implement science-based management plans, in order 
to restore fish stocks in the shortest time feasible, at least to levels that can produce maximum 
sustainable yield as determined by their biological characteristics.
14.4.1 Proportion of fish stocks within biologically sustainable levels.
14.5 By 2020, conserve at least 10% of coastal and marine areas, consistent with national and 
international law and based on the best available scientific information.
14.5.1 Coverage of protected areas in relation to marine areas.
14.6 By 2020, prohibit certain forms of fisheries subsidies which contribute to overcapacity and 
overfishing, eliminate subsidies that contribute to illegal, unreported, and unregulated fishing 
and refrain from introducing new such subsidies, recognizing that appropriate and effective special 
and differential treatment for developing and least developed countries should be an integral part 
of the World Trade Organization fisheries subsidies negotiation.
14.6.1 Progress by countries in the degree of implementation of international instruments aiming to combat 
illegal, unreported, and unregulated fishing.
(Continued)264 A. M. Cisneros-Montemayor
14.7 By 2030, increase the economic benefits to small island developing States and least developed 
countries from the sustainable use of marine resources, including through sustainable management 
of fisheries, aquaculture, and tourism.
14.7.1 Sustainable fisheries as a percentage of GDP in small island developing States, least developed 
countries, and all countries.
14.a Increase scientific knowledge, develop research capacity, and transfer marine technology, taking 
into account the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission Criteria and Guidelines on the 
Transfer of Marine Technology, in order to improve ocean health and to enhance the contribution 
of marine biodiversity to the development of developing countries, in particular small island 
developing States and least developed countries.
14.a.1 Proportion of total research budget allocated to research in the field of marine technology.
14.b Provide access for small-scale artisanal fishers to marine resources and markets.
14.b.1 Progress by countries in the degree of application of a legal/regulatory/policy/institutional framework 
which recognizes and protects access rights for small-scale fisheries.
14.c Enhance the conservation and sustainable use of oceans and their resources by implementing 
international law as reflected in UNCLOS, which provides the legal framework for the 
conservation and sustainable use of oceans and their resources, as recalled in paragraph 158 of The 
Future We Want.
14.c.1 Number of countries making progress in ratifying, accepting, and implementing through legal, policy 
and institutional frameworks, ocean-related instruments that implement international law, as reflected 
in the United Nation Convention on the Law of the Sea, for the conservation and sustainable use of the 
oceans and their resources.
Table 16.1 Continued
SDG 14: Life Below Water
A significant challenge with this set of targets is that, while they are relatively 
comprehensive, they have few specific benchmarks for success (Cormier & Elliott, 
2017); this is a shortcoming which must be addressed when designing indicators (as 
discussed below). The one exception is 14.5, aiming to “conserve at least 10% of 
coastal and marine areas”, but even here there is no specific indicator on the quality 
of protection (Table 16.1). This can lead to “paper parks” with poor implementation 
(Gill et al., 2017), or that impact marginalized communities (including Indigenous 
peoples; Cisneros-Montemayor et al., 2018b), or the declaration of protected areas 
where there is little human activity to begin with (Devillers et al., 2020). There are 
ways to evaluate progress toward similar unspecific goals (Andriantiatsaholiniaina 
et al., 2004; Cisneros-Montemayor et al., 2018b), but to achieve a Blue Economy, ob￾jectives and goals must match local needs – and, ideally, include quantifiable indica￾tors and benchmarks to track progress and adapt policy strategies to local contexts.
Another issue is that most SDG 14 targets focus on environmental protection 
(Table 16.1), even if it is linked to subsequent economic and social benefits. This 
may follow from a common development model which assumes that the state of the 
environment and its natural capital are the base for development and must be pri￾oritized accordingly, with social systems and governance institutions as a secondary 
layer that will lead to a final layer of economic production and benefits (a “layer 
cake” model; Folke et al., 2016). A growing body of literature argues for a different 
approach in which social inequities and power dynamics must be addressed first, 
given that they are at the root of both inequitable distributions of economic bene￾fits and unsustainable use of natural resources (Bennett et al., 2019).Measuring Progress toward a Blue Economy 265
As seen through the example of SDG 14, indicators are essential for tracking 
true progress toward policy goals and can also highlight possible gaps in goals 
themselves. In the case of the Blue Economy, a specific aim to prioritize equita￾ble outcomes requires actions – and associated progress indicators – beyond the 
state of the environment. For example, a fish stock can be recovered to a target 
abundance given decreases in fishing mortality, but we can simultaneously ad￾dress existing or historical inequities in the distribution of catch, such that we 
reduce impacts and increase benefits for marginalized fishers (a “just transition” 
to sustainability; Bennett et al., 2019). If they do not explicitly account for equity 
in implementation, even well-intentioned conservation or sustainability goals – 
 including reducing pollution or decreasing illegal fishing – can have negative ef￾fects on human wellbeing, usually impacting marginalized populations the most 
(Bennett et al., 2019; Cisneros-Montemayor et al., 2018a).
Measuring Progress toward a Blue Economy
General Principles for Blue Economy Indicators
Indicators for a Blue Economy – prioritizing social equity while promoting envi￾ronmental sustainability and economic viability – must be able to directly meas￾ure progress on many different aspects of development (Cisneros-Montemayor 
et al., 2021). For example, if decreasing poverty is the ultimate objective of devel￾opment for a coastal community, one would wish to track indicators of poverty 
and purchasing power itself, not only the state of local fish stocks or even per 
capita income (since local costs of living can change as a result of interventions). 
One must be aware of local contexts (e.g., are there local power dynamics or group 
inequities?), ultimate drivers (e.g., is poverty directly related to fishing, or to other 
factors?), and underlying assumptions of development (e.g., will recovering fish 
stocks lead to higher local incomes?) when designing strategies and their indica￾tors, making sure to track progress on the desired objectives as directly as possible.
An influential set of guidelines for designing indicators are the Bellagio Prin￾ciples (Pintér et al., 2012), which continue to be used in many national planning 
strategies (Hass et al., 2002). Notably, the first principle outlines the assumed goal, 
“delivering well-being within the capacity of the biosphere to sustain it for future 
generations”; agreement on what is understood as wellbeing will of course be an 
important first step for applying this to a specific place (Pintér et al., 2012). Goals 
must be clearly defined and informed by diverse perspectives, recognizing social 
and ecological relationships and how they can change. Progress can then be as￾sessed using indicators which are adequately scoped (e.g., with useful time frames 
and geographic scales); transparently collected, interpreted, and communicated; 
part of a framework of interrelated indicators and goals; and involve broad public 
participation and a capacity to update our strategies as we create new information 
(Pintér et al., 2012; Valentin & Spangenberg, 2000).
Similar to the Bellagio Principles but closer to the implementation stage, a 
common framework for choosing useful indicators (or goals) is the SMART cri￾teria. That is, an indicator should be Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, 
and Time-bound (Cormier & Elliott, 2017). The most important aspects of the 266 A. M. Cisneros-Montemayor
SMART framework include explicit and transparent discussion of how indicators 
specifically reflect intended goals; whether they can be reliably and continuously 
collected; and whether indicators change and can be measured fast enough to 
allow for adaptive policy responses (i.e., changing as needed based on outcomes). 
Of course, measuring more indicators could provide more details about our pro￾gress, especially if we are working in very complex systems and have multiple 
interrelated goals (both of which are almost always true for oceans). However, we 
also have to consider tradeoffs, including added costs of monitoring and the chal￾lenges of interpreting many different types of data. In any case, composite indi￾cators that aggregate multiple indicators into one or only a few – such as the HDI 
discussed above, or the Ocean Health Index (Halpern et al., 2012) – are easier to 
communicate to politicians and the general public. In practice, these “headline” 
indicators (Hass et al., 2002) can be used together with more detailed technical 
indicators as long as they are all collected in a formal and transparent way that 
makes it easier to see how they reflect overarching policy goals.
Following these general principles, in this section we will discuss potential 
indicators that can be used to gauge our policy progress and help direct our 
management strategies to achieve and maintain a Blue Economy. For clarity, we 
separately address indicators related to social equity, environmental sustainabil￾ity, and economic viability, but remember that these aspects of development and 
their corresponding indicators will almost always be very closely interconnected 
(Figure 16.1).
Social Ecological
Economic
Recognion (e.g., who is 
affected, who must be
included?)
Inclusion (e.g., who can 
and is parcipang and
how?)
Distribuon (e.g., costs, benefits,
risks, access, decision power)
Non-material well-being (e.g.,
culture, relaonships, recreaon) Occupaon (e.g., subsistence,
livelihoods, employment
Species (e.g.,
abundance, distribuon,
demographics)
Habitat (e.g., extent,
quality, diversity)
Financial profit (e.g.,
formal, informal)
Equitable Viable
Sustainable
Blue Economy
Ecosystems (e.g., structure,
funcon, qualitave
percepons)
Figure 16.1 Blue Economy conceptual diagram (adapted from Cisneros-Montemayor 
et al., 2019) including key components and examples of corresponding indi￾cators. This list is not meant to be exhaustive and there are many alternative 
or additional indicators; their selection must be carefully considered given the 
specific place, context, and objectives.Measuring Progress toward a Blue Economy 267
Social Equity
Social equity does not have a unique definition but can be synonymous with 
fairness in human relationships. From a simplified but useful perspective, “[to] 
discuss the equity of public policies is to discuss who gets what and by what rules” 
(Blanchard, 1986). Three aspects are generally recognized as central in the con￾text of a Blue Economy. Recognitional equity refers to identifying and considering 
all of the different human groups affected, directly or indirectly, by ocean devel￾opment (the “who” in the quote above). Procedural equity refers to the way the 
strategies of development and rules concerning the distribution of benefits and 
costs are formulated, ideally fully incorporating the perspectives of all of the prior 
recognized groups. Distributional equity refers to outcomes of development and the 
subsequent share of these groups in benefits, costs, or risks.
Distribution is probably the most intuitive aspect of equity for the majority 
of policy practitioners and natural science researchers and is relatively straight￾forward to measure, yet is not always specifically considered. Common indica￾tors of distribution include those of income equality, such as the Gini index and 
other related measures (World Bank, 2016). Note, however, that these indicators 
measure (in)equality in distribution, not equity. Sometimes it may be desirable 
for some groups to receive a larger share of benefits – for example, if an ocean 
industry aims to prioritize increased income for specific marginalized populations. 
Furthermore, distribution of income is only one small part of equity. Other indi￾cators can include ease of access to resources and public services (e.g., distance or 
time from places of work, education, and recreation), relative purchasing power 
(i.e., accounting for changes in local prices of goods and services), or employment 
of different groups within institutional or company hierarchies (e.g., managerial 
versus entry-level positions).
To better help address equity outcomes, any indicator related to a development 
must be collected in a way that allows for comparison across different groups 
of people. This can include material benefits (e.g., income, employment, food), 
negative impacts (e.g., health, insecurity), risks (real or perceived), and qualitative 
perceptions of wellbeing and satisfaction (e.g., through individual surveys). De￾pending on the context, monitoring specific outcomes for different groups during 
the measurement of these indicators requires accounting for gender, sex, age, na￾tionality, ethnicity, religion, political affiliation, Indigeneity, profession, location, 
etc. The fundamental assumption is that ocean development impacts people in 
different ways, so ensuring equitable outcomes requires an understanding of these 
differences so that appropriate policies can address pertinent issues and actively 
intervene to ensure that vulnerable human groups are protected and supported 
(Bennett et al., 2019).
It is very important to remember that adequately accounting for distributional 
equity requires that recognitional and procedural equity concerns be addressed 
first. This is what will determine the appropriate human groups that must be 
included, the types of benefits or impacts to consider, and the social and power dy￾namics that could influence distribution. In practice, distributional concerns are 268 A. M. Cisneros-Montemayor
an inherent part of any political process, but recognitional and procedural ones 
often are not, because marginalized populations, by definition, require specific 
actions to bring into policy discussions. Similar to distribution, these indicators 
may include, for example, the age, gender, ethnicity, and residence of participants 
in meetings; the types of existing processes for determining ownership (formal or 
informal) and access to resources; and the types and appropriateness of our own 
efforts at contacting and including individuals given local customs. Active collab￾oration with social scientists is essential for designing indicators of social equity, 
regardless of whether they are linked to ecological or economic outcomes (Hicks 
et al., 2016). A first step toward this must be for teams tasked with monitoring 
policy progress to include sociologists, anthropologists, historians, etc., with the 
tools and expertise to define and monitor equity outcomes and help us to leave no 
one behind in the global push for human wellbeing (UN, 2015).
Ecological Sustainability
Sustainability, in an ecological context, implies using natural resources in such 
a way that ecosystem functions necessary to produce them, and other ecosystem 
services, are maintained through time. A common misconception is that ecolog￾ical sustainability is inherently at odds with maximizing financial benefits. For 
natural resources, including those underpinning ocean sectors, unsustainable ex￾ploitation actively decreases financial benefits, both currently and for any future 
industries (Daly, 1990).
In oceans, the most common approach to monitoring ecological sustainability 
is stock assessment models used for most marine fisheries. Most agencies focus on 
determining the necessary exploitation rate required to achieve the maximum 
yearly production that can be sustained over time (maximum sustainable yield, 
or MSY; Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, 2018), and 
the yearly state of the fishery in relation to this reference point. While there are 
many possible reference points that can be drawn from such models, including 
the maximum economic yield (which maximizes profit instead of production), 
the vast majority of models focus on stocks (a distinct population) of single spe￾cies and generally do not explicitly account for ecological dynamics or variability. 
Nevertheless, single-species indicators can be quite useful to monitor ecological 
state, whether of exploited species or of others including seabirds, coastal vegeta￾tion, marine mammals, etc. These indicators can be related to total production, 
as in most fisheries, but can also include measures of observed or estimated abun￾dance, distribution, extractive effort, production rate (e.g., fish catch per boat), or 
population structure (e.g., size, age, and sex ratios). A common criticism of these 
approaches is that they require large amounts of data that may not be available; 
while this is true for more sophisticated models, there are many alternative in￾dicators designed to provide credible advice in data-limited situations (see, for 
example, Carruthers & Hordyk, 2018; Cope & Punt, 2009; Kleisner et al., 2013).
The widely recognized concept of ecosystem services, or nature’s contri￾butions to people (Díaz et al., 2018), focuses on functioning ecosystems – not Measuring Progress toward a Blue Economy 269
species in isolation – as the providers of human benefits. These include market 
benefits, such as food, livelihoods, income, and shelter, and non-market benefits, 
such as culture, inspiration, kinship, and recreation, among many others (Alli￾son et al., 2020). Recognizing that marine ecosystems underpin human benefits 
means that we must account for ecological functions beyond the single-species 
indicators mentioned above, which can be done qualitatively or quantitatively 
(Arreguín-Sánchez & Ruiz-Barreiro, 2014). For example, quantifying the effects 
of ocean sectors on ecosystems can be done through ecosystem models such as 
Ecopath with Ecosim, Atlantis, or others (Fulton, 2010; Plagányi, 2007). These 
allow users to represent a full marine ecosystem and its trophic webs, and track 
potential impacts on marine species of, for example, fishing pressure, habitat 
modification, pollution, shipping noise, or conservation and restoration actions. 
Ecosystem indicators include ratios of species abundances (reflecting ecosystem 
structure), rates of energy transfer (pointing to potential large-scale changes), and 
the relative abundances of key species (including primary producers, keystone spe￾cies, or apex predators) (Coll et al., 2016; Perrings et al., 2011).
In some cases, quantitative marine ecosystem models can be built using lo￾cal information provided by fishers or other ocean users (Bentley et al., 2019; 
 Cisneros-Montemayor et al., 2020). This has the added benefit of requiring close 
collaboration between different stakeholders, potentially encouraging trust, and 
further cooperative management actions. Even conceptual ecosystem models based 
on scientific and/or local knowledge can be highly useful to anticipate potential 
ecosystem effects from specific ocean sectors, identify ecological or cultural key￾stone species, and highlight specific ecological relationships that could lead to sig￾nificant ecosystem changes (such as cascading effects or alternate stable states) and 
therefore require further research (Cisneros-Montemayor et al., 2020).
In addition to species and ecosystems, indicators for a Blue Economy must 
monitor marine habitats. This includes physical habitat, such as sea ice, kelp for￾ests, mangroves, and coral reefs, and water quality more broadly. Importantly, it is 
not only the extent of coverage that must be monitored, but the quality of habitat. 
The simplest example is that of living versus dead coral reefs, where the latter can 
still provide habitat for marine species but with a vastly lower overall productiv￾ity. Similarly, mangrove forests can be highly resilient to human disturbance and 
pollution, but the species associated with them may not be.
Economic Viability
Although economics deals with a wide range of issues related to resource alloca￾tion and utility, we focus in this subsection on what is termed the “ocean econ￾omy”, which refers to the financial economic activity supported by or linked to 
ocean resources. This includes sectors based on renewable and/or living marine 
resources, such as fisheries, ecotourism, blue carbon, mariculture, bioprospecting, 
and offshore wind and tidal energy (Cisneros-Montemayor et al., 2019). The ocean 
economy is not limited to these sectors, however, or explicitly tied to sustainabil￾ity or equity, but to an accounting of economic activity related to the ocean. It 270 A. M. Cisneros-Montemayor
therefore also includes sectors such as offshore oil and gas, shipping and port 
services, marine technology and infrastructure development, mass coastal tour￾ism, coastal development, etc. (World Bank & UNDESA, 2017). These would not 
be considered within a Blue Economy strictly defined as requiring sustainability, 
except perhaps as part of temporary transition plans toward renewable resource 
sectors, yet they must be accounted for within indicators of the ocean economy.
A wider consideration of economic benefits (both market and non- market) 
from multiple ocean sectors means that we must take special care to avoid 
 double-counting values. This is important to help policy decisions comparing 
ocean industries to each other, but also to be able to compare the ocean econ￾omy as a whole to other sectors of the economy (Colgan, 2016). In general terms, 
an accurate accounting of the ocean economy involves: (1) categorizing types of 
ocean sectors depending on their degree of dependence on oceans and/or their 
living resources; (2) considering the geographic location and corresponding juris￾diction of ocean industries; (3) ensuring appropriate confidentiality and transpar￾ency in data collection; (4) including both natural capital (value of resources “in 
the water”) and flows (value of harvested resources); and calculating value added 
(the economic activity related to post-harvest processing, marketing, and industry 
services) for marine sectors as completely as possible. Some measures of economic 
viability account for the fact that some industries receive subsidies to operate, 
and these subsidies should be subtracted to estimate societal returns (Schuhbauer 
et al., 2019a). For example, a fishery that receives subsidies to lower operating 
costs may bring a lot of societal benefits but should not include public subsidies in 
estimates of these benefits; rather, subsidies are costs to society that may or may 
not be used for other types of investments, including for ocean sectors with more 
direct benefits to local coastal communities (Schuhbauer et al., 2019b).
Accurate financial accounting can be challenging in the context of oceans and 
their associated sectors, but there are already data and frameworks specifically 
designed to do so (Colgan, 2016; Fenichel et al., 2020; Wang, 2016). However, 
because a Blue Economy is intended to provide local benefits, national-level in￾dicators such as GDP will most often not be appropriate for reflecting progress 
on ocean development goals (Fenichel et al., 2020). Furthermore, oceans support 
very large informal economies and livelihoods, and indicators should account 
for this regardless of whether they are officially recognized as part of the formal 
economy. An important first step in doing so must be to identify and include all 
stakeholder groups as previously discussed in the Social Equity section. This can 
help to more fully appreciate the breadth of economic indicators necessary to 
reflect local contexts, objectives, and dynamics.
The most widely used measure of economic viability, especially in a develop￾ment context, is Net Present Value (NPV), which estimates the net benefits of a 
public or private investment over the length of time it is expected to operate (or 
over a long time span, say 30 or 50 years, representing multiple generations). This 
calculation is often used to gauge return on investment (ROI) and assumes that 
humans place more value on benefits (or costs) today than in the future – i.e., the 
future is discounted. Higher discount rates mean that we value the future less; Measuring Progress toward a Blue Economy 271
therefore, we would be less willing to invest in a project expected to provide bene￾fits in the future but known to have high costs today. (Reluctance to take actions 
on climate change is one good example of this).
In order to account for benefits and costs in NPV, discount rates are often 
calculated by economic planning departments or investment banks. But one 
should consider their use very carefully because these rates (usually between 3 
and 10% per year) have been shown to be potentially vastly different from those 
measured directly through field surveys of ocean users. One field survey of ar￾tisanal fishers, by far the largest group of marine employment throughout the 
world, found discount rates of well over 200% (Teh et al., 2014). At a deeper 
level, it has been argued that by assuming high discount rates we are implicitly 
and wrongfully discounting the needs of future generations. A more equitable 
approach involves “resetting” the NPV clock so that benefits to future generations 
are better captured, known as intergenerational discounting (Sumaila & Walters, 
2005). Discount rates can also be lowered by reducing the urgency to use up natu￾ral resources today, which can be supported by promoting alternative livelihoods 
and education on responsible consumption, decreasing environmental impacts of 
marine industries, and promoting more equitable sharing of current benefits from 
marine resources. Like any indicator, the use of NPV is not inherently flawed, but 
it requires critical and careful consideration of its assumptions, parameters, and 
limitations for advising policy.
The various economic indicators discussed above are intended to be direct 
measurements of economic activity, but not all economic values from ocean eco￾system services can be measured directly. These ecosystem services (or nature’s 
contributions to people) include provisioning of material goods, regulation of cli￾mate and environmental systems, and a wide array of cultural, inspirational, and 
recreational contributions (Díaz et al., 2018). Some, such as shadow values (e.g., the 
approximate market value of fish that are caught and eaten, not sold) or regulating 
services (e.g., storm protection by mangrove forests or reefs), can be indirectly cal￾culated based on the market value of substitutes (in the prior examples, fish sold 
at a market or the construction and maintenance of a seawall). Other methods for 
indirectly calculating economic indicators related to ocean development and eco￾system services include hedonic pricing, benefit-transfer, and contingent valuation 
(e.g., surveys of willingness-to-pay or -accept) (Austen et al., 2019). Within a Blue 
Economy approach, analyzing economic viability must recognize that economic 
values go far beyond prices and income, so indicators must try as much as possible 
to reflect deeper changes in human wellbeing (Allison et al., 2020).
Conclusion
There are hundreds of potential indicators that have been proposed, adapted, 
and used (Hass et al., 2002), but local contexts and objectives should always dic￾tate which ones are relevant for a specific application. There are many seemingly 
 useful indicators that are very difficult to actually collect, and which result in the￾oretically sound frameworks with little hard data to evaluate progress. Conversely, 272 A. M. Cisneros-Montemayor
we must ensure that the indicators that are easier to collect over time or across re￾gions truly reflect policy outcomes and progress on objectives (Fernandez- Macho, 
2016). Finally, when evaluating any indicators of sustainable development – 
particularly in complex systems such as oceans – it is important to not let the 
measures become the goal.
To use a final example to bring together the discussion above, SDG 14.7 aims 
to increase benefits to SIDS from ocean sectors including fisheries, tourism, and 
mariculture (Table 16.1). However, the corresponding indicator (14.7.1) aims for in￾creasing the proportion of fish stocks assessed as sustainable (e.g., at MSY) and their 
percent contribution to national GDP. Ideally, this indicator is intended to reflect 
the overall state of local marine ecosystems, helping direct efforts to protect and re￾cover fish stocks and thus contribute to GDP growth. However, one could also make 
progress on this indicator by modifying reference points or assessment methods to 
make it easier for stocks to be deemed sustainable. If local fishers are displaced to 
reduce overfishing, loss of access to food and cultural practices would not be ac￾counted for in the measurement of benefits by the indicator. Conversely, if a nation 
sees significant economic growth from investments in ecotourism or the technol￾ogy sector, the relative contribution of fisheries to GDP would decrease, showing a 
negative trend in the indicator even if stocks are sustainable. Any of these possible 
drivers of indicator trends would clearly not reflect progress on the intended goal.
The example above is intended as one more illustration to emphasize the power 
of indicators to facilitate or impede achievement of a Blue Economy or other de￾velopment goals, and we should now be able to think of many others. Any and all 
social, ecological, and economic aspects considered in an objective can easily be 
lost depending on the choice of indicator, which is why great care must be taken in 
designing them (Valentin & Spangenberg, 2000). Social systems, ecosystems, and 
economies are complex and interconnected, so indicators must not be evaluated in 
isolation (Cisneros-Montemayor et al., 2021). As this chapter highlights, designing, 
choosing, and collecting indicators for a Blue Economy cannot be a purely techni￾cal process, but requires transparent and inclusive collaboration within a dedicated 
policy process to make sure that we are advancing our intended goals.
Professional Pathways
Students interested in working in the context of the Blue Economy can follow a 
variety of paths. Typical fields of study would likely include economics, p olitical sci￾ence, sociology, or other interdisciplinary human dimension fields such as political 
economy, marine studies, or development studies. Specific entities to explore for 
career opportunities might include regional or national natural- resource planning 
institutions; fisheries and ocean management departments at the international 
(e.g., FAO), national (e.g., national governments), or local (e.g., state or counties) 
level; intergovernmental organizations related to sustainable development such as 
the UN agencies or the World Bank; marine industry associations (e.g., shipping, 
tourism, logistics); or intergovernmental, non- governmental, or national marine 
and environmental conservation institutes.Measuring Progress toward a Blue Economy 273
Questions for Reflection
 1. What is a Blue Economy?
 2. How is the Blue Economy framework linked to equitable and sustainable 
 3. What are development indicators, and how do we choose them for a Blue 
 4. How can we consider social equity in choosing indicators – even ones related 
Acknowledgments
AMCM gratefully acknowledges comments and suggestions of the editors and 
three anonymous reviewers. AMCM is supported by the Nippon Foundation 
Ocean Nexus Center at EarthLab, University of Washington, in collaboration 
with the University of British Columbia.
References
Allison, E. H., Kurien, J., Ota, Y., Adhuri, D. S., Bavinck, J. M., Cisneros-Montemayor, 
A. M., Fabinyi, M., Jentoft, S., Lau, S., Mallory, T. G., Olukoju, A., van Putten, I., 
Stacey, N., Voyer, M., & Weeratunge, N. (2020). The human relationship with our 
ocean planet (p. 80). World Resources Institute. https://oceanpanel.org/publication/
the-human-relationship-with-our-ocean-planet/
Andriantiatsaholiniaina, L. A., Kouikoglou, V. S., & Phillis, Y. A. (2004). Evaluating 
strategies for sustainable development: Fuzzy logic reasoning and sensitivity analysis. 
Ecological Economics, 48(2), 149–172. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolecon.2003.08.009
Arreguín-Sánchez, F., & Ruiz-Barreiro, T. M. (2014). Approaching a functional measure 
of vulnerability in marine ecosystems. Ecological Indicators, 45, 130–138. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.ecolind.2014.04.009
Austen, M., Andersen, P., Armstrong, C., Döring, R., Hynes, S., Levrel, H., Oinonen, 
S., Ressurreição, A., & Coopman, J. (2019). Valuing marine ecosystems – Taking into 
account the value of ecosystem benefits in the Blue Economy [Preprint]. MarXiv. https://doi.
org/10.31230/osf.io/vy3kp
Bell, S., & Morse, S. (2004). Experiences with sustainability indicators and stakeholder 
participation: A case study relating to a “blue plan” project in Malta. Sustainable Devel￾opment, 12(1), 1–14. https://doi.org/10.1002/sd.225
Bennett, N. J., Blythe, J., Cisneros-Montemayor, A. M., Singh, G. G., & Sumaila, U. R. 
(2019). Just transformations to sustainability. Sustainability, 11(14), 3881. https://doi.
org/10.3390/su11143881
Bennett, N. J., Govan, H., & Satterfield, T. (2015). Ocean grabbing. Marine Policy, 57, 
61–68. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpol.2015.03.026
Bentley, J. W., Hines, D., Borrett, S., Serpetti, N., Fox, C., Reid, D. G., & Heymans, J. J. (2019). 
Diet uncertainty analysis strengthens model-derived indicators of food web structure and 
function. Ecological Indicators, 98, 239–250. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolind.2018.11.008
Blanchard, W. (1986). Evaluating social equity: What does fairness mean and can we 
measure it? Policy Studies Journal, 15(1), 29–54. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1541-0072.1986.
tb00442.x274 A. M. Cisneros-Montemayor
Carruthers, T. R., & Hordyk, A. R. (2018). The data-limited methods toolkit (DLM tool): 
An R package for informing management of data-limited populations. Methods in 
 Ecology and Evolution, 9(12), 2388–2395. https://doi.org/10.1111/2041-210X.13081
Cisneros-Montemayor, A. M., Cashion, T., Miller, D. D., Tai, T. C., Talloni-Álvarez, N., 
Weiskel, H. W., & Sumaila, U. R. (2018a). Achieving sustainable and equitable fi sheries 
requires nuanced policies not silver bullets. Nature Ecology & Evolution, 2(9), 1334. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41559-018-0633-0
Cisneros-Montemayor, A. M., Moreno-Báez, M., Reygondeau, G., Cheung, W. W. L., Cros￾man, K. M., González-Espinosa, P. C., Lam, V. W. Y., Oyinlola, M. A., Singh, G. G., 
Swartz, W., Zheng, C., & Ota, Y. (2021). Enabling conditions for an equitable and sustain￾able blue economy. Nature, 591(7850), 396–401. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-021-03327-3
Cisneros-Montemayor, A. M., Moreno-Báez, M., Voyer, M., Allison, E. H., Cheung, W. W. 
L., Hessing-Lewis, M., Oyinlola, M. A., Singh, G. G., Swartz, W., & Ota, Y. (2019). So￾cial equity and benefits as the nexus of a transformative blue economy: A sectoral review 
of implications. Marine Policy, 109, 103702. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpol.2019.103702
Cisneros-Montemayor, A. M., Pauly, D., Weatherdon, L. V., & Ota, Y. (2016). A global 
estimate of seafood consumption by coastal Indigenous peoples. PLoS ONE, 11(12), 
e0166681. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0166681
Cisneros-Montemayor, A. M., Singh, G. G., & Cheung, W. W. L. (2018b). A fuzzy logic 
expert system for evaluating policy progress towards sustainability goals. Ambio, 47(5), 
595–607. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13280-017-0998-3
Cisneros-Montemayor, A. M., Zetina-Rejón, M. J., Espinosa-Romero, M. J., Cisneros-Mata, 
M. A., Singh, G. G., & Fernández-Rivera Melo, F. J. (2020). Evaluating ecosystem im￾pacts of data-limited artisanal fisheries through ecosystem modelling and traditional 
fisher knowledge. Ocean & Coastal Management, 195, 105291. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ocecoaman.2020.105291
Colgan, C. S. (2016). Measurement of the ocean economy from national income accounts 
to the sustainable blue economy. Journal of Ocean and Coastal Economics, 2(2), 12. 
https://doi.org/10.15351/2373-8456.1061
Coll, M., Shannon, L. J., Kleisner, K. M., Juan-Jordá, M. J., Bundy, A., Akoglu, A. G., 
Banaru, D., Boldt, J. L., Borges, M. F., Cook, A., Diallo, I., Fu, C., Fox, C., Gascuel, D., 
Gurney, L. J., Hattab, T., Heymans, J. J., Jouffre, D., Knight, B. R. … Shin, Y.-J. (2016). 
Ecological indicators to capture the effects of fishing on biodiversity and conservation 
status of marine ecosystems. Ecological Indicators, 60, 947–962. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ecolind.2015.08.048
Cope, J. M., & Punt, A. E. (2009). Length-based reference points for data-limited s ituations: 
Applications and restrictions. Marine and Coastal Fisheries: Dynamics, Management, 
and Ecosystem Science, 1(1), 169–186. https://doi.org/10.1577/C08-025.1
Cormier, R., & Elliott, M. (2017). SMART marine goals, targets and management – Is 
SDG 14 operational or aspirational, is “Life Below Water” sinking or swimming? Marine 
Pollution Bulletin, 123(1–2), 28–33. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.marpolbul.2017.07.060
Daly, H. E. (1990). Toward some operational principles of sustainable development. 
Ecological Economics, 2(1), 1–6. https://doi.org/10.1016/0921-8009(90)90010-R
Devillers, R., Pressey, R. L., Ward, T. J., Grech, A., Kittinger, J. N., Edgar, G. J., & Watson, 
R. A. (2020). Residual marine protected areas five years on: Are we still favouring ease 
of establishment over need for protection? Aquatic Conservation: Marine and Freshwater 
Ecosystems, 30(9), 1758–1764. https://doi.org/10.1002/aqc.3374
Díaz, S., Pascual, U., Stenseke, M., Martín-López, B., Watson, R. T., Molnár, Z., Hill, R., 
Chan, K. M. A., Baste, I. A., Brauman, K. A., Polasky, S., Church, A., Lonsdale, M., Measuring Progress toward a Blue Economy 275
Larigauderie, A., Leadley, P. W., van Oudenhoven, A. P. E., van der Plaat, F., Schröter, 
M., Lavorel, S. … Shirayama, Y. (2018). Assessing nature’s contributions to people. 
Science, 359(6373), 270–272. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aap8826
Elfes, C. T., Longo, C., Halpern, B. S., Hardy, D., Scarborough, C., Best, B. D., Pinheiro, 
T., & Dutra, G. F. (2014). A regional-scale ocean health index for Brazil. PLoS ONE, 
9(4), e92589. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0092589
Fabricius, K. E. (2005). Effects of terrestrial runoff on the ecology of corals and coral reefs: 
Review and synthesis. Marine Pollution Bulletin, 50(2), 125–146. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
marpolbul.2004.11.028
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. (2018). The state of world 
fisheries and aquaculture 2018. Meeting the Sustainable Development Goals (p. 227). FAO.
Fenichel, E. P., Milligan, B., Porras, I., Addicott, E. T., Árnasson, R., Bordt, M., Djavidnia, 
S., Dvarskas, A., Goldman, E., Grimsrud, K., Lange, G.-M., Matuszak, J., Muawanah, U., 
Quaas, M., Soulard, F., & Zhang, J. (2020). National accounting for the ocean and ocean econ￾omy (High Level Panel for a Sustainable Ocean Economy, p. 48). World R esources Institute.
Fernandez-Macho, J. (2016). A statistical assessment of maritime socioeconomic indica￾tors for the European Atlantic area. Journal of Ocean and Coastal Economics, 2(2), 4. 
https://doi.org/10.15351/2373-8456.1047
Folke, C., Biggs, R., Norström, A. V., Reyers, B., & Rockström, J. (2016). Social- ecological 
resilience and biosphere-based sustainability science. Ecology and Society, 21(3), 41. 
https://www.jstor.org/stable/26269981
Fulton, E. A. (2010). Approaches to end-to-end ecosystem models. Journal of Marine 
Systems, 81(1–2), 171–183. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmarsys.2009.12.012
Gill, D. A., Mascia, M. B., Ahmadia, G. N., Glew, L., Lester, S. E., Barnes, M., Craigie, I., 
Darling, E. S., Free, C. M., Geldmann, J., Holst, S., Jensen, O. P., White, A. T., Basurto, 
X., Coad, L., Gates, R. D., Guannel, G., Mumby, P. J., Thomas, H., … Fox, H. E. (2017). 
Capacity shortfalls hinder the performance of marine protected areas globally. Nature, 
543(7647), 665–669. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature21708
Golden, C., Allison, E. H., Cheung, W. W., Dey, M. M., Halpern, B. S., McCauley, D. J., 
Smith, M., Vaitla, B., Zeller, D., & Myers, S. S. (2016). Fall in fish catch threatens hu￾man health. Nature, 534(7607), 317–320. https://doi.org/10.1038/534317a
Guggisberg, S. (2019). The roles of nongovernmental actors in improving compliance with 
fisheries regulations. Review of European, Comparative & International Environmental 
Law, 28(3), 314–327. https://doi.org/10.1111/reel.12304
Halpern, B. S., Klein, C. J., Brown, C. J., Beger, M., Grantham, H. S., Mangubhai, S., 
Ruckelshaus, M., Tulloch, V. J., Watts, M., White, C., & Possingham, H. P. (2013). 
Achieving the triple bottom line in the face of inherent trade-offs among social equity, 
economic return, and conservation. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 
110(15), 6229–6234. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1217689110
Halpern, B. S., Longo, C., Hardy, D., McLeod, K. L., Samhouri, J. F., Katona, S. K., Kleis￾ner, K., Lester, S. E., O’Leary, J., Ranelletti, M., Rosenberg, A. A., Scarborough, C., 
Selig, E. R., Best, B. D., Brumbaugh, D. R., Chapin, F. S., Crowder, L. B., Daly, K. L., 
Doney, S. C. … Zeller, D. (2012). An index to assess the health and benefits of the 
global ocean. Nature, 488(7413), 615–620. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature11397
Hass, J., Brunvoll, F., & Hoie, H. (2002). Overview of sustainable development indicators 
used by national and international agencies (OECD Statistics Working Papers, No. 
2002/02). OECD Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1787/838562874641
Hicks, C. C., Levine, A., Agrawal, A., Basurto, X., Breslow, S. J., Carothers, C., Charnley, 
S., Coulthard, S., Dolsak, N., Donatuto, J., Garcia-Quijano, C., Mascia, M. B., Norman, 276 A. M. Cisneros-Montemayor
K., Poe, M. R., Satterfield, T., St. Martin, K., & Levin. P. S. (2016). Engage key social 
concepts for sustainability. Science, 352(6281), 38–40.
Hilborn, R., & Mangel, M. (1997). The ecological detective: Confronting models with data. 
Princeton University Press.
Kleisner, K., Zeller, D., Froese, R., & Pauly, D. (2013). Using global catch data for inferences 
on the world’s marine fisheries: Catch data for fisheries inferences. Fish and Fisheries, 
14(3), 293–311. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-2979.2012.00469.x
Konar, M., & Ding, H. (2020). A sustainable ocean economy for 2050: Approximating its 
benefits and costs (p. 62). High Level Panel for a Sustainable Ocean Economy. Retrieved 
July 11, 2022 from https://www.readkong.com/page/a-sustainable-ocean-economy￾for-2050-approximating-its-7989226
Merry, S. E. (2011). Measuring the world: Indicators, human rights, and global govern￾ance. Current Anthropology, 52(S3), S83–S95. https://doi.org/10.1086/657241
OECD [Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development]. (2016). The ocean 
economy in 2030. OECD Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264251724-en
Perrings, C., Naeem, S., Ahrestani, F. S., Bunker, D. E., Burkill, P., Canziani, G., Elmqvist, 
T., Fuhrman, J. A., Jaksic, F. M., Kawabata, Z., Kinzig, A., Mace, G. M., Mooney, H., 
Prieur-Richard, A.-H., Tschirhart, J., & Weisser, W. (2011). Ecosystem services, targets, 
and indicators for the conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity. Frontiers in 
 Ecology and the Environment, 9(9), 512–520. https://doi.org/10.1890/100212
Pintér, L., Hardi, P., Martinuzzi, A., & Hall, J. (2012). Bellagio STAMP: Principles for 
sustainability assessment and measurement. Ecological Indicators, 17, 20–28. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.ecolind.2011.07.001
Plagányi, É. E. (2007). Models for an ecosystem approach to fisheries (FAO Fisheries Tech￾nical Paper No. 477; p. 108). FAO. http://www.fao.org/docrep/010/a1149e/a1149e00.htm
Schuhbauer, A., Cisneros-Montemayor, A. M., Chuenpagdee, R., & Sumaila, U. R. (2019b). 
Assessing the economic viability of small-scale fisheries: An example from Mexico. 
Marine Ecology Progress Series, 617–618, 365–376. https://doi.org/10.3354/meps12942
Schuhbauer, A., Cisneros-Montemayor, A. M., & Sumaila, U. R. (2019a). Economic v iability 
of small-scale fisheries: A transdisciplinary evaluation approach. In R. Chuenpagdee 
& S. Jentoft (Eds.), Transdisciplinarity for small-scale fisheries governance (Vol. 21, pp. 
93–117). Springer International Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-94938-3_6
Seto, K., & Campbell, B. (2019). The last commons: (Re)constructing an ocean future. 
In A. M. Cisneros-Montemayor, W. W. L. Cheung, & Y. Ota (Eds.), Predicting future 
oceans: Sustainability of ocean and human systems amidst global environmental change (pp. 
365–376). Elsevier.
Spijkers, J., Morrison, T. H., Blasiak, R., Cumming, G. S., Osborne, M., Watson, J., & 
Österblom, H. (2018). Marine fisheries and future ocean conflict. Fish and Fisheries, 
19(5), 798–806. https://doi.org/10.1111/faf.12291
Sumaila, U. R., & Walters, C. (2005). Intergenerational discounting: A new intuitive 
approach. Ecological Economics, 52(2), 135–142. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolecon.
2003.11.012
Teh, L. S. L., Teh, L. C. L., & Sumaila, U. R. (2014). Time preference of small-scale fishers 
in open access and traditionally managed reef fisheries. Marine Policy, 44, 222–231. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpol.2013.08.028
United Nations. (2015). Transforming our world: The 2030 agenda for sustainable develop￾ment (A/Res/70/1, p. 35). United Nations General Assembly. https://www.ceeol.com/
search/article-detail?id=304581Measuring Progress toward a Blue Economy 277
United Nations. (2017). Work of the statistical commission pertaining to the 2030 agenda for 
sustainable development (A/RES/71/313). United Nations General Assembly.
United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs. (2014). Blue economy concept 
paper. United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs. https://sustaina￾bledevelopment.un.org/content/documents/2978BEconcept.pdf
United Nations Development Programme. (2020, December 15). Human development re￾port 2020. The next frontier: Human development and the Anthropocene. United Nations 
 Development Programme. http://hdr.undp.org/en/content/human-development-report-2020
Valentin, A., & Spangenberg, J. H. (2000). A guide to community sustainability indica￾tors. Environmental Impact Assessment Review, 20(3), 381–392. https://doi.org/10.1016/
S0195-9255(00)00049-4
Vierros, M. K., Harrison, A. L., Sloat, M. R., Crespo, G. O., Moore, J. W., Dunn, D. 
C., Ota, Y., Cisneros-Montemayor, A. M., Shillinger, G. L., Watson, T. K., & Govan, 
H. (2020). Considering indigenous peoples and local communities in governance 
of the global ocean commons. Marine Policy, 119, 104039. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
marpol.2020.104039
Voyer, M., Quirk, G., McIlgorm, A., & Azmi, K. (2018). Shades of blue: What do com￾peting interpretations of the blue economy mean for oceans governance? Journal 
of Environmental Policy & Planning, 20(5), 595–616. https://doi.org/10.1080/15239
08X.2018.1473153
Wang, X. (2016). The ocean economic statistical system of China and understand￾ing of the blue economy. Journal of Ocean and Coastal Economics, 2(2). https://doi.
org/10.15351/2373-8456.1055
World Bank. (2016). Poverty and shared prosperity 2016: Taking on inequality. The World 
Bank. https://doi.org/10.1596/978-1-4648-0958-3
World Bank, & United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs. (2017). 
The potential of the Blue Economy: Increasing long-term benefits of the sustainable use 
of marine resources for Small Island Developing States and Coastal Least Developed 
Countries (p. 50). World Bank. https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/bitstream/han￾dle/10986/26843/115545.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y17 Conclusion
Marine Studies as an 
Interdisciplinary Approach 
to the Study of the Coupled 
Natural–Human Ocean System
D. O. Suman and A. K. Spalding
The ocean covers more than 70% of the Earth’s surface. About 97% of the water 
on Earth is found in the Ocean. Between 50 and 80% of oxygen produced on 
Earth comes from the ocean, mostly from phytoplankton photosynthesis. Marine 
fish provide about 15% of protein consumed by humans. The marine realm pro￾vides many services to humans, including provision of food, energy, and minerals; 
climate regulation; recreational opportunities, spiritual and cultural meanings, 
creative inspiration, maritime transportation routes, opportunities for scientific 
study, carbon sequestration, oxygen production, among others. We use the Ocean 
in so many ways!
However, despite its great importance to humans, the Ocean is in trouble. One￾third of fish stocks are overfished, and only 7% have any room for growth. Soci￾ety has used the Ocean as a waste bin. By 2050, some researchers estimate that 
the weight of plastics in the ocean could exceed the weight of fish. Plastic waste 
has been found on the deep Mariana Trench, and Antarctic waters and deep-sea 
sediments contain microplastics. Nutrient pollution plagues the world’s coastal 
waters. Recent dramatic oil spills from maritime accidents and offshore oil opera￾tions add to the substantial amounts of hydrocarbons that are released to marine 
waters from numerous smaller operational sources. Invasive species of algae and 
mollusks carried around the world in ballast waters create havoc in marine and 
freshwater ecosystems. Due to global climate change, the average surface ocean 
temperature may increase between 0.7°C and 3°C by 2100, impacting the distri￾bution of living marine resources and causing rising sea levels that have already 
begun to impact low-lying coastal areas. Predictions for global sea level rise by 
2100 range from 43 to 84 cm relative to 1986–2005 levels.
Human activities are ultimately responsible for these adverse impacts to the 
Ocean and its resources. At the same time, the degradation of the marine envi￾ronment also creates feedback loops that affect human societies in many ways. 
This volume has stressed the importance of considering the Ocean as a Coupled 
Natural–Human System, where people are an integral part of the marine environ￾ment. Therefore, our efforts to study and protect the Ocean must fully integrate 
human dimensions approaches, including social sciences, arts, and humanities. 
The chapters in this volume do just that. Part I laid the foundation for what we 
DOI: 10.4324/9781003058151-20Conclusion 279
have called “Marine Studies”, outlining the various human dimension approaches 
and the natural and physical processes that define the marine environment. Part 
II examined some of the grand challenges that the global Ocean faces, namely, 
overfishing, climate change, marine pollution, international ocean governance; 
and the various ways in which humans have contributed to and been affected 
by these challenges. Limitations of space have made it impossible to discuss ad￾ditional challenges, such as inadequate coastal planning, consumption patterns, 
deep-sea mining, globalization of trade and its impacts on maritime transporta￾tion and port development, among others. Yet, as you find your niche in Marine 
Studies, we invite you to further explore other current and emerging ocean issues. 
Finally, Part III described a suite of approaches that could be used to address and 
explore the Ocean’s human dimensions. Taken together, the essays describe some 
of the interlocking pieces that comprise the Coupled Natural–Human Ocean 
System. Table 17.1 illustrates some of the linkages between the challenges (fish￾eries and aquaculture, renewable energy, climate change, High Seas biological 
diversity) and several of the human dimension topics (social justice, international 
ocean governance, and marine conservation/marine protected areas).
Integrating the Human Dimension
Solutions to marine environmental problems must integrate people if they are to 
be effective. In particular, the chapters in Part III of this volume offer a variety 
of perspectives on how to approach this integration. For instance, the chapter on 
ocean governance introduces the international ocean regime by outlining how 
regulating and managing human activities in ocean and coastal spaces requires 
governance of this global commons. This is not a simple issue because govern￾ance depends entirely on the voluntary goodwill and cooperation of Nations, en￾forcement mechanisms are weak, and the levels of development of Nations vary 
widely. Specifically, it describes how ocean governance has evolved from a focus 
on zones and boundaries (spatial governance), exemplified by the UN Conven￾tion on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS), to a more nuanced approach that is based 
on issues (functional governance), such as biological diversity, climate change, 
marine pollution, among others.
Marine protected areas (MPAs) are an important tool for ocean governance 
and conservation. The chapter on MPAs and marine reserves shows how this 
tool is gaining prominence as a way to address overfishing and biodiversity loss. 
It also introduces how MPAs call for human dimension considerations, such as 
the need for social inclusion and participation of all stakeholders in the planning, 
development, and management of MPAs; consideration of the potential adverse 
socio-economic impacts of conservation measures and the need for compensa￾tion; implementation of management plans and sustainable funding mechanisms; 
consideration of the cultural and economic needs of fishers who may be restricted 
from traditional fishing grounds; and the need to coordinate management of 
MPAs and other conservation measures into broader coastal and watershed man￾agement, as well as other marine sectors through marine spatial planning.280 D. O. Suman and A. K. Spalding Table 17.1 Relevance of human dimension considerations to challenges faced by the ocean Human Dimension Approaches Conservation/MPAs Social Justice International Ocean Governance Challenges Fisheries Siting of MPAs in best locations to protect and enhance fish stocks; socio- economic impacts of MPAs; enforcement issues Allocation of coastal space between recreational fisheries and tourism facilities; allocation of quotas between industrial and artisanal fisheries; beneficiaries and losers of ITQ systems Governance and management of marine living resources on the High Seas; management of transboundary stocks; promotion of sustainable fisheries; High Seas MPAs Ocean Aquaculture Uses of restorative aquaculture to improve water quality Conflicts between capture fisheries and aquaculture operations; labor conditions of aquaculture workers Permitting, siting, and management of ocean aquaculture operations in national waters and High Seas; transboundary impacts Climate 
Change
MPAs as an adaptive strategy 
to climate change; new 
and mobile MPAs that 
account for displacement of 
marine living resources from 
climate change 
Sea level rise and climate gentrification; 
social vulnerabilities from climate 
change impacts; allocations of 
displaced fish stocks
Management of the Ocean to promote 
climate change mitigation; linkages 
between climate change and 
biodiversity conventions
Marine 
Pollution
Impacts of marine pollution 
on MPAs and conservation 
efforts; conservation efforts 
to assist recovery from 
marine pollution events
Social vulnerabilities from pollution 
impacts
Implementation of measures to reduce 
marine pollution from vessels, land￾based sources, and invasive species; 
emerging pollutants
Renewable 
Ocean 
Energy
Synergies between renewable 
energy facilities and MPAs
Siting of facilities and space conflicts 
with other marine uses; energy 
pricing; ownership of operations
Siting of energy facilities and subsea 
cables; contingency planning 
High Seas 
Biodiversity
High Seas MPAs (designation, 
implementation, 
management, enforcement)
Sharing of benefits from uses of High 
Seas biodiversity; transfer of new 
technologies
Governance frameworks for High Seas 
MPAs, marine genetic resources, 
environmental assessments, and 
transfer of technologiesConclusion 281
The chapter on social justice expands on the tradeoffs illustrated in using 
MPAs as a governance tool by showcasing how human activities in the Ocean 
benefit some socio-economic groups and disadvantage others or how some mar￾itime activities deprive certain users of the marine space or resources that they 
have traditionally used and enjoyed. Examples include industrial fisheries that 
usurp living marine resources that are important for small-scale fishers, shrimp 
aquaculture ponds constructed in mangroves that block access for traditional us￾ers of mangrove resources, exclusive coastal residential or tourist developments 
that displace vulnerable coastal communities. Specifically, this chapter explores 
these issues through the lens of a coastal fishing community in southern Or￾egon in the United States that examines the intersection of gender, race, and 
socio-economic class. Other case studies discussed in the essays mention the in￾creased vulnerability of disadvantaged communities to sea level rise and other 
climate change impacts, and the squeeze experienced by small-scale fishers from 
expanding coastal tourism.
Those who work in marine spaces must further recognize and respect different 
ways of knowledge about the natural environment. Marine resource users have 
great knowledge about the marine environment, even though it may be different 
from what we have been taught is “scientific”. The chapter on traditional ecolog￾ical knowledge (TEK) advances this concept further, epitomizing the marine 
space as a Coupled Natural–Human System. Indigenous peoples consider them￾selves to be part of the Earth home and have a spiritual and ceremonial relation￾ship with the environment: important lessons for all of us in these challenging 
times of a climate change crisis. TEK is rooted in the land and waters, and the 
chapter asks important questions about whether this traditional knowledge can 
exist when Native peoples have been colonized, massacred, and displaced from 
their lands. The essay encourages us to give Indigenous peoples that space and 
respect to develop and fortify their traditional knowledge base and gain the tribal 
sovereignty that they desire. Importantly, we should never assume or expect that 
TEK can solve global climate change, marine pollution, or overfishing. Indeed, 
we invite you to explore how a TEK perspective can help us develop our own 
environmental ethic and more integrated way of living.
Coastal communities maintain special relationships with the adjacent Ocean 
that evolve due to natural and human-caused changes in the social, economic, 
and natural environments. The chapter on Community development defines 
coastal communities and outlines how a community-centered approach aims 
to strengthen community wellbeing, resilience, and their capacity to adapt to 
changing conditions. Coastal communities are undoubtedly on the frontline of 
the environmental crisis of our time – from climate change, fish stock fluctuations 
and displacements, gentrification and increasing coastal tourism, as well as the 
rise and fall of industries. How well communities adapt to change while main￾taining their identities and structures depends on knowledge and training of its 
residents, social capital (trust and cohesion within the community), financial and 
infrastructure resources, and natural capital or ecosystem resources. The chap￾ter illustrates how those of us who are helping coastal communities strengthen 282 D. O. Suman and A. K. Spalding
their resilience must understand coastal and marine ecosystem processes, while 
maintaining a keen sensitivity to the human dimensions of the community and 
its residents.
In addition to the people and environment-centered approaches of the previ￾ous chapters, the chapter on marine entrepreneurship showcases how the busi￾ness sector offers numerous opportunities for innovation that broadly promote 
sustainability and as well address some of the challenges that the Ocean faces. 
Clearly, successful marine business ventures require well thought-out business and 
financial plans, as well as market identification and evaluation. The chapter also 
points out how the marine environment presents unique risks of environmen￾tal variability, difficult environmental conditions, seasonality, insecure property 
rights, among others for which an entrepreneur must prepare. Examples include 
sustainable fishing operations, carbon-neutral aquaculture, renewable energy 
technologies, new seafood technologies and products, and innovative marketing 
strategies that create tighter links between the fisher and the consumer. Non￾consumptive activities, such as community-based coastal tourism, diving and 
surfing businesses, and charter fishing operations, also show room for growth.
The final chapter of this volume explores the concept of the Blue Economy as 
an approach that has the potential to support the integration of natural and social 
sciences through its particular emphasis on equity and justice. Although different 
definitions exist for Blue Economy, this chapter defines it as the application of 
Sustainable Development to the Ocean with particular emphasis on social justice 
and proposes indicators for the three branches of sustainability – economic, so￾cial, and environmental.
These seven topics showcase that to understand the Ocean and address the 
grand challenges outlined in Part II of this book, we must include a broad suite 
of lens and disciplines – drawing from the natural and social sciences, as well 
as the humanities. However, the treatment must be holistic and transdiscipli￾nary and not focused only on fisheries biology, physical and chemical oceanog￾raphy, economics/business, anthropology, political science, or law. The Coupled 
 Natural–Human Ocean System must draw on all these areas of knowledge, ways 
of learning, and the lens through which we view the Earth and its residents.
Role of Marine Studies – Ocean Literacy, Capacity-Building, 
Education
Our responsibility as citizens, and particularly as marine studies students and pro￾fessionals, is to act in ways that minimize our adverse impacts on the Ocean, 
protect and restore its environmental quality, promote social justice, and find 
and implement solutions to the challenges that we have created for the Ocean’s 
health and, ultimately, for society. There are many ways we can further these 
goals: critically examining the ways people use the Ocean; being sensitive in our 
professions to the human dimensions of the marine environment; recognizing 
how gender, race, and social class are reflected in relations between stakeholders; 
becoming involved with movements to protect the Ocean; voting, encouraging Conclusion 283
our representatives to support sustainable policies, and participating in govern￾mental initiatives; and making sustainable choices as consumers, among others.
Our efforts to study and understand the Ocean must fully integrate human 
dimensions; viewing the Ocean as a Coupled Natural–Human System is essential 
for creating meaningful, innovative, adaptive, equitable, and effective responses 
and policies to these challenges. We hope that this book has provided readers 
with an appreciation of the importance of this integration.Index
adaptation 99–100, 228–33, 244
African bondage 88, 143–4
Alaska 102–3, 110
aquaculture 59–73, 237–8, 246–7; and 
advances 62–5, 67, 69; best practices 
72; certification programs 67–8, 
71–2; economic advantages 63–4; 
environmental impacts 64–9; Gulf of 
Mexico 65; inland 60–1; integrated 
multi-trophic 70; legislation 64–5; 
ocean acidification 108–11; open ocean 
60–3, 70–1; oyster 109–11; permitting 
64–5; production 59–61; recirculating 
aquaculture systems (RAS) 62–3, 69; 
restorative 70; salmon 68–9; sea lice 
68–9; seaweed 70, 111, 246–8; seed 
stock 62, 66–7; shrimp 60–8; supply 
chains 63; technical development 62–3
Arctic 157–8, 167–9
Areas Beyond National Jurisdiction 
(ABNJ) see BBNJ
Atlantic menhaden see marine species
Bahamas 235–6
Bellagio principles 265
benefit sharing 143–4, 146
best aquaculture practices 72
biodiversity 28–30
Biodiversity in Areas Beyond National 
Jurisdiction (BBNJ) 137–48, 169, 
177–8, 184–5
bivalves see marine species
Block Island (Rhode Island) 119, 127
blue economy 165–6, 244–5, 251–3, 
260–72
blue revolution 66, 73
bonefish see marine species
BP Horizon 116
bycatch reduction devices (BRD) 46, 
236–7
California 230–1, 239–40
California Aquaculture Association 246–7
California Coastal Commission 185
cannon shot rule 140
capacity building 147
carbon cycling 27
Carson, Rachel 83–6
catch-and-release 236
catch shares 48–9
cell-based seafood production 248
certification programs 71–2, 245–6
Clean Water Act 220–2
climate change 29, 49–51, 59, 88–9, 
99–111, 138, 157–8, 163, 167–9, 
209, 211–12, 214, 230, 244, 252–3; 
and climate refugees 102–3; fisheries 
105–8; ice melt 51, 100, 167–9; ocean 
acidification 108–111; sea level rise 
100–4, 163
cod see marine species
colonialism 87–8, 94, 213, 224
common-pool resources 64, 66–7, 162
community development 228–40
contiguous zone 161, 165
Convention on Biological Diversity 
163, 177, 187; and Aichi Targets 177, 
187; Post 2020 Global Biodiversity 
Framework 177
Convention on International Trade in 
Endangered Species 164, 168
Convention on Wetlands (Ramsar) 163
Coos Bay, Oregon 197–9, 201–2
copepods see marine species
coral reefs 31, 109–11, 178, 181
crustaceans see marine species
crustose coralline algae see marine species
cultural services 33, 143
DDT see pollution
disasters 200286 Index
ecological sustainability 268–9
economic development 231–3; and 
dimensions 180–1; viability 269–71
ecotourism 249–50
El Niño – Southern Oscillation (ENSO) 
43–4, 229
Endangered Species Act 219
entrepreneurship 244–56; and risk 254–5
environmental impact assessments 130, 
138, 145, 147
Exclusive Economic Zones (EEZs) 43, 106, 
128–9, 139, 161–2, 184
extinction 30
fisheries 32, 41–55, 263–5; and capture 
fisheries 42–5; catch shares 48–9; 
challenges 45–51; climate change 
49–51, 105–8; commercial 45, 48, 
245–6; conflicts 46–7; ENSO 43–4; 
graying of 49; Greenland 50–1; human 
trafficking 144, 204; Italy 46–8; IUU 
fishing 30, 45, 142, 169, 245, 263; 
landings 42–3, 59–61; legislation 45, 
52–4; markets 237–9, 247–9, 251; 
population shifts 105–7; primary 
production 43; Small Island Developing 
States (SIDS) 107, 264; technological 
developments 44; transboundary stocks 
106–8; United States 45, 52–4
Food and Agricultural Organization 
(FAO) 141, 166
fortress conservation 176, 187
Galapagos Islands 157
genocide 213
gentrification 101–2, 199, 204, 280–1
Global Aquaculture Alliance 72
Grotius, Hugo 140
haddock see marine species
hake see marine species
High Seas 138–41, 162–3; and biodiversity 
see BBNJ
Human Development Index (HDI) 262
human dimensions 3–7, 14–22, 278–83
humanities 21
hurricanes 101
Icelandic Ocean Cluster House 252
indicators 261–72
Indigenous history of North America 
214–7; and fishing rights 204
integrated multi-tropic aquaculture 70
intellectual property law see traditional 
ecological knowledge
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change (IPCC) 99, 109, 163
International Court of Justice (ICJ) 160, 
164
international human rights law 222–3
International Maritime Organization 141, 
166
International Oceanographic Commission 
141, 166
International Seabed Authority 141
Italy 46–8
Kiribati 94, 103, 107
Latinos 197, 202
living shorelines 103–4, 252–3
lobster see marine species
Louisiana 102, 201
Magnuson-Stevens Fisheries Conservation 
and Management Act 45, 65, 107
managed retreat 104
mangroves 66–7, 253, 269, 281
marine genetic resources 138, 141, 143, 
145–6
Marine Mammal Protection Act (MMPA) 
218–9
Marine Protected Areas (MPAs) 108, 
146–7, 175–88, 263–4; and Bonaire 
National Marine Park 181; Canavieiras 
RESEX (Brazil) 183–4; Channel 
Islands National Marine Sanctuary 
185; Coiba National Park (Panama) 
184; connectivity 178–9; Eastern 
Tropical Pacific Marine Corridor 184; 
effectiveness 186–7; Florida Keys 
National Marine Sanctuary 182, 186; 
fully protected 176; funding 181; 
governance 183–5; Great Barrier Reef 
Marine Park 176; larval export 179–80; 
monitoring 186; networks 179; outreach 
186; planning 185–6; spillover 31, 179; 
Tortugas Ecological Reserve 182; very 
large (VLMPA) 177, 184, 187
Marine Protection, Research, and 
Sanctuaries Act (MPRSA) 85–6
marine spatial planning 64, 118, 
129–30, 279
marine species: Atlantic menhaden 42; 
bivalves 70, 109; bonefish 235–6; cod 
42, 50, 105–6; copepods 105; coral Index 287
reefs 109–11; crabs 60, 109, crustaceans 
60–1, 66–8; crustose coralline algae 109; 
haddock 106; hake 42; lobster 106, 179; 
mollusks 61, 109; oysters 109; pteropods 
105, 109; salmon 42, 60, 68–9, 109; 
shellfish 109–11; shrimp 60–1, 66–68, 
237; squid 107, 230; walleye pollock 42; 
West Coast groundfish 52–4
Marine Stewardship Council 245–6
marine studies 3–11
MARPOL Convention see pollution
Marshall Islands 94, 103
Melville, Herman 82–5, 91
Miami 100–2, 104
mitigation 99–100, 112
mollusks see marine species
Monterey Bay Seaweeds 246–7, 254
nature-based solutions 103–4, 252–3
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) 
166–7
nutrient cycling 26
ocean acidification see climate change
ocean circulation 25
ocean governance 137–48, 157–70
ocean grabbing 199
Ocean Health Index (OHI) 266
offshore oil and gas 116, 126
Oregon 197–202, 230, 251
Oslo Convention 85
OSPAR Convention 184, 187
overfishing 30, 47, 50, 72, 88, 108, 142, 
157, 178, 236, 272, 279, 281
oysters see marine species
pandemic (Covid-19) 7–8, 20, 32, 46, 51, 
145, 201, 248, 250–1, 254
Pardo, Arvid 140
plant-based seafood production 246–8
pollution 78–95; and DDT 79–80, 83–5; 
export of wastes 93–4; Industrial 
Revolution 79, 81; MARPOL 
Convention 163, 168; plastics 79, 81, 
89–94; recycling 90
port incubator hubs 251–2
pteropods see marine species
Puerto Rico 204
Regional Seas Programs 141, 163, 184
renewable energy 116–32; and Cape Wind 
125–6; European Marine Energy Center 
(EMEC) 120, 124; Meygen Tidal Energy 
Project 123–4; Orsted 117, Pac Wave 
121; public perception 125–8, 230; tidal 
117, 120, 123–5; Vindeby Offshore 
Wind 118, wave 117, 120–5; wind 
117–20, 125–7
resilience 232–3
salmon see marine species
Sargasso Sea 86, 143
SCUBA 87–8, 176, 181
Sea Grant Extension 233–5, 239–40
sea level rise see climate change
seabed mining 30, 138–43, 157, 168, 
178, 279
seafood: consumption 42–3, 59–60, 246; 
marketing 42, 237–9, 247–9; production 
42, 59–61
shellfish see marine species
shrimp see marine species
Small Island Developing States (SIDS) 18, 
31, 103, 107, 145–6, 163, 261, 
264, 272
social equity 267–8
social justice 193–207, 223–4; and ableism 
200; diversity 194–7; ethnicity 196–7; 
gender 8, 197–8; oppression 194–5; 
positionality 195; power 194–200; race 
196–7; socioeconomic class 198–200
squid see marine species
straddling stock agreements 141
submersibles 86–7
technology transfer 147
temperature regulation 25
Territorial Sea 128, 139–40, 
161–2, 165
The Area 138–9, 141, 162–3
tourism 18, 20, 32, 46–7, 51, 111, 142, 
166, 180–1, 184, 199, 228, 236, 244, 
249–51, 255, 264, 269–70, 272
Traditional Ecological Knowledge (TEK) 
15–16, 209–224; and Anishinaabe 
culture 210–12; Guna People of Panama 
212; intellectual property law 223; 
legal frameworks 218–23; Makah Tribe 
218–9; Manoomin 210–12; Miccosukee 
Tribe 220–1; Ojibwe culture 210–12; 
sea turtles 212; social justice movements 
223–4; whaling 218–20
UN Convention on the Law of the Sea 
(UNCLOS) 128–9, 138–48, 
160–9, 264288 Index
UN Declaration on the Rights of 
Indigenous Peoples 222–3
UN Framework Convention on Climate 
Change (UNFCCC) 163
UN General Assembly 144–6, 177
UN Sustainable Development Goals 
164–5, 187, 263–5
UNESCO 166
vessel monitoring systems (VMS) 249
walleye pollock see marine species
water cycling 25–6
wellbeing 232–3
West Coast groundfish see marine species
whaling 141, 160, 164, 218–20
working waterfronts 230–1, 239–40
