Tracey Gray OCEANS of PLASTIC
UNDERSTANDING AND SOLVING
A POLLUTION PROBLEM
Tracey Gray
PLASTIC
OCEANS
ofPLASTIC
Our oceans are amazing! 
They are filled with wonderful sea creatures and are essential for a healthy planet. 
But it’s now estimated that there are more pieces of plastic in the ocean than visible 
stars in the Milky Way. So how can we stop plastic from our homes and cities from 
ending up floating in oceans far away? By becoming ocean change-makers!
Oceans of Plastic explores how ocean systems and swirling currents bring plastics 
together into massive ocean garbage patches. It also uncovers the floating world 
of the ‘plastisphere’ – a mini community of microbes living on ocean plastics – and 
explains how plastic breaks up, not down, and can even end up on your dinner plate! 
Oceans of Plastic is packed with great ideas and simple changes that you can make 
to help our oceans. Become an ocean change-maker in your home, school or 
community, and inspire others to join you in protecting the future of our oceans.
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Tracey Gray is an aquatic 
scientist and environmental 
science teacher, who provides 
education programs for 
schools and educators. She 
cares deeply about the ocean, 
beaches and living creatures, 
and inspires everyday 
actions to create positive 
environmental change.
publish.csiro.au
CHILDREN’S NON-FICTIONPLASTIC
UNDERSTANDING AND SOLVING
A POLLUTION PROBLEM
OCEANS
ofPLASTIC
TRACEY GRAY© Tracey Gray 2022
All rights reserved. Except under the conditions described in the Australian Copyright Act 1968
and subsequent amendments, no part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval 
system or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, 
recording, duplicating or otherwise, without the prior permission of the copyright owner. 
Contact CSIRO Publishing for all permission requests.
Tracey Gray asserts their right to be known as the author of this work.
A catalogue record for this book is available from the National Library of Australia.
ISBN: 9781486312573 (pbk)
ISBN: 9781486312580 (epdf)
ISBN: 9781486316847 (epub)
Published by:
CSIRO Publishing
Private Bag 10
Clayton South VIC 3169
Australia
Telephone: +61 3 9545 8400
Email: publishing.sales@csiro.au
Website: www.publish.csiro.au
Sign up to our email alerts: publish.csiro.au/earlyalert 
Edited by Nan McNab
Cover, text design and layout by Cath Pirret Design
Cover photo by Rich Carey; cover illustrations by Good Studio
Illustrations on pp. 8, 11–13, 16, 18, 22–23, 25, 27, 29, 34, 38–39, 44–45, 47, 50, 53–54, 57, 59–60, 62, 
68–69, 74, 96, 100 and 102 by Envisage Information Technology based on concepts by Tracey Gray
Other iIlustrations by Good Studio (pp. 1, 2, 4, 5, 14, 15 and repeated throughout); Maquiladora (dolphins 
throughout; whale on p. 28); Andrew Rybalko (p. 30); Roi and Roi (bottle on p. 38); ekler (p. 93)
Printed in China by Leo Paper Products Ltd
The views expressed in this publication are those of the author and illustrator and do not necessarily 
represent those of, and should not be attributed to, the publisher or CSIRO.
CSIRO acknowledges the Traditional Owners of the lands that we live and work on and pays its respect to 
Elders past and present. CSIRO recognises that Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples in Australia 
and other Indigenous peoples around the world have made and will continue to make extraordinary 
contributions to all aspects of life including culture, economy and science. CSIRO is committed to 
reconciliation and demonstrating respect for Indigenous knowledge and science. The use of Western 
science in this publication should not be interpreted as diminishing the knowledge of plants, animals and 
environment from Indigenous ecological knowledge systems.
Note for readers: Words in bold are explained in the glossary at the end of the book.
Note for teachers: Teacher notes are available at: 
https://www.publish.csiro.au/book/7926/#forteachers
Feb22_01CONTENTS
Introduction 4
Chapter 1. The role of our oceans 7
Chapter 2. Slow-motion oceans 20
Chapter 3. Catching a current 31
Chapter 4. Great oceans! It’s a garbage patch! 37
Chapter 5. A lifetime of plastic 48
Chapter 6. Impacts on oceanic wildlife 56
Chapter 7. Marine science in action 70
Chapter 8. Communities for change 79
Chapter 9. Ideas, inspirations and innovators 91
Chapter 10. Action for the oceans 99
Further information 113
Glossary 114
Index 119INTRODUCTION
We use plastic every day, from the moment we wake up to when we switch 
off our lights at night. Our day is packed with plastic. It is woven into our 
clothes and wrapped around our food. We play on plastic and we even tie our 
shoelaces with plastic. There is no question that plastic is a part of our lives. 
Plastic may be fantastic, but it is affecting our planet. Tiny pieces of plastic are 
now found in the air, water and oceans.
How many stars can you see on a clear night in the sky? It’s hard to count 
them all, with over 1 trillion stars out there! Scientists estimate that there are 
more pieces of plastic in the ocean than visible stars in the Milky Way. If we do 
nothing, by 2050 there will be more pieces of plastic by weight, than fish, in 
the ocean! 
Get ready because we are going on an ocean-sized adventure! We’re going 
to discover the importance of our oceans to all living things and dive into the 
world of ocean plastics. We’ll explore ocean gyres and investigate how plastic 
pieces break up into smaller and smaller pieces. We’ll find out why marine 
creatures are mistakenly eating plastic, and how plastic is making its way along 
the marine food chain – right onto your dinner plate! 
Along the way we’ll learn from scientists, be inspired by ocean activists and 
see how community programs help to prevent ocean plastics. We can do so 
much to help. Our everyday actions can create powerful positive change. We 
can use knowledge, ideas and inspiration to make the changes we need to stop 
the flow of plastic. Together we can become ocean change-makers!
4How to use this book
The words in bold are explained in the Glossary. These terms and concepts 
will help you increase your knowledge about oceans, plastics and marine 
ecosystems. 
You might see a name in italics and in brackets after the common name of 
a creature; for example, green sea turtle (Chelonia mydas). This is the unique 
scientific name for that species.
Fact boxes and creature features contain fun facts and amazing information 
helping you to explore ocean plastics.
Lastly, there are things you can do to help: practical ways to reduce plastic 
in your daily life and information about inspirational groups and organisations 
that you can join, as well as new ideas and solutions to inspire you as ocean 
change-makers.
51
Chapter
THE ROLE
OF OUR
OCEANSPlanet Earth is 
home to one 
global ocean 
covering 70 
per cent of the 
planet. The ocean 
is connected to 
every living thing 
on the planet. 
Oceans create the 
air we breathe, 
water we drink and 
food we eat. We 
depend on oceans.
Land
Ocean
one global connected ocean
life support
wa
t
e
r
we
dr
ni
k
air we
bre
a
t
h
e
Our watery world
Over 70 per cent of the Earth is covered in water. Oceans are huge. They 
hold around 97 per cent of Earth’s water. Oceans create weather, make 
clouds, bring rain, push wind and power storms. All land plants and animals 
rely on water from the weather created by oceans to survive. 
8 Oceans of PlasticOceans create the fresh air we breathe, the water we drink, water for farms 
and provides us with food we eat. Oceans help control Earth’s temperature. 
Ocean waters can store large amounts of heat as warm water. The water moves 
around in ocean currents, helping to keep the Earth’s temperature stable and 
warm. Oceans assist the climate, by taking in carbon dioxide and keeping 
it out of the atmosphere. Oceans create oxygen – about 70 per cent of the 
world’s oxygen is produced in oceans!
Most importantly of all, oceans are home to our planet’s incredible marine 
life, from tiny krill to massive blue whales. Deep-sea vampire squids, icy 
narwhals, leafy sea dragons, sharks, flying fish, and spinner dolphins are 
just some of the fantastic creatures that live in marine habitats. Our frozen 
oceans, cool temperate seas, marine trenches and tropical reefs all support 
ecosystems containing an amazing variety of living things.
Without oceans, there would be no life on Earth. Every living thing on Earth 
is connected to the ocean in some way. Let’s dive in to find out how they power 
our world.
The ocean is home
Oceans are the largest living spaces we have on the Earth! Oceans take up 
more space on the Earth’s surface than land. To fill our oceans, we would need 
a massive 1.35 billion cubic kilometres of saltwater! Now that’s a lot of water. 
The salty water is held in one large, interconnected ocean, which is divided 
into five great oceans. These are, in order of size from largest to smallest: the 
Pacific, Atlantic, Indian, Southern and Arctic oceans. The equator runs through 
the Pacific, Atlantic and Indian oceans, and each has warm tropical waters and 
cold temperate seas. The Arctic Ocean surrounds the North Pole and at the 
South Pole, Antarctica, is surrounded by the Southern Ocean. The Arctic and 
Southern oceans are the coldest oceans because they are super cooled by the 
Earth’s polar ice caps.
Chapter 1: The role of our oceans 9Deep oceans
Rockpools
Coral reefs
Mudflats
Sunlight
Twilight
200 m
Abyss
600 m
Trench
Mangroves
Open oceans
Sea ice floes
Seagrass
meadows
Dark sponge
gardens
Giant kelp
forests
ecosystems
Marine
Seas are smaller parts of an ocean and are often surrounded by land. Think 
of the Mediterranean Sea, the Black Sea, the Red Sea, the Caribbean Sea or the 
Arafura Sea. Seas are usually smaller and shallower than oceans. 
The sun-filled upper layers of oceans and seas are home to over 90 per cent 
of marine life. In the shallow edges of the oceans and seas live soft seaweed, 
beautiful corals, seagrass meadows, mangroves and mudflats, which provide 
homes for all types of organisms. Further down in some parts of the ocean 
giant kelp forests and bright sponge gardens grow.
Out in the open oceans, swarms of small zooplankton called krill are the 
favourite food of the most gigantic creatures that have ever lived on Earth – 
enormous blue whales.
Deep underwater, where sunlight cannot reach and pressure is extreme, 
mysterious creatures use light to attract prey. Each is adapted to survive in 
some of the most extreme conditions on the planet.
Marine habitats
Marine habitats are important underwater places where different species 
are found based on their environmental needs. These needs may include the 
temperature of the water, the amount of light, the salinity (saltiness) of the 
water, the amount of nutrients (food) or the type of shelter. Marine habitats 
include seagrass beds, kelp forests, rockpools, rocky shores, tropical reefs, 
mangroves, mudflats, coral reefs and sea ice floes.
Marine ecosystems
Ecosystems are exciting places where living things compete, work together 
and share resources. A marine ecosystem contains different living and non￾living things. Imagine a kelp forest, with long brown kelp fronds reaching to 
the surface. Fish, sea snails, sea stars and seals live here, they are all connected 
to each other. They eat, hunt, share homes, find mates or rear their young in 
their ecosystem. All of these interactions make the ecosystem work.
Mighty marine 
ecosystems 
are home to 
many different 
organisms, living 
together and 
creating marine 
habitats. The 
ocean is alive 
with things that 
depend on each 
other to survive.
10 Oceans of PlasticDeep oceans
Rockpools
Coral reefs
Mudflats
Sunlight
Twilight
200 m
Abyss
600 m
Trench
Mangroves
Open oceans
Sea ice floes
Seagrass
meadows
Dark sponge
gardens
Giant kelp
forests
ecosystems
Marine
Chapter 1: The role of our oceans 11Evaporate
Energy
Ocean
Light as air
Liquid rain
Cool clouds
Condensed cool clouds
Gas Sunlight
Liquid water
Cool clouds Cool clouds
Oceans and water cycle
Every drop of water has been on the Earth for millions of years! Moving around 
in a constant water cycle. The world’s oceans fuel the water cycle. When 
energy from the sun heats water, it evaporates, changing from a liquid into 
an invisible gas – water vapour. Water vapour is warm and light, so it rises 
up into the atmosphere. As it rises, the water vapour cools down. The water 
molecules join together creating small water droplets and form clouds. The 
clouds get bigger as more water droplets cool and condense. The clouds hold 
the drops until they are large enough to fall to Earth as rain, hail, sleet or snow. 
This water fills dams, lakes and flows into creeks and rivers, or is trapped in ice, 
but eventually it flows back to the ocean where the water cycle starts again. 
The water cycle 
moves water 
around the planet 
and is powered by 
the heat of the sun. 
The ocean is a vital 
part of the Earth’s 
water cycle, 
which provides 
important 
resources for life 
on Earth. 
12 Oceans of PlasticSunlight Carbon dioxide
CO2
Water
H2O
Photosynthesis
Oxygen
O2
Phytoplankton Carbon
+ O C O + O O +
Water
H2O
Evaporate +
Energy
Ocean
Light as air
Liquid rain
Cool clouds
Condensed cool clouds
Gas Sunlight
Liquid water
Cool clouds Cool clouds
Oceans help create 
the air we breathe
Water is alive! It’s amazing to think that every drop of ocean water is teeming 
with over 1 million forms of microscopic life called plankton. Plankton live 
in the surface waters of the ocean. They are tiny and come in many different 
shapes and sizes. Some plankton are animals called zooplankton. Others 
are plant-like organisms called phytoplankton, which include diatoms, 
cyanobacteria and algae. Most phytoplankton are single cells.
Each tiny phytoplankton can create oxygen during photosynthesis. This 
is when light energy from the sun combines with carbon dioxide and water to 
produce food and oxygen. This happens in cells called chloroplasts, which 
are like solar panels, converting sunlight into energy. All plants and algae have 
chloroplasts that make simple sugars (carbohydrates) and oxygen from carbon 
dioxide and water, using the sun’s energy.
Meet the 
phytoplankton, 
the oceans’ 
oxygen-making 
mini factories. 
In the oceans, 
phytoplankton
use sunlight 
energy to 
produce food for 
themselves and 
oxygen for 
all living things.
Chapter 1: The role of our oceans 13As you take your next breath 
think about where that oxygen 
came from. Amazingly, one in every 
five breaths are made by marine 
phytoplankton! In the ocean, the 
photosynthesisers are seaweeds, 
algae and phytoplankton such as 
diatoms and cyanobacteria (blue￾green bacteria). These tiny ocean 
dwelling organisms create over
 half the world’s oxygen! They are 
the floating oxygen factories of 
the oceans. 
Exploding 
phytoplankton
may create clouds
Some species of phytoplankton may help make 
clouds! Scientists are investigating how sea spray 
helps create clouds over oceans. They are studying 
a group of special microscopic phytoplankton – 
hard-shelled coccolithophores.
Coccolithophores are a phytoplankton. When 
seen under a microscope, they are incredibly 
beautiful. Their delicate hard shell is made of 
calcium, just like your teeth. Coccolithophores like 
Emiliania huxleyi can catch viruses that make them 
explode! Tiny parachute-shaped parts of their shell 
are tossed into the air with sea spray and bubbles. 
They are so light they can be carried up into the 
atmosphere where they help seed clouds. These 
ocean clouds become so large they reflect the sun’s 
energy back out into space. This helps to make the 
ocean and our planet cooler.
Creature
 Feature
14 Oceans of PlasticOceans and our climate
The carbon balance
The air we breathe is made up of a mixture of gases. It is 
roughly 78 per cent nitrogen, 21 per cent oxygen, and almost 
1 per cent argon. Carbon dioxide is a greenhouse gas. There 
is only about 0.04 per cent of it in the atmosphere, and yet 
that tiny amount is helping to warm the planet. It is essential to 
have the right balance of these gases in the atmosphere. Too 
much carbon dioxide in the atmosphere and the planet warms. 
Too little and the planet cools. Just the right amount and we 
have the perfect temperature to support life on Earth. 
Currently, our planet has the highest amount of carbon 
dioxide in the atmosphere in the last 800 000 years, because 
of human activities. We need to stop adding carbon dioxide 
and other greenhouse gases to the atmosphere and start 
removing them. 
Storing carbon 
The oceans help to remove carbon from the air. On the coast, 
plants like mangroves and seagrass take in carbon from the 
air and water. They store this carbon in their leaves, branches 
and root systems. This is called blue carbon. Under the water, 
seaweed and phytoplankton take in carbon dioxide and store 
it inside their cells. If the seaweed or phytoplankton is eaten, 
the carbon inside is passed to the next animal that eats it. 
When the seaweed or phytoplankton dies, it sinks down to 
the sea floor with the carbon inside. The carbon is safely 
stored in the sediment (sand, mud or silt) deep under the 
water, as a carbon sink. This keeps it out of the Earth’s 
atmosphere.
Chapter 1: The role of our oceans 15Equator
heat
bank
Equator
heat
bank
Arctic ice cap
Antarctic ice cap
Icy water
Water current
W
s
ater currents
Water currents
Water currents
Water currents
Water currents
Water currents
Water currents
Carbon
dioxide
O C O
16°C
16 Oceans of PlasticKeeping it cool
The world’s oceans can take in and release large amounts of heat energy 
without creating big changes in the temperature of the Earth. Have you ever 
run across burning hot sand into the cold ocean on a hot day? Then you’ll 
know that the sand heats up faster than water. Sand grains are tiny and solid, 
heating up faster than water. As a liquid, water takes time to heat up. Water is 
great at trapping in the rays of sun, storing the heat and releasing it slowly. The 
temperature of the ocean water is important because it creates water currents 
and weather systems around the world, helping to control Earth’s temperature.
Oceans help to stabilise the Earth’s climate in several ways. Oceans 
are a carbon sink, storing carbon and keeping greenhouse gases out 
of the atmosphere. The ocean stores heat, helping to cool our planet. 
Oceans distribute heat and cold around the Earth through ocean 
currents, keeping the temperature stable and Earth just warm enough 
to support life on our planet.
Chapter 1: The role of our oceans 17Arctic
Ocean
Pacific
Ocean
Pacif
ci
Ocean
Atlantic
Ocean
Indian
Ocean
Southern Ocean
It’s all connected
Underneath the ocean there are large parts of sea floor waiting to be 
discovered! We have more detailed maps of the surface of Mars than of the 
sea floor. Each continent on Earth sits on a continental shelf. Australia’s 
continental shelf extends to Tasmania in the south and New Guinea in the 
north. It creates a shallow sea that extends to the continental slope which 
drops steeply to the depths of the ocean floor. Australia’s continental shelf 
sits on a tectonic plate. The Earth’s crust consists of over 20 tectonic 
plates, with seven large plates under the continents and the Pacific Ocean. 
These tectonic plates also form the sea floor and abyssal plain. 
Where two plates collided in the Western Pacific Ocean, they formed 
the Mariana Trench – the deepest part of the ocean. At its deepest point, 
the trench is 10 894 metres below the ocean surface, that’s nearly 11 
kilometres! The world’s deepest canyon is called Challenger Deep, it is 
found at the southern end of the Mariana Trench. 
The Earth has one 
large interconnected 
ocean. The waters 
of the ocean 
continuously move 
around the planet. 
Mixing and stirring 
ocean waters renews 
food sources, 
provides transport 
for marine creatures 
and brings new 
weather to the land.
How deep is the Mariana 
Trench? Imagine the 
highest mountain 
on Earth, Mount 
Everest, standing at a 
whopping 8848 metres 
(8.8 kilometres) above 
sea level. If we could 
move Mount Everest, 
we would easily fit it 
inside the Mariana 
Trench and there would 
still be 1600 metres (or 
1.6 kilometres) of water 
above the highest peak! 
18 Oceans of PlasticUnderwater 
mountain 
ranges
Hidden under the ocean is the 
longest mountain chain in the 
world! The mid-ocean ridge is 
65 000 kilometres long! It is 
10 times longer than the longest 
mountain range on land, the 
Andes in South America. 
The island of Mauna Kea, near 
Hawaii in the Atlantic Ocean, 
shows us a snow-covered 
mountain 4200 metres above 
the water. Below the water 
surface the mountain continues 
for another 5800 metres to the 
sea floor below.
When oceans thrive, 
we survive
Water, water everywhere, but not a drop to drink! 
Our oceans contain 97 per cent of the world’s 
water, and it’s salty. Let’s investigate the world’s 
freshwater supply. Imagine a bucket filled with 
9 litres of water, this represents all the water 
of the world (including the oceans). Scoop out 
one-and-a-half cups of water from the bucket. 
This represents all of the freshwater found 
on the Earth! One cup holds the frozen water 
locked away in ice and ice caps (2 per cent). The 
remaining half a cup is the freshwater available 
for all living things to use and drink! This is the 
freshwater found in rivers, lakes, streams, in the 
atmosphere and underground (1 per cent). Water 
is precious, we can’t survive without it.
Inside the oceans over 2 million species are 
found. Scientists estimate that 90 per cent are 
new species. Creatures that are yet to identified, 
leaving new discoveries waiting to be found. 
Healthy oceans are important for producing food 
and supporting marine species so they can thrive.
The ocean absorbs 90 per cent of the Earth’s 
heat and stores over 30 per cent of carbon 
produced by humans. Without our oceans we 
would be living in much a warmer world!
Chapter 1: The role of our oceans 19SLOW￾MOTION
OCEANS
Chapter
2The movement of ocean currents is controlled by the biggest natural forces 
on Earth. These forces are the strong winds pushing across the ocean, the 
rotation of our planet, and the shape of the ocean floor. Together these forces 
create large slow-moving currents called ocean gyres. 
Shaped by the land
Oceans have basins, like an enormous kitchen sink or bathroom basin. An 
ocean basin is surrounded by the coast, islands, reefs and the ocean floor. The 
ocean floor has hills, mountains, valleys and plains, just like those on dry land. 
An underwater landscape might have submerged mountain peaks, volcanic 
vents, deep drop-off zones, trenches and canyons. The ocean floor not only 
contains the water, it directs the movement of water. Its shape changes the way 
water moves over it.
Imagine stirring a drink in a cup. A slow current begins to form as the liquid 
moves around the cup. Even when the spoon is taken out, the liquid keeps 
moving in a gentle spiral. This circular motion is called a gyre. If the cup was a 
rockpool, a square fish tank or a large swimming pool, its shape would change 
the way the water moves. Oceans have different shaped ocean floors and 
basins, that change the shape of the gyre current. Gyre currents can be forced 
into an oval shape or spread out into a big circular current. 
Chapter 2: Slow-motion oceans 21water current movement
Ocean floor
topography
Shape of the ocean basin affects
the ocean gyre current
some currents sink deep
others rise to th e surface
Swirly sinks and slowly
spinning ocean gyres
It is often said that the water in a sink or bathtub drains out in different 
directions, spinning down the plug hole either to the left or to the right 
depending on which part of the Earth you are on – but this isn’t true. To see 
the effect in real life the amount of water needs to be huge! Ocean sized! It 
turns out that the way an ocean current moves depends both on the amount 
of water and the shape of the sea floor or ocean basin, as these affect 
how the current is squished or stretched out. The rotation of the Earth can 
also put a slow spin on things. These elements cause ocean gyres in the 
Northern Hemisphere to flow clockwise and in the Southern Hemisphere 
to flow anticlockwise. 
Shaped by the 
land. A cup being 
slowly stirred 
creates a small 
current. In the 
ocean, the shape 
of the sea floor 
changes the shape 
of the gyre at the 
surface.
22 Oceans of PlasticPush and pull of the ocean
Warm air
Cool air
Wind pulls up
Frictional force
drags up the waves
the wave
Pushed by the wind
The ocean and the atmosphere are connected in powerful ways. Wind is the 
main force that creates and moves surface currents. Winds are caused by parts 
of the Earth heating up more than other parts.
The equator is an imaginary line around the widest part of the Earth. It 
divides the Earth into two halves: the Northern Hemisphere and the Southern 
Hemisphere. The Earth is tilted slightly on its axis, which creates the seasons. 
Around the equator, the weather is always warm and tropical. In the North Pole 
and South Pole, the weather is always cold.
When the sun shines on the equator, the air heats up and gently rises, like 
steam from a kettle. The air then heads towards the North and South poles. 
Here the air cools and falls back towards the surface of the Earth and blows 
back towards the equator. These giant air currents in the atmosphere circulate 
all around the globe between the equator and each of the poles, carrying 
moisture, heat and pollution with them. 
These winds create friction between the air and water. The top layer of 
water is pushed forward by the wind, creating waves. As the top layer moves 
it pulls the layers of water beneath, creating the beginning of a large oceanic 
current. Not only is the wind at work, but the Earth’s rotation is involved in the 
ocean gyre currents.
In a temperature 
race around the 
sky, cold air follows 
warm air and 
creates wind. As 
the winds slows 
it creates the 
movement of the 
waters of ocean 
gyres. Ocean gyres 
bring in floating 
objects, as they 
are caught up in 
the slow-turning 
waters.
Chapter 2: Slow-motion oceans 23Pulled by the planet
As you sit reading this page, you are spinning at 
1600 kilometres an hour. It’s hard to imagine, but 
that is how fast the Earth rotates. Because of the 
great size of the planet, the speed of its movement 
doesn’t affect us, but it does affect the oceans.
The Earth’s rotation affects air currents in the 
atmosphere and water currents in the ocean. If the 
planet didn’t rotate, the air and ocean currents would 
move in straight lines from north to south between the 
warm equator and the cold poles. 
Physical forces such as the Coriolis Effect and the 
Ekman Spiral also affect ocean currents. The Coriolis 
Effect occurs when wind pushes the surface water of the 
ocean. The Ekman Spiral pulls surface water down into the 
ocean depths in a spiral pattern. 
The Coriolis Effect 
is a force that 
affects an object 
that is moving 
over something 
that is turning or 
rotating. It causes 
wind and ocean 
currents to bend to 
the right (Northern 
Hemisphere) or 
left (Southern 
Hemisphere). 
24 Oceans of PlasticSpinning around at 1600 km/hour
Gravitational spin
Chapter 2: Slow-motion oceans 25Wind mix
Warm ocean mixing
Antarctic ice shelf
Ice water
Deep sea ridges
Cold water sinks
Ocean currents create a stir
Ocean water is always moving and never still. The currents flow around the 
ocean because of the wind, water temperature and the salinity (saltiness) of the 
water. The temperature difference between the warm and cold ocean water 
moves the ocean currents below, mixing the water in a continuous cycle. The 
currents can be slow, fast or circular. Currents move heat, nutrients (food) and 
oxygen around the planet.
Surface and deep currents
The warm surface currents carry warm water from the equator to the poles. 
The deep ocean currents carry cold water away from the poles to the equator. 
Surface currents move the upper layer of the ocean and last a short time. Tidal 
currents and rips are examples of short-lived surface currents. Deep currents 
move the deepest layers of the ocean and may take hundreds of years to circle 
the Earth. 
Icy cold sinking currents
In the polar regions of the planet, less sunlight means colder oceans. Cold 
water is heavier than warm water, causing it to sink to the ocean floor. As 
colder water sinks, it pushes warmer water around the oceans. The Antarctic 
and the Arctic oceans have deep convection currents created by the sinking 
of cold water and the pushing up of warm water. These currents flow from the 
polar ice caps into the oceans, keeping them cool and stable. 
Cool waters from below
An upwelling current pushes cold water from the bottom of the ocean to 
the surface. The cold water contains nutrients, feeding ocean life including, 
phytoplankton, krill, bait fish, tuna and dolphins. Upwelling currents support 
some of the largest marine food webs in the ocean.
Fast-flowing 
currents are 
water transport 
superhighways, 
moving water 
around the Earth. 
Cold water sinks 
and is pushed up 
over the deep-sea 
ridges, mixing 
the water and 
controlling the 
temperature of the 
Earth as it goes.
26 Oceans of PlasticWind mix
Warm ocean mixing
Antarctic ice shelf
Ice water
Deep sea ridges
Cold water sinks
When nutrient-rich waters are brought up into warmer sunlight, the 
microscopic algae in the phytoplankton multiply quickly, producing algae 
blooms, covering the ocean surface. Some algae blooms are big enough to be 
seen by satellites in space! 
Quick currents on the move
The Antarctic Circumpolar Current is the only current that flows right around 
the Earth. It surrounds Antarctica and is the coldest current of all. It keeps 
warmer waters away from Antarctica, helping to keep it icy cold.
The Leeuwin Current is the longest current in the world! It flows for over 
5000 kilometres down the coast of Western Australia, then along the coast of 
South Australia into the Great Australian Bight. It brings warm water all the way 
to the Tasman Sea and the Southern Ocean.
Chapter 2: Slow-motion oceans 27The Indonesian Through Flow is a 
system of currents that carry water 
west from the Pacific to the Indian 
Ocean, past the Indonesian islands 
and into the Leeuwin Current. It is the 
only place in the world where warm, 
tropical water flows from ocean 
to ocean. The warm water held in 
the currents and moisture in the 
atmosphere are important to global 
weather patterns. 
The East Australian Current is a 
large, warm, productive current 
off Australia. It brings warm water 
from the tropical regions of the 
Coral Sea down along the coast of 
Australia to the Tasman Sea. This 
current is so fast, it moves a massive 
35 million litres of water per second! 
Just imagine 14 000 Olympic-sized 
swimming pools of water moving 
every second in this current. 
Oceanographers measured the East 
Australian Current at 100 kilometres 
wide and 500 metres deep.
Massive marine
mammal migration 
On an epic ocean migration journey, humpback 
whales swim over 10 000 kilometres each year! In late 
summer humpback whales (Megaptera novaeangliae) 
leave their cold-water feeding grounds near Antarctica 
in the Southern Ocean. Pods of humpback whales 
swim against ocean currents surrounding Australia to 
reach their warm-water breeding areas. Some whales 
swim up the East Australian Current, while others swim 
against the Leeuwin Current off Western Australia. 
The whales migrate to give birth to their young calves 
in warm oceans. These waters are perfect for saving 
energy and putting on weight. The mother whales 
feed their babies over 250 litres of milk a day, to 
prepare them for the return to their feeding grounds 
in Antarctica. 
28 Oceans of PlasticSlow-moving whirlpool
Plastics like confetti
littering the ocean
Boundary
currents
Ocean gyres
Subpolar: Arctic, Indian, Antarctic
Subtropical: North Atlantic, South Atlantic
Tropical: North Pacific, South Pacific
Gyres of the world
Boundary
currents
Great ocean gyres
There are five great gyres on Earth. The Atlantic Ocean 
and the Pacific Ocean both have two ocean gyres each. 
They are found in the north and south areas of their 
oceans. The Indian Ocean has one large gyre. Gyres 
also form in cold polar oceans. The Alaskan Current 
and the Norwegian Current are found in the Northern 
Hemisphere. The Weddell Gyre and Ross Gyre are found 
in the Southern Hemisphere. The northern Pacific Ocean 
Gyre is the largest on the planet. The Indian Ocean Gyre is 
the second largest.
These gyres all differ in shape, speed, temperature and 
size. The waters that form the gyre can be icy cold, cold or 
warm. For this reason, oceanographers group gyres into 
different categories: subpolar, subtropical and tropical.
How is an ocean gyre made? Ocean 
gyres are made by the Earth’s natural 
forces: they are pushed by the wind, 
shaped by the land and pulled by 
the planet. Fast-moving ocean water 
slows down as it reaches the equator. 
The warm winds push the water in a 
spiral movement. The Earth’s forces 
become the power source of the gyre’s 
continual movement. 
Chapter 2: Slow-motion oceans 29Subpolar gyres
Subpolar gyres carry icy water around Antarctica 
in the Southern Ocean and around the Arctic seas. 
The waters of subpolar gyres are so cold they contain 
icebergs. They are also rich in nutrients brought up 
to the surface from deep below. These nutrients feed 
the entire ecosystem of polar marine animals that 
live there.
Subtropical gyres
Subtropical gyres are the largest ocean gyres. They 
are found in the warmer ocean waters of the Pacific, 
Indian and Atlantic oceans. The outer edges of the 
gyres are like underwater ocean highways, used by 
marine creatures, such as whales, to move around the 
planet. These are called boundary currents.
Tropical gyres
Tropical gyres are warm and slow moving. They are 
formed near the equator by the winds because the 
Coriolis Effect doesn’t exist at the equator. Because of 
this, tropical gyres don’t move in a circular motion like 
other gyres. Instead, they flow east to west and are 
stable and predictable.
Break-away eddies
Eddies are small circular currents that don’t last for 
very long. They bring nutrients from the deep to the 
surface. Changes in wind and water temperature 
can create them and they can form off to the side 
of powerful boundary currents. 
Duck-spill! 
In 1992 a shipping container full 
of rubber ducks fell overboard, 
spilling 28 000 ducks into the 
northern Pacific Ocean! The 
ducks floated on the currents 
and washed up on beaches 
all over the world. This ocean￾sized rubber duck event helped 
us learn more about the way 
the ocean currents move, by 
seeing how far and wide the 
ducks travelled. Keep an eye on 
your rubber duckie, in case it is 
planning an ocean escape!
30 Oceans of PlasticCATCHING 
A CURRENT
Chapter
3Ocean drifters
Ocean currents create water 
transport systems for marine life. 
The currents assist marine creatures 
to navigate across oceans to feed 
and to find mates or new places 
to live. Marine turtles use currents 
to help them swim long distances. 
Why not catch a ride on the biggest 
currents in the ocean to quickly reach 
your destination?
Marine
leatherback
turtles
Going with the flow on the open ocean
Marine leatherback turtles (Dermochelys coriacea) are 
one of the ocean creatures that go with the flow. The 
turtles use ocean currents to travel the world. It’s a 
great energy saving idea when your main food source 
of jellyfish is made of 95 per cent water.
When turtles drift on the currents, they take in all 
types of information about marine habitats. Turtles 
remember their favourite eating spots like seagrass 
meadows or algae-filled reefs. Turtles drift on currents 
in suitable habitat areas where they find food and the 
water temperature is warm. A turtle will actively swim 
out of unsuitable habitats with cooler water or areas 
with limited food. 
No matter how far they travel, female turtles always 
return to the same beach on which they hatched. 
Leatherback turtles return when they are ready to 
breed at 15–25 years old. Then the females come 
ashore to lay their eggs deep in the sand. Female 
leatherback turtles nest every 2–5 years. Between 
nesting they spend their time exploring the ocean 
looking for food, finding mates and using the currents 
to navigate across the ocean. The male turtles spend 
their time cruising the ocean currents and never return 
to the beach once hatched.
Creature
 Feature
32 Oceans of PlasticTravelling turtles follow invisible 
magnetic fields around the 
oceans
Scientists have discovered that turtles use the Earth’s magnetic field to 
navigate around the ocean. We use the Earth’s magnetic field when we use 
a compass. A magnetic field is the area around a magnet in which there is 
magnetic force. The Earth is like a giant magnet with its own magnetic field. 
Magnets (and the Earth) have a north and south pole.
Marine biologists say the first few years of a turtle’s life are ‘the lost years’ 
as they are not sure where hatchling turtles go exactly. In a quest to find out 
where sea turtles travel, biologists attached tiny tracking tags on the shells 
of day-old hatchlings. Scientists think that turtles use the Earth’s magnetic 
field like a Global Positioning System (GPS) to help them find their way. 
The turtles develop a sensory map of the oceans, noting good food spots 
and currents to use when returning to nesting areas. When the scientists 
collect the information from the tracking tags, they can see the currents 
that the turtles used. The information tells them where they drift and when 
they are actively swimming. Scientists have found there are common paths 
between nesting and feeding areas. These are called migration corridors.
Chapter 3: Catching a current 33Marine larvae
drift
N
S
Huge storms
Larvae
Drift down
Nesting islands
Feeding
grounds
Floating
lizard
Coconut raft
Settle on rock surface
Earth’s
magnetic
field
Hot swirling
magma core
Floating lizards on a coconut raft
In an ocean gyre, currents carry anything that floats, such as driftwood, 
coconut shells, seaweed and plastic. Wild storms can blow trees like coconut 
palms into the ocean, and floating items can become accidental rafts. Land￾based animals can become passengers on unplanned ocean voyages. Lizards 
such as iguanas have been found on distant islands, drifting onto the beaches 
on fallen coconuts or trees.
Volcanic rock rafts
Bubble, rock and roll! Active underwater volcanos have been erupting for 
hundreds of millions of years, helping to transport marine life around the 
oceans. When underwater sea vents or volcanos erupt, they can spill out 
lava into the ocean. The lava can form floating mats or rafts of volcanic 
pumice. Pumice is a lightweight, bubble-filled rock that floats in water. 
It is formed when frothy magma hits the water and cools fast, trapping air 
bubbles inside. 
Ocean drifters 
catch a ride in an 
ocean current. 
Turtles, limpets 
and lizards can 
all use the ocean 
to move around, 
as babies, adults 
or even as 
stowaways.
34 Oceans of PlasticMega pumice 
sea rafts 
In 2019 a mega pumice raft was created by a 
submarine volcanic eruption near Tonga in the Pacific 
Ocean. The pumice raft spread out over 200 square 
kilometres (that’s the size of Port Phillip Bay in Victoria, 
Australia!). Three weeks later the currents had spread 
the raft over 3000 square kilometres.
Each piece of pumice can become a floating 
home, a vehicle for living things to attach to and be 
transported over thousands of kilometres away within 
a few months. Geochemical scientists have found 
that large rafts of pumice can transport species over 
30 kilometres each day. The pumice rafts can help 
living things to cross deep oceans that would normally 
act as a geographical barrier. Pumice helps to 
transport corals, barnacles, anemones, crabs, molluscs 
and other sea life to new areas. The pumice can also 
be a place for marine pests to hitch a ride, and if not 
monitored can become a problem. 
Spreading larvae 
around the ocean
As a great survival plan, ocean 
species send out their young 
(larvae) on ocean currents! Sea 
creatures such as sea snails, jellyfish, 
sea anemones, fan worms and 
coral release millions of eggs and 
sperm into the water. This is called 
broadcast spawning. The eggs 
and sperm float to the surface of 
the ocean where they mix and the 
fertilised eggs become larvae. As 
the larvae grow, they float in the sea 
as zooplankton and provide food 
for many other animals. If the larvae 
aren’t eaten, they drift down and 
settle on the sea floor – on rocks, 
sand or a coral reef – and make their 
home. 
Once a year on a full moon a special 
synchronised event happens in the 
Great Barrier Reef. Corals release 
tiny egg and sperm bundles as 
spawn into the water. They create 
an amazing event that looks like a 
colourful underwater snowstorm that 
can last for a week or more.
Chapter 3: Catching a current 35A limpet’s life
Many marine creatures are sedentary. This means they don’t 
move around much. A limpet (Cellana tramoserica) is a small 
marine snail. Limpets live their entire life on one rock! Limpets 
can live to 20 years of age. As baby limpets (larvae), they spend 
a few days floating about in ocean currents then sink down to 
a new place. Here they find their rock, settle in and grow. This 
is an excellent strategy for limpets and other sea snails. It helps 
them find mates and spread out their young, which reduces 
competition for food and space.
Limpet larvae 
are transported 
on currents 
to new areas. 
They settle 
into crevices 
in rockpools, 
where they 
grow and live. 
The limpet shell 
protects and 
helps them to 
survive in tidal 
rockpools.
TRACEY GRAY
Creature
 Feature
36 Oceans of PlasticGREAT 
OCEANS!
IT’S A
GARBAGE 
PATCH!
Chapter
480%
Land
Transported
by rivers
Ships
Fishing gear
20%
Blown by wind
Caught up 
in the current
Plastic is not a natural part of the ocean. Humans are the 
only creatures that make and use plastic. Each year more 
than 8–10 million tonnes of our plastic are entering the 
world’s oceans. This plastic is being blown into the sea 
by wind, washed into rivers or dropped into the ocean. 
Once in the ocean these plastics can be washed back onto 
shore or carried by ocean currents.
Look where all the 
plastic rubbish 
comes from! We find 
80 per cent of ocean 
rubbish comes from 
land and 20 per 
cent from fishing 
and ships. The 
rubbish coming 
from land is mainly 
from packaging, 
while fishing gear is 
lost from boats and 
ships.
What a lot 
of ocean 
rubbish
Every year 8–10 million 
tonnes of plastic end up in 
the world’s oceans. That’s 
equal to one rubbish truck 
full of plastics entering the 
oceans, every minute of 
every day!
38 Oceans of PlasticIt’s a plastic soup out there
Imagine you’re sailing home from Hawaii in a yacht. After a week of seriously 
big waves, you decide to take a short cut across the Pacific Ocean. You find 
yourself in an eerily quiet place. There is not a breath of wind, and you are 
far from land. In the water you notice a faded blue bottle top, a plastic bag, a 
plastic drink bottle – there are tiny plastic pieces everywhere. You’ve entered 
the waters of the Pacific gyre, and you are stuck in the biggest floating garbage 
patch in the world!
In 1997, Captain Charles Moore, an oceanographer, was alarmed when 
he found a huge patch of plastic-filled water out in the middle of the Pacific 
Ocean. Fishing nets, toothbrushes, bottle tops, water bottles and plastic bags 
were easy to recognise. Other smaller pieces of plastic were broken up, which 
he described as confetti or cupcake sprinkles. These fragments of plastic float 
just below the surface of the ocean waters. Captain Moore named the area the 
‘Great Pacific Garbage Patch’. 
The Great Pacific 
Garbage Patch was 
formed when ocean 
currents slowed and 
brought in floating 
items. The swirling 
motion of the ocean 
creates the perfect 
place for plastic 
pieces to collect 
in an underwater 
plastic soup.
Chapter 4: Great oceans! It’s a garbage patch! 39When Captain Moore returned home, he told people about the 
plastic pollution in the oceans. News of the Great Pacific Garbage 
Patch spread around the world, and scientific voyages and research
scientists started to uncover a global environmental problem. We 
need to think about what really happens when we throw away our 
plastic toothbrushes, pens, bags and drink bottles. We like to think 
they have gone away forever, but if plastic isn’t disposed of correctly, 
it can end up in the ocean.
How big is the Great 
Pacific Garbage Patch?
The Great Pacific Garbage Patch is described as being twice the size 
of Texas in America, as big as Queensland in Australia or three times 
the size of France in Europe. It is 1.6 million square kilometres and 
growing. The plastic in the Great Pacific Garbage Patch is estimated 
to weigh more than 43 000 cars! The Great Pacific Garbage Patch 
holds over 1.8 trillion pieces of plastic, floating beneath the surface. 
If we divided up the plastic pieces evenly, between everyone on the 
planet, we would each have 250 pieces. This is just the start of the 
plastic problem, with four more big ocean gyres with plastic in 
their waters.
Lurking beneath the surface
The plastic found at the surface of the ocean is only the start of 
the plastic story. Plastic is finding its way to the deepest parts of 
the ocean. A deep-water submarine called the Okeanos Explorer 
identified a plastic bag in the Mariana Trench at 10 975 metres deep. 
After viewing over 5000 hours of underwater video collected by the 
submarine, scientists found plastics in over 50 per cent of the video. 
Scientists have been investigating ocean plastics to understand how 
much plastic is out there. They have learned that there is more plastic 
in our oceans than ever before and it’s changing our oceans forever.
Plastic, plastic 
everywhere! 
The plastics in 
the ocean are 
suspended in the 
water, floating and 
moving with the 
currents. Some 
plastics sink, 
others remain 
TANGAROA BLUE FOUNDATION
on the surface. 
40 Oceans of PlasticPlastic stars
Scientists estimate that a 
massive 5.5 trillion pieces 
of plastic are floating in the 
world’s oceans. There are 
more pieces of plastic in the 
ocean than visible stars in the 
Milky Way. 
Chapter 4: Great oceans! It’s a garbage patch! 41Plastic not so fantastic
Did you know that plastic was created to replace ivory from elephant tusks? 
Elephants were being slaughtered to make ivory billiard balls, so in 1869 a 
New York business offered a $US10 000 reward to make an alternative to ivory. 
The first plastic was made with cotton and camphor oil. It could be moulded 
into many shapes and replaced ivory, tortoiseshell, bone, tusk and horn. The 
earliest form of plastic was made to help save wildlife – but now it’s having the 
opposite effect!
By the 1960s, plastic had changed to a strong and lightweight product. 
Plastic replaced materials like glass, ceramics and metal. It was cheap to make, 
easy to use, light, hard to break and it cost less to transport.
People became hooked on plastic, and more and more disposable items 
were produced: plastic straws, cutlery, crockery, toys, bottles, crates, pots, 
radios ... The invention was meant to make our lives easier. Don’t wash dishes 
– just throw them away! Many products were designed to be used once, then 
thrown away. The idea of single-use plastics was born. In 60 years, over 
8.3 billion tonnes of plastic have been created, and every day more is made!
Not all plastics are bad; we need plastics for many purposes including 
medical treatments. These plastics are designed for single use and can’t be 
reused safely. The problem with single-use plastic is how much is being made 
and how we choose to dispose of it. Each year 380 million tonnes of plastic 
are made. Over 50 per cent are single-use plastics! Used for only a short time, 
the impact will last a very long time. 
42 Oceans of PlasticGoing to pieces
The plastic that we use every day does not break down in nature like wood, 
cotton or paper. When plastic is exposed to natural forces like sunlight and 
wave action it breaks up into smaller plastic pieces. One plastic object can 
become millions of tiny plastic particles. In laboratory experiments, scientists 
found that an average plastic bag could break up into over 20 million plastic 
particles! That’s only one plastic carry bag, made of two sheets of soft plastic. 
What a big impact one bag can have on the marine environment!
Cracking up the plastic
When hard plastic enters the ocean, it breaks into smaller fragments. The 
plastic changes as it reacts with the seawater. Cracks start appearing. The 
seawater soaks into and leaks out of the plastic pieces. As the plastic weathers
in the ocean, it can change its outer texture from smooth to rough, and its size, 
colour, shape and ability to float.
This collection of 
ocean-washed 
plastics shows 
cracks beginning 
to form. After being 
in the ocean the 
plastics become 
weathered, as they 
are washed in the 
waves, rubbed by 
sand or rocks, lived 
on by microscopic 
life or exposed to 
the sun.
TRACEY GRAY
Chapter 4: Great oceans! It’s a garbage patch! 43Which plastics float and which sink in seawater? 
The weathering of plastics
If you leave your things outside in the weather for a few weeks or months they begin to change. 
They may fade, crack and look a little different. These changes are because of weathering. 
Let’s investigate how weathering happens to plastic in the ocean:
• Light: The longer plastic is exposed to 
sunlight, the harder and more brittle it 
becomes. Sunlight can form small cracks 
that can make the plastic break up. 
Scientists call this photodegradation
(photo = sun, degradation = break up).
• Water: In the ocean, chemicals from plastic 
are released into the water. Plastic also 
takes in chemicals from the surrounding 
water. Over time, plastic can become 
concentrated pieces of pollution. 
• Living things: Microscopic living things like 
bacteria and algae attach to the surface of 
the plastic. The microbes affect the ability 
for objects to float.
• Heat: Most plastics start off floating in 
the ocean. Plastic can be 40–60 per cent 
lighter than saltwater, causing it to float on 
the surface where it is exposed to sunlight. 
Some coloured plastics have sunlight 
stabilisers, which act as a sunscreen, 
slowing the break-up of the plastic.
Bottle caps
Plastic bags
Buoys/floats
Fishing nets
Containers
Textiles
Soft drink
bottles
Plastic film
44 Oceans of PlasticPlastic bobbing around
Plastic floats
up to surface
New plastic
Light
level Microbes arrive
(algae, bacteria)
Microbes weigh cap down
out of light zone
Microbes weigh cap down
out of light zone
Microbes leave Microbes arrive Microbes leave
Plastic floats
up to surface
The plastisphere 
Life on the surface of the Earth is called the biosphere. Life on the surface 
of ocean plastic is called the plastisphere. To understand the plastisphere 
we have to think on a really small (micro) scale. In the sea there are millions 
of microbes ready to attach onto the plastic pieces like a thin biofilm. 
Once attached the microbes turn the plastic into a liveable habitat. The 
plastic surface needs to be slightly weathered for the micro community 
to start growing. 
First the sunlight-seeking algae attach and start growing. Then the microbes 
that graze on algae arrive. Soon after, the predators and decomposers settle 
in. It is estimated that over 1000 kinds of microbes can be living on a single 
piece of plastic that is only 5 millimetres in size!
As the community of the plastisphere grows, something fascinating 
happens: the faster algae and bacteria grow on the surface of the plastic the 
heavier it becomes. The microscopic life changes the weight of the plastic, 
making it heavier, so it sinks down in the water. Small plastic pieces can reach 
their deepest point at midday when sunlight is the brightest. As night-time 
comes the plastic floats back to the surface. This movement of small pieces of 
plastic up and down in the water happens every day. It may go on for weeks 
or months depending on the type of plastic and where it is found in the ocean, 
until eventually the plastic piece sinks forever.
The plastisphere: 
a new floating 
home. Plastic 
pieces like lids 
are colonised
by microbes, 
algae and 
invertebrates
forming a living 
platform. The 
plastic sinks and 
rises in the water 
as the weight 
of the microbes 
grows.
Chapter 4: Great oceans! It’s a garbage patch! 45How many pieces of plastic 
in the ocean?
The Ocean CleanUp Foundation conducted the largest scientific survey of 
plastic in the Great Pacific Garbage Patch. In 2015, a fleet of 30 ships pulled 
over 650 nets through the water to collect floating plastic. They found over 
1.7 trillion items of plastic, from small fragments to large items such as fishing 
nets, plastic drums and bottles. They found plastic waste dating back to 1977 – 
these items had been in the ocean for nearly 40 years!
Making the invisible plastics 
visible
When it comes to ocean plastic, size matters. To help sort out the plastic pieces 
they are grouped into different sizes, from microplastics to megaplastics.
The super-invisible plastics
Nanoplastics are between 1000th and 1 000 000th of a millimetre in size. 
These are the smallest of the small. We need a powerful microscope to see 
them, and yet they are everywhere. They are found in drinking water, the air 
we breathe, the food we eat and of course in the ocean.
Nanoplastics are added to products such as cosmetics and washing 
powders. Microfibres are nanoplastics. Every time we wash clothes made 
from plastic fabrics like polar fleece, the microfibres are released from the 
fabric. These human-made materials are flushed from the washing machine 
into the wastewater and eventually out to sea.
Plastic pieces of any size are of concern, but nanoplastics and microplastic 
can be eaten by our simplest marine species. Microplastics are now found in 
zooplankton and phytoplankton floating in the ocean. Microplastics may be 
tiny, but they pack a powerful plastic punch and are harming life on our planet.
Marine litter 
comes in all shapes 
and sizes. 
46 Oceans of PlasticDebris size Animal groups affected
Whales, seals, dolphins
turtles, birds
Megaplastics
Macroplastics
1 metre
2.5 centimetres
5 millimetres
1 micron*
28 mm
Mesoplastics
Microplastics
Nanoplastics
Particle invisible
to naked eye
* one thousandth of a millimetre
Birds, fish, invertebrates
Fish, invertebrates,
other filter feeders
Invertebrates,
other filter feeders
Plastic
bottle cap
Plastisphere on beach-washed 
plastics. Look closely at the 
surface of the red piece of plastic 
and you can see the white outer 
casing of a tube worm. Sometimes 
marine creatures such as tube 
worms, barnacles or anemones 
attach to plastics. These 
creatures make use of the floating 
objects just like the microscopic 
plastisphere community.
Bottle build-up
What a lot of plastic! Over 
1 million plastic water bottles 
are purchased every minute 
of every day. Our thirst for 
water is damaging our oceans, 
with all the disposable plastic. 
Re-think your next drink and
refill a reusable bottle.
TRACEY GRAY
Chapter 4: Great oceans! It’s a garbage patch! 47A LIFETIME
OF PLASTIC
5
ChapterPrehistoric past
Do you know how old plastic is? Plastic is made from plants, animals, plankton 
and algae that lived on the Earth or floated in the oceans over 150 million 
years ago! 
In the ocean, living things like plankton make and store their own carbon. 
When plankton die, they drift down and settle on the sea floor. Here they are 
covered by thick layers of sand and sediment. Over a really, really long time, 
these cells change into a sticky, oily sludge, rich in carbon. These ocean fossils
form oil and gas. 
On land a similar thing happens. As carbon-storing plants and animals die, 
they are covered by sand, mud and soil sediments. Over time, these cells also 
form into oil, coal and gas. These are called fossil fuels. It takes millions of 
years for living things to become a fossil fuel!
Humans find and remove the fossil fuels of coal, oil or gas, and use it as a 
fuel. We use these fuels to power our world, drive our cars and make products 
like plastic. 
Super strong and flexible bonds
Oil is a fossil fuel, and the ancient carbon in it is used to make different types 
of plastic. The plastic can be strong and hard, soft and squishy, or bendable 
and flexible. Just about anything can be made from plastic. 
The molecules in plastic are connected by strong carbon bonds. These 
bonds hold together for years, which is excellent when we need a plastic 
container to hold tomato sauce, mayonnaise or chocolate topping. Our kitchen 
cupboards would become very messy places if the plastic bonds broke apart 
quickly, leaking out the liquids inside before we had time to use them. 
Plastic becomes a problem when the container is no longer needed. When 
the plastic is thrown out, the bonds still hold. The food waste begins to rot 
away inside but the plastic stays in shape. This is why recycling is important. 
By melting down and reusing the plastic, we can transform it into a new 
product. Recycling stops plastic becoming waste on the land or in the oceans.
Chapter 5: A lifetime of plastic 49Wetland and swamp plants
150 million years in the making
In the oceans Phytoplankton in the sea
Oil
pumped
Oil Pellet
Bottle
of
water
H2O
Dinosaur
Cells pressure cooked
to form fossil fuels
Pressure cooked by the Earth's core
Sand
245 million
years ago
Current day
Nurdle
The evolution of a plastic bottle. 
Fresh from the dinosaurs and 
ancient phytoplankton to perfectly 
cooked fossil fuels. Under the sea 
and soil, oil is formed over 150 
million years. To make a plastic 
bottle the oil is changed into 
plastic pellets. The pellets are 
melted and reshaped into a new 
plastic bottle.
50 Oceans of PlasticPlastics and the microbes
If plastic comes from oil created by the remains of creatures that lived millions 
of years ago, you may think that it can be broken down easily. But it’s not as 
easy as it seems because the oil in plastic has changed during manufacturing. 
Plastic is made of carbon mixed with other chemicals to create long, strong 
products that won’t break apart. This means they are harder for nature to break 
apart. In nature, microbes are powerhouse super-munchers of materials, but 
they need the right conditions to survive. So, the place where plastic ends up 
is important if microbes are to eat it. 
Mighty land-loving microbes 
On land, microbes like bacteria get to work by breaking down the organic
carbon-based things that are easy to decompose, like food, paper packaging 
or wooden containers. When the microbes reach plastic, digesting it is much 
harder. Think of a juice box: microbes can get in and consume the left-over 
juice quickly, but the plastic packaging takes so much more time! They usually 
give up and move onto something faster to eat.
The lifespan of plastic is tested by exposing it to microbes like bacteria, 
fungi and algae to see if they can break it apart. Most microbes don’t instantly 
recognise plastic as a natural food source. They have not evolved with the 
human-made plastic. Those long, strong polymer chains are hard to break. 
Marvellous marine microbes 
There are pit-forming bacteria species that are able to chew into the surface 
of plastics. These species may contribute to the breakdown of plastics, and it 
is hoped that more species can be found. But there are trillions of plastic pieces 
in the ocean, spread over large areas, so we can’t just leave it up to microbes 
to sort out our plastic mess. We need to help stop the plastics getting into the 
oceans to help out the marine microbes!
Chapter 5: A lifetime of plastic 51Sorting out the 
plastics
Bread tags, bottles, bottle caps, cotton-bud sticks, 
plastic tags on clothing, and toothbrushes are all made of 
different types of plastic. Many plastic items have a plastic 
symbol stamped on them – a triangle with a number 
from one to seven. This symbol tells us if the plastic can 
be recycled. Most hard plastics are numbered 1 to 7 and 
can be recycled, if your local council recycles all types of 
plastic. The most common recycled plastic is clear plastic 
made of PET (number 1). Some plastics like bread tags are 
made of polystyrene and can’t be recycled. Always check 
the number of the plastic and see if it can be recycled.
Nurdles in the ocean
A nurdle is a small, hard plastic pellet that is melted 
down to make plastic products. The pellets are the same 
size as a grain of rice, but rounder, like a lentil. Nurdles 
are a microplastic.
How many nurdles does it take 
to make a bottle?
It takes around 600 nurdles to make a 600 ml bottle. 
Over 1 million plastic bottles are used every minute on the 
planet! That makes a whopping 1.3 billion bottles used 
each day. This means that a massive 780 billion nurdles 
are needed to make the 1.3 billion bottles used every 
day! That’s a lot of nurdles, but it’s only those used for 
clear plastic bottles. It doesn’t include all the other plastic 
products, such as food containers, plastic lids and clear 
plastic wraps, created every day across the world.
Nurdles of all 
different shapes 
and sizes are used 
to make plastic 
products. These 
nurdles have been 
collected off a 
beach. Nurdles are 
small microplastics 
almost impossible 
to pick out of the 
sand.
As small as a lentil, 
it takes a whole lot 
of nurdles to make 
one plastic product. 
Imagine how many 
nurdles are needed 
to make the plastic 
products the world 
uses every day. The 
work of Nurdlers 
involves counting 
the microplastics 
to add into marine 
databases. 
COLLEEN HUGHSON
52 Oceans of PlasticCan you outlive your 
lunchbox?
Is it possible to outlive the items inside your lunchbox? It is if your lunchbox is 
filled with nude food! Nude food is fresh fruit, wrapped in its own natural fruit 
skin. Think of bananas, oranges or apples, grown naturally in their own skins. 
Or maybe you use paper wrap to cover a sandwich or snacks. If you do, the 
waste will only take a couple of weeks or months to decompose back to nature.
On the other hand, if your lunch is wrapped in plastic, it will take much 
longer to break up. One packet of chips, a sandwich bag or a squeezable 
yogurt will add to the lunchbox lifetime. It only takes a few minutes to eat your 
lunch each day, but the impact of plastic packaging can last a lifetime. Choose 
wisely next time you reach for a snack or pack your lunch. You and your family 
are making important plastic-saving choices! 
Lunchbox lifespan
You will be at school for about 13 years – think about how many 
lunches you’ll have during those years. If each and every lunch is 
packaged in plastic, then this will add up to one big plastic problem 
by the time you leave school! Can you go ‘nude’ with your lunch? 
A collection of 
everyday items in 
lunchboxes. Which 
lunchbox is the 
eco-friendliest? 
What’s inside? Is 
there plastic wrap? 
Paper? Or is it all 
nude food? Which 
lunchbox could you 
outlive?
1–2 months 50 years
Longest lunch ever
100+ years
Chapter 5: A lifetime of plastic 53Plastic future thinking
Can you imagine 400 years into the future? It’s hard, isn’t it? Imagine who will 
see the plastic waste we are creating today. What will be left behind? Are we 
passing on waste to the next generation and generations beyond to deal with? 
What are our choices? How can we change our plastic waste story?
Natural waste footprints of the past
Today we can look back over tens of thousands of years of Indigenous culture 
to see the waste they created. One interesting place to discover waste is a 
midden, a place where Indigenous people ate together. Middens can tell a 
story about the foods that were eaten, the way they were prepared and shared.
Found all along the Australian coast, middens show how the waste that was 
created was natural. Most middens are made up of shells from shellfish and 
bones from fish or animals that were cooked and eaten. Middens show how 
Indigenous groups left only natural waste behind. What waste footprint do we 
leave on our Earth and in our oceans now?
Lifespan of a chip packet.
80 years 160 years 240 years 320 years 400+ years
54 Oceans of PlasticTechnology fossils 
of the current age
The plastic that is sitting in rubbish tips 
or drifting to the ocean floor may leave 
a lasting impression. Plastic bottles, bits 
of broken plastic, technology waste and 
plastic packaging could become the 
technofossils of the future. Could our 
plastic waste create a plastic imprint in 
future fossil records?
Plastic ocean 
floors
The first ever global estimate 
of microplastics on the sea floor 
is just in! CSIRO scientists have 
calculated that over 14 million 
tonnes of microplastics have 
drifted down to the sea floor. 
That’s more than double the 
amount of plastic estimated 
to be floating on the surface! 
To make this discovery, deep sea 
robotic submarines investigated 
the sea floor. They were sent 
3000 kilometres down, in a 
remote location 380 kilometres 
off the coast of South Australia. 
The underwater robots removed 
samples from the sea floor using 
a cylindrical core. Imagine a robot 
arm pushing a long round cylinder 
(like a cookie cutter) into the soft 
layers of the sea floor. The soft 
sea floor sediments made of silt 
were removed and brought back 
to the surface. The scientists then 
used high-powered microscopes 
and counted the number of 
microplastics found in each 
sample. Even the deep ocean is 
collecting our plastic waste! It is 
time for us to stop using single-use 
plastics to end this plastic pollution. 
80 years 160 years 240 years 320 years 400+ years
Chapter 5: A lifetime of plastic 55IMPACTS
ON OCEANIC 
WILDLIFE
Chapter
6instead
of
Jellyfish 
Plastic bag
Plastic nurdles Fish eggs
Ocean plastic Ocean fish
instead
of
instead
of
Fishing line 
instead
of
Sea eggs
Bottle caps
instead
of 
Salps
Plastic mimicry
In the ocean, looks can be deceiving. 
Sometimes things that look like food are not 
what they appear to be. Ocean-dwelling 
creatures use their senses to work out if 
food is safe to eat. Most marine creatures 
rely on sight or smell to help them find food.
Did you know that sharks can detect the 
electric pulse of their prey in the water? Or 
that oceanic seabirds can smell their feeding 
areas kilometres away in the open ocean? 
They use their super-sensitive olfactory 
noses and nostrils to smell krill swarms or 
bait balls in the surface waters of the ocean!
Have you ever noticed that a fish has 
nostrils? It helps them detect chemical 
signals of food or potential predators in the 
water. Fish can actually smell underwater, 
using the sensory pits in their olfactory 
nose. Fish use this clever feature to find 
food but can be tricked into eating plastic 
junk food if they are not careful!
Once marine creatures find food, they 
have to eat quickly before it escapes or 
disappears. Often creatures eat their prey 
before they’ve had time to properly inspect 
it. This is a problem if your food is not what 
you thought it was. Plastic, in all its many 
forms, can fool marine wildlife into thinking 
it is food, such as animals that are enticed by 
plastic bags that look like jellyfish. 
How has the ocean dinner 
menu changed? Plastic 
bags or jellyfish, plastic 
pieces or fish, bottle 
caps or salps are just the 
beginning for marine 
diners in the 21st century. 
What else could be served 
on the new menu of ocean 
food?
Chapter 6: Impacts on oceanic wildlife 57Why are anchovies eating plastic and not 
krill? Are they being tricked into eating 
plastic? Fish scientists set out to discover if 
anchovies are consuming plastic and why 
they might be doing this. Here are the facts 
they know:
• Fact 1: Anchovies are small fish that swim 
in schools.
• Fact 2: Anchovies love to eat krill and use 
their sense of smell to find them.
• Fact 3: Plastic emits a smell like food, 
which fools the anchovies into seeking 
it out and eating it.
• Fact 4: Marine predators, especially 
bigger fish, eat anchovies.
• Fact 5: Anchovies are an essential part 
of the marine food web.
• Fact 6: When anchovies eat plastic, 
everything in the food chain eats plastic.
When plastic items float at sea, after a few 
weeks bacteria and algae begin to grow as a 
thin layer or biofilm on the items. The theory
is that bacteria covers the plastic and releases 
a smell in the water. Anchovies mistake this 
for the smell of food and then eat the plastic, 
thinking it was a meal of krill. 
To test their theory, scientists made three 
solutions: 1) New clean plastic in seawater, 
2) Old plastic pieces soaked in seawater, and 
3) Krill soaked in seawater. The anchovies 
behaved as if there was food nearby when 
exposed to either the krill solution or the 
plastic pieces solution.
The anchovies’ feeding behaviour 
confirmed the scientists’ theory that the 
plastic pieces covered with a biofilm smelt 
similar to krill. A lot of plastic fragments were 
needed to release enough of the smell to 
mimic food. This is important because of 
the large concentrations of plastic found 
in ocean gyres. 
Anchovies are vital to the survival of 
many fish species in the world and are also 
consumed by seabirds travelling across the 
ocean. Marine life and oceanic birds are 
smelling the bacteria and microbes that cover 
plastics in the ocean, mistaking them for food 
and eating plastic!
Krilling it – ocean plastics for dinner?
58 Oceans of PlasticMany ocean creatures such as sponges, clams, krill, baleen whales and 
feather stars are filter feeders. They filter their food out of the water and don’t 
select it at all. These marine species catch whatever drifts past in the water, so 
even microplastic fibres can be taken in as a food source. Invisible plastic fibres 
are then stored inside their bodies!
Fish and other animals are eating plastics as part of an ocean food chain. 
Plankton absorb microplastics and are then eaten by small fish, small fish are 
eaten by bigger fish, big fish are eaten by humans, and all of a sudden plastic is 
carried up the food chain to us.
Which species are most affected by eating plastic? All species of turtle 
(100 per cent), 90 per cent of bird species, 59 per cent of whale species, 
39 per cent of seal species and 25 per cent of all fish species were found 
to have eaten plastic.
Seal
Turtle
Bird
Whale
Fish
59%
90%
100%
39%
25%
Chapter 6: Impacts on oceanic wildlife 59Detritus
Phytoplankton
Krill
Seahorse
Bait fish
Tuna
Octopus
Squid
Fish
Killer whale Southern
right whale
Shark
Crab
Zooplankton
Food web connections 
Energy passes along a food chain as animals eat or are eaten. An ocean food 
chain is made up of seaweeds, seagrasses, algae and marine creatures of all 
shapes and sizes. Every living thing in the ocean is part of a food web formed 
by connected food chains. These food webs form ocean ecosystems.
Let’s dive in and discover how food webs work and how plastic gets into 
food webs.
Follow the feeding 
pathways to find 
the connections 
between living 
things in the ocean 
food web. Living 
things depend on 
each other for food. 
Food chains connect 
together, and create 
larger intricate food 
webs. If one species 
is removed it can 
affect the balance of 
the ocean food web.
60 Oceans of PlasticOcean food webs
Ocean food webs are powered by the sun’s energy. Sunlight in the seawater 
is taken into the cells of tiny phytoplankton. In these cells, the sunlight 
powers the process of photosynthesis, where carbon dioxide and water are 
transformed into sugars helping the phytoplankton to grow. As they grow, they 
become an energy-packed food source for other living things to eat. Seaweeds 
and seagrasses also produce food by photosynthesis.
Some marine creatures eat only plants. These are the ocean herbivores. 
They can be massive creatures like dugongs that weigh 500 kilograms and eat 
30–40 kilograms of seagrass per day. Or they can be the size and weight of a 
paperclip, like krill. Krill are one of the most abundant creatures in the ocean. 
As herbivores, krill eat phytoplankton and turn them into energy-packed 
protein. Swimming in massive swarms, krill are an essential power-packed food 
source. Ocean food webs depend on krill! 
The food webs in the oceans are made up of different creature 
combinations. Krill are eaten by whales and ocean fish. Squid are eaten by 
dolphins and turtles. Sharks eat turtles, fish, seals, octopus and crabs. Energy 
is transferred from one living thing to the next.
Munching on marine
plastic dinners 
When marine creatures eat plastic for dinner instead of natural food it causes 
serious problems. The plastic takes up space in their stomach, reducing the 
amount of food they can eat. Then, the creature feels full even though they 
have not eaten enough. Some migratory species, such as birds, fish or whales, 
travel long distances and need to store energy for their journey. They need 
natural food, free from plastic pollution, if they are to survive.
Chapter 6: Impacts on oceanic wildlife 61Seabirds 
Microplastics
floating on
surface water 
Beach
Marine mammals
Pelagic fish
Zooplankton Microplastics
sinking
Fish
Fish
Bivalves
Ocean floor
Crustaceans
Microplastics
floating back up
Delicate digestion
The digestive system contains the stomach and intestines. These organs 
absorb the nutrients in food and expel waste. The food is turned into energy 
to fuel creatures to swim, fly, dive, mate, hunt and play. When animals eat 
plastic, it can cause blockages in the digestive system and stop the creature 
expelling waste such as poo or gas. Gas can build up in the body, causing 
bloating, which makes the creature float to the surface. This can make the 
animal vulnerable to attack, or take it away from its food source, so that it 
may be killed or starve.
It is difficult for animals to get rid of plastic once it is in their bodies. Often 
the piece of plastic is small enough to be eaten but too large to be digested 
and expelled. Ouch! The plastic can remain in the stomach for days, months 
or even years. Put simply, the more plastic a creature eats the bigger the 
problem becomes.
How does plastic 
enter the food 
chain? Plastic is 
finding its way into 
ocean food webs. 
How is it passed 
up the food chain?
62 Oceans of PlasticSeabirds 
Microplastics
floating on
surface water 
Beach
Marine mammals
Pelagic fish
Zooplankton Microplastics
sinking
Fish
Fish
Bivalves
Ocean floor
Crustaceans
Microplastics
floating back up
See food 
and eat it! 
Opportunistic feeders are not fussy 
eaters. They don’t specialise in one 
kind of food, but eat a variety of 
different things. These creatures 
catch whatever passes by. Marine 
turtles are a great example of 
opportunistic feeders. Turtles eat 
different types of food such as green 
seaweeds, delicate sea anemones 
and jellyfish.
Floating plastic bags look a lot 
like jellyfish. If a turtle eats the 
plastic bag by mistake, it may cause 
a blockage. Gas can build up inside 
the turtle, making it float on the 
surface. As turtles dive down to 
catch their food, this is big problem!
Rescuing Tina
Tina, a green sea turtle (Chelonia mydas), was 
found floating in the Exmouth Gulf and brought 
into Bullara Station in Western Australia, then 
taken to the Ningaloo Sea Turtle Rehabilitation 
Centre at Exmouth. She had been floating on the 
surface long enough to allow barnacles to grow 
on her back. A team of people helped Tina. Dr 
Jane Giliam, the local vet who set up the Ningaloo 
Sea Turtle Rehabilitation Centre, ensured Tina had 
fresh food and a safe and comfortable tank to rest 
in. Then everyone waited for her to eat or to poo! 
This would show if Tina had eaten plastic and if her 
stomach was bloated. Or it may reveal that there 
was another explanation for why Tina was unwell.
Susie Bedford, a turtle rescue volunteer, found 
that Tina had been feeding on sea anemones, 
not plastics. She had just eaten a little too many 
of those squishy delights and Tina’s gut had filled 
with gas, which made her float.
Volunteers at the rehabilitation centre have 
rescued over 19 sea turtles in the past 3 years, 
with 12 successfully released back into the ocean. 
Everyone is excited when the turtles recover and 
can be released back into the warm waters of the 
Ningaloo Reef.
Turtles around the world are not so lucky. 
Research tells us that over 52 per cent of the 
world’s turtles have eaten plastics. The most 
common items are plastic bags, which turtles 
mistake for jellyfish. The plastic sits in their 
stomach, making them feel full. Turtles also get 
tangled in floating fishing nets. The nets can stop 
turtles surfacing to breathe so that they drown. 
Chapter 6: Impacts on oceanic wildlife 63Hunting from 
above
Seabirds can tell us a lot about the 
health of the oceans. Seabirds cover 
large areas of ocean in search of 
food, which means they can also 
provide information about plastic 
in the oceans.
Denise Hardesty is a scientist 
from CSIRO who investigates ocean 
plastics and the impact it has on 
marine life including seabirds. 
Denise and her research team have 
found that oceanic seabirds feed in 
areas with high concentrations of 
plastic. They estimate that 99 per 
cent of all oceanic seabirds will have 
plastic inside them by 2050.
Eating plastic causes problems 
for seabirds in the same way it does 
for other animals. If seabirds have 
stomachs full of plastic they might 
not store enough energy for long￾distance flying. This can be bad 
news for migratory birds. Some bird 
species fly from one end of the Earth 
to the other two times a year to feed, 
breed and look after their young. 
If turtles make it to their nesting grounds safely, 
plastic waste on the beach can make it hard for 
turtles to dig nests in the sand. This can be a big 
problem for those turtles that return to the same 
nesting beach on which they were hatched. Turtles 
do not simply find a new beach to breed on, but 
stop breeding. Marine turtles feel the full effects 
of ocean plastics during their lives.
Tina the turtle at 
the Ningaloo Sea 
Turtle Rehabilitation 
Centre. Tina was 
rescued and cared 
for, then released 
into the ocean when 
she recovered.
SCOTT GRAY
64 Oceans of PlasticShort-tailed shearwaters (Ardenna 
tenuirostris) fly on migration 
journeys of over 30 000 kilometres 
around the Pacific Ocean each 
year. They fly from Bass Strait south 
of Australia to northern feeding 
grounds in the Bering Sea off Japan, 
Siberia and Alaska to feed in the 
Arctic summer.
These shearwaters live to 
30 years of age and fly over 
900 000 kilometres in their 
lifetime. That does not include 
local feeding flights when they are 
nesting. At the end of the nesting 
season, when raising their young, 
the short-tailed shearwaters fly up 
to 2000 kilometres to the icy seas 
off Antarctica to feed.
The shearwaters save energy 
by gliding – flying close to the 
water. Shearwaters are able to 
fly up to 600 kilometres in a day 
in long flights. This flying pattern 
Short-tailed 
shearwaters 
and plastic 
oceanic 
journeys
Short-tailed 
shearwaters 
out on the open 
ocean. The 
ocean is their 
home. Hunting 
and feeding 
over the waves 
of the ocean, 
shearwaters 
are tricked into 
eating plastic for 
dinner.
remarkably helps them to save 
energy on their long journeys. 
The energy they get from squid 
and small fish like anchovies is 
vital for birds who must fly so far. 
Shearwaters have a keen sense 
of smell to help them find food, 
which they hunt for in the open 
ocean.
Shearwaters usually feed in the 
top layers of the ocean, from 1 to 
5 metres down, but they can dive 
to 10 metres to chase swimming 
prey using their strong wings and 
webbed feet.
Not only does floating plastic 
smell like food, but pieces found 
floating near the surface layers can 
easily be mistaken for food. From 
above, plastic pieces may look like 
the flash of a fish or the glimmer 
of squid. A diving shearwater can 
collect lots of plastic items on its 
ocean journey.
SCOTT GRAY
Creature
 Feature
Chapter 6: Impacts on oceanic wildlife 65Nurdles look like fish eggs floating 
in the sea, but when they wash 
ashore, shorebirds can mistake 
them for food. Shorebirds like 
hooded plovers (Thinornis 
rubricollis) scurry along the beach 
searching in the wet seaweed for 
the sand hoppers (amphipods) that 
live there. Sand hoppers recycle 
seaweed into beach nutrients as 
well as feed shorebirds.
Sand hoppers are pale and 
round, and a similar size to nurdles. 
They usually spring off when 
disturbed. Hooded plovers snap 
up these energy-packed critters 
as quickly as they can before they 
hop away. If a hooded plover 
mistakes a nurdle for a sand hopper 
and eats it by mistake, it could get 
sick from the pollutants absorbed 
by the nurdle. It is also at risk of 
eating plastic rather than natural 
food sources. These threats are 
serious, so let’s hope that the 
hooded plovers are too smart to 
eat nurdles.
Hooded plovers 
undercover
Hooded plovers on the shore. Hooded plovers live 
their entire life on the shore – feeding, nesting and 
raising their young on ocean beaches.
DAN LEES
Creature
 Feature
66 Oceans of PlasticSand hoppers on the 
sand – a favourite 
food source of the 
hooded plover. 
They use their 
pale sandy colour 
as camouflage to 
blend into the beach 
habitat.
Nurdles found in 
the sand. These 
small plastic pellets 
are a similar size 
and shape to sand 
hoppers – one of the 
natural food sources 
of hooded plovers.
When nurdles 
are found among 
seaweed they blend 
in. Hopefully the 
hooded plover does 
not mistake the 
nurdle for a sand 
hopper.
DAN LEES COLLEEN HUGHSON COLLEEN HUGHSON
Chapter 6: Impacts on oceanic wildlife 67Persistent Organic
Pollutants (POPs)
POPs
POPs
POPs
Bread tag shows movement of
POPs and plastic fragmentation
Human connection
Feel like eating a credit card each week? Or having a teaspoon of plastic 
sprinkled on your cereal every Saturday? On average, we are eating 5 grams of 
microplastics each week. The plastic is hidden, eaten in food or slurped down 
from refilled water bottles. Invisible plastics are making their way up the food 
chain and into our stomachs.
Feeding on plastic POPs
Chemicals called Persistent Organic Pollutants (POPs) are found in the 
oceans. These chemicals are created to do many different things, such as kill 
pests (pesticides) or stop fires (fire retardants), but they are also produced by 
industries when they are making products. These pollutants are invisible in 
the ocean. If swallowed, POPs are easily stored in the flesh or tissues of living 
things. The POPs become part of their bodies and can be passed on along the 
food chain.
POPs in the plastic. 
Take the humble bread 
bag clip. It’s made 
from a hard form of 
polystyrene, which 
floats and is easy to 
break. The plastic 
releases chemicals into 
the ocean and also 
soaks up chemicals.
68 Oceans of PlasticPlastic
The organic pollutants are attracted to ocean plastics and attach to their 
surfaces, becoming more concentrated over time. For example, plastic nurdles 
can be coated in chemicals, but once in the sea they absorb POPs. Nurdles can 
hold one million times more POPs than the surrounding seawater. If the nurdles 
are eaten by a fish, those poisonous POPs become a problem for not only the 
fish that ate them, but all of the other fish, sharks or even us, that consume it. 
Building up in the food chain
Each link in the food chain connects to the next. Part of the food that each 
creature consumes is stored in its body as muscle, fat and organs. When 
creatures eat microplastics, chemicals from the plastic enter their cells or 
tissues and the toxins from the plastic are stored in their bodies.
Everything is 
connected in an 
ocean food web. 
The plastic leaks 
chemicals into the 
water. The creatures 
use the water to 
filter their food or 
actively eat the 
plastic, resulting in 
the chemicals being 
stored in the body 
of the creature.
Marine life 
under threat
One in three species of marine 
mammals have been found 
entangled in marine litter. Over 
700 marine animal species 
are believed to be threatened 
because of plastic pollution 
in the ocean. Marine life is 
affected by ocean plastics.
The higher up the food chain we go, the more 
plastic and poisons we find. Each link in the food 
chain collects the pollution from the creature before, 
so all the toxins in all the animals eaten are passed 
on to the bigger animal that eats them. The scientific 
term for this is bioaccumulation. We collect small 
amounts of plastics in our bodies as a top-order 
consumer, so this is something to consider when we 
choose our food. Plastic is a part of our food chains, 
affecting not only our ocean wildlife but all of us.
Chapter 6: Impacts on oceanic wildlife 69MARINE 
SCIENCE
IN
ACTION
Chapter
7Marvellous marine scientists
Scientists work in different areas of science to learn about the ocean. 
Oceanographers study the open ocean and ocean floor. Marine biologists 
investigate life within the ocean. Marine ecologists are interested in how ocean 
habitats and ecosystems work. Ocean hydrologists study water movements. 
Some scientists such as marine toxicologists study how animals are affected 
by plastic, while marine chemists investigate the way that plastic and 
chemicals behave in seawater. They are all gathering information and trying 
to understand more about the health of the Earth’s oceans and how plastic is 
affecting it. This is important, because the health of the world’s oceans affects 
not only us but the health of global ecosystems. Scientists are working with 
people, communities, governments and businesses to help create solutions 
to the problem of plastic.
What questions are the scientists investigating? What can we learn from 
them? How is their work helping to find solutions?
Here are some of the questions scientists are asking:
• What impact does plastic have on marine life? And on people?
• How will plastic pollution affect the future of our oceans?
• How can science help solve the problems of plastic?
A record of ocean plastic
Over 60 years ago, a piece of plastic twine was caught in something called the 
Continuous Plankton Recorder or CPR. The CPR was used to study plankton, 
but scientists have gone back through its records to learn about ocean plastics. 
The plastic twine became the first sample of recorded marine plastic. Then the 
first plastic bag was caught in 1965, over 55 years ago! The survey is still going 
today, and it holds the longest continuous record of marine plastic samples 
ever undertaken.
Plastic research was big in the 1970s and 1980s, with marine scientists first 
warning people about the problem of plastic in our oceans and beaches. 
In the 1990s plastic research was bigger than ever with Captain Moore’s 
Chapter 7: Marine science in action 71crossing of the Pacific Ocean. Since then scientists have studied microplastics 
and chemicals leaking from plastics and accumulating on plastics. As our 
knowledge grows, we understand that the problem is much bigger than 
we imagined.
Science in focus
Marine entanglement
Floating ropes, fishing nets and buoys form a large part of plastic pollution. 
These are lost or discarded by fishing vessels. The fishing industry uses 
specialised fishing equipment to catch different types of fish, shark, squid, 
crayfish and other seafood. Fish farmers grow marine species like salmon, 
oysters and mussels for people to eat. Unfortunately, sometimes animals that 
are not meant to be caught in fishing equipment become entangled and are 
killed or injured. Researchers found that 5.7 per cent of all fishing nets, 8.6 per 
cent of all fish traps and 29 per cent of all fishing lines are lost at sea, leaving a 
tangled trail in our oceans.
TRACEY GRAY
Watch out whales! 
Whales can become 
entangled with fishing 
gear of all shapes and 
sizes including fishing 
nets and craypot 
lines. As air-breathing 
mammals this can 
become a big problem 
very quickly.
72 Oceans of PlasticSouthern right whales (Eubalaena australis) move along the coast of 
Australia each winter. They migrate from the cold waters of Antarctica to 
give birth to their young. The female whales come close to the coast and 
beaches to give birth to their calves. This allows us to whale watch and 
see this amazing part of a whale’s life cycle, but it does create risks for the 
whale. Whales and fishing industries use the same water. One of these 
industries harvests the southern rock lobster (Jasus edwardsii). So, how 
does fishing for lobster affect the whales?
Whales swim in deep water over rocky reefs where rock lobsters live. 
To catch lobsters, traps or pots are left in the ocean. These pots are 
attached to a buoy on the surface by a long line of rope. Buoys mark the 
spot where each lobster pot can be found underneath the water. If the 
whales swim over a lobster-pot line and their tail becomes entangled it 
can become a problem. Whales are at risk of being caught up in the rope 
lines that are attached to crayfish pots. The whale’s tail can be caught, 
preventing it from diving or surfacing to breathe.
Over the years scientists have worked with the local fishing industry 
to help free whales that have become entangled. They now have a planned 
response to a whale being caught up and work together to help free 
the whale: 
It’s a wild day with a rough sea in south-west Victoria. People have 
spotted a whale that has become entangled in a lobster-pot line. 
They call the wildlife officers, who call the local marine entanglement 
group. Wildlife officers, whale watchers, scientists and the local 
fishermen spring into action. They meet at the boat ramp, with the 
marine entanglement gear. The boats are launched, and head out 
to sea through big waves. It’s a very challenging task. The whale is 
stressed, the boats have to be positioned perfectly and everyone 
must know what to do. As they approach the whale, they use blades 
attached to long poles to cut the rope and free the whale. The whale 
flicks its tail and dives down, free.
Marine entanglement: 
helping out a southern right whale
Chapter 7: Marine science in action 73Ghost-net hunters
Ghost nets are discarded or lost fishing nets. They are held up by their floats, 
and capture all types of marine animals, making them a floating death trap. 
These fishing nets can be huge, and they can also wash onto the shores of 
some of the most beautiful beaches in the world.
One type of net, the purse seine net, is designed to catch a whole 
school of fish. The net can be 2000 metres long and reach down to a depth 
of 600 metres like a wall. Once the school of fish is encircled, the net is then 
pulled in at the bottom, closing it like a purse with the fish inside. The net is 
then brought onto the ship so the fish can be sorted and packed to be sent 
to market.
Purse seine nets 
capture a whole 
school of fish. The nets 
become a problem 
when they break away 
from their fishing 
boat or are discarded 
and float at seas as 
ghost nets. They trap 
and entangle marine 
creatures as they drift 
on ocean currents.
On the beaches of 
northern Australia 
ghost nets are 
washed ashore. 
Tangled on the 
shoreline, the nets 
are hard to remove. 
In the ocean the nets 
trap ocean creatures 
and become caught 
on boat propellers.
74 Oceans of PlasticImportant Indigenous rangers
A special science program is running in the Gulf of Carpentaria in Australia. 
The program involves 18 Indigenous communities with 90 Indigenous rangers 
working with scientists to find and remove the nets. The rangers scan remote 
beaches for ghost nets.
In the first few years they found 5532 ghost nets washed ashore. This 
number has tripled with over 15 000 nets found and removed. The ghost nets 
trapped over 15 000 marine turtles! What a sad story for the marine turtles that 
became tangled in the fishing gear.
TANGAROA BLUE FOUNDATION
Chapter 7: Marine science in action 75Ocean wanderers
For scientists wishing to research ocean plastic, shearwaters are a good 
species to study. They return to their nests in burrows every night. In breeding 
season, they leave an information trail of what they have encountered during 
the day at sea when they return to feed their chicks.
Research scientists like Jennifer Lavers are not surprised to find plastic pieces 
in seabirds’ stomachs. In one study of flesh-footed shearwaters (Ardenna 
carneipes) she found over 200 pieces of plastic in one seabird on Lord Howe 
Island. Her work includes flushing the plastic out of the birds’ stomachs so they 
can eat and put on weight.
One of the most surprising findings was that almost all of the shearwater 
chicks had plastic pieces in their stomach. These chicks are not old enough to 
have left the nest, but their parents feed them plastic in their evening meal. 
This is a clear warning sign about the amount of plastics in our oceans.
ZOOS VICTORIA
Shearwater chicks 
like this one are 
being fed anchovies 
with a side order of 
plastic for dinner. 
Scientists work to 
remove the plastic out 
of the shearwaters’ 
stomachs. They flush 
the plastic out with 
seawater, so the 
chicks can eat and 
grow into healthy 
adults.
76 Oceans of PlasticScientists have worked out that 8 per cent of a bird’s bodyweight may be 
plastic. This is equal to a 62-kilogram person having 5 kilograms of plastic 
inside them! Or 12 pizzas’ worth of plastic in your stomach. Can you imagine 
that? The plastic found in seabirds include parts of toothbrushes, bits of 
balloons and bottle tops. 
The fulmar’s lunchbox
The northern fulmar (Fulmarus glacialis) is the smaller cousin of the wandering 
albatross. They feed by skimming the ocean surface for food. Sadly, some of 
what they catch is plastic. This plastic addition to their diet is making them very 
unwell. Scientists have discovered on average 34 pieces of plastic are found 
in a northern fulmar stomach. If you scale that up to the size of a human that 
would be like having a full lunchbox-sized ball of plastic inside you! The plastic 
pieces are collected by the bird over several years. If they are lucky some 
plastic waste is pushed out of the body as bird droppings, otherwise the pieces 
stay inside the fulmar’s body.
Seabird stomachs
Crunchy lunches! Ninety per cent of 
seabirds have some form of plastic 
in their stomach! Some chicks have 
eaten plastic before they even leave 
the nest. Scientists predict that by 
2050 over 99 per cent of birds will 
have plastic in their bodies!
Chapter 7: Marine science in action 77Wandering 
albatross scour 
the oceans
Research scientists in the United 
Kingdom are investigating the 
largest seabird on the planet, the 
wandering albatross (Diomedea 
exulans). These ocean giants 
spend their life at sea, sometimes 
not touching land for a year. The 
albatross fly incredible distances 
over the oceans of the world, 
feeding in the surface waters. 
On remote islands they have found 
albatross nests made of plastics. 
In South Georgia these ocean 
giants are raising their young 
surrounded with plastic fragments.
The plastic items mistaken for 
food eaten by this albatross are 
left behind. The plastic remains as 
the albatross’s body decomposes. 
DENISE HARDESTY
Creature
 Feature
78 Oceans of PlasticCOMMUNITIES
FOR
CHANGE
Chapter
8Turning the tide on plastic 
pollution
We now understand the problem of plastics in our oceans. We can see the 
long-lasting impacts of plastic on marine life. Plastic is everywhere, and it 
cannot be ignored.
But we can start to change, and encourage each other to think and act for 
our oceans. We can pick up plastic rubbish when we see it. We can say no to 
single-use plastic items like straws, bags and packaging. Most importantly of 
all we can put plastic in the recycling bin. Everything we do counts, everything 
we do matters. Everyday actions have the power to create plastic-free oceans. 
The change is in our hands.
Bioplastics for the future
Bioplastics look like plastic and behave like plastic but are made of natural 
materials. If we can create a product that is made of naturally occurring plants 
or animals, then it will be quick and easy for microbes to devour. Scientists are 
working on ways to replace plastic products that we use every day.
Could juice from a prickly pear cactus replace petrol-based plastic? 
Scientists have made a chain of molecules that act like plastic but can be 
broken down in nature. The sticky juices of the cactus can be reformed into 
products similar to plastic items we use today but will break down in a matter 
of months.
Mushroom glue could be another new alternative to plastic products. 
Mushroom mycelium, the underground body of the mushroom, is made of long 
fibres. The mycelium is mixed with chopped up farm waste such as corn stalks, 
and then the mixture is pressed into a mould. The mushroom mycelium grows 
through the stalks, forming a strong shape. The items are then ‘cooked’ to stop 
the mushroom from continuing to grow. This mushroom glue could be used as 
an alternative to polystyrene packaging.
80 Oceans of PlasticThe shell or exoskeleton of a 
lobster is made of chitin (ky-tin). 
Chitin is a very common substance, 
found in crustaceans like lobsters, 
but also in insects and fungi. It is a 
protein that makes the lobster shell 
hard, flexible, water-resistant and 
strong, and yet it breaks down in 
nature leaving no trace. These are 
great properties for a lobster, and 
also great properties for plastic. 
When lobsters outgrow their shell, 
they peel off their old shell and 
the new shell underneath hardens 
when exposed to seawater. When 
new, lobster shells are soft and 
flexible. Researchers extract the 
chitin, powder it, add vinegar, 
process it and make a flexible 
plastic for bags, film, pots and 
other items. 
A young school student, 
Angelina Arora, made headlines 
at the age of 16. She developed 
a bioplastic made from prawn 
shells and silkworms. After many 
trials she created a clear, flexible, 
Southern rock lobster 
(Jasus edwardsii) 
in the ocean. Rock 
lobsters and prawns 
have chitin in their 
exoskeletons. 
Innovative scientists 
are using chitin and 
silkworms to find new 
solutions to the ocean 
plastic problem. The 
lobster shells and 
silkworms completely 
break down and 
return to natural 
components without 
leaving a trace. 
Lobsters and 
silkworms 
solving plastic 
problems
strong material that acts like cling 
wrap. She discovered that by using 
sticky proteins of the silkworm 
(similar to those found in spider 
webs), the bioplastic was able to 
cling tightly to surfaces. The new 
natural material only takes 33 
days to completely degrade. She 
was successful in developing a 
bioplastic that keeps food fresh 
and the planet healthy.
SCOTT GRAY
Chapter 8: Communities for change 81Fish guts smell yucky, but they can be used to produce 
oil. With some creative thinking and research this oil could 
be made into a bioplastic. It will take some time before 
these new plastic innovations hit the supermarkets, but 
scientists are continuing to research and develop new and 
exciting bioplastics for the future. 
We need to be careful with the way we dispose 
of bioplastics as well. They need to be put into a 
healthy compost system full of hungry microbes to be 
composted. If they become litter they can break up like 
plastics, getting smaller and smaller, but will eventually 
decompose. 
Take 3 for the Sea
Take 3 for the Sea is an award-winning environmental 
charity with a mission to reduce global plastic pollution. 
Take 3’s simple call to action encourages people 
to ‘Take 3’ pieces of rubbish away before leaving a 
beach, waterway or anywhere. This action removes 
over 10 million pieces of rubbish from the environment 
every year. Take 3 has delivered education programs to 
350 000 people around Australia. Take 3 aims to get more 
people to reduce waste and plastic pollution. It’s amazing 
that 80 per cent of marine plastic pollution comes from 
the land. If we don’t change our ways, by 2050 there 
will be more plastic by weight in the ocean than fish! By 
teaching small simple actions, Take 3 is helping everyone 
be part of the solution. Next time you’re out in nature, 
Take 3 for the sea! It’s all connected and it all helps!
It’s simple: Take 3 
items of rubbish for 
a cleaner sea. This 
action can have a 
big impact. A small 
handful of rubbish 
removed from 
nature and put in a 
bin helps keep our 
oceans clean. 
DILLON MOULD
82 Oceans of PlasticTangaroa Blue Foundation 
and marine debris
Tangaroa Blue Foundation is a clever citizen-scientist program. The main aim 
of the foundation is to remove beach litter and work out what types of plastic 
are washing ashore. Volunteers collect the litter to clean up beaches and add 
information about it to the Australian Marine Debris Initiative (AMDI) Database. 
It is then shared with a large group of people working on where the plastics 
are coming from and how to get rid of marine debris and ocean plastics in 
the future. 
Tangaroa Blue Foundation uses the term marine debris to describe any item 
made by people that ends up in our oceans or rivers. Plastics form a large part 
of the items floating in our environment. Tangaroa Blue Foundation and teams 
of volunteers clean up beaches and rivers, working along the foreshore to 
make a difference.
The clean-ups happen on a beach with volunteers walking for a set distance 
of at least 100 metres collecting all the rubbish that they find as they go. Once 
collected, the rubbish is sorted into waste groups. The groups include waste 
from fishing, household waste, medical waste, soft plastics and hard plastics. 
The information is added to the AMDI Database.
The AMDI Database helps to identify where each item of marine debris 
came from. The information can be used to track the waste back to the source. 
Here the information can be useful to report large rubbish spills or to see 
patterns of waste found on beaches or rivers.
Beach detectives
Have you ever wanted to be a detective working on a case, trying to solve a 
mystery? Well, collecting marine debris is a little like detective work on a beach. 
It is as simple as finding a plastic item and looking for the signs and symbols that 
can tell you where the item is from. We know that our oceans are all connected. 
Often the plastic you find is from your local area, but sometimes we find plastic 
items that have floated in from other countries around the world.
Chapter 8: Communities for change 83A plastic bottle found on the beach can tell 
an amazing story if you know what to look for. 
First, check if the bottle has a label. If so, you’re 
in luck. It makes identifying the bottle easier. 
Check out the language it is written in. Can you 
read it or is it from a different country? Is the label 
a current design? Has the colour faded? Does it 
look like an old or new bottle? Some people have 
found bottles that are well over 50 years old on 
beaches.
Next, look at the lid. This is an essential part of 
the identification. What colour is it? Does it have 
any symbols imprinted in the plastic?
The next step is to find the source of the ocean 
plastics. What companies are responsible for the 
waste? Where was the waste found? What boat 
or ship may have lost the item? Tangaroa Blue 
Foundation works with companies that make 
plastic, helping these companies to be careful 
and responsible.
Citizen scientists in action
Tangaroa Blue Foundation is amazingly successful 
with over 150 000 people involved as citizen 
scientists assisting in the collection, sorting 
and data entry of ocean plastics. With the help 
of more than 1100 AMDI partners, they have 
removed over 15 million items from beaches and 
rivers and entered them as marine debris data. 
Tangaroa Blue Foundation and the beach clean￾up volunteers and partners should be proud. 
The information is all at the fingertips of scientists 
and people caring for our oceans.
Message 
in a bottle
Imagine a beach full of thousands of 
plastic bottles washed ashore. On an 
ocean clean-up day that’s exactly what 
Tangaroa Blue Foundation volunteers 
found in Queensland. A whole bay of 
bottles. The bottles were collected, and 
the data recorded.
The bottles looked new and hadn’t 
been in the ocean for very long. Could 
the bottles have fallen off a boat? Or 
perhaps floated in on a local ocean 
current? It was interesting that the 
bottles were in good condition, but the 
label suggested that the bottles were 
from another country, with the writing 
in Vietnamese.
The team at Tangaroa Blue 
Foundation began investigating and 
with the help of government partners 
found the source of the bottles and the 
company was held responsible.
Where does our waste float away 
to? These plastic bottles washed 
ashore on a remote beach in 
northern Australia. The Tangaroa 
Blue Foundation discovered that the 
bottles had come from faraway places 
by checking the labels collected by 
beach clean-up volunteers. 
84 Oceans of PlasticTANGAROA BLUE FOUNDATION
Chapter 8: Communities for change 85Communities in action
Pick up sticks
A beach littered in white plastic sticks – what are they from? Perhaps they were 
dropped from a ship carrying lollipops? Passionate beach walker and ocean 
conservationist Colleen Hughson first noticed the sticks on her daily beach 
walks in Warrnambool, Victoria.
Taking a closer look at the sticks Colleen noticed that not all the sticks were 
the same. Some had holes at the top and the others did not. What could they 
possibly be used for? They found out that the lollipop sticks had holes, and 
those without holes were the plastic stems from cotton buds.
Concerned with the number of cotton buds being washed up, Colleen 
created a call to action to ‘pick up sticks’. Joined by local community volunteers 
and students, the team found and removed over 23 000 white plastic cotton￾bud sticks off ocean beaches in the Warrnambool area.
How did these sticks end up in the ocean? Were people 
flushing them down the toilet? Or poking them down the 
drain? Did people know that they end up in the ocean, 
creating a plastic pollution problem that will not go away 
unless they are picked up?
The pick-up sticks message is to find ‘better buds’. 
Switch to buying cotton buds with paper or bamboo
sticks, not plastic, for the betterment of the ocean. Don’t 
flush any cotton buds down the toilet or push them down 
the bathroom drain. Be careful how you dispose of waste. 
Talk to your friends and make a ‘better buds’ ocean 
pledge. Get active and pick up some plastic and help to 
bring an end to this preventable ocean plastic problem. 
Join the Better Buds campaign and switch your sticks for 
a plastic-free ocean. 
Volunteers in 
Warrnambool, 
Victoria, including 
Elfie Bourger￾Hughson, picked 
up an astonishing 
23 000 plastic 
sticks from their 
local beaches. If 
only we switched 
to alternatives, like 
bamboo or paper.
COLLEEN HUGHSON
86 Oceans of PlasticBubbles not balloons
Did you know that balloons can be dangerous for wildlife when they end up 
in the ocean? Balloons are one of the three most harmful floating items on the 
ocean surface. Scientists on Lord Howe Island are finding balloons and other 
plastic rubbish in over 80 per cent of seabird chicks that haven’t even left their 
nest. Seabird parents have found the rubbish and delivered it for dinner.
So why are there so many balloons in the oceans? People use or release 
balloons at events, to celebrate or just for fun. If balloons are used outdoors 
they can float way up into the atmosphere before bursting and falling to Earth. 
On a planet that is 70 per cent water, they will most likely fall into the ocean.
Blow bubbles instead of balloons outdoors, especially at outdoor events 
where balloons can break free and blow away, out over the ocean. Balloons, 
strings and clips can end up in rivers, streams and drains where they are 
carried to the ocean. Simply switching from balloons to bubbles makes a 
massive difference for seabirds and marine life in our oceans, and who 
doesn’t love bubbles?
ZOOS VICTORIA
Inspired to help 
seabirds, Zoos 
Victoria started 
a campaign to 
encourage people 
to run seabird￾friendly events 
by changing how 
we use balloons 
or not using them 
at all and blowing 
bubbles instead. 
Chapter 8: Communities for change 87TANGAROA BLUE FOUNDATION
4Ocean bracelets for change
The Galapagos Islands are remote and isolated, but plastic still washes up 
on their shores. The plastic affects the islands’ incredible wildlife, such as the 
Galapagos sealions.
4Ocean is a business that removes garbage and rubbish from the oceans 
of the world and turns some of it into bracelets. For every bracelet purchased, 
4Ocean promises to remove half a kilogram of waste. The sale of the bracelets 
helps funds waste removal. The bracelets are made from 100 per cent recycled 
plastic bottles, melted and turned into recycled thread. The glass beads are 
made from recycled glass as well. The bracelets close the recycling loop and 
are part of the solution to cleaner and greener oceans.
4Ocean run vessels specially designed to collect floating plastic waste 
from rivers around the world. This stops the plastic from reaching the sea. 
The plastic recovered from the water is sorted into colours, bundled and 
sent to recyclers to make new products.
4Ocean removed nearly 4.3 million kilograms of waste from the water 
in three years. They work in Haiti, Bali (Indonesia), Florida (America) and 
Ocean plastics are in 
your hands. Everyday 
items like straws, 
balloons, take￾away cups, twine, 
plastic bottles, caps 
and toothbrushes 
are washing up on 
the shores around 
the planet. Beach 
clean-ups happen 
worldwide. In Australia 
information from 
beach clean-ups can 
be recorded on a 
marine plastic debris 
database.
88 Oceans of PlasticBottle flipping 
sealions in the 
Galapagos
The most abundant marine mammal on 
the Galapagos Islands is the Galapagos 
sealion (Zalophus wollebaeki). It is endemic, 
being found nowhere else in the world. The 
thousands of sealions are at home sunbaking 
on beaches, catching food and playing in 
the waters of the islands. Sealions have been 
spotted with something new. They have been 
flipping plastic bottles, playing with them like 
toys. The floating plastic bottle has sparked 
the seals’ natural curiosity. The action of the 
seal flipping the bottle can speed up the time 
it takes to break up into smaller pieces! It is 
clear that plastic is not only reaching the shores 
of the Galapagos Islands, but can become a 
problem for wildlife. The impact of our plastic 
reaches far and wide, but we can be part of the 
solution, helping organisations to remove the 
plastic waste in faraway places of the oceans. 
Guatemala (South America). 4Ocean 
is glad to have access to some of the 
most polluted rivers and oceans on 
the planet, employing local people 
to remove plastics from the water.
4Ocean involves people in many 
ways. It allows people around 
the world to contribute to ocean 
clean-ups by wearing a bracelet 
that is 100 per cent recycled. It 
has encouraged people to start 
conversations about our oceans and 
the plastics. These can be powerful 
ways to create change.
The Great 
Nurdle Hunt
The Great Nurdle Hunt is on. 
People from around the world are 
looking for nurdles on beaches 
and riverbanks. The Great Nurdle 
Hunt is a project of Fidra, a Scottish 
organisation that wants to rid the sea 
of nurdles forever.
We know that nurdles are not 
only coated in chemicals, they also 
absorb more chemicals once they 
enter the ocean. You can hunt for 
nurdles anytime, anywhere and 
record your finds on the Fidra 
website. Fidra encourages people 
to be citizen scientists and collect 
information to help solve the world’s 
nurdle problem.
Creature
 Feature
Chapter 8: Communities for change 89COLLEEN HUGHSON
Each year a worldwide event is held in 
March. When the Great Nurdle Hunt is on, 
nurdlers from around the globe head to 
beaches to hunt for nurdles. The nurdles 
are collected and counted and added to 
the nurdle hunt database. The Great Nurdle 
Hunt becomes a snapshot in time of the 
number of nurdles in the environment. 
The data can be used as evidence when 
information is needed about nurdles as 
a form of plastic pollution.
Nurdles sometimes reach a beach in 
astonishing numbers, covering the beach 
like snow. Then it’s all hands on deck 
to collect them (with caution and hand￾washing after), count them and share the 
knowledge. This is important work for 
citizen scientists around the world who 
keep watch and help marine wildlife.
Organisations and communities have 
come together to make a change. They’ve 
inspired everyday actions that will help 
clean the ocean. From buying a bracelet 
and picking up plastic on the beach, to 
choosing to refuse plastic and recycling 
wisely, each of us has a way to help our 
oceans. We can be the change-makers 
of the future.
Islands 
overrun with 
plastics
Have you ever seen 997 000 
shoes? Or maybe 373 000 
toothbrushes on the beach? 
If you go to Cocos Islands in 
the Pacific Ocean chances 
are you will see more ocean 
waste than you expected. 
Over 262 tonnes of plastic 
rubbish has washed ashore 
on the Cocos Islands. 
Scientists and volunteers 
count plastics while they 
clean up in an effort to help 
understand and find waste 
solutions for these islands 
far, far away.
Nurdlers unite to 
make a clean sweep 
of our beaches in 
the Great Nurdle 
Hunt. Nurdles are 
tricky to find and 
hard to remove, but 
that doesn’t deter 
the Nurdlers of the 
world from picking 
up microplastic one 
piece at a time. 
90 Oceans of PlasticIDEAS, 
INSPIRATIONS
AND
INNOVATORS
Chapter
9Melbourne
Cairns
Ideas are powerful
An idea can change so much. Tackling our biggest ocean plastic problems will 
take a lot of new ideas, inspirations and innovations.
There is no age limit on ideas. Some of the most inspirational change-makers 
are young people. Starting with a simple idea, they worked to make it a reality.
All brilliant ideas need work, time and people power to make them happen. 
Innovation starts with a bright idea, and a willingness to give the idea a go. A 
whole lot of trying, trialling, failing, rethinking and trying again is needed to 
innovate. Innovation is an essential part of stopping plastic pollution in our oceans. 
Let’s see some of the exciting ways people are tackling some of our biggest 
plastic-pollution problems.
StrawNoMore
Let’s talk about straws. Most drinking straws are plastic, used once for a few 
minutes and then thrown away. Some people even put two straws in a drink. 
Over 10 million straws are used in Australia every day. In one year, that’s a 
massive 3.5 billion straws thrown away! They end up everywhere, at the beach, 
in parks, in streets, in rivers and eventually in the sea.
StrawNoMore was started in 2017 by Molly Steer, an Australian girl who was 
11 years old. She began the campaign after watching a documentary called 
A Plastic Ocean. She wanted to do something about plastic pollution.
Molly began the StrawNoMore program at her local school in her hometown 
of Cairns in Queensland. She talked to her school and encouraged her school 
principal to take action and remove the plastic straws from the school canteen. 
Her actions encouraged others. Students in other schools were inspired by 
Molly and became StrawNoMore schools. She wanted every school in tropical 
north Queensland to stop using straws. Being so close to the Great Barrier 
Reef, north Queensland was a fantastic place to start.
92 Oceans of PlasticMelbourne
Cairns
Molly inspired local councils to make a change and ban 
straws from their region. She now has ‘StrawBassadors’ 
working around Australia to help rid the country of single￾use straws. Molly has been on ABC Television’s War on 
Waste series. Molly even has her own TED talk. 
The StrawNoMore campaign asks people to take a 
pledge to stop using straws. It asks us to talk about the 
impact that straws have on our planet’s oceans. Say ‘no 
thanks’ to straws and explain why when you are next 
offered one. You may change a shopkeeper’s mind.
Working with nature 
to clean up the oceans
Seabins cleaning up one marina 
at a time
While travelling the ocean in search of great waves, two 
surfers saw oceans littered with plastic pollution. They 
came up with a brilliant idea: to create a bin that removed 
pollution from the ocean. They focused the litter￾removing project on harbours and boat marinas. These 
areas are where rubbish often enters the ocean from 
boats, jetties and street runoff. The team spent their life 
savings to build the working prototype model.
The result was a floating Seabin that collects rubbish 
just like pool filters do, bobbing up and down in the 
water. The plastic waste drifts into the slow-moving 
backwaters of the harbour, just like the rubbish in ocean 
gyres, where it is sucked up by a carefully placed Seabin.
Seabins are innovative because they remove ocean 
plastics 24 hours a day. The filters can be taken out, 
Plastic straw 
facts from 
StrawNoMore!
Australians use 10 million 
straws every day! If they 
were put end to end, 
they could reach from 
Melbourne to Cairns 
(a distance of 2324 
kilometres). That’s 
a lot of straws!
Chapter 9: Ideas, inspirations and innovators 93cleaned and replaced. The Seabins collect rubbish such as pieces of plastics, 
bottles, plastic packaging, fishing line and cigarette butts. The Seabin can also 
collect oil from the water. As there are lots of boats in a marina that leak or spill 
fuel, this is a bonus. The oils float on the top of the water and can be skimmed 
off into the Seabin and removed from the ocean.
The latest Seabin model brings more innovations. The fabric used in the 
mesh bag can remove microfibres from the water. The smaller mesh size allows 
the Seabin to remove microscopic threads. These microplastics or nanoplastics 
are harmful because they end up in the ocean and are eaten instead of food.
The Ocean Cleanup
The Ocean Cleanup is tackling the problem of ocean plastic on a massive 
oceanic scale. The ambitious task of this organisation is to remove 50 per cent 
of the plastic from the Great Pacific Garbage Patch every five years. The Great 
Pacific Garbage Patch is found in two locations between the coast of America 
and Japan, in the Pacific Ocean. The east garbage patch floats near Japan. In 
the west, the garbage patch floats between Hawaii and California.
Boyan Slat created The Ocean Cleanup. He was studying aerospace 
engineering but was inspired to work on ocean plastics when he was 
snorkelling in Greece as a 17-year-old. Seeing so much plastic in the water, 
Boyan wanted to make a difference. His plan was to remove plastic from the 
ocean’s biggest garbage patches. He knew the task was enormous, but he 
wanted to try to solve the problem.
The team created an ocean collecting device to remove ocean plastics from 
the water. The collected waste is to be recycled and used to make new plastic 
items to fund future ocean clean-up programs.
The Ocean Cleanup program is a great STEM (Science, Technology, 
Engineering and Maths) project in action on a mission to solve this ocean-sized 
problem. The floating system makes use of the natural forces of winds, waves 
and currents to collect plastic in a giant floating rope loop. The rope loop is 
fitted with a net-like skirt that also collects underwater plastic fragments. 
94 Oceans of PlasticThe system works by drifting with 
the plastic. When the plastic 
pollution is concentrated inside the 
loop, it can be extracted by a ship. 
The Ocean Cleanup team conducted 
tests and trials to see how the plan 
works out at sea. With each test, 
new information was discovered, 
and the design was adjusted to 
solve the problems found.
The Ocean Cleanup team has 
recently created solar-powered 
boats called Inceptors to clean up 
rivers. The Inceptor is completely 
solar powered and does not require 
any human input to work. It collects 
floating litter to stop it reaching 
the ocean. The waste is caught on 
a boom arm coming out from the 
boat, then picked up on a conveyor 
belt and separated in the boat. The 
waste is then collected from the boat 
and taken for recycling. The Ocean 
Cleanup group has four vessels in the 
water, and they are working away at 
cleaning up the most polluted rivers 
on the planet.
Discovering 
dolphinfish hideouts
Dolphinfish, or mahi-mahi (Coryphaena hippurus), 
live in warm open oceans; they are a pelagic
fish and are designed to swim long distances. 
Dolphinfish live and feed near floating objects, 
using natural items like seaweed and coconut 
palm fronds as habitat. As plastic pollution fills our 
oceans, plastic is quickly becoming a common form 
of shelter in the open ocean. Hiding under plastic 
containers, or floating with drift nets, dolphinfish 
use them as temporary floating homes. 
Dolphinfish make the most of the food that is 
available, often feeding in a frenzy. They definitely 
‘eat before they think’. This is a risky feeding 
strategy! People fishing for dolphinfish find plastic 
items in the gut of these ocean travellers, including 
bottle lids, cigarette lighters, rope pieces and parts 
of plastic containers. Dolphinfish remind us that we 
need to remove plastic from our oceans. It is up to 
us to refuse plastic, recycle plastic and always pick 
up plastics before they make it to the ocean. 
Creature
 Feature
Chapter 9: Ideas, inspirations and innovators 95Native
grasses River water flow
Litter caught
stream side
Plastic caught
in trap
Catching our waste
Have you ever thought about the litter that washes down the drain in the 
street? Where does it go? Is it heading to the sea? Or a wetland? Is the drain 
connected to a local river or stream? Where does that river lead to, and what 
happens to the litter that travels down the drain? How do we stop it from 
getting out to the ocean?
Litter traps could be the answer. Putting up a screen to catch the litter is one 
way that we can reduce waste reaching the ocean. Local governments all over 
the world are installing litter traps to help stop the flow of plastics into oceans. 
There are lots of different designs for litter traps. Some float, some are 
permanent concrete structures, some use screens, but the newest idea is to use 
nets to catch the litter. The trash net bags expand when they are full of rubbish 
and are then removed, sometimes with the help of a crane. The waste can be 
sorted and taken to rubbish tips or recycling centres. The netting bag is then 
reset, ready to catch the next load of rubbish from the stormwater drains. If you 
know a local waterway with a whole lot of plastic, let your local council know. 
Ask what is being done to stop the litter in the waterway.
Trap it in the street! 
These traps capture 
waste that is dropped 
in the street or blows 
down the road and 
into a local waterway. 
It is estimated that 
90 per cent of the 
world’s rubbish enters 
our oceans from only 
10 main rivers of 
garbage flowing into 
the ocean.
96 Oceans of PlasticChange is in the bag
Local communities are making big changes to the way they shop, 
especially in Anglesea and Port Fairy, at either end of the Great 
Ocean Road in Victoria. Being so close to the ocean comes with 
environmental responsibilities. Knowing the impact of single-use 
plastic bags on ocean wildlife, the two towns were inspired to 
act. In 2004, Anglesea became one of the first towns in Australia 
to eliminate plastic bags at the supermarket checkout and the 
town is now plastic-bag free.
Local schools in Port Fairy joined forces to encourage the town 
to go plastic bag free in 2008. Led by students and supported by 
families, the whole community wanted to see change.
The students asked local businesses to stop handing out single￾use plastic bags. They asked shoppers to change their single-use 
bags for natural cloth bags. The See Change Bag Project sold 
over 2000 bags in the first few years of the program. The children 
created eye-catching marine designs. The successful designs were 
printed onto bags, which were sold at the local supermarket. They 
were a hit. The program was relaunched in 2016, a second design 
was completed, and the bags were back in stock.
This changed the way the town shopped, and people started 
switching to cloth bags – a big step for a small rural township of 
3000 people. The program was sustainable, and it helped raise 
funds for local schools, with sales from the bag going to new 
sustainability projects at each of the schools.
Plastic bags 
around the 
world
Over 5 trillion single-use 
plastic bags are being used 
every year, which adds up 
to a mind-blowing 160 000 
bags per second! That’s 
enough to cover a country 
the size of France in plastic 
bags – or, if you laid the 
plastic bags end to end, 
they would loop around the 
world seven times every 
hour! Large supermarket 
chains are now asking us 
to bring our own reusable 
bags. It’s a small act, with 
a big impact.
Students can change the way plastic bags are used 
in their community. Port Fairy students created ‘See 
Change Bags’ in reusable material with appealing 
designs. To see the change, they had to be the 
change, inspiring others and creating waves of 
community change in their local area.
TRACEY GRAY
Chapter 9: Ideas, inspirations and innovators 97Inspiring leaders of the future
Have you ever seen a soy sauce sushi fish? They are single-use, 
soy sauce containers in the shape of a fish, often given out with 
sushi. If a year 6 primary student from Victoria succeeds, they 
may become extinct. Scarlett Rosshandler has collected over 
73 000 signatures for her campaign. She wants to ban the 
single-use plastic fish. Help Scarlett’s ocean crusade by saying 
no to the soy sauce sushi fish as well!
Did you know that Australia has its own plastic-free 
superhero! Arlian Ecker, is the ‘Plastic Free Boy’ of Byron 
Bay. He’s on a mission to rid the world of plastic bags. Arlian 
is not shy in talking about the ocean impacts of plastic on 
turtles. He is happy to stand out the front of supermarkets to 
explain where plastic bags can end up or give speeches to 
sustainability leaders from around the world. He made a film 
‘Plastic Alarm’ about the turtles to share the ocean plastic 
story. He wants to create change.
There are many stories of young ocean guardians around 
the world, showing that kids are not afraid to lead the way in 
stopping ocean plastics in their communities. They are true 
ocean activists! 
If oceans 
could talk, 
what would 
they say? 
Would oceans ask us to think 
about our rubbish that floats 
in its waves? Would they ask 
us to consider the creatures 
that need to feed, without 
eating plastic junk? Would 
they ask us to change our 
ways? I wonder, what would 
they say? We all need to find 
ways to change the plastic 
future of our oceans today. 
KATATONIA82/SHUTTERSTOCK.COM
98 Oceans of PlasticACTION
FOR THE 
OCEANS
Chapter
10
KATATONIA82/SHUTTERSTOCK.COMSmall changes for 
healthy oceans
Small changes can make a big difference. Every day we 
make choices that affect our world. Often, we feel as if 
our choices don’t matter, but you have the power to make 
changes that will last a lifetime.
Be a change-maker. Find an ocean plastic program that 
matters to you. Whether you’re passionate about marine 
creatures, interested in beach clean-ups or simply saying 
no to straws, your actions will make a difference.
Plastic footprints 
in the sand
Have you ever heard of a plastic footprint? A plastic 
footprint is a measure of the amount of plastic that you 
create each day, month or year. The measurement is 
important because it helps you understand the amount of 
plastic you use in your life. If we are to break our plastic 
habits, we need to find out what we are using so we can 
make better plastic-free choices.
The more plastic you use, the bigger your plastic 
footprint. If you use less plastic, your plastic footprint 
will be smaller. Find yourself some recycled paper and 
think about your day. Break it into morning, afternoon 
and evening. Let’s look at some ways you can reduce your 
plastic footprint.
How big is your plastic 
footprint? Think about 
all of the plastic that 
you come into contact 
with in one day. This is 
a part of your plastic 
footprint. You can shrink 
your plastic footprint by 
choosing plastic-free 
products and finding 
plastic-free solutions.
100 Oceans of PlasticPrepare to break up with 
plastics
Breaking up with plastic can be hard. You have to be prepared and be smart. 
A great way is to prepare a bag to take when you are on the go. Think about 
where you’re going and what you’re doing. Use some of these ideas to help 
you on your plastic-free quest.
School day
Here are some ways to help our 
planet and avoid plastic waste:
• bamboo toothbrush
• shampoo bars instead of shampoo 
in bottles
• soap bars instead of body wash
• deodorant bars instead of 
deodorant in plastic bottles
• cotton buds with bamboo or 
paper sticks instead of plastic
• breakfast at home in bowls with 
spoons
• rubbish-free lunchbox packed 
with nude food (unwrapped of 
course)
• refillable drink bottle.
Sports activities
Get ready for action and adventure 
with a little kit of plastic-free 
goodness:
• refillable drink bottle or cup for 
hot drinks
• reusable snack pack filled with 
fruit and snacks (no single-use 
packs)
• fresh fruit as nude food to give 
energy on the go
• cloth towel for wiping hands and 
cleaning up before you eat.
Chapter 10: Action for the oceans 101Weekends – hanging out with friends
Be the leader of the pack when it comes to plastic awareness. Lead with 
kindness and offer solutions to your friends who might not have found the 
plastic-free path:
• refillable drink bottle or cup for hot drinks
• metal or bamboo straw, or insist on paper straws
• reusable snack pack (with fruit and snacks)
• eating in at cafes or restaurants to reduce take-away waste
• at the movies bring out your refillable cup and straws.
When your day is over, don’t forget to unpack your rubbish-free pack. The 
cups, drink bottles, containers and straws will need to be cleaned. Take them 
out and wash them with hot soapy water. Dry and put them back into the pack, 
ready for your next plastic-free day.
Everyday 
examples of 
plastic-free packs 
to get you out 
and about on 
eco-adventures. 
Get inspired, get 
excited and get 
packing. You’ll be 
on your way to a 
plastic-free day.
Shampoo bar
Bamboo straw
Reusable
containers
Nude food packs
Nude food packs
Reusable bag
Travel bag
Refill drink
Metal straw
Towel
Drink bottle
Eco-adventures
Nude food
School bag Lunch box
Refill cup
Bamboo
toothbrush
102 Oceans of PlasticWhere is the plastic 
hiding out?
Become a plastic detective in your home. Find out where the plastic is hiding 
out. This is a simple idea that lets you discover where your family is using 
plastic products. Grab a pencil, some paper and get cracking. Create a mini 
plastic audit sheet to find out where plastic is hiding in your home.
Once the plastic is found, make some notes about each item. What type of 
plastic is it? Think up some ways in which you can change plastic for a different 
biodegradable or recyclable material.
In the kitchen
Kitchens are a favourite place for single-use plastics. Check the fridge, 
cupboards, pantry and under the sink for plastics. We need containers 
for food, but we can be wise and choose products in glass packaging or 
cardboard. If we must use plastic, we can wash it out and recycle it. If we have 
soft plastics, such as plastic bags or packaging, collect them and return them 
to a supermarket to be recycled.
When storing leftovers, use a bowl with a plate on top for a lid, or some of 
the silicone or waxed cloth wraps available, instead of cling wrap. Glass jars 
are also useful for leftovers.
In the bathroom
Plastics can accumulate and multiply in bathrooms. Check out the drawers 
under the basin as well as the bathroom cabinets. Bathroom plastics are 
stronger and need to be recycled. With a quick clean, containers can be 
recycled and go on to a new life as another plastic product. Switch to using 
shampoo bars instead of shampoo in bottles, and traditional soap bars instead 
of body wash. Bamboo toothbrushes can replace plastic toothbrushes and 
toothpaste tablets can replace plastic toothpaste tubes.
Chapter 10: Action for the oceans 103Creature
In the laundry Feature
Check the cupboards and under 
the sink for washing liquids and 
cleaning products. These products 
come in many different types of 
plastic containers with spray nozzles 
attached. There are lots of great 
products for sale that help reduce 
laundry packaging. Think about 
using laundry detergent paper strips, 
which are designed to dissolve in 
the wash, and natural cleaners that 
can be refilled into reusable spray 
bottles. Microfibre capture balls can 
be added to your washing machine; 
they catch the microfibres from your 
clothes so that they don’t get washed 
down the drain.
Quit plastic and 
help a hermit crab
Hermit crabs (Coenobita perlatus) are the ultimate 
beach cleaners, scouring the beach looking for dead 
organic pieces of food to eat. Hermit crabs work 
hard to find food, and as a result keep beaches clean 
and healthy. Don’t be fooled by their ‘hermit’ name – 
they may live alone in their protective shell, but they 
are part of a hermit crab community. 
Did you know that hermit crabs use their sense of 
smell when looking to up-size their shells? They are 
attracted to the smell of dried out sea snails. They 
then try the sea snail shell on for size and if it fits, 
they move in.
As the crabs move along beaches, they find lots 
of single-use plastic items on the shore, which can 
become a dangerous trap. Once a hermit crab 
goes inside a plastic container, they can become 
stuck inside.
During the day plastics on beaches heat up, 
becoming too hot for the crabs to survive! The 
dead crabs release a smell similar to dead sea snails, 
attracting more hermit crabs. The plastic container 
has now become a lethal trap! 
On the remote Henderson Islands, scientists 
found 526 dead hermit crabs in a single plastic 
container! It’s time to quit plastic to protect our 
oceans, beaches and living creatures. 
104 Oceans of PlasticPlastic switch out
Using items made from different materials is a great way to get plastic 
out of your life. What are some of the great choices available?
Bamboo is a 
great choice. It 
grows fast, locks 
in carbon as it 
grows, is reusable 
and can be used 
more than once 
before it heads to 
the compost bin.
Metal is good; and it 
can be washed and 
reused. It does take 
a lot of energy to 
create metal items, 
not to mention 
digging minerals out 
of the ground and 
transporting them. 
Choose metal items 
carefully, use them 
wisely and care for 
them so they last.
Cloth is an excellent choice, if it is from 
plants like cotton. Although cotton 
takes a lot of water to grow, it has a long 
lifespan and can be used over and over 
again. The impacts of its production are 
reduced the more times you reuse the 
bag. Cotton shopping bags or cotton 
dishcloths are great for everyday use. 
Beeswax wraps are a fantastic natural 
alternative to plastic wraps. A beeswax 
wrap is cotton fabric painted with 
beeswax to make flexible wraps that can 
keep your snacks fresh without plastic.
PIPPILONGSTOCKING/SHUTTERSTOCK.COM OLGA MILTSOVA/SHUTTERSTOCK.COM
YESPHOTOGRAPHERS/SHUTTERSTOCK.COM
Chapter 10: Action for the oceans 105Remember these plastic-swapping ideas:
• Single-use plastic bottles swapped for reusable and 
refillable bottles
• Single-use plastic plates and cutlery swapped for 
reusable ceramic plates and cutlery, or bamboo cutlery
• Cotton buds with plastic sticks swapped for cotton 
buds with paper or bamboo sticks
• Throw-away cups swapped for reusable cups or mugs 
for hot chocolate and milkshakes
• Plastic straws swapped for paper, metal or bamboo 
straws
• Single-use plastic bags swapped for reusable cloth or 
mesh bags
• Single-use plastic wrap swapped for waxed lunch wrap 
or a reusable lunchbox
• Single-use small chip and biscuit packets swapped for 
bigger packs emptied into reusable containers.
• Plastic-wrapped foods swapped for unwrapped food 
snacks (nude food)
• New plastic items swapped for products containing 
recycled plastic
• Plastic items swapped for bamboo, metal, cloth, 
cardboard, paper or beeswax wraps.
Plastic 
switch-a-roo
Can you see how you could 
make two to four changes 
in your home to help our 
oceans? What could you 
switch? How will you switch?
106 Oceans of PlasticBe a part of the plastic 
solution
It’s time to get active, support a program and be a change-maker. People 
are changing the world one plastic item at a time. They are working to create 
awareness and programs that help reduce the amount of plastic in the world. 
There are some fantastic programs out there. Some directly tackle the problem 
of plastics, while others encourage people to rethink the way they use plastic 
in daily life.
Plastic-free July
Join the global movement of going plastic free for July. Encourage your friends 
and family to join the 250 million people in 177 countries around the world 
who go plastic free for a whole month. Let’s stand up and challenge ourselves 
to look after our planet and live more sustainably. Let’s reduce our plastic 
footprint and make it as small as possible.
During July look for things made from aluminium, tin or other metals, glass, 
paper, cardboard, cotton, wool, linen, bamboo, timber or nude (no wrapping 
at all). Switch plastic items for other items, buy recycled goods, think about the 
plastic within the product or the plastic in the garment, and refuse single-use 
plastic items. Who knows, you might just start a plastic-free trend of your own?
Go strawkling
What is strawkling? It’s snorkelling for straws. Strawkling is a great way to help 
the ocean and remove plastic straws from our beaches and seas. Volunteer 
snorkellers hunted for straws in Sydney Harbour and picked up more than 
2500 straws from the sea floor. Australia uses 2.9 billion straws every year. We 
love our straws, and we don’t always put them where they belong. Snorkelling 
is a great way to get out and be active in our oceans. Removing straws from the 
natural environment is very important. It prevents the plastic straw turning into 
tiny plastic confetti pieces and continuing to pollute the ocean and enter the 
food chain.
Chapter 10: Action for the oceans 107A plastic pelican made from 
ocean plastics washed onto 
the beach in Warrnambool, 
Victoria. The nurdles and 
plastic artwork reminds us of 
the impact we have on our 
ocean wildlife. A real pelican 
can collect up to 20 litres of 
seawater in one gulp when 
feeding – imagine all the 
plastics they could also pick 
up in their giant beaks!
COLLEEN HUGHSON
108 Oceans of PlasticThere are alternatives out there: straws made of paper, bamboo or metal 
all help reduce single-use plastic straws. Programs like StrawNoMore and The 
Last Straw have inspired businesses to stop giving away straws. We can refuse 
single-use straws or take our own when we are out and about, or just drink 
from a glass.
Get down and join a beach clean-up
Everyone loves a day at the beach, whether you live right near a beach, or if you 
are on holiday. Remember to Take 3 For the Sea. Take three pieces of rubbish 
home every time you go down to the beach. Take more than three if you can. 
Every bit of plastic counts, and when it’s so close to the ocean, it is even more 
critical. One quick change in the wind and it could be out to sea, another item 
added to the plastic soup. You could change that. Pick up the plastic and put it 
in the bin where it won’t blow away.
Perhaps you want to get involved in beach clean-ups. These are fantastic 
events which bring people together. Become part of citizen-science programs. 
Ocean clean-ups tell different stories about the rubbish that is collected. By 
recording the information from the items collected, the data can help us find 
solutions and help remove plastic waste before it gets into the oceans.
You never know what you might find. You might be lucky and find a message 
in a bottle sent years ago. You might find a plastic bottle or a plastic lid that’s 
floated in from far away. Put your beach detective skills to the test, uncover an 
ocean mystery and help oceans at the same time.
Plan for an eco-celebration
Balloon-free events are an exciting way to express your ocean connection. 
Ocean-friendly parties inspired by Zoos Victoria are a great way to avoid 
plastics. By blowing bubbles, not balloons, you’re thinking about the health of 
the oceans.
Celebrations can often be single-use plastic nightmares. But there are 
different ways to celebrate without letting the plastic get out of hand or a 
single balloon get out of sight.
Chapter 10: Action for the oceans 109Hooded plover under 
cover. Keeping ocean 
plastics from our 
beaches helps all types 
of ocean creatures. 
This hooded plover has 
been made of beach￾washed ocean plastics 
including nurdles, 
inspiring us to think 
about the plastic we 
use each and every 
day. What could be 
avoided? What could 
be used instead?
COLLEEN HUGHSON
Choose foods that are natural and 
fresh. Avoid food wrapped in plastic at the 
supermarket. If you are choosing chips, 
choose big packs. Big packs use less plastic 
than small individual packs. Remember to set 
up a soft plastics recycling bin and separate 
your waste for recycling. By separating soft 
plastic waste, it can have a new life – perhaps 
it will be remoulded into a plastic seat! If you 
take your soft plastics to a REDcycle drop￾off point, it can be made into new outdoor 
furniture. It’s much better than ending up in the ocean. Choose real plates or 
paper plates instead of plastic plates and serve drinks in glasses or bottles with 
paper straws. It may take a little bit of time to wash up, but the planet will thank 
you for it.
Be a champion of change 
Look around at the possibilities of where plastic could be replaced by a natural 
material. Here is a great idea to get you thinking: What about changing the 
plastic stick of lolly pops. Why aren’t they available with bamboo sticks? 
It is time to get active, rethink, reimagine and redesign a new plastic-free 
future! With a little bit of creativity, you could start a whole new movement. 
You and your friends could be the next inspirational ocean change-makers! 
110 Oceans of PlasticIdeas for 
plastic-free 
futures
Design thinking is all about coming 
up with a new innovative solution 
to a real-world problem. It might be 
a way to stop plastics entering the 
ocean, replacing a plastic product 
or sharing a message!
Use these design thinking steps 
to bring your bright ideas to life: 
The Brainstorm: Go solo or gather your 
friends around and brainstorm your ‘plastic 
switching’ ideas. No idea is too silly or 
crazy. Include them all! 
The Share: Talk about the idea to see what 
people think! Listen to their suggestions, 
could they help improve the design or 
suggest a way to grow your new idea.
The Rethink: Is there something that is 
missing? Is there a way to improve the 
idea? Redesign, rework and rethink. Keep 
testing ideas and reinventing! It may take 
many attempts to get the idea working but 
keep going!
The Reach: Reach out and share your 
ideas! Whether it’s fantastic or a flop it 
is definitely worth a try! Don’t give up, 
try and try again! It will be worth it in the 
end because our oceans need you! Be a 
champion of your idea. 
The Vote: Choose one idea that you want 
to bring to life.
The Plan: Get started, drawing, sketching, 
researching and imagine the idea in action. 
Chapter 10: Action for the oceans 111COLLEEN HUGHSON
Be an ocean change-maker
The plastic ocean tide can be turned, and it can be changed. It’s up to us to 
make the change. Start by saying ‘no thanks’ to plastic, make the switch to 
plastic-free products and be positive advocates for change. We have the 
knowledge and the ideas to innovate. We need to make changes now or our 
planet’s oceans will continue to drown in plastic.
What will you do to help our oceans? The change starts with each one of 
us, making great choices with plastic alternatives, talking to people, having 
our voices heard, working with scientists, changing our behaviour and being 
proud to stand up for our oceans and being true ocean guardians. How will you 
make a difference?
Nurdle circle – 
beauty in the 
making. Nurdles 
removed off 
a beach can 
be made into 
inspiring 
artwork, 
encouraging us 
to think about 
our plastic 
oceans and what 
we can do to 
help.
112 Oceans of PlasticFURTHER 
INFORMATION
The following groups are all involved in ocean research and protection, and 
kindly provided information for this book. The author thanks them for their 
assistance: 
• Better Buds: https://www.betterbuds.org.au/
• Fidra: https://www.fidra.org.uk/
• StrawNoMore: https://www.strawnomore.org/
• Take 3 for the Sea: https://www.take3.org/
• Tangaroa Blue Foundation: https://www.tangaroablue.org/
• Zoos Victoria fighting extinction website: When balloons fly seabirds die. 
https://www.zoo.org.au/balloons/
The following websites are all useful resources for you to learn more about 
ocean plastics: 
• Australian Marine Conservation Society: 
https://www.marineconservation.org.au/ocean-plastic-pollution/
• National Geographic: 
https://www.nationalgeographic.com/environment/oceans/
• National Ocean and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA): 
https://www.noaa.gov/oceans-coasts
• Plastic Oceans: https://www.plasticoceans.org.au/
• Smithsonian: https://ocean.si.edu/ocean-life 
• World Wildlife Fund (WWF): https://www.wwf.org.au/get-involved/plastics
113GLOSSARY
Abyssal plain: the area of the ocean that is the deepest part 
of the sea floor. 
Algae: these ancient, primitive plant-like organisms live in 
water but are neither plants nor animals. Like plants they 
make their own food by photosynthesis using energy 
from the sun. Unlike plants, algae have no roots, leaves or 
stems. They use water to keep themselves afloat to reach 
sunlight. Seaweeds are algae, but algae also grow in 
freshwater.
Algae bloom: a sudden increase in algae when the right 
environmental conditions occur.
Anticlockwise: the opposite way hands on a clock move 
to show time. Anticlockwise creates a left circular motion.
Atmosphere: layers of gases surrounding the Earth and 
keeping it warm. The main gas is nitrogen, then oxygen, 
argon, water vapour and carbon dioxide.
Bacteria: small single-celled organisms. They are found in or 
on all living things and almost all ecosystems in the world. 
Bacteria are essential to life. 
Bamboo: a fast-growing plant that is part of the grass family. 
It makes strong fibres and wooden stems. Bamboo can 
be shredded to make a pulp and reformed into items, like 
knives, forks, spoons or plates. It is a great natural choice 
when switching from plastic products.
Bioaccumulation: the build-up or concentration of 
substances such as poisons in the body of living things, 
becoming more concentrated further up the food chain; 
plastic pollution is a source of poisons that accumulate in 
marine creatures.
Biofilm: a thin layer of microbes on objects. A biofilm 
forms on plastic items when they enter the ocean. The 
plastisphere is a biofilm.
Bioplastic: a plastic made from natural materials that can 
break down within a few months. 
Blue carbon: the carbon dioxide captured by the world’s 
oceans and coastal ecosystems. Plants (seagrasses and 
mangroves), phytoplankton and algae remove carbon 
dioxide from the atmosphere and store it in their cells 
using photosynthesis.
Broadcast spawning: when eggs and sperm are released 
on ocean currents to mix and become fertilised. Many 
creatures including fish, sea snails, sea stars and coral use 
broadcast spawning to reproduce.
Calcium: a mineral used by living things to make strong 
skeletons, bones, teeth and shells.
Carbon: an element that is found in diamonds, coal, petrol, 
the gas carbon dioxide, as well as plant and animal bodies. 
The way the carbon atoms are arranged differs in these 
forms of carbon. Carbon moves around the planet in the 
carbon cycle. Carbon makes up about 18 per cent of all 
living things.
Carbon cycle: the ways carbon is passed between the 
atmosphere, water, the Earth, and living things where it 
is used, transformed, stored and released, and changing 
from a gas to a solid at times.
Carbon dioxide: is made of two oxygen atoms and one 
carbon atom. It is found in the Earth’s atmosphere as 
a gas. Carbon dioxide traps heat and creates a stable 
temperature on Earth. Too much carbon dioxide in the 
atmosphere makes the Earth’s temperature rise.
Carbon sink: a place where carbon is held or stored. Living 
things in the ocean take in and store over 25 per cent of 
the world’s carbon. As they die, they drift down and create 
a carbon sink on the ocean floor.
Chitin (ky-tin): a protein that makes hard, strong, water￾resistant exoskeletons in insects and crustaceans such as 
lobsters, in the cell walls of fungi, the teeth-like structures 
in molluscs and the beaks of octopus and squid.
Chloroplasts (klor-o-plasts): a tiny part of the cells of 
plants and algae that contains chlorophyll, which absorbs 
sunlight to help the plant photosynthesise. Chloroplasts 
are green (chloro- means green in Greek).
Citizen science: people and the community involved in 
scientific research or data collection for such things as 
conservation programs, mapping species, etc.
Clockwise: a circular motion in the direction in which the 
hands on a clock move.
Cloth: a material woven from natural cotton, wool or 
other fibres to make fabric. Cloth fabric is used to make 
wearable clothes (jumpers, jeans) or can be used to clean 
up spills (dish cloth).
Coast: where the ocean or sea meets the land; continents 
are surrounded by coastlines.
Coccolithophores: single-celled marine algae that form 
plates or coccoliths from calcium; they occur in such 
numbers that they can cloud the water and produce 
114more than 1.5 million tonnes of calcite a year, the mineral 
that forms marble, limestone and chalk; coccoliths are 
significant microfossils.
Colonise: find a place to live and grow; microbes colonise 
plastic pieces in the plastisphere.
Condense: when water vapour or gas cools it turns back 
into liquid (condensation). In the water cycle, clouds are 
an example of condensation. In the bathroom, steam from 
your hot shower condenses on the mirror.
Continents: very large land masses surrounded by oceans 
or seas. There are seven continents on Earth – Africa, Asia, 
Australia, Europe, North America, South America and 
Antarctica.
Continuous Plankton Recorder (CPR): a device pulled 
behind boats that is used to record plankton in the ocean. 
Convection currents: are the circular movements of water 
or air that are different temperatures. Cool air or water 
sinks and warm air or water rises.
Coriolis Effect: the pattern of deflection taken by objects 
not firmly connected to the ground as they travel long 
distances around the Earth. In oceans, the Earth’s rotation 
creates a water current that moves at a 45° angle. The 
wind above the water pushes the surface layers in the 
opposite direction, in a downward spiral.
CSIRO: Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research 
Organisation.
Currents: moving water; currents can be big or small, and 
are produced by winds, the rotation of the planet, and the 
temperature and density (heaviness) of water.
Cyanobacteria: bacteria that live in water and can 
photosynthesise; they were once incorrectly called blue￾green algae.
Database: information stored and organised on a computer; 
data may be evidence or information used in scientific 
experiments.
Decompose: when things naturally break down into smaller 
pieces. It is the first stage in the recycling of nutrients that 
have been used by living things.
Decomposers: organisms that break down natural products 
back to their original form.
Diatoms: tiny single-celled algae that live in water and can 
photosynthesise. Diatoms have a cell wall made of calcium 
in the form of two overlapping shells, often with beautiful 
and elaborate patterns on them. Diatoms are a common 
form of phytoplankton.
Digestion, Digesting: breaking down food so the body can 
absorb the nutrients and expel the waste.
Digestive system: the system in the body that breaks down 
food, absorbs nutrients and expels waste.
Drop-off zones: the areas where the ocean floor drops 
down to the abyssal plain. They are found at the edge of a 
continental plate. 
Ecosystem: a community of living things that interact with 
each other and their environment, for example, a coral 
reef or a pond. In a marine ecosystem, some of the living 
things are algae, phytoplankton, fish, mammals, sharks, 
jellyfish and reptiles, and the non-living things are water, 
sand, mud and rocks. All of these things interact and 
connect in the ecosystem.
Ekman Spiral: is a part of the Coriolis Effect. The Ekman 
Spiral describes the way water turns below the surface of 
the ocean. It is named after the Swedish oceanographer 
who described it, Vagn Ekman.
Element: a substance made from a single type of atom, such 
as iron, carbon, gold or oxygen. Elements are the building 
blocks of everything on Earth. They can be in the form of 
a gas, a liquid or a solid. Scientists know of 118 elements, 
but only 94 exist naturally on Earth.
Endemic: a living thing that is found naturally in one location 
or region.
Entangle: to become tangled in fishing equipment such 
as ropes, nets and fishing lines. Sea creatures and birds 
can starve, or be injured, drowned or killed when they 
become entangled.
Equator: an imaginary line that divides the Earth into the 
Northern Hemisphere and Southern Hemisphere. 
Evaporate: to change from a liquid to a gas. Water 
evaporates in the water cycle: the sun heats the water, 
turning the water molecules into water vapour, an 
invisible gas. 
Evolve: to gradually change, develop or improve. Living 
things change and adapt over long periods of time as 
a response to their natural environment or habitat. For 
example, an animal might develop changes in colour, 
pattern, body size or shape. 
Exoskeleton: the outer skeleton of a living thing (exo = 
outside, skeleton = body frame or structure). 
Exoskeletons are a hard casing that supports and protects 
invertebrates (animals without backbones). Many 
creatures have exoskeletons including insects, crabs and 
seahorses. 
Food chain: the feeding order of living things. Food chains 
connect living things to each other based on what they 
eat.
Glossary 115Food web: the feeding relationship between creatures. 
Food chains connect together to create food webs in 
habitats or ecosystems. 
Fossil fuels: fuels made from life forms that lived on Earth 
millions of years ago. When they died their bodies 
decomposed and became fossilised over time, leaving 
elements like carbon and hydrogen behind. The three 
most important fossil fuels are oil, gas and coal. Oil can be 
used to make products like plastics.
Fragment: a small piece of something that was once a 
whole. Plastics break up into smaller pieces which can be 
called fragments.
Friction: when one object moves against another, friction is 
the force that resists the movement. When any two things 
rub together, they cause friction – rough surfaces cause 
more friction, smooth surfaces cause less. 
Fungi: a simple living thing that is not a plant or animal, and 
can break down organic material. It grows in the dark, 
making its own energy. 
Geochemical scientist: a person who studies the chemistry 
of the Earth, including the chemical processes that occur 
when rocks and minerals are formed.
Geographical barrier: something that physically prevents 
the spreading of organisms. This could be because of 
temperature (climate), land or water bodies. The open 
ocean acts as a physical barrier for larvae due to its size 
and depth; larvae can cross the barrier by floating with 
assistance from objects, such as pumice.
Global Positioning System (GPS): a navigation system that 
uses satellites orbiting the Earth to identify a location.
Great Pacific Garbage Patch: an area of the Pacific Ocean 
were ocean plastics collect. The northern ocean gyre 
brings in plastics from around the world. There are two 
garbage patches, the biggest is between Hawaii and 
California, and the second is near Japan. There are also 
garbage patches in gyres in all the other oceans.
Greenhouse gas: any gas that traps heat in Earth’s 
atmosphere. These gases let sunlight pass through to 
the Earth but stop heat escaping into space. The natural 
greenhouse gases are water vapour, carbon dioxide, 
nitrous oxide, ozone and methane. Chlorofluorocarbons 
are artificial greenhouse gases that also damage the 
ozone layer.
Gyres: slow-moving, ocean-wide, swirling currents that flow 
anticlockwise in the Southern Hemisphere and clockwise 
in the Northern Hemisphere. Gyres are powered by the 
wind, the land around them and the Earth’s rotation. There 
are five ocean gyres, which occur in the Indian, North 
Atlantic, South Atlantic, North Pacific and South Pacific 
oceans. In the centre of gyres are calm waters where 
ocean debris accumulates.
Habitat: a place where organisms naturally live that has 
what they need to survive and grow, such as water, food, 
shelter, mates and a suitable climate or temperature.
Hemisphere: half of a sphere such as the Earth or a planet. 
Earth has two hemispheres, a Northern and a Southern 
hemisphere. When it is summer in one hemisphere, it is 
winter in the other. 
Invertebrate: a living thing that does not have a backbone 
or internal skeleton. Invertebrates have an exoskeleton to 
protect their bodies. 
Krill: a small shrimp-like crustacean that is an important food 
source for whales. 
Larvae: the young of animals without backbones. The larvae 
of marine species may drift in the ocean until they change 
into their adult form and settle in a suitable habitat where 
they can live.
Lava: a hot liquid rock that comes out from the Earth’s core 
onto the surface, creating volcanos and ocean seafloor 
vents. When lava cools it hardens to form rocks. 
Magma: the hot liquid rock continually moving inside the 
Earth’s core. Magma can reach temperatures of over 
1200°C.
Magnetic field: the area around a magnet where there is 
a magnetic force. A magnetic field creates a positive or 
negative force. The Earth has a magnetic field, created 
by the movement of magma in the Earth’s core. It is 
an invisible force that can be observed when using a 
compass. Migratory species use the Earth’s magnetic field 
when travelling long distances. 
Marine debris: floating objects in the ocean; ocean plastics 
form a large part of marine debris.
Metal: natural elements used to make strong, long-lasting 
products. Metal can hold heat and transfer electricity. 
There are many different types of metals including steel, 
tin, aluminium and silver. 
Microbes: minute, simple living things such as bacteria, 
viruses, algae and fungi. They can be found everywhere, 
in water, air, soil, and inside and outside our bodies. Some 
are helpful, and some are harmful.
Microfibres: extremely fine plastic fibres from fabric such 
as polyester or fleece.
116 Oceans of PlasticMicroplastics: small pieces of plastic less than 5 millimetres 
in size. They are harmful to marine and aquatic life. 
Microplastics can be formed by larger plastics breaking 
up into smaller pieces. They can also be purposely made 
into items like nurdles or even microbeads for beauty 
products.
Microscopic: so small that it can only be seen through a 
microscope.
Middens: a mound of discarded shells and food scraps 
indicating a site where Indigenous people lived.
Migrate: when a living thing moves from one place to 
another for food, shelter or mates. 
Migration: journeys over small or large distances, as 
the season’s change or daily, but usually refers to long 
seasonal journeys. 
Molecule: two or more atoms bonded together tightly to 
form substances that can be solid, liquid or a gas. The form 
of the substance depends on the atoms and the way they 
are arranged. For example, two hydrogen atoms and one 
oxygen atom make water (H2O).
Nanoplastics: extremely small particles of plastic (1 billion 
nanoparticles can fit on the head of a pin) that can cross 
cell walls and cause unknown damage to living things, 
including people.
Natural: made by or in nature, not artificial.
Nitrogen: a gas found in the Earth’s atmosphere. Nitrogen 
is important for all living things as it helps them grow. 
Nostril: two small openings that are connected to 
a creature’s airway for breathing. Nostrils can be 
permanently open (like on a bird’s beak) or they can open 
and close (like in mammals such as a seal). 
Nurdles: small hard plastic pellets the size of a grain of rice 
and shaped like a lentil.
Nutrients: the parts of food that feed living things, 
providing them with energy to live and grow.
Oceanographer: a scientist who studies the biological and 
physical aspects of the ocean.
Olfactory nose: an area or nose (nostril) capable of smelling 
or receiving chemical signals that food or predators are 
close. Fish have nostrils and pits that can detect smell 
underwater, while seabirds have nostrils on their beak that 
can receive smells over long distances.
Organic: anything relating to living things; natural things or 
materials that are made in nature that can break down.
Organism: any living thing – it can be a plant, animal, 
bacteria or fungi. The same kind of organisms are called a 
species. Organisms have basic needs to survive, including 
water, food, shelter and, in some species, reproductive 
mates.
Oxygen: a chemical element. It is a colourless, odourless, 
tasteless gas that is necessary for some life forms on Earth.
Pelagic: a species living in open ocean waters.
Persistent Organic Pollutants (POPs): industrially 
manufactured chemicals that stay in the environment 
for a very long time and harm living things, for example 
pesticides, drugs and plastics.
Photodegradation: when materials, such as plastic, change 
because of light. Light can cause the plastic to become 
harder and more brittle, resulting in cracks appearing or 
the colour fading. 
Photosynthesis (foto-syn-the-sis): the process by which 
green plants and algae use energy from sunlight to make 
their own food from water and carbon dioxide, and giving 
off oxygen.
Phytoplankton (fy-toe-plank-ton): microscopic plants, 
algae, bacteria and other plant-like organisms that 
live in water. Like land plants, phytoplankton can 
photosynthesise.
Plankton: tiny drifting plants and plant-like organisms 
(phytoplankton) or animals (zooplankton) that live in the 
surface layers of water. Some zooplankton, like jellyfish, 
can be quite large, other zooplankton are microscopic 
or tiny and includes the eggs and larvae of fish and other 
living things. 
Plastic: a lightweight material that is made by people using 
petroleum (crude oil) and chemicals. Plastic is used in 
many different products, for example straws, containers, 
cups, phones and cutlery.
Plastic footprint: the measure of the amount of plastic that 
someone creates each day, month or year.
Plastisphere: life such as microscopic bacteria and algae 
growing on the surface of ocean plastic.
Pollution: something that when added to the environment is 
harmful to living things.
Polymer: made of single molecules called monomers, 
joined together to make chains called polymers. 
Predators: creatures that feed on other living things to gain 
a food source or energy. A predator can hunt or capture 
prey to eat it.
Prototype: the first design of a new invention or product 
that is tested to check for problems and to prompt new 
ideas.
Glossary 117Pumice: formed when lava bubbles up to the surface of the 
ocean. As the lava cools it releases gas bubbles, making 
the rock light and aerated. Pumice floats on the ocean’s 
surface. When large underwater volcanos or vents 
release lava, the pumice can form large floating masses, 
sometimes called pumice rafts. 
Purse seine net: a net designed to catch a whole school 
of fish; these nets are large and cause serious problems 
when they are lost at sea.
Recycle: collect used products and materials to process and 
to make new products or materials.
REDcycle: an organisation collecting soft plastic items 
and creating bench seats or other hard plastic recycled 
products.
Research: investigate carefully to find out information, 
facts or principles; scientists conduct research to find out 
answers to questions.
Rotation: turning on an axis; the Earth rotates once every 
24 hours, and this rotation produces day and night.
Salinity: a measure of the salt that is dissolved in water; the 
saltiness of seawater can be lower when it is near rivers or 
near the equator, and higher under sea ice in the Arctic or 
Antarctica. Ocean water has a salt concentration of about 
3.5 per cent. 
Salps: transparent, barrel-shaped marine animals that live in 
groups. They are filter feeders and float in the ocean.
Sample: a scientific collection of items to investigate, for 
example organisms, soil, air or water.
Sedentary: living things that live their lives attached to a 
surface or only move small distances.
Sediment: sand, silt, mud or other materials that cover 
the bottom surface of oceans, lakes, rivers or streams. 
Sediment also contains pieces of dead organic matter 
(plants and animals), and stores carbon in sediment layers.
Senses: marine animals have senses: they can taste, smell 
and see. Some marine creatures have the ability to detect 
electrical or magnetic fields, to echolocate, and to see 
infrared and ultraviolet light.
Single-use: something that can only be used once such as 
cups, bags and wrappers.
Species: a group of living things that have the same common 
characteristics like physical appearance or biology and 
can produce fertile living offspring. 
Subpolar: on Earth, the zone found close to the North and 
South poles but not within the Arctic or Antarctic circles.
Subtropical: on Earth, the zone found between the tropics 
(near the equator) and temperate zones (between the 
subtropics and the subpolar zones).
Synchronised: events that happen at the same time. In 
the ocean, the events can depend on environmental 
conditions like weather, tides and temperature. Coral 
spawning is a synchronised event.
Technofossil: a word used by scientists to describe waste 
left from plastic products that will be found in future fossil 
records.
Tectonic plates: continents sit on plates of the Earth’s crust 
that are larger than the continents and also form the sea 
floor. Tectonic plates float over the Earth’s inner mantle. 
Under the ocean, the continental plates are thinner. The 
continental plates drop off into deep trenches under the 
ocean. 
Theory: an idea or thought that is tested to work out if it is 
possible. Scientists conduct experiments to test theories.
Toxins: poisonous substances that cause harm and can build 
up over time to unsafe levels.
Tropical: on Earth, the zone found on either side of the 
equator.
Upwelling current: a current of cold water rich in nutrients 
that rises to the surface near coastlines.
Vapour: gas, such as water vapour.
Virus: a type of germ that often causes sicknesses such as 
influenza and colds; viruses are too small to be seen by 
ordinary microscopes and can only survive and multiply 
inside the cells of a host (the organisms they infect).
Waste: any substance that is discarded or thrown away 
after use. Waste can be made or manufactured. Plastic 
becomes waste when it is thrown away. Waste can also 
be natural, made from natural functions of living things, 
including carbon dioxide (breathing) and poo (digestion). 
Water cycle: the movement of water between oceans, rivers 
and lakes into the atmosphere as water vapour and back 
to Earth as rain, snow, hail or sleet.
Weathering: a natural process that slowly breaks apart a 
material like stone or plastic. Heat, wind, water, living 
things and other natural forces can cause weathering. 
Zooplankton: tiny animals or animal-like organisms that 
float or swim in water; zooplankton and phytoplankton 
are the basis of the food web in marine and freshwater 
environments. 
118 Oceans of PlasticINDEX
A
abyssal plain 18
algae 13, 14, 27
anchovies 58
atmosphere 9, 12, 15
B
bacteria 14, 45, 58
bamboo 101
beach clean-up 109
beach detectives 83
bioaccumulation 69
biofilm 45, 58
bioplastics 80, 82
blue carbon 15
broadcast spawning 35
C
carbon 15
carbon dioxide 9, 15
carbon sink 15
citizen scientist 83–84, 109
climate 15, 17
continent 18
continental shelf 19
Continuous Plankton 
Recorder 71
Coriolis Effect 24
currents 26–28, 32
Antarctic 
Circumpolar 27
boundary 29
break-away eddies 30
convection 26
East Australian 28
Indonesian Through 
Flow 28
Leeuwin 27, 28
upwelling 26
D
decompose 45, 51
design thinking 111
diatoms 13, 14
digestion 51, 62
dolphinfish 95
drop-off zones 21
E
eco-celebration 109
ecosystem 10
equator 9, 30
F
fish eggs 57, 66–67
food chain 62, 69
food webs 26, 60–61, 62
fossil fuels 49–50
fulmar 77
fungi 51, 80
G
geochemical scientists 35
ghost nets 74
Global Positioning 
System 33
Great Pacific Garbage 
Patch 29, 39–40, 46
plastic pieces 40
size 40–41
greenhouse gas 15, 17
gyres 21–24, 26, 28–29
subpolar 30
subtropical 30
tropical 30
H
habitat 9–10
hemisphere 22
hermit crab 104
hooded plovers 66–67, 110
I
ice cap 16
Indigenous rangers 75
invertebrate 45
J
jellyfish 32, 57, 63
K
krill 58, 61
L
larvae 35
lava 34
limpets 36
litter traps 96
lobsters 81
M
magnetic field 33
Mariana Trench 18
marine debris 83
marine entanglement 73
microbes 51
land 51
marine 44, 45, 51
microfibre 46
microplastic 46, 55
microscopic 13, 44
phytoplankton 13
plankton 13–14, 47
midden 54
migration 28
mimicry 57
molecule 12
N
nanoplastic 46–47
North Pole 9
nurdles 52, 57, 66–67, 89
nutrients 10, 26, 27, 30
O
oceanographer 28
oceans 8–10
Arctic 9
Atlantic 9
Indian 9
Pacific 9
Southern 9, 27
olfactory 57
119opportunistic feeders 63
organism 10
oxygen 9, 15
P
Persistent Organic 
Pollutants 68–69
photosynthesis 13, 14
phytoplankton 13–14
plankton 13, 49
plastic
bags 30, 57, 97, 103
bottles 39, 47, 52
floating rubbish 38–41
footprint 100
free 107
pieces 39, 40, 43
single-use 42, 106
switching ideas
105–106
weathering 43–44
plastisphere 45, 47
polar ice caps 9
pollutants 68–69
pollution 23, 80
predators 45
pumice raft 35
R
recycle 49, 52–53, 88
research 40
reuse 101
rotation 24–25
S
salps 57
samples 55
sand hoppers 66–67
sea anemones 63
sealions 89
seas
Arafura 10
Black 10
Caribbean 10
Mediterranean 10
Red 10
sediment 15, 49
short-tailed 
shearwaters 65, 76
silkworms 81
South Pole 9
strawkling 107
straws 88, 93
T
technofossils 55
tectonic plate 18
temperature
air 23
Earth’s 9, 16, 17
water 26–28
turtles
green 63–64
leatherback 32
V
viruses 14
volcanic eruption 34
W
water cycle 12
condense 12
evaporate 12
vapour 12
whales
humpback 28
southern right 73
wind 23
friction 23
wandering albatross 7
Z
zooplankton 10, 13
120 Oceans of PlasticTracey Gray OCEANS of PLASTIC
UNDERSTANDING AND SOLVING
A POLLUTION PROBLEM
Tracey Gray
PLASTIC
OCEANS
ofPLASTIC
Our oceans are amazing! 
They are filled with wonderful sea creatures and are essential for a healthy planet. 
But it’s now estimated that there are more pieces of plastic in the ocean than visible 
stars in the Milky Way. So how can we stop plastic from our homes and cities from 
ending up floating in oceans far away? By becoming ocean change-makers!
Oceans of Plastic explores how ocean systems and swirling currents bring plastics 
together into massive ocean garbage patches. It also uncovers the floating world 
of the ‘plastisphere’ – a mini community of microbes living on ocean plastics – and 
explains how plastic breaks up, not down, and can even end up on your dinner plate! 
Oceans of Plastic is packed with great ideas and simple changes that you can make 
to help our oceans. Become an ocean change-maker in your home, school or 
community, and inspire others to join you in protecting the future of our oceans.
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Tracey Gray is an aquatic 
scientist and environmental 
science teacher, who provides 
education programs for 
schools and educators. She 
cares deeply about the ocean, 
beaches and living creatures, 
and inspires everyday 
actions to create positive 
environmental change.
publish.csiro.au
CHILDREN’S NON-FICTION
