ON DESIGNiiON DESIGN
THEORY, HISTORY, EDUCATION AND PRACTICE
Tevfik BalcıoğluBLOOMSBURY VISUAL ARTS
Bloomsbury Publishing Plc
50 Bedford Square, London, WC1B 3DP, UK
1385 Broadway, New York, NY 10018, USA
29 Earlsfort Terrace, Dublin 2, Ireland
BLOOMSBURY, BLOOMSBURY VISUAL ARTS and the Diana logo are trademarks of 
Bloomsbury Publishing Plc
First published in Great Britain 2024
Copyright © Tevfik Balcıoğlu, 2024
Tevfik Balcioglu has asserted his right under the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act, 1988, to be 
identified as Author of this work.
For legal purposes the Acknowledgements on p. xviii constitute an extension of this 
copyright page.
Cover design: Louise Dugdale
Cover photograph © Burak Özbek, sculpture by Akın Yıldırım
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by 
any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or any information stor￾age or retrieval system, without prior permission in writing from the publishers.
Bloomsbury Publishing Plc does not have any control over, or responsibility for, any third-party 
websites referred to or in this book. All internet addresses given in this book were correct at the 
time of going to press. The author and publisher regret any inconvenience caused if addresses 
have changed or sites have ceased to exist, but can accept no responsibility for any such changes.
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
A catalog record for this book is available from the Library of Congress.
ISBN: HB: 978-1-3503-5931-4
PB: 978-1-3503-5930-7
ePDF: 978-1-3503-5933-8
eBook: 978-1-3503-5932-1
Typeset by Deanta Global Publishing Services, Chennai, India
To find out more about our authors and books visit www.bloomsbury.com and 
sign up for our newsletters.This book is dedicated to five people who made me who I am today. They are always 
remembered with great love and gratitude: my parents, Naciye and Afif Balcıoğlu, my 
aunt Fahrünnisa, her husband Mustafa Balöz and my other aunt Fatma Moler.viCONTENTS
List of Figures ix
Author xi
Preface xii
Foreword Jonathan M. Woodham xiv
Acknowledgements xviii
Introduction 1
Section One Theory 7
1 Original and reproduction: From corporeal to clone 9
2 In search of principles: We have been told that they died long ago 19
3 Problematic of local and global design identity in newly industrialized 
countries: With special emphasis on Turkey at the end of the twentieth century 33
4 The essential elements: The unity of work and transferability of knowledge 41
5 Research, knowledge and doctorate programmes: Towards the third domain 50
Section Two History 61
6 On transformations of the term design with reference to 
mass-produced objects 65
7 Mapping the mind: Tracing the mentality change 74
8 Observations on the rise of design historiography by the end of the 
twentieth century in the UK: A view from ‘outside in’ with a touch of 
globalization 86
9 Uncharted territories of transnational design history with particular 
reference to Turkey 107Contents
viii
10 Turkish graphic design: From the age of the alphabet revolution to the 
end of the twentieth century 114
11 4T Design and Design History Society: A critical analysis 143
Section Three Education and practice 155
12 Integrated Design Approach (IDeA): Reflections on a new school of 
design building 159
13 PhD, DFA or both: The protection of identity, nature and the potential 
power of differences 174
14 Towards an understanding of professional doctorates 178
15 A threshold where theory and practice congregate fortuitously 184
16 Industrial design in Turkey: A new agenda (rewritten with Aren Emre 
Kurtgözü in 2023) 189
17 Redesigning Turkish cult objects: From traditional to ‘modern’? 200
References 209
Index 219FIGURES
 1 Pagoda House designed by Bruno Taut, situated at the 
Bosphorus in Istanbul 109
 2 Propaganda postcard by İhap Hulusi Görey showing old and 
new marriage ceremonies 115
 3 Atatürk introducing the new Turkish Alphabet with Latin 
script in 1928 116
 4 One of the first editions of the new Turkish Alphabet with 
Latin script by the Language Committee, 1928 117
 5 Advertisement for Bank of Agriculture, designed by İhap Hulusi, 1948 121
 6 Advertisement for Beykoz Shoes, designed by İhap Hulusi 122
 7A–B Photograph of İhap Hulusi drinking rakı (7A), and the label of 
Kulüp Rakısı (7B) 123
 8A–B Photograph showing Atatürk teaching the new alphabet to his 
adopted daughter Ülkü (8A) and the new alphabet book cover 
derived from this photograph (8B), 1935 124
 9 The cover of Edgar Allan Poe’s book, Incredible Stories,
designed by Münif Fehim, 1938 125
10 Münif Fehim’s design: the cover of Amok, a book by Stefan Zweig, 1939 125
11 Münif Fehim’s design: the cover of The Hungry Stones by 
Rabindranth Tagore 126
12 Poster for the play Amadeus, designed by Mengü Ertel, 1983 127
13 An illustration by Mengü Ertel 128
14 Poster for Istanbul Festival by Mengü Ertel, 1973 128
15A–C Logo designs by Mengü Ertel: Logo for a real estate company, 
1984 (15A), the Social Democratic Party, 1984 (15B), and the 
Fair for Affordable Clothing, 1976 (15C) 129
16 Erkal Yavi’s book cover design for Tekin Publications, 1984 129
17 Erkal Yavi’s poster design for Adam Publications, 1990 130
18 Book cover for The Iliad by Homer. Designer: Sait Maden, 1967 131
19 Mengü Ertel’s poster design for Keşanlı Ali Destanı [The Ballad 
of Ali of Keshan], a play by Haldun Taner, 1984 132
20 Sadık Karamustafa’s poster design for the Eight Istanbul Film 
Festival, 1989 132
21 Poster for a play by Philip King, entitled Papaz Kaçtı [How 
They Run], designer: Sadık Karamustafa, 1987 133
22 Sadık Karamustafa’s poster for the Mind the Map, the Third 
International Conference on Design History and Design 
Studies, ICDHS, Istanbul, 2002 134Figures
x
23 Bülent Erkmen’s design for Jan Garbarek’s jazz concert, Istanbul, 1998 134
24 Yurdaer Altıntaş’s Hitchcock poster for Eighteenth Istanbul 
Film Festival, 1999 135
25 Poster for International Prison Watch, designed by Bülent 
Erkmen, 1995 135
26 Bülent Erkmen’s poster for the play Cadılar Zamanı [The Pope 
and the Witch] written by Dario Fo and Franca Rame 136
27 Bülent Erkmen’s poster design for the film Arabesk [Arabesque] 137
28 The sleeve and cover for the book entitled Benim Tek İstediğim 
Bir Kitap Yazmaktı [The Only Thing I Ever Wished was to 
Write a Book] designed by Sadık Karamustafa, 1999 138
29 Back sleeve of the book entitled Benim Tek İstediğim Bir Kitap 
Yazmaktı [The Only Thing I Ever Wished was to Write a Book] 
designed by Sadık Karamustafa, 1999 139
30 Esen Karol’s poster design for Macbeth by William Shakespeare, 
Istanbul, 1999 140
31 Esen Karol’s poster design for an art photography exhibition 
called Sokaklardan [From the Streets] by Şakir Eczacıbaşı, 1996 140
32 Gülizar Çepoğlu’s poster for the exhibition Manuscript, Istanbul, 1994 141
33 Sunday Supplement of Güneş Newspaper, designed by Gülizar 
Çepoğlu, Istanbul, 1990 141
34 Faculty of Fine Arts and Design, the building at the opening 
night, 20 October 2010 167
35 Faculty of Fine Arts and Design building, bridges connecting 
blocks. A view from the courtyard 168
36 Interior of a typical staff room 169
37 Common design studios 170
38 One of the vast areas of indoor open space and large corridors 171
39 An open office and work area for research assistants 172
40A–B Traditional coffee pot (40A), compared with Arzum Cezve 
(40B) designed by Kunter Şekercioğlu in 2005 205
41 Coffee pot made out of glass, designed by Ali Bakova in 2010 205
42 Boiler providing hot water to make tea or coffee in traditional 
public Turkish tea houses 207
43A–E A few examples of Paşabahçe tea glasses. From left to right: 
Aida (43A), Etnik (43B), Heybeli (43C), İncebelli (43D), 
Samanyolu (43E) 207
44A–F Tea glasses (from left to right): Ti Te Chai by Ali Bakova (44A), 
Hisar (two glasses) by Can Yalman (44B), Unnamed by Defne 
Koz (44C), Dervish (saucer and glass) by Faruk Malhan (44D), 
İstanbul by Faruk Malhan (44E) and İncebelli (three glasses) by 
Koray Özgen (44F) 208AUTHOR
Tevfik Balcıoğlu is a Professor of Design who retired in 2022 and lives in Izmir, Turkey. 
He received B. Arch (1976), M. Arch (1981) and PhD (1993) degrees at Middle East 
Technical University; won a British Council research grant and attended the Royal 
College of Art (1988–1990); and taught at Goldsmiths’ College (1991) and Kent Institute 
of Art and Design (1992–2002), where he established the BA (Hons) Three-Dimensional 
Design course as course leader. Returning to Turkey in 2003, he founded the Faculty 
of Fine Arts & Design at Izmir University of Economics. As its Dean (2004–2011), he 
established five departments, two MA courses and a research centre. He was instrumental 
in establishing 4T: Turkish Design History Society, which organised annual conferences 
between 2006–2014. This later became a formal body, 4T: Design & Design History 
Society. He also served as its founding president (2014–2018). After joining Yasar 
University in 2011, he worked as Vice-Rector (2012–2015) and Professor of Design until 
September 2018. Balcıoğlu has organized several international conferences and edited 
many conference proceedings, some with colleagues. These works include ‘The Role 
of Product Design in Post-Industrial Society’, ‘Mind the Gap’, ‘Dancing with Disorder’, 
‘Gender Perspectives in Design’ and ‘Design and Resistance’. He was a board member of 
the European Academy of Design (EAD) and the International Committee for Design 
History and Design Studies (ICDHS) until 2022. He was a design coordinator and 
member of Izmir Mediterranean Academy’s executive board and scientific committee 
(2012–2018) and initiated the ‘Design Corridors’ and ‘Izmir Good Design’ projects.
After buying a 450-year-old Ottoman primary school building in 2005, he restored 
and converted it into ‘Urla Design Library, Faruk Tabak Reading Room’, which is open 
to the public. In 2017, the building received the Izmir Municipality ‘Respect for History 
Local Conservation Award’ in the category of ‘substantial restoration where original 
function altered’.PREFACE
This book includes essays, articles and conference papers delivered in a broad range of 
geographic locations over the years. They can be classified into four main categories: 
design theory, history, education and practice. I find this range of subjects rather 
comprehensive, presenting a fertile ground for generative debate and discussion. 
Encouraged by the diversity of the ideas and subjects presented in these works, I decided 
to publish them in a single volume.
Due to the wide range of topics included, I believe that each chapter can attract 
the interest of different groups of people working in various fields of design. There are 
chapters addressing pedagogical issues that may interest educationists. There are chapters 
concerned with theories that may entice academicians. There are chapters on design 
practice that may draw the attention of designers. Students may find useful information 
in each chapter depending on their area of research and enthusiasm.
The reasons for and the rationale behind this republication are manifold. When I 
decided to bring the papers together, the first question I asked myself was what their 
value and validity in today’s world were. Further questions arose: why are they still 
meaningful despite the contextual differences between their original date of publication 
and today? Are there books of the same nature available in the market?
I selected the papers with these questions in mind and responded to them one by 
one. I realised to my surprise that the arguments and the main ideas discussed are still 
relevant, effective and applicable.
To respond to the second question, we need to look into the characteristics of the 
essays. I would say that articles on history and theory in Sections One and Two are not 
– and probably cannot be – time-dependent because the issues raised and the research 
conducted provide interesting results and valuable information. In Section Three, the 
reproduction of articles on education has a different purpose. Although the debate on the 
practice versus studio-based PhD appears to be over in the UK, I think my observations 
and suggestions may help future discussions and studies when the present situation 
is reviewed. These chapters also provide alternative views that may be of use to many 
countries where practice-based PhD programmes have not yet been launched. In Section 
Three, there is a chapter on integrated design approach that I applied and experienced 
at the Faculty of Fine Arts and Design, Izmir University of Economics, where I was the 
Founding Dean between 2004 and 2011. I value this as a unique experience achieved 
together with seventy-five full-time staff members and about 1,200 students. The lessons 
learned are prototypical and useable by many schools.
To my knowledge the answer to the third question is negative. Therefore, the 
publication justifies itself, for there are few design books written by Turkish researchers Preface
xiii
in English, and there are no collected essays published in the last twenty-five years. What 
I find most interesting is that this book is a record of an academic journey of a designer/
educator who has produced different kinds of work throughout his career. Naturally, the 
attainments of this journey were not always intentional but emerged gradually in line 
with the changing academic and administrative responsibilities and duties.
For this publication, each paper was edited, certain parts updated and some papers 
were subjected to minor amendments and additions except Chapter 16 in Section Three 
which was completely rewritten. Relying on the quality of papers examined in many 
academic circumstances and encouraged by their variety, I concluded that this book may 
make a modest contribution to current global and Turkish design literature and is worth 
publishing at least to record the design knowledge that I have produced or been involved 
in. I hope that my expectations will be realised and that this book will fulfil its mission 
by being beneficial for a broad range of design circles.FOREWORD
Jonathan M. Woodham
I was delighted to be invited to write the foreword for this absorbing collection of 
seventeen talks and essays written by Tevfik Balcıoğlu between 1994 and 2023. Grouped 
in three broad-ranging sections devoted to theory, history, and education and practice, 
they have been delivered to a wide variety of national and international constituencies. 
His audiences typically range from those at the Design History Society’s (DHS) 17th 
Annual Conference in Plymouth, England, in 1995; the European Academy of Design’s 
(EDA) conference in Stockholm, Sweden, in 1997; and the inaugural International 
Conference on Design History and Design Studies (ICDHS) at the University of 
Barcelona in 1999. He subsequently addressed a spectrum of design-focused audiences 
in Aveiro, Guadalajara, Havana, Helsinki, Istanbul, Jerusalem, London, Mexico City, 
Milan, Taipei, Tokyo, São Paolo and elsewhere.
In 1999 Balcıoğlu described himself as ‘a foreigner’ observing from ‘outside in’. This 
notion of difference is a positive and engaging aspect of this book: audiences will find 
much of interest in the various lenses through which Balcıoğlu has chosen to interrogate 
his themes. These include bringing the history and presence of Turkish design to greater 
international prominence, allowing for greater scrutiny of curriculum initiatives in 
Turkish design education, and evaluating aspects of the nature and purpose of research 
in such fields.
The timespan of Balcıoğlu’s texts in this book runs from the late 1980s to the present. 
In addition to the diversity of his research papers delivered in geographically dispersed 
locations, Balcıoğlu’s energy, enthusiasm, and considerable personal involvement in 
developments in British and Turkish design education, theory, practice, and history 
shines through. His wide-ranging agenda – as it began to formulate itself – was initially 
grounded in his direct experience of the Turkish architectural and design education system 
from the 1970s onwards where he successfully navigated his way through undergraduate 
and postgraduate degrees at the Middle East Technical University (METU), Ankara. 
From 1985, at the same institution, Balcıoğlu had also delivered classes in design history 
to industrial design students. This dimension of his work culminated in the award of a 
PhD in historiography in 1993, providing an important stepping-stone to his pivotal role 
in the establishment in 2005 of 4T: Design History Society Turkey which took on a formal 
status in 2014 when he was recognized as the Founding President, playing a key role 
until 2018. 4T annual symposia were established and the proceedings published, several 
of them in full English editions and thus available to audiences worldwide. In the later 
1980s Balcıoğlu was awarded a British Council research grant and attended the Royal 
College of Art, London, before becoming a lecturer at Goldsmith’s College in 1991. Foreword
xv
He then spent a decade (1992–2002) at the Kent Institute of Art and Design (KIAD), a 
Higher Education Institution (HEI) in southern England that had been formed through 
the slightly uncomfortable amalgamation of three previously independent art schools 
in 1987. Balcıoğlu was thus thrown into the cut and thrust of British higher education 
in art and design at a time when there was considerable – often heated – contemporary 
debate about the nature and structure of doctoral education in the field, accompanied by 
the emergence of such awards from the early 1980s onwards. Balcıoğlu’s evaluations of 
the pros and cons of Professional Doctorates, Doctorates in Fine Art or Design, or PhDs 
relating to art and design practices are discussed at some length in this book, especially 
in Section Three. His direct involvement in such debates reflected his role as the PhD 
programme coordinator at KIAD between 1998 and 2002. An important footnote 
relating to his time in British higher education was the fact that the Council for National 
Academic Awards (CNAA) in Britain had been stressing the importance of establishing 
research degrees in art and design in the 1980s, a decade in which Polytechnics1
 and 
Higher Education Institutes prepared for higher level recognition. Polytechnics were 
recognized by government as ‘new’ or ‘modern’ universities in 1992. Consequently, 
for the first time, these institutions became eligible to bid competitively for significant 
government research funding and thus raise the perceived status of research in art and 
design to the highest levels. KIAD went on to become a major constituent element in the 
University of the Creative Arts when it was formed in 2005. During his time in Britain 
Balcıoğlu had also aligned himself with notable voices in contemporary discussions 
of industrial design as, for example, in the conference he organized at the Courtauld 
Institute of Art, London, in 1995, at which his invited speakers included Ezio Manzini, 
Dieter Rams, John Heskett and Victor Margolin.
In Chapter 8 in Section Three, ‘Observations on the rise of design historiography 
by the end of the twentieth century in the UK’, Balcıoğlu recounts that as a ‘foreigner’ 
he ‘had an opportunity to look closely into the rise of design history in the UK’ and 
he had identified several possible shortcomings. He gave the chapter a subtitle: ‘A view 
from “outside in” with a touch of globalization’. Whether or not Balcıoğlu was correct 
or not is open to question: but what was important was the realization that, by the turn 
of the century, a more global critique of design history was ‘in the ether’. Balcıoğlu’s 
‘Observations on the rise of design historiography’ were presented at the inaugural 
ICDHS conference convened by Anna Calvera and colleagues at the University of 
Barcelona in 1999, an event that event presented something of a challenge to a still 
maturing academic discipline that was increasingly viewed in many quarters as an 
Anglophone and Western-dominated field of study – academically, museologically, 
and in terms of publishing visibility. Most delegates at the Barcelona conference were 
1
In the 1960s and 1970s, many previously independent schools of art and design were aligned with colleges 
of technology and colleges of education to form larger, vocationally inclined institutions, the polytechnics. A 
notable exception to this was the Royal College of Art, London, which received a Royal Charter and university 
status in 1967.Foreword
xvi
from Spain and the Spanish-speaking world. This provided a golden opportunity to 
consider an alternative framework for design history and design studies: the inclusivity 
of an outlook that foregrounded the many Spanish-speaking countries of the South 
American continent and elsewhere. Accordingly, a follow-up conference was held in 
Havana, Cuba, in 2000 and was organized by Lucila Fernandez, a Cuban historian, with 
Anna Calvera. Balcıoğlu, who had attended and spoken at both events, was persuaded 
by Fernandez and Calvera to organize the 3rd ICDHS conference in 2002 in Istanbul. 
This was another venue that would prove attractive to new audiences and thereby have 
the potential to act as a further stimulus for extending the world map of the history of 
design and design studies. To effect this Balcıoğlu contacted Professor Nigân Bayazıt, 
Head of Industrial Design at İstanbul Technical University (ITU) who proved willing to 
support the proposed conference through the provision of facilities and accommodation. 
Balcioglu also successfully persuaded his then employers, KIAD, to provide financial 
underpinning for a joint venture with ITU. In addition to taking on the demanding 
role of organizer and coordinator of a complex event, he conceived the rather catchy 
title of the Istanbul conference, ‘Mind the Map: Design History beyond Borders’, and 
designed the distinctive conference logo and related ephemera. This major event not only 
attracted design studies professionals and design historians from Turkey but also from 
many other countries where networking possibilities were limited and research funding 
relatively scarce. In passing, it is worth noting that several Turkish design students who 
had assisted in organizing and assisting delegates at this ‘Mind the Map’ conference went 
on to study for doctorates and subsequently became design academics.
In the following year, 2003, Balcıoğlu returned to Turkey, becoming the founding 
Dean of the Faculty of Fine Arts and Design at Izmir University of Economics (2004–
2011). Something of the ideas shaped there are considered in Chapter 12 in Section Three 
‘Integrated Design Approach (IDeA): Reflections on a new school of design building’. 
He later moved on to Yasar University, Izmir, as Vice-Rector (2012–2015). Balcıoğlu’s 
insights into Turkish design practices and the country’s national industrial design profile 
are particularly valuable for assisting readers to understand the wider national and 
international context of such concerns, as in Chapter 3 in Section One ‘Problematic of 
local and global identity in newly industrialised countries’; also, in a considerably updated 
(2023) co-authored paper in Chapter 16 in Section Three ‘Industrial design in Turkey: A 
new agenda’. The latter concludes with what amounted to a structured manifesto for future 
action. In these ways On Design contributes to our understanding of the characteristics 
of doctoral research in art and design as contested nationally and internationally in the 
closing decades of the last century. These early debates, represented in several chapters 
in this book, have moved on incrementally through the passage of time with increasing 
levels of sophistication and complexity, as can be observed in the activities of several 
significant design organizations. These include the European Academy of Design (EAD) 
with which Balcıoğlu has been closely associated from 1997 to the present day, serving 
as a member of its Scientific Committee. The EAD held its first conference on doctoral 
research in design in 1998 and, twenty-five years later in 2023, is mounting a further 
such conference entitled ‘What Got Us Here Won’t Get Us There’.Foreword
xvii
This book highlights key elements of the history of Turkish design explored in 
Balcıoğlu’s writings, conference papers, publications, and the activities of the 4T: Design 
History Society Turkey. He nurtured the latter in its early stages of development through 
to its emergence as a higher profile organization complete with volumes of proceedings 
with titles such as Design in Times of Turmoil and Design and Resistance. As a result of 
Balcıoğlu’s constant interventions in his role as activist, communicator and historian, 
Turkish design is now far more widely recognized internationally and our understanding 
of the country’s design education much enhanced.
Brighton, England, June 2023ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This book represents research and works developed over the years. Therefore, I would 
like to thank a number of friends, relatives and colleagues who have encouraged and 
supported me during all those years. Some of them have made significant contributions 
to certain articles, and I express my gratitude to them in the acknowledgements at the 
end of the relevant chapters.
However, some names have never appeared anywhere despite their direct or indirect 
encouragement. In particular, Bernard Holdaway, Head of School, Rochester College 
employed me as a course leader and principal lecturer, and was always beside me 
with brilliant ideas and advice when necessary. A few academicians have inspired me 
throughout my career. I was lucky to meet them and appreciate their lovely friendship. 
The late Necdet Teymur, John Heskett, Anna Calvera and Victor Margolin are Four 
unforgettable figures of whom I always have wonderful memories. Great friends of mine 
that I feel very close to include Sevil Peach Gence, Gary Turnbull, Claudia Wegener, 
Emel Teymur, Gülsüm Baydar, Behiç Ak, Ali Artun, Defne Koz, Önder Biçer, Manuela 
Antoniu, John and Alma Wood, Jonathan Woodham, Helena Barbosa, Pekka Korvenmaa, 
Oscar Salinas, Priscila Farias, Clive Dilnot, Paul Atkinson, Rachel Cooper, Haruhiko 
Fujita, Irini Pitsaki and Marinella Ferrara. I am much obliged to these friends for their 
contributions to my work by means of insightful questions, remarks and comments.
I was fortunate to study and work with wonderful people and colleagues during my 
educational and administrative experience in Turkey. They have always inspired and 
motivated me. I would like to thank those who have touched my academic life, enriched 
it and made it pleasant and enjoyable.
I am deeply indebted to Sinan Niyazioğlu, Ömer Durmaz, Emre Yıldız, Gülsevil 
Ağca and Ece Helvacıoğlu for providing me with valuable sources, archival materials 
and images. I have also continuously felt the dear support of Fahri, Tuba and Faruk 
Öner, Begüm and Gökhan Kılıç, Çiğdem Beyaz, Ceren Aslan, Sevilay Emiroğlu and my 
close relatives, especially Ekin, Hale, Batu and Melih Balcıoğlu. My brother Melih has 
constantly been around and helped me generously without hesitation and always with 
love; likewise, my son Batu, whose existence is the joy of my life.INTRODUCTION
Metaphorically speaking, I consider each book an unknown box containing its own 
mystery. You never know what you will encounter until you open the cover and begin 
to read, turning the pages to discover what it offers. I will tell you straight away that this 
volume has three sections, consisting of my published articles, conference papers and 
essays on design theory, history, education and practice. It is a retrospective collection 
in which each chapter considers a different aspect of design and tries to provide a new 
vision, knowledge or interpretation, which I believe are all still valid today. One should 
not look for unity in this book but rather a compilation, variety and diversity of design 
studies. Each of them, I hope, has merit and provides a fresh spectrum of ideas.
Perhaps the first interesting feature of the book is that I come from Turkey, where 
I studied design and worked in higher education. Despite growing up in a different 
culture, I am trying to write on design issues that are mostly questions posed in the 
West, or at least they often appeared first in the West before spreading to a wider global 
public. Although I have no particular intention to reflect my background in my writing, 
this notion of how East sees West is something that the reader should keep in mind 
throughout the book while evaluating its rationality and legitimacy.
A second interesting feature is the inclusion of chapters specific to Turkish design. 
This demonstrates the penetration of design into a country facing many dilemmas, such 
as between new industry and old craft, traditional and modern, secularity and orthodoxy, 
or progressive and conservative people. These coexist with tensions and conflicts in 
many situations. I have therefore integrated chapters and cases concerning Turkey into 
the book to provide an example for other developing or newly industrialized nations.
The book is composed of three sections, namely, theory, history and education and 
practice. Each section has its own introduction written not for the purpose of explaining 
the structure but to place the papers into a context since they were published in different 
years and not necessarily connected to each other. While a general introduction is 
provided here, the introduction of each section is designed to elevate the discussion to 
another level with contemporary arguments and references.
The first section of the book focuses on theoretical studies. Chapter 1 explores 
reproduction, an essential characteristic of industrial design objects and mass production. 
The relationship between the original, replicas and reproductions is examined in depth, 
with special reference to cloning as the latest reproduction technique of the late twentieth 
century.
Objects do change. As we all know, their quantity, quality and variety have been 
increased and enhanced with enormously accelerating speed since the Industrial 
Revolution. Objects also have characteristics, which I categorize in terms of their 
connotative and denotative values, their position as active, semi-active and passive, On Design
2
and according to their tasks as single or multi-functional products. Ultimately, these 
characteristics are affected when objects are subjected to technological transformation 
and objects progress in certain directions. For example, the original toothbrush 
was a passive object requiring human energy to function. However, after the electric 
toothbrush was invented, it became a semi-active object requiring less human effort to 
function, thereby evolving from passive to semi-active status. Chapter 2 studies these 
shifts and attempts to portray the natural evolution of products.
Because industrialization puts pressure on traditional manufacturing systems and 
replaces them in many cases, it threatens local crafts. In addition, it also generates a 
design identity problem. Designers of developing countries must come to terms with 
industrialization, put their signature under new products that they designed and take 
responsibility for the emergence of new methods, systems, shapes, forms, styles and, 
thereby, new design identities. Chapter 3 looks into globalization and its impact on 
design in newly industrialized countries with a special focus on Turkey.
Chapter 4 analyses the problematic relationship between theory and practice, 
which surfaced when advanced degree programmes, such as practice-based PhDs, 
first appeared in the UK. The main question is how these art and design practices can 
contribute to knowledge, which is the essence of any PhD programme. Therefore, the 
key goal of the chapter is to explain how art and design practices do in fact produce 
knowledge during a systematic study period and demonstrate how they can make this 
knowledge transferable and available to the community.
Chapter 5 interrogates the nature of design knowledge. This epistemological 
investigation goes into the core of art and design practice as they operate at the doctorate 
level in university departments. The debate is moulded around the following questions: 
to what extent do design thinking and production processes, and hence the knowledge 
created, differ from the knowledge derived from art and science? Does this level of 
knowledge production exalt design and endow it with a special territory of knowledge to 
form a third domain alongside art and science?
The second section of the book considers design history. Each of its six chapters focuses 
on a specific subject related to history and historiography. In terms of their ordering, the 
chapters move from general concepts like the formation and transformation of the term 
‘design’ towards specific subjects like the 4T Design and Design History Society in Turkey.
Chapter 6 begins with the story of the term ‘design’ in the UK and its transformation 
over the centuries. The meaning of design has always been an intriguing matter for 
researchers wishing to uncover the past, understand the present and perhaps to make 
suggestions for the future. Design is heavily dependent on scientific, technological, 
social and economic developments, while its content, meaning and direction change 
and expand rapidly in line as these factors alter. As a result, design is subject to various 
definitions depending on these factors as well as the aims and objectives of each 
design area, industry, business, sector and so on. Therefore, tracing the transformation 
of design is a good start to comprehending its contemporary meaning, position and 
status. Although the term has its own Latin and Italian origins and different histories 
in each country and language, as an English word, ‘design’ has suppressed other similar Introduction
3
expressions, dominated the field and became widely accepted and used globally. This 
chapter reveals how it rose in the UK in parallel with the Industrial Revolution. It also 
explains why the French word ‘dessin’ caused misunderstandings in the UK and triggered 
the invention of several other expressions, especially in the nineteenth century.
Chapter 7, ‘Mapping the mind: Tracing the mentality change’, proposes a peculiar 
but perhaps very stimulating way of looking into history. It suggests that researchers 
should identify a renowned design personality, study their works and trace how their 
mind has changed regarding a specific subject. The method involves closely analysing 
various works, especially by examining different editions of the design personality’s 
books to identify what kinds of amendments they made. This enables various questions 
to be answered: what are the reasons for different ways of thinking? Why did their 
ideas change at that particular point in time? How many times did they modify, alter 
or improve their ideas? This method is widely used today by the media, especially by 
politicians. Journalists are good at digging into files, finding previously published or 
televised statements and comparing them with what politicians now say to demonstrate 
contradictions or inconsistencies. Similarly, tracing mentality changes in design could 
provide a novel view of how ideas mature.
Chapter 8 shows the expansion of design historiography in the UK, which is 
undoubtedly one of the leading countries on this subject. The abundance of quality 
British design sources is well known. However, as an ‘outsider’, I present a different 
account of history writing and the conditions encouraging the intensification of design 
literature in the UK. It is rather interesting to observe that this literature has extended 
far beyond the UK’s borders, leading to great books on design in many countries, 
including Germany, Italy, Spain and Japan. Scholars in the UK have thus played a major 
role in spreading design interest and knowledge worldwide and hence are instrumental 
in the globalization of design. This obviously raises the question of patronization and 
other critical issues as well as initiatives to democratise design, in which the role of UK 
academics should not be underestimated.
Currently, there is increasing interest in questioning national histories. One reason is 
the pressure that globalization puts on nation-states as territorially bounded sovereign 
polities and huge institutional formations formed just a few centuries ago. In fact, all 
the earth’s borders have either been artificially drawn or imposed by wars and mutual 
agreements. The flow of designs, designers and design ideas naturally extend beyond 
these borders, so every substantial historiography has to take these dynamics into 
consideration. Regardless of their writers’ own values, neither pure national histories 
nor comparative studies can provide a sufficiently broad perspective. Accordingly, 
Chapter 9 explores the concept of transnational design history through an example from 
Turkey of a well-known German architect, Bruno Taut, who worked in Japan in the 
1930s, later came to Turkey, designed several important buildings and died in Istanbul 
in 1938.
Chapter 10 considers graphic design in Turkey. After the establishment of the Republic 
in 1923, numerous radical reforms were implemented, such as replacing the Arabic 
script with the Western alphabet. Building the new nation required powerful devices for On Design
4
education, propaganda posters, advertising and packaging, for which graphic design was 
an obvious and inevitable vehicle. Turkish designers, whether educated in the West or in 
schools influenced by modernism, created a new graphic design panorama. This chapter 
analyses it and categorizes the works produced in terms of their design characteristics.
Chapter 11 offers a brief history of 4T Design and Design History Society, Turkey, 
which is one of a few design history institutions organizing international conferences 
and symposia to disseminate design knowledge and encourage young researchers 
around the world. While this kind of mission was successfully pioneered by the Design 
History Society (DHS) UK, 4T closely follows its aims and objectives. The inclusion 
of a short history of 4T in this book could set a precedent for recently industrialized 
countries considering its role as an international player and the number of proceedings 
that it has published. This neither means that 4T is exclusive nor that it is problem-free, 
as it has experienced its own ups and downs due to Turkey’s fluctuating circumstances. 
Therefore, this chapter provides a critical account of 4T by analysing both its successes 
and failures, and pros and cons.
The chapters in the third section of the book focus on education and design practice. 
Integrated design approach (IDeA), the topic of Chapter 12, is a method that I developed 
and applied with colleagues in the Faculty of Fine Arts and Design at Izmir University of 
Economics, where I served as founding Dean for over seven years. The method requires 
close collaboration between all design disciplines, common lessons, joint projects, 
shared studios, offices, tutors and programmes. They must all work in harmony within 
purpose-built premises that allocates each student year group to the same story of the 
building and where staff members are mixed without departmental territories. However, 
this integrative approach only works with dedicated academic members who believe in it 
and work together in total agreement. The chapter describes the system applied but does 
not reveal much about the contradictions, internal tensions and other problems which 
may well be the subject of another article in the future.
The following three chapters, Chapters 13, 14 and 15, discuss various aspects of 
practice-based PhD programmes, which were the subject of one of the most important 
academic disputes in the UK at the turn of the twenty-first century. The key dimensions 
of this debate concern the nature of knowledge produced in art and design practices, the 
determination of what title to bestow on students who complete the programmes and 
the relationship between practice and theory.
The penultimate chapter, Chapter 16, provides a list of suggestions for action to 
develop industrial design in Turkey. The table indicates sensitive areas of design, 
identifies problems, makes suggestions and shows potential actors. I used a similar table 
but with fewer items almost 25 years ago for the same purpose, which was published 
in the catalogue of Turkey’s second biggest design exhibition, Designers’ Odyssey 98. 
Revisiting the article and expanding it in accordance with contemporary needs brings 
a fresh look to the design scene. It is surprising to see how many issues have not been 
resolved yet and how many new matters have emerged. This inevitably triggers the idea 
of comparing the two works, which could provide a research topic for a curious reader 
in the future.Introduction
5
The final chapter, Chapter 17, explores how Turkish design has transitioned from 
traditional to modern in terms of cult objects, some of which have been redesigned by 
renowned designers. As mentioned before, design creates an identity problem for newly 
industrialized countries where many traditional objects are exposed to new substances, 
shapes and forms thanks to innovations in technology, materials and recent production 
techniques and methods, such as robots, CNC machines and laser cutters. The tensions 
between old and new, and the desire of designers to reinterpret cult objects, are perfectly 
understandable. Nevertheless, the chapter critically scrutinizes the directions that 
designers have taken, their sources of inspiration and how they are using heritage and 
tradition.
A legitimate question to ask is what this book aims to achieve. I think the answer is 
simple and clear: an analysis of various design aspects that first appeared in the West 
before being reflected overtly or covertly in the East. I hope that the diversity of articles 
in the book is not a hurdle but an opportunity to address the expectations of various 
readers with different backgrounds and interests.6SECTION ONE
THEORY
This section has five theoretical chapters related to specific aspects of design. They 
are independent of each other and attempt to develop theoretical ideas for better 
comprehension of the design world. This naturally raises the question of what theory 
is in design. As the first well-established design discipline, architecture provides initial 
theoretical writings dating back to Vitruvius in ancient times (Kruft, 1994). Various 
individuals became influential in different historical periods, notably Leone Battista 
Alberti in the Renaissance, Marc-Antoine Laugier, Giovanni Battista Piranesi and Robert 
Adam in the Enlightenment, and Augustus Pugin and John Ruskin in the nineteenth 
century (Pevsner, 1936, 1937).
What I have observed is that ‘other’ design theories gradually emerged in line with the 
surfacing of ‘other’ design fields after the Industrial Revolution in the UK. Theoretical 
architecture continued to develop thanks to Eugène Viollet-le-Duc, Gottfried Semper, 
Adolf Loos, Frank Lloyd Wright, Le Corbusier and so on, while industrial design 
thinking developed with the works of Henry Cole, Walter Crane and particularly William 
Morris (Naylor, 1971). Naturally, their theoretical writings were based on and related 
to consumer goods, crafts and mass-produced objects in general. At the beginning of 
the twentieth century, Hermann Muthesius and the Deutscher Werkbund, William 
Lethaby and the Design and Industries Association, and Walter Gropius and Bauhaus all 
contributed to theory strictly related to industry and its relationship with art and design 
(Naylor, 1985; Woodham, 1997).
What I argue is that the rise of design theory next to architectural theory also marks 
the beginning of other design theories. Around the mid-1930s, terms like applied art 
and industrial art were abandoned in favour of industrial design, which initially covered 
a vast area of various production fields, including tableware, electrical appliances, 
furniture, vehicles and so on. It was, in a way, an umbrella term embracing all mass￾produced things, defining the territory and giving comfort to those who call themselves 
industrial designers. In the beginning, it was a satisfactory expression for all. However, 
after the Second World War, specialization and new design practices bourgeoned in a 
way that made industrial design an inadequate term to cover new emerging subjects, 
such as graphic design, product design, boat design, interior design, engineering design, 
visual communication design, experience design and service design. Consequently, 
these fields have gained their own territories and have become increasingly well-defined, 
established and theorized. Industrial design gradually became less accommodating and 
was replaced by design as the term covering all related areas.
It is easy to follow this transformation by looking into the changing names of design 
associations. For example, the Council of Industrial Design was founded in 1944, but On Design
8
the word ‘industrial’ was dropped from its title in 1972, when it became the Design 
Council. In 2010, the Design Council absorbed the Commission for Architecture and 
the Built Environment (CABE) (Design Council, 2022), which made it explicit that even 
architecture was now considered part of design.
Another example is the changing name of the International Council of Societies of 
Industrial Design (ICSID), which was established in 1957. In 2017, it was renamed the 
World Design Organization. Clearly, ‘design’ has become the only word that everybody 
agrees has unifying power for every creative and innovative production activity.
In this respect, two options can be considered regarding theory in design. Either 
there is a grand theory that explains almost everything concerning design or theories are 
specific to each design field. Is there a grand design theory that we subscribe to today? 
If there is, can we say that it explains almost everything? Is there such a thing in design? 
Probably not. And, even if it exists, what is a grand theory in design anyway?
The concept of grand theory was coined by American sociologist C. Wright Mills 
in reference to Talcott Parson’s work, which he found so general that it was useless. An 
analogy with design may not be completely appropriate. Nevertheless, if we borrow 
the term and look into history, we can say that major styles and movements may be 
considered in this category, such as Gothic, Baroque, Rococo, Arts and Crafts, Futurism, 
Art Nouveau and Art Deco. During the twentieth century, we have experienced 
Modernism, Postmodernism, Structuralism and Deconstructivism among others. Thus, 
today’s design world apparently has no single dominating grand design theory but many 
proliferating ideas operating simultaneously. These theories are based on semantics, 
environmentally friendly approaches, human-centred design, user experience, recycling 
and other factors.
During the 1960s, design research was an important issue in the search for a scientific 
method. Herbert Simon’s book, The Science of Design (1998), was very enlightening as 
well as expanding the territory of design into everything. Since ‘everything is design’ 
(borrowing the title of Paul Rand’s 2015 exhibition at the Museum City of New 
York) theories of design appear to be the deux ex machina for many fields thanks to 
‘design thinking’ that became popular in recent years. Design thinking comprises five 
fundamental stages (empathise, define, ideate, prototype and test). It is now used by 
businesses and recommended for everybody, not just designers. A comprehensive list of 
theories and models of design is available today. It shows us the wide variety of design 
theories we encounter (Chakrabarti, 2015; Rodgers, 2021).
The chapters in this theoretical section draw on this background to investigate 
various aspects of design, particularly theoretical topics that are considered less often. 
Chapter 1 questions the relationship between the original and its copies, which is an 
issue in multiple production. Chapter 2 tries to identify a general pattern or direction in 
the development of products. Using Turkey as an example, Chapter 3 focuses on local 
design identity in relation to globalization. Chapter 4 considers transferable knowledge 
and the relationship between theory and practice in education. Chapter 5 examines the 
nature of research in design and questions how it differs from scientific and artistic ways 
of producing knowledge.CHAPTER 1
ORIGINAL AND REPRODUCTION
FROM CORPOREAL TO CLONE
This chapter is based on a paper delivered at the 17th Annual Conference for the Design History 
Society, 15–17 December 1995, University of Plymouth, UK.
There are many phrases in English to describe production: repetitive production, 
multiple production, quantity production, volume production, mass production, serial 
production, batch production, flexible production, electronic production and so on. 
These names are based on the outcome and technology employed or coined in terms of 
how the production was organized and managed.
1.1 Reproduction
This chapter investigates the reproduction process from the viewpoint of industrial design 
to develop a coherent perspective. It also identifies the distinct stages of reproduction 
historically. Here, it is useful to distinguish between production and reproduction.
Production refers to a wide range of fields of activity, from agriculture to 
manufacturing. In this chapter, reproduction is used specifically for objects, implying 
that there is an original, a product or a thing to be reproduced, while also referring 
to the processes dealing with re-creating and re-making. The concept of reproduction 
entails that something already exists or has been produced, such that the issue is its 
re-production. This interpretation of the concept forms the backbone of my principal 
argument. If reproduction is accepted as an umbrella term, one can fit many versions 
or variations beneath it: copies, replicas, fakes, counterfeits, duplicates, facsimiles, 
imitations, simulations, clones, models, prints, photocopies and so on. Each has its own 
characteristics, function and relationship with the original. In this chapter, I prefer to 
ignore them in favour of surveying the relationship between original and reproduction 
within the context of industrial design specifically. The reproduction of two-dimensional 
works is also beyond the scope of this chapter.
1.2 The original
The key to the analysis, however, is the concept of ‘original’, which is crucial both for 
thinking about and producing designed objects. The attributes of reproduction with 
respect to the original were studied first by Walter Benjamin ([1936] 1977), who, On Design
10
according to Jean Baudrillard, ‘showed that reproduction absorbs the process of 
production, alters its goals, the status of its product, and the producer. He [Benjamin] 
established this on the terrain of art, cinema, and photography’ (Baudrillard, 1988: 138).
In order to investigate reproduction systems, I apply a method inspired by Benjamin 
and based on the concept of ‘original’. Two meanings of the word ‘original’ will be the 
subject of our inquiry. The first is the use of original in the discourse of reproduction, 
while the second refers to the original as an object of design or work of art.
1.2.1 Original in the discourse of reproduction
Any work to be produced in quantity requires a reproduction system. Any work to 
be produced in quantity is an ‘original’. A reproduction system requires an ‘original’, 
for an original is the initiator of reproduction. Without an ‘original’, there cannot be 
a reproduction. Reproduction is thus the production of a ‘thing’ that has already been 
produced. Hypothetically, anything that has already been produced can be reproduced. 
By the same token, as an initiator of reproduction, an original can be anything.
The outcome of reproduction varies according to the technique employed, as the end 
product can be copies, replicas, imitations, prints, counterfeits, simulations and so on. 
The initiator is called the ‘original’ simply because the end products originate from the 
original. In other words, the reproduction process attributes the status of original to 
anything from which copies are derived. What makes it original is the existence of its 
copies, duplicates, multiples and so on.
1.2.2 Original and uniqueness
The second meaning of the original refers to its status, which has a relationship with 
‘uniqueness’. An original can be a work that is unmatched and not identical to any other 
similar thing in its category or nature. This could be an ‘original’ created by people – 
most likely an artist, architect, a designer or a craftsperson. In this sense, a sculpture, 
painting or design is an original and a unique piece of work.
What makes it unique is the nonexistence of its copies, duplicates and multiples. Yet, 
paradoxically, what makes it original is the existence of its copies, replicas, duplicates, 
counterfeits and so on. We call it the original when we know that there are copies and to 
differentiate it from its copies. Hence, an object is unique unless a similar one is unveiled, 
discovered or disclosed.
The uniqueness prevails in the absence of the other. The presence of the other 
jeopardizes, invalidates and eliminates its uniqueness. The uniqueness then bids for the 
state of ‘original’ when a ground for commensurability and comparison is established 
by the existence of the other. The other evokes the question: Which one is the original? 
Therefore, once an object is known as unique, it ceases to be unique and can only be 
original when its copy is found. Ironically, the ‘copy’ discovered might well be the 
original. In this case, the object known as unique not only loses its status of uniqueness 
but also the chance of being original.Original and Reproduction
11
The motivation for differentiating the original from its copies stems from the belief 
that originals are more valuable than reproductions. As Lewis Mumford puts it: ‘Though 
here, as in many other places, I shall be grateful for the mechanical reproduction, I shall 
never deceive myself by fancying that it is more than a hint and promise of the original 
work’1
 (Mumford, 1960: 108). Throughout the text, the word ‘original’ will be used in 
both senses, as an initiator of reproduction and as a work of art or design. To understand 
the position of the original in the production process, a framework for the analysis is 
needed. The criteria for this are explained below.
1.3 The criteria
Two criteria are used to reveal differences between reproduction systems with respect to 
industrial design.
1.3.1 The first criterion: Involvement of the original in the 
reproduction process
The prime concern of the analysis is to figure out how the original is involved in the 
reproduction process. Theoretically, this means to question the function of the original 
with respect to the reproduction process. The way in which the original activates and 
contributes to reproduction is directly related to the nature of the original. It is therefore 
the principal criterion for classifying reproduction systems.
1.3.2 The second criterion: The relationship between the original 
and its reproductions
The second criterion concerns the relationship between the original and its 
reproductions. The degree of resemblance and identicalness is the battleground where 
reproductions challenge the original. The closer reproductions are to the original, the 
more one questions the role, position, status and form of the original. The quality of 
technique is also tested in terms of the degree of resemblance between the original and 
the reproduction. Reviewing reproduction systems with these two criteria suggests four 
distinctive historical stages: repetitive production, multiple production, mass production 
and electronic production.
1.4 Repetitive production
Historically, the Stone Age is the earliest period when simple tools and techniques 
were employed. Its products include stone implements, bone needles, handmade clay 
1
I find a strong influence of Benjamin’s article in this work. The way Mumford uses the word ‘reproduction’ and 
the way he describes the invention of print directly recall Benjamin’s work.On Design
12
objects, early glass pieces, hand-woven fabrics and carpets. A master with appropriate 
knowledge, experience, skill and possession of or access to the means of production, 
materials and tools can make similar objects. Each is made individually by repeating 
the whole process again and again. Thus, independent repetition forms part of the 
production process whereby all activities for creating an object are repeated from the 
original or another copy. Repetition happens in every reproduction and is a necessary 
factor. What is interesting here, is the detachment of each unit from others and from the 
one that inspired imitation or copying. To depict this particularity, I call this first period 
of reproduction ‘repetitive production’.
1.4.1 Involvement of the original
Applying the first criterion, we see that the original has no active role in the reproduction 
process. Its physical entity is not involved in the production at all. Yet, knowledge about 
or of the original is utilized. Knowledge of similar objects and the prefiguration of what 
the final reproduction should be are essential theoretical elements derived from the 
original. Knowledge of the object is thus an inseparable part of production. However, it 
is not the real, actual object but its image, represented by a model, a plan or a scheme, 
that participates in reproduction.
Prefiguration is the advance comprehension of the final form in the maker’s mind 
through invoking memory or studying the original. Memory is the accumulation of past 
experiences, while the original is the real thing facing the maker. The original may stand 
before the master or apprentice to be observed and, if necessary, measured, imitated 
or copied.2
 The function, form, pattern, texture and colour of the original remain 
a source of inspiration or imitation. For instance, a Palaeolithic scraper made by the 
Levallois technique is undoubtedly a designed object and certainly carved on the basis 
of prefiguration, accumulated knowledge, experience and talent (Childe, [1942] 1964; 
Cipolla, 1979). One can assume that the Palaeolithic craftsperson had an image of the 
final form in mind, and probably an example in front of him, before starting the act 
of cutting, scraping or carving. Obviously, since the technique applied is not sufficient 
for perfect duplication of the original tool and the material property of every stone is 
different, each piece can be similar but not exactly identical. A potter, on the other hand, 
can achieve a higher degree of resemblance to the original and make copies of it rather 
easily because of the elasticity of the material and the consistent power provided by the 
turntable.
2
‘Imitation’ and ‘copying’ are terms to pinpoint the spectrum of resemblance. Of course, one may propose 
using ‘duplication’ and ‘replica’ as well. Since in these terms, respectively, the exaltation of the original and the 
denigration of copies is visible, it seems that they should not accompany the term ‘reproduction’.Original and Reproduction
13
1.4.2 The original and its reproductions
The second criterion enables us to compare the end product with the original. 
Ultimately, many similar objects are made as derivations of and deviations from the 
original. Variations in the degree of resemblance of the objects depend on the techniques 
mobilized and display a historical trajectory of evolution in conjunction with the 
development of social formations.
Each product is different from others to different extents. Similarity is the common 
feature. The level of resemblance changes with the skill of labour, the source and quality 
of materials and conditions. In other words, no objects are entirely identical, neither 
to each other nor to the original. This situation may create a dilemma: Is every single 
work produced through repetitive production an original, for they are not identical 
and made separately? It is neither easy nor straightforward to answer this. For instance, 
can we say that a Roman sculpture is an original until we discover that it is actually 
a copy of a Greek work? What seems not new is the idea, form and composition of 
figures. However, the material, technique, artistic skill and interpretation are perfectly 
Roman.
1.5 Multiple production
The second stage in the historical development of reproduction techniques goes back 
to antiquity. In this period, we come across the discovery of moulds and mould￾related techniques like stamping and casting. In addition, there is extensive use of 
new materials like metals and, later on, the emergence of auxiliary equipment, such 
as templates. Clay, glass and metal are the materials used in moulds. While probably 
not the earliest examples, Greek red and black figure vases, the famous Arretine vases 
and the minted coinage of the Macedonians are certainly some of the best examples of 
their kind.
1.5.1 Involvement of the original
In contrast to repetitive production, here we witness the direct participation of the 
original in the production process because moulds require an original. The original 
may also be in the form of a prototype or a one-to-one scale model around which 
the whole production process revolves. Moulds, which are of a reverse form to the 
prospective product, are shaped in several ways, such as carving and casting, by using 
guides or samples. In an extreme case, a maker prepares a mould without an original 
and actually makes an original in the form of a mould. Hence, the mould itself could 
be an original actively participating in production through both its physical entity and 
information.
Moulds and their relationship with reproductions have an interesting dimension in 
that moulds themselves are also reproduced after reaching the end of their life span. On Design
14
There is thus an anachronistic repetition of two cycles of reproduction: the first is 
concerned with the duration of reproduction for each item, while the second relates to 
the duration of renovation for each mould. Since a mould can cast many objects, the 
frequency of repetition for moulds is low. Therefore, these two cycles of production are 
completed in different time periods. This non-parallel rotation of each cycle is termed 
anachronistic repetition.
1.5.2 The original and its reproductions
Regarding the resemblance between the original and reproductions, the similarity is so 
close that one can consider them the same. As opposed to ‘similarity’ in the previous 
phase, ‘sameness’ here refers to a very strong resemblance.3
 There are two aspects of 
sameness.
The first is the sameness of each single item produced. In other words, we can 
question to what extent they look like each other. We know that moulds are subject 
to deformations, deflections and fatigue due to their intensive use, which may create 
differences between products, even if minute. Ultimately, therefore, each item may 
possess a barely discernible difference, which sometimes provides objects with particular 
characteristics and value. This is the case with textile products like carpets and kilims. In 
other words, accidental differences may increase or decrease the value of certain items.
The second aspect is the degree of sameness between the original and the 
reproductions. Obviously, the above argument is also perfectly valid for the relationship 
between the original and reproductions. One substantial distinction is that reproductions 
are checked and tested against the original, which constitutes the basis of comparison. 
The quality control process takes the original as the reference and monitors production 
accordingly. Success is proportional to the degree of resemblance.
This reproduction process includes a multiplier, namely the mould itself, which gives 
its form to and leaves traces on the reproduced objects. Given this role, this phase is 
called multiple production. Multiple production involves the use of moulds, templates, 
stamps and so on, which determine the final form of the object and are the fundamental 
elements in the production process.
As one might expect, multiple production raises the quality of products and labour 
productivity through the use of moulds. In multiple production, a copy may well 
overshadow the so-called ‘original’. An ideal example is Josiah Wedgwood’s attempts to 
make a copy of the Portland Vase, a Roman cameo glass. According to Adrian Forty: ‘The 
point of the reproductions was not just that they were as good as the original, but that 
they demonstrated the sophistication of contemporary manufacturing techniques better 
than any new and original designs could have done’ (1986: 16). It is obviously a matter 
3
There are three levels of resemblance, each of which points to the different modes of reproduction. These 
levels are indicated by three concepts, namely similarity, sameness and identicalness. In this particular context, 
‘sameness’ refers to a certain degree of resemblance between ‘similarity’ and ‘identicalness’.Original and Reproduction
15
of discussion whether Wedgwood’s version is more valuable than the Roman Portland 
Vase. The reason why an original can sometimes be challenged by its copy is that value 
judgements are involved in the evaluation. These concern both age and historical value. 
In this case, value attribution mechanisms play a significant and rather complicated role, 
but this goes beyond the scope of this chapter.
Both multiple and repetitive production are essentially pre-capitalist and pre￾industrial, besides being craft-based techniques. Usually, the major source of quality is 
skill. The number of items generated by these techniques is limited because production 
capacity relies on human beings and their abilities.
1.6 Mass production
Mass production is the third period in the evolution of reproduction systems. This 
crucial break in history corresponds to the Industrial Revolution, when technology 
gained a significant momentum and incentive. The late eighteenth and nineteenth 
centuries witnessed new manufacturing techniques, production machines and 
numerous inventions. Steam, iron and coal constituted the backbone of the societies of 
the era. The driving forces of the American system were standardization, interchangeable 
parts, assembly lines, substituting manpower with machines and new energy sources. 
Frederick Klem, the writer of A History of Western Technology, observes: ‘At the end of 
the nineteenth century the Americans began to plan mechanized production by accurate 
time and motion study. Especially Frederick W. Taylor from the turn of the century led 
the way with his scientific and rational system of works management’ (1964: 331).
The core of Taylorism is to free production from skill and replace labour with 
machines wherever possible. Where workers are irreplaceable, Taylor suggests treating 
them as machines: ‘Under our system the workman is told minutely just what he is to 
do and how he is to do it; and any improvement which he makes upon the orders given 
to him is fatal to success’ (Taylor, 1906: 26–7). The result of mass production was the 
remarkable escalation in the variety and number of commodities and the consolidation 
of consumption culture.
1.6.1 Involvement of the original
What is new in comparison to multiple production is the introduction of mechanization 
and precision. In terms of the role of the original, production is not drastically different 
from the previous phase since moulds, stamps, templates, presses and so on continue 
to be the main elements of production. Instead, the most significant change is the 
mechanization of almost all processes, such that even originals and moulds begin to 
be generated through appropriate mechanical tools, instruments and other relevant 
equipment that also benefits from automation.
In the end, it is the nature of original that slightly changed rather than its necessity. 
Models are found sufficient to provide the form required for industrial moulds. On Design
16
Prototypes are now essential to test new designs. In this sense, originals are no longer 
distinct objects. Instead, they result from research, projects and design activities. In 
the realm of industrial design, we utilize the results of reproductions in the form of 
consumer goods, everyday used objects, gadgets and so on, while the original may not 
exist anymore in the form that we are familiar with. There could be more than one 
mock-up, while the final product may incorporate elements that did not exist in the test 
models. Therefore, the original of, let’s say, the Fiat Panda is the Fiat Panda that we know, 
rather than the one created through projects, models, mock-ups, prototypes and so on.4
In mass production, the involvement of the original requires not only the knowledge and 
presence of the original or its models, prototypes and so on but also the knowledge of its 
elements, parts and components with all their complexities.
1.6.2 The original and its reproductions
As mentioned above, in analysing the resemblance of reproductions to the original, we 
should bear in mind that the original may not exist in the form of an original. Probably, 
the most appropriate word for expressing the likeness of reproductions is ‘identicalness’.
In almost all cases, the identicalness of the reproductions is taken for granted due 
to the precision of the manufacturing process. One factor supporting this is the use 
of advanced quality control systems to identify anomalies and discard substandard 
elements, pieces and components – that is, not identical to those aimed at. Despite these 
efforts, researchers have demonstrated various differences in quality if not in form. In 
the automobile industry, for instance, cars produced on mid-week days tend to be better 
quality than those produced on Mondays and Fridays. Therefore, identicalness can still 
be questioned at various levels despite the extremely high precision achieved through 
modern technology.
1.7 Electronic production
Increasing production and productivity is one of the main motives of the entrepreneurial 
system and the direction of improvement in technology. The introduction of computers 
and computer-aided design (CAD) in industry has contributed immensely to achieving 
this goal. Computer numerical control (CNC) systems, for instance, incorporate a 
microcomputer loaded with information to control and direct machine tools ‘to produce 
a part according to pre-recorded, coded numbers, letters, and symbols’ (Lindbeck, 1995: 
290). Increased use of automation, computer-guided machine tools, robots, flexible 
manufacturing systems and other advanced technologies has shifted technological 
development towards electronic production.
4
For the detailed story of the Panda, see Edward Lucie-Smith (1983: 133–40).Original and Reproduction
17
1.7.1 Involvement of the original
Obviously, these systems operate with electronic information. Consequently, the original 
often no longer needs to be three-dimensional. Instead, it can be created on a screen with 
various views and wireframe representations from which solid models can be produced 
for design trials and possibly consumer tests. This process allows designers to make 
alterations to their design easily and get models for new variations quickly if they wish to 
proceed with the images on the screen. According to Lindbeck, ‘These new technologies, 
whereby CAD plans are quickly transformed into solid objects and not merely 3-D 
drawings, are variously referred to as rapid prototyping, free-form manufacturing, 
conceptual modelling, and desktop fabrication among others’ (Lindbeck, 1995: 281).
Through electronic production, the original gains a new form, shifting from concrete 
to abstract, from real to representation, and from physical to hypothetical. The original 
of this chapter does not exist. Instead, what exists is its representation in an electronic 
configuration on my screen. The models produced from the screen are models of 
thoughts, ideas and designs but not the original, which is not present. Its representation 
leads to production, such that we have no originals for some products. Since the 
invention of electronic reproduction, the status of the original as well as its uniqueness 
are now under threat for the first time in history.
1.7.2 The original and its reproductions
The absence of the original makes it impossible to compare it with the reproductions. 
The models, mock-ups and prototypes are not the original but rather its representation 
and substitute. Nevertheless, one should not think that the original will disappear 
immediately. As discussed earlier, there is a factor of coexistence that implies a pattern 
of substitution and replacement. In addition, there is no rule that early versions, or 
old techniques, production systems and products will instantly disappear. Even the 
developers of computer modelling warn us: M. Evans, M. Veveris and P. Wormald 
underline that the range of modelling techniques continues to increase and stress that 
it is necessary to carefully consider the relative merits of ‘conventional’ approaches 
before changing to computer-based modelling (Evans, 1994). No doubt, their role in 
production will inevitably be reviewed in light of recent innovations. A comparison 
between reproductions will show a higher degree of resemblance and, on many 
occasions, identicalness.
1.8 Conclusion
Several points can be made about the relationship between these four reproduction 
systems. First, they evolved historically in the chronological order presented here, that is, 
repetitive, multiple, mass and electronic productions. The first two emerged in the pre￾capitalist era, while the latter two flourished in the industrialized and capitalist societies.On Design
18
This order of appearance does not imply that later systems superseded previous ones 
in every field of production. Not at all. They have all survived to operate in particular 
industrial and geographical domains. Thus, the invention of new production techniques 
does not necessarily annihilate or replace the prevailing ones. Instead, they can coexist 
and serve together for a certain period of time, although this coexistence may vary from 
place to place and from one field of production to another.
There are composite reproduction processes benefiting from several different 
processes of reproduction to produce certain objects, especially those with many 
complicated components. A sophisticated manufacturing process utilizes various 
reproduction techniques, such as artificial intelligence and robotic systems, which 
require further investigation.
There is also a general tendency to reduce the size of products. Tomás Maldonado 
interprets the miniaturization of components as dematerialization: ‘Miniaturization of 
this sort may appear to upset the material reality of objects as we know them today by 
cancelling their physical identity, or indeed contributing to their actual disappearance as 
technical objects’ (Maldonado, 1993: 3).
Electronic production enables us to create imaginary environments and objects 
for which the original does not exist. Virtual reality promises to furnish us with the 
appropriate equipment to experience these at full scale.
I am not a great believer in linear development. Discontinuities, epistemological 
breaks and paradigm shifts form the other face of what one may dare to call progress. 
However, when the story of the original is reviewed in terms of reproduction, it reveals 
an interesting pattern of transformation. In the first phase, the original enjoys a status of 
uniqueness and independence from reproduction. Its image and knowledge contribute 
to the making of things, similar to that of the original. The second phase requires more 
involvement of the object, which physically participates in production. During mass 
production, the complexity of products means that the original is designed and subject 
to testing through its representations as models, mock-ups, prototypes or computer￾generated images. That is, the unity of the ‘original’ is composed of these fragmented 
experiments. The original drives from a process and continues to be a part of the process 
of research and trials. Thus, in one sense, the disintegration of the ‘concept’ of the original 
as much as the original itself reaches another level with electronic production, where it 
is subjected to perpetual alterations and negations. If this is the current direction, the 
question is then what the future of industrial design will be. Is designing for virtually real 
environments going to be more challenging than designing for the real one?CHAPTER 2
IN SEARCH OF PRINCIPLES
WE HAVE BEEN TOLD THAT THEY DIED LONG AGO
This chapter was first presented as a paper at the international conference, ‘Contextual Design – 
Design in Contexts’, organized by the European Academy of Design, at the Swedish Industrial Design 
Foundation, Stockholm, between 23–27 April 1997.
2.1 Introduction
I would like to begin by making comparisons between different design practices and 
cultures and finding out what we have in common. Generally speaking, what different 
societies have in common regarding design cannot easily be abstracted from what they 
have in common regarding socioeconomic and technological systems. Dominant factors, 
such as the market economy and technological development, have a considerable impact 
on design, independent of the cultures within which they operate. This chapter looks at 
this commonality from a global point of view rather than a contextual perspective.
First, one has to ask what commonality means. In practical terms, it is something shared 
by all parties. If references are being made to understandings, values, forms, functions 
and so forth, and if a common ground is found, especially a strong one, wouldn’t we be 
facing a question concerning the nature of design? Again, if these common features exist 
despite cultural obstacles, and exist for certain periods of time, wouldn’t they go further, 
beyond the limits of the word commonality, and be perceived as the natural attributes 
of design? If these commonalities depict the nature of design, aren’t they forming the 
principles of design? The question that I am asking indeed concerns the extent to which 
commonalities lead to principles, that is, principles of design. By searching for common 
aspects, and widespread, ubiquitous and universal values, aren’t we in fact investigating 
possibilities for principles, that is, principles that govern the realm of design? Ultimately, 
if commonalities are the source of principles, then we need to be aware of what principles 
mean today.
Given that the word ‘principle’ is forceful and powerful, one may prefer the modesty 
of the word ‘commonality’. In addition, principle does not happily fit into the agenda 
of the late twentieth century, which tends to be critical, cautious and sceptical of 
any definitive statement. For example, Odo Marquard’s book has a stimulating and 
provocative title representing the critical spirit of the era, the Zeitgeist: Farewell 
to Matters of Principle (1989). Keeping this suggestion in mind, I will look at the 
transformation of products, objects and artefacts to find a common ground for various 
fields of design and design practices in context. Certainly, if there is a commonality On Design
20
among design objects independent of their cultural presuppositions, this should be 
traced not only within their form and function but also within the progression and 
advancement of products. In other words, the purpose of this inquiry is to find 
common attributes, particularly certain directions occurring during the development 
of products, which are intrinsic to, embodied in or anticipated by design processes. 
To that effect, I will scrutinize two aspects of these changes. The first is the oscillation 
between the denotative and connotative values of objects, while the second is changes 
in formal qualities.
2.2 The oscillation between denotative and connotative values of objects
Before proceeding further, I would like to explain two concepts essential for the ‘reading’ 
of objects: denotative and connotative values. Briefly, the denotative value of an object 
corresponds to its functional value only. For example, a pair of scissors is made to cut; 
as long as they cut, they fulfil their function. Hence, denotative value is determined by 
a) how successfully the purpose is achieved (for example, how sharp the scissors are, 
how easy to handle, how efficient to use); and b) to what extent meeting this function is 
important. The connotative value of an object corresponds to its symbolic, ideological, 
reflective, communicative, aesthetic, ethical, environmental and other subjective 
aspects. Going back to the same example, scissors designed by David Mellor, scissors 
having an ivory handle or scissors belonging to Queen Victoria have many qualities 
apart from their normal function of cutting. The connotative value is thus created: a 
social, historical, psychological, ideological value and so on.
The correlation of denotative and connotative values of objects and the transformation 
of this link with respect to time reveal the original history of products. In other words, a 
social history of objects reflects the displacement of values from the connotative realm 
to the denotative one or vice versa. Let us have a look at Rolex watches: they gained 
their reputation initially due to their reliable performance and fortified it with their 
classic, aesthetic features. Today, although many other technically perfect watches are 
available, Rolex still retains its fame independent of its initial credentials. In other words, 
possessing a Rolex watch is so important that it probably doesn’t make much difference 
whether the watch fulfils all expectations of users concerning functions properly. It is 
likely that consumers take its functional qualities for granted. In this particular case, it is 
also clear that the introduction of other factors considerably shifted the significance of 
the object from denotative to connotative value.
The determining essence of this reciprocal relationship is tangible. I think a product 
can exist without denotative values but never without connotations. Religious, ideological 
and cult objects are examples of things with no direct function, such as a medal awarded 
to a war veteran or a crucifix worn by a Catholic.
The status of objects in a society and their denotative and connotative values are 
closely allied with the prevailing cultural and socioeconomic climate. Thus, they are 
formed under the influence of current circumstances. The ruling market economy and In Search of Principles
21
its crucial tools, such as advertisements and promotion campaigns, have a substantial 
impact on the consumption of products. The media is another giant agent promoting the 
proliferation of both values, no matter how artificially boosted.1
If we return to our main point of investigation, we see that the common denominator 
is the oscillation between denotative and connotative values that occurs everywhere, 
independent of culture or time. For example, let us take a lemon squeezer. As a 
contemporary cult object, a lemon squeezer by Philippe Starck is much more than a 
lemon squeezer. It is so popular that you can find it both in quality high street shops 
worldwide and in design museums. The question is to what degree its function is 
eclipsed and subordinated by its connotative values created within a few years and to 
what degree you would like to buy it for its potential to define your social status rather 
than its practical use in the kitchen. Thus, normal traditional glass lemon squeezers, 
which fulfil the same function – probably better than Starck’s – can be turned into an 
object, a wall lamp doing an entirely different job, as we see in the work of Michael 
Marriot who inserted a bulb into it and transformed it to a lighting apparatus.
2.3 Transformations in formal qualities
Throughout history, objects with more or less the same function have varied and evolved 
greatly in shape, size, form, texture, function, material and so on. Although it is hard to 
identify the dominant factors that determine the transformation of objects, it should be 
accepted that it is mostly due to technological improvements alongside other social and 
cultural elements. This is the situation we encounter today, especially in contemporary 
industrialized societies. I shall try to develop a conceptual framework for detecting, 
understanding and analysing the direction and logic of this transformation. Before 
commencing, let us focus our attention on a few points that need further explanation.
The direction in the transformation of objects can be formulated roughly as follows: 
from easy to difficult within the range of optimum and reasonable, conceived and set up, in 
relation to socioeconomic aspirations as well as scientific and technological constraints. 
The direction follows the challenge. For example, if making an object smaller is difficult 
to achieve but offers a benefit, then research is encouraged in this direction, not because 
of its size, of course, but because small means less space, weight and material, and in 
many cases makes the object more mobile, practical or portable. Conversely, if it is 
advantageous to make the object bigger, then efforts are channelled towards that target. 
Targets, that is to say, directions, are determined by a much more complex mechanism, 
such that, in many cases, it is easier to discern and follow their route rather than the 
reasons.
1
W. F. Haug takes the role of the media further by speaking of manipulated needs and their repressive 
satisfaction ([1971] 1986 and 1987).On Design
22
However, there are cases in which the motivation and impetus determining the design 
of objects are self-evident. When the first cars were produced at the beginning of the 
twentieth century, one of the prominent objectives of manufacturers was to increase their 
velocity to keep pace with contemporary society and its rapidly growing expectations. 
These had already been identified with speed, as in the Futurist movement. A few 
decades later, it reached an optimum. In the early seventies, however, the unexpected 
oil crisis rendered fast cars redundant as speed limits were introduced for highways. 
Moreover, rising costs were forcing manufacturers to build smaller cars. Of course, other 
factors supported this trend, such as parking difficulties in metropolitan areas and the 
possibility of selling more small cars. Aerodynamic forms became popular, not only 
because of stylistic interest but also because less wind resistance saves fuel. Thus, design 
criteria keep changing due to the different trends created by media, fashion, tradition, 
and socioeconomic and technological aspirations. Unsurprisingly, commentators on 
design make similar observations in terms of changes:
Three clear cultural changes are encouraged by the new technology in the late 
twentieth century. There is a move away from heavy to lightweight and sometimes 
invisible infrastructures. And there is also more perplexing change: the narrowing 
of the gap between what looks like nature and what looks manmade. A third trend, 
a move away from non-renewable resources, is also beginning to flourish in the 
form of research into re-usable materials.
(Dormer, 1990: 62)
When we compare Dormer’s trends with those employed in this chapter, we notice that 
his first and third observations, ‘a move away from heavy to a lightweight’ and ‘from 
non-renewable to re-usable’, correspond to what I call ‘from large to small’ and ‘from 
non-renewable to renewable’, respectively, as we will see below.
The following observations on changes to products indicate the directions that mostly 
fluctuate between opposite poles. Therefore, rather than represent a complete list or 
mark out one direction of progress, they present a foundation, an initial view, a potential 
framework for further analyses. For the sake of the argument, ‘developments’ concerning 
the nature of objects can broadly be classified as one- and two-directional.
2.3.1 One-directional transformation
I assume that designed and produced objects generally improve over time. I call this 
one-directional progress since there is a linear course from one pole towards the other. 
However, even if this presupposition is correct, objects and their production techniques 
from earlier categories or stages do not necessarily disappear. Instead, in most cases, they 
continue to exist alongside the new one or in a different location.
This situation also begs the question of domination. Can we assume that objects 
produced more recently are superior to previous ones of the same kind in terms of In Search of Principles
23
quality, quantity, technical and aesthetic aspects and popularity? My answer is no, not 
necessarily! To be new does not always mean to be better. Goods just introduced to 
consumers may not necessarily be better than previous ones of the same kind. Vance 
Packard,2
 an American journalist and consumerism expert noticed this more than thirty 
years ago:
Karl H. Nagel, head of Consumers Union television testing division, told me that 
despite all the miraculous claims made in television advertising a television set 
made in 1952 offered a ‘nicer picture’ than sets made in 1959. He said: ‘There has 
been no major advance in terms of the quality of the received picture since the 
early 1950s.’ And he felt that sets made in 1947 were better constructed than those 
being offered for sale a decade later. In 1947, television sets were able to reproduce 
all the picture components contained in the ‘signal’ sent out by a broadcasting 
station. In 1956, not a single one of the sets tested could reproduce the transmitted 
picture!
(1964: 106)
The technological myth that ‘the newest one is the best one’ is not as persuasive as it 
once was. Regarding technology, people have adopted a cautious approach. Years after 
Packard’s investigation, Peter Dormer, a design consultant and interpreter observes:
In 1989, following incidents and a crash (in Britain) involving Boeing aircraft 
(not 747s), the aviation authorities in the USA and Britain ordered special wiring 
checks on new Boeings. Faults were found. What is surprising is not that faults were 
found, but that the world expects their total elimination. Of course, manufacturers 
and service industries must aim for perfection, but they and we, as the consumers, 
make mistakes more rather than less likely by believing in the myths of technology, 
rather than in what common sense and common experience should teach us. To 
demand perfection is sensible; to expect it can be fatal.
(1990: 18–19)
These reservations regarding the idea that technology can achieve perfection make 
it clear that the future may not always bring better things than we have already. Old 
objects can be as valuable as new ones – perhaps even more so. Besides, there are other 
demands that encourage the consumption of different goods, prevent earlier goods and 
their production techniques from vanishing, and provide us with a variety of objects, 
occasionally even enriched with an antique style.
2
Packard worked on human behaviour, advertising, consumerism, planned obsolescence and briefly on objects 
and their reflections on our lives. He highlighted the confusion of ‘the possession of goods with the good life’, 
publishing a trilogy on the subject: The Hidden Persuaders (1957), The Status Seekers (1959) and The Waste 
Makers (1960).On Design
24
There is another important aspect worth mentioning: being one-directional is not 
a destiny, verdict or eternal attribute. Over time, the direction may well swing to the 
opposite pole. For instance, electrical appliances have brought comfort and ease to 
kitchen work, which was sometimes considered rather monotonous and unexciting by 
working people. Now, with changing attitudes, the kitchen is becoming the central living 
area in the house. In parallel, not only our cooking and eating habits but also our taste 
in kitchen appliances is altering. Energy consciousness and the rediscovered aesthetic 
of metal and authentic forms are encouraging us to use traditional kitchen tools.3
 For 
example, the Aga Cooker, first manufactured in the nineteenth century, is now a very 
popular and expensive cult object.
2.3.1.1 From passive to active
We are surrounded by three basic types of objects: passive, active and intermediary or 
transitory which can also be seen as semi-passive or semi-active. Passive objects never 
bear signs of movement and never act by themselves, while active objects move, operate, 
act or at least have the potential for motion due to some mechanism like a machine, 
electric or electronic circuit and so on.
Passive objects are mostly household items: kitchenware, silverware, tableware, 
furniture (urban, office and domestic), garments (regular, official and casual), packing 
materials, furnishings, and almost all ceramic, glass or textile objects. There are two kinds 
of passive objects, classified according to their performance and energy requirements.
The first group comprises entirely passive objects, which do and need nothing but 
function as they are, such as containers, furniture, mirrors, ceramic and glass objects. I 
call these immobile passive objects.
Objects in the second group require human touch and energy to operate and perform 
their function. They are mostly basic tools that do not incorporate any machine within 
themselves, such as simple knives, forks, screwdrivers, gardening and agricultural tools. 
I call these mobile passive objects
Active objects include mechanical, electrical and electronic devices. They include 
production, transportation, communication (audio-visual), scientific, technical, medical 
and educational instruments, domestic appliances, agricultural machinery, and some 
sports and hobby equipment. Fully automatic robots with artificial intelligence represent 
the cutting edge of this group. In many cases, these objects require no human energy to 
function beyond a touch. Of course, the level of human interaction required varies with 
their level of sophistication. For instance, a great majority of aircraft still need a human 
touch despite their complex and refined systems although fully automatic electric cars 
are on the agenda today.
Finally, semi-active or semi-passive objects lie between passive and active ones, as 
they contain elements with the qualities of both groups. Examples include tools that are 
3
These kitchen tools, having traditional forms are, of course, still available. However, in some circles where 
design is highly popular and prestigious, their new and modified reproductions as well as replicas are desired.In Search of Principles
25
not active alone but participate in an action as auxiliary members and require human 
energy to some extent, such as electric toothbrushes, lawnmowers, torque screwdrivers 
and power drills.
Before dwelling on the justification of this tripartite scheme, it is time to turn to its 
source of inspiration from Lewis Mumford’s Technics and Civilization, in which he sets 
out the distinction between tools and machines:
In general, the machine emphasized specialization of function whereas the tool 
indicates flexibility; a planing machine performs only one operation whereas a 
knife can be used to smooth wood, to carve it, to split it or to pry open a lock, 
or to drive in a screw. The automatic machine then, is a very specialized kind of 
adoption, it involves the motion of an external source of power, a more or less 
complicated inter-relation of parts and a limited activity.
[1934] 1947: 10)
Here, the horizon of the notion of machine was enlarged in the light of contemporary 
technological developments and was substituted not with a concrete entity but with an 
abstract concept like action, which always consumes energy. The properties of objects 
regarding energy sources can determine the tripartite classification: active objects require 
sources of energy whereas semi-active ones require both external energy (electricity, 
battery spring and so on) and human power. Container-type, immobile passive objects 
need nothing; they serve as they are. However mobile passive objects require human 
touch and energy.
This crucial categorization takes into account the objects’ historical mission. 
In many cases, the invention of passive and semi-passive/semi-active objects was 
followed by active ones. The juxtaposition of active and passive objects corresponds to 
certain historical periods. Although this can be different for each particular item, the 
Industrial Revolution is the turning point for the great transformation from passive to 
active, and since the mid-eightieth century, the balance has changed in favour of active 
objects. In other words, since the Industrial Revolution and across all countries, the 
production of active objects has increased significantly along with a shift from passive 
to active.
This shift – the invention of the active versions of previously passive objects – does not 
necessarily eliminate passive objects. Instead, they coexist most of the time. For example, 
the mechanical (semi-active) toothbrush did not supersede the passive, traditional one. 
Rather, they continue to appear next to each other in department stores.
What we observe in this process of transformation is an inclination towards much more 
complex structures. For example, the electric shaver is undoubtedly more complicated 
than a disposable razor, which is in turn already more advanced than a traditional razor 
blade. This exigency of transition also indicates the degree of specialization. While 
objects become more and more complex, they also become specialized and the number 
of their variety increases immensely. One should think about the multifariousness of On Design
26
electric shavers that we have in the market today as well as the complexities and varieties 
they present.
No doubt, the classification and categorization of objects in terms of the three 
distinctive positions intrinsic to their very nature should be further studied, detailed 
and illustrated. This chapter draws the basic framework, and I hope it prompts interest 
for further research.
2.3.1.2 From functional to multi-functional
Maximum utilization of goods is obviously for the benefit of users. Increasing the range 
of use of an object helps to reach this target. If a minor modification is sufficient to 
enlarge the capacity of a product, why should it not be realized? Production-wise, saving 
materials, energy, labour and time will lower the cost. From the owner’s viewpoint, it 
should in theory save money and space.
The application of these ideas to production has been widely visible in furniture since 
the eighteenth century. A chair designed for sitting is made convertible into a table when 
necessary. A bed combined with a wardrobe can serve as a bed at night and a wardrobe 
during the day. As books by Sigfried Giedion and Edward Lucie Smith show, this process 
has sometimes gone too far with exaggerated designs like a combined piano, bed and 
drawer (Gideon, ([1948] 1955).
Nevertheless, the aim was achieved by bringing together at least two items of 
furniture, regardless of the weight and bulk of the resulting product. This was very 
rightly called ‘combination furniture’. Another approach was also possible: the functions 
of two different things could be the starting point to design a new item of furniture. 
However, this was not the case in the earlier examples, which involved combining two 
items together with their functions. The bed was still a bed; the wardrobe was still a 
wardrobe; and the result was a ‘wardrobe + bed’, not an integrated unity. It was not an 
amalgamation of functions but objects with their functions. The first step had been 
completed.
The second step deals with functions only and unites them so successfully that totally 
new products appear on the market. The emergence of many contemporary goods is 
based on this policy of production.
If the first step was a ‘combination of objects’, this second step can be called a 
‘unification of functions’ or rather ‘multi-functional’. Here, it is worth noticing two 
points. One, the transition from the first to the second does not necessarily occur 
for every object and in the same manner. Second, the existence of the second step 
does not necessarily correspond to a replacement of the first. Both can overlap and 
juxtapose.
One simple example incorporating all these processes is the music centre more than 
40 years ago. Initially, two objects, a record player and a radio, were combined to form 
one piece of music furniture. Later, a tape recorder was added and fused into a new body, 
for which a new term is coined: the music centre. The addition of an amplifier created 
an inseparable trio. At the end of the twentieth century, the compact disc (CD) player 
joined them. Music centres then became portable with a proliferation of combinations: In Search of Principles
27
radio + tape recorder, radio + alarm clock, CD player + tape recorder + radio, TV + radio 
+ video, TV + radio + alarm clock, and so on.
In the twentieth century, this strategy of production (combining objects and unifying 
functions) was widely accepted implicitly or explicitly, and applied by companies’ design 
research and development departments. No doubt, producers and salesmen were very 
happy with this, as it was a magic key for re-opening saturated markets. Consumers have 
become accustomed to buying the same thing in different forms and with slightly different 
functions. However, ‘multi-functional’ does not necessarily mean ‘multi-purpose’. What 
I understand from the former is that a product includes many functions in its body and 
that we can benefit from the combination of them in most cases. A telephone answering 
machine, for example, is basically a tape recorder connected to a telephone. It answers 
the phone and records messages, while more advanced types provide other functions, 
such as hands-free calls, call screening, day/time stamp, memos, mute and remote￾control facilities. Certainly, it is multi-functional.
However, all these functions are bound to one purpose only, which is to communicate 
with whoever phones if the phone user is not available or does not wish to reply. In 
other words, all of these functions are centred around this one, single purpose and 
cannot be used for other goals. For instance, the answer phone’s tape recorder cannot 
be used to listen to music since its sound quality is poor and the whole machine is not 
designed appropriately. Especially in compact models, the recorder is integrated with the 
telephone and cannot be separated for use as an independent recorder. Unfortunately, 
therefore, these apparatuses are single-purpose objects despite all their multi-functional 
features.
Secondly, various functions compounded in one body are very often used singly. 
In some pieces of equipment, these various functions are adjacent and may perform 
with the advantage of this expanded capacity achieved by a harmonious interconnected 
network. However, it is more likely the functions do not all perform simultaneously. If 
one is switched on, then the others are most probably off, as with a Swiss pocket knife: 
when the can-opener is in use, the knife cannot function. Similarly, while listening to a 
record on a music centre, one cannot also listen to the radio or the tape recorder. Even if 
technically possible, it would be nonsensical. Thus, when one part of the music centre is 
functioning, the other parts are usually useless and cannot be used by others.
The consequences of these strategies in the production of commodities are devastating 
if seen from the customer’s point of view. First, the user is entirely alienated from the 
mechanisms of these high-tech, compact devices. Neither repair nor maintenance is 
possible without specialist services. Indeed, they are usually not designed to be repaired 
but to be replaced. If one attempts to get the device repaired, it does not take long to 
realize that it costs almost as much as buying a new piece of equipment. On the other 
hand, when one of the parts irreparably breaks, the other working parts are immediately 
affected negatively and often become useless since the functional and perhaps aesthetic 
unity is destroyed.
Nevertheless, the number of multi-functional objects will continue increasing as 
this is inevitable within the logic of consumer-oriented economic programmes. The On Design
28
market keeps demanding new consumer goods, and the easiest way is to create ‘unified 
functional objects’ with newly invented or merely fabricated purposes.
These strategies are obviously familiar to anyone living in neoliberal economies, and 
this undoubtedly considerably influences the design and formation of new products. 
Perhaps the best example is smartphones, which replace cameras, video cameras, tape 
recordings, video players and, in many cases, table and laptop computers, thanks to the 
abundance of new software they contain.
2.3.1.3 From common to personal
Considering the above framework, we can observe that another policy that the industry 
strongly approves of is to support the expansion of personal territory by providing 
people with a wide spectrum of goods. Items that were once introduced for the family, a 
group of people, large companies and even for public use now became personal property. 
The most dramatic example is one of the pioneering technological achievements: the 
clock. When mechanical clocks were first invented, it became a widespread practice to 
build clock towers in the main square of towns. Only rich people could afford to buy one 
for domestic use. Public clocks, as well as church bells in the West and calls to prayer 
from minarets in the East, used to contribute to the organization of daily life. By the late 
nineteenth century, however, mass production in America made clocks available and 
inexpensive so that almost every family could afford to buy one. At the beginning of the 
twentieth century, the ‘one-dollar watch’ campaign was aimed at individuals within the 
family and furnished many people with a new gadget (Heskett, 1980).
The following pattern of progress in time measurement seems very useful for illustrating 
the expansion of objects from public to private, from common to personal, and from 
space to objects. Initially, clock towers served the public while mass production later 
furnished houses. Soon, every man had the privilege of enjoying his own personal watch, 
while watches for women followed later as did watches for children. In the meantime, the 
clocks’ areas of use extended from space to objects. Cars, refrigerators, ovens and radios 
were decorated with them. Thanks to developments in digital technology, even a simple 
fountain pen could include one.4
Similar chronologies can be given for many other technology-based, industrial 
products: radios and televisions (from grandiose items of home furniture to the pocket￾sized Sony Walkman and Sony Watchman5
), calculators, cameras, computers and so on. 
All these articles have become personal. In the early decades of the twentieth century, 
‘one car per family’ was considered an ideal match. Later, however, this changed to ‘one 
4
Simply to satisfy my curiosity, I calculated how many time measurement systems there are in my home, where 
two people live. I found ten: two personal watches, one alarm clock, one small plastic digital table clock (a free 
promotional gift), one in the oven, two in mobile phones, one in the alarm radio, one for the automatic hot￾water heating system and one in the computer.
5
The Sony Walkman is a portable, small cassette player that emerged in 1979 and revolutionized the way people 
listened to music. Sony Watchman is again a pocket-size television that was available in the market in the early 
1980s.In Search of Principles
29
car for each parent’ followed by ‘one car for everybody’ and nowadays ‘a car for every 
age’. The message is clear: please keep replacing your car according to your changing age 
and status.
From this, we can conclude that a common tendency in the development of 
technologically intensive objects is from mass consumption towards personal use. This 
is achieved by making products more advanced, cheaper, smaller scale, with a bigger 
capacity, or more efficient.
It is high time we remembered that individualism is the keystone of the capitalist 
system. It is bolstered and stimulated both philosophically and theoretically, and thereby 
ideologically, and by a physical environment stuffed with a plethora of goods that display 
both advantages and unbearable attraction of personal objects. Without doubt, the 
technological and ideological products of the system are working in compliance with 
each other: what you hear is being consolidated by what you see.
2.3.1.4 From single to various
Another change in the world of commodities is more variety. Once, only one or two 
objects were used to execute the same job. Today, many kinds of artefacts are available 
for the same or very similar purposes. Mass production, which aims at gigantic 
consumerism of goods, has introduced the idea of a proliferation of functions whereby 
new fields of use are opened for more specialized products. Examples are evident in many 
areas. Let us take a very simple one: toothpaste. Even an ordinary corner shop stocks 
many varieties produced with mint, menthol, fluoride and so on. Similarly, thinking of 
the wide selection of chewing gums is sufficient to realize how the variety of goods has 
increased and has poured into the market again and again.
Product variety is another strategy used by companies. Consumers are bombarded by 
new items or by new looks for old ones. Thus, the apathy of users is minimized; visual 
fatigue caused by repeated appearances of the same product is cured by the use of brand￾new labels, packaging and forms that demand close attention rather than a single glance. 
If customers are dissatisfied with one product, they do not get particularly upset but try a 
different one next time. Alternatives are always being presented. Customer discontent is 
thus eliminated by purchasing the other product, at least until that one is used. Products 
that do not sell well enough are removed from the shelves, their ingredients slightly 
modified and their packaging redesigned before eventually being presented as a new
product for the attention of users. Of course, it is not just company policies that create 
a variety of goods; there are many duplicated companies operating in the same field, 
thereby providing competition and the emergence of countless new articles.
2.3.1.5 From non-renewable to renewable
A perceivable change in the strategy of current technology occurred thanks to the rise of 
environmental consciousness. Since the late 1960s, alternative technology groups have 
warned that natural resources are not infinite and that the appropriation of the world’s 
non-renewable sources should cease. In the early 1970s, the petrol crisis showed how 
right they were. The calculation of the earth’s oil reserves indicates that non-renewable On Design
30
energy sources, minerals and other raw materials would be exhausted in the foreseeable 
future.
The environmentally friendly approach encourages the use of replaceable materials, 
energy sources and recycled components. This attitude towards nature is mostly a 
phenomenon of the twenty-first century and finds its reflection in objects in a material 
sense. The sustainable world is the ultimate aim, while design is one of the crucial means 
to this end as expressed in a project called The Solid Side (Manzini, 1995).
2.3.2 Two-directional transformation
The basic feature of this group is that transformation occurs in both directions, from one 
pole to the other and vice versa. Both objects and some production techniques follow 
this line.
2.3.2.1 From simple to complex or vice versa
As with arguments concerning passive and active artefacts, parallel progress can be 
observed in the structure of objects. The more technology is introduced to an object, the 
more complex it becomes. The transition from passive to active involves the inclusion of 
sophisticated mechanical equipment, electrical devices, electronic circuits and so forth. 
Each stage of development corresponds to a higher level of sophistication. Two kinds 
of sophistication can be distinguished: process and product-oriented. The former refers 
to sophistication in production processes due to using more complex technologies. The 
Wassily chair designed by Marcel Breuer is a classic example. At first glance, the chair 
does not show any interesting features, being made out of tubular steel and leather with 
remarkable simplicity. However, the achievement behind this simplicity comes partly 
out of the design and partly out of previously impossible technical progress that opened 
up ways for making tubular steel, bending it without distortion, perfect welding and 
chromium polish. In this kind of example, the production hardware becomes more and 
more sophisticated although it is not so clearly reflected in the manufactured objects 
themselves.
Product-oriented sophistication refers to products with more complex or high￾technology hardware. The signs are often visible through a series of knobs, lids, control 
systems and so on. For example, we can see how complicated things have become by 
comparing the number of buttons on a CD player remote-control device with a hand￾driven gramophone of the early twentieth century. Such changes have not only occurred 
in the world of electrical or electronic objects. Tools have developed as well. Even a 
simple pocket knife has been transformed into a portable workbench as with the famous 
Swiss Army knives. In the case of tools, there are two ways of becoming complex. One 
is the transformation from passive to active, as in the case of the toothbrush. Here, the 
main function of the tool is retained in a new object that includes an electrical device or 
circuit.
However, objects can also become more complex by keeping their original 
characteristics while adding new elements and functions to become more complex than In Search of Principles
31
ever. The Swiss Army knife, for example, is still a pocket knife; it still retains its own 
identity and mechanism despite these new features. What makes it more complex is 
combining extra functions.
2.3.2.2 From large to small or vice versa
Size is another variable. Objects that are highly subjected to technological innovations 
may change size over time. The ultimate objective is to reach the optimum size for the 
function alongside other limiting factors. If the prototype or early version of an object 
is clumsy, it is most probably due to the technical material used in it. Later versions are 
developed by removing these obstacles and to give a ‘better’ look as well as to make 
it more practical. Almost all electrical and electronic devices fall into this category. 
The radio, television, telephone, tape recorder, record player, computer, camera and 
many other commodities share the same history in terms of the larger sizes of their 
predecessors. For some design objects, the target is to be larger. Efforts are focused on 
achieving an optimum feasible capacity. Transport is a good example.
Mass transportation requires more effective vehicle systems, particularly by 
accommodating more passengers by enlarging the vehicle. Buses, for example, reached 
an optimum capacity of forty to forty-five people before their volume was reconsidered. 
One solution was to introduce double-decker buses while another was to attach a new 
articulated section to the rear, rather like adding another carriage to a train. However, 
here the constraints are visible: a third level cannot be built on top of double-decker 
buses since the physical balance of the structure does not allow it; a third coach cannot 
be added to buses because driving would become impossible in city traffic where the 
curvature and slope of roads are not designed for such long vehicles. Of course, the larger 
space needed for more powerful engines, high running costs, management problems 
and efficiency are other reasons, to name a few. Therefore, the optimum is not always 
determined by technical factors.
Consequently, increased efficiency is a constant objective, with greater size being 
one way to achieve it. Here, two points are worth mentioning. First, smallness does not 
necessarily correspond to reduced capacity. Theoretically, smaller but technologically 
new and recently designed products should perform at least as well as their predecessors. 
Secondly, largeness definitely means greater capacity. No objects are made larger without 
introducing some new aspect.
2.4 Conclusion
The observations in this chapter are indicative rather than conclusive. Undoubtedly the 
factors affecting the transformation of products are influencing how new-generation 
objects are being designed, whether noticed or not. Are they hidden principles of design 
or some commonalities that we share? I would be cautious in responding to this question. 
According to Necdet Teymur, ‘a pure principle is a pseudo-theoretical structure defined 
by a homogeneous field. It is assumed to be the property of the ‘essence’ of the phenomena. On Design
32
As such, it is a ‘unique internal principle’’ (Teymur, 1982: 100). This definition is rather 
precise and leaves no room for manoeuvre. Therefore, I would prefer to highlight the 
strong commonalities regarding the development of products, independent of their 
contextual existence, and to leave the question of whether they are principles for my 
readers to decide.CHAPTER 3
PROBLEMATIC OF LOCAL AND 
GLOBAL DESIGN IDENTITY IN NEWLY 
INDUSTRIALIZED COUNTRIES
WITH SPECIAL EMPHASIS ON TURKEY AT THE END 
OF THE TWENTIETH CENTURY
WHERE DOES HOPE LIE?
THE EXPLOITED PROMISES OF GLOBALIZATION AND LOCAL HEROES
A version of this paper was presented at the Third European Academy of Design Conference, Sheffield 
Hallam University, Sheffield, UK, 30th March – 1st April 1999 and published in its proceedings. 
(Balcioglu, 1999)
3.1 Introduction
I would like to begin with certain aspects of globalization that affect local design cultures. 
The purpose is to develop short but general perspectives that will provide important clues 
about where local design practices arise. The second part of the chapter will look into 
a newly developing country, Turkey, and the state of design at the end of the twentieth 
century. I would like to share some observations regarding the impacts of globalization 
as an external factor on the one hand and changing social, economic and technological 
internal factors on the other.
3.2 Aspects of the theses of globalization concerning local design
3.2.1 Economics
Marx’s rallying cry from 1848, ‘Workers of the world unite! You have nothing to lose but 
your chains!’ is remembered as the last sentence of the Communist Manifesto. Now, over 
150 years later, it reads slightly differently: ‘Capitalists of the world unite! You have a lot 
to gain with no pain!’ – and probably deserves to be remembered as the first declaration 
of globalization. This is to say that the economic aspect of globalization makes the rich 
richer and the poor poorer. As Bauman (1998: 70) notes, ‘the total wealth of the top 358 On Design
34
‘global billionaires’ equals the combined incomes of 2.3 billion of the poorest people’, that 
is, ‘45 percent of world population’. Eighty per cent of the world’s population owns 22 per 
cent of global wealth whereas, ‘in 1991, 85 percent of the world’s population received 
only 15 percent of its income.’ Bauman (1998: 71) continues, ‘2.3 percent of global wealth 
owned by 20 percent of the poorest countries thirty years ago has fallen now still further, 
to 1.4 percent.’ The World Bank’s World Development Indicator 1997 gives a similar 
impression: ‘More than 1.3 million people live on less than a dollar a day, and 2 billion 
more are only marginally better off ’ (The World Bank, 1997: 22).
While the financial situation of the world’s poorest is not improving, cash flow clearly 
represents the globalization of economies.1
 According to The World Bank, ‘net private 
capital flow to developing countries has soared – from $44 billion in 1990 to $184 billion 
in 1995 – outstripping official flows’ (26). However, this does not mean equal distribution 
of investment, as ‘78 per cent of this private money has been going to only a dozen or so 
countries’ (26). It is thus fair to claim that while globalization has produced undeniable 
economic growth in recent decades, only some countries, and mostly their higher and 
upper middle classes, have benefited. Given that most designers are likely to be situated 
here, I believe they belong to a category that has benefited from the ever-increasing 
opportunities offered by economic globalization.2
3.2.2 Communication
Probably the least disputable attribute of globalization is what has been achieved in 
communication (Jameson, 1998). The triumph of communication networks and the rise 
of the media have made the world smaller. Consequently, economic, political, ideological 
and cultural issues have become more transferable and accessible to the public. 
Designers are one group enjoying this rapid advancement of information technology, 
as international links and joint projects and schemes with overseas companies became 
easily realizable.
3.2.3 Awareness
I would argue that the most paramount, but ironically less visible, impact of the 
globalization debate has been a rising awareness of the world. Roland Robertson, who 
coined the term, emphasizes the importance of awareness in his definition: ‘Globalization 
as a concept refers both to the compression of the world and the intensification of 
consciousness of the world as a whole’ (Robertson, 1996: 9). People begin to realize that 
we are all on the same small planet: so much so that a fire on one side may easily spread 
and burn others. For example, the unexpected and sudden fall of East Asia’s so-called 
1
Woudhuysen reaches a similar conclusion from his analysis (1998). 2
For a wider discussion of globalization from the viewpoint of design and designers, see Aldersey-Williams 
(1992) and Margolin (1998).Problematic of Local and Global Design Identity
35
Asian Tigers threatened the world with a new wave of recession. This issue dominated the 
G7 meeting of 1998, and the news broke on newspapers’ front pages. The first sentence of 
a The Guardian report on 31 October 1998, reflects the spirit of those days: ‘A global action 
plan to rebuild shattered confidence in the international financial system and to shore 
up failing economies in the developing world was yesterday unveiled by the Chancellor, 
Gordon Brown.’ The acting chairman of the G7 meeting, Brown made a statement on the 
matter with a vision of the world: ‘A new age requires a new approach. Ministers agree that 
in this new inter-dependent and instantaneous global market place we must now create 
systems for supervision, transparency, regulation and stability that are as sophisticated as 
the markets they have to work with’ (Gordon Brown. The Guardian, 31 October 1998).
Consciousness of globalization raises hopes of realizing the dream of ‘a better world’ 
possible, simply by encouraging us to make plans for the future. However, this optimistic 
view has not got much ground for the main impetus towards globalization. This mostly stems 
from economic and political advantages as well as the need to collaborate against natural 
disasters to save the world, such as measures to protect the ozone layer (Martin, 1997).
Clearly, it is not sufficient to analyse how globalization occurs but essential to propose 
what it should be. A similar observation is valid regarding the relationship between 
nature and human beings. We interfere more and more every day. Desirable or not, I 
suspect, one day someone will notice that the world is revolving on its own and we still 
do nothing about it! Is it not true that the entire history of human beings is the history of 
gradual emancipation from an unknown destiny towards a known destination? In this 
respect, designing the future or designing for the future is indeed an indispensable part 
of design as a discipline and congruent with creative design practice. It explains why 
designers more than welcome the idea of a wider perspective.
Not every professional is as lucky as a designer since some other fields have fewer 
prospects than others. Take literature for example. How many poets can produce a global 
product written in a global language to sell around the world? Not many I guess! This, 
of course, does not mean that literature has not benefited from electronic information 
flow and the internet. However efficient it is, we cannot expect everyone to utilize 
globalization to the same degree due to the nature of their professions. Since designers 
create objects for global markets, speaking a relatively more common global language, 
such as need, function, aesthetic, meaning and so on, they thus have many opportunities 
to serve internationally.
3.3 Culture and its infiltration channels
The dominating factor for local design is undoubtedly cultural flow and its irresistible 
force. For many theoreticians, modernization, equipped with a vigorous concept of 
Americanization, appears to be the driving force towards a global culture. Featherstone 
(1993: 170) writes that ‘a global culture was seen as being formed through the economic 
and political domination of the United States which trusts its hegemonic culture into all 
parts of the world’ Fredric Jameson does not disagree with this view:On Design
36
A great Indian filmmaker once described the ways in which the gestures and 
the allure of walking of his teenage son were modified by watching American 
television: one supposes that his idea and values were also modified. Does this 
mean that the rest of the world is becoming Americanised? and if so, what do we 
think about that; or perhaps one should ask, what does the rest of the world think 
about that, and what might Americans think about it?
(Jameson, 1998: 58)
We all experience how quickly branches of McDonald’s, Kentucky Fried Chicken and 
Starbucks are opened everywhere; how Hollywood penetrates our domestic privacy 
through the black hole in the living room; how CNN turns facts into fiction and wars 
into electronic games. Under such a bombardment, it is rather difficult to witness the 
transformation of what we have as remnants of cultural heritage.
Assuming that each society is influenced by others, I would like to make some 
observations on the particular domains where we are subjected to the notions, norms 
and values of other cultures in relation to design. Technology is one of them. As Arjun 
Appadurai notes, technology ‘moves at high speeds across various kinds of previously 
impervious boundaries’ (Appadurai, 1990: 297). It is easily disseminated widely and 
receives the least cultural resistance, except in those cases where it clashes with ideological 
values or beliefs – as in internet prohibitions in China for example.
Foreign food and cuisines also do not recognize boundaries as long as they do not hit 
high costs or quota barriers, or require complicated and less familiar cooking techniques. 
Fruits, prepacked and ready-to-eat products are cautiously welcomed as an exotic addition 
to domestic cooking but without radically changing entire eating habits. In Turkey, for 
example, kiwis and avocados were introduced approximately fifteen years ago. While they 
have increased variety, they have won only limited acceptance. Foreign restaurants are 
likely to develop rapidly in metropolitan areas as it becomes more and more popular to try 
ethnic cuisine. A Thai, Italian, Vietnamese or Chinese restaurant next to a Greek taverna 
is not an unusual sight in cosmopolitan districts. The lesson we learn from this culinary 
mosaic is that ethnic cultures can coexist within a given urban fabric. Does this not provide 
us with an excellent example of concurrent cultures where different backgrounds, races, and 
ethnic, religious, and ideological groups live together in harmony, providing that no group 
attempts to subordinate the others and they respect the rules and rights of coexistence?
When France’s film industry was shaken by Hollywood, the government protected this 
cultural production with subsidies. Yet is this the way to preserve local cultures against 
the global one? Can it be a solution to accept the dominance of the latter while supplying 
a lifeline for the former? How realistic a policy is this when the other local industries 
under threat also demand subsidies? Protection of an industry as such is nothing but 
the protection of the industry only, which does not ensure absolute immunity against 
the interventions of alien cultures. Let us think of Turkish cinema for a moment without 
underestimating the international reputation of its directors and the popularity of its 
TV series. Many directors who have been abroad, some of whom have studied there, 
inevitably and understandably admire particular foreign directors, such as Fellini, Problematic of Local and Global Design Identity
37
Wenders and Tarkovsky. Likewise, we can sympathize with Turkish scriptwriters who 
are influenced by European writers or actors who follow the same path as Hollywood 
stars. How then can we claim that a film shot in Turkey with Turkish crew and personnel 
is purely Turkish once we know about the complicated intellectual backgrounds, desires 
and aspirations of those involved as well as the imported techniques and equipment? 
Creating a cultural identity with mostly foreign methods, techniques and technology 
and a determined subscription to modernism probably results in global more than local 
values. Nevertheless, operating mostly with global values does not mean that these works 
automatically reach a global standard or quality.
If we draw an analogy with product designers in Turkey, we may come to the same 
conclusion that they are aware of contemporary developments and have similar design 
tools as their counterparts in other countries. Cultural infiltration is most difficult if 
not impossible ideologically. For example, you can eat Chinese food and read Chinese 
literature every day without changing your image in society. However, the day you wear 
traditional Chinese clothes in your country, you make a statement. Such visible cultural 
interference and identity markers probably face resistance more often than not, while for 
most consumer products that leave no traces of visible identity change, social approval 
is easier with no objections.
The ideological elements of cultural infiltration are probably the hardest to accept 
without confrontation, which may even escalate to war. History is an excellent collector 
of wars caused by the manipulations of ideological differences. Therefore, regardless of 
whether it is right or not, I would suggest that the introduction of Western ideology 
and thinking process is a minefield of cultural infiltration. One can anticipate that 
establishing a common ideological ground is the most formidable task to be completed 
for the sake of a ‘united globe’.
3.4 Turkey: Where does it stand?
Over the years, Turkey has undeniably progressed despite its political and economic 
instability, as clearly demonstrated by these figures.
1973 1977 1993
Annual income per capita (USD)
(Source: Macrotrends.com)
490 1,427 3,180
Urban population (%)
(Source: Macrotrends.com)
40.3 42.51 65.6
Fertility (%)
(Source: Macrotrends.com)
5.39 4.83 2.89
Life expectancy (years)
(Source: Macrotrends.com)
53.75 56.39 65.49
Infant mortality (%)
(Source: Fred Economic data)
116 101.2 47.6On Design
38
Having reached 4,500 USD by 1998, per capita income grew over tenfold in twenty-five 
years. Although Turkey’s inflation and state debt are both rather high, overall, the figures 
indicate a shift from a poor rural state to a relatively better-off urban society with half 
the infant mortality and higher life expectancy than before. Is this a tangible sign that 
Turkey is now a newly industrializing country (NIC)? Although I would prefer economists 
to answer, I am content to portray how Turkey is participating in the globalizing world 
and radically intensifying its international links.3
 Outgoing phone calls totalled 130,205 
minutes in 1989, rising more than three and half times to 473,433 minutes in 1996. The 
number of foreign tourists almost doubled from 4,516,077 in 1989 to 8,536,778 in 1996.4
Likewise, the number of Turkish citizens travelling abroad increased at a similar rate from 
2,590,844 in 1989 to 4,309,606 in 1996. Over recent years, there have been similar increases 
in private TV and radio channels, mobile telephones sold and purchases of new cars. These 
are concrete indications that Turkey is eager to plug into international networks.
3.4.1 Local designers
Creative designs based on ideas inspired by local cultures may revitalize ossified thinking 
and bring a distinctive flair for internal markets as much as the potential they have for 
international clients. In recent years, Turkish product design has been documented, 
published widely, reasonably exhibited and its discourse was elaborated thanks to 
dedicated academics and successful designers (see Asatekin (1975, 1976, 1994, 2006), 
Bayazıt (1984, 1987, 1996, 2006) Bayrakçı (1996), Er, A (1995, 1997, 2003), Er, Ö (1997, 
2006) Küçükerman (1978, 1996, 1997, 2021), Hasdoğan (1994, 2009, 2021) and so on). 
I will try to explain the advantages and opportunities of globalization for designers 
working in Turkey.
What I notice is how the gap is closing between developing and developed countries. 
Indeed, there is no single gap as such; rather, there are qualitative and developmental 
differences that vary between sectors. While Turkey might have been in the Champions 
League with its leading football teams, its high-tech industry definitely remains in the 
second division. Likewise, communication technology may have reached an acceptable 
level, but the quality of Turkish TV programmes has a long way to go. The reasons 
are manifold and vary accordingly. Each sector requires detailed scrutiny to identify 
which one has more potential and a tendency to globalize. For instance, we all know 
that Turkey’s furniture industry is rather advanced and already participates in the 
international market, even if its share remains small.
Here, however, I will focus on small design offices and freelance designers rather than 
the industry overall. Within this framework, their positions in the global market clearly 
reveal the possibilities:
3
It is interesting to note that the development of design in Turkey resembles in many aspects the pattern 
followed by other NICs (Ghose, 1995).
4
The number of tourists is still rising. According to the Turkish Statistical Institute, more than 29 million 
people visited Turkey in 2021.Problematic of Local and Global Design Identity
39
1. Design is not a mega, technology-based industry; hence it does not require a 
great deal of unsustainable infrastructure.
2. The overwhelming majority of design activity and practice does not require 
advanced scientific knowledge or high technology that an NIC could not afford.
3. Design does not demand large capital investment; hence many design 
companies are small with few employees.
4. Design education in Turkey perfectly meets Western standards despite criticisms 
of it. Foreign languages are widely spoken, and many designers take the initiative 
to pursue lifelong learning even if this is rarely organized institutionally.
5. The sudden rise of design publications in Turkey provides concrete evidence of 
public interest as well as a growing domestic market.
6. Many practitioners and academics are well connected to the design world 
through media, publicity, information technology, international fairs, exhibitions, 
institutions and so on; hence the intellectual level of the field is never inadequate.
7. The workforce, including design labour, is generally economically viable in 
Turkey, which may easily attract foreign investment and collaboration.
8. Local designers have the significant privilege of unprecedented creative designs 
inspired by Turkey’s culture, which is understandably not well known in the 
West. Given that design perpetually insists on and instigates novelty, unknown 
territories always promise serendipity. The potential of local design is within its 
hidden capacity and its ability to produce new designs.
3.4.2 How does local culture work for new design? (Does it really work?)
I doubt there is a simple answer to this question although speculation is possible. Based 
on the interviews I conducted for design research in Turkey, I observed various ways of 
exploiting culture with different levels, aims, intentions and implications. Their success or 
failures could be evidence of justification. Rather than making judgemental remarks, I offer 
the list below as indicative, suggestive and never complete – and may never be completed.
1. The neologistic approach: design objects are commonly named after a Turkish 
city, hero, location and so on, including battleships and aeroplanes, many of 
which have nothing to do with Turkish design. However, the title of the object 
rather than the making of it is the signifier that tries to position ‘a modern and 
global’ product within a national context by naming it.
2. Morphological application: here, a cultural, historical, traditional or even 
popular ‘shape’ is picked up and bestowed on objects for decorative purposes. 
Such utilization may alter the ‘original’ size, colour, texture, meaning and 
function. Above all, the shape becomes a symbol representing common values 
as well as establishing a missing link between users and their identities.
3. Topographical execution: forms can also be generated by bequeathing three￾dimensionality through a function to a two-dimensional ‘shape’ or fragment of On Design
40
a pattern derived from historical ethnographical or architectural sources. This 
strips the shapes of their context and attributes a use value to their new three￾dimensional configurations.
4. Formal interpretations: occasionally, a new form or product is created from 
a known item by developing, mutating, distorting, altering, modifying or 
adjusting it. The major issue in such interpretations concerns the relationship 
between the previous and subsequent forms, regarding the dominant element 
of identity. Products falling into this category continue to reflect the main form 
with some degree of respect.
5. Allegorical interpretations: another way of benefiting from our living memory 
and material archive is to give a new function to an old object and modify its 
known features. These alterations may employ new, sometimes metaphorical, 
allegorical and/or ironical depth that may subordinate the original function by 
imposing new meanings. In other words, a source of inspiration, such as the 
original form, may not retain its prime characteristics after introducing entirely 
new functions or meanings. Although the main source is still the recognizable 
‘original’ form, the imposed attributes hijack the former ones – hence my term, 
allegorical interpretations.
6. Conceptual inspirations: probably the most sophisticated and stimulating 
sources for designing new products are ideas originating from cultural norms, 
beliefs, social behaviours and actions rather than concrete objects. In this age 
of mass communication, emphasizing the semantics of objects and making 
them more than what they are strongly represent the Zeitgeist.
3.5 Conclusion
Needless to say, the level and variety of Turkey’s design industry determine the 
experience of designers, whose possibilities of new fields of expertise are increasing 
rapidly and confidently. The global market is certainly a magnificent opportunity that 
local designers are successfully penetrating, albeit slowly. Designers in Turkey are no less 
creative than their colleagues in other countries. Although their number remains small, 
they are producing high-quality, world-standard work. This is, in fact, the new feature 
of globalization: the highest quality design work is no longer produced in just a few 
developed countries. Instead, you may come across remarkable design projects anywhere 
in the world, realized and executed with refined ingenuity, although they may be limited 
in numbers. The West retains an advantage in having more good quality designers, a 
wider variety of design fields and greater experience. Therefore, successful, creative and 
intellectually well-equipped local designers always have a chance to go beyond their 
borders. Bill Gates, one of the world’s richest men, would not have employed Indian 
software designers if he had not seen the right capacity and had not had the right strategy.CHAPTER 4
THE ESSENTIAL ELEMENTS
THE UNITY OF WORK AND TRANSFERABILITY OF 
KNOWLEDGE
This chapter was first presented as a paper at a conference entitled ‘Practically speaking: The 
relationship between theory and practice’. It was a two-day national conference on practice-based 
research in Art and Design at Wolverhampton University, 14–15 December 1998.
This chapter analyses the relationship between theory and practice within the context of 
advanced study programmes. Later, in light of this analysis, I offer some suggestions on 
the issue of studio or practice-based doctorates. There are a few characteristics within 
the reciprocal relationships of theory and practice concerning practice-based doctorate 
schemes. This paper studies some of them and concentrates on certain concepts, such as 
timing, unity, permanency, balance, individual identity and transferability.
4.1 Timing and sequence of realization: Theoretical and practical work
The timing of the execution of each work is the first consideration. Why one part will be 
realized before the others needs explanation:
1. The theoretical part is developed first before practice is used to prove, support, 
explain, explore or exemplify the thesis generated in a classic scientific 
approach. You develop the theory and then go to the laboratory to test and 
prove it.1
 I can imagine a study where, say, constructivism is theoretically 
explored, its contemporary interpretation is drawn out and then the artwork, 
in line with these findings, is produced to realize the points made. Thus, in 
a successful study, one part of the work completes the other and presents a 
consistent body.
2. The practical part is realized first, theorized and put into an historical, 
philosophical, theoretical, conceptual and/or contemporary context so that the 
portion of the practical work is defined in relation and with reference to the 
1
A research student makes a clear statement on this issue: ‘Practice is absolutely the real test of research’ 
(Macleod, 1998: 33)On Design
42
others. Practical work incorporates practices and embodies physical works, 
performing arts, composing music and so on. This process enables the student 
to contribute to the development of knowledge, as is the case in art criticism, 
where theory may be derived from existing practice. Equally, existing practice 
may be inspired by the theory available. Practice may involve exploration of 
new material or even its invention. In that case, the theory incorporates the 
knowledge derived from the process of making. A very typical example is 
material science in which a candidate develops a new material in workshops 
before writing about the process and explaining how it was obtained. This, 
ultimately, forms the thesis. This is probably acceptable for scientists and 
designers but not for artists. There is a paradox here, which I will try to explain. 
Recording and documenting the process and the result may well be sufficient 
for some disciplines to award a doctorate degree where there is an assumption 
that the final product is something useful and will be reproduced as necessary.
 Recording and documenting is a kind of log that describes the process so that 
whoever follows it may produce and realize the new material or product as 
it was discovered, designed, manufactured or invented during the original 
research. In art, however, if the recording and documenting of the process result 
in the form of a thesis, anyone applying it as described will end up producing the 
same artwork. This is neither meaningful nor desirable. Of course, I do not deny 
that there might be other useful information in the records and documentation. 
If the main purpose of a dissertation is to contribute to knowledge, it should 
clearly communicate and argue in depth the theoretical context of the work in 
line with the research undertaken. The records and documentation are part of 
the practice and must represent the practical work accordingly unless they are 
deliberately linked to the theory for justifiable reasons.
3. Theoretical and practical work are conducted simultaneously, creating a mutual 
and interactive relationship that brings a new perspective as well as unity. 
Each part influences the other reciprocally and the development of research 
accordingly. Findings in practice re-shape the theory and the re-shaped theory 
re-forms the practice. This impact has its own creative and destructive tension, 
with the danger of bringing one part of the work to the fore in place of the 
other. It may also build a consistent unity between theory and practice; as 
Hanrahan explains ‘the relationship between the two modes of communication 
can involve the equal participation of equals in investigating a common 
concern’ (Hanrahan, 1998: 31). I wish the relationship between theory and 
practice was as simple as I have described so far. Unfortunately, it is not so 
explicit. In many cases, these three forms of realizing theoretical and practical 
research may overlap or correspond at certain stages of the process. Regarding 
the composition of theoretical and practical elements, other concepts are 
involved, among which unity becomes an absolute necessity for the coherence 
and completeness of the ultimate work.The Essential Elements
43
4.2 Unity
In principle, the work produced for a doctorate must have a coherent body, which is the 
key factor when it is composed of practical and theoretical elements. The relationship 
between these two parts is the first potential question a candidate may face in the viva 
voce. In the extreme case of a relationship forming a unity, one could say that neither 
of these works can stand on its own without the other. This may create a problem, 
particularly at the examination stage, as indicated in the booklet of the UK Council for 
Graduate Education (UKCGE) on Practice-Based Doctorates.
It has been noted that examiners still receive the written thesis in advance and, 
whilst this should include photographs, drawings or other representations of the 
exhibition, this is not the same as viewing the genuine artefact. One institution, 
recognising this, stated that the examiners should not come to, or record their 
decision until they had experienced the creative work.
(UKCGE, 1997: 36)
Initially, this argument seems fair regarding the assessment of the work. However, 
reading between the lines, it becomes obvious that attributing great importance to the 
ephemeral part of the final submission undermines the permanence of accessibility to 
the knowledge produced, as explained below.
4.3 Permanency
If the contribution to knowledge is being made with the entirety of the project including 
an exhibition, how can we claim that the remaining parts can continue to fulfil their 
function after dismantling the practical work? What the examiners judge would be 
different from what the public would find on the library shelves. I do not think that 
it is satisfactory if a work contributes to knowledge at a particular point during the 
examination and exhibition period but later ceases to do so.
Where the completeness of the work entirely depends on its unity, both parts must be 
available for public scrutiny since the entirety of the work contributes to knowledge rather 
than either part alone. Therefore, I suggest we must secure the permanency and unity of 
the work contributing to knowledge. I believe temporary elements must be well recorded 
through films, videos, photographs, catalogues and so on. This would then be presented 
in a completed form with the written work to leave no gap in the final submission.
This does not mean that only the permanently available part of the work should be 
assessed; rather, it means that what is permanently archived is the part contributing to 
knowledge. As the contribution to knowledge is not the only criterion to look at, the 
assessment process should also consider other requirements as appropriate in awarding 
the degree.On Design
44
4.4 The individual identity of each part
At the other extreme sense of relationship, the theoretical and practical parts may stand 
on their own as a piece of design or artwork on the one hand and a thesis on the other. 
Additionally, when considered together, a third option, another reading and unity of 
self-standing pieces may occur at another level. The integration of each part with or 
without losing its individual strength must bring a clear insight, a strong statement of its 
own that adds value to both the practical and theoretical sections.
Noticeably, this is a highly sophisticated relationship. Projects anticipating a 
structure as such need to elucidate the justification and reveal how the unity is being 
constructed. This will undoubtedly form the introductory and methodology section of 
the dissertation.
4.5 Balance
This raises the question of the balance between theory and practice. In an ideal world, 
both have equal weight in forming the final product. However, one element of the work 
tends to subordinate the other due to the candidate’s main interests, background and 
research findings. If the theory dominates the artwork, the final outcome may well be 
a conventional PhD.2
 If the practical part dominates, the result may be a design of an 
object, an artistic performance or an exhibition. Although this may be perfect in its own 
right, it is unlikely to fulfil the requirements of the research programme.
Here we come across one of the main arguments regarding the position of practice￾based doctorates. The UK Council’s booklet implies that the focus of such research is 
not ‘to advance the knowledge about practice, or to advance knowledge within practice. 
… The practice-based doctorate advances knowledge partly by means of practice’ 
(emphases in original) (UKCGE, 1997: 18). Of course, there is no problem in advancing 
knowledge through practice.3
 However, the question is how to make this ‘knowledge’ 
generally accessible: a knowledge that is indeed intrinsic, embodied and integrated 
within the practice itself as experienced by its author. The final product may reflect 
these qualities. However, in the absence of a thesis contextualizing the creative work, it 
is exposed to all too superficial judgements. This brings us to the issue of transferability 
of knowledge.
2
An example is the work of Claudia Maria Wegener, an artist who graduated from the RCA printmaking 
department in 1991, attended a practice-based PhD programme at the Fine Art Department of Goldsmiths’ 
College and ended up submitting a ‘normal’ PhD dissertation without any significant practical work attached 
(see The Last Monument, 1998, unpublished PhD Dissertation, London: Goldsmiths’ College). 3
The ways of advancing knowledge through practice have been well illustrated by Frayling (1993, 1998), who 
examines the differences between research into art and design, research through art and design, and research 
for art and design.The Essential Elements
45
4.6 Transferability
How can we find out what the contribution of an original practical work to knowledge 
is? Some may think that the work speaks for itself. However, it speaks to a Chinese 
person differently than it speaks to a Saudi as much as it speaks differently to anybody. 
Frankly, the work does not speak at all. It is we who make it speak, and undoubtedly in 
our own language. This is the inspirational and subjective power of the work, which is 
open to interpretation. Texts are also interpreted as studied by hermeneutics. However, 
the reading of texts is identical, while the reading of practical works is not. Once written, 
texts do not normally change over the centuries; if they survive, they survive as they are. 
Our spectacles change, yes, but not the texts. We often explain a text with another text 
using excerpts while operating within the same realm and medium.
The unfortunate destiny of practical work is that it conveys knowledge to us in a very 
different way. ‘Us’ is the receiver, the audience, the viewer before the work. We do not make 
an artwork to narrate another one. The medium is replaced by words, images and secondarily 
representative vehicles rather than an original language. It appears that the textual narrative 
is sine qua non. That is how the relationship between theory and practice is cemented.
4.7 Other aspects of the relationship
In a practice-based doctorate, I believe, a theoretical text is an arena where the practical 
work is emancipated from its subjectivity by being exposed to critical inquiry, put into 
a wider context and related to contemporary or other relevant literature. Kate Macleod 
describes this eloquently:
Artists undertaking higher degrees need to identify the position of their art practice, 
not through historical research, in the sense that this dictates the methodology but 
through a knowledge of what their practice is and what it does and this, I have to 
say, is dependent on knowledge of other practices, of artist precedents, of other 
artists’ judgements, of the discourse of art to which they are contributing.
(1998: 36)
It is an amalgamation of practical and theoretical research, a testing ground for ideas, 
hypotheses and findings. These require the skill to analyse and process the results of 
the research conducted. Here, we arrive at an often forgotten and omitted aspect of the 
debate, which is the study.
Let’s remember that doctorate programmes are advanced studies developing the 
intellectual perceptions of students among other things. The period of study equips students 
with research skills, techniques and methodologies, with abilities to collect and analyse 
data and work under supervision. They also experience argument development, academic 
paper writing and presenting and gain expertise within a particularly well-defined domain 
of their subject. Vital though it is, research is just one of the aspects of the study. Without 
other elements of the programme, no completion of the degree should be expected. Hence, On Design
46
not every research project is a PhD, and a PhD is not research only. Not every PhD holder 
is an excellent researcher, just as not all excellent researchers are PhD holders.
After looking into the complexity of theory and practice, I realized the potential 
embedded within the scope of practice-based doctorates for the future of art and design 
in general. It is not a matter of finding an appropriate niche within the conventional PhD 
to implement practical work and receive a title. I am aware that the UK Council booklet 
advocates another direction by calling it an ‘inclusive model’. Understandably, it warns us 
against the increasing number of titles and supports a simple and unique PhD to avoid 
such complications. ‘It is arguable that more flexible, inclusive and nationally agreed 
regulations for PhDs could extend to all such professionally-oriented study and activity, 
and avoid further proliferation of titles’ (UKCGE, 1997: 26). Visibly, another concern of 
this approach is to eliminate the possibility, image or notion of second-class doctorates by 
only offering an inclusive PhD programme. At first sight, this looks refined, workable and 
lucid. It also suits the personal aspirations of many practitioners. However, I believe that 
this strategy can be risky in the long run. New research degree programmes emerge from 
the needs of people, society, industry and technology. Establishing programmes without 
investigating these needs thoroughly may lead to undesirable consequences. I have a few 
observations regarding what the framework of such a programme should consider.
4.7.1 The demands of the artists and designers
The first question is why the practitioners need a research degree. Responses may vary 
but I can list some:4
1. Professional development: advancement of personal skills, professional 
knowledge, research techniques and problem-solving ability.5
2. Career development: increased the probability of employment and the area of 
job opportunities at higher levels including universities.
3. Intellectual development: intensive academic discussion on wider issues and 
feedback on personal work.
4. Profile development: wider audience, networking, contact and publicity.
4
There are other reasons causing a rise in the numbers of postgraduate students in general, including ‘economic 
recession’ and ‘the attractiveness of postgraduates to higher education institutions themselves’ (UKCGE, 1995 
& 1996).
5
Expectations regarding doctorates have gradually changed as in other fields. As one education supervisor 
noted, ‘The people who come for our doctorates don’t want that (an academic career). They want to do a 
doctorate because they are interested in a problem. We’re in a different ball game’ (Hill, 1994: 61). The 
expectations sound different in scientific circles:
Our informants assumed that PhDs will provide for the replenishment of the UK academic 
community and, despite the state of the academic labour market in most subjects, that most PhDs 
would want jobs in higher education. The assumptions among scientists were broader: that the PhD 
was a licence to do research but that many students would be recruited to industry as researchers. 
(Becher, 1994: 58)The Essential Elements
47
4.7.2 The demands of the changing nature of professions and practices
We live in an information era where the production and circulation of knowledge 
are growing exponentially. Research skills are essential to keep up with the growth in 
knowledge, progress in technology and overwhelming availability of information. Current 
art discourse is characterized by a sophisticated and highly elaborate nomenclature 
derived from contemporary philosophy. Art with a capital A does not exist anymore 
without its discourse, at least in certain circles. Therefore, artists very rightly wish to be 
equipped with theoretical tools for further understanding, interpreting, presenting and 
developing their work.
4.7.3 The potential of a new professional degree
An advanced study and research programme incorporating theory and practice will 
inevitably and proactively explore the relationships of its components in depth. This 
initial debate about the programmes themselves has already interacted with, instigated 
and accumulated a considerable body of ideas and literature in the last few years. 
It would be naive not to imagine that a new form of art, design and theory alliance 
would flourish from these programmes, contributing not only to knowledge but also to 
motivate each of the participant disciplines enormously. A separate degree structure has 
more potential than the established PhD tradition because a specialized, dedicated and 
well-defined advanced professional study and research programme would be purpose￾built as opposed to the general structure of PhD programmes.
4.7.4 Jeopardizing the established concept of the PhD
Despite variations between each university’s PhD regulations, there is some sort of 
consensus on what a PhD consists of. The sciences, social sciences and humanities each 
have their own traditions and systems in place, namely an academic research degree 
mostly based on theory presented in the form of a thesis. When the practical element 
constitutes half of the final work, the nature of theoretical participation and the essence 
of the final products differ radically from a traditional PhD. Given that the number of 
words required also changes drastically, it becomes hard to define what a PhD consists 
of, if the ‘inclusive model’ is adopted.6
 The term ‘practice-based PhD’ has already 
become popular to mark these differences, which are rather clear, as argued above. The 
problem, however, is to coin the right term for the right activity. If a practice-based PhD 
is different from a traditional PhD, why do we not name it differently? This will give a 
6
The ‘inclusive model’ is developed and suggested in the UK Council pamphlet. It reads: ‘This inclusive model 
would involve either demonstrating/accepting that the activities and outcomes outlined … could reasonably 
be seen as consistent with a traditional scientific model, or broadening the model so as to encompass the entire 
continuum from scientific to practice-based research’ (UKCGE, 1997: 20).On Design
48
distinctive character and mission to the programmes without jeopardizing the existing 
conceptualization of PhDs.
4.8 Conclusion
My argument is that the so-called practice-based PhD has its own attributes, potential 
and strengths that are sufficiently dissimilar from the traditional PhD that it deserves to 
be named independently. This will give a new identity and power to such programmes 
regarding further exploration of the fertile soil of the theory–practice duality. Degree 
titles such as Doctor of Art (D.Art), Doctor of Fine Art (D.F.A.) and Doctor of Design 
(D.Des) awarded by Harvard University, clearly demonstrate the area and the level 
of specialism. I have noticed the implication that separate titles prefaced by the word 
‘Doctor’ may be treated as second-class degrees. I disagree with this view because I think 
that they are equal to PhDs but with different expertise (which conventional PhDs lack). 
I can think of the extreme benefit of this level of expertise within education. Take BA art 
or design studio teaching: would it not be ideal to have a practicing artist or designer, 
someone with a D.Art or D.Des, and another tutor with a PhD teaching various aspects of 
the subject with a greater balance of theory and practice embodied within the expertise 
present? In other words, one could anticipate the alleviation of the theory–practice 
controversy within art colleges by employing tutors with D.Art or D.Des qualifications.
Some may feel that it is rather tiring and an unnecessary battle to raise the status of 
these new degrees instead of taking refuge in the easier solution and enjoying the existing 
prestige of the PhD. If this approach achieves a consensus, then I am worried that the 
concept of the PhD may soon become misleading with all these options included within 
it. This may even cast a shadow on the quality and substance of the title, both nationally 
and internationally, not due to the standard of the work but due to inconsistency in the 
inclusiveness.
If, however, we argue that D.Art and D.Des are dissimilar to PhDs in nature, then 
let’s face the fact and work for it. When prestige is concerned, we should remember that 
the relationship in question here between a practice-based PhD and a PhD somewhat 
resembles the statuary relationship between design and art at the turn of the century: 
Although the recognition of the design profession had been on the agenda, many people 
continued to prefer the expression ‘industrial art’. Moot points: friendly disputes upon art 
& industry between Walter Crane & Lewis F. Day, a book published in 1903, is an ideal 
example to re-discover this (Crane, 1903). The designers used to call themselves ‘artists’ 
to benefit from the existing prestige, status and protective umbrella of art.7
 According 
7
I encountered this desire of being or being considered an artist during my research on design concepts. Those 
who we confidently call ‘designers’ today were far from naming their activity ‘design’. Instead, they insisted on 
terms containing the word ‘art’. Commercial art, industrial art, applied art, practical art, art manufacturers and 
art applied to industry are some of the expressions employed in the ninetieth and early twentieth centuries 
(Balcioglu, 1993).The Essential Elements
49
to Noel Carrington, ‘Lethaby managed to avoid the dangerous word art almost entirely 
from the start to finish in the pursuit of the recognition of “design” in the inaugural 
pamphlet of the (DIA) Design and Industries Association in 1915’ (1976: 30).
I do not think that history repeats itself. However, some social and human attitudes 
do. In this particular case, I would like to believe in the lessons learnt from history to 
avoid repeating what has turned into a deviation from the identification process.CHAPTER 5
RESEARCH, KNOWLEDGE AND 
DOCTORATE PROGRAMMES
TOWARDS THE THIRD DOMAIN
This paper was first presented at a conference in Milan and then published in its proceedings. 
Pizzocaro, S., Arruda, A. and de Moraes, D., eds, (2000), Design Plus Research: Proceedings of the 
Politecnico di Milano Conference, 321–329, Milan: Politecnico di Milano.
Two prevailing aspects of the debate regarding research in art and design concern me: 
the epistemological and the educational. This chapter undertakes an epistemological 
investigation of the nature of knowledge in art and design, while its reflection on 
the educational perspective is traced through research-based education at doctorate 
level.
5.1 Background
At the turn of the twenty-first century, a debate regarding research has become dominant 
within art and design. Among the many reasons why research has been praised are the 
following – in no particular order:
Research Assessment Exercise was introduced to UK universities and art and design 
in 1992. As the ranking of departments, schools and colleges intensified competition, 
institutions rushed to establish research centres, programmes, fellowships, research 
assistants and studentships, motivated primarily by the funds given to higher education 
institutes based on their rating. Depending on size, it was not unusual for a higher 
education institute with a ‘five-star’ ranking to receive up to one million pounds. Earlier, 
the majority of UK art and design courses were delivered by polytechnics and institutes. 
However, in 1992, polytechnics became universities or began operating as part of the 
university sector. Art and design education was thus subjected to a more academic 
and structured approach, within which research is paramount. Within curriculum 
design, unitized or modular systems gained recognition. In parallel, vocational training 
courses like the Higher National Diploma (HND) have lost popularity, whereas BA and 
master courses are in the ascendant. Certainly, the prevailing climate is increasingly 
aspirational, with rapid growth in taught master courses, research degrees and MPhil 
and PhD programmes.Research, Knowledge and Doctorate Programmes
51
There are, of course, other factors. Higher education in the UK is an industry.1
 It is 
known that ‘whatever their slant on postgraduate work, all institutions will have to come 
to terms with the increasing internationalisation of the postgraduate market as part of 
the liberalisation of world trade’ (Bone, 1999: 59).
This transposition is particularly noticeable in newly developed countries, where once 
there is reasonable provision of undergraduate courses and universities, the main interest 
in advanced study focuses on education abroad. Demand from overseas countries is thus 
shifting towards postgraduate courses, which has encouraged the rise of research in the 
UK. Postgraduate programmes need to be delivered by academically qualified teachers. 
However, supervisors with doctorate degrees are still rare in design, and particularly art. 
Although more scholars are now researching the history and theory of the subject, they 
often operate in academic environments while few conduct practice-based tutorials. This 
niche encourages the ambition to teach in higher education, thereby motivating some 
practitioners to equip themselves with the requisite qualifications. In comparison with 
the vagaries of the art market and art business, a teaching career appears an attractive 
proposition.
There are complex and diverse reasons why artists and designers require advanced 
research degrees. The hiatus between their expectations is also visibly widening. 
Designers are often interested in a specific problem and wish to direct their research 
abilities towards its solution. More often than not, these solutions are product-oriented 
and applicable to industry. This is attractive to businesses, companies and industries, 
which are likely to provide funds and financial support for prospective or present staff 
members wishing to undertake a project-related research degree. In theory, the hopes of 
higher education institutions have been realized, as there are qualified and experienced 
applicants, funding is available and collaboration with industry is being intensified. It 
looks like an ideal situation! However, it is not so straightforward because conventional 
programmes such as MPhil/PhD are often unsuitable for industrial projects. This is 
because they are usually theoretical, require full-time involvement and are structured 
to produce academic researchers and scholars rather than practitioners with advanced 
applied research skills. Although applied research is not alien to scientific disciplines like 
physics, chemistry and anthropology, this question needs to be addressed within art and 
design education.
Artists’ mounting interest in research degrees is likely to be linked to personal, 
professional, intellectual and career development.2
 In other words, the research problems 
1
The number of international postgraduate students rose by over 300 per cent from 25,000 in 1988 to almost 
78,000 in 1997 (Watts, 1999: 17). Over the same period the number of international students in the United 
States grew by approximately 20 per cent from 123,000 to 147,000 (Watts, 1999: 17). These figures demonstrate 
the rise in the popularity of English-medium universities. Given the average annual cost of a postgraduate 
science course was £14,800 in 1998 (Watts, 1999: 16), such students obviously provide millions of pounds per 
year.
2
There are other reasons for the general rise in postgraduate students, including ‘economic recession’ and ‘the 
attractiveness of postgraduates to higher education institutions themselves’ (UKCGE, 1995 & 1996).On Design
52
they intend to tackle have probably emerged from their individual work. No doubt, 
a creative and responsive milieu in academic circles could be a source of inspiration 
for many people. The establishment of the Art and Humanities Research Board in 
1998 notably encouraged research through funding research projects with a budget of 
approximately 50 million pounds dedicated to art and design, and its practice. All of 
these issues have propelled the debate on research and research degrees. Many questions 
were asked and considerable advances were achieved. Arguably, however, a consensus 
has yet to be reached about the nature of the PhD and its difference from studio or 
practice-based PhDs.
5.2 Epistemological aspect
When artists and designers want to do a research-based PhD for their own reasons, 
they encounter the basic principle of the degree: ‘A PhD dissertation must contribute to 
knowledge.’ This argument of ‘contributing to knowledge through art and design practice’ 
raises the question of what knowledge fundamentally is. The Rector of the Royal College 
of Art, Christopher Frayling, summarizes it succinctly and effectively:
What we actually do:
● Research into art and design
● Research through art and design
● Research for art and design (Frayling, 1993: 3)
The first two are relatively uncomplicated. Historical, aesthetic and theoretical research 
falls into the first category, whereas material and technical research, development work 
and action research are covered by the second one. But the third category is what Frayling 
calls ‘thorny’: ‘Research where the end product is an artefact – where the thinking is, 
so to speak, embodied in the artefact, where the goal is not primarily communicable 
knowledge in the sense of verbal communication, but in the sense of visual or iconic or 
imagistic (sic) communication’ (Frayling, 1993: 5).
When we enter the domain of action within which an art or design object is created, 
the place of knowledge becomes elusive. What motivates artists and drives the creative 
action is not essentially knowledge but a composition of subjective decisions, ideas, 
feelings, expressions, exploration, intuition and so on. Within this process, the position 
of knowledge, its weighting and its determinative role, is questionable and varies in each 
case. What is certain, however, is its uncertainty, as Clive Dilnot notes.3
 In his Ohio 
(1999a) and later Helsinki Paper (1999b) he examines the issue further, focusing on 
3
I do not know at this stage what Heisenberg’s theory of uncertainty may offer to design, but if ‘uncertainty’ is 
further studied and accepted as intrinsic to design knowledge, a visit to Heisenberg may be inevitable. (Theory 
of uncertainty: the impossibility of determining the exact position and the momentum of a moving particle 
simultaneously. Chambers, 21st Century Dictionary).Research, Knowledge and Doctorate Programmes
53
the concept of knowledge and its validity in design. ‘A third way of knowing’ is the 
precept which permeates his investigation: ‘Because design cannot be accommodated 
satisfactorily within either the model of the sciences/technological sciences or within the 
humanities/social sciences, then design sets up “an-other” model of knowing and doing; 
instantiates a particular form of praxis or phronesis’ (1999a: 67). Dilnot approaches 
the concept of knowledge from a ‘language’ perspective, through which knowledge 
develops and is communicated. Without communication, knowledge does not exist. 
Communication is not limited to one or two particular ways of conveying knowledge. 
Indeed, there must be different ways of communicating knowledge. There are different 
languages. The development, generation and production of knowledge is also dependent 
upon communication. Language within a given discipline is the medium through which 
the knowledge of that particular discipline is advanced. Different languages and ways 
of communication may thus be instrumental in the emergence of different kinds of 
knowledge. Once the vital link between knowledge and language has been perceived, 
the unique characteristic of knowledge can be better comprehended – if, of course, it 
exists as such. This at least is my reading of Clive Dilnot’s account.
His analysis of knowledge highlights an interesting association: ‘Science numbers the 
world and the humanities narrate it.’ He continues: ‘design neither narrates nor numbers.’ 
If so, the logical conclusion is that art operates audio-visually and/or sensorially while 
design does so artifactually. Thus, artefactual and sensorial knowledge need to be defined. 
Furthermore, the formation of artefactual and sensorial knowledge, its accumulation 
and progress should be discernible, as should its mechanisms and raison d’être. The 
exigent task of developing design knowledge, as described by Dilnot, is rather new to us.
However, what I am concerned with here is not to develop a language of objects and 
thereby knowledge particular to the artificial but the concept of knowledge as articulated 
in science. I believe that the concept of knowledge borrowed by many design theorists 
and historians belongs to certain schools. One of them is Justificationism, which believes 
in proven knowledge and is the source of post-Enlightenment rational thought (Lakatos, 
1970). It is not difficult to predict how design operates within this premise: identification 
of a design problem, developing a project (a proposition), designing, testing, observing 
failures, getting feedback, redesigning, re-testing, market research, users’ and consumers’ 
response, alterations in design and so on.
Another trend subscribes to Karl Popper’s explanation of knowledge within the 
school of Falsificationism, whereby a proposition remains valid unless it is refuted. 
Before formulating the systematic application of Falsificationism or Justificationism to 
design, we should note criticisms of these theories. Any theory imported into design 
should also give an account of itself within its own context. This is what I see missing 
in the relationship between design and knowledge. What both proven knowledge and 
non-falsified knowledge impose is that what is proven is valid forever, and what is non￾falsified is valid unless it is refuted. In both cases, time and space are not specified. Once 
accepted, that particular item of knowledge is valid everywhere on earth, independent 
of location but confined to the time period between when the proposition first emerged 
and its falsification (if it ever occurs). This notion of knowledge – spatially independent On Design
54
but temporally bound – is not valid for either art or design because their knowledge is 
strictly bound to both. Therefore, what constitutes art knowledge and design knowledge 
has to be explored with surgical precision. The relationship between science, art and 
design also needs to be portrayed in context because, if the concept of knowledge is only 
developed by scientists, its application to art and design remains undifferentiated.
5.3 Science, Art and Design
If any single work defines the polarisation and split between art and humanities and 
science, it is The Two Cultures by C. P. Snow (1995). First published in 1959 after the 
annual Rede Lectures in Cambridge, it initiated a public debate that still resonates. Snow 
observed, analysed and compared the two cultures to develop ‘a brilliant delineation 
of divide’ (1995). Although he mostly referred to the humanities and literature, he 
nevertheless fomented the art and science controversy. Since then, however, the 
contemporary understanding of interdisciplinary approaches has removed many of 
these boundaries, although the belief in the oppositeness of art and science has not 
diminished.4
Design was not part of this polarization, at least initially. Various propositions situate 
design in relation to art and science. Philosopher Vilém Flusser has made observations 
similar to C. P. Snow’s: ‘Modern bourgeois culture made a sharp division between the 
world of arts and that of technology and machines; hence culture was split into two 
mutually exclusive branches: one scientific, quantifiable and “hard”, the other aesthetic, 
evaluative and “soft”’ (Flusser, 1999: 18). He demarcated a region for design between art 
and technology.
In the gap design formed a bridge between the two. It could do this since it is 
an expression of the internal connection between art and technology. Hence in 
contemporary life, design more or less indicates the site where art and technology 
(along with their respective evaluative and scientific ways of thinking) come 
together as equals, making a new form of culture possible.
(Flusser, 1999: 18–19)
Earlier attempts tried to secure space for design within science rather than claiming 
a zone of its own. These efforts included Bauhaus, Hochschule für Gestaltung (HfG) 
Ulm,5
 Herbert Simon’s Science of Design (1998) and Bruce Archer’s attempts to introduce 
scientific methods into design processes in the UK. Educationally, design in the UK 
lined up with art as a traditional ally. This is probably because, at least until recently, 
4
For me, the question is not whether it exists but what the relationship is within the unity and diversity of 
scientific, artistic and design thinking.
5
Richard Buchanan (1995) gives a good account of the endeavours connecting design with science.Research, Knowledge and Doctorate Programmes
55
art and design education has often been established under one roof, thereby bolstering 
the image that they are inseparable. With the raising of the question of knowledge, 
science, art and design (SAD) require repositioning in relation to one other. However, 
this chapter does not risk undertaking this task. Instead, it is worth looking into the 
use of knowledge in science, art and design as an initial criterion for comparison in the 
context of research. In science, knowledge forms the basis of research and development. 
Observation, experiment, rational and abstract thinking, logic, creativity and so on 
are all important. Scientific knowledge forms the basis of scientific research, pursued 
intrinsically and perhaps solely to expand the frontiers of knowledge. That is, knowledge 
is the main motivation, stimulus and outcome.
Art, however, benefits from knowledge differently. History, theory and knowledge 
of materials, techniques and processes are all useful intellectual backgrounds for artists 
and for producing work. However, when it comes to contemporary artistic activity, 
other forces predominate: ideas, intuition, creativity, meaning, subjective decisions and 
plans, aesthetic and expressive concerns and so on. The role of knowledge in the act of 
producing an artwork is ‘uncertain’ and not easily definable for many, if not all artworks. 
Therefore, it is probably right to say that the main personal drive in creating art today is 
the idea, meaning and communication.6
A major conflict, however, emanates from what I call ‘the challenge of uniqueness’. 
In principle, an artwork should be unique, except for manual, mechanical or electronic 
reproductions. Even then, these reproductions are numbered and signed separately 
to ensure that they too are endowed with a degree of uniqueness. Therefore, the art 
knowledge leading to the creation of a particular and unique artwork is destined to 
be unique itself. Whether artists use the same knowledge to produce the same work 
again is another matter. What matters is that the knowledge of each work is embodied 
within itself and remains with the artist (or designer) unless conveyed to others. While 
the production techniques, materials, forms and experience gained can be shared and 
may lead to other works, the uniqueness of the artwork and its embodied personal 
knowledge remains intact. Although the end product can be multiplied, the uniqueness 
of the design experience for each single project is identical to that of art. Under normal 
circumstances, an artist does not use the same knowledge to produce the same work 
again. If the knowledge is not shared and remains possessed only by the artist, its 
validity as knowledge becomes questionable. On the other hand, if the artist reveals the 
knowledge of that particular work – whatever that knowledge might be – this knowledge 
will be useless because it can only lead to the reproduction of the original work. This is 
the challenge of uniqueness in the context of knowledge.
Personal knowledge, on the other hand, is the kind of knowledge we try to formulate 
for art and design. Michael Polanyi, a distinguished philosopher of science, has already 
eloquently articulated the notion in a way that is perfectly applicable to art and design.
6
Artistic action and its main drive are not fixed but subject to changes, altering historically and culturally 
between eras and locations.On Design
56
We may distinguish between the personal in us, which actively enters into our 
commitments, and our subjective states, in which we merely endure our feelings. 
This distinction established the conception of the personal, which is neither 
subjective nor objective. In so far as the personal submits to requirements 
acknowledged by itself as independent of itself, it is not subjective; but in so far 
as it is an action guided by the individual passions, it is not objective either. It 
transcends the disjunction between subjective and objective.
([1958] 1974: 300)
Commitments are crucial for personal knowledge and instrumental for demarcating its 
differences from subjective knowledge: ‘commitment is a personal choice, seeking, and 
eventually accepting, something believed (both by the person incurring the commitment 
and the writer describing it) to be impersonally given, while the subjective is altogether 
in the nature of a condition to which the person in question is subject’ ([1958] 1974: 
302). I believe that his explanation of discovery is also applicable to art and design: ‘From 
a first intimation of a hidden problem and throughout its pursuit to the point of its 
solution, the process of discovery (or art or design – my addition) is guided by a personal 
vision and sustained by a personal conviction’ ([1958] 1974: 301).
The knowledge I have talked about so far is the knowledge of the artist while creating 
an artwork. Once created, however, the artwork itself generates its own discourse, hence 
its own knowledge. The value and knowledge of a given artwork are not determined by 
scientific tests and experiments but by consensus, probably formed by artists, critics, 
audiences, dealers and so on. Although the mechanisms of what constitutes consensus 
are complicated and may not even be impartial, it is obvious that the value and thereby 
the validity of an artwork is determined through these mechanisms, which are in a sense 
verification devices.
Comparing the use of knowledge in design to its equivalent in art and science helps 
make the relationship between them clearer. Certain elements of design require scientific, 
social, economic, ergonomic, cultural and technological knowledge that is very solid or 
‘hard’, as Flusser described it. In contrast, despite all the attempts outlined above, creative 
processes are not accessed through scientific methods but via an approach similar to that 
of art. The designer’s philosophy, interpretation of the subject, creative instinct, feelings, 
principles and so on may also play a role in forming the product. However, the key 
player and determining factor for which the knowledge is employed is satisfying needs 
and requirements by producing products and environments with strong functional 
characteristics.
By identifying the main use of knowledge in scientific, artistic and design research 
as a knowledge-oriented, idea-oriented and function-oriented activity, I am trying to 
underline one of the major aspects defining science, art and design. I would predict that 
design will become an issue in the coming years. Indeed, a few scholars, such as Victor 
Margolin, Clive Dilnot and Nigel Cross, have already initiated the debate: ‘There has 
been a growing acceptance of design on its own terms, a growing acknowledgement and Research, Knowledge and Doctorate Programmes
57
articulation of design as discipline in its own right. We have to come to realise that we do 
not have to turn design into an imitation of science, nor do we have to treat design as a 
mysterious, ineffable art’ (Cross, 1999: 7).
Let us be clear about the relationship of science, art and design regarding the use of 
knowledge: rather than representing three monolithic domains, the trio are all interrelated 
and inter-penetrable to various degrees. Science is not devoid of art: a mathematical 
formula, DNA helices and images of the nucleus of an atom or from space can be more 
than an excellent aesthetic. Similarly, design is becoming gradually integrated into 
science as in bioengineering and cloning. Conversely, artworks benefit from science and 
technology while modern design has been an integral component of modern art. In 
short, every work receives a certain input from other domains. For instance, designing 
a lancet or surgical knife may require scientific knowledge of the latest materials, 
ergonomics and function, although no art is involved; nothing should distract attention 
in an operating theatre, only design, science and technology. In contrast, Swatch is more 
successful through its artistic appeal than technological expertise. Design knowledge 
has explicitly contributed to producing unusual watches for different age groups 
while the environment has something to do with the Zeitgeist rather than any proven 
knowledge. Taste, style, manner, popular culture, tradition, fashion and many other 
social and cultural ingredients determine the success of a design. Here, we encounter 
the problem with the concept of proven knowledge mentioned above. Understandably, 
proven knowledge is needed to design a product, yet not every product is successful as 
many disappear as rapidly as they appear. Does this mean that the design knowledge has 
failed if a product does not survive? Is the market a verification mechanism for design 
knowledge per se? Can we ask the same question about artists by claiming that only 
those who are established and known by the public are endowed with art knowledge? 
Can success be tied to the justification of knowledge? What can we say of those who are 
not successful and whose work is not known? Ultimately, what does success have to do 
with knowledge?
All these unanswered questions tell us something, namely that the deciding agent 
in art and design is consensus. This consensus is constituted by a comprehensive 
mechanism that probably comprises various powers, such as the market, media, culture, 
custom, ideology, tradition and so on. If consensus is the key to the substantiation of art 
knowledge and design knowledge, we can look to existing theories to determine whether 
consensus-based knowledge is legitimized.7
Imre Lakatos explains the same situation in science. ‘For centuries knowledge 
meant proven knowledge,’ he says, ‘proven either by the power of intellect or by the 
evidence of the senses’ (1970: 91). Although sceptics questioned the power of intellect 
7
This approach does not rule out what Dilnot suggests: an understanding of design knowledge with its own 
means of communication and justification.On Design
58
and sense, the success of Newtonian physics prevailed and added another keystone to 
the Enlightenment’s foundations. According to Lakatos, ‘Einstein’s results again turned 
the tables and now few philosophers or scientists still think that scientific knowledge 
is, or can be, proven knowledge’ (Lakatos, 1970: 92). One of the strongest arguments is 
truth by consensus. If the truth is constituted by consensus in science, why would not 
this be applicable to art and design? This question is perfectly legitimate considering 
that discourses determine the aura of art and design works and form the consensus 
within communities. Therefore, consensus-based knowledge is perfectly suitable for art 
and design, even in the form discussed by scientists. This definition of art and design 
knowledge is crucial for doctorate-level research, for which ‘contribution to knowledge’ 
is an indispensable condition. To this end, it is time to review the structure of advanced 
research programmes with all these concerns in mind.
5.4 Educational aspect
The debate about art and design doctorates has generated great enthusiasm and interest. 
Particular attention has been directed towards practice-related doctorate programmes. 
Artists and designers who believe their practice is research, or incorporates a great deal 
of research, question the nature of PhDs. They demand academic recognition for their 
practice as the core aspect of art-based PhD programmes.8
 In other words, the theory 
and practice duality and their balance or proportional representation appear to be the 
key issue dominating the dispute.9
 The relationship between theoretical and practical 
work, their composition and weighting raises the question of whether they are PhDs 
or professional doctorates.10 This division has emerged in the last decade. Some PhD 
programmes have reduced the number of words required for the dissertation while 
incorporating a substantial amount of practical work for submission. As a result, 
practice-based, practice-led and studio-based PhDs have appeared.
Other universities have preferred to award a separate title, such as professional 
doctorates (PD), for similar kinds of work. Practice-based learning and cooperative 
education are phrases used in Australia, where they are now considering ‘work-based 
learning programs at the doctorate level’ (Caban, 1998).
These schemes are not only confusing but also considerably damaging to the concept 
of the PhD. Trying to introduce practice as the basis of research while redressing and 
renaming the existing PhD is problematic. Instead, clarification and simplicity are 
needed. I therefore argue that a doctorate level of both PhDs and professional doctorates 
8
Katy Macleod’s paper reveals these. She states, ‘What this study uncovered was the postgraduate Fine Art 
student’s anxiety about centring the research firmly within his/her art practice’ (Macleod, 1998).
9
For a detailed articulation of the argument, see Hanrahan (1998). 10This question is described as a contentious issue in the UK Council for Graduate Education, Practice-based 
Doctorates in the Creative and Performing Arts and Design (1997).Research, Knowledge and Doctorate Programmes
59
offers a good combination of degrees from which to launch a variety of research projects. 
PhDs can be allocated mostly to those who wish to pursue an academic and research 
career and mostly for theory-based research aiming to contribute to knowledge, the 
advancement of the discipline and its theory. Professional doctorates can be directed at 
those who wish to improve their subject specialism and practical research skills, pursue 
educational and professional careers, and contribute to knowledge, the advancement of 
the profession and its practice.
Having these two programmes does not prevent the assimilation of the two different 
notions of knowledge discussed above. Proven knowledge or unfalsified knowledge, 
or other notions of knowledge discussed and employed in science, can serve the same 
function for theoretical research in art and design within PhD programmes. As I argued 
before, artefactual language, personal knowledge, design knowledge and art knowledge 
are likely to be consensus-based and inseparable from practice. The duality at the 
doctorate level is thus congruent with the kinds of specialist knowledge functioning 
in each programme. No clear-cut division is suggested here, except an attempt at 
demarcating zones.
These concise definitions of the two doctorate programmes give critical importance 
to the threshold where theory and practice merge. If theory, theoretical research 
and the thesis form the main body of work, a PhD is the right programme. Within 
this spectrum, work comprising substantial theoretical research appears adequate for 
PhD programmes whereas work balancing theory and practice is an ideal duality for 
professional doctorates.
I think that allocating the PhD mostly for theoretical, academic, knowledge-oriented, 
discipline-related research and the PD scheme mostly for professional and practice￾based research with an identified subject specialism, draws a clear line between the 
differences. It also incorporates many contentious areas within a simple and coherent 
structure. However, there are a few points to stress. First, while both degrees are equal at 
the doctorate level, they are designed to serve distinct functions as required by various 
bodies. This equality is an important issue, and the worry that one might be superior to 
the other is actually groundless, for each one is distinct and serves a different purpose.
Second, both degrees contribute to knowledge in their own direction and with 
their own means. I think, to ensure quality, one should not sacrifice the principle of 
contributing to knowledge and originality of work at doctorate level. Third, there has 
been concern about the proliferation of titles. Although I sympathize with this, I do not 
worry about the number of qualifications providing that the resulting works are high 
quality and of the required standard. No doubt, a proliferation of titles will attract more 
people to apply for doctorate programmes. This does not mean that standards will be 
lowered. However, it does necessitate that the areas of interest defined by the new titles 
be carefully tailored to the needs of industry and people – more people than those who 
are already involved. Hence, the real question is not qualification inflation but the quality 
of qualification, which is not to be compromised at all. This is why I insist that ‘originality 
and contribution to knowledge’ should remain two of the main criteria and defining 
factors at the doctorate level.On Design
60
PhDs and professional doctorates operating at the threshold of theory and 
practice, exploring the potential of design knowledge, developing the language and 
knowledge of the artefactual for the third domain and searching for possibilities 
of personal and consensus-based knowledge promise new perspectives in art and 
design. They will probably lead towards work that is not only new but also full of 
promises.SECTION TWO
HISTORY
Design history has developed immensely in the UK thanks to the annual conferences 
of the Design History Society, its journal and works of distinguished scholars such as 
Adrian Forty, Clive Dilnot, Gillian Naylor, Grace Lees-Maffei, Guy Julier, Hazel Conway, 
John Heskett, Jonathan Woodham, Judy Attfield, Kjetil Fallan, Penny Sparke, Tim 
Putnam, Tony Fry and so on. Therefore, the chapters in this section are nothing more 
than a modest contribution to the field from an outsider who gives examples of design 
history research, methodology and historiography with a different view.
Chapter 6 explores the term ‘design’ and its transformation in the UK. This provides 
a useful perspective regarding its development and the emergence of various design￾related professions and disciplines. Chapter 7 proposes another way of looking into 
design history by tracing mentality changes. For this purpose, it focuses on the writings 
of John Gloag to show how his ideas improved over time and how these changes in his 
thinking furnished us with new knowledge about the perception of design in society.
Chapter 8 focuses on research concerning the rise of design historiography in the UK, 
which is a continuation of the previous two in providing insights and presenting how 
British design history flourished. Chapters 9, 10 and 11, however, consider Turkish design. 
Thus, this history section contains research about both the UK and Turkey, reflecting the 
author’s Turkish origin and his extensive research activities in London. Since the examples 
come from both the UK and Turkey, it inevitably raises issues regarding the relationship 
between British and Turkish design, and two significant current debates: decolonising and 
transnational design history. Where should we place these chapters in this context?
The relationship between British and Turkish design is not new. Its early culmination 
goes back to the 1851 Great Exhibition, where the Ottoman Pavilion was one of the centres 
of attraction. Although this relationship requires further detailed study, there are a few 
points worth underlining. For instance, Sir Alec Issigonis, the designer of the Morris Mini￾Minor was born in Izmir, Turkey, while the first mass-produced Turkish car, the Anadol, 
designed by Reliant and Ogle, arrived in Turkey in 1966. Rıfat Özbek, Bora Aksu and 
Hussein Chalayan are famous names in the UK fashion world while the British designer 
Ross Lovegrove is responsible for many products of the Turkish company VitrA.1
1
The Turkish company VitrA is different than the other similarly named furniture company Vitra which gives 
a brief explanation in its website about this coincidence:
VitrA is a company that constitutes part of the Turkish Eczacibasi Group which has produced 
tiles and sanitary ceramics and distributed these globally since 1942. The name similarity with the 
brand name vitra is coincidental; both companies developed entirely separately from one another. 
A friendly exchange presently exists between both companies, but there are no commercial links. 
http://www.vitra.com.tr/On Design
62
Regarding the academic relationship in design, the author had the opportunity 
to meet Sir David Carter, Prof Frank Height and Prof John Heskett in the UK in late 
1987 thanks to Michael Preston, who was a senior member of the exhibition department 
of the Science Museum, London. These well-known figures were invited to Turkey and 
delivered a series of lectures that had a considerable impact on industrial design students 
at Middle East Technical University in late 1987 and 1988. Later, Prof Bruce Archer 
was involved in design research activities in Istanbul and Ankara. Thanks to the strong 
networks established over the years, many Turkish professors of design completed their 
PhDs in the UK, and some are now heads of university departments and have published 
well-regarded academic papers.2
At the end of the 1990s, the author was instrumental in organising a conference on 
Turkish Design at the Architectural Association, where Marco Susani, Defne Koz and 
John Langrish delivered speeches. The British Council had organized similar activities 
in Turkey. Nowadays, there are so many British and Turkish architects and designers 
operating in both countries that it is a hard task to list them. The relationship between 
British and Turkish design and its effects have become rather complicated, which needs 
further exploration, perhaps in a comparative study. When the papers in this section were 
written, a comparative study was never on the agenda, as Turkish product design was 
still in its infancy and globalization was a mainstream matter preoccupying intellectuals 
as decolonizing and transnational history do today.
In a broad sense, colonization probably started in ancient times when a group of 
people migrated and occupied the lands of the indigenous people. We witness this 
in each period of world history. Perhaps the word gained its current meaning after 
Columbus’s discovery of the New World, which enabled European countries to establish 
colonies in America, Africa, the Far East, Australia and New Zealand. As a result, local 
resources were exploited, and Western values were imposed on indigenous cultures. 
Such anti-democratic and imperialist moves are criticized today while decolonizing 
design has been introduced as a vehicle to appreciate local values, products, techniques, 
experiences, views and so on, and to incorporate diversity and inclusion. The term 
decolonization itself is also problematic and widely discussed. As Dori Tunstall, Dean 
of Design at the Ontario College of Art and Design University, puts it, ‘Diversity is 
getting the invitation to the party. Inclusion is if someone asks if you want to dance. 
Decolonizing is allowing the most vulnerable to choose the music, plan the food, etc. for 
the party’ (Tunstall, 2020).
In this respect, it would be rather interesting to read some chapters in this section 
with these debates about decolonizing in mind since Turkey was never colonized and 
the Ottomans had not colonized at all. That is, although the Ottomans occupied huge 
territories in Europe, Asia, North Africa and the Middle East, they mostly retained local 
systems and were satisfied with governing the people and collecting taxes.
2
I would like to list a few holders of PhDs from the UK who serve in academia in Turkey: Alpay Er, Özlem Er, 
Naz A. G. Z. Börekçi, Gülay Hasdoğan, Bahar Şener Pedgley and Harun Kaygan.History
63
If, however, decolonizing design means removing white or Eurocentric thinking in 
design, this is another issue. Westernization was introduced to the Ottomans in the 
nineteenth century, with all kinds of styles emerging in architecture, including Baroque, 
Rococo, eclecticism and Art Nouveau. The question is the extent that Westernization 
overlaps with colonization in a country that was never colonized. If a country’s leaders 
decide that Westernization provides a means to progress and therefore adopt and apply 
its various institutions, systems, sciences, technologies and values, can the result be 
considered indirect colonization or a new state with its own structure and merit? The 
latter is the case for Turkey.
Thus, it is neither reasonable nor possible to connect the following chapters on 
Turkish design with decolonization. Furthermore, decolonization design has never 
been a focus of discussion within the Turkish intellectual milieu. What surfaced instead 
as a consequence of Westernization is the question of design identity and its link 
with heritage, tradition and local culture. The first and second national architectural 
design movements in Turkey are two examples while design identity remains an issue, 
particularly among product designers.
While in my experience, decolonization is not applicable to Turkey, transnational 
history is essential to understand design developments in depth. Considering how 
cosmopolitan the Ottomans were and how Turkey exists at the crossroads of many 
cultures and under the influx of immigrants today, transnational historiography is 
becoming essential. To this end, Chapter 9 considers examples from architecture while 
encouraging new researchers to take transnational historiography seriously.
Chapter 10 studies Turkish graphic design in the republican era, categorizes works 
in terms of their style and characteristics, and analyses some to justify the argument. 
Finally, Chapter 11 narrates the story of the 4T: Design and Design History Society in 
Turkey in which the author played a major role. At first sight, these last three chapters 
are not directly linked – in contrast to the first three chapters on UK design, which were 
derived from the author’s PhD and subsequent research work. The last three chapters 
in this section, which surfaced out of distinct interests, touch on different aspects of 
Turkish design while giving key information and introducing new insights into three 
diverse areas.64CHAPTER 6
ON TRANSFORMATIONS OF THE 
TERM DESIGN WITH REFERENCE TO 
MASS-PRODUCED OBJECTS
The first version of this chapter was published in Design, Industry and Turkey. See: Balcioglu, T. 
(1994), ‘On Transformations of the Term Design with Reference to Mass Produced Objects’, in Design, 
Industry and Turkey, 253–263, G. Hasdogan (ed), Ankara: Middle East Technical University
In this chapter,1
 I will first present the crucial elements of this analysis. There will be 
two arguments: a) the impossibility of reaching an agreed meaning of design because 
of the term’s very nature and, consequently, b) the transformation of design in line with 
technological change and in relation to the development of other design fields.
Using this initial framework, I will then scrutinize the term design in the context 
of mass-produced objects. I will introduce three phases of the term design. The first 
corresponds to the period when design has a broad content. The second describes a 
period when design was misinterpreted under the influence of the French word dessin. 
The third concerns the rise and absolute dominance of the word design over other 
expressions in the field.
To begin, I would like to look at the design concept first since, without having a view 
of design, it is impossible to perceive the transformation. To understand design is also 
to set the parameters and describe the fluctuating boundaries of the field. However, this 
is not as easy as it looks due to the lack of consensus on what design is. This surfaces 
immediately in texts dealing with the subject. Writers are aware of it and quick to draw 
our attention to the matter.
For example, Clive Dilnot offered what is probably the first critical analysis of design 
history decades ago in an article entitled ‘The State of Design History’. He pointed out 
the difficulty: ‘design has acquired several different, often seemingly contradictory, 
meanings and associations’ (Dilnot, 1984a).
Five years later, in 1989, John Walker published a book entitled Design History and 
History of Design. He claimed that ‘there is not yet a consensus concerning the meaning 
and scope of the term/concept “design”’ (Walker, 1989). In 1993 Paris witnessed a 
comprehensive exhibition with a substantial catalogue offering a 100-year account of 
1
This chapter is an extension of ideas developed in my PhD dissertation presented at METU in 1993.On Design
66
industrial design history. The author of the forward written for the catalogue was Sir 
Terence Conran, the design guru of the 1970s and 1980s, the creator of Habitat and 
Mothercare, and the founding figure of the Design Museum in London. He made a very 
similar statement. After asking what design is, he responded that it causes confusion 
to many people and means different things to them. He underlined that a great deal of 
people had tried to define its meaning and according to him, some attempts were made 
with great erudition, some with simple good intentions and some with malice (Conran, 
1993).
These quotations are sufficient to show that there is still no agreed definition and 
conception of design. Why are we deprived of a common perception on this matter? What 
are the reasons for the lack of consensus? What are the particulars of the concept that 
stop us from finding a common ground for a definition? Despite widespread complaints 
about the lack of consensus, these questions can hardly find convincing answers. Dilnot, 
in his aforementioned article, tried to provide an explanation. According to him, it 
was ‘because of its [that is, design’s] refraction through the still incompletely chartered 
and understood industrial, economic, and cultural developments of the past 200 years’ 
(Dilnot, 1984b).
Victor Margolin, an American scholar and editor of the journal Design Issues, has 
made similar observations. He writes that ‘Designing is an activity that is constantly 
changing’ (Margolin, 1992).
I think these points are important and need to be explored. Several factors contribute 
to the formation of the profession we call design today and any changes within them 
affect its meaning. First, design consciousness – that is, a systematic way of looking at 
the subject, its education, professional bodies and literature – was developed mostly in 
the West, at a certain cultural, socioeconomic and technological level. Hence, design 
has always remained dependent upon these levels and has varied with respect to them. 
Later, when design was introduced to other countries in the same way that had allowed 
it to flourish in the West, it took on a different shape and was interpreted according to 
these countries’ needs and means. It became a political and ideological term as well as 
an economic one.
Technological progress is undoubtedly the dominant cause of the proliferation of new 
design areas. The variety of objects produced during the twentieth century is so vast 
that, with the introduction of new objects, the field of design expands naturally. When 
these new objects are accepted and established in society, their continued production, 
together with the expertise and specialism they offer, is guaranteed. It is normal to expect 
that these design specialisms may define their own area of operation in due course and 
have their discrete title as a discrete profession. It is also normal to expect that, with 
the annexation of new design areas, the design concept develops new meanings and is 
subjected to change. The widening of the areas where design operates means broadening 
the content of design and thereby modifying the term. Since both the understanding 
and developments of industry and technology vary, their intervention and impacts on 
design alter accordingly. Hence, different definitions are inevitable and seem intrinsic to 
the characteristics of the term.On Transformations of the Term Design
67
Although the West is credited for the rise of design awareness, one should not 
assume that the design concept and the term have identical connotations in all Western 
countries. Formgebung (that is, ‘form giving’ in German) is not the same as disegno in 
Italian or esthétique industrielle in French. Jacques Guillerme, in his article ‘Design in the 
First Machine Age’, accentuated that the word design has been used recently for what was 
earlier known as esthétique industrielle, and he claims that these terms do not mean the 
same thing (Guillerme, 1993). Therefore, it is logical to conclude that what we understand 
by design has a different etymology and history in each country or even in every design 
circle. The concept’s dynamic and dialectic kernel thus avoids any generalization by not 
referring to a specific time and place. Having recognized this, we can now talk about the 
word transformation regarding design.
The abundance of meanings and changing interpretations of the term design encourage 
us to investigate it from a historical perspective. Examining its patterns of variation 
from past to present shows not only changes in meanings but also its ramifications and 
the proliferation of new design vocabularies, terms, expressions, areas, activities and 
professions. All these aspects of design have a mutual and interactive relationship with 
design and within themselves. It is this web of lineage and its changing fabric that forms 
the transformation of design. Within this framework, transformation means converting 
various sets of relationships with and within design and design-related fields over time. In 
this particular sense, transformation neither corresponds to development nor to progress or 
linear evolution. Rather, it is just a change in the pattern of a set of relations and meanings.
After this somewhat lengthy introduction to the key elements of the subject, it is time to 
review the transformation of the design concept in Britain. From my reading of literature, I 
identify three easily discernible phases. The first is the period when design accommodates 
comprehensive and spacious meanings. In the second, there is a withdrawal, a pullback, 
a reduction in content, limited use and subordination. The third phase is when design 
comes to the fore to cover a wide area and dominate as a ruling term. Obviously, this is 
the panorama when one views the past from the perspective of the present. That is, I wish 
to reconstruct a story of how design acquired the meaning it has today.
The first phase corresponds to the early use of design. In his book Design, Anthony 
Bertram confidently proposes a date and a clear meaning: ‘by 1588 the word “design” 
had the meaning “Purpose, aim, intention”: by 1657 the meaning “The thing aimed at”’ 
(Bertram, 1938: 12). In the sixteenth century, the word was employed by Shakespeare.2
In Love’s Labour Lost, he uses the word in the last sentence of a love letter written by Don 
Adriono de Armado: ‘Thine, in the dearest design of industry’ (Shakespeare, 1988: 142). 
This probably means something like ‘yours, with best intentions at your service’.3
2
Shakespeare also used the word ‘design’ in his other plays, such as in The Tragedy of King Richard II and 
Macbeth. What I find alluring here is the coincidence that design and industry, two inseparable words of 
contemporary design literature, were actually uttered together, centuries ago, in such a different context.
3
Here, design reads as intention, purpose and aims. Industry, according to commentator Richard David stands 
for ‘assiduity in ladies’ service’ or ‘careful and kind diligence’ (1966: 69).On Design
68
From our point of view, probably the most interesting contribution to the content 
of the term was made by Jean-Jacques Rousseau, the famous French philosopher of the 
eighteenth century. Rousseau published A Musical Dictionary (1768) in which he defined 
design as ‘the invention and conduct of a subject, the disposition of each part, and the 
general direction of the whole’ (Rousseau, 1779: 116).4
 Rousseau was thus highlighting 
the significance of part-whole relationship to achieve a unity in a subject:
It is not sufficient to compose beautiful airs [that is, melodies]5
 and a pleasing 
harmony. All this must be conjoined by a principal subject, to which all the parts of 
the work must be connected, and by which it may become one. Thus unity should 
reign in every air [that is, melody], in the movement, the character, the harmony, and 
the modulation. The whole must have reference to one general idea, which unites it.
(Rousseau, 1779: 116)
His description of design was a theoretical enterprise rather than an attempt to attribute a 
new meaning or introduce a new application. Rousseau converted the term into a concept 
by analysing what constituted design and by proposing principles for its formation. In 
1771, the first edition of the Encyclopaedia Britannica presented a variety of meanings 
and situations in which design was used. (Rousseau’s interpretation was included later in 
the second edition.) It described design as ‘the plan, order, representation, or construction 
of a building, book, painting, etc.’ (EB, 1771: 418–419). The figures applied to fabrics, 
carpets and so on were also called design as well as contours or outlines of the figures in 
painting, which owe much to the interpretations of disegno in the Italian Renaissance.6
All these meanings referring to various fields of production enriched the content of 
design in the late eighteenth century. From today’s vantage point design in this era was 
a broad term, mature enough to cover several aspects of the subject. One might assume 
that design would have become the leading term in the following century, when the 
fruits of industrialization began reaching the people, mainly as mass-produced objects. 
This is the corollary I deduce after reviewing the first phase of design.
However, the second phase of design is full of evidence that challenges the impression 
given in the first. That is, the term design is stripped of its potential power, loses its strong 
4
I quote from: Monf. J. J. Rousseau, Dictionary of Music (trans. by William Waring) London: Printed for J. 
French, 1779 (?), 116. The original: J. J. Rousseau, Dictionnaire de Musique Paris: M DCC LXVIII (Chez la 
veue duchesne, Libraire, rue Saint Jacques, au Temple du Gout). 5
My addition. 6
Baxandall expresses clearly that ‘disegno’ has also caused theoretical confusion for Italian artists. According to 
him, Leon Battista Alberti, the great architect of the era,
was trapped with the ambiguity of the term disegno’. Piero della Francesca, a well-known painter, 
approached the problem by surveying the principles of painting: ‘Painting contains three principal 
parts, which we call disegno, measurement and colouring. By disegno we mean profiles and contours 
which enclose objects. By measurement we mean the profiles and contours put proportionally in 
their proper places. By colouring we mean how colours show themselves on objects, lights and darks 
as the lighting changes them.
(Baxandall, ([1991] (1972): 141)On Transformations of the Term Design
69
position and is subjected to limited use. Throughout the nineteenth century, its low profile 
remains in the background of a debate concerning art and industry.7
 The idea that the 
word design was not at the axis of discussions in the nineteenth century contradicts the 
common belief of today. Nevertheless, it is true that the controversial terms were art and 
industry while the other terms created and involved in the debate were fine art, decorative 
art, ornamental art, art manufacture, commercial art, industrial art, applied art and so on.
Why was design as a term deprived of its leading role in the nineteenth century? Why 
was it ignored as a major term despite being available with its full capacity and potential? 
Most likely these questions have several answers. However, the one I would like to highlight 
here is the misleading and confusing meaning of design, which was imported ‘successfully’ 
from France. The confusion lies with the French word dessin, which then only meant 
drawing. I believe that this association and identification of design with dessin (that is, 
drawing in English), created a minefield for the term and led people to use it cautiously.
Historically, the French connection has always existed, with well-known figures of 
the time expressing their admiration of French products. For example, the distinguished 
eighteenth-century painter William Hogarth wrote to a member of parliament in 1735 to 
express his concern about the aesthetic qualities of British products in comparison to 
those of France.
That this is not merely a Romantic Notion, will appear from the remarkable 
Preference which is given to the French in everything of this sort they send over 
to us. Our own Furniture, our own Silks, our own Manufacturers are as useful as 
theirs; but not so elegant, not so well fancied, nor our patterns so well Designed.
(Hogben, 1983: viii) 8
In 1766, architect John Gywnn made a similar remark:
Happy would it be for this country if we imitated the French in that patriotic 
prejudice for their own productions which has rendered them the arbiters of taste 
to Europe, the rewards and honours paid to the artists of their own nation, have 
been the great incitement of every work of genius for which they are distinguished.
(Gwynn, 1766: 32)
The issue of British products’ quality continued to be discussed, with Sir Robert Peel 
raising the same argument in the House of Commons in 1832. A few years later, in 1835, 
7
In an article published in Journal of Design History, v: 4, n: 4, 1991, David Irwin prefers to name the art and 
industry debate as ‘Art versus Design: The Debate 1760–1860’. However, he accepts the ‘imprecise meaning 
of a modern term such as “industrial design” when used in the period under discussion’. In my reading, he 
studies the debate using the modern concept of design rather than the actual terminology used in those 
discussions.
8
This quotation from Hogarth was cited by Carol Hogben, in the ‘Introduction’ to British Art and Design, 
London: Victoria & Albert Museum, 1984 (Catalogue, first published in 1983) viii.On Design
70
a Select Committee was formed under Mr Ewart ‘to examine the state of art in this and 
other countries as manifested in their different manufacturers. To see how a knowledge 
of the arts and the principles of design might best be spread among the people. And to 
find the best ways of advancing the higher branches of art at the same time’ (Hogben, 
1983: viii). The Select Committee’s report opened the way for the establishment of the 
Normal School of Design in London in 1837. William Dyce was appointed its director 
following his visit to several European cities, including Paris, Lyon and Berlin.
All these examples show that links were already established and that there were good 
grounds for allowing the word design to be translated and thereby confused with dessin. 
According to Quentin Bell, the writer of The Schools of Design, a misleading parallel 
between the word design and the French dessin occurred when the school was founded. 
The performance of the school may have influenced the use of this misleading image of 
design. Nikolaus Pevsner writes that, in 1848, a Parliamentary Committee investigating 
the system introduced by the school concluded that it was ‘an utter and complete failure’ 
([1940] 1973: 248). They reported critically that the main exercise seemed to be copying 
drawings.
Under those circumstances, it would have been very peculiar to advocate a new 
image for the word design. When Henry Cole, founder of the Journal of Design and 
Manufactures, was asked to organize a new school after the closure of the Normal School 
of Design, he proposed that the name should be changed to provide a clearer definition. 
His concern was made explicit in a letter he sent to the Board of Trade in 1852. ‘I 
would venture to suggest that the name of the “School of Design” which is subjected to 
misinterpretation, should be altered to one more nearly expressive of the objects in view. 
Such a name as the “Department of Practical Art” would, I think, be well understood and 
appropriate’ (Cole, 1884: 296). He was absolutely right to indicate the risk of employing 
a confusing term. An essay published in The Gentlemen’s Magazine in 1856 included 
the remark that government drawing schools had been a ‘facetiously styled, “School of 
Design”’.9
 It appears that the confusion between design and dessin stayed for a long time 
in the public domain. The following text from the Times, published on 7 October 1876, 
tries to separate design from dessin by differentiating the two meanings:
All the drawing schools in France were called ‘Ecoles de Dessin’ which, as is well 
known, means ‘Schools for Drawing’ and not necessarily ‘Schools of Design’. 
However, the justification of the Board of Trade’s inquiring into these schools, was 
that information as to ‘design’ – an important element in the commerce of fancy 
articles – was required in England.
(Cole, 1884: 281)10
9
Later, the essay also claims that the schools failed to create ‘an English school of ornament, or, probably an 
English Style’.
10The last sentence is notable for its somewhat archaic description of design as ‘an important element in the 
commerce of fancy articles’.On Transformations of the Term Design
71
To conclude this description of the second phase, when design was often confused 
with dessin, we should mention briefly the other terms that proliferated to address the 
problematic marriage of art and industry. Henry Cole claims that he invented ‘the term 
“art manufacturers” meaning Fine Art, or beauty applied to mechanical production’ 
and that Prince Albert coined the term ‘Fine Art applied to Industry’ (Cole, 1884: 104). 
Applied art, industrial art, decorative art, ornamental art and so on were popular and 
widely used terms, especially after the Great Exhibition of 1851. In 1886, in a lecture 
entitled ‘Of the Origins of Ornamental Art’, William Morris, after describing ‘a mass 
of wealth-producing labour’, said ‘this labour is called what I should almost venture to 
name in our modern jargon the Industrial Arts’ (1969: 137–138). A year later, in 1887, 
Walter Crane listed them: ‘We have “industrial”, “decorative”, or “applied art”, as we 
call it, and “fine” art’ (1887: 717). There is no need to prolong this lexicon, but what is 
worth emphasizing is that almost all art and industry debate was conducted using this 
terminology, which rarely included the word design.
In the third phase, we see the triumphant return of design and its overwhelming 
domination, which grew steadily during and especially towards the end of the twentieth 
century. At the beginning of the twentieth century, design was far removed from any 
association with dessin, and no reference was made to it, thanks to writers, theorists and 
‘designers’ such as William Morris, Walter Crane, Lewis Day and W. R. Lethaby. However, 
by the time the Design and Industries Association had been established in 1915, its 
credibility had already been restored. That is, design had begun to enjoy its pre-nineteenth￾century rich content and came to the fore while its meaning began to be explored. The 
stylish expression of art and industry was gradually losing its place to design and industry 
– although there was resistance. The problem was the difficulty of abandoning the banner 
of art as artists have always enjoyed the high status of their field while ‘designers’ were 
used to calling themselves artists not designers. Thus, when Lethaby presented a complex 
notion of design at the Design and Industries Meeting in 1915 he faced a reaction from 
the audience. He ‘had sometimes defined design as “the arranging of how the work is to 
be done” but this annoyed the people who loved to be told that design is the organization 
of beauty, embodying style by creative genius e.t.c.’ (DIA, 1915: 5). Beauty, style, creative 
genius and so on, that is what some people wanted to hear – an obvious reference to art. In 
the inaugural pamphlet of the Design and Industries Association (DIA), entitled Design 
in Industry, ‘Lethaby managed to avoid using the dangerous word art almost entirely from 
the start to finish,’ as Noel Carrington (1976: 30) spotted. Actually, Lethaby distanced the 
DIA from the traditional art and industry dispute, which had strong links to the Arts and 
Crafts Movement. By doing so, he not only endorsed the word design but also attributed 
to it a new identity and status, independent of that of art.
These pioneering efforts needed time to develop. Furthermore, two popular terms 
survived from the jumble of nineteenth-century vocabulary: industrial art and applied 
art. Both terms were widely discussed. ‘There has been much talk in recent years of 
applied art’ said Serge Chermayeff (1982: 24) in 1933 while the writer Arthur Pulos 
commented that Robert W. de Forest, President of the Metropolitan Museum of Art in 
the 1920s, ‘felt that although industrial art was not quite appropriate title, it might have On Design
72
to be used’ (1983: 318). In England, the Committee on Art and Industry under Lord 
Gorell prepared a report in 1932 that expressed concern about the terms ornamental art 
and applied art since both ‘gave colour to the pernicious notion that Art is something 
superficial and extraneous to be “applied” to an industrial product, instead of being an 
essential and organic element in the article itself ’ (Read, ([1934] 1956: 192–193).
While these two terms were being worn out through these discussions, a new one 
found relatively quick acceptance among the public: industrial design. Industrial 
design gained respect in the United States in the late 1920s thanks to some flamboyant 
designers, such as Walter Dorwin Teague, Raymond Loewy, Norman Bel Geddes and 
Henry Dreyfuss. Obviously, the British public was not unaware of the expression, 
which was used occasionally. However, I have not come across any argument about 
this term in British literature before the 1930s. American scholars believe it was 
developed in the United States. However, the oldest text I have found referring 
to industrial design is a British book from 1894.11 Whatever its origins, the term’s 
practical consequences remain the same: it was recognized in the United States and 
known in the UK as early as the mid-1930s. The literature has since gained impetus, 
with books using industrial design as the title and subject published in both the 
United States and the UK.
Design also became a very popular expression. It already had its own area of 
dominance in the realm of architecture and architectural texts but soon became an 
expression linked with the objects of daily life. In Britain, it was also promoted by the 
magazine Design for Today and on design programmes on the radio and became common 
parlance. However, industrial design was initially the winning term, leaving behind the 
two worn-out expressions of industrial art and applied art. American influence may 
well have encouraged the acceptance of industrial design in the UK (Gloag, 1946). This 
acceptance also reflected the establishment of professional associations, including the 
Industrial Designers Institute and the Society of Industrial Designers in the United 
States and the UK’s Council of Industrial Design, formed in 1944.
To cut a long story short, I would say that industrial design has enjoyed its popularity 
for a few decades more. Another sign of change was detected at the beginning of 
the 1960s, when the Society of Industrial Artists changed its name to the Society of 
Industrial Artists and Designers (MacCarthy, 1982: 149) Over the course of time, several 
fields of what was once referred to as industrial design gained recognition under discrete 
titles because of the inevitable and rapid growth of specialisms, such as furniture design, 
vehicle or transport design, and packaging. After all, the emergence of the term product 
design not only created confusion with industrial design but also somehow ended its 
11The writer, Frank G. Jackson, employed the term industrial design in the book, Theory and Practice of Design: 
An Advanced Text-Book on Decorative Art where he explains novelty in design: ‘Industrial designers are so 
accustomed to the elaborate decorative objects which are current, that the reasons for the particular forms they 
have assumed are rarely sought after; and, if a new design is wanted for an old purpose, a mere alteration or 
rearrangement of part is held to be sufficient to effect a new pattern’ (1894: 3).On Transformations of the Term Design
73
dominance. These specialisms obviously already incorporated the word ‘design’ in their 
titles since they were all part of a general design discipline. That is, design is an umbrella 
expression covering all these fields.
The official leadership of design was declared when the UK’s Council of Industrial 
Design was renamed the Design Council in 1973. What has happened since then is 
another story.CHAPTER 7
MAPPING THE MIND
TRACING THE MENTALITY CHANGE
First presented at ‘No Guru, No Method’, International Conference on Art and Design Research, 4–6 
September 1996, University of Art and Design, Helsinki.
Do not ask who I am and do not ask me to remain the same
Michel Foucault ([1969] 1974: 17)
7.1 Introduction
Concepts have their own history. During the process of emergence, development, 
maturation and fatigue, they are subjected to various interpretations, descriptions and 
definitions. It is probably fair to say that the history of a concept mostly comprises the 
history of its transformation and the consensus formed. Both transformations and 
the forming of conceptual consensus within a community endure for a period of time 
during which the process itself gains importance, and becomes significant and revealing. 
Accurate dating is neither possible nor desirable because events have yet to be defined 
but remain as a flow of thoughts, opinions, ideas and understandings spread over a time 
span. Therefore, studies dealing with the development of concepts need to focus on the 
processes of mapping. These, I think, require theoretical tools devised for this purpose.
What I attempted to do was to look at one particular person’s understanding of one 
particular subject and to observe how this view was altered, and/or modified over the 
years. The first task is to identify an institute, an association, a group or an individual 
involved in the subject who has made many statements on the issue. We are seeking 
gradual variations in the view of this particular institution or person. It is therefore 
essential to locate as many written or recorded sources as possible to make a fair 
comparison. These include films, speeches, statements, notes, letters, interviews, papers, 
books and articles, wherever possible in translated versions and, the different editions – 
especially those with differences – because they are the prime sources to trace changes 
in an author’s thoughts.
7.2 A survey: John Gloag and the concept of industrial design
Before going into the details and analysing the use of the method and its pros and cons, 
I would like to begin with a short case study. I have chosen John Gloag (1896–1981), Mapping the Mind
75
who was a prolific writer and had an opportunity to witness the rise of design culture 
in the UK from the 1920s. In 1947, he introduced himself in his book, Self Training for 
Industrial Designers:
Here are the facts: I studied architecture in 1911–12, went into business as a 
junior draughtsman in a studio in 1913, changed over to the selling side of 
the business which interested me more, and after service in the 1914–18 war, 
I went into advertising and technical journalism. I also taught myself how to 
write books, because I wanted to write books, both technical books and novels; I 
was also interested in organization and in industry and educational propaganda. 
This sounds like the set up for a jack-of-all-trades: but I have become a writer: 
between 1921 and 1945, I published thirty-six books, fourteen of which are 
works of fiction, the rest dealing with such technical subjects as architecture and 
industrial design.
(1947a: 22)
John Gloag continued to write, producing over ninety books in the following decades. 
I will probe the ideas of John Gloag on two subjects: first, the formation of the concept 
of ‘industrial design’ in the UK; second, the British intelligentsia’s understanding 
of industrial design and designers. Let us begin with the meaning and definition of 
industrial design and follow its progress through his eyes.
7.3 John Gloag: The meaning of industrial design
In 1934, Gloag writes in Industrial Art Explained:
The growth of mechanised industry during the last hundred and fifty years has 
affected our surroundings and the articles we use every day. It is the purpose of 
this book to show how design has affected:
1. The accommodation of industry
2. The products of industry, and,
3. The distribution of those products to the public.
The term industrial architecture will be used for the first category; industrial art
will apply to the second, and commercial art will cover the third. Reference will 
also be made to the nature and the development of what may be called machine 
design.
(1934: 33)
Here, Gloag uses the term industrial art to indicate what we nowadays call ‘product 
design’. It is worth remembering that, at the beginning of the twentieth century, industrial On Design
76
art was the popular expression to represent the area we currently name industrial or 
product design.1
 Therefore Gloag’s definition was not unusual. Yet the third edition of 
Industrial Art Explained, published in 1946, has significant revisions and enlargements. 
Gloag writes:
The term Industrial Art is used throughout this book to describe the visible 
results of our industrial civilisation which have been or could be affected by the 
operation of design. It is a comprehensive term; but it covers a subject which 
may be conveniently divided for study, such divisions being determined by the 
character of industry, its service and its needs. Three main divisions are thus 
suggested:
1. Industrial design.
2. Commercial art.
3. Industrial architecture.
(Gloag, 1946: 17)
Comparing this passage with the previous excerpt, we discover that the term ‘industrial 
art’ is now interpreted as having a higher status in comparison to his first edition. 
According to Gloag, it covers great variety of design activities and appears as an 
umbrella term with three subdivisions. Industrial design, commercial art and industrial 
architecture. ‘Machine design’ is withdrawn.
The following amendments are discernible. (a) Industrial art has been elevated 
to the level of a main concept covering all other three divisions. (b) Where ‘machine 
design’ disappears, ‘industrial design’ is introduced. (c) The order of subdivisions is also 
modified: ‘industrial architecture’ moves from the first to the last and ‘industrial design’ 
proceeds to the first rank in the list. What interests us here is the recognition and the 
use of the term ‘industrial design’, its position among the others and if there is a sense of 
priority in the list. This was not the first time Gloag acknowledges the term ‘industrial 
design’. Two years before, when he published Plastics and Industrial Design in 1945, 
Gloag gives his own account of what it is:
Industrial design becomes a basic operation in the production of goods when 
trained imagination is introduced to secure the most efficient, agreeable and 
inventive use of appropriate materials and processes. The industrial designer is 
the man with the trained imagination; he is a technician, and his work is just as 
basically important as that of the research chemist or the production specialist. 
Omit the designer, and you have omitted imagination, and very often lost the 
chance of gaining a new market or reviving and extending an old one.
1
The difference between industrial design and product design is a matter for another discussion. I try to avoid 
it here for it does not directly relate to the subject and is not relevant to those years mentioned.Mapping the Mind
77
There are two divisions of industrial design, and I put them in this order of 
importance:
1. Design which is concerned with the form and function of a manufactured 
object and which determines the selection of materials and fabricating 
processes. It is for this division that the industrial designer works 
primarily, though his interest and activity are often carried into the second 
division
2. Industrial decorative art, which is concerned with the creating of decorative 
patterns and the use of colours and textures in relation to such patterns.
(Gloag, 1945: 46–47)
There is no doubt that, by the mid-forties, Gloag was already preoccupied with 
the concept of ‘industrial design’, reflections of which can easily be traced in his 
subsequent publications. The status of ‘industrial design’ changes soon after this time 
to reach a more prestigious position in Gloag’s understanding, as presented in Self 
Training for Industrial Designers, published in 1947. He explains the term with a new 
insight: ‘Industrial design, or, as it is sometimes more loosely termed, industrial art, 
may be classified under these divisions: – (1) Industrial design and (2) Commercial 
art’ (1947a: 16).
Here, he has begun to associate industrial design more closely with industrial art. The 
former acquired an increased popularity whereas the latter lost ground. In the same year, 
Gloag rephrased the same paragraph in another book. When Good Design Good Business
came out, it was clear that he identified industrial design with industrial art:
Industrial design, which has sometimes been called industrial art, may be classified 
broadly under two main divisions, each subdivided into various sections, which 
are affected by its operation. The two main divisions may be headed:
1. INDUSTRIAL DESIGN
2. COMMERCIAL DESIGN.
(1947b: 4)
In spite of these alterations, both versions continue to present a slight problem, although 
this did not seem to annoy Gloag much. Yet, his taxonomy, hierarchy or ranking of 
terms is problematic. How could one of the subdivisions of industrial design be shown 
as industrial design itself? In other words, how could, let us say, A is equal to A plus 
B (A=A+B)? We can find other inconsistencies in his adjustments. For example, 
commercial art is now shown as to be commercial design. Is it the result of a purely 
logical deduction that ‘industrial art’ is substituted with ‘industrial design’ and that 
‘commercial art’ should be replaced with ‘commercial design’? Or does this simply On Design
78
demonstrate that the word design is becoming more popular, prestigious, definable and 
thereby an acceptable expression? I do not know the answer. However, what is clear to 
me is that the way in which the concept of industrial design, and design in general, have 
gradually gained recognition.
The difficult problem to elucidate is how these shifts in Gloag’s idea occurred. It 
is useful to point out that Gloag’s visit to the United States seems to have been very 
influential in the development of his ideas in the mid-forties. The foreword to the third, 
revised edition of Industrial Art Explained provides enough evidence for this assertion. 
He states: ‘It [the first edition of Industrial Art Explained] was written before I had visited 
the United States and had acquired first-hand experience of the operation of industrial 
design in America. When I was invited to prepare a revised edition, I soon realised that 
the book demanded re-writing’ (Gloag, 1946: 5).
So far, we have examined changes in John Gloag’s vision of industrial design. The 
second issue that I would like to explore in his texts is the way he perceived the inception 
and the establishment of industrial design in the UK.
7.4 John Gloag: The acceptance of industrial design in the UK
Gloag makes a remark on the subject in The English Tradition in Design published 
in 1947.
That industrial design was a subject demanding intelligent study and attention 
was an idea that gained acceptance only after an infinitude of misunderstandings; 
but in 1914 it had achieved official recognition, for in that year a joint scheme 
was framed and sponsored by the Board of Trade and the Board of Education for 
establishing a British Institute of Industrial Art, which was actually launched in 
1920… Industrial design had certainly been discovered and identified by a few 
far-sighted and exceptional people at the end of the First World War.
(Gloag, 1947c: 32)
After being revised, these sentences reappear as follows in the 1959 edition of The English 
Tradition in Design:
The idea that industrial design was a subject demanding intelligent study and 
attention, slowly gained acceptance. By 1914 it had achieved official recognition, 
for in that year a scheme was framed and sponsored jointly by the Board of Trade 
and the Board of Education for establishing a British Institute of Industrial Art, 
which was actually launched in 1920.
Industrial design had certainly been discovered though not clearly identified by 
a few far-sighted and exceptional people by the end of the First World War.
(1959: 75)Mapping the Mind
79
The differences between these texts are subtle, but I do not think that the implications 
can be ignored. Gloag certainly changed his opinion and made cautious comments in 
later years. Although this amendment was featured in the 1959 edition, it had already 
been articulated in 1950 in an article entitled, ‘Identity and Development of Industrial 
Design’, printed in the journal Eidos.
Industrial design in Britain has only been clearly identified as a technical subject 
during the second quarter of this century, before about 1925 it was difficult to 
classify and appraise its manifestations, which were still confused with the 
results, variously accomplished and desirable, of the handicraft revival that had 
been brought forth by William Morris in the eighteen sixties, and subsequently 
nourished by his disciples. This confusion prevented the industrial designer from 
being recognised as a technician.
(1950: 34)
In the same article, after writing about the establishment in 1915 of the Design and 
Industries Association, Gloag continues: ‘Nine years later, writers and critics were 
still failing to identify the industrial designer’ (1950: 34). He tries to determine when 
industrial design gained its identity and why its emergence was delayed although Britain 
was the world’s first industrialized country.
7.5 Characteristics of the method
It is probably time to end my survey and discuss the characteristics of the method used. 
Before proceeding, however, it is worth mentioning that I am not the only one employing 
this method and I do not think that it is entirely novel. Nevertheless, it is at least a 
systematic analysis.2
 While conducting my research and developing ideas, I encountered 
2
There are systematic methods of research based on a work of details and, in one sense, similar and inspirational 
to the one I employed here. For instance, historian Carlo Ginzburg illustrates a technique of investigating reality 
by a ‘conjectural method’ inspired by that of Giovanni Morelli’s theory. Morelli, an Italian art historian, had 
claimed that studying the details and minor points in paintings reveals much about the techniques of painters 
so that, on the grounds of similarity in particular details, paintings can be identified or their authenticity 
checked. From studying details like hands, ear lobes, fingernails, toes and so on, he made new attributions, 
such as identifying Giorgione’s painting in the Dresden Gallery, which for years had exhibited the work as ‘a 
copy by Sassoferrato of a lost work by Titian’ (Ginzburg, 1980: 7).
Ginzburg also builds his methods on clues and hints. He analyses texts meticulously and queries ‘“the 
favourite words and phrases” which “most people, whether talking or writing, make use of without meaning to 
and without noticing that they do so”’ (1980: 24). In the light of Morelli’s and Ginzburg’s approach, a technique 
which I suggest for textual analysis in industrial design history is allied to them with regard to the basic 
principle of ‘forensic evidence’ although it is entirely new in its kind.On Design
80
to my surprise a few years ago a similar approach applied to an article written by Robin 
Kinross (1988). Kinross had comparatively analysed the different editions of a ‘cult book’, 
Art and Industry, by Herbert Read. Kinross was interested in the history of the book to 
the extent that he considered all modifications, such as typefaces, graphics and pictures, 
as well as changes in content. Although he does not attempt to systematize this effort and 
propose it as a method, I would consider his article a good example of what I am trying 
to outline here.
I am sure that, for many people, John Gloag’s changing ideas are incompatible. 
Again, for many scholars, he may not be an ideal source. Indeed, in spite of his extensive 
publications, few design works cite Gloag. I do not share this attitude, however, and feel 
the opposite to be true. Gloag has been a wonderful source for me to apprehend and 
come to grips with the spirit of his era. Not only what he said, but how he formulated 
and revised what he said, makes him an interesting reference. He does not provide us 
with a kind of text on which we can rely or to which we can surrender or subscribe to. 
He does however supply useful material to work with, which contains large amounts of 
information ‘between the lines’ and which requires a certain effort from the reader to 
pick, sort and compile.
When the attributes of this method are considered, one can see that it has a potential 
that can be elaborated and used to pursue mentality shifts. Some of the territories where 
this method can be viable include determining how the opinions of institutions and 
people change, how concepts are formed, consensus set up, common beliefs shaped, 
and ideas, words and terms become popular or obsolete. Processes are important, not 
dates or the minutiae of events. Transformations, mutations, permutations, changes, 
conversions, modifications, variations, alterations, amendments and substitutions are 
domains that need to be focused on. Careful generalization and accuracy must be not 
expected. The aim of this method is not to uncover the unknown but to map mentality 
changes, shifts in understanding and the destination of thoughts. Polarization is essential 
in tracing the direction of inclinations. What we learn from this inquiry into John Gloag’s 
work is how and to what ends his observations were gradually channelled. If we want to 
know more about how these occurred, we need to consult other works to grasp how the 
other developments of the era are explored.
The main controversy here is the unconventional way of developing a method that 
mainly relies on dissimilarity and contradiction. Therefore, we need to inspect closely 
the proposition of inconsistency, which is crucial to the argument. It is perhaps time 
now to pose some questions. Is this search for consistency still valid, and should it still 
be valid today in every field of research? Is there not an understanding of history that 
leaves room for a method that dares to inscribe inconsistencies while not attributing 
a central importance to documented facts representing the ‘truth’, whatever the truth 
means? Is it really impossible for researchers to benefit from texts or ideas considered 
to be at variance? The answers are found in contemporary literature. To address the first 
question, I refer to Hans Magnus Enzensberger.Mapping the Mind
81
7.6 Inconsistency: Rising status
Enzensberger is one of the writers who cast a shadow on the concept of consistency as a 
logical category. He shows how consistency can lead to fatal consequences: ‘Consistency 
as a logical category, is empty’ (1990: 5). One can be a consistent thief, a smoker, a 
racist, a rapist or stalker. ‘It is therefore not quite clear how consistency could ever lay 
claim to the status of a moral postulate,’ says Enzensberger. Attributing prestige and 
value to inconsistency is not to defend it nor to attack rational thinking.3
 Rather, it is 
a phenomenon whose presence cannot be denied. Hence, we have to accept it and find 
ways to benefit from its existence. Enzensberger expresses this plainly: ‘Inconsistency 
is not the answer to our predicament, but it has its attractions. It cannot be preached. It 
increases our freedom of thought and our freedom of movement’ (1990: 13). I believe 
this statement encapsulates the theoretical essence of the method and defines the key 
elements of its premise.
People, politicians, theorists, philosophers, writers and ourselves occasionally 
redefine our position as opposed to what we previously believed, wrote or stated. To me, 
this has nothing to do with inconsistency or negation of the past; on the contrary, it is to 
review the situation, to rectify views not valid anymore or to keep pace with the times, 
and, finally, to bring ideas up to date.4
7.7 Inconsistency: A room in historiography
The second question is to seek a place for inconsistency in history writing. If a method 
is developed on the grounds of tracing the mentality change, could it have a chance of 
finding room in historiography? History, as one of the oldest disciplines, has been much 
3
There is a paradox here. On one hand, inconsistency cannot be defended with consistent terms; on the other, 
inconsistency cannot justify itself with inconsistent arguments. Furthermore, even an attempt at justification 
is itself a consistent action, a sign of acceptance of logic that is not attuned with the nature of inconsistency.
4
History is full of examples. But I am satisfied with an excerpt from Baudrillard, who clearly presents a shift in 
his theoretical stance and introduces his new interpretation of media analysis:
In reality, even if I did not share the technological optimism of McLuhan, I always recognised and 
considered as a gain the true revolution which he brought about in media analysis (this has been 
mostly ignored in France). On the other hand, though I also did not share the dialectical hopes of 
Enzensberger, I was not truly pessimistic, since I believed in a possible subversion of the code of the 
media and the possibility of an alternate speech and a radical reciprocity of symbolic exchange.
Today all that has changed. I would no longer interpret in the same way the forced silence of the 
masses in the mass media. I would no longer see in it a sign of passivity and of alienation, but to 
the contrary an original strategy, an original response in the form of a challenge; and on the basis 
of this reversal I suggest to you a vision of things which is no longer optimistic or pessimistic, but 
ironic and antagonistic. 
(Baudrillard, 1988: 208)On Design
82
discussed in the last three centuries, not only by historians but also by many people with 
interests in a wide spectrum, from philosophy to politics.5
Examining orthodox history shows that the principle of historiography relies on 
‘historical fact’ and requires concrete evidence without any self-contradiction. Therefore, 
I believe inconsistencies and their merits are not well studied. Any challenge concerning 
the merit of ‘inconsistency’ is conceived to have a responsive attitude towards the 
concept of facts. Among other aspects of historiography, facts and their proof, evidence 
and documents, have always been hotly contested issues, much discussed by historians.6
Their meaning, use, effects and importance, as well as the criteria for the choice of 
documents, were the main basis of debate. However, Foucault reveals the ultimate 
stance of history regarding this subject: ‘history has altered its position in relation to the 
document: it has taken as its primary task, not the interpretation of the document, nor 
the attempt to decide whether it is telling the truth or what is its expressive value, but 
to work on it from within and to develop it’ (1974: 6). In this explanation we witness a 
broader approach to history which has no problem of accommodating methods like one 
we discuss.
7.8 Inconsistency: The author and his/her work, the emergence 
of conflict
There are inexplicable relations and sometimes tensions between authors and their work, 
which may embody the seeds of future conflicts that lead to a paradox in some way or 
another. Here I would like to argue that inconsistency inevitably derives from a current 
position that may seem to nullify the previous stance. To some extent, it is possible to 
trace how authors move away from a point they held in earlier works. The author and 
his/her work are the two elements that determine the orbit of change. While the former 
represents actions and growth, the latter identifies and hardens external references. 
Regarding the question of the author versus work relationship, French literary critic 
Roland Barthes offers this insight:
As institution, the author is dead: his civil status, his biographical person have 
disappeared, dispossessed, they no longer exercise over his work the formidable 
paternity whose account literary history, teaching, and public opinion had the 
responsibility of establishing and renewing, but in the text, in a way, I desire the 
5
For a brief history of historiography, see Arthur Marwick (1976). 6
In this respect, opposing views are well-represented by two British historians, E. H. Carr and G. R. Elton in 
their books What is History? and The Practice of History. While Carr argues that historical facts cannot be found 
easily, documented objectively, narrated truly and so on (1964), Elton takes a straightforward professional line, 
criticizes Carr as a relativist and says that ‘I may well be taken to believe that facts about the past are simple, 
discrete, knowable entities which need only be collected in order that a structure called history may emerge’ 
(1984: 78).Mapping the Mind
83
author: I need his figure (which is neither his representation nor his projection), 
as he needs mine.
(Barthes, 1976: 27)
The author is a living entity, a person and a human being. In contrast to his/her work, the 
author is alive. His/her work is concrete, static, stagnant, rigid and frozen, which reflects 
the author’s ideas at the moment it is produced. Once written, it comes into existence 
and acquires life. The text’s life is then independent of its author. Once written, the ways 
of the author and his/her work become separate. They have different life spans, different 
standards of living. Nevertheless, they may have a very close relationship to each other, 
whether dynamic, reciprocal or dialectical.
Until the text is published, this relationship is under the absolute intimate sovereignty 
and total possession of the author as s/he may do anything, whether to change, rewrite, 
add, extract, edit and so on. It is a one-directional conversation, a monologue. The author 
is always active; the text is always passive. When the work is completed, however, its body 
comes into existence. When it is published, its life begins. When it is released, it gains 
its freedom. The author can no longer change it or touch it as it belongs to the public. 
It exists there as long as its propositions, axioms, theses, suggestions and narrations are 
valid and useful.
In the meantime, of course, there are positive and negative reactions. The text cannot 
respond beyond its content and, since it cannot change, it is invariable. The author is 
the one who responds, who is not static, who changes. The separation between the 
author and his/her work is due to the antagonistic nature of the two bodies. The body 
of the text is frozen and not subject to transformation whereas the body of the author 
is alive, hence open to change, as the French philosopher, Michel Foucault eloquently 
puts it at the beginning of this essay. When the author moves from one theoretical 
stance to another, his/her position alters in relation to the work.7
 The text represents 
its writer as long as the author agrees with the text. Whenever disagreement occurs, 
their ways diverge.
The value of the text has no relation to the author’s current ideas and is independent 
of him. The one-to-one correspondence between the ideas presented in the text and the 
author’s ideas are only present at the exact time the text was written. The author may 
7
 Fernand Braudel delineates his personal experience very genuinely in the preface to his book On History:
Like everyone else, I cannot recognise my own voice when I hear it recorded. Nor I am sure whether I 
can immediately recognise, in any real sense of the word, my thoughts of yesterday on reading them. 
Are such thoughts fed on so many echoes, so many memories, in which voices once heard come 
spontaneously to life again, really my thoughts? Yes and no. So many things have happened since 
then, so many things beset me today. Since I am not a man for polemic, being concerned only with 
my own path, my own particular path, and since polemic and dialogue are a double and unavoidable 
necessity, here I am holding dialogues and engaging in polemic with myself, in a natural process of 
detachment from texts for which I obviously remain responsible. 
(1980: vii)On Design
84
ignore, object and even reject his early work, whether partially or totally. However, this 
should not threaten our respect for either text or author. Nor does this exclusion by the 
author cast a shadow on the work’s value. However, the work has no choice. It is faithful,8
and never rejects or denies its author.
7.9 Inconsistency: A function within research
It is a widespread practice that a work found inconsistent is ignored or rarely mentioned. 
They are ‘forgotten works’ and politely referred to as ‘out of date’. The reason is that 
discrepancy is simply not acceptable in common practice. Taking into account variations 
in attitudes towards the theory of history, cases of ‘negated texts’ may be discussed as 
a subject for scrutiny. We have recourse to so-called inconsistencies and could benefit 
immensely from their potential and latent serendipity. Especially in pursuing changes 
to concepts, it seems essential to pursue variations in texts, records, documents, films 
and so on. It would be useless, for instance, to seek the transformation of abstract 
and dynamic notions within a given single text. The dynamic analysis of a text can 
only be achieved by a series of comparisons with their revised editions. Bringing, let 
us say, all different editions of a book together and then discovering and comparing 
dissimilarities, determining the direction of differences and trying to date and explain 
them are preliminary steps towards more comprehensive research. Distinctions and 
modifications in documents are signs of dynamism. Alterations, transformations or 
displacements of ideas are no longer disputed as they used to be, probably as a result 
of increasing social tolerance. The modifications may then offer suitable material for 
research. The project described above is, in one sense, to reinstate and restore the 
prestige of works damaged by neglect. Since inconsistency is still widely used as the 
basis for repudiation, I venture to call my reparative proposal ‘the reaffirmation of the 
negated’.
7.10 Conclusion
There are a few points I would like to make in summary. Mentality change in a particular 
society, the shift of ideas within institutions or individuals and the transformation of 
concepts all require an analysis of the periods within which they occur. Inconsistencies 
are one of the main sources of information about these processes. As such, they should 
be appreciated. This method can be more effective if it is used within the context of, and 
in relation to, other phenomena of the era, but not in isolation. The article by Robin 
Kinross is a good example of this. The method definitely requires a clear set of aims and 
8
Faithfulness has connotations of stagnancy, conservatism and resistance to change. Furthermore, it sounds 
like ‘consistency’, does it not?Mapping the Mind
85
objectives. No doubt, among others, it would need further experimentation, detailing, 
elaboration and refinement. It may not lead to generalizations but would be instrumental 
in mapping minds. I will end by taking refuge in a quotation by Carlo Ginzburg, who 
puts the case elegantly: ‘Certainly, there is no need to exaggerate when we talk about 
distortions. The fact that a source is not “objective” … does not mean that it is useless’ 
([1976] 1980: xvii).CHAPTER 8
OBSERVATIONS ON THE RISE OF DESIGN 
HISTORIOGRAPHY BY THE END OF THE 
TWENTIETH CENTURY IN THE UK
A VIEW FROM ‘OUTSIDE IN’ WITH A TOUCH OF 
GLOBALIZATION
The first version of this chapter was presented as a paper at the First International Conference on Design 
History, Barcelona, 26–28 April 1999. Later it was published in its proceedings, see: Calvera A. and 
Mallol, M. eds. (2001) Historiar desde la periferia: historia e historias del diseño / Design history 
seen from abroad: History and Histories of Design, 117–139, Barcelona: University of Barcelona 
Publication.
8.1 Introduction
Years ago, when I had an opportunity to look closely into the rise of design history in 
the UK as a ‘foreigner’, it surprised me to see the impact of several factors, especially 
art and architectural history, and the way in which they took precedence. While the 
documentation and literature for manufactured objects are impressive, design history, 
in its early years, appears to have struggled considerably with defining its subject matter 
as well as suffering from the lack of an original way of dealing with it. Designing, mass 
production, marketing, dissemination, use, recycling, disposal and the life span of 
objects require a different understanding and concept of history, which is not something 
that is easily built. Nevertheless, the British experience of writing design history offers 
immense potential for those sharpening their pencils to undertake a similar task.
This chapter recounts my observations on the emergence of design historiography in 
the UK and the problems it confronted. It is neither a short history of design historiography 
nor a critical review but maps out the important historical studies in the twentieth 
century. The purpose is to shed light on the pathways of history writing to learn some 
lessons that might help those working on their own local design history. The proliferation 
of literature is clearly encouraging and parallels the increase in design awareness and 
history consciousness worldwide. Although nation-based approaches to design history 
provide us with invaluable material and insights, they are rare while a framework in the 
context of globalization is yet to be established that situates local, national and cultural 
identities. To this end, the observations presented here may be useful to comprehend 
the journey of the historiography of design in the UK. I will conduct this journey with 
certain assumptions and try to explain the reasons behind them.The Rise of Design Historiography in the UK
87
First, many factors caused the emergence of strong design historiography in the UK. The 
main hypothesis of this paper is that the conditions leading to design history have matured 
gradually since the beginning of the nineteenth century, although institutionalization 
commenced in the 1960s. It can be assumed for the sake of a sketchy illustration that the 
academic debate on design history that led to its institutionalization began in the 1960s while 
early works appeared in the 1970s, developed in the 1980s and flourished in the 1990s. During 
the last decade of the twentieth century, this discussion has been carried out on international 
platforms. Therefore, within the scope of this chapter, I will limit my observations to what 
I call the early years while leaving aside the 1990s for another investigation. Before going 
into detail, it would be useful to identify two important determinants paving the way for the 
ascent of design history in the UK: the historical conditions that matured in the 1960s and 
the government policy of supporting design in general.
8.2 Historical conditions
A reliable ground for the emergence of design historiography has surfaced in the UK, 
basically by means of institutionalization of design and expansion design practices 
amongst other things.
8.2.1 The institutionalization of design as practice and profession 
has been achieved
It is fair to underline that the UK was well situated to foster the rise of design history, for 
two obvious reasons among many others:
a) the emergence of the so-called ‘industrial revolution’, which opened an avenue 
for mass production of objects, and
b) the steady design debate that commenced by questioning the ‘machine 
aesthetic’ and the establishment of art and design schools in the nineteenth 
century, which continued to explore the concept of design in great depth.
Under normal circumstances, the history of a discipline appears as and within one of the 
final phases of institutionalization. Practice and theory might well be the first indicators 
of a new area. However, without substantial information flow, a discipline cannot exist. 
A growing practice may gradually turn into a profession through organizations, laws, 
rules, regulations, regulatory and professional bodies, associations and councils. The 
emergence of written, visual or other types of documents creates a basis for a prospective 
history. The presence of literature and archival material on the subject is crucial for 
historiography and also a kind of assurance of its establishment.
As soon as a community of professionals is formed, it is normal to expect that 
information flow will lead to the emergence of leaflets, brochures, posters, journals, 
magazines, books, broadcasting and moving or still imagery. Occasions bringing people On Design
88
together for the advancement of the practice, such as workshops, seminars, conferences, 
symposia and exhibitions, are particularly useful for completing the institutionalization 
of a particular subject. Education and research are the other aspects of institutionalization. 
Probably at this late stage, history comes to the fore to complete the scenario and provide 
people with a vision of the past, an interpretation of today and speculative powers for 
predicting the future.
What happened in the UK regarding design provides us with this simple looking 
but in fact rather arduous scenario. A few examples include the establishment of 
design education (Normal School of Design, 1837), the publication of design journals 
(Journal of Design and Manufactures, 1849), magazines and books, the establishment 
of associations (Design and Industry Association, 1915), radio broadcasts on the issue 
(1930s), exhibitions (1851, and so on) and the formation of professional bodies (Society 
of Industrial Artists, 1930). This list, which can easily be extended, is sufficient to 
convince us that the well-documented ‘past’ of design in the UK was mature enough to 
be investigated by historians in the second half of the twentieth century.1
It is not easy to identify when design history began. Some early writings, texts and 
books definitely included historical material and research, and showed understanding. For 
instance, The Wheelwright’s Shop by George Sturt, 1923, is highly acknowledged.2
 There 
are, no doubt, a few more works bearing traces of historical research and perspectives 
encompassing Pevsner, Read, Bertram, Banham, Gloag and so on. Nevertheless, what is 
of concern here is not individual efforts but the formation of continuing debate leading 
to the rise of a design history consciousness and its institutionalization. In that sense, the 
position of design as a concept plays a determining role.
8.2.2 Design has risen as a dominant term and 
concept among other related nomenclature
Many researchers would agree that a clear definition of design would be of the greatest 
help to design historians. A short review of the history of nomenclature indisputably 
shows that there have been many terms since the beginning of the nineteenth century 
to name the activities covered by what we today call ‘design’.3
 By the 1930s, industrial art 
and applied art were competing expressions. Pevsner, for instance, preferred Industrial 
Art as his book’s title whereas Herbert Read used Art and Industry. Ironically, although 
he included industrial design as a subtitle, it is never referred to in the text.4
 The term 
industrial design, which became unequivocally recognized in the UK in the 1930s, 
1
Knowing that this part of history and literature is well studied by writers such as C. Dilnot, A. Forty, T. Fry, J. 
Heskett, V. Margolin, P. Sparke and J. Woodham, I will omit further details.
2
My gratuities go to Frank Height and John Heskett, who separately had drawn my attention to this work in the 
late 1980s and told me that they regard George Sturt’s book as one of the pioneering works in design history.
3
For the transformation of the design concept and the battles of expressions, see Chapter 6 in Section Two. 4
To my reading, he employs the term only once and in brackets.The Rise of Design Historiography in the UK
89
first appeared as a proper book title (Holme, 1934) and was accepted in the 1940s 
(Read 1947, Gloag, 1946, 1947a, b, c, 1950). Since then, it has become ubiquitous in 
Britain.5
The formation of the Council of Industrial Design and subsequent events and 
activities expanded the employment of the expression. Industrial design was apparently 
beginning to acquire a strong voice in professional and educational institutions. In the 
early 1960s, after its introduction to higher education curricula as a new subject in 
degree courses, design became a powerful umbrella term, gradually covering more than 
the others. Although the popularity of industrial design was not at stake, areas that arose 
independently, such as product design, furniture design, transport design and vehicle 
design, fell under the aegis of design in general, although these relatively new fields often 
used to operate under industrial design.6
Interestingly, these changes were even reflected in official language. In retrospect, we 
immediately notice how the names of the design committees, exhibitions and councils 
varied and were subjected to alterations. The following list partially taken from the works 
of MacCharty (1979) illustrates this fluctuation of terms. Industrial art was replaced by 
industrial design, which was later substituted by design only7
 (books and publications 
are in italics while the relevant phrases are underlined):
8.2.3 The term design and its rise in official and formal titles
● 1915 Design and Industries Association founded
● 1919 Art and Industry pamphlet issued by the Ministry of Reconstruction
● 1920 British Institute of Industrial Art founded
● 1923 Exhibition of ‘Industrial Art Today’
● 1927 The periodical Commercial Art & Industry was published
● 1929 British Institute of Industrial Art exhibition, ‘Industrial Art for the Slender 
Purse’
● 1930 Society of Industrial Artists founded (SIA)
5
At the beginning of the twentieth century, the term industrial design was in use for some time in Britain 
although not very frequently. As I mentioned in a footnote in Chapter 6 in Section Two, the first written 
evidence goes back to 1894, when Frank G. Jackson, employed the expression (only once) in Theory and 
Practice of Design (1894: 3) where he associates industrial design with decorative objects. (At this point it is 
worth developing a critical view questioning the argument and Raymond Loewy’s claim that industrial design 
was born in America with Loewy as the first industrial designer.)
6
This point should be made clear to avoid misunderstanding: on the one hand, the content of design history was 
subject to reduction due to the exclusion of certain design disciplines, such as architecture and city planning; 
on the other, design’s content was extended thanks to the inclusion of industrial design and its specialist fields.
7
Many items in this list are taken from Fiona MacCarthy’s book, A History of British Design 1830–1970, and 
checked with the list in Twentieth Century Design by Jonathan M. Woodham, who later made some comments 
on the list above for which I am very grateful.On Design
90
● 1933 Council for Art and Industry set up by the Board of Trade (it is first met in 
1934)
● 1934 Industrial Design and the Future by Geoffrey Holme
● 1934 Art & Industry: The Principles of Industrial Design by Herbert Read
● 1935 Report on Industrial Art submitted by the Nugent Committee
● 1936 National Register of Industrial Art Designers formed
● 1936 The periodical Commercial Art & Industry renamed Art & Industry
● 1937 ‘An Enquiry into Industrial Art in England’ published by Nikolaus Pevsner
● 1937 The Council for Art and Industry published the Design and Designer in 
Industry Report
● 1939 Central Institute of Art and Design formed
● 1943 Report on ‘Industrial Design and Art in Industry’ completed but not 
published
● 1944 Proposals for a Central Design Council and Industrial Design Centre 
published by the Industrial Art Committee
● 1944 Council of Industrial Design formed
● 1959 The periodical Art & Industry renamed again as Design for Industry
● 1963 Society of Industrial Artists (SIA) renamed as Society of Industrial Artists 
and Designers
● 1972 Council of Industrial Design renamed as Design Council
● 1987 Society of Industrial Artists and Designers (SIA) renamed as Chartered 
Society of Designers (CSD)
Of the hints heralding the shift, an obvious one is the Council of Industrial Design 
(CoID), formed in 1944, which was renamed the Design Council in 1972. Another 
example is the Society of Industrial Artists (SIA). MacCarthy observes that ‘by the 1960s 
the profession had begun to look quite different, a change of outlook marked, in 1963, by 
the SIA decision to rename itself Society of Industrial Artists and Designers’ [the italics 
are mine] (MacCarthy, 1982: 149). The substitution of terms appears to signify a switch 
from a specific, limited context to a wider spectrum, if not a statement of the dominance 
of design. Although there are departments, articles, books and so on, bearing the title 
industrial design, it is nowadays very common to employ the term design and use it to 
enjoy the comfort of its vast and flexible content unless special emphasis is needed like 
graphic design, textile design, product design and so on.8
8
When a new course opened at Goldsmiths’ College in the early 1990s, it was called ‘Total Design’. This title ‘has 
been adopted as a convenient vehicle with which to define and to develop new boundaries of design practice 
in a changing world’ (Wood, 1990: 2).The Rise of Design Historiography in the UK
91
8.2.4 The introduction of design history in British higher 
education instigated the debate in the 1960s
In 1960, the National Advisory Council on Art Education (NACAE) published its first 
report. It stated that ‘history of art should be obligatory’ and that ‘each student should 
learn the history of his own subject – fashion including the history of costume, furniture, 
the history of furniture, and so on’ (Ashwin, 1978: 98). Although the history of design 
was not mentioned specifically, it does not require great effort to imagine the anticipation 
of design history studies.
In 1963, a Diploma in Art and Design (DipAD) was instituted in British higher 
education. Initially, it was ‘not a degree but degree equivalent’ (Renzio, 1977: 11). 
However, this was soon amended to make it a proper ‘Honours Degree’ (MacCarthy, 1982: 
155). According to Toni del Renzio, a principal lecturer, ‘when art and design education 
sought respectability and academic parity, a decision was made that the course needed 
some intellectual stiffening, as though there were grounds for doubts as the intellectual 
components of art and design’ (1977: 11). Whatever the initial considerations were as 
implied above, design was on the curriculum of higher education, requiring delivery 
with appropriate content and rigour. There were many obstacles but tutors have sought 
a way to teach it.
Firstly, there were not enough competent and specialised staff members but people 
with different backgrounds and expertise. Later, from the early 1970s, these issues would 
be brought into the open and discussed. Tim Benton portrays the situation with broad 
brushstrokes:
There are a few specialist design historians pursuing the study of clearly defined 
problems in the development of modern design. There are the collectors and 
connoisseurs, freelance or in museum, who are mainly interested in objects for 
their aesthetic and rarity value.
There are the cultural historians who use design as an expression of popular 
culture or social hierarchies. There are the historians of art or architecture who 
drift into design studies in pursuance of favourite themes.
(Benton, 1975: 7)
Secondly, sources were very scarce, and the available ones were far from satisfactory for 
the various demands of different design departments. Additionally, there were many 
irrelevant subjects in the books because they represented a vast range of interests rather 
than being specially written for design. Renzio criticized this situation:
Nearly all the books that have the word ‘design’ in the title, like Pevsner’s Pioneers 
of Modern Design and Banham’s Theory and Design in the First Machine Age for all 
the immense value of these books, are marginal to the general history of design, 
and treat special or architectural aspects; others, like Anthony Bertram’s admirable On Design
92
Penguin special [Design] now a valuable document, or Herbert Read’s Art and 
Industry with its conceptually equivocal rhetoric, are not history.9
(Renzio, 1977: 11)
Thirdly, the lack of a precedence for design history teaching was a problem that created 
future disputes in the subject. Ultimately, art history lecturers found themselves 
extending the scope of their courses to include new issues and preparing lectures on 
design. They mostly took on the burden of design. Having said this, the conclusion 
can easily be drawn that ‘design history is in Britain being defined and developed as 
a component of design education in the schools, colleges and polytechnics’ (Kinross, 
1985: 12).10 The early engagement of art history with design history may be an exigency, 
a historical coincidence or even maybe an undesired marriage. Although it undoubtedly 
solved the immediate delivery problem in the classrooms, it raised question marks in 
the long run, especially concerning its negative influences – some of which probably 
stemmed from its nexus with art history.
8.3 Government’s policy: A market-oriented 
strategy supporting design generously
The overwhelming popularity of design fostered by the British government under 
Margaret Thatcher in the 1980s left no room for an alternative but the prosperity of 
design.11 Given this policy of raising the quality of design and boosting exports, the 
government strongly supported design circles, consultancies and businesses. From 
1982 to 1985, the Department of Trade and Industry and the Design Council implemented 
a programme called the ‘Funded Consultancy Scheme’ (FCS). This was followed by 
9
Of course, eleven years after this statement, Kinross’ article ‘Herbert Read’s Art and Industry: a History’ would 
tell us a different story (see Kinross, 1988).
10Alongside the determining role of higher education institutions, there have always been other circles 
interested in design. In this respect, the contributions of museum and gallery curators, and collectors and 
connoisseurs to the development of design history should not be forgotten.
11Paul Reilly, who was the director of the Council of Industrial Design (1960–1973) and then the Design 
Council (1973–1977), describes in his autobiography how he introduced the subject to Margaret Thatcher 
while she was Secretary of State for Education. 
Of course, as Prime Minister she did more for design which she called ‘a key factor in ensuring the 
economic health of the nation.’ She encouraged the Department of Trade and Industry to finance 
what she called the Funded Consultancy Service, which provided first three million pounds, then ten 
and yet again ten to finance the employment of designers in industry.
(Reilly, 1987: 82).
John Walker gives another figure: after a meeting at 10 Downing Street in 1982, he says, ‘Government spending 
on the promotion of design was subsequently increased from £4 million to £12 million’ (Walker 1989: xi). The 
employment figures illustrate this effect: ‘29 000 people were working in design consultancy business of which 
yearly capacity was over £1 billion’ (Walker, 1989: XI).The Rise of Design Historiography in the UK
93
another, the ‘Support for Design’ (SFD) scheme. A survey conducted with about 2,000 
and 3,000 companies participating in the SFD and FCS schemes, respectively, reveals the 
success of the investment in design:
This study shows that the Government’s programme of subsidised design 
consultants has encouraged a proportion of small and medium sized UK 
manufacturers to make use of professional design, many of whom would not have 
done so without help. Although at the time of the subsidised design project over half 
of the firms employed full-time, qualified in-house RD&D staff, in nearly a third 
design/development was undertaken mainly by individuals with main jobs other 
than RD&D, and in most cases this was the first time the firms had used a design 
consultant or drawn on specialist expertise in areas such as industrial design.
The study shows that, even in typical small and medium sized firms such as 
these, the development of new and improved products, components, packaging, 
etc. using professional design expertise can be an excellent commercial investment. 
Two-thirds of the projects were implemented and 60% were financially successful.
(Design Innovation Group, 1990: 15)
Overall, this policy greatly popularized design and created a substantial market, both 
for new products and publications, including a proliferation of design literature and 
history books. Meanwhile, the establishment of the Design Research Society in 1967 and 
the Design History Society in 1977 created a considerable impetus for progress in the 
subject via their journals and annual conferences. In a well-planned coincidence, the 
inauguration of the Design Museum in 1989 and its subsequent exhibitions and other 
activities provided further stimulation to raise design history awareness. The money 
poured into the sector bore fruit.
8.4 The problems of design historiography in the 1960s
Design history encountered a few problems in its early days as the influence of art history 
was strongly felt even if it did not always leave a detectable imprint. Metaphorically 
speaking, the fallacy of art history legacy is discernible:
First, art history courses neglected many subjects that are a substantial part of design. 
It was, of course, not very easy to include design issues as much and as quickly as needed 
since no profound research had been conducted. In addition, the dearth of appropriate 
knowledge meant that art history could not be aware of crucial design subjects and 
set the agenda appropriate for another discipline. Indeed, it was not even considered a 
discipline at that time anyway.
Second, the special perspective of the theoretical analysis of design, without which the 
subject cannot be grasped thoroughly, was neglected. As Ashwin argues, the approach 
adopted disregarded the ‘economic, technological or sociological mode of analysis which 
plays no part in conventional courses in the history of art’ (Ashwin, 1978: 99).On Design
94
Third, a distorted understanding of art history infected design with a long-lasting 
‘illness’: as the pioneers, heroes and protagonists were epoch-making figures, they should 
be the main axis of history, within which their stories must prevail. This view reduced 
some studies of history to texts of the collected works of various well-known designers at 
the expense of the principal elements of historiography. Again, Ashwin makes it explicit: 
‘The history of design conceived as the history of “pioneers” is, it is claimed, particularly 
attractive to the art historian because it allows him to account for the evolution of design 
in terms of the unique personal insights of individual designers, rather than in the more 
complex terms of technological change and socio-economic transformations’ (Ashwin, 
1978: 100).
Fourth, the emphasis that art history put on design objects was either inadequate 
or ignored the prominent features. Superficial aesthetic concerns that dominate the 
descriptive approaches of some conventional art history were applied to the realm of 
objects where an artefact was concerned. Meanwhile, its most important element, its 
function, was ignored. This attitude caused another misinterpretation.
Fifth, since the objects were often reviewed in terms of their aesthetic merits, it became 
all too easy to categorise them with respect to the styles attributed to them. Ultimately, 
design history began featuring the same stylistic periodization as art history, that is, Arts 
and Crafts, Art Nouveau, Futurism and so on. In certain incidences, products came to 
be treated as if they were artistic pieces and classified accordingly. This account of the 
detrimental influences of the art history background can be prolonged as easily as the 
number of complaints expressed by commentators pointing out this fact: ‘The problem of 
defining the object of study and finding an appropriate historiography have been fraught 
by design history’s art attitudes and precedents. In attempting to assert itself, design 
history has sought to establish its distinctness from art history by defining its object of 
study as the useful and functional instead of the merely beautiful’ (Attfield, 1985: 26).
8.5 Identity formation
What design history is, what it consists of, its subject matter, aims, methodologies and 
so on. have been major questions asked since the mid-1970s. Within this context, the 
identity of design history has surfaced as an essential problem. The exigency of forming 
an identity was discovered and discussed by scholars in the 1970s and 1980s. Design 
History: Fad or Function? is essential evidence while Block, an important journal of the 
time, devoted a few issues to the subject that included key articles.12 However, at the end 
of the 1980s, John Walker insisted that ‘There is now no shortage of books on design 
but the subject is still in its formative stages and hence suffers periodic identity crisis’ 
(Walker, 1989: 18).
12See Hannah & Putnam (1980), Fry (1981) and Teymur (1981).The Rise of Design Historiography in the UK
95
Walker was not alone in his criticism as Tibor Kalman, an American émigré graphic 
designer, strongly criticized contemporary design history simply for having no vision: 
‘We seem to be locked into a self-fulfilling prophecy: designers don’t read, so design 
writers don’t write. They write captions. Sometimes they write really long captions, 
thousands of words that do nothing but describe the pictures. Books of design history 
that are packaged for a supposedly illiterate audience only engender further illiteracy’ 
(Kalman, 1991: 50). Kalman suggests that the method of transcending this difficulty is to 
perceive design history as ‘a way of filtering the past, a way of selecting what should be 
remembered’ (1991: 50). The phrase, ‘filtering the past’ brings up the issue of theory; the 
‘filter’ is actually nothing but a ‘theoretical framework’ by which historians operate, well, 
at least some of them. In this respect, one could say that the subject matter, the content of 
design, the aims and objectives, and the theoretical frameworks, moulded the backbone 
of the initial debate that led towards the discipline’s identity formation.13 The following 
sub-sections look into each of these issues in turn.
8.5.1 Subject matter
As many critics have indicated, neither design history nor industrial design history has 
a subject matter agreed on by the majority of historians. Judy Attfield’s remark quoted 
above is an example. Clive Dilnot, in an important article on the subject,14 considers this 
issue as the first crucial problem ‘in the movement toward creating a discipline of the 
history of design’ (Dilnot, 1984b: 3). He holds that ‘design historians as a whole have 
at best an incomplete grasp of their would-be subject matter’ (Dilnot, 1984b: 3). John 
Walker seems totally in agreement with this statement. After discussing the object and 
scope of design history he concludes, ‘unless the object of design history is precisely 
defined the sheer magnitude of its possible subject matter will reduce the researcher 
to impotence’ (Walker, 1989: 36). This is not a kind of view that historians were willing 
to share easily in the 1990s. Adrian Forty has a clear vision and is convinced that ‘the 
discipline of (design) history15 as it has developed over the last century or so already 
provides a perfectly satisfactory definition of the “field”’ (Forty, 1993: 132). The debate 
between Victor Margolin and Adrian Forty reflects the unsettled territories where the 
legitimization crisis of design history and design study is depicted (see Design Issues, 
Spring 1995).
The reason why the subject matter of design history has been a problem is the same 
old story: the lack of consensus on what constitutes design. Without defining the area 
covered by design, one cannot define the subject matter of design history. So far, it 
13Whether design and design history is a ‘discipline’ or not is another arena of dispute, apparently especially in 
the United States (Margolin, 1999).
14At the Ohio conference in 1998, Dilnot presented a paper discussing the concept of knowledge and the 
epistemological dimensions of the object within the context of design (1999a).
15My edition. Although Forty did not use ‘design history’ in this sentence, regarding the context of his response, 
I assume this is what he meant.On Design
96
seems that the definition of design itself is highly dependent on the scope of historical 
studies. If I were allowed to make a critical comment here, I would raise the question 
of why design has always been subject to ‘static’ definitions. The dynamic content and 
the uninterrupted transformation of design may well form a different interpretation 
of history, which is transformed as its object changes. The neglect of this dialectic 
relationship between the designed object and its history may also explain why we need a 
historiography specifically for design and its sub-fields.
8.5.2 Content of design
There was, is and will be an ongoing endeavour to define the content of design. Again, 
this is a definition-related problem. One of the reasons for the impediment derives 
from an attempt to narrow the content of design for practical purposes. Certain 
design-related disciplines or design-oriented activities employ this term to describe 
their particular area of action, product and production processes. However, they 
consciously or unconsciously, but no doubt unilaterally, disregard and exclude other 
fields of design.
When the so-called ‘design literature’ is examined, it appears that some disciplines 
and their professional practices, which are highly involved with design processes, are not 
mentioned at all, such as engineering design, landscape design, urban design and regional 
design. Architecture and craft are victims as well. However, one may venture to call them 
the relatively fortunate ones since, despite their elimination, their ‘dismissal’ is always felt 
in the same way and expressed ‘regrettably’. Design History: A Student’s Handbook edited 
by Hazel Conway is an example. As the editor, Conway, on behalf of the other contributors, 
openly presents their understanding of design history and the purpose of the book. 
She agrees that its scope is very wide: ‘Although many historical examples are included 
in this introduction to design history, it is not intended to be a concise history of the 
subject’ (Conway, 1987: 4). Design history was to comprise many areas of specialization, 
each of which requires separate study and some of which already have ‘their particular 
professional institutions and publications’ (Conway, 1987: 5). Among these are those 
mentioned above, that is, architecture, town planning, landscape and civil engineering. 
Conway prefers to bring them together under the title of ‘environmental design’ rather 
than reserving a chapter for each subject. In his review of this book, John Walker does 
not hesitate to draw our attention to this point: ‘Architecture as a distinct topic is also 
excluded, although it crops up, of course, under interior and environmental design. 
Although some scholars feel that architectural history is an independent discipline, in 
my view it ought to have been given separate consideration because it has been so vital 
to the origins of design history’ (1988: 80). In fact, it is not unusual or unknown for 
architecture to have a place in design histories. Independent of whether successful or 
not, Ann Ferebee shows in A History of Design from the Victorian Era to the Present
how architecture is inserted into other design subjects. A survey of the literature gives 
us more detailed information about the shifting axis and changing content of design The Rise of Design Historiography in the UK
97
history. Nicolaus Pevsner’s Pioneers of Modern Design16 and Reyner Banham’s Theory 
and Design in the First Machine Age (1989) are works where the relationship of ‘design 
and architecture’ or ‘design in architecture’ is not exposed. This literature corresponds 
to the years before the fragmentation and departmentalization of design. In contrast, 
sources from the 1970s and 1980s provide us with a new scenario in which specialized 
design books were published even more frequently. With them, themes like articulation, 
integration, harmony and unity with different design practices fade from the agenda. 
Parallel to this, there are fewer comprehensive and global design histories. Design 
history in general is being fragmented. New, smaller isles of sovereignty of various design 
histories proceed from this proliferation. As noted elsewhere, fragmentation leaves its 
traces firmly and stamps the era instantly.17 Regarding fragmentation, the situation had 
become clear by the late 1980s, at least in posing the following questions: ‘Does design 
include architecture? Is architecture part of the object of design history or art history or 
is architectural an independent discipline in its own right? Similar uncertainties arise in 
respect of the crafts, the minor or decorative arts and the mass media’ (Walker, 1989: 22).
Although not direct, this statement is explanatory, especially when we read between 
the lines. Firstly, it appears that the area where design exercises its power is subjected to 
restrictions. There should be no doubt that design is a sine qua non that is integrant of 
architecture as well as intrinsic. With this interpretation, it is understood that architecture is 
to be stripped of its prime constituent, design, which is reduced to a negligible level. Such a 
perspective may help people who wish to limit the content of design in order to appropriate, 
possess and reserve the term, and thereby legitimize its use for particular disciplines, such 
as those dealing with mass-produced images, artefacts and everyday objects.
Secondly, it queries the position of ‘others’ that are obviously involved with design like 
engineering design, landscape design, urban design and so on. These others are treated by 
design history as if they do not exist. Their names are hardly mentioned in the literature 
if at all. For instance, Walker, who complains about the omitting of architecture and craft 
in the last quotation, does not speak of urban or regional design and their elimination. 
His interest in these ‘others’ remains limited to architecture and craft. Is there any room, 
then, for ‘others’ in design history? Probably, it is time to review the idea of global design 
history incorporating all fields concerning design. Colossal books, such as History of 
the World or World Architecture, might be extremely useful as a general reference and 
for educational purposes, but this is not what all historians repeatedly produce. Rather, 
a history of an object (Barcelona Chair), an institution (Bauhaus), a period (Twentieth 
Century Limited) or a country (Spanish Design), successfully completes the mosaic 
16In the first edition, in 1936, the title was slightly different: Pioneers of Modern Movement. 17If we remember that fragmentation is one of the phenomena of postmodernism, we realize immediately that 
this is not a simple coincidence. In other words, the years of fragmentation in design correspond to the years 
of postmodernist euphoria. What sort of substantial link could be established is, of course, a matter for further 
investigation, although I believe it is worth taking note of this juxtaposition.On Design
98
towards a better understanding of the past. Therefore, the proliferation of independent 
design histories is more than welcome.
Design euphoria and desire for objects is a creation of economies based on consumerism. 
If we look at society with this in mind, it appears that there are two fundamental phenomena 
in addition to the rise of information technology, which characterizes the period we live 
in: reproductions of objects and reproductions of images. Both of them form the main axis 
of everyday life because they are consumed or used by all without exception. No doubt, 
design is an inevitable element of both. Apparently, the quality and quantity of objects and 
images are being increased with a latent assumption that objects are vehicles for people 
to express and identify themselves. This popular trend encourages people to search for 
authentic, original, exotic, unique, extravagant, pompous or luxuriously designed things, 
which furnish their owners with a special status, identity and pleasure.18 The more objects 
are available, the greater the opportunity is for one to choose for the fulfilment of services, 
enjoyment of function and exposition of self, whenever desired.
Whether virtual, real or conceptual, design provides us with a variety of new objects 
far quicker than technology does. This is because technology is inextricably bound to 
new inventions and can bring out novel forms only after being justified by considerable 
research input and discovery. This is not an obstacle for design since it is not necessarily 
dependent on scientific and technological discoveries but may be content with new 
forms and minor alterations utilising existing possibilities. Furthermore, design is being 
publicly understood today as a quality and value-adding factor which of course never 
contradicts how it has been considered by most designers. However, this understanding 
of design has been notably misused by marketing strategies so that almost everything 
produced since the 1980s has been labelled with the magic word ‘design’ as a kind of 
guarantee of quality and taste.
As a result, the number of designed products remained far behind the number of 
times the word design was uttered. Both designed products and the word ‘design’, which 
was turned into a commodity itself, are marketed. This plethora of designed goods was 
directly reflected in the world of publication. Many books came out: furniture design, 
chair design, car design, lamp design and so forth. Within this panorama, it is most 
probably correct to conclude that the fragmentation of design is also linked to the boom 
of designed articles, retail, corporate identity, branding and digital imagery (Press, 2003).
18Ideal examples of the role of objects in our life are marvellously illustrated in the novel Things by George 
Perec (1990), who explores the meaning of the goods we are besieged with. It is highly recommended for 
anybody who is interested in the obsession with objects. Another novella drew the attention of design circles. 
The Mezzanine by Nicholson Baker (1990) was reviewed by Jeffrey Meikle, writer of Twentieth Century Limited, 
Industrial Design in America, 1925–1939 (1979): ‘I am especially keen on convincing anyone involved in design 
history or material culture studies that they can learn more from this slender fiction than from most academic 
works of history or criticism’ (Meikle, 1992: 3). For me, it is also important that objects, particularly designed 
objects, are being examined and studied from various points of view as objects of film, art and literature. 
Such enquiries undoubtedly increase our sensibility towards our physical environment and contribute to our 
understanding of material culture.The Rise of Design Historiography in the UK
99
8.5.3 Aims and objectives
Arguably, one of the most important factors defining the identity of a discipline is that of 
its aims and objectives. Without them, no research can be conducted, and no discipline 
can operate. Unfortunately, design history lacks a sufficiently discussed set of aims and 
objectives, particularly in relation to its object of research with the particular methods 
evolved for the purpose. Of course, this does not mean that individual works and studies 
have no target to achieve or objective to fulfil. The fact is that aims and objectives 
were, to my knowledge, never proposed systematically and thereby properly debated 
and improved. The suggestions made have sometimes remained valid only temporarily 
or are inadequate. As a result, they appear to be far from constituting a coherent set 
of objectives and operational parameters for historians. I will argue the case through 
several examples.
Bruce Archer, the promoter of design awareness (1974) and the scientification 
of design in the 1960s, claims that ‘the identification of designed objects, with date, 
attribution, history of ownership and so on, is a crucially important contribution to 
design scholarship’ (Archer, 1977: 5). No doubt, it is! But is this the sole purpose of the 
historian? He continues:
The simple cataloguing of every sort of artefact is a task as daunting as that of the 
cataloguing of the stars. In every sub division of the design area, nevertheless, there 
is urgent need for such cataloguing and classification to be done. And since the 
development of design scholarship, not to mention the attainment of ordinary, 
practical understanding, depends upon the maturing of design history from the 
tasks of cataloguing and commentary to the tasks of explanation and generalisation, 
there is urgent need for increase in the depth as well as the range of historical enquiry.
(Archer, 1977: 10)
Cataloguing and classification are, of course, important. But whose tasks are these? 
Archaeologists of artefacts, archivists of products or design historians? This understanding 
is probably reducing the role of design historian to that of object identification and 
description, and, eventually, to explanation and generalization.19
Another example demonstrating the weakness of the aims and objectives of design 
history is Dilnot’s article. He, very rightly, asks a series of crucial questions. Yet, these 
questions, apart from giving an impression of how crucial they are, show how vulnerable 
design history is. I would like to use these questions to illustrate the confusion on design 
history. Dilnot indicates the
major problem facing the discipline: defining what design history’s roles should 
be and who its potential audiences are. And who should they be? Should design 
19It is also not explicit what the function and nature of explanations and generalizations will be.On Design
100
historians write for themselves or for professional designers? Or is their role 
principally in design education? If so, what, if any, is the relationship between 
historical study and studio education? Or should design history be considered as 
wholly academic discipline, or, perhaps, as a contribution to design studies – the 
historical dimension of design studies’ attempts, so far profoundly ahistorical, to 
analytically and logically model the design process?
(Dilnot, 1984b: 8)
These questions reflect the belief in a holistic design history. This is not what the writer 
of the text intends to do. Undoubtedly, widening the philosophical, theoretical and 
historical horizons of the discipline in scholarly work is one thing; writing design history 
books for different audiences with different levels of interest in design is another. Usually, 
the latter uses the results and findings of the former and adapts them to its own specific 
objectives and the requirements of its target market. Therefore, it is probably right to call 
the former primary and the latter secondary sources, such as some textbooks written 
for educational purposes that are not derived from original research. However, this does 
not mean that a very special work addressing the demands of a limited group cannot be 
a scholarly written design history. Naturally, the quality of the work is independent of 
the limits of its audiences and readers. Yet, it is important to distinguish the scholarly 
activity required by the discipline from that of the history books demanded by designers, 
students, connoisseurs, the public and so on. Any confusion on this issue clearly stems 
from the inadequacy or ambiguity of aims and objectives. Unless these are precisely 
uttered and a consensus on them established, comprehensive design histories can hardly 
be written. Dilnot is, of course, well aware of this and holds that ‘design history, in the 
sense of a single, organised discipline with defined aims and objects, does not exist’ 
(Dilnot, 1984a: 11).
Dilnot’s article was published in 1984. However, eight years after his statement, we 
witness gradually increasing efforts to build up the discipline of design. Philip Pacey, 
pronouncing that he has ‘a longstanding interest in non-elitist approaches to art and 
design’, questions the position and attitude of design history towards non-professional 
designers. His argument is that ‘design history should not merely chronicle the separation 
of designing from making and the subsequent history of the design profession, but 
that it should place this in relation to a broader picture which encompasses the non￾professional which preceded and has co-existed with professional design’ (Pacey, 1992: 
224). Whether one accepts his argument or not, one cannot deny that this is a suggestion 
concerning the content of design history as well as its aims and objectives. This is also 
evidence of the uninterrupted debate on the nature of design history. In other words, it 
shows that the aims and objectives of design and industrial design histories were never 
finalized. Tony Fry advocates that ‘a history of design should, therefore, be a history of 
formations and process, as well as objects and form’ (Fry, 1988:43). Suggestions were still 
being made in the early 1990s. In his debate with Margolin, Forty remarks on the aims: 
‘To suggest that the aims of design history should be to write good history and shed 
light on how people in the past have discriminated quality may not seem very radical The Rise of Design Historiography in the UK
101
ambitions. None the less, I do not believe that the possibilities they offer for research 
have yet been exhausted’ (Forty, 1993: 132).
Research has continued to flourish since then. Regarding the writings of the 1990s, 
I would say that the discussion on design history reached a new level thanks to the 
emergence of the quality work produced, which deserves a substantial analysis.
8.5.4 Theoretical framework
The argument here is rather simple: although the value attributed to the role of theory 
in history writing varies from one scholar to another, I believe that theory cannot be 
excluded. Therefore, design historiography should present its own account. Tony Fry 
justifies this with no difficulty:
the object of study of design history is always constituted by theory. Even 
calling up the object as material fact is totally dependent upon the reality 
constructed by empiricism. There is no pure object which travels through time 
with an encapsulated meaning, which can be unpacked as an historical record. 
Here meaning is a product of the social output of knowledge in tandem with 
interpretative activity.
(1988: 53)
Theory in relation to general history has been one of the issues preoccupying both 
theorists and historians since the middle of the eighteenth century, especially since 
Marxist approaches. Briefly, the question is whether history follows a discernible pattern 
of development. If it does, there must be a theory laying bare the course of history that 
enables us to predict the future and perhaps to construct it. The extreme version of 
this idea even claims that the social structure of society in the future can be known 
and planned in advance. These ideas were discussed much, both within and outside of 
Marxist literature. It is not difficult to show that the role of theory in history has not, so 
far, been entirely resolved. Even Arthur Marwick, the author of The Nature of History, 
who does not believe in ‘claiming for history a theoretical basis’ (Marwick, 1989: 152), 
admits that there is room for theory in history.
History is a systematic subject which calls for a fully conscious and fully articulated 
statement of assumptions and methods, which employs generalisations, concepts, 
and theories (plural), which as and when necessary can be tested by empirical 
methods, and a subject which has complex, definable, but always expanding ranges 
of sources and means of exploiting them.
(1989: 152)
Given this argument, if one looks at design or industrial design history, one finds that 
there is no distinct theory of historiography, neither to be developed nor be subscribed On Design
102
to. Furthermore, no comprehensive discussion on this issue is being carried out, except 
for some limited attempts. The ‘closeness’ of design circles to theory is known. In a 
quotation given above, Kalman draws attention to ‘a self-fulfilling prophecy: designers 
don’t read, so design writers don’t write’ (Kalman, 1991: 50). Dilnot makes it clear: 
‘Design activity since 1945 can be explained by paying attention to the main motors of 
economic-industrial motivation in this period. However, resistance to ‘theory’ and to 
concepts brought in from other disciplines or areas is often rooted in the dislike of the 
idea that the imported concepts are merely background’ (1984b: 10).
Regarding these observations and given that current design literature offers far 
fewer theories than expected, I believe that design history as a serious scholarly activity 
demands more effort to improve its theoretical framework. To this end, I would like to 
look at the relationship of design history with history in general.
8.6 Degree of historical consciousness
My first set of arguments concerns the specific stages in which the connection of two 
disciplines was initially neglected, later recognized and eventually studied. My second 
point is how design history conducted a direct dialogue with history. A glance at the 
subject indicates that there is much common ground.
8.6.1 Stage of negligence
According to the view outlined above, one of the important sins of omission of the 
industrial design literature is not being fully aware of the problems of the discipline of 
history. What that history is, is the question that never appears in the overwhelming 
majority of design books. This negligence is most likely due to the direct co-operation 
of art and architecture. Since design history mostly developed under the aegis of 
these two disciplines, it did not need further methods, techniques or theories to 
fulfil expectations in its early years of formation. What art and architecture offered 
was sufficient to solve most of the problems faced in lecture halls, design courses and 
limited textual works.
Naturally, the question of what history is would be absurd in a milieu where 
conditions are not mature enough to raise it. The development of a discipline is a process 
of many stages: initially, it is fated to be dependent, followed by a period of imitation as 
the adaptation of tested methods offers a safe way. In many cases, before creating its own 
methods, a discipline must apply existing ones to check where they work and where they 
do not. Eventually, the discipline reaches adolescence, when it is preoccupied with the 
search for its identity. Originality and an appraisal of the past are inevitable. This period 
of identity seeking is a time of total consciousness and perpetual inquiry, hence also a 
period of independence when critical questions are asked more often than ever. The 
structure of the area of research is mostly formed through these efforts. I am convinced The Rise of Design Historiography in the UK
103
that design history, which is arguably in its mature years of formation, has followed this 
pattern with similar phases.
8.6.2 Stage of recognition
I have noticed that more critical questions have appeared after the mid-1980s as the 
identity of design history has come under scrutiny. In this context, one of the matters 
preoccupying scholars is the relationship with other areas. Clive Dilnot, a distinguished 
spokesman on the subject, asks: ‘What is the relationship between design history 
and other areas of study and inquiry? To use the most obvious example, what is its 
relationship to art history? Also, what is its relationship to history in general and to the 
specialist histories of technology, economy, and business that impinge on the subject?’ 
(1984a: 4–5).
Scholars have raised these and similar questions again and again. However, it seems 
that the answers have been less fruitful and abundant than the questions. A few works have 
attempted to throw light on this issue, such as John Walker’s Design History and History 
of Design: ‘Since design history is a branch of the discipline history, design historians 
encounter in their practice the same basic methodological and theoretical problems, as 
do all historians’ (Walker, 1989: 74). Starting from this premise, Walker draws a parallel 
with the problems of history and design history, such as facts, narration, synchrony and 
diachronic periodization. Analysis of design history’s relations with history not only 
introduces the current debates taking place in and around history but also furnishes 
the researcher with the vast experience and many methods of an established discipline. 
Moreover, it enables design history to locate itself within various histories and form its 
own reference points accordingly.
8.6.3 Stage of study
It is worth pointing out from the outset that approaching history should be carefully 
orchestrated. Otherwise, it could easily replace the position of art and architecture, 
and might begin to influence design history as much as the others. Nor is it a matter 
of the balance of influence between these three disciplines. Rather, it is simply the 
reconstruction of a healthy relationship that has been neglected so far. It should aim to 
give an account of design history’s emancipation from art and architectural influence, 
and the provision of the backbone of an authentic identity based on a reasonable 
relationship with history in general as well as with the other disciplines.
At this point, two questions come to mind: why is an account with history necessary? 
And how can design history benefit from it? To respond to the latter is not as easy as 
to respond to the former. While a short answer suffices for the first question, a longer 
investigation is necessary to formulate a detailed method of usage for the second.
Let us take the first question. Given that the discipline of history is very old, it is 
naturally very experienced in the study of the past. Therefore, any scientific work in 
any field of research concerning the past is expected to have recourse to history’s vast On Design
104
accumulation of erudition. However, this is not to say that history provides a single 
holistic way of looking at the past. Rather, there are many methods of studying the past 
and many distinct approaches, all operating simultaneously and representing diverse 
philosophical and theoretical stances. Hence, digging up the past without consulting 
these sources is both an isolated and limited effort in which the conjectures and 
conclusions may well be superficial.
To benefit from the experience of history is neither evidence of subordination nor 
dependence. It is unlikely that interdisciplinary relations can be comprehended with 
these terms. Thus, when we closely examine the situation, it becomes more and more 
transparent that the real problem is not to determine and label the position of disciplines 
with respect to each other but to inquire into the nature of their relationship and the 
essence of their interaction.
In such an interaction, for example, the methodologies applied in the writing of 
history could be inspirational if not provide a direct contribution to design history. 
However, the objects of study in these disciplines are rather different. Given that the 
objects and, most likely, the objectives of histories vary substantially, the extent to 
which their methodologies might be shared, becomes a matter of discussion. Therefore, 
particular historical studies have to develop their own methodological tools to meet 
their own specifications and provide their own research techniques.
Expressed directly and frankly, the nature of design history obliges further ongoing 
inspection. Without this, the definition and legitimization of its identity is difficult to 
be clarified. However, this resurrects the question reiterated over millennia: the nature 
of history. This has been profoundly studied and may well provide the young scholars 
of design history with a source of inspiration and reasonable examples to follow and 
improve.20
8.7 Notes for a prospective historiography
In light of the arguments and observations I have presented, I would like to make a few 
constructive remarks as a corollary. The impression I have is that if industrial design 
history is defined without addressing the issues mentioned above, it is doomed to be 
prescriptive, descriptive, static and therefore limited. The major reason why a direct 
answer is not adequate ensues from the ambiguity and the ambiguity surrounding the 
discipline, which has to be uncovered, probably by developing theoretical frameworks 
with which to consolidate its structure. The absence of such an endeavour opens the way 
for a wide range of questions in search of an identity for design history. Clive Dilnot 
continues his inquiry into its position and later its nature:
20In this respect, many works can be cited, particularly classics like Marc Bloch’s The Historian’s Craft, Fernand 
Braudel’s On History, R. G. Collingwood’s The Idea of History.The Rise of Design Historiography in the UK
105
is it better to think of design history as a part of history in general? But if so what 
kind of contribution should or could it make? Is it, or would it be, merely a minor, 
if useful, subsection of economic, social, and technological history? Or might it 
be a more significant contribution, a different way of reading or comprehending 
history? In its twentieth -century guise and its more theoretically informed aspects, 
does not design history potentially deserve to be linked with cultural studies 
and the sociology of media and culture, even with aspects of anthropology and 
archaeology? And, finally, as a history of ‘things seen,’ what might its relationship 
be to art and architectural history and to the histories of the decorative arts?
(1984a: 4–5)
A quick response to these straight inquiries may perhaps be given as follows. To start 
with, all questions anticipating interdisciplinary, multi and cross-cultural approaches to 
the subject are undeniably valid and more than welcome. As long as an article is produced 
within a culture or belongs to a culture, a profound analysis involving all related fields 
becomes inevitable. From anthropology to industrial archaeology, numerous scientific 
research areas have definitely something to offer concerning objects. Yet, (industrial/
product) design history should not be confused with the history of objects, for example 
with George Kubler’s suggestion of a ‘History of Things’, which includes almost 
everything. He uses the term as opposed to the ‘bristling ugliness of “material culture”’, 
which is, for him, preferred by
anthropologists to distinguish ideas, or ‘mental culture’, from artefacts. But the 
‘history of things’ is intended to reunite ideas and objects under the rubric of visual 
forms: the term includes both artefacts and works of art, both replicas and unique 
examples, both tools and expressions – in short all materials worked by human 
hands under the guidance of connected ideas developed in temporal sequence.
(Kubler, 1978: 9)
The broadness of this approach obviously differentiates it from what we understand 
by industrial design history. His controversial remark on the concept of ‘material 
culture’, made in 1962, seems to have failed to discourage researchers, given the rising 
popularity of the term (for example, Daniel Miller’s 1987 book, Material Culture and 
Mass Consumption, received positive responses in those years).
Beyond the special role proceeding from the nature of its object, design history 
has a mission identical to that of history. Therefore, its readers should not be radically 
different from those of any other historical study. Design historians do scholarly work 
to contribute to the discipline. Hence, they do not write for themselves but to serve the 
development of design history. However, this does not mean that all scholarly written 
history incorporates knowledge in the form and content required by professional 
designers, educators, students, managers and so on. Identifying the requirements that 
different audiences demand from history and composing the information as necessary On Design
106
may require a special emphasis on certain subjects, details and cases. While these special 
demands cannot challenge the course of historical studies, they can encourage specialism 
and expertise within the field. However, it is also true that history written especially for 
a limited and defined audience may well provide a scholarly work that contributes to the 
discipline: ‘Even meagre, scattered, and obscure documentation can be put to good use,’ 
says Carlo Ginzburg (1980: xvii).
What these observations can do for local design historiography is a good subject 
for further research. Globalization brings a new perspective to historiography, which 
should not be ignored.21 Fry considers this a ‘fundamental challenge to the nature and 
authority of the current Eurocentric models of history writing’. He thinks that local 
history22 ‘will not be based on the same agenda, object, rhetoric or concerns. He insists 
that “Design history on and in the margins … is a different history”’ (1995: 217). Fry’s 
argument provides another perspective within which historians of the ‘margin’ may seek 
another trajectory to locate their findings through which they can examine in depth the 
enigmatic relationship with the ‘centre’ and global concerns.
21For a short view on particular aspects of globalization in design see Chapter 3 in Section One. 22The vocabulary of global and local is my emphasis. Although Fry uses these expressions – especially in Design 
History: Australia – the binary model of centre and margin is utilized more frequently in his article published 
in Design Issues (see Fry, 1995).CHAPTER 9
UNCHARTED TERRITORIES OF 
TRANSNATIONAL DESIGN HISTORY WITH 
PARTICULAR REFERENCE TO TURKEY
This chapter was presented at ICDHS 2016 Taipei conference, entitled: Building Trans/National 
Design History, The 10th International Conference on Design History and Studies, 26–28 October 
2016. Taipei. It was published in the conference proceedings. W. S. Wong, Y. Kikuchi and T. S. Lin, 
eds. (2016), Building Trans/National Design History, San Paolo: Blucher.
9.1 Introduction
This chapter aims at revealing and discussing the particular characteristics of transnational 
design history that we have encountered in Turkey. In order to study the subject with a 
coherent approach, the understanding of transnational history and its interpretation for 
the field of design will be briefly revealed. This will help define a conceptual territory 
within which an undefined area will be looked into with an example from design history 
in Turkey.
9.2 Transnational history
The expression of transnational is not new. It goes back to 1862 when German philologist 
Georg Curtius discussed ‘transnational’ languages in Leipzig (Macdonald, 2013). 
It took six years for its first English appearance, in an article published in Princeton 
Review (Macdonald, 2013). Nevertheless, the term gained widespread use and enriched 
substance since 1990, which has opened avenues for serious discourse as well as offering 
new ways for history research (Yuko Kikuchi, 2014; Katarina Friberg, 2007; Macdonald, 
2013). The rise of globalization debates and the issues of migration are among the leading 
factors bringing the term transnationalism to the agenda. Simon Macdonald gives a 
good account of the evolvement of the term and concludes that ‘Akira Iriye’s influential 
call in 1989 for new research “to search for historical themes and conceptions that are 
meaningful across national boundaries” accelerated the emergence of transnational 
histories’ (Macdonald, 2013: 4).
The relationship, meaning and position of transnational histories with respect to 
comparative studies, global and world histories were much discussed (Bayly, 2006, 
Tyrrell 2007, 2009). It would not be right to draw a straightforward conclusion and give On Design
108
precise definitions of each one, but a few sentences formulating the framework of this 
paper would be useful for the arguments presented later. Comparative studies have their 
own aims and objectives and are restricted to nations and states. The critical writers 
underline that comparative studies could be strengthening the national version of history 
and may treat ‘its cases as autonomous and ignores the link between them’. In defence 
of comparative studies, Frieberg, Hilson and Vall argue that ‘comparative methods, 
practiced as a heuristic search for similarities and differences across space, may transcend 
national borders without reinforcing dominant national paradigms’ (Friberg, 2007: 735). 
Referring to Miller’s article, many commentators would agree that comparative and 
transnational histories are not mutually exclusive, but they are complementary although 
the scope of transnational studies is much wider and inclusive (Szélpál, 2009).
The differences between world and global histories are vague as the differences between 
transnational histories and comparative histories. Bayly has stated ‘that the distinctions 
between world, global, and transnational history have never adequately been explained’ 
(2006: 1442). His explanation is to highlight the minor distinctions: ‘I get the sense 
that “trans-national history” stands in the same relationship to “international history” 
as “global history” does to “world history”: that it is much the same thing, except that 
the term “transnational” gives a sense of movement and interpenetration’ (Bayly, 2006). 
Ian Tryyell’s observations are in the same direction: ‘The new transnational history was 
related to, but not the same as globalization, world history, and comparative history’ 
(2007: 1).
Kikuchi gave a good account of these debates and analysis of the concepts with special 
emphasis on their reflection on design history (2014). To focus on the subject of this 
paper, her description of transnational history will be utilized for it is pragmatic and 
instrumental: ‘The transnational approach identifies the porousness of national borders 
and allows us to see different flows of human activities, including interactions of people, 
objects, ideas and art and design movements; otherwise the perspectives are delimited by 
national borders’ (2014: 325). Actually, this is a definition accepted by many scholars, as 
Thelen writes: ‘We wanted to explore how people and ideas and institutions and cultures 
moved above, below, through and around as well as within the nation-state’ (1999: 967).
9.3 Two cases from Turkey: Bruno Taut and Balians
Taking these sentences as starting points, two hypotheses will be formulated based on 
specific cases concerning design history in Turkey. The purpose of these suppositions 
is to raise questions, touch upon uncharted territories and perhaps generate new 
perspectives for the further development of transnational design history. The first 
situation is Non-Reflective Transnational Dissemination of Impacts, which denotes a 
one-directional process where design ideas mostly run from the centre to the periphery 
but not vice versa in particular areas. An excellent example is Bruno Taut who was born 
in Konigsberg in 1880, studied architecture in Stuttgart, designed the legendary Glass 
Pavilion for the 1914 Deutscher Werkbund Exhibition, built many housing compounds Uncharted Territories of Transnational Design History
109
in Berlin, moved to Japan in 1933 and finally relocated to Turkey in 1936, where he 
died and was buried in Istanbul, just after he designed the catafalque for Mustafa Kemal 
Atatürk. Taut was appointed as the first Head of Architecture Department at the Fine Art 
Academy in Istanbul. Although his life in Turkey was short and limited to his last two 
years, the amount of work he created and his influence on the constitution of modern 
Turkish architecture is considerable (Aslanoğlu, 1976). Taut had worked as a practicing 
architect for the Turkish State as much as he operated as a head of department. Among 
the many buildings he designed, the Faculty of Languages, History and Geography of 
Ankara University is particularly important for its scale, appearance, materials selected 
and details, which made it a manifest for modern architecture in the late 1930s of Turkey. 
Among his other works, he made another fascinating move: as a cultural agent and a 
restless soul, after his experience in Japan, Bruno Taut designed and built a ‘pagoda’ 
house for himself in Istanbul (Figure 1).
When Taut’s life, experiences and successes in various countries are taken into 
account, his irrefutable role and undeniable value for international architecture become 
apparent. In this respect, we can assume and expect that his work is the subject of intensive 
research, leading to vast quantities of publications. Unfortunately, this is not the case. 
As an exception to this general trend, we may include the works of Manfred Speidel, 
a Bruno Taut expert, an early text by Aslanoğlu (1976), a book section by Bozdoğan 
(1997), an article by Erdim (2007) and the seminal book of Esra Akcan published in 
Figure 1 Pagoda House designed by Bruno Taut, situated at the Bosphorus in Istanbul. Photo 
courtesy of Senanur Ceylan.On Design
110
2012. Most of the researchers on Bruno Taut have often focused on his worldwide known 
‘Glass House’ or his achievements in national scopes, for instance, his housing schemes 
in Berlin, his buildings and pedagogical role in Turkey or his endeavours in Japan.
Three issues surface here: (a) he is underrated and ignored by many historians in 
the West; (b) his works in countries far from the West, namely in Turkey and Japan, 
remain distant from current design discourses and have been missed out; and (c) 
national histories and comparative studies have failed to uncover his transnational 
significance. Reyner Banham’s remark on Taut supports these observations. Referring 
to his 1914 Glass House, Banham writes: ‘Quite apart from the possibility of its having 
been influenced by Paul Scheerbart’s book, Glasarchitektur which came out in the same 
year, its rare qualities suggest that it was produced in a moment of genius that Taut was 
unable to repeat’ (Banham, 1989: 81). Is ‘unable to repeat’ not a judgemental statement 
proposed without evaluating Taut’s later work in Japan and Turkey?
İnci Aslanoğlu encounters another kind of reserved approach to Taut (1976: 35). 
Aslanoğlu, referring to Walter Segal’s article (1972), notes that post-war architectural 
historians had focused sufficiently on the Bauhaus and many German émigré architects 
but they avoided Taut and his work for this is a very difficult subject matter that they 
did not know how to handle or classify. Thanks to a transnational approach, Esra Akcan 
has worked to overcome these difficulties forty years after those sentences were written 
(2012). Akcan prefers the word ‘translation’ instead of ‘transnational’ in her book. 
However, her definition of the former is not dissimilar to the definitions of ‘transnational’ 
that we use here, a ‘term I particularly find accessible since it is a common experience, 
whether one has translated between two languages, mediums or places. … a cultural 
flow from one place to another’ 2012: 4).
Nevertheless, even Akcan’s work serves to prevent further inquiries: Taut’s house in 
Istanbul known as Japanese House, due to its pagoda-like appearance, offers a wonderful 
view of the Bosporus due to its architectural configurations (Akcan, 2000). But, why 
‘pagoda’, a form used for temples in Japan, should be employed in Istanbul for a dwelling 
is not very clear. Akcan considers it a ‘critical and innovative gesture’ while Taut, in a letter 
to Walter Segal, stresses that his designs are samples of his architectural understanding 
(Akcan, 2012). Bozdogan underlines that this house ‘stands out from the rest of his 
built work in Turkey as the symbol of his preoccupation with the lessons of vernacular 
in Japan and Turkey’ (1997: 185–186). If we take the Turkish design concepts used in 
this building into account, one may conclude that Taut has created an amalgamation 
of transcultural design appropriate to geography and climate with innovative features 
reflecting a contemporary taste of his own.
What effect this house and Taut’s other works in Turkey have made in architectural 
practice and education in Japan or in the West has not surfaced in this initial survey. 
Probably none. Is it because Istanbul and Taut were not part of cutting-edge design 
discourse in the West? Could we assume that this may be a Non-Reflective Transnational 
Dissemination of Impacts, a one-directional process where design ideas among others, 
flow from centre to periphery but not vice versa? Could the centre (or some countries Uncharted Territories of Transnational Design History
111
of the centre) be more introverted and self-oriented and, thus, closed to the periphery at 
certain time periods?
This brings the second example to the fore for examination: the Balian family 
(Balyan in Turkish). Three generations of the Balian family, members such as Kirkor 
(1764–1831), his son Karabet (1800–1866), and his sons Nikogos (1826–1858), Sarkis 
(1835–1899) and Agop Balian (1830–1875), were the key figures of nineteenth-century 
Ottoman architecture (Goodwin, 1992). They were working for Ottoman Sultans and 
had erected the most important buildings, comprising Dolmabahçe, Çırağan and 
Beylerbeyi Palaces, Ortaköy and Valide Sultan Mosques, Beyazıt and Dolmabahçe Clock 
Towers, and houses at Akaretler in Istanbul to name but a few. Nikogos, Sarkis and Agop 
had studied at Sainte-Barbe College in Paris, where Alexandre Labrouste, brother of 
renowned French Architect Henri Labrouste, was the head. Goodwin wrote years ago 
about their attendance at Sainte-Barbe College and underlines how Henri Labrouste was 
influential on Nikogos (1992: 419).
What concerns us within the scope of this paper is how Balian’s works are treated 
by national and transnational histories. The situation from the viewpoint of the former 
is not something that one can be proud of. Deliberating the great number of buildings 
they built more than a century ago, we discern that studies on their works are limited 
and publications are inadequate and are mostly comprised of articles, except for a 
few books on the subject. The main reason for the shortage of knowledge may derive 
from the ‘little information concerning Balians themselves in the documentation of 
the Ottoman archives’ (Wharton, 2010: 93). The list published in the book Armenian 
Architects of Istanbul portrays well the scenery and inevitably leads to the following 
critical observations:
First. In recent years the variety of commentators has increased and has been mostly 
and understandably researchers of Armenian origin who study the architecture of the 
Balian family. Benefiting from Armenian sources is obviously an advantage to getting 
further information at least for cross-checking.
Second. Up until a few decades ago, some historians kept a distance from Balian’s 
designs and mentioned them in nothing more than a few superfluous sentences. 
When mentioned, Balian’s architecture is neither praised nor acknowledged properly. 
A respected architectural historian, Abdullah Kuran, successfully describes several 
nineteenth-century Balian buildings without mentioning the originators’ names in the 
text but in the footnotes only (Kuran, 2012). For art historian Oktay Aslanapa, Çırağan 
Palace is a hybrid example of a stupefaction period in which foreign constructions were 
destroying the portrait of the city where Italian architects were prevailing (Diez and 
Aslanapa, 1955). C. E. Arseven writes that Ottoman architecture was in total collapse in 
1861 and adds, ‘respected Rum and Italian architects of that time, used to make sort of 
weird buildings totally alien to Turkish Art’ (Arseven, 1984: 180). (Rums are people who 
lived in East Roman Empire. As a Turkish expression, in common parlance, it refers to 
people of Greek origin who live in Ottoman territory as her citizen).
Third. The role of Armenian architects in Turkey is a minefield and an ideological 
battleground. For example, Aygül Ağır’s assertion is that there is a lack of evidence On Design
112
to support that the Balian brothers officially studied in France (Ağır, 2005). Alyson 
Wharton, a researcher working on Armenian architects and architecture (Wharton, 
2015) thinks the opposite and tries to prove it (Wharton, 2016). In a conference paper, 
Şerafettin Deniz claims that Nikogos Balian could not have built Ortaköy Mosque 
(Deniz, 2006). Selman Can takes the proclaims further: for him, Balians were not 
architects but constructors. Having said that, he then gives a list of architects as the 
designers of many buildings ascribed to Balians (Elmas, 2008). While nationalist 
history discourse attempts to ignore or discredit Balians or try to diminish their role 
in the design and construction of notable premises certified to them, their church 
designs are not even mentioned or not considered part of Ottoman architecture 
(Kuban, 2007).
Irvin Cemil Schick has very recently taken part in the writing of an edited book 
entitled Türk Mimarisinde İz Bırakanlar [Those Leaving Traces in Turkish Architecture]. 
The Ministry of Environment and Urban Planning has initiated an edited book project 
on Turkish architecture. Schick has been invited to become a member of the editorial 
board. He realizes that there is almost no foreign or non-Muslim architect on the list 
prepared. He insists that the list needs alterations and succeeds in getting some names 
included. His experience with the authorities and his narration of the publication process 
of the book illustrates clearly and ironically the current state of a prevailing nationalist 
attitude (Diler, 2016).
National histories do not grasp entirely the realities of fundamentally homogenous 
but at the same time multi-ethnic structure of Ottoman urban culture (Cerasi, 1988). 
Edhem Eldem articulates the situation eloquently: ‘Nation-states are often incapable 
of understanding empires’ (Eldem, 2010: 13). To this end, it becomes evident that 
transnational history finds another fecund soil within which to grow justification of its 
presence and effectiveness. Exactly here, the aforementioned question surfaces again: 
what impact has Balians’ Baroque and Empire style architecture made on global or world 
history? Afife Batur and many other scholars accentuate that their work is not a copy 
of Western architecture but an original approach adopting and taking it further, which 
definitely requires a substantial investigation.
What can be said regarding Taut could also be reiterated in this point: Non-Reflective 
Transnational Dissemination of Impacts could also be valid for Balians. In other words, 
one would always like to know the influence and contribution of their architecture 
beyond the borders of the Ottoman Empire if there is any. Where does this stand in 
relation to conventional Baroque and Empire style and within the dominant discourse? 
How could transnational history draw a perspective within these niches of uncharted 
territories?
9.4 Conclusion
These questions are intended to indicate the necessity of new approaches as well as new 
directions needed in the design history of Turkey. However, the current nationalist streams Uncharted Territories of Transnational Design History
113
also present gaps, voids and domains to be scrutinized. A nation-state born out of the 
ashes of a huge, cosmopolitan empire is substantially different than a nation-state based 
on one or two ethnic groups. In a sense, Turkey is to suffer from non-comprehension 
and non-embodiment of these diversities, which render the materialization of various 
religious and political fractions, societies and communities possible. This fragmentation 
causes and forces each group to search for and built its own identity. Historiography 
as well as design appears to be the victim of these affords, for they are being used and 
abused from time to time (Balcioglu and Emgin, 2014). Therefore, ‘Trans-community 
Design Trends’ drives from this multi-layered and, perhaps, as a positive remark, 
colourful mosaic but at the same time chaotic situation.
As a corollary, this paper draws the attention of design historians focusing on 
Turkey on two methodological concerns: Non-Reflective Transnational Dissemination 
of Impacts and Trans-community Design Trends. These two unexplored areas of 
transnational historiography, which definitely demand further study, may not be a 
Turkish-specific specificity but might be applicable in and for other countries as well. 
Therefore, historians have to be prepared to construct bridges over troubled waters.CHAPTER 10
TURKISH GRAPHIC DESIGN
FROM THE AGE OF THE ALPHABET REVOLUTION TO 
THE END OF THE TWENTIETH CENTURY
The first version of this paper was presented at the 4th European Academy of Design Conference, 
Aveiro, 10–12 April 2001, and published in its proceedings: R. Cooper and V. Branco, eds. (2001), 
d3 Desire, Designum, Design: 4th European Academy of Design Conference Proceedings, 
476–481, Portugal: University of Aveiro.
10.1 Introduction
This chapter provides an overview of graphic design history during the Republican 
Era, from 1923 to 2000.1
 It is structured in three sections. The first one, ‘a historical 
perspective’ summarizes the political context of the period, which is closely related 
to graphic art as it was utilized for propaganda and advertising purposes. The second 
section, ‘an analytic framework’, proposes a classification and a theoretical approach 
to graphic design in Turkey, using examples of works produced by distinctive graphic 
designers. It is an attempt at a stylistic categorization of graphic works in terms of their 
design characteristics. It provides a general framework to study the history of graphic 
design in Turkey and refers to a group of selected works. Needless to say, there are many 
more well-established graphic designers in Turkey whose works deserve attention and 
take place in history books. It is unfortunate that this chapter cannot include more due 
to its limits. The final section presents the debate concerning the artistic value of graphic 
works.
10.2 A historical perspective
Research on Turkish graphic design is still in its infancy with only a handful of 
publications. Therefore, this chapter presents analytical observations on the development 
of graphic design in the Republic of Turkey based on the available material. This is not 
1
Please note that all Turkish words are transliterated and translations (in brackets) are by the author. The 
English translations are given without alteration as they appear in Turkish documents. Some world-famous 
books, plays, films and so on, were given new titles in Turkey; when such media are quoted here, their Turkish 
titles, rather than the original ones, will be used. If the original titles are known, they are indicated in brackets.Turkish Graphic Design
115
entirely a historical account; neither is it an attempt to uncover and name heroes or 
heroines. Rather, it is an endeavour to define a framework for further studies.
10.2.1 From 1923 to 1950
After being established in 1923, it was vital for the Turkish Republic to emerge fresh 
from the ashes of the old Ottoman Empire with a new identity. The caliphate was 
abolished and replaced by a secular and later democratic state. A Latin script alphabet 
(Sadık 1928, Sâdullah 1928) was introduced as part of Atatürk’s reforms in 1928. The 
canonical legislation of Islam was replaced with laws mostly borrowed from the West; 
the fez was replaced with the hat; traditional garments with suits and ties. A poster by 
İhap Hulusi Görey (hereafter İhap Hulusi), the leading designer of the era, illustrates how 
traditional religious marriage was replaced with a modern one (Figure 2). Modernisation 
was associated with Westernization at a time when the West was embracing modernity. 
Therefore, the project of modernization imported into Turkey the ideas of modernity 
and Westernization without differentiating between them. Statism was adopted as an 
economic strategy of development with the bourgeoisie created through the state itself. 
The entire country was being rebuilt. State railroads, state banks, The Turkish State 
Maritime Lines and so on were being re-formed and established.
Figure 2 Propaganda postcard by İhap Hulusi Görey showing old and new marriage ceremonies. 
Image courtesy of Sinan Niyazioğlu.On Design
116
Regarding graphic design, the most drastic transformation was experienced in 1928, 
when the Arabic script was replaced with the Roman alphabet. As a result, graphic 
practice – however limited it was – changed irreversibly (Karamustafa, 1999). Atatürk, 
the founder of the Turkish Republic, introduced the new alphabet himself (Figure 3) 
and his image dominated the covers of the book ‘Alphabet’ for decades. The new alphabet 
(Figure 4) had the ironic mission of introducing itself as much as introducing the project 
of modernization within which German influences were prominent.2
 The well-known 
graphic designer – or, using the expression of the time, commercial artist – İhap Hulusi 
(1896–1986) was instrumental in the introduction of German graphic design. He was 
the most important name on the Turkish graphic design scene until the late 1950s. He 
had studied in Germany in the 1920s, having first trained as an artist and later as a poster 
and graphic designer (Maden, 1999). After returning to Istanbul in 1925, he worked as 
a freelance designer, mostly for state companies, banks and free enterprise. His famous 
triangular signature appeared on countless posters until he retired in 1975. During his 
long career, he also designed book covers, labels, logos and lottery tickets, among other 
things. Although he is now considered one of the pioneers of the profession, he hardly 
2
I recently did a Google search and found out that there are a number of new alphabets published in 1928. See 
Sadık (1928), and Sâdullah (1928).
Figure 3 Atatürk introducing the new Turkish Alphabet with Latin script in 1928. Photo courtesy 
of Sinan Niyazioğlu.Turkish Graphic Design
117
enjoyed this status in his lifetime. Instead, he was rediscovered in the late 1970s after 
graphic design had been recognized as an important commercial activity and the profile 
of the profession was elevated and gained wider status.
Although İhap Hulusi was the most important personality of this period, others 
also practised graphic design. Sait Maden (1989), a graphic designer and researcher, 
acknowledges Mithat Özer, Münif Fehim, Cevat Şakir and Ali Suavi among those 
practising in the 1930s, 1940s and 1950s (Maden, 1989). In an interview with the author, 
Yurdaer Altıntaş, the senior character in the field, remarked that he had not seen many 
works from the early period. He believed the great majority disappeared while people 
working in what we now call graphic design were not fully aware of the discipline as 
such. A few did graphic design among other occupations to earn their living but had no 
concern for the advancement of the profession.
Unfortunately, I had not come across substantial research to uncover and evaluate 
the works of these pioneers when this chapter was written in 2000. However, thanks 
to the recent revival of interest in design history, as attested in several design journals,3
3
Mimar Sinan Fine Arts University, Centre of Graphic Design Research and Archive was recently established 
thanks to Prof. Dr. Sinan Niyazioğlu. Research projects are being conducted on key figures of Turkish graphic 
design (Erdem, 2003).
Figure 4 One of the first editions of the new Turkish Alphabet with Latin script by the Language 
Committee, 1928. Image courtesy of Sinan Niyazioğlu.On Design
118
names like Latif Ariş whose work and life were the subject of a short article4
 are being 
reclaimed.
10.2.2 The 1950s: The Democrat Party
The years of the Second World War and those in its wake were not very fruitful for 
graphic design. After the war, Turkey abandoned the one-party system and entered 
the 1950s with a political election. During the 1950s, a new party, the Democrat Party, 
was elected with a large majority. Its adoption of a market economy and investment 
in industry changed the domestic political atmosphere drastically. Joining NATO and 
taking part in the Korean War helped open Turkey to world affairs. On the one hand, 
notions of independence, a multi-party system, social consciousness, workers, unions 
and democratic rights were entering the agenda; on the other, nationalists, religious 
fundamentalists and the extreme right were stepping in. From this perspective, the 1950s 
were interesting years of transformation, witnessing the birth of free capitalist enterprise 
and a new spirit in Turkish social and political life.
Sait Maden mentions the work of Kenan Temizan, who won third prize in the NATO 
poster competition of 1951 and who also opened an exhibition at the Fine Art Academy 
in 1953. In addition, he refers to a few new graduates, such as Mesut Manioğlu, Selçuk 
Önal and Fikret Akgün. He considers Manioğlu to be the greatest master of the 1950s, 
with his logos, posters and exhibition designs (Maden, 1999). No doubt, the graphic 
design of this period also needs further scrutiny.
10.2.3 The 1960s: The first coup d’état
Turkey experienced three coups d’état, in 1960, 1971 and 1980. Although each had its own 
social, political and economic consequences, it is widely accepted that the 1960 coup was 
a turning point for many developments, including graphic design. Sait Maden stresses 
that ‘an intense and qualified application of graphic arts in every branch took place after 
the 1960s’ (Maden, 1999). In the late 1950s, two designers who graduated from Istanbul 
State Academy of Fine Arts, and who would become two of the leading names, were 
already practising: Mengü Ertel and Yurdaer Altıntaş.
Graphic design education had been introduced at the Istanbul State Academy of 
Fine Arts in 1927. Later, in 1957, the State School of Applied Fine Arts was established. 
Both schools benefited from German expertise, which contributed considerably to 
Turkish higher education, design and architecture in the early years of the Republic 
(Karamustafa, 1999). Although design education was never adequate in those years,5
4
See Umut Kart, Art Decor, September 2002. Art Decor is a Turkish journal publishing on art, design and 
decoration.
5
In an interview in 1987, Yurdaer Altıntaş described his years at the Academy between 1952 and 1957: ‘The 
first year was devoted to drawing busts, the whole time no life work or colour…. You were given seven or eight 
subjects a year; no briefs or tuition’ (Erkmen, 1987: 40).Turkish Graphic Design
119
there were a few trained designers practising in the 1960s who were the major 
characters in introducing contemporary graphic design in Turkey. Mengü Ertel was 
the leading figure, who raised the stakes in the development of graphic design, while 
Yurdaer Altıntaş was the first graphic designer from Turkey whose work was published 
abroad. He was instrumental in establishing the Society of Graphic Artists, founded 
in 1968. He also organised the publication of Turkish designers’ work in the German 
magazine Gebrauchgraphic in 1967. Other important contributors to the profession 
included Sait Maden (1985, 1989, 1999), Aydın Erkmen, Cemalettin Mutver and Erkal 
Yavi, mostly through their theatre posters, book covers and logo designs.
10.2.4 1971 and 1980: Two more coups d’état
The 1960 coup ushered in a liberal, democratic climate within which Marxist ideas 
flourished in line with the political events of 1968 internationally. By contrast, the 
1971 coup brought restrictions and oppression, although the subsequent proliferation 
of political posters, leaflets and publications played a significant role in the rise 
of graphic design. During the 1970s, graphic practice in Turkey began to change. 
Another important factor in the rise of the profession was the establishment of the 
Higher School of Applied Industrial Arts with its policy of employing professional 
and practising graphic designers. In those years, despite political difficulties, there 
was an increase in democratic organizations and political awareness, improvements 
in industry and the market economy, and a growing number of advertising agencies, 
which became harbingers of a new era. Television, which had become part of daily life, 
colour press and offset printing, which were developing rapidly, and political activities, 
all required intensive communication while publicity was becoming more important. 
Hence, conditions were now ripe enough for graphic design to flourish. Among many 
new designers emerging and enhancing the profession, Bülent Erkmen and Sadık 
Karamustafa, with their strong graphic works, and Emin Barın, with his original 
typographic research, began to make statements in the field. Although calligraphy had 
been a widely explored art form during the Ottoman period, typography has never been 
the strongest point of graphic design in Turkey. Only after the 1980s has it become 
an area in design, with a few pioneers developing typefaces for logos and posters with 
limited use. While I assume that young, new-generation designers are working on the 
subject, I have not come across any Turkish fonts used in publishing, which makes Emin 
Barın’s efforts invaluable and unique.
10.2.5 After the mid-1980s
The big leap in graphic design development took place after the mid-1980s. The 1983 
elections brought Turgut Özal to power with his Thatcherite free market policies. After 
serving as Prime Minister, he later became president until his death in 1993. In the On Design
120
years of Turgut Özal, graphic practice in Turkey was affected by the way in which it was 
commercialised. An export-oriented open market policy, privatization of state-owned 
companies and the abolition of the state’s monopoly on communication, including 
TV and radio, all boosted the private sector considerably. As a result, retailers, large 
sectors of industry, businesses, banks, publishers, press insurance companies and so on 
launched consumer-targeted promotion campaigns undertaken by advertising agencies 
as complete – and very expensive – packages. Partly to meet deadlines and maintain 
quality, and partly to increase profits, these agencies then invested in in-house production, 
developing as many services as possible from graphic design studios to publishing. Even 
filming and post-production facilities were incorporated. However, this left no room for 
individual freelance designers, who eventually found themselves seeking employment in 
advertising agencies. Small graphic studios could hardly survive on minor commissions. 
Even today, Turkey has only a few independent respected designers fighting against the 
mainstream.
Of course, under these circumstances and thanks to computer and digital technology, 
graphic design was radically transformed. The talent and experience once gained 
through designing educational, cultural and political posters, book covers, calendars and 
leaflets were now being ‘consumed’ through billboards, TV advertisements, filmmaking, 
corporate and promotional materials, website designs and so on. Commercialization 
and a culture of consumption prevailed, with no difference to the West, except in scale.
Today’s graphic designers operate across a great range of fields, the number of designers 
and design schools has grown considerably, and the gender balance has also improved, with 
women designers working on the front lines with great success. Contemporary graphic 
design in Turkey is already part of global culture. Under the leadership of Yurdaer Altıntaş, 
the Society of Graphic Artists (Grafik Sanatçıları Derneği) was established in 1968 and it 
shaped the foundation of the Turkish Society of Graphic Designers (Grafik Tasarımcılar 
Meslek Kuruluşu, GMK) in 1978. GMK regularly organizes annual exhibitions, publishes 
catalogues and awards prizes for designs in categories such as posters, book covers, logos, 
promotional materials, letterheads and press campaigns (GMK, 1995, 1998, 1999, 2000). 
Turkish designers are exhibiting and getting published abroad and receiving overseas 
awards. Indeed, a lot of work produced in Turkey is world-class. The problem, however, 
is that we do not know to what extent they are close to the cutting edge, fostering new 
ideas and potential, just as we do not know to what extent they are doomed to disappear 
within the market after completing their missions successfully.
10.3 An analytic framework
During the research for this paper, it became apparent to me that certain periods and 
groups of works can be described and may even be categorized under specific headings. 
I name these Realistic/Representative, Symbolic/Illustrative, Abstract/Integrative and 
Conceptual/Referential. These are by no means either rigid or canonical but rather a 
set of open-ended descriptions to understand and place the work in context. However, Turkish Graphic Design
121
I believe their emergence is sequential and sometimes overlapping. Of course, other 
groupings can also be obtained from these four. For instance, some works may straddle 
Symbolic/Abstract graphics; others may be Abstract/Conceptual. Nevertheless, it appears 
to me that the majority of the works fall into the initial four categories, with which I 
feel confident to cover most of the design territory explored, especially in relation to 
the historical periods described. With this framework in mind, I would argue that the 
works produced in the early years of the Republican period can be classified as Realistic/
Representative. To support this claim, I examine below the graphic works of İhap Hulusi, 
Münif Fehim and Latif Ariş as examples.
10.3.1 Realistic/representative
İhab Hulusi developed his strong drawing ability by drawing from life every day for two 
years at the Heimann Schule in Munich in the early 1920s (Erkmen, 1987). This makes 
his work very characteristic of the era in that it is directly informative, based on realistic 
representations and conveys a straightforward message. The visual image depicts what 
the text says. Take the poster for the Bank of Agriculture (Figure 5), it reads ‘Whoever 
saves lives comfortably’ while the image shows a money box – for savings of course – 
and a relaxed peasant resting on the ground enjoying his cigarette. Or take the poster of 
Beykoz Shoes (Figure 6): it reads ‘Beykoz shoes are like seagulls, they are waterproof ’ 
Figure 5 Advertisement for Bank of Agriculture, designed by İhap Hulusi, 1948. Image courtesy 
of Sinan Niyazioğlu.On Design
122
and you see a pair of shoes, with flying seagulls and raindrops above, all realistically 
rendered. Removing the image changes nothing because the image is subordinated 
to the text; the text is explanatory, making a clear statement about the message. İhap 
Hulusi also resorted to photography to create images and figures. For example, used 
a photograph of himself to design a label for rakı, a popular Turkish alcoholic drink 
(Figures 7A and 7B). More than seventy years after his design, the label still represents 
the brand, Kulüp Rakısı [Club Raki]. He used the same technique to design the cover of 
the alphabet book published in 1932. He took a photograph of Atatürk, the founder of 
the Turkish Republic, teaching the new alphabet to his adopted daughter Ülkü (Figures 
8A and 8B), and he modified it by replacing the person behind Atatürk with Ankara 
Castle and by slightly manipulating the posture of the girl.
A similar relationship between text and image can be observed in the works of Münif 
Fehim, who started designing book covers in the 1930s. The illustrations are again 
realistic, descriptive and with painterly qualities; they either represent a certain moment 
of fiction or refer to it. For instance, the cover of Edgar Allan Poe’s Incredible Stories was 
derived from one of the stories, The Golden Scarab (Figure 9) (Gönenç, 1985). Others 
present an extraordinary moment of action, excitement and mystery. Amok (Figure 10) 
and Bir Kadının 24 Saati [24 Hours in The Life of a Woman] by Stefan Zweig, Acıkan 
Taşlar [The Hungry Stones] by Rabindranath Tagore are as if cut and taken from an 
action movie, making you wonder what happens next (Figure 11).
Figure 6 Advertisement for Beykoz Shoes, designed by İhap Hulusi. Image courtesy of Ömer 
Durmaz.Turkish Graphic Design
123
Figures 7A–B Photograph of İhap Hulusi drinking rakı (7A), and the label of Kulüp Rakısı (7B). 
Photo and image courtesy of Ömer Durmaz.On Design
124
Figure 8A–B Photograph showing Atatürk teaching the new alphabet to his adopted daughter 
Ülkü (8A) and the new alphabet book cover derived from this photograph (8B), 1935. Photo 
courtesy of Ömer Durmaz, cover of the alphabet book courtesy of Sinan Niyazioğlu.Turkish Graphic Design
125
Figure 10 Münif Fehim’s design: the cover of Amok, a book by Stefan Zweig, 1939. Image 
courtesy of Izmir National Library.
Figure 9 The cover of Edgar Allan Poe’s book, Incredible Stories, designed by Münif Fehim, 1938. 
Image courtesy of Izmir National Library.On Design
126
Thus, the attraction of the graphics lies not in the images themselves but in what they 
depict. The designer promises a good story behind the cover. In fact, what you see is not a 
cover but the inside of the book, so one may feel that any illustration inside the book could 
have been selected and turned into the cover with no difficulty. The cover is like a window 
looking inside the book, foreshadowing the stories, probably the most intriguing ones.
Latif Ariş, born in 1908, studied graphics at Galatasaray Academy in Istanbul and 
graduated in the late 1930s. He lived and worked in Adana, in southern Turkey, as a 
freelance graphic designer and as a teacher (Kart, 2002). His work ranged from package 
graphic design for a salt company, to posters for several state institutions. His ticket 
design for the national lottery looks like the German fifty-Pfennig coin regarding the 
structure of the layout: the use of borders, big letters, big images and so on. It appears that 
the fifty-Pfennig coin was designed in 1921 (Haller, 1998: 105), and I wonder whether it 
was used as a source of inspiration for the lottery ticket design.
10.3.2 Symbolic/illustrative
During the late 1950s and 1960s, a new era of graphic design emerged. One designer 
widely recognized and appreciated as responsible for this breakthrough is Mengü Ertel. 
The characteristics of this period marked a radical departure from earlier work. In 
particular, realistic rendering is no longer essential while images are mostly symbolic 
Figure 11 Münif Fehim’s design: the cover of The Hungry Stones by Rabindranth Tagore. Image 
courtesy of Ömer Durmaz.Turkish Graphic Design
127
representations that, in many cases, stand on their own merits independently of the 
text (Figure 12). Strong emphasis is put on representation while the text is either not 
important for the design, or secondary, as if it were an addition to the image (Figure 
13). In many cases, the lettering has clearly been inserted afterward and placed in the 
appropriate part of the illustrations. Sometimes, the illustration is so powerful and the 
meaning so obvious that no text is needed (Ertel, 1999).
What one can also observe is that the main success of the work derives from the 
artistic and drawing abilities of the designers. That is why, perhaps rightly, they call 
themselves ‘graphic artists’.6
 Since their training was heavily based on art education, 
it is no coincidence that the quality of the work stems from the artistic quality of the 
illustrations. Therefore, when a founding member of the Society of Graphic Artists, who 
later became Head of the School of Applied Industrial Arts, Yurdaer Altıntaş, says ‘I love 
my profession but have occasionally wished I were a painter’, we understand the feeling 
as well as the link established with art (Erkmen, 1987: 47). Sadık Karamustafa, who was 
elected Vice-President of ICOGRADA in 1995, has considerably contributed to the 
6
Expressions such as ‘commercial artist’, ‘graphic artist’ and ‘graphic designer’ mark the transformation of 
the profession in the twentieth century; their use in Turkey is more likely than not the reflection of closely 
following developments in the West.
Figure 12 Poster for the play Amadeus, designed by Mengü Ertel, 1983. Image courtesy of Murat 
Ertel.On Design
128
Figure 13 An illustration by Mengü Ertel. Image courtesy of Murat Ertel.
Figure 14 Poster for Istanbul Festival by Mengü Ertel, 1973. Image courtesy of Murat Ertel.Turkish Graphic Design
129
theory and practice of the profession (1999, 2002) calls the years between 1970 and 2000 
a transition period from the stage of graphic art to graphic design (Erdem, 2003: 82).
These designers were undoubtedly aware of works being produced in the West 
and trying to keep up with world standards. They also made cultural references to 
traditional objects, archaeological findings and local attributes in Turkey from time to 
time. For example, Mengü Ertel’s poster for the Istanbul Festival is made of mosaic￾like images depicting the city itself as well as referencing famous Byzantine mosaics 
and the notion of festival (and even that of the city) as a mosaic of people representing 
Figures 15A–C Logo designs by Mengü Ertel: Logo for a real estate company, 1984 (15A), the 
Social Democratic Party, 1984 (15B), and the Fair for Affordable Clothing, 1976 (15C). Logos 
courtesy of Murat Ertel.
Figure 16 Erkal Yavi’s book cover design for Tekin Publications, 1984. Illustration courtesy of 
Erkal Yavi.On Design
130
the whole world with a wide variety of colour and texture (Figure 14). Some of Ertel’s 
logo designs also incorporate strong elements of symbolism and illustration, as in those 
designed, variously, for a building company, the Social Democratic Party and the Fair for 
Affordable Clothing (Figures 15A, 15B and 15C).
Erkal Yavi’s book cover design for Tekin Publications and poster design for Adam 
Publishers present powerful images loaded with political messages (Figure 16). One 
features a pen tip that appears to be one end of a burning match. Although it is open to 
various interpretations, I think it symbolizes the difficulty of writing under oppressive 
regimes, the risks that controversial writers are taking and the courage of touching upon 
hot issues. The poster for Adam Publisher is perhaps more optimistic showing beautiful 
daisies planted into an empty glass ink bottle (Figure 17). We do not see the ink bottle 
but we see its traces in its absence on the soil where daisies flourish. We immediately 
notice that to obtain this view, the ink bottle must have been broken and become useless. 
Does it mean writers were silenced and ink bottles ceased to function? Does it mean, 
even if it is not used for the purpose it is designed for, it is still capable of producing 
beauty and serves for peace and betterment of life? The image embodies lots of meanings 
and is open to further interpretations.
Other powerful visual expressions are produced by incorporating distorted images, 
cartoon-like characters, simplified silhouettes and outlines, which, together with signs 
like the dove and olive branch for peace, underline the symbolic nature of these works. 
Figure 17 Erkal Yavi’s poster design for Adam Publications, 1990. Illustration courtesy of Erkal 
Yavi.Turkish Graphic Design
131
Figure 18 Book cover for The Iliad by Homer. Designer: Sait Maden, 1967. Image courtesy of 
Ömer Durmaz.
Prominent designers such as Yurdaer Altıntaş, Sait Maden (Figure 18) and Aydın 
Erkmen, employed similar techniques to forcefully express their subjects.
10.3.3 Abstract/integrative
The major characteristic of this new generation of work is its emancipation from the 
illustration/typography duality, which had dominated the previous period. Designers 
began to use various techniques and media to convey the message, such as unfinished 
sketches, free-hand drawings, handwriting and doodling, as well as techniques such 
as silk-screen printing, photography, collage and air-brushing. Through this, they 
experimented with and explored the notion of graphic design further and further.
During this era, the overwhelming dominance of fonts like Helvetica, Times 
and Futura fades away while the unity between image, message and typography is 
highlighted. Early examples of these elements of integration include Mengü Ertel’s 
poster for Keşanlı Ali Destanı [The Ballad of Ali of Keshan] (Figure 19) and for Ionesco’s 
Gergedan [Rhinoceros] and Altıntaş’s poster for Georges Feydeau’s play Bit Yeniği [A 
Flea in Her Ear], which are not unlike a dialogue between image and typography. Later, 
there are some extreme instances of typography itself constituting the image. These 
include Karamustafa’s posters for the Istanbul Film Festival (Figure 20), a play by Philip 
King entitled Papaz Kaçtı [How They Run] (Figure 21)) and the Third International On Design
132
Figure 19 Mengü Ertel’s poster design for Keşanlı Ali Destanı [The Ballad of Ali of Keshan], a 
play by Haldun Taner, 1984. Image courtesy of Murat Ertel.
Figure 20 Sadık Karamustafa’s poster design for the Eight Istanbul Film Festival, 1989. Photo 
courtesy of Sadık Karamustafa.Turkish Graphic Design
133
Conference on Design History and Design Studies (Figure 22), B. Erkmen’s designs 
for Garbarek, and exhibition and dance performance posters (Figure 23) and Yurdaer 
Altıntaş’s Hitchcock poster (Figure 24). Although they represent different approaches, 
they all enjoy the hidden pleasures of letters that themselves create visual images, 
illustrations or maybe even paintings.
10.3.4 Conceptual/referential
During this era, a few designers resisted the visual pollution created by the tabloid press, 
mass media and the dominance of advertising agencies. The following examples reflect 
their conceptual search, which I believe also includes a strong element of referential 
quality. References to history, ideas and movements are probably part of multiple 
readings, pluralist attributes, post-modern metaphors or irony. However, even an 
experimental exercise, a journey into the wilderness or a passage into the unknown 
requires a known referent. Here I critically analyse a few example works.
The first is Bülent Erkmen’s poster for International Prison Watch (Figure 25). It is a 
minimalist piece of vertical parallel lines with two words, ‘outside’ and ‘inside’, written 
in white on black. The former is behind the lines whereas the latter is in front. Within 
this simplicity lies an enormous depth. You feel the three-dimensionality immediately 
while the vertical lines turn into metal bars. You notice that the word ‘outside’ is in fact 
Figure 21 Poster for a play by Philip King, entitled Papaz Kaçtı [How They Run], designer: Sadık 
Karamustafa, 1987. Photo courtesy of Sadık Karamustafa.On Design
134
Figure 22 Sadık Karamustafa’s poster for the Mind the Map, the Third International Conference 
on Design History and Design Studies, ICDHS, Istanbul, 2002. Photo courtesy of Sadık 
Karamustafa.
Figure 23 Bülent Erkmen’s design for Jan Garbarek’s jazz concert, Istanbul, 1998. Photo courtesy 
of Bülent Erkmen.Turkish Graphic Design
135
Figure 24 Yurdaer Altıntaş’s Hitchcock poster for Eighteenth Istanbul Film Festival, 1999. Image 
courtesy of Ömer Durmaz.
Figure 25 Poster for International Prison Watch, designed by Bülent Erkmen, 1995. Image 
courtesy of Bülent Erkmen.On Design
136
on the other side of the bars. Hence, you as a viewer/reader are inside, and the word 
‘inside’ is shouting at you that you are ‘inside’. Inside of what? A prison? A cell? Or 
within yourself? Are these my own bars that I set against myself? Against others? Am 
I protected because I am inside? Or are they being protected from me because I am 
inside? What is the difference between inside and outside? They look the same, both 
pretty grim. Then you realize that the entire audience watching the poster is inside, 
together with you – we are all inside. We are all insiders! And maybe no one is out there! 
We are all surrounded by bars.
The dramatic reading may continue since the poster is like a text that you can read, 
and read again. The occasion, the title and the rationale for the poster, that is, ‘prison 
watch’, fades in significance and becomes secondary. The range of potential meanings 
goes beyond the brief. The poster stands on its own with its sophisticated and unfolding 
content that exists as much as – and as long as – we interpret it.
Bülent Erkmen, who publishes his design works each year in a book format (1992, 
1994, 1997 a, b, c, 1999, 2000, 2001), works with themes to create a series with which he 
makes his mark with a strong design identity. In particular, he widely uses objects, faces, 
masks and masked faces to expose layers of meanings, metaphors and ironies that leave 
the door open to post-modern interpretations (Figures 26 and 27).
Sadık Karamustafa’s cover design for Dudu Akpınar’s book blends black humour 
with irony (Figure 28). The title reads: ‘The Only Thing I Ever Wished was to Write 
Figure 26 Bülent Erkmen’s poster for the play Cadılar Zamanı [The Pope and the Witch] written 
by Dario Fo and Franca Rame. Image courtesy of Bülent Erkmen.Turkish Graphic Design
137
a Book’. The front cover is in the form of a blank ruled notebook page. You know that 
you buy a book, yet you buy a book that looks like a notebook. At the same time, you 
wonder whether it is a notebook given to the author whose wish had always been to 
write a book. If so, you know that the book has yet to be written, in which case you 
might not be surprised if, when you open the book, all its pages were blank. Yet, you do 
not know this until you do open it. The visual reading of the cover already initiates a 
dialogue with you. You begin to read the book before you even open it. The image, of a 
blindfolded girl, adds to the suspense. Is she the author? Is ‘writing a book’ her last wish 
before the death squad? You will never know unless you read the book. But before you 
do, by placing the inside sleeves side by side, the girl reveals a little more of herself, and 
from closer (Figure 29).
The third example is by Esen Karol, a female, freelance Turkish book and graphic 
designer (Karol, 2001). Her theatre poster for Macbeth has a depth requiring closer 
examination (Figure 30). The stage photography instantly indicates that this is a play, 
even if you do not know what Macbeth is. The silhouetted figures, occupying the stage 
in groups or on their own, reveal that they are soldiers. Figures with rifles and long 
coats remind you of the First or Second World War, signalling a modern adaptation of 
the play. Their irregular distribution on stage is offset by, and weighed against, the title 
of the play, spelled in rigidly geometric and equally spaced letters, which contrasts with 
Figure 27 Bülent Erkmen’s poster design for the film Arabesk [Arabesque]. Photo courtesy of 
Bülent Erkmen.On Design
138
the lower half of the poster. The letters seem to be hanging from above like destiny or 
the Sword of Damocles hanging over the soldiers’ heads. The uncompromising visual 
effect is further enhanced by Karol’s use of colour, with a deep shade of red almost 
tangibly evoking spilled blood. Meanwhile, the other words float all around like scattered 
soldiers. They are in harmony with the rest, but neither their colour nor their size can 
challenge ‘Macbeth’. That is, the strength, dimension and placement of the letters spelling 
‘Macbeth’ exert real supremacy over the others; an ongoing and unfinished struggle is 
there on the surface. Observers feel the tension, blood and destiny. Esen Karol explores 
a similar approach in a poster for an art photography exhibition called Sokaklardan
[From the Streets] by Şakir Eczacıbaşı (Figure 31). She presents the title as if it were 
graffiti scrawled on a large wall. In doing so, she shows her appreciation for one of the 
photographs in the exhibition, which she uses for the poster, yet she is not shy about 
making her own statement as a graphic designer.
Gülizar Çepoğlu explores the potential of the intersection between typography, 
meaning and depth of graphic communication. The exhibition poster that she designed 
for İpek Aksüğür Duben shows the transparency of floating letters forming layers above 
each other while the negated dialogue of overlapping images speaks in their dignified 
silence, each of which has its own orientation (Figure 32). Çepoğlu’s newspaper designs 
Figure 28 The sleeve and cover for the book entitled Benim Tek İstediğim Bir Kitap Yazmaktı
[The Only Thing I Ever Wished was to Write a Book] designed by Sadık Karamustafa. The image, 
Vadedilmiş Topraklar 3 [Promised Lands 3] by Gülsüm Karamustafa, Istanbul, 1999. Photo 
courtesy of Sadık Karamustafa.Turkish Graphic Design
139
from the late 1980s (Figure 33) are highly advanced and rather bold in their free-floating 
positioning of images and texts, which somehow expose a concealed three-dimensionality.7
10.4 Conclusion
The artistic value of a graphic work is a matter of discussion, which could go on 
indefinitely perhaps. My readings of the works presented here may well be at variance 
with the intentions of their respective designers, who may or may not agree with me. 
However, what makes these works significant is that their conceptual core allows various 
interpretations, which deserves inquiry and bridges the gap with works of art.
7
Another successful publication in this respect is the Tasarım Gazetesi [Design Newspaper] a weekly 
supplement to Radikal, a daily newspaper published at the beginning of this century. Emre Senan, who is 
responsible for its design, bestowed a dynamic contemporary look perfectly matching its content. His mastery 
is obvious when one considers that ‘designing for design’ is probably one of the hardest things to do especially 
considering that the audience members are mostly designers who know what good design is and are keen to 
criticise any weakness they notice. (Footnote added in 2023.)
Figure 29 Image showing the folded front and back sleeves of the book entitled Benim Tek 
İstediğim Bir Kitap Yazmaktı [The Only Thing I Ever Wished was to Write a Book] designed 
by Sadık Karamustafa. The image, Vadedilmiş Topraklar 3 [Promised Lands 3] by Gülsüm 
Karamustafa, Istanbul, 1999. Photo courtesy of Sadık Karamustafa.On Design
140
Figure 30 Esen Karol’s poster design for Macbeth by William Shakespeare, Istanbul, 1999. Photo 
courtesy of Esen Karol.
Figure 31 Esen Karol’s poster design for an art photography exhibition called Sokaklardan
[From the Streets] by Şakir Eczacıbaşı, Istanbul, 1996. Photo courtesy of Esen Karol.Turkish Graphic Design
141
Figure 32 Gülizar Çepoğlu’s poster for the exhibition Manuscript, Istanbul, 1994. Photo courtesy 
of Gülizar Çepoğlu.
Figure 33 Sunday Supplement of Güneş Newspaper, designed by Gülizar Çepoğlu, Istanbul, 
1990. Photo courtesy of Gülizar Çepoğlu.On Design
142
Some designers disagree with the idea that a graphic work can be an artwork in itself. 
They argue that the mission of a graphic work is to serve the product or its subject matter, 
rather than impose itself. What should cause the product to sell are the qualities of the 
product represented appropriately, not the quality of the graphics attracting consumers 
or telling more than what they are supposed to tell.
This modernist view of respect for the product or the subject matter, which reduces 
the graphics to a mere conveyor, is currently being questioned in Turkey. In fact, what 
some designers challenge is the temporality of a graphic and its message in comparison 
to works of art, which envisages a wider audience (as opposed to just consumers) and 
longevity8
 (as opposed to effectiveness).
Longevity in a given graphic work can be achieved through added value, which 
entirely depends on the designer’s creativity. If this added value has the power to survive 
longer than the actual subject matter itself, then the work lives longer. The ephemeral 
nature of advertising and the message can be reversed by an idea, which could be another 
layer of reading and meaning because ideas arguably live longer than products. The 
conceptual approach is a font of possibilities for designers who are pushing boundaries 
in a relentless creative search. Luckily, the contemporary Turkish graphic scene is not 
without such designers, as I hope this chapter has shown. Granted, they are not many 
but they are keen and committed to exploring depths of meaning, thus keeping company 
with dedicated researchers.
10.5 Acknowledgements
I would like to thank Bülent Erkmen, Sadık Karamustafa, Esen Karol, Gülizar Çepoğlu 
and Yurdaer Altıntaş, Yeşim Demir, Tevfik Barın, Ayşe Karamustafa, Sinan Niyazioğlu, 
Emre Senan, Ömer Durmaz and Erkal Yavi who kindly gave time for interviews and/or 
provided me with valuable printed and/or digital materials. Behiç Ak and Yılmaz Aysan 
offered their ideas and comments on many occasions during informal discussions on the 
subject. Finally, I would like to express my gratitude to Manuela Antoniu for editing the 
first version of this text presented as a conference paper at the Aveiro Conference in 2001.
8
With some exceptions, of course, such as self-destructive artworks, performances, installations and so on.CHAPTER 11
4T DESIGN AND DESIGN HISTORY SOCIETY
A CRITICAL ANALYSIS
The first version of this chapter was presented at Istanbul Graphic Design Days, Mimar Sinan Fine 
Arts University, 3 May 2017, and later published in Grafist 21, (2017).
11.1 Introduction
Based on my observations, I believe a trend began in 2016 that called into question the 
functions, objectives and benefits of design associations, institutions and organizations. 
Inside the design circles I am familiar with, this issue was first pronounced during the 
2016 Taipei Conference between 26 and 28 October 2016, organized by the International 
Committee for Design History & Design Studies (ICDHS), which was founded in 1999. 
During this tenth international conference, the committee’s board of directors felt the 
need to come up with an evaluation, published a book (Calvera, Woodham and Barbosa, 
2016) and debated the issue in a panel discussion at the end of the conference. A few 
days later, in early November, Brighton University’s Internationalising Design History 
Research Cluster posted a call for papers for a conference on 9 and 10 November 2017 
(Cluster, 2016) with the theme International Design Organizations: Histories, Legacies, 
Values. In the meantime, I was invited to deliver a speech in a conference in Istanbul. 
Seeing Grafist 21 in the title, I thought of a graphic design article I had written many 
years previously and assumed that the invitation is related to it. However, Prof. Dr. 
Ayşegül İzer clearly defined the following framework:
1. Observations of and experiences with foreign design organizations
2. Foundation, development and maturation phases of 4T1
 (including accounts 
of interactions with institutions and individuals in neighbouring countries 
such as Greece and Bulgaria as well as other West Europeans and Far Eastern 
nations)
3. In comparison with these countries, regional and institutional diversifications 
in terms of design historiography
1
‘4T’ stands for Türkiye Tasarım Tarihi Topluluğu/Design History Society, Turkey. It is the early name of the 
group which was founded in 2006. Later, as explained in this chapter, the name changed in the course of time, 
and the society was established as a formal body under the name of 4T: Tasarım ve Tasarım Tarihi Topluluğu/ 
4T: Design and Design History Society in 2014.On Design
144
4. The role and significance of the developing discipline of Turkish design 
historiography within the broader framework of international design history
Thus, this topical issue of the evaluative study of design associations appeared again. 
In offering a critical analysis, this chapter inevitably touches on the personal role of the 
author as well as conveys a historical perspective of developments to analyse the status 
of 4T within the context of similar relevant institutions. Undoubtedly, a thorough study 
is needed to provide a global list of significant organizations, associations, councils and 
institutions operating in architecture, interior decoration, graphic design, furniture 
design, industrial design and so on, and to define their boundaries. Only then can we 
begin to scrutinize 4T in light of these findings.2
 Some organizations in Turkey, such 
as the Industrial Design Association (Turan, 2006), the Industrial Designers’ Society 
of Turkey (Hasdogan, 2009) and the Association of Industrial Designers, fall outside 
the limited scope of this chapter, which considers previously unrecorded events and 
phenomena to outline a critical yet integrated network of progress and relations.
11.2 Observations of and experiences with foreign design organizations: 
The accumulation behind the foundation of 4T
Regarding the foundation and progress of 4T, two significant factors can be highlighted: 
my experience of living in London and observing first-hand the working principles of 
similar organizations in Europe – a slowly growing web of international relations woven 
with mutual trust and respect. Other contributing factors are obviously good fortune by 
being in the right place at the right time. The following section elaborates on these points 
by first looking at organizations that are similar to 4T.
11.2.1 Design organizations similar to 4T
Looking into similar organizations, we immediately encounter two reputable names 
based in the UK and renowned for the quality of the design conferences they organize: 
the Design Research Society (1966) and the Design History Society (1977). In fact, both 
originated from conferences. The first was established after heated debates following the 
conference on design methods in 1962 (Design Research Society, 2015). The foundation 
of the Design History Society also resulted from a series of writings, discussions and 
conferences. From the 1960s, British universities and polytechnics began to include 
2
The guilds (of artisans and/or merchants) in the Middle Ages were transformed into professional associations. 
This process accelerated in the early nineteenth century, driven by a momentum experienced in design, 
especially architecture. Pioneering bodies that played key roles in the history of design institutions and 
organizations include the British Institute of Architects (1834), the New York Institute of American Architects 
(1857), Deutscher Werkbund, led by Hermann Muthesius in Germany (1907) and the British Design and 
Industries Association (1915).4T Design and Design History Society
145
design history in their curriculum. However, since design historian was hardly a 
recognized profession at the time, art historians were responsible for these courses. 
By the 1970s, several discussions and conferences had considered the nature of design 
history and its role in education. Out of these, the one with the greatest impact was 
Design History: Fad or Function? (Design Council, 1978). The conference proceedings 
were published with the same title, and the Design Research Society was established 
within the year.
Conferences obviously assemble people of similar interests. As they became annual, the 
assemblage gradually transformed into a society and continued its presence in a new format. 
It was a generative model followed by many other similar future formations. However, by 
the mid-1990s, there was increasing criticism of institutional bodies. The standard format 
of societies naturally demanded adherence to certain procedures, such as membership fees 
and subscriptions, which led to the renting of office space, hiring of various administrative 
staff, forming of executive boards, general assemblies, meetings, written communications 
and so on. These bodies inevitably turned into formal structures in which bureaucratic 
functions – mostly disliked by academics – became rather overbearing.
One organization that successfully avoided this pitfall was the European Academy of 
Design (EAD), established in the UK in 1994. With a biannual conference and operating 
in as many overseas locations as possible, EAD played an important role in the field. 
Prof. Rachel Cooper (who can be considered the founder) is a pioneer in the area of 
design management.
A few years ago, she received the Order of the British Empire for her services to 
the field. While Cooper began her work with a conference focusing mainly on design 
management, the European Academy of Design (EAD, 2017) gradually extended its 
scope. For example, the twelfth EAD Conference in 2017 was titled ‘Design for Next’.3
EAD has never organized itself formally. Rachel Cooper and later Paul Atkinson 
did not become the chairperson through a written or officially voted decision by EAD’s 
board of directors. Instead, these decisions were based on mutual understanding and 
general consensus. In 1995, on the last day of EAD’s first conference, held in Salford 
and themed Design Interfaces,4
 a forum was held to discuss future possibilities. Dr. 
Elizabeth Svengren of Stockholm University announced that she would organize the 
1997 conference and invited participants. University members who attended both 
conferences ended up forming EAD’s Executive Committee. Even today, it is university 
members rather than private individuals that provide EAD’s structure.5
The Executive Committee meets once every two years before the conference to 
determine the next venue and the people in charge. The board comprises people who 
previously organized EAD conferences and/or university representatives. However, since 
not every member can attend this biennial meeting, the Executive Committee is always 
3
See https://ead.yasar.edu.tr/conferences/ead-12-italy-2017/. 4
See https://ead.yasar.edu.tr/conferences/ead-01-uk-1995/. 5
See https://ead.yasar.edu.tr/committee/.On Design
146
enriched by a dynamic flow of new faces. EAD’s small budget relies on a little income from 
the Design Journal, published since 1997. The conferences are hosted by universities and 
funded through attendance fees. EAD’s Executive Committee supervises the process to 
ensure the smooth running of all operations. This flexible structure has survived thanks to 
the sustainable system developed by academics working in the same field, as well as a sense 
of mutual trust and inexhaustible enthusiasm shared by the older and younger generations.
Another example is the International Committee of Design History and Studies 
(ICDHS), which aims to promote design history in developing countries. Its foundation 
was motivated by university lecturers led by Prof. Dr. Anna Calvera who gathered for 
a conference in Barcelona in 1999. At a conference in Havana in 2000, it was decided 
that meetings would be biennial. The Istanbul conference of 2002 ensured the future 
of ICDHS. As distinct from EAD, ICDHS chooses a different international location 
for each conference and takes responsibility for motivating and encouraging the local 
design community, including researchers, thinkers and historians, to actively participate 
on the global platform.
ICHDS has developed a clear management model. The core team, the Executive 
Committee, keeps expanding with the addition of conference organizers who rejuvenate 
it with their experiences of such events. The leading positions were taken by senior 
historians from various continents, such as Anna Calvera, Jonathan Woodham, Victor 
Margolin, Pekka Korvenmaa and Oscar Salinas. This seems to have endowed ICDHS 
with a distinctive mission and perspective (ICDHS, 2008). A critical eye cannot easily 
ignore EAD’s and ICDHS’s scientific contributions. They have provided many young 
researchers and future lecturers with ample opportunities to construct a perfect web 
of experience and communication. Through their democratic structures, which allow 
space for the maturation of sophisticated discussions, they have managed to create a 
globally effective and reputable heritage.
Their main weakness is a lack of concern and adequate instruments for self￾promotion, which could otherwise enhance their visibility, consolidate their prestige 
and increase their membership. Their prestige has been limited by the consistent ability 
to organize biennial conferences. Naturally, their success has always been linked to the 
success of these events. It is a problem encountered not just by ICDHS and EAD but 
all similar institutions without a formal structure. One could avoid problematizing the 
situation and choose to honour this success attained through minimal effort. One could 
also ignore post-conference concerns about the location of the next venue, which hang 
over the board members’ heads like the Sword of Damocles. Yet, it is also true that this 
ignites a perpetual search for young teams to run the next conference, which creates an 
exhilarating momentum.
11.2.2 Web of relations
Earlier, I defined the second most influential factor driving the formation of 4T as the 
gradually evolving web of relations. This network was formed partly through chance 
encounters but mostly through diligent efforts to build and maintain solid friendships. 4T Design and Design History Society
147
In 1987, Michael Preston, the Exhibitions Director of the London Science Museum, 
was collaborating with Teoman Aktüre to establish a Science Museum in Ankara, 
Turkey. With the incentive of Michael Preston, I was granted a two-month research 
scholarship at the London Science Museum. During this time, I became acquainted with 
several prominent British designers. As a result, Sir David Carter, who was contacted 
through Michael Preston, Prof. Frank Height and Prof. John Heskett, the author of 
the first serious book on industrial design history, gave conference presentations for 
the Industrial Design Department of Middle East Technical University, Turkey, during 
the academic year of 1987–88. Having kept in contact with Heskett, I invited him to 
take part in the Somerset House conference that I organized in 1995 at the Courtauld 
Institute of Art, which I discuss in more detail below. One of the most important focal 
points of the web of relations is the Royal College of Art (RCA). The time I spent at 
the RCA during 1988–90 created opportunities to meet many designers, historians and 
thinkers. One such figure is Prof. Manzini, who later spoke at the Somerset House 
conference.
To sum up, connections made at the Science Museum and RCA, and relationships 
that developed during EAD and ICDHS conferences exemplify the formation of 4T and 
later proved very helpful in securing its international visibility. Regarding my initial 
experiences before EAD and ICDHS emerged, a localized initiative in London is worth 
noting. The following section examines in more detail the nature of this undertaking, 
The Inter-Cultural Forum For the Arts, which has not taken its place in the written 
historical record yet.
11.2.3 Beginning of the story: ICFA
As emphasized above, personal experiences and relations played a significant role in 
the emergence of 4T. To observe how these ties developed over the years, one needs to 
revisit London before the 1990s. Back then, following the lead of three people resident in 
the UK, a series of meetings were held with a gradually growing number of participants. 
This wave led to the emergence of an informal group in February 1993 called the Inter￾Cultural Forum for the Arts (ICFA).
The three initiators were İsmail Ertürk, a senior lecturer at the University of 
Manchester, Dr. Sedat Aybar, a member of SOAS at the time (now a member of Istanbul 
Bahçeşehir University) and Dr. Saliha Paker, a professor of translation studies at 
Bosphorus University, Istanbul. ICFA’s vision and objectives were to encourage interest 
in modern Turkish arts, literature and culture, engage in promotional activities based on 
a thorough understanding of global trends while enabling the exchange of ideas and the 
flow of information through an intercultural perspective and take an extensive approach 
towards the study of connections and relations. Although ICFA was dominated by 
Turkish citizens, its members made a point of creating an international environment 
for different cultures to meet. A document from 12 September 1996 lists Musa Farhi as 
ICFA chairperson, James Christie as vice-chair, Nilgün Canver as treasurer, Miranda 
Griffin as secretary, and Tevfik Balcıoğlu, Adem Özer and Selma Göker as board On Design
148
members. Activities included a concert by Cihat Aşkın, literature talks by Vedat Türkali 
and Murat Belge, memoirs by Maureen Freely, a seminar on Mediterranean cuisine by 
Claudia Roden, and design presentations by Necdet Teymur, Marco Susani and Defne 
Koz. Other well-known attendees of ICFA meetings included Bernard Lewis, Cem 
Mansur and Orhan Suda. After organizing its last event, a jazz concert by the Ahmet 
Gülbay Trio presented by Füsün Levet on 9 March 1997, this venture disappeared into 
the unrecorded annals of history.
ICFA is an interesting case in terms of its organizational model. Despite lacking 
any official registration whatsoever, it still functioned as an association. There were 
membership application forms, a logo designed by myself, a board of directors ready 
to serve with a chairperson, vice-chair and treasurer in place, and regular meetings 
with carefully prepared agendas and minutes.6
 Relying on nominal entrance fees to run 
the events, ICFA operated on the basis of good intentions, solidarity, mutual trust and 
respect.
Another important experience is relevant here. In 1995, it was decided that an Industrial 
Design Pathway would be established within the Department of Three-Dimensional 
Design affiliated with Kent Institute of Art and Design7
 in Rochester, UK. As the 
course leader, I asserted the need to develop an educational strategy based on the latest 
developments in design. I convinced the institute’s administration that an international 
conference would be absolutely indispensable towards this end. The conference title was 
quite ambitious: ‘The Role of Product Design in Post-Industrial Society’. The conference 
proceedings were later published under the same name (Balcioglu, 1998).
Based on my experience with ICFA, the invited speakers were Prof. Ezio Manzini 
of Milano Polytechnic (Italy), Dieter Rams, a designer at Braun Company (Germany), 
Victor Margolin, a professor of design history at the University of Chicago (United 
States), John Heskett, a professor of design history (UK), James Woudhuysen8
 of Henley 
Centre for Forecasting and Prof Jeremy Myerson9
 of Royal College of Art (RCA).
Strong connections and fortuity both played a role in gathering reputable people from 
varied fields and countries. Heskett and Manzini’s confirmations encouraged Margolin 
and others to participate. It is important to note here that the event was hosted by 
the Courtauld Institute of Art, located inside the Somerset House building in central 
London. Somerset House is a grand building that housed the Government School of 
Design, the very first design school, founded in 1837. Thus, the location was significant 
in terms of design history and an attraction in itself, which helped ensure the success of 
the conference.
6
I would like to extend my thanks to Selma Göker Wilson, who sent me an electronic copy of the ICFA archive.
7
In 2005, Kent Institute of Art and Design merged with Surrey Institute of Art and Design and became part of 
the University of Creative Arts in 2008.
8
Woudhuysen later served as Professor of Estimation and Innovation at De Montfort University. 9
Myerson is the founding editor of Design Week magazine (1986). In 1999, he co-founded the Design Center 
with Helen Hamlyn at the RCA and has been the director of this center.4T Design and Design History Society
149
11.3 The foundation, development and maturation phases of 4T
The foundation stones of 4T were set in place during the meeting led by Prof. Haruhiko 
Fujita at Izmir University of Economics (IUE), Turkey. I was then the Dean of the Faculty 
of Fine Arts and Design and knew Fujita through some work I did for the ICDHS 
Executive Committee. While working at Kent Institute of Art and Design, I co-organized 
with ITU (Istanbul Technical University) ICDHS’s 2002 conference, titled ‘Mind the 
Map’. The success of this conference strengthened ICDHS’s influence and contributed 
to promoting design history studies. Possibly driven by this momentum, Fujita had 
been travelling abroad to gather international support for an online publication, Design 
Discourse,
10 published by the Design History Forum founded in Japan in 1998. He also 
wished to motivate and support the formation of similar institutions in other countries. 
Our meeting took place on Wednesday, 9 August 2004, attended by academic staff from 
IUE, Izmir Institute of Technology and Dokuz Eylül University. The discussion following 
Fujita’s presentation resulted in a decision to schedule a conference in 2006.
This first conference of invited speakers took place on 12 May 2006 with the theme 
of Design History and Discourse in Turkey. The second conference was held on 11 May 
2007 with the same format and the theme of Design and Daily Life in History. The 
next conference on 12–13 May 2008 had the theme of Designing Identities. The fourth 
conference (14–15 May 2009), Other Design Histories, included both invited guests and 
commissioned papers. This tradition, started by Prof. Jonathan Woodham, still continues 
today. In 2010, a peer review system was introduced using Turkish academicians. That 
year, when English-language papers were first accepted, the theme was Deciphering the 
Object, while in 2011 it was Design, Technology and Experience. Until 2012, Turkish 
papers were accompanied by a brief summary in English and vice versa. While many 
4T contributors have come and gone, some names have remained within the core 
team.11 One of the key figures behind the theoretical framework of the conferences and 
symposium organization is Prof. Gülsüm Baydar. For example, thanks to her personal 
connections, Hilde Heynen participated in 2013 as a guest speaker.
4T changed its name when some of the founding members transferred from IUE 
to Yaşar University. The Dean of the Faculty of Architecture insisted on drawing a 
distinction. Consequently, 4T continued the conferences as 5T (Türkiye Tasarım Tarihi 
Topluluğu Toplantıları/Turkish Society of Design History Meetings between 2012 and 
2014, for three year only). The graphics and format of the conference publication also 
changed. After the 4T society was founded on 4 June 2014, the official terminology of 
TÜBİTAK (Scientific and Technological Research Council of Turkey) was accepted, 
10Design discourse was one of the most popular concepts of the 1990s. The concept of discourse developed by 
the famous French philosopher Michel Foucault was also applied to design. In this context, it is worthwhile to 
mention Necdet Teymur’s Environmental Discourse (1982) and Victor Margolin’s Design Discourse (1989).
We can assume that what happened in Japan was partly influenced by this atmosphere.
11I would like to extend my gratitude to all fellow academicians, assistants and students for their selfless efforts.On Design
150
and the word symposium was used instead of the word conference for annual meetings. 
Many foreign experts were invited to act as referees while all papers, presentations and 
books were published in English after 2013. Between 2010 and 2013, the organization’s 
books were published by Yaşar University. 5T’s most recent publications include New 
Relationship: Design History and Virtual Design Museum (2012) and Gender Perspectives 
in Design: Turkish and Global Contexts (2013).
We can now return to the question posed at the beginning of this chapter regarding 
meetings with institutions and colleagues in Western and Eastern Europe, the Far East 
and Turkey’s neighbours such as Greece and Bulgaria. Experiences of several Western 
European bodies contributed indirectly to the foundation of 4T, including RCA, ICFA 
(based in the UK), EAD and ICDHS (based in Barcelona), while the Japan Design History 
Forum was an encouraging example from the Far East. For some reason, however, Eastern 
Europe has never been an influence for either EAD or ICDHS. The only connection was 
established with Tallinn, Estonia, thanks to Prof. Pekka Korvenmaa. This inertia was 
probably because Eastern European organizations lacked centres and financial resources 
to send people abroad to build communication bridges for this particular field of design.
In any event, the absence of a formal structure hardly allows the management 
the freedom to use their initiative for creating other projects. Another objective that 
motivated 4T as a society was to develop its capacity and influence in the design world. 
Regarding ties with Turkey’s neighbours, Greece provides the only example. Although 
there have been no official contact with its design institutions, Dr Artemis Yagou and Dr 
Kalliopi Amygdalou, two dedicated academic experts, have maintained their relationship 
with 4T and other design institutions and universities in Turkey.
11.4 Regional and institutional diversification 
in terms of design historiography
Although a serious analysis of this topic requires extensive, a limited evaluation and 
personal observations may contribute towards future studies. Instead of making 
deductions about other countries, this chapter focuses on a number of interesting 
qualities, strengths and weaknesses observed in Turkey. Comparisons can be drawn 
from three areas: research methods, writing style and the selected themes.
11.4.1 Research methods
I believe that we have enough knowledge of methods of research. However, despite 
the significant growth in first-hand studies, archives and field studies in recent years, 
which have increased the visibility of a few competent academicians, it is still a far from 
well-established and widespread practice. Therefore, while not ignoring second-hand 
resources, returning to the archives and the field, conducting studies in oral history and 
carrying out documentation work to illuminate the recent past will noticeably increase 
the quantity and the quality of research.4T Design and Design History Society
151
Here, I’d like to highlight some important points that require the attention of critics, 
writers, historians and theoreticians. These include claiming and illuminating our own 
history, performing an archaeology of knowledge, recording and spreading findings while 
accentuating certain characteristics that are unique to us and building our critical framework 
with our own resources. One of the greatest obstacles preventing the institutionalization 
of design in Turkey is the lack of strong intellectual design thinking and debate platforms. 
This is the main reason why we have developed a seemingly natural habit of depending on 
foreign resources. An interesting anecdote can illustrate this issue. One day, I was asked – 
with all good intentions – to review an article. It was an original work that I appreciated 
and commented on positively. I then asked the author: ‘You are Turkish and you work at a 
university in Turkey. Your research is based on Turkey and it concerns an authentic product 
of this country. Your article is in English, which is fine, but why are all the references in 
the bibliography foreign? Why are there no Turkish references?’ The author replied: ‘You 
are right. I never realized.’ It may well be that there are no Turkish publications on some 
subjects, so the intention to publish abroad may encourage the use of foreign resources 
while attaining a doctorate degree abroad may direct one’s focus to resources accumulated 
overseas. Although this is all understandable, it still cannot justify our neglect of creating 
our intellectual framework in design. I believe that this is the current topic that must be 
brought into sharp focus in Turkish design writing.
Towards this end, we would be well advised to take the following steps. We need to 
identify the unnoticed heroes (educators, designers, producers and so on) of our design 
history, shed new light on their work, and, through this effort, create a legacy that will 
help us build the future. These steps are sure to elevate us to a higher level.
11.4.2 The style of writing
This is an area in need of much improvement. Diligent attempts at scientific writing 
are known to produce extremely technical, boring and monotonous narratives, so it 
would be a benefit to liberate design writing from the confines of engineering jargon. A 
writing style that relies heavily on descriptions and chronological linear narratives, and 
is neither critical nor challenging, is no longer acceptable. A flowing, striking, humorous 
style that is generous with references and proofs is a lot stronger and more convincing. 
The same aspiration towards scientific writing is also apparent in the titles of papers that 
can be extremely long, trying desperately to pinpoint issues and end up alienating the 
reader. Instead, titles must be short, simple and striking.12
Another error often encountered in our writing style is frequent and abundant referencing 
of the writer’s own work, as may be detected in the bibliographies of some papers. Except for 
pioneers and leaders of certain fields, extreme self-referencing is hardly persuasive. On the 
contrary, indicates a vicious circle. It seems as though such writers have limited themselves 
12I would like the readers to know that I don’t hold myself exempt from these criticisms. I must confess that I 
suffer from the same ailments. Ultimately, we all grew up within this culture. I would therefore like to warn the 
youth and encourage them to think about developing a different, original writing style.On Design
152
to their own thoughts and findings, writing and reading what they have written, and re￾written it. Such self-referential writing indicates conceit and is extremely unattractive.
Multi-authorship also needs our attention. In a speech given a few years ago in Izmir, 
a top executive at Elsevier said that multi-authorship was the new trend in writing 
with scientific studies encouraged along this path. It is indeed a trend that is highly 
compatible with our current research culture. However, here too, we need to avoid some 
of our traditional mistakes in Turkey. For example, dissertation students are known to 
put the names of their tutors – sometimes out of respect – on their papers, regardless of 
whether the tutors have made any meaningful contribution. If it is truly a collaborative 
work produced by student and tutor, then there is no problem. However, the academic 
code of conduct should not allow giving credit out of kindness.
11.4.3 Topics
The drive to be topical is an irreplaceable passion that must always be pursued as a 
primary objective. At the 2016 ICDHS Taipei conference, Dr. Sarah Teasley, who is the 
department head of design history at the RCA, told me in conversation about what 
differentiates 4T from similar formations: ‘Your study of history is based on the hottest 
contemporary issues reflecting today’s problematiques. That’s why you’re special.’ For 
me, this was the most precious compliment of 4T yet and provided a more accurate 
definition than any we had come up with before.
The search for a design identity is a rather prevalent trend, not just in Turkey but in 
many other countries. Historical research initiatives are launched to facilitate this quest. 
To give an example, I have witnessed first-hand many Japanese academicians studying 
relationships with the West, the influence of Western design education and modernism. 
The identity issue is always on the agenda for us, too. Just as it is with teacups or coffee 
machines, social research based on design – whereby traditions and historical forms are 
questioned both practically and institutionally – is a prevalent practice. This approach 
reconstructs contemporary utility objects to harmonize with the current requirements 
of technology, fashion and aesthetics. While doing so, it also generates material for 
historical and theoretical studies.
On the other hand, given Turkey’s challenging geopolitical position, we can appreciate 
that continuing societal tribulations and the current economic situation directly 
influence local design practice. This is why the number of research projects focused on 
material culture and politics is popular in Turkey.
11.5 The role and significance of the developing discipline of Turkish 
design historiography within the broader framework of international 
design history
The response to this issue can help us determine our roadmap on a number of levels. 
Here is the critical point: when will a Turkish design historian ever write about world 4T Design and Design History Society
153
design history or design history in the West? In other words, in our handling of topics, 
we need to break away from the dichotomy of ‘us and them’, ‘local and global’ and ‘local 
and universal’, and try to put a more holistic approach into practice. If the practice of 
transnational design historiography finds a breeding ground in Turkey, then the writing 
of design history will be sure to evolve to a higher plane (Akcan, 2012).
Just as mentioned at the 2017 ICDHS Taipei Conference, Turkey is one of the countries 
where we observe a steady growth of design history studies, the quality of its research 
projects, the number of researchers and their participation in meetings. Nevertheless, 
these appreciative comments can hardly mask the lack of a single well-prepared and 
comprehensive design history book in Turkey (with the exception of architecture, which 
was a very early developer within design).
Having said that, the increasing presence of original and high-quality work in 
interior architecture, industrial design, graphics and other related disciplines, and of 
culturally and politically advanced publications in comparison to other countries, shows 
that Turkey is progressing confidently. The efforts of academicians based abroad have 
contributed significantly to this success in the international arena. The global platform 
offered by 4T and its role as a facilitator will continue to encourage design practices and 
the writing of history. But how far does 4T’s support extend?
11.6 The ultimate tipping point: Does 4T have a future or not?
Inevitably, both EAD and ICDHS have concerns about their own sustainability. In 
meetings held after each conference, determining the next venue and organizers is 
not as easy as expected, and there is often anxiety about the future. 4T faces similar 
problems. Moving ahead as a society is much more difficult than being organized under 
the wings of a university. Having come out of this protective shield in 2016, 4T held its 
first symposium in a neutral setting, at the Izmir Center of Architecture, which proved 
its ability to stand alone. This venue was used again in 2017, with over sixty papers 
submitted and forty chosen. For the first time, the referees included both symposium 
members and renowned and published foreign academicians.13
Since 2009, the invited speakers have always been visitors from abroad the exception 
of the film director Cem Kaya in 2016. As mentioned above, all symposia since 2013 have 
been conducted in English. However, there is still plenty of room for improvement. The 
website, for example, needs urgent attention while some books covering recent works 
are still due to be published although they should be printed as soon as each symposium 
ends.
Obviously, 4T must also organize other kinds of events, support members’ projects, 
plan activities and be more active generally. To meet these expectations to a certain extent, 
13See http://cargocollective.com/4T2017/Scientific-Committee.On Design
154
meetings called ‘one in four’ have been held at the end of every month on the forth day 
of the forth week, since 23 February 2017, when a roadmap and a twenty-five-item to-do 
list were drawn up. These meetings were carried out for a while, however, the number of 
people who took on the tasks was rather disappointing. Unfortunately, political tension 
and a prevailing mood of pessimism affected both university staff, who see no hope for 
the future, and 4T members. Although the society is an institutional body, its lack of 
regular income makes it dependent on the contributions of a few dedicated individuals, 
which arouses concerns for the future. The society has strong international relationships, 
but they are mostly built on a personal basis. Transferring these connections to younger 
generations requires much attention and diligent care. Our wish is for 4T to grow with 
contributions and, as a sustainable international design platform, offer academicians 
opportunities to make global connections, come up with new ideas, create grounds for 
discussion, realize their projects and build their careers.SECTION THREE
EDUCATION AND PRACTICE
The chapters in this section fall into two groups: the first four are related to education 
in general while the following two concern design practice in Turkey specifically. The 
first chapter of this section, Chapter 12, presents the integrated design approach (IDeA), 
which formed the foundations of a new fine arts and design faculty established by the 
author at Izmir University of Economics. IDeA is a philosophy requiring all departments 
to work together closely, introducing common courses for all students, encouraging 
joint projects and without allocating space to specific departments except for specialized 
workshops. Instead, staff members teach wherever their expertise is needed throughout 
the faculty, sharing offices with colleagues from other departments and all research 
assistants located in a large open space. In other words, integration is achieved on all 
fronts, wherever possible, from top to bottom, from curricula with common elements to 
the use of offices, studios, workshops and so on.
After the fashion design department opened in 2004, four more departments were 
added by 2010, together with a research centre and two MA programmes. Staff members 
also designed the new faculty building in accordance with the IDeA philosophy of being 
a purpose-built premises. It was officially inaugurated on October 20, 2010, at 20.10. 
The faculty somewhat resembles Bauhaus with its five departments, namely fashion 
design, architecture, industrial design, visual communication, interior architecture, 
and environmental design, and its integrated curricula and new building. Although 
the advantages and disadvantages of the common curricula and the performance of the 
overarching philosophy have not yet been scientifically analysed, this experiment was 
implemented successfully during the author’s deanship, and its graduates have proved 
themselves in professional life, according to the feedback from the industry.
The following three chapters consider PhD and doctoral studies, which were a focus 
of debates in the UK during the late 1990s. Briefly, professionals, artists and designers 
argued that existing PhD programmes were inappropriate for their postgraduate 
education which is based on theoretical works only. Instead, they argued, postgraduate 
students could only progress through practical work accompanied by a supportive 
theoretical thesis. This instigated a debate in which the curricula, titles and positions 
of practice-based programmes and the quality of their results were discussed at a series 
of conferences organized by universities and the UK Council for Graduate Education.
These three chapters of section three are closely linked and complement each other. 
However, there are other chapters in this book touching upon the same subject. The 
fourth and fifth chapters of the first section, entitled respectively ‘The essential elements: 
The unity of work and transferability of knowledge’ and ‘Research, knowledge and On Design
156
Education and Practice
doctorate programmes: Toward the third domain’, explore similar issues with reference 
to postgraduate studies but from a different and theoretical viewpoint. I, therefore, 
considered that they are more suitable for the theory rather than the education section. 
The connections are so obvious that the reader may well notice that they sometimes raise 
comparable ideas, albeit with different arguments and references.
Chapter 13, ‘PhD, DFA or both’, argues that we need both because they are at the same 
academic level despite being different in terms of their nature. Chapter 14 looks into 
the characteristics of professional doctorates, while Chapter 15 examines the balance 
and relationship of practice and theory in postgraduate studies. This debate primarily 
focused on the nature of doctoral studies in art and design, and the identification of the 
right title for these studies.
Nowadays, the heated debate seems to be over, and it appears that universities have 
developed practice-based programmes and adopted new titles. Thanks to the UK 
Council for Graduate Education’s annual conferences, the results are being presented 
while examples of works are discussed in academic papers. In addition, there were two 
major international conferences in Ohio, United States, in 1998, and La Clusaz, France, 
in 2000 (Buchanan, 1999; Durling, 2000). My main argument was to keep the title ‘PhD’ 
for scientific research and use a different title for practice-based studies and consider 
both to have an equal academic level. It appears that universities preferred to keep the 
title of ‘PhD’ and added a few words to differentiate it from ‘classic’ PhDs, hence Practice￾based PhD, PhD in Art, PhD by Design and so on. Regarding higher education systems, 
practices vary widely in many countries concerning doctorate studies.
For example, the Council of Higher Education (which is ‘Yüksek Öğretim Kurulu: 
YÖK’ in Turkish), responsible for all higher education institutions in Turkey, resolved 
the issue long before the UK debate in late the 1990s without mentioning the word PhD. 
Instead, the degree is called ‘Proficiency in Art’ and includes all kinds of practice-based 
subjects like fine art, music and design. In academic terms, this degree is equivalent 
to a PhD, and those who have it can apply for a professorship in due course. Unlike 
UK practice, professors in Turkey shorten their titles to ‘Prof. Dr.’ if they hold a PhD 
degree while those who have a Proficiency in Art use the abbreviation ‘Prof.’ without 
‘Dr.’ attached.
In this respect, my argument in these chapters includes different and sometimes 
controversial views. However, I find this useful since the main rationale in compiling 
these essays concerns their validity and the possibility that they may be beneficial 
and inspirational for those who have not yet launched practice-based postgraduate 
programmes.
Chapter 16 deals with a specific aspect of design practice and seeks a new agenda for 
Turkish industrial design, which fluctuates in relation to Turkey’s political and economic 
situation. It was originally established in 1998 to determine a design route for Turkey. 
This chapter was recently extended, updated and rewritten with Aren Kurtgözü for this 
book in light of the current position of Turkish industrial design. A substantial revision 
was needed because the content was referring to the design agenda that has changed 
drastically since the delivery of the original paper. The chapter proposes a draft action Education and Practice
157
plan and an agenda that may interest both the Turkish audience and those in other 
countries at a similar stage of development. Based on my experience and observations, 
I offer several new practical suggestions for Turkish design in penultimate and final 
chapter of this book.
Actually, each field of design requires a separate analysis and strategy for its 
advancement. For instance, wedding dress manufacturing is an important element 
of Turkey’s fashion design industry. Its products are exported to more than forty 
countries, which requires special attention and appropriate policies to make the sector 
more effective worldwide. The proposed agenda is nothing more than a provocative 
statement, urgently demanding a state policy for design, carefully crafted for each 
sector, which demonstrates specific patterns of progress that are perhaps unique to 
Turkey. For example, there has been an attempt in Turkish product design practice to 
redesign traditional everyday artefacts with new approaches, shapes, forms, meanings 
and symbols. Accordingly, the final chapter investigates why cult objects are targeted and 
redesigned, and tries to unearth the hidden expectations in these motivations. Strangely 
enough, many well-established designers have been involved in this process and created 
new forms and products for traditional objects, such as tea glasses and coffee cups.
The chapters presented here only touch on certain features of design practices 
in Turkey, which are of course, very limited. However, I believe they highlight rather 
interesting areas. The evaluation of general design practices in Turkey and the results 
are beyond the scope of this book. Instead, the chapters explore certain characteristics of 
design theory, history, education and practice and present new insights on these subjects.158CHAPTER 12
INTEGRATED DESIGN APPROACH (IDeA)
REFLECTIONS ON A NEW SCHOOL OF DESIGN 
BUILDING
The first version of this paper was presented as a keynote speech at the 9th European Academy of 
Design Conference, Aveiro, 4–7 May 2011.
12.1 Introduction
Originally derived from a notion, the Integrated Design Approach (IDeA) has gradually 
turned into a method formulated at a theoretical level. The main principle of IDeA comes 
from the argument that the fundamental principles of all design disciplines are the same 
and that design education must include as many interdisciplinary projects and group 
work as possible. From this, a structure emerges whereby the walls separating design 
disciplines are perforated and cooperation platforms are widened. The key features 
of IDeA are transparency and permeability between design disciplines, more internal 
communication within the faculty, more common projects and lessons, employment of 
instructors capable of lecturing in different departments and the provision of integrated 
studios, workshops and studio spaces. IDeA emphasizes an inquisitional, critical, 
analytical, creative, innovative and research-based approach.
This process occurred as the Faculty of Fine Arts and Design (FFAD) at Izmir 
University of Economics (IEU) developed under the founding deanship of the author. 
Therefore, we are not discussing a predetermined and applied education model. On the 
contrary, we are discussing a design education practice that gradually took shape within 
a faculty from scratch. Before proceeding further, some brief background information is 
needed about Izmir University of Economics and the Faculty of Fine Arts and Design.
12.2 Brief information: Izmir University of Economics 
(IUE) and Faculty of Fine Arts and Design (FFAD)
The Izmir University of Economics was founded by the Izmir Chamber of Commerce 
on 14 April 2001, as the first foundation university in Turkey’s Aegean Region. There 
are six faculties, including a recently established Faculty of Law, three graduate schools, 
two institutions and eight application and research centres. Twenty-seven different 
undergraduate departments, eighteen master’s and three PhD programmes are currently On Design
160
on offer in these academic units. The language of education is English while a second 
foreign language is obligatory during the four-year undergraduate programme. Having 
opened with just 304 students in 2001, IUE had 6,150 students in 2011.
FFAD, which was established in 2003, benefited from the pre-existing Higher School 
of Fashion and Couture course, which it incorporated under a new name and curriculum 
to launch FFAD’s first department: the Department of Fashion Design. The first cohort 
of students graduated in 2005. In 2004, four new departments were launched: Industrial 
Design, Communication Design, Interior Architecture and Environmental Design. 
These were followed by the Department of Architecture in 2005, the Design Studies 
graduate programme in 2006 and the Architecture graduate programme in 2010. Student 
numbers grew from 142 in 2003 to 1,168 in 2011, including those in the preparatory 
school of languages.
12.3 The FFAD’S general education strategy
Undergraduate university education lasts four years in Turkey. Each year has a different 
level and purpose within FFAD. There is a hierarchical structure that begins with more 
general and universal issues and ends with each student choosing a specialism and 
developing an individual design identity.
12.3.1 The first year
Here, students learn what it is to be a university student and also what it means to be 
a design student in a design faculty. The first-year curriculum includes various core 
university courses, such as Introduction to Computer and Information Technologies, 
Principles of Social Sciences and Academic Skills in English. During the first year, students 
are introduced to general concepts through courses that broaden their perspectives and 
construct a common foundation of art and design. All design students share a first-year 
studio in which they work together on a common ground to understand the meaning 
of design using a common vocabulary. This structure helps students to develop a 
better understanding of each design discipline, which in turn enables them to transfer 
between departments in later years within the regulations. Significantly, students begin 
to understand the integrated design approach not by discussing or reading about it but 
through first-hand experience. In studios, design education is executed using project 
work.
12.3.2 The second year
In the second year, students enter departments. They progress to their own disciplines 
and learn the foundations of their specific professional fields, through theoretical 
and applied classes, and studio projects. During this year, students are first exposed Integrated Design Approach (IDeA)
161
to the introductory concepts and issues of their prospective profession and learn its 
fundamentals together with other support courses. During this year, students begin to 
feel clearly that they belong to a department.
12.3.3 The third year
If second-year students belong to their department, then third-year students begin to 
belong to a specialization. The third year can also be described as a year of options. In the 
departments of Fashion Design, Industrial Design and Visual Communication Design, 
students choose a specialization, such as Fashion Design or Fashion Business, Product 
Design or Design Management, and Graphic Design or Multimedia Design. Each 
specialization is studied in the departments of Architecture and Interior Architecture 
through third- and fourth-year elective courses. IUE has also recently reviewed all its 
academic programmes in line with the Bologna Process to enable students to obtain 
double or minor degrees through electives
12.3.4 The fourth year
This year is the year of the student, when students write a thesis on a chosen subject and 
present their chosen project. This allows each student to form their own design personality 
and identity. In principle, faculty never impose a design style, trend or approach. Instead, 
they introduce as many as possible and encourage students to form their own design 
identity. Given that they are largely preoccupied with a graduation project and thesis, 
and preparing a portfolio, fourth-year students gradually formulate their own design 
thinking, preferably in terms of the needs of the country and with a social consciousness 
within a global context. The graduation exhibition and fashion show provide both closure 
for the students’ formal design education and mark the beginning of their professional 
careers.
12.3.5 Reflections on the Integrated Design Approach
The structure outlined above is intertwined with a series of common courses to give 
students a broad sense of design and a wider vision of current social responsibilities. 
FFAD achieves unity for both students and staff through commonalities created at 
various levels and fields
12.3.5.1 Architecture within the framework of design
Although there are independent architecture faculties in Turkey, historically architecture 
departments have generally been established within faculties of engineering. 
Consequently, ‘design’ is a relatively new and recently popularized word as part of the On Design
162
titles of faculties. Traditionally, architecture has occupied its own realm in Turkey outside 
the domain of design. Thus, FFAD in IUE enjoys the unique position of assembling 
many design fields under one roof. For the first time in a faculty, architecture sits with 
the other design disciplines, cooperating and working closely with other departments. 
This is achieved thanks to the commitment of the architecture staff members to FFAD’s 
integrated design approach (IDeA).
12.3.5.2 The common first-year studio
As outlined above, the common first-year schedule is an ideal component of IDeA. 
From the students’ point of view, the first semester helps them to locate and position 
themselves in the university, understand the visible and invisible rules and codes of 
conduct of this new study environment and encounter the essentials of basic design 
and art studies. Students get to know each other and the way that the university and 
the faculty operate. In the second semester of the first year, a rearrangement of studios 
enables students to make new friends from other design departments. As a result, starting 
from the first year, students become familiar with various design disciplines, increase 
interdepartmental communication and can instigate collaborative projects – in addition 
to and independent of what the curriculum offers. In the second semester, there are 
several discipline-specific courses that are not common to all, whereby students attend 
for the first time a course delivered by their own department, such as Introduction to 
Architecture or Pattern Making & Sewing Skills.
The Art and Design Studio is the keystone of the first year. A group of fifteen to 
eighteen lecturers conducts studio teaching under the supervision of a coordinator. 
Each department has several representatives among the first-year staff members and 
contributes to forming the first-year curriculum and design projects. Communication is 
essential and is established both among students and the whole group of lecturers from 
these different departments.
12.3.5.3 Common courses
During the four-year programme, two courses are common across every FFAD department: 
Drawing and Representation, and Computer-Aided Technical Drawing. Some common 
courses are delivered with different course codes and slightly altered content depending 
on the needs of each department. Model Making, Advanced Design Presentation, and 
Furniture Design courses are taught in the Interior Architecture and Environmental Design 
(IAED) and Industrial Design (ID) Departments. Computer-Aided Architectural Graphics, 
and Architectural Environmental Control Systems are common to Interior Architecture 
and Environmental Design and Architecture. Multimedia Applications in Design are 
given to both Fashion Design (FD) and Visual Communication Design (VCD) students. 
Branding in the Design Industry is given in both the Fashion Design and Industrial Design 
Departments. Design Semiotics is common for both Visual Communication Design and 
Industrial Design. In the third and fourth years, students may select courses from other Integrated Design Approach (IDeA)
163
FFAD departments or even other faculties. The level of integration within FFAD can easily 
be understood from the following list of common courses:
Common to all five departments:
FFD101 & FFD102: Art and Design Studio 1 & 2
FFD121 & FFD122: History of Art and Design 1 & 2
Common to three departments (Architecture, IAED, ID):
FFD111: Drawing and Representation
FFD104: Computer-Aided Technical Drawing
Common to two departments (IAED, ID):
FFD142: Model Making
FFD202: Advanced Design Presentation
FFD301: Furniture Design
Common to two departments (Architecture, IAED):
FFD201: Computer-Aided Architectural Graphics
FFD203: Environmental Control Systems
Common to two departments (Fashion, VCD):
FFD204: Multimedia Applications in Design
Common to two departments (Fashion, ID):
FFD304: Branding in the Design Industry
Common to two departments (VCD, ID):
FFD401: Design Semiology
This list does not include the joint projects and electives in which students from various 
departments can mix. Clearly, the degree of commonality cannot be easily illustrated. 
However, it is assumed that the students mix in their classrooms, work on assignments 
and projects in mixed teams, and are able to understand each other and each other’s 
design language more and more. This collaboration can only happen if the lecturers 
and tutors of these courses thoroughly embrace the idea of common courses, improve 
the course content accordingly and thereby achieve the desired integration. To be fair 
and critical, one must confess that this is not always the case. In fact, some instructors 
of common courses do not embrace the idea. Instead, they attempt to offer different 
content to students from different departments registered for the same course. However, 
this contradicts the very nature of the concept of common courses.
No doubt, each lecturer and tutor has tried to deliver the common courses to the 
best of their ability. Nevertheless, their concern has been focused on the content 
needed for each department rather than creating common content for these mixed 
groups. When this perspective is not embodied, appropriated and embraced, it is very 
difficult to achieve unity within the classroom. Instead, it becomes relatively easy to On Design
164
divide the groups according to their departments and teach specialized subjects in 
their own fields.
I understand that there may be pressure on staff members from students who 
know nothing about IDeA and hence force the curriculum towards what they want 
(for example, fashion design students want more fashion design content, architecture 
students want more architecture and so on). Nevertheless, our aim should not solely be 
to feed the students with what they want but to apply a coherent education policy that 
is contemporary, self-critical and self-evaluative, endowed with universal values and in 
line with the vision and mission of our university. All said, one has to accept that this is 
the weakest link in the chain of IDeA.
12.3.5.4 Academic staff employment policy
In January 2004, the faculty comprised two assistant professors, three research assistants 
and one technician. In 2011, there were four professors, two associate professors, 
eighteen assistant professors, twenty-four lecturers, eighteen research assistants, seven 
technicians and two secretaries. These include fifteen foreign academics from nine 
different countries. The faculty was effectively created from scratch. The connection 
between the employment of new staff members and the integrated design approach is 
understandable: whenever a new academic post became available, we looked for lecturers 
with a background and ability to instruct in several departments. From the beginning, 
staff are acquainted and make friends with each other across FFAD. For some courses, 
the heads of departments decide in consultation with other heads about who should 
teach which course. This strengthens the idea of being under the same roof within FFAD 
rather than the feeling of belonging to a separate department.
Even today, when we consider an application, we do not limit ourselves to the 
curriculum of any one department. Instead, we look more widely across the faculty to 
identify courses in other departments that a candidate could teach. We do this because 
qualified academics are usually specialized in one or two areas and also because there 
may not be enough courses in one department to offer someone a full-time position. 
For example, although art and design history is a first-year course in all five FFAD 
departments, each department cannot afford to employ a full-time art or design historian 
because there are only two courses related to art history throughout the year, which does 
not justify full-time employment. Clearly, therefore, we must share staff members across 
departments based on their expertise and specialism.
12.3.5.5 Research assistant employment policy
Each FFAD department has research assistants who are either master’s or PhD students. 
Posts for assistantships are advertised regularly and open to students registered in such 
programmes from any university in Turkey. Research assistants are salaried, given an 
office, work on their research and help the department by attending certain courses and 
assisting tutors. On completing their master’s or PhD, the assistants leave the university Integrated Design Approach (IDeA)
165
and are replaced by a new cohort. Depending on their academic achievements, some 
are offered a teaching post during their study or soon after. This system is designed 
to support young researchers, especially those who are bright and display potential as 
academicians.
In theory, each department aims to employ master’s or PhD students with a 
background education directly related to its design specialism. In reality, this is not 
always the case. While this conflicts with IDeA policy, the lack of applicants in an 
FFAD department’s required field can necessitate employing research assistants 
from other fields. For example, a research assistant registered in a city planning PhD 
programme is currently working in the Department of Industrial Design while one 
research assistant in Visual Communication Design is an architect and another has a 
BA in philosophy. Indeed, in a sense, this diversity is a very beneficial outcome that 
supports IDeA.
12.3.5.6 Gradual and controlled growth
As previously explained, FFAD started with the Fashion Design Department. The 
employment strategy and the arrival of new staff members each year have caused a 
gradual expansion in faculty numbers. As new departments opened and postgraduate 
programmes were introduced, steady growth was achieved with new courses joining 
the existing structure as a natural integration. Unsurprisingly, this situation had begun 
to change by 2011, with five departments and 1,168 students. Inevitably perhaps, each 
department felt that it must emphasize its own identity once it has produced graduates, 
when its final projects and degree shows have demonstrated the results and quality of 
student work. With more staff, interdepartmental teaching has decreased, although it 
still continues.
12.3.5.7 Common activities
One of the main factors sustaining FFAD as a whole is common activities. Since its 
inception, there have been monthly wine and cheese parties for tutors, lecturers and 
research assistants to present their academic work to colleagues. Other academic and 
social activities to bring faculty together include an Architecture Talks programme for 
which the Department of Architecture invites famous designers, the 4T: Design History 
Society, Turkey – (4T: Türkiye Tasarım Tarihi Topluluğu) symposia, fashion shows and 
graduation exhibitions.
12.3.5.8 Shared offices
Another factor that has supported bonding within the faculty is the mixed office 
experience. Although this was not planned, each new staff member was given an 
office space wherever it was available and suitable to their rank, but never according 
to their department. As a result, staff members from the same department rarely On Design
166
share offices while single rooms are allocated for professors and assistant professors 
according to university policy. Other academic staff share double or triple offices 
depending on their academic ranking. Because there is no office allocation for specific 
departments, two or three staff members from different departments share offices 
and sit together. This naturally-developed policy of mixed offices has further added 
to FFAD’s unity and increased internal dialogue, cross-departmental communication 
and friendship.
12.3.5.9 The awareness of being different
Situated within a university focused on economics, our staff members had a sense of 
being different from the very beginning. We hold glamorous fashion shows with an 
annual budget of approximately 50,000 USD. We have degree shows, degree catalogues, 
exhibitions and so on. Thus, we consider ourselves as different from the rest of the 
university – like an elaborate façade. This helps us gain publicity, recognition and 
respect. Soon after its establishment, FFAD became the public face of IUE, which 
occupies a large building complex of several linked premises. Therefore, when it came 
to building IUE’s first separate faculty building, the opportunity was given to FFAD. 
This was either because of our success or because we are different – whatever it means 
to be different for designers situated among engineers, economists, mathematicians 
and so on.
12.3.5.10 The idea of being a team
On almost every occasion since FFAD’s very early days, the idea of being a team has 
been adopted and reiterated as a unifying factor. The faculty was like a steadily growing 
club. Each year about ten people joined, which enabled people to get to know each other 
reasonably well. However, recently, once all the year programmes were running fully, a 
sort of competition emerged between FFAD departments, which brought the identity 
of each department to the fore. Therefore, the sense of being a member of a team is 
probably shifting from the faculty to the departments.
12.4 The emergence of IDeA
The issue of the identity of the individual departments within FFAD arose from the 
specific demands of each department’s academic programme. Along with Fashion 
Design, which requires handcraft and technical skills to educate better qualified, 
competent and experienced students, the Department of Architecture, which requires 
technical proficiency, insisted that only the first semester of the first year should have a 
common curriculum. Thus, in 2009–1010, a debate was opened.
I started this debate with a short paper entitled ‘At the Crossroads: Let’s not Throw 
out the Baby with the Bath Water. Or: In Search of a Faculty Philosophy’. The paper, 
which was circulated in March 2010 within FFAD, reviewed the current situation, Integrated Design Approach (IDeA)
167
analysed FFAD’s structure of the faculty and coined the term Integrated Design 
Approach: IDeA.
It has since been discovered that this concept already exists in that The Design School 
in New York has a programme called Integrated Design Curriculum based on the same 
or similar ideas. Both part-time and full-time staff members joined the dialogue by 
e-mail. Over time, the discussion turned into a comprehensive document. However, 
while FFAD was debating its own academic programme, the university had already 
decided to review and restructure all its academic programmes in line with the Bologna 
Process, commencing in the 2010–2011 academic year.
Consequently, FFAD was simultaneously conducting an internal debate on IDeA 
during 2009–2010 while also revising academic programmes and designing a new 
faculty building to move into by October 2010. Miraculously, the five-floor, 13,000 
m2
 ‘béton brut’ [raw concrete] building was completed in just eight months. All 
preparations were made to move into the purpose-built new building assuming that 
construction would be completed by the new academic year in September 2010. A 
risk was taken since the faculty moved out of the present premises and prayed that 
it would be ready on time before the new academic year commenced. During this 
waiting period, we had no idea whether it was going to be an ‘annus horribilis’ or ‘annus 
mirabilis’. It turned out to be the latter. The building was officially opened at 20.10 on 
20 October 2010 (Figure 34).
Figure 34 Faculty of Fine Arts and Design, the building at the opening night, 20 October 2010. 
Photo: author’s archive.On Design
168
12.5 Reflections of IDeA on the new FFAD building
In July 2009, İzmir Metropolitan Municipality gave the university permission to build on 
a 20,000 m2
 site within the campus. IUE’s administrators decided to build a new faculty 
building for FFAD designed by faculty members. It would be approximately 13,000 m2
and built on the university’s covered car park, which had been constructed three years 
before with this possibility in mind. The architect designing the parking building had 
incorporated a strong structural system. The brief was short: a faculty building to create 
a difference that could be designed to go out to tender and be built in thirteen to fourteen 
months. The story behind the building and its architectural criticism is interesting, but 
another issue. This chapter does not discuss the building’s sustainability, environmental 
factors, circulation patterns or accessibility. Instead, I would like to focus on how the 
building was planned according to the above criteria of IDeA.
The building consists of two blocks (one with three floors; the other with five), 
connected by three bridges placed on top of each other (Figure 35). The five-floor 
structure can be considered the main building. The third and fourth floors of the main 
building are two stories in height. The Dean’s office, administrative offices and instructor’s 
offices are on the top floor (Figure 36). From the fourth floor to the first, the studios are 
the dominant features of the main building (Figure 37).
Figure 35 Faculty of Fine Arts and Design building, bridges connecting blocks. A view from the 
courtyard. Photo: author’s archive.Integrated Design Approach (IDeA)
169
12.5.1 Studio locations: Not according to departments but year groups
Each floor is allocated to a specific year group. The fourth floor belongs to first-year 
students, the third is for second years, the second floor is for third years and the first 
floor belongs to the graduating students. As somebody said, ‘first-year students are on 
top because they need to broaden their horizons and the fourth-year students are on 
the ground floor to graduate and walk out quickly’. However, the main purpose is to 
enhance visual communication in building circulation. Generally, in design education, 
senior students do not normally visit the studios of junior classes as the learning curve 
is the other way around: junior students are expected to follow the work of senior 
students. Therefore, buildings are designed to enable the younger year groups to watch 
and learn from the elder students, which is why studios are located from top to ground 
in a hierarchical order. On the other hand, placing students from different departments 
but the same year on the same floor encourages cooperation between students of various 
disciplines.
12.5.2 Studios expanding to corridors and open areas for critiques
The building has vast areas of indoor open space and large corridors (Figure 38). These 
open, wide hallways situated around the studios are used for exhibitions of studio 
work and reviews of student projects. This ensures that project critiques take place in 
Figure 36 Interior of a typical staff room. Photo: author’s archive.On Design
170
Figure 37 Common design studios. Photo: author’s archive.
open spaces within the building so that everybody can observe and participate in the 
activities.
12.5.3 Collateral, transparent and open
The essence of the building’s design is transparency. Many locations, including 
studios and offices, are separated by only glass walls. Clarity, visual communication 
and transparency increase and encourage democratic participation. Of course, there 
are untouchable departments and ‘ivory towers’ in some universities here and there. 
Metaphorically speaking, we can see that the many walls between the departments in 
our school are removed, perforated or made permeable. Some of the walls were replaced 
with glass while the identity of each department is carefully protected and respected. 
From FFAD’s experience, I would say that the balance between transparency and privacy 
is a sensitive issue that must be adjusted gently.
12.5.4 Numerous and wide range of common areas
Shared spaces were thought to be another element connecting the faculty. Consequently, 
the ground floor includes a wide courtyard area developed as a street concept, multi￾purpose hall, open-air amphitheatre, meeting place, open classroom, designated 
smoking area, canteen and exhibition area. The wide corridors on each floor provide 
additional shared spaces. The open bridges connecting the two parts of the building 
provide vista points and enrich the potential for common area usage.Integrated Design Approach (IDeA)
171
12.5.5 Zones separated by functions not departments
Departments do not have special areas allocated for them. In line with this policy, 
the spaces in the building belonging to departments are reduced to a minimum. 
Naturally, the sewing workshops belong to the Department of Fashion Design; 
however, the press workshop, wooden, ceramic, metal and model workshops are in 
common use. Each area has a designated technician or a person responsible. Each 
academic year, a studio is allocated to a group, and a table, chair and locker are 
assigned to each student. There are no specific zones belonging to departments; 
rather, there are functional zones. The classrooms are grouped on the third floor; 
likewise, the computer laboratories, studios and offices are grouped together in 
particular areas.
1. Offices
 Offices can be separated into three categories.
a) Fifth-floor offices
 The offices on the fifth floor are reserved for the department heads and the 
senior faculty members. The Dean’s office and secretaries are also on this floor 
in a separate wing of the building.
b) Open offices
 Open offices are workspaces located in the middle of the fifth floor 
surrounded by the offices for heads of departments and other faculty 
Figure 38 One of the vast areas of indoor open space and large corridors. Photo: author’s archive.On Design
172
members. Two meeting rooms and a common informal coffee/staff room 
are also located here, mostly serving those working in the open offices. 
Research assistants use an open office where they have their personal work 
area (Figure 39). The remaining desks and drawers in the open office are 
reserved for the part-time academic staff, who utilize them for studying, 
preparation before or after a lesson, or as a meeting place for student 
consultations.
c) Offices on the mezzanine floors
 The third and fourth floors of the building are two storeys high. Two studios 
on these floors have a mezzanine with offices overlooking the studios below. 
Academic staff mixed from various departments occupy these offices, although 
priority is given to academicians and tutors responsible for studio teaching 
below. Visual contact helps to facilitate communication with the student body. 
However, some tutors are not very happy with this arrangement and would 
probably prefer to have more isolated offices.
The main aim of allocating rooms and desks is to consolidate unity within the faculty. 
Conventional procedure is avoided by seating staff from different departments together. 
The placement strategy also includes placing local with foreign staff, male with female 
staff, and experienced members with new recruits to maintain further balance and 
harmony within the school.
Figure 39 An open office and work area for research assistants. Photo: author’s archive.Integrated Design Approach (IDeA)
173
12.5.6 From the specific to the common
From another perspective, the building’s spatial distribution reflects an interesting 
quality. It was previously mentioned how the top floor is reserved for academic and 
administrative staff whereas the ground floor is reserved for common use and the 
workshops are located in the basement. In other words, the level of communality 
intensifies from the top floor to the ground. In general, upper floors have more specific 
usage while lower floors have more common areas sheltering various activities and 
services
12.6 Conclusion
It is not often that a design faculty is offered the opportunity to design its own school 
building in line with its own pedagogical philosophy. Even when such permission is 
granted, the work is normally undertaken in a project office under the supervision of 
a few people. Thus, FFAD was both lucky and unlucky: lucky for being afforded the 
opportunity to conduct its own project; unlucky due to the vast amount of hard work 
involved and the very limited period of time to relocate. The intention was to include as 
many designers and students from the school as possible. It is by no coincidence that the 
project started with an open meeting and a poster with the slogan ‘Have your finger in 
the pie.’ It would be impossible to name all those who have contributed to this project, but 
three main groups must be thanked: first, Michael Edward Young and Özlem Akın from 
the Department of Architecture, who along with five students designed the first concept 
and the first project within EKOTAM (the University of Economics Design Research 
Centre); second, Erguvan Ünal, a part-time instructor from the department and her 
husband Mahir Ünal, who considered the needs of all departments and developed the 
project, and prepared the application details and the bidding documents; third, the 
team that implemented the project, particularly architect Hüsnü Alpan, the university’s 
Project and Construction Manager, and Kuryap Construction under the supervision of 
Pelin Doğan, who had graduated from IUE’s Department of Architecture in 2010. The 
furniture was supplied by two Turkish brands, Koleksiyon and Yenkur, while the studio 
furnishing, including tables, chairs and lockers, was designed and produced specially for 
our new school.
It is not an easy task to design a school of design where almost everybody is a designer. 
Perhaps the most difficult thing is to meet the demands of all these designers as well as 
those of the top management. We should highlight that many designs fell through the 
cracks while the final result is pleasing for the majority rather than everyone. Of course, 
the FFAD building will be criticized but the critical point is to what extent it fits the 
purpose and reflects the philosophy of the faculty. Would it work as presupposed and 
planned? Would it embody and represent IDeA? Would the staff embrace and adopt 
IDeA and apply it systemically despite all the challenges summarized in this chapter? We 
don’t know yet. We will find both the answer and its proof in time.CHAPTER 13
PHD, DFA OR BOTH
THE PROTECTION OF IDENTITY, NATURE AND THE 
POTENTIAL POWER OF DIFFERENCES
This chapter was presented as a paper at ‘Exchange 1999: Facilitating Art & Design Research’, a one￾day conference, Wednesday, 3 February 1999, University of the West of England, Bristol.
Since September 1998, this has been the fourth conference I attended on the subject of 
research. Many of the presentations and papers during that period focused on a key element 
of PhD definition, namely to ‘contribute to knowledge’. The main argument, developed 
mostly by practising artists, designers and their supporters, frequently emphasized that 
research as an instrument of advancing knowledge is intrinsic to practice, which should 
form a substantial part of the PhD. Thus, it is crucial to explore the concept of contributing 
to knowledge. In this chapter, I unpack the phrase in relation to PhDs and professional 
doctorates, with particular emphasis on the differences between them.
I am concerned with two attributes of the phrase: the way we contribute to knowledge 
and the nature of knowledge. While this chapter focuses on the former, I would like to make 
a few remarks and highlight the significance of developing an understanding of knowledge 
for art and design. The second part concerns epistemology by raising the question: what 
is knowledge? This is a legitimate question since we cannot contribute to knowledge if we 
do not know what it is. This is also a daunting question for it drags us into a theoretical 
debate in a foreign territory of epistemology while attributing immense importance to the 
definition of knowledge in art and design. From reading various papers, I understood that 
the issue of knowledge dominated the Ohio Conference,1
 which took place a few months 
before the conference where this chapter was presented as a paper.
Klauss Krippendorff (1999) makes an alarming observation: ‘Too often, design is seen 
as a service to industry, as having no right to claim a separate body of knowledge … having 
no right to claim a separate body of knowledge.’ However, I do not believe this is the case 
in the UK because, if it were, the notion of a PhD in Design could be abandoned. Victor 
Margolin explains the solutions proposed: ‘There have been continuous efforts, particularly 
among design educators, to rigorously ground design in a body of domain knowledge that 
they believe will insure its social acceptance as a serious endeavour’ (1999: 197).
1
The Ohio Conference is titled ‘The 1st Conference On Doctoral Education’, and was organized by R. Buchanan, 
D.P. Doordan, L. Justice and V. Margolin in 1988.PhD, DFA or Both
175
Rather than being ‘preoccupied with justifying a separate sphere of domain knowledge 
as the primary subject of investigation’, Margolin prefers an open conception of design, 
such as ‘Design Studies’ as opposed to ‘Design Science’ (Margolin, 1999). Challenging 
this problematic from an epistemological viewpoint, Clive Dilnot tries to secure an 
independent zone of knowledge for design. He refers to ‘a third way of knowing’ and 
develops arguments for it as explained in Chapter 5 of the theory section. His argument 
is that if science generates knowledge mostly numerically and humanities narratively, 
then design does so artefactually. Considering that the main preoccupation of design 
is artefacts, Dilnot’s proposal has a basis and requires an enquiry into the nature of 
knowledge embedded in artefacts.
Having indicated the significance of epistemology, I will pose some questions regarding 
other aspects of knowledge, especially those related to the concept of contribution:
1. How should we identify a certain field of knowledge that is to be contributed 
to?
2. Why should that particular knowledge be prioritized over others?
3. Why does that particular knowledge need to be contributed to at that 
particular time?
4. How should the contribution be defined, and its importance, quality and 
quantity evaluated?
These questions could be answered easily if we art and design educators were operating 
in an academic milieu with an established research agenda and appropriate specialisms. 
Many disciplines operate with set agendas. In medicine, for instance, there are ongoing 
research areas, such as heart disease, cancer or AIDS. In addition to ongoing research, 
new research subjects are proposed and money invested accordingly. Certain research 
fields come to the fore, enjoy popularity and huge financial support, dominate others 
and set the research programmes of the day.2
 Of course, universities as institutions have 
enormous power and an undeniable role in constituting research programmes within 
their fields of expertise. This is one of the major challenging missions of universities: to 
generate new ideas and contribute to the advancement of disciplines through research.
In his seminal book The Structure of Scientific Revolutions, Thomas Kuhn explained 
clearly how researchers and their communities work: ‘Aristotle’s Physica, Ptolemy’s 
Almagest, Newton’s Principia and Opticks, Franklin’s Electricity, Lavoisier’s Chemistry, 
and Lyell’s Geology – these and many other works served for a time implicitly to define 
the legitimate problems and methods of a research field for succeeding generation 
of practitioners’ (Kuhn, (1970: 10). Kuhn identifies two characteristics about the 
achievements of these works: ‘An enduring group of adherents’ and being open-ended, 
thereby leaving many possibilities to be explored by practitioners. Regarding these two 
2
Elon Musk’s space programme, metaverse, artificial intelligence and digital technologies are among those that 
tend to lead today’s agenda. (Footnote added in 2023)On Design
176
characteristics, Kuhn refers to them as paradigms: ‘some accepted examples of actual 
scientific practice’. As he describes it, paradigm reminds us somehow of movements 
and styles in art and design. Although it would require further study to make a direct 
correlation, there are similarities between the active members of research communities, 
whether within a movement, style or paradigm. To illustrate this, I will quote Kuhn again. 
However, I will substitute the word science with art, and the word paradigm with style:
The study of styles (my words) … is what mainly prepares the student for 
membership in the particular artistic community with which he will later practice. 
Because he there joins men who learned the bases of their field from the same 
concrete models, his subsequent practice will seldom evoke overt disagreement 
over fundamentals. Men whose research is based on shared styles are committed 
to the same rules and standards for artistic practice. That commitment and the 
apparent consensus it reproduces are prerequisites for normal art, i.e., for the 
genesis and continuation of a particular research tradition.
(Kuhn, (1970: 11)
Given that it reads well and is not contradictory at all, can we talk about a dominant art 
or design paradigm today? Since postmodernist and deconstructivist discourses faded, 
there is to my knowledge no single strong debate currently prevailing but there are a few. 
In order to portray the situation we can look at universities.
In art and design, the characteristics of certain influential colleges are easily 
distinguishable. However, I find it impossible to claim that certain schools determine 
the debate on current issues, let alone set the agenda. Of course, successful graduates 
represent their institutions perfectly well as alumni once they become practising 
artists and designers. However, this does not necessarily mean that their activities can 
be considered organized research. On the contrary, working as individual artists and 
designers, they pursue their own business and personal objectives.
Theoretically and ideally, academic institutions comprise a community of scholars 
who influence the agenda regarding current issues, create and participate in a discussion 
platform, and undertake research to advance knowledge, particularly in their subject 
specialisms. Therefore, by entering into the research culture through increased publication 
and the proliferation of conferences, art and design colleges have a new responsibility of 
creating and sustaining research programmes and projects. This inevitably leads to the 
establishment of a research agenda. Without strong academic dispute and a dominant 
discourse in art and design, someone like Charles Saatchi3
 feels sufficiently confident to 
behave as an institution, launch a new movement – the so-called Neurotic Realism – and 
set the agenda on his own. Well, at least for a couple of weeks!
3
The Saatchi Gallery exhibits the works of emerging artists, and, as stated on its website, ‘the Gallery acquired 
a strong reputation for introducing artists who would later gain worldwide recognition.’PhD, DFA or Both
177
If we go back to my earlier questions regarding the contribution to knowledge and 
acceptability of research subjects, we can see how an established schema can help. First, 
we can assume that academic staff members will be working on current research issues 
and research proposals outside their interests will not be appropriate and acceptable 
to them. Second, the knowledge to be contributed will probably be defined in terms of 
current issues or the unresolved problematics of the prevalent paradigms that scholars 
deal with. Many PhD subjects will be derived from the needs of this agenda.
To this end, we encounter the necessity and potential power differences between PhDs 
and professional doctorates. We need both due to the functions they fulfil. Institutions 
need PhD students and theoretical research at that level to advance the discipline 
and actively produce its knowledge. Let’s accept that the advancement of a discipline 
cannot be left to fortuitous individual activities only. Rather, this is the essential mission 
of universities and research institutions. The PhD is a means both to contribute to 
knowledge and educate prospective expert researchers.
Professional doctorates, such as DFA, D.Des or D.Art, are new eighth-level degrees 
that are different in nature. The necessities for these degrees are various and perfectly 
justify their presence. Unlike PhDs, their main concern is and should be the advancement 
of knowledge in a practice and the development of highly evolved professional skills and 
research ability as required by industry. No doubt, their contribution to knowledge may 
not be restricted to practice-related issues. However, their main potential is to explore 
the nexus between practice and theory, and thus contribute to knowledge from a very 
fruitful point of view.
Another undeniable opportunity given to candidates wishing to pursue a professional 
doctorate is the choice of subject. The subject matter of research in professional 
doctorates may stem from personal aspirations, whereas PhDs are somehow expected 
to be associated with a current discourse. This greater freedom to define the subject 
encourages creativity and the creation of exceptional works beyond the borders of 
mainstream and conventional PhD research schemes.
While PhDs prioritize improving philosophical, theoretical, historical and 
methodological aspects of a given discipline, advanced professional degrees, such as 
Doctor of Design (D.Des), Doctor of Art, (D.Art) or Doctor of Fine Art (DFA), enable 
students to develop and apply projects and research techniques, and explore their 
relationships with theory and practice within the context of personal work. In light of 
these arguments, I would venture the following short definitions of both categories: a 
PhD is an advanced theoretical research degree mostly for those who wish to pursue 
academic and research careers and contribute to knowledge, especially within a theory. 
A professional doctorate is an advanced practice-based research degree for those who 
wish to improve subject specialism and research skills, pursue an educational and 
professional career, and contribute to knowledge, especially within a practice.
In short, PhDs and professional doctorates fulfil different missions, with neither 
less important than the other. Rather, they complete each other by covering areas not 
covered by the other. Hence, I argue that PhD and D.Des, D.Art., DFA and so on are 
equal degrees with different purposes, emphases and outcomes. Therefore, we need both.CHAPTER 14
TOWARDS AN UNDERSTANDING OF 
PROFESSIONAL DOCTORATES
This chapter was first presented as a paper at the International Conference, ‘Matrix 4: Research in 
Fine Art & Design’, Central Saint Martins College of Art & Design, 5–7 July 1999, London.
14.1 Introduction
The previous chapter discusses the necessity of both PhD and professional degrees. This 
chapter takes the subject further and looks into professional doctorates within the same 
context. As mentioned before, the debate regarding research degrees in art and design 
has exposed an interesting shift towards a refined exploration of the theory–practice 
relationship. This appears even in the proliferation of nomenclature. For example, 
the term ‘studio-based PhD’ has been replaced by ‘practice-based PhD’ to express its 
wider perspective while, a sensitive final touch, political correctness, has offered a more 
promising and appealing suggestion: Practice-led PhD. However, is it really justifiable to 
seek a niche within the established concept of the PhD for the sake of creating room for 
art and design research degrees in which practice plays a key role and the work produced 
has its own nature and capacity? While the ‘traditional’ PhD is available to art and design 
graduates, is it not more enhancing to open another avenue where the full potential 
of theory and practice, and their relationship are rigorously examined by integrating 
theoretical and practical work? This paper explores some aspects of the hidden or 
ignored potentials of professional doctorates. To this end, I will look into
1. PhDs and professional doctorates
2. The academic level of professional doctorates
3. Practice and research
4. The advantages of professional doctorates
5. Factors in assessing work
6. The separation of art and design
14.2 PhDs and professional doctorates
Sir Ron Dearing’s report allocates level 8 for doctorates although it does not define 
qualifications offered at this level (Dearing, 1997: 18). In reality, excluding honorary An Understanding of Professional Doctorates
179
titles, there are two schemes: PhDs and professional doctorates. In recent years, the 
concept of the PhD and the concept of knowledge more generally have been severely 
scrutinized. As a result, a new set of nomenclature has emerged. Although expressions 
like art-practice-based research, studio-based PhD, practice-based PhD and practice￾led PhD are helpful to create a constructive discourse towards transparent definitions, I 
believe they damage and cast a shadow on the concept of the PhD unless it is redefined 
and accepted by the majority with consensus. An article in Connoisseur, titled ‘PhD in 
Pastry’, exemplifies how concepts are consumed in common parlance and exhausted 
carelessly for the sake of an esoteric cover (Kimmer, 1989).
We all know that the way in which we acquire, develop and use knowledge, and the 
way in which we contribute to knowledge are changing, which is in fact manufacturing 
the pressure that we face and the force dragging us towards new programmes. One of 
the ways to deal with this is to question the status quo of the exiting PhD structure 
and reform it as necessary. It is no coincidence that Professor Tim O’Shea (1998) of 
Birkbeck College titled his article ‘How New Technology is Changing the Nature of the 
PhD’ at the Annual Summer Conference of the UK Council for Graduate Education in 
1998. The way that I prefer is to identify the causes, address the issues encountered and 
constitute programmes accordingly. I believe the need for programmes that combine 
practice and theory is so high that there is no need for distorting, extending or reshaping 
the established concept of a PhD. An architect with a PhD degree is not necessarily a 
better architect than one who has not – likewise for artists. A PhD is not a licence for 
better practice or better practical work but an advanced study for research and scholarly 
activity.
What we are actually doing is restructuring the highest level of education in the wake 
of current developments. Therefore, if there are reasons, causes and needs to create 
programmes to improve the quality of practical work, we should not hesitate to propose 
them. I think professional doctorates are well situated for these purposes. A higher 
education programme composed of PhD and professional doctorates is not new at all. 
For example, Harvard University has a system in which a Doctor of Design is considered 
advanced professional research. They describe the scheme with clarity:
The program leading to the degree Doctor of Design (DDes) offers advanced study 
and research in the design disciplines of the built and natural environments. It 
is intended for persons who have already mastered professional skills and who 
seek to make original contributions to their fields. At the same level of academic 
standards as the PhD program, the DDes program focuses on applied research and 
emphasizes the advance of knowledge in the design disciplines.
(GSD, 1999: 39)
I think the distinction between the PhD and the professional doctorate should be 
drawn as follows. A PhD is basically an advanced theoretical research degree, designed 
mostly for those who wish to pursue academic and research careers. Therefore, its On Design
180
essential contribution to knowledge is often achieved at a theoretical level and mostly 
by means of theory, although this may vary from one discipline to another. Although 
the knowledge produced is generic, it is not unusual to witness the advancement of a 
particular discipline, especially regarding theoretical and philosophical matters. Within 
this perspective, the professional doctorate is also an advanced degree based on research 
that combines practice and theory, and is mostly for those who wish to improve their 
subject specialism and research skills, and pursue educational and professional careers. 
Here again, the contribution to knowledge is essential and achieved often within a 
practice and by means of practice and its theorization and contextualization. As opposed 
to PhDs, the knowledge produced is discipline and, in some cases, profession specific. 
Hence, it is fair to say that the advancement is accomplished for a particular profession 
and/or discipline, especially for knowledge concerning practice and practical matters. 
This by no means rules out the possibility of producing generic knowledge through 
professional doctorates. On the contrary, it is highly possible that the proactive and 
interrelated process of theory and practice relationship may yield results in both areas 
rather than one.
14.3 Academic level of professional doctorates
I suggest that the level of professional doctorates is doubted for two main reasons. Firstly, 
many people are cautious about professional doctorates because of prejudice regarding 
their status. A booklet by the UK Council for Graduate Education addresses this 
explicitly: it reads: ‘There is … debate as to whether they (that is, professional doctorates) 
are superior or inferior to the PhD depending on the subject, institution and recipient’ 
(UKCGE, 1997: 25). This idea that professional doctorates cannot be considered equal 
to PhDs understandably makes artists and designers reluctant to register for these 
programmes. A consultation paper circulated by the Quality Assurance Agency makes 
the following statement about allocating doctoral titles for works not containing original 
research: ‘Awards at doctoral level for work other than original research (or an artefact or 
other form of work accompanied by a written explanation that is examined) should use 
doctoral titles other than PhD (for example, DMus)’ (QAA, 1998: 8). Whether covertly 
or overtly, this supports the impression that because professional doctorates may not 
be as original as PhDs or not include original research, they are not at the same level. I 
believe that a work at level 8 must contain original research and contribute to knowledge, 
whether as a doctorate or PhD. The difference between the two is not and should not 
be a question of the originality of the research but the way in which the knowledge 
is generated. What makes professional doctorates different to PhDs is the way they 
build and contribute to knowledge. This is the real merit and the value of professional 
doctorates that makes them both distinctive and justifiable. By the same token, the 
incentives rendering professional doctorates desirable emerge from the characteristics 
of a research process that incorporates a dialectical and reciprocal relationship between 
theoretical and practical components.An Understanding of Professional Doctorates
181
The second reason stems from the novelty of the scheme. No one knows yet what a 
professional doctorate will mean in the art and design world. Therefore, it appears rather 
comfortable for many applicants to take refuge in and benefit from the established status 
of PhDs rather than struggle to raise the status of the new research degree. I think these 
two points, that is, the position of professional doctorates with reference to PhDs and the 
endeavour of building a status from scratch, should not be deterrents for those aiming at 
long-term benefits. The real danger is to jeopardize the concept of the PhD for the sake 
of expanding its scope to accommodate work, which is different in nature.
14.4 Practice and research
Although the following chapter is to concentre on the relationship between practice and 
research, I would like to touch upon a few key aspects here. The connection between 
research and practice is often confused. Practice that intrinsically incorporates research 
encourages the idea that doctorates can be achieved by practice only. This has already 
been ruled out, as Nigel Cross observes: ‘I do not see how normal works of practice can 
be regarded as works of research. The whole point of doing research is to extract reliable 
knowledge from either the natural or artificial world, and to make that knowledge 
available to others in re-usable form’ (Cross, 1998: Editorial). Clive Dilnot agrees: ‘Design 
practice per se is not research since its practice is not oriented, in the first instance, 
to knowledge. But this does not mean that practice cannot become knowledge (1999b: 
86). Here, intention is the key factor that determines the outcome. Therefore, one of the 
aspects of professional doctorates consolidating the distinctive position of this degree is 
to develop methods to acquire and build knowledge derived from practice, which may 
not be within the framework of PhDs.
14.5 Advantages of professional doctorates
The possibility of advanced research in art and design has already motivated both 
industry and education. A few indicators of anxiety, interest and enthusiasm regarding 
this are the rising quality of theoretical debate, the increased number of conferences, 
and national and international enquiries for MPhil/PhD programmes. In the longer 
run, art and design will have their share and be influenced distinctly. Optimists such as 
myself unreservedly expect a sudden rise in quality and a surprising diversity of practical 
work and theory in the near future. Some advantages of professional doctorates are the 
following:
1. Stronger links, cooperation and collaboration with industry and education.
2. Development of practice and professional work.
3. Sustainable exploration of the relationship between theory, practice and 
communication.On Design
182
4. Emergence of a new category of educators belonging to neither history and 
theory nor the studio team of the traditional academic duality, but operating in 
between and possibly bridging the gap.
5. Steady advancement of knowledge of/on/in/for practice.
6. Unique and distinct contribution to theoretical knowledge by means of and 
through practice.
7. Encouragement of new research, works and products as well as their discourse.
14.6 A few points to consider regarding the assessment of work
The final submission in professional doctorates normally contains two major elements, 
written and practical work, so assessment should inevitably focus on this duality. During 
the assessment, responses will probably cover the following areas, either in a written 
format as part of the dissertation and report or in the viva voce.
1. Justification of the practical work or research taking place in an academic 
institution.
2. Explanation of the relationship between theoretical and practical elements, 
which could be:
i. Complimentary
ii. Exploration of the theory
iii.Application of the theory
iv. Theorization of the practical work
3. Documentation of the process as a component of practical work.
4. Contextualization of the practical work.
5. Identification of problems or potential problems for future study.
6. Presentation of the major findings and demonstration of their contribution to 
knowledge.
14.7 Separation of art and design
One of the consequences of introducing professional doctorates appears to be an 
ultimate yet maybe unavoidable dissolution of the art and design marriage, which is not 
inauspicious. There is no need to mention that independence offers promises for both 
of them. The first indication is that separate titles for doctorates, such as DA (Doctor 
of Art), DFA (Doctor of Fine Art) or DDes (Doctor of Design), evokes the apparently 
still unresolved question of knowledge. I assume that we will be heavily involved with An Understanding of Professional Doctorates
183
the question of knowledge in art and design over the next decade. With reference to 
Clive Dilnot’s Ohio paper, I would argue that knowledge about art is different from 
art knowledge. Knowledge about art, such as art history and theory, is derived from 
artworks and the results of artistic actions. Art knowledge is derived from the process, 
means and artistic action itself. This is different from both knowledge about art and 
also knowledge of methods, techniques and materials. Whether it springs from invisible 
sources of inspiration, vision and interpretation, the art knowledge that generates 
artworks needs to be identified if we stick to the concept of knowledge developed by 
the scientific research tradition. If we don’t, which is likely to be the case, we face the 
daunting task of defining art knowledge.
Of course, design is not exempt from this knowledge-defining process. Despite their 
cognitive characteristics, no one can convince me that art knowledge resembles design 
knowledge. Therefore, I speculate that C. P. Snow’s famous book, The Two Cultures, may 
be rewritten as The Three Cultures at the beginning of the twenty-first century. While I 
may be a reader of this one day, I certainly will not be the author.CHAPTER 15
A THRESHOLD WHERE THEORY AND 
PRACTICE CONGREGATE FORTUITOUSLY
This chapter was first presented as a paper at The UK Council for Graduate Education Annual 
Summer Conference 1999, 14–15 July, Leeds Metropolitan University.
As the previous two chapters indicate, the debate about doctorates in art and design 
has created great enthusiasm and interest, with particular attention to practice-based 
doctorate programmes in the last years of the twentieth century. This chapter is an 
attempt to clarify further the basic arguments concerning doctoral programmes.
Artists and designers who believe their practice is research, or incorporates a great 
deal of research, question the nature of PhDs, demanding academic recognition of 
their activities as the core aspect of their programme. In other words, the duality of 
theory and practice, and their balance or proportion, is the key issue dominating the 
dispute. The relationship between theoretical and practical work, and their composition 
and weighting, raise the question of whether they belong in the category of PhDs or 
professional doctorates. This question falls into the contentious area described by 
the booklet on practice-based doctorates, published by the UK Council for Graduate 
Education (UK Council, 1997). Having attended five conferences and delivered three 
papers on the subject in the 1998–99 academic year, I would like to attempt to present a 
coherent scenario.
First, I note that the desire to achieve a PhD with a substantial amount of practical 
work has led to an inflation of expressions, including the following, which are widely 
used today in the UK:
1. Art and practice-based research
2. Studio-based PhD
3. Practice-based PhD
4. Practice-led PhD
In Australia, the Ohio papers show that the following phrases are used, although they are 
also considering ‘work-based learning programs at the doctorate level’ (Caban, 1998).
1. Practice-based learning
2. Cooperative education
3. Work-based learningA Threshold Where Theory and Practice Congregate
185
However, this diversity is both confusing and considerably damaging to the concept of 
the PhD. Trying to introduce practice as the basis of research while renaming existing 
PhDs accordingly is problematic. Being aware of the problem and using existing practice 
in music as a precedent, the UK Council booklet suggests an ‘inclusive’ method, which 
is a strategy that accommodates practice-based art and design research for a PhD degree 
award. At first sight, this looks fine because all practice-based research is included 
under the single title of PhD by revising the concept in light of new developments, 
thereby avoiding the current proliferation of titles. However, despite seeming simple 
and workable, this strategy is detrimental in the long term because it jeopardizes the 
established understanding of a PhD. The reason is obvious: not all practice-based research 
proposals are appropriate within the scope of a PhD. Hence, their inclusion in such 
programmes creates unavoidable ambiguity as to what a PhD is. Instead, considering the 
balance of theory and practice, as well as the intention of the project proposal, may help 
to define a suitable structure for the highest level of study.
I believe that level eight, which comprises PhDs and professional doctorates, provides 
a good combination of degrees in which to locate the vast variety of research projects. 
For comparison, we can briefly list the following major attributes of PhD:
1. Advanced study programme
2. Mostly theory-based research
3. Theorization and/or contextualization of applied or practice-based research
4. Contribution to (mostly theoretical) knowledge of a discipline
5. For academic and research careers
A professional doctorate has a slightly different emphasis, including the following basic 
characteristics:
1. Advanced study programme
2. Mostly practice-based research
3. Theorization and/or contextualization of applied or practice-based research
4. Contribution to (mostly practical) knowledge of a discipline
5. For educational, professional and research careers
These concise definitions strongly prioritize the threshold where theory and practice 
congregate fortuitously. The PhD is the right programme if theory, theoretical research 
and the thesis form the main body of work. I believe practical work should not account 
for over 40 per cent of a reasonable work for a PhD, so the theoretical part should be 
60 per cent. Although I do not like the idea of limiting and defining written and practical 
work with word counts and percentages, I am not courageous enough to deny their 
descriptive power. Thus, a PhD thesis should probably be in the region of 60–80,000 
words, depending on the weighting of the practical work.
For professional doctorates, the ideal proportion can be 50 per cent practice and 
50 per cent theory; this is because the principle of the equal participation of the equals On Design
186
should be applied here to give the right power to both parties. Within this spectrum, a 
thesis with substantial theoretical research appears appropriate for PhDs whereas a thesis 
balancing theory and practice represents the ideal duality for professional doctorates. 
The question is the minimum percentage of theoretical work essential for doctorates. 
It should probably not be less than 40 per cent while the word count should be about 
30–40,000, as specified in the booklet mentioned above.
I think that allocating the PhD mostly for theoretical academic research without any 
suffix or prefix while allocating the doctorate scheme mostly for professional practice￾based research with an identified subject specialism makes clear the differences besides 
incorporating many contentious areas within a simple and coherent structure. However, 
there are a few points to emphasize. First, both degrees are equal at level eight but 
designed to serve distinct functions, as required by various circles such as academia, 
business, industry and so on. Given the importance of equality, the worry is that one 
degree might be superior to another, which would lead to them being treated differently. 
Unfortunately, the booklet on practice-based doctorates does not take a clear stand, but 
in reading between the lines, this is the case: ‘There is debate as to whether they (that is, 
professional doctorates) are superior or inferior to the PhD depending on the subject, 
institution and recipient’ (UKCGE, 1997: 25).
One way of resolving this problem is to introduce clear definitions, a common 
understanding of PhD and professional doctorates, quality assurance and high 
standards. The QAA has published a booklet on the subject, entitled ‘Code of Practice 
for the Assurance of Academic Quality and Standards in Higher Education’. However, 
the real test of quality and equality will emerge from the works of those graduates who 
set a precedent.
Second, degrees contribute to knowledge but not always with similar means. 
Professional doctorates aim at advancing the knowledge in/for/on/by practice for 
a particular discipline whereas PhDs are concerned with generic knowledge, as 
Professor Frayling explained at the Matrix Conference in 1999. Again, what I find 
unhelpful for this argument is, as mentioned in a previous chapter, a consultation paper 
circulated by the Quality Assurance Agency, which does allocate the doctoral title for 
those works not containing original research (QAA, 1998). Ensuring quality should 
not mean sacrificing the principle of contributing to knowledge or the originality of 
work at level eight, where PhDs and other forms of doctorates are situated by Sir Ron 
Dearing’s Report.
Third, there has been concern about the proliferation of degree titles. In last year’s 
Annual Summer Conference papers, Lucy Thorne, for example, listed fifty-one different 
doctoral titles awarded in the United States and commented that ‘The American model 
of a plethora of doctoral titles did not augur well and this may lead to undesirable 
qualification inflation’ (Thorne, 1998: 51).
Although I sympathize with her concern, I do not worry about the number of 
qualifications, providing that the work produced is sufficiently high quality. While the 
proliferation of degree titles will undoubtedly attract more people to apply for such 
programmes, this does not mean that the standard will decrease. Instead, it means that A Threshold Where Theory and Practice Congregate
187
the areas of interest defined by these new titles are carefully tailored to the needs of 
specific industries and people. Hence, the real question does not concern qualification 
inflation but qualification quality, which should not be compromised at all. Hence, I 
insist that originality and contribution to knowledge should remain among the main 
criteria for a doctorate level.
Concerns about inflation can also be linked to the question of subject matter in 
doctorates. Will this possibility of launching doctorates under distinct titles lead 
to various subjects being proposed without solid ground? Or, are there currently 
unrecognized subjects, professions or disciplines that have accumulated sufficient 
knowledge in theory and practice to instigate substantial scrutiny at the doctorate 
level? Professor Hugh H. Genoways responded to these questions from his particular 
profession’s perspective in ‘Museum Studies Programs are not Prepared for the Ph.D.’ 
(1996). One of his justifications for this judgemental title is that ‘we have not created a 
body of scholarly knowledge sufficient to support a doctoral program’ (Genoways, 1996: 
7). The reasonable corollary of this is that investigating any body of scholarly knowledge 
requires a scientific method. This understanding corresponds to the second assumption 
of two controversial approaches, as identified by the UK Council booklet:
Every subject can give rise to a PhD award,
OR
Only those subjects where the ‘scientific method’ can be applied in reasonably 
direct form should give rise to a PhD.
(UKCGE, 1997: 9)
Again, one could argue that museum studies may have not created a body of scholarly 
knowledge yet. However, they have solid professional knowledge which may now need 
advancement thanks to the subject’s growing significance, which professional doctorates 
could certainly address. Hence, I could stress, in line with the structure of the two options 
in doctorates, that the first assumption may well be addressed by professional doctorates 
whereas the second is reserved for PhDs, as suggested. To this end, assuming that many 
subjects can give rise to professional doctorates, there are a few reasons why professional 
doctorates should not use a general title such as DProf.
First, it reminds me immediately of the award of a PhD because it emphasizes 
generality. The generality and resemblance of these titles underestimate the different 
nature of professional doctorates and the characteristics of each individual subject 
specialism. Thus, I fear that DProf as a single degree title will be vulnerable to direct 
comparison with PhDs, and possibly based on criteria that are not applicable to both.
One of the reasons to identify the subject area within the title is that professional 
doctorates are linked to a discipline, so the practical research conducted should naturally 
reflect this. For example, the DDes, that is, Doctor of Design, perfectly represents the 
qualification level and subject specialism, as well as highlighting that this is a degree On Design
188
that combines practice and theory. The communication of the title is simple, clear and 
decisive.
Another reason is that professional doctorates are the ultimate extension of professional 
study programmes so it is not unusual to have as many professional doctorates as BA 
(Hons) degrees. If we deny this, we deny the discipline-oriented and profession – and 
practice-based approach of the doctorate programme, which is its essence, is it not?
There are other advantages worth mentioning. As opposed to the rigid academic 
research approach of PhD programmes, professional doctorates supply students 
with a flexible scheme within which a variety of projects can be launched. Especially 
in art and design, where personal projects have particular meaning and aspirations 
for their realization are high, it is essential that the programme is flexible and allows 
wider exploration of the subject.1
 Therefore professional doctorates operating on the 
intersection between theory and practice promise new perspectives in art and design 
that likely lead towards work that is both new and full of potential.
1
Katy Macleod’s paper reveals these when she states, ‘What this study uncovered was the postgraduate Fine Art 
student’s anxiety about centring the research firmly within his/her art practice’ (1998: 33).CHAPTER 16
INDUSTRIAL DESIGN IN TURKEY
A NEW AGENDA (REWRITTEN WITH AREN EMRE 
KURTGÖZÜ IN 2023)
The first version of this paper was published as ‘Industrial Design in Turkey: Agenda’, in G. Türkoğlu 
Akay, ed. (1988), Designers’ Odyssey 98, exhibition catalogue, Istanbul: ETMK publication. This 
paper was revised, updated and rewritten with Aren Emre Kurtgözü in 2023.
16.1 The rise of industrial design
Industrial design in Turkey has advanced significantly since the beginning of the twenty-first 
century due to many factors. I make a list of them in no particular order of importance. The 
first is the significant increase in the number of designers, industrial design departments, 
graduate and postgraduate programmes, design offices and design competitions
Second, rising media diversity and expansion including conferences, fairs/exhibitions, 
design weeks, design publications, magazines, journals and TV programmes have all 
contributed to a growing interest in and awareness of design.
Third, the activities of the Industrial Designers’ Society of Turkey (ETMK), established 
in 1988, have also raised design awareness and expanded recognition and appreciation 
of the profession through conferences, seminars, workshops, exhibitions and a design 
award scheme.
Fourth, the sector of design and design activities was growing at the beginning of the 
twenty-first century by the demand due to economic developments, such as an increase 
in per capita income, the emergence of a new middle class with substantial purchasing 
power and investment in housing, new interiors and furniture.
Fifth, changing shopping habits in Turkey have resulted in reliable domestic markets for 
mass-produced and high-quality consumer goods for those who can afford them. Supermarket 
chains and shopping malls, including international ventures, have opened across the country, 
changing the whole structure of the culture of purchasing and consumption. The products of 
global brands and designer goods have become available to the public in giant new shopping 
centres, where high-income groups can satisfy their consumption needs.
Sixth, newly enacted legislation due to the European Customs Union (1996) and 
the efforts of the Turkish Patent Institute (1994) ended the ‘free’ era of unlicensed 
production of designed goods (that is, copying). This has increased the demand for 
new designs. Meanwhile, Turkey’s industry has penetrated international markets with 
globally competitive consumer goods and realized the importance of original design as 
an essential element of competitiveness.
Accordingly, growing numbers of industrial designers, including some recognized 
internationally, are confidently designing and producing in many sectors: white goods, On Design
190
electrical appliances, brown goods, electronics, communication systems, information 
technology, domestic and office furniture, packaging, ceramics and glass, textiles, 
leather, transport and automotive industries, lighting, kitchen apparatus and utensils, 
cutlery and so on. There are designers specialized in certain fields such as Alev Ebüzziya 
Siesbye in ceramics, Oya Akman in glass, Orhan Irmak and Gamze Güven in packaging 
design. Adnan Serbest, Aziz and Derin Sarıyer, Faruk and Koray Malhan are among 
those designers, well-known for their furniture works. There are also designers operating 
in various areas such as Ali Bakova, Can Yalman, Ece Yalım, Erdem Akan, Kunter 
Şekercioğlu, Meriç Kara, Şule Koç, Tamer Nakışçı and Ümit Altun to name but a few. A 
few highly regarded industrial designers live abroad with close links with Turkey such as 
Ayse Birsel, Defne Koz, Koray Özgen and Mirzat Koç. Obviously, this is an indicative list 
giving an idea about the dimensions and variety of industrial design practices in Turkey, 
which has interesting other features worth investigating briefly.
16.2 Industrial design departments
Industrial design (ID) as a discipline was first discovered by educationists and incorporated 
into academic programmes long before the industry realized its significance. One of the 
results of this early discovery was an unplanned burden on the ID departments that 
found themselves before the industry, arguing for the importance of industrial design 
and the potential benefits of adopting it. In their formation years, departments somehow 
felt responsible for the employment of their graduates and tried to secure strong ties 
with the industry. For industrial placement, summer practice in a factory was a good 
vehicle for students and industrialists to get to know each other. Departments also 
organized design exhibitions before design weeks were launched in 2002. The Italian 
Design Exhibition in 1980 was not a big one, but it was very effective in demonstrating 
what industrial design is. Designers’ Odyssey 1994 and 1998 were two statement-making 
exhibitions and conferences where young Turkish industrial designers began to gain 
confidence in the quality of their work.
The first ID department was launched at the Higher School of Applied Industrial 
Arts (today’s Mimar Sinan Fine Arts University, Istanbul) by Önder Küçükermen in 
1971 (Küçükerman, 2021). Mehmet Asatekin is responsible for the establishment of the 
Department of Industrial Product Design, at Middle East Technical University, Faculty 
of Architecture, in Ankara, in 1979 (Asatekin, 2006; Hasdoğan, 2021). Chronologically 
speaking, two professors, Şermin Alyanak and Nigan Bayazıt, founded the third and 
the fourth departments. Alyanak established the Department of Industrial Product 
Design at Marmara University in 1985 while Bayazıt launched her Department of 
Industrial Product Design1
 at Istanbul Technical University in 1993 (Bayazıt, 2006). 
1
Many product design departments were established in the twenty-first century in Turkey. When established 
these departments were named as industrial design, industrial product design, industry design and so on. The 
Higher Education Council in Turkey stepped in 2020 and adopted industrial design as a generic title and asked 
the existing departments to change their names accordingly if needed.Industrial Design in Turkey
191
Following these initial attempts, design education has flourished rapidly in this century 
as both state and private universities opened new programmes, with the number of 
ID departments today having reached thirty-three. As a result, this relatively new 
profession has been widely recognized, and thousands of designers began to operate 
in various fields as in-house designers, company owners, freelance designers and 
academicians. Some researchers have found opportunities to complete their PhDs 
abroad, while some designers worked overseas and got international recognition. 
Reputable names like John Heskett, Bruce Archer, John Langrish, Guy Julier and Clive 
Dilnot are among those who were somehow involved in Turkish design education 
through conferences, seminars and supervision of MA and PhD works of Turkish 
students, and later became important figures in the field of industrial design. In this 
respect, the following section is a short introduction to academic works demonstrating 
the changing trends in research.
16.3 Industrial design academia
Until the late 1980s, academic studies were pursued, and the degrees obtained by 
the ID graduates were mainly from MSc programmes in architecture and PhDs in 
building science. Most of these postgraduate studies were addressing such hard￾science topics as ergonomics and user models, as well as some case-based explorations 
of particular design methods (such as scenario building) or materials. The rationale 
behind the choice of subject matter was not arbitrary. When the ID departments were 
first established, they were, and some still are, institutionally located within faculties 
of architecture. The well-established postgraduate programmes in architecture were 
the closest option available to the young staff of ID departments in need of academic 
promotion. Hence, those hard-scientific, positivist topics were probably considered 
the common ground between the two disciplines in the formative years. Some works 
of Asatekin (1975, 1976), Bayazıt (1984, 1987) and Küçükerman (1978) fall into this 
category.
The second decade of scholarship in ID, beginning in the early 1990s, was a period 
of expansion and discovery of new territories, new subjects and topics as well as newly 
identified issues coming to prominence. On one hand, we saw a considerable number 
of academics focusing on design management, design thinking and design methods 
in a very rigorous sense; on the other hand, an equal number of academics undertook 
graduate studies in such areas as semiotics (product semantics included), cultural 
studies, material culture and anthropology. In addition to this plethora of interests, a 
small number of academics broached a fresh concern with design history, theory and 
criticismas we see in the publications of N. Bayazıt (1984, 1987, 2006), S.B. Çelikel 
(2015), A. Er (1995, 1997, 2003), Ö. Er (1997, 2006) G. Hasdoğan (1994, 2009), A. 
O. İlhan (2016), H. Kaygan (2008, 2016, 2019) and so on. Overall, this was a decade 
characterized by an unbridled pursuit of interdisciplinary work, with academics crossing 
boundaries in order to find useful substance to be adopted and claimed for the newly On Design
192
emerging discipline of ID. Compared to the previous decades, this was also a period that 
saw the majority of ID academics acquiring their postgraduate degrees from abroad, that 
is, graduate programmes in Europe and the United States.
The period since the early 2000s has been one of disciplinary consolidation and 
full integration into the global ID academia. Firstly, academics pursuing postgraduate 
degrees in ID have found an array of available topics ready to be explored, which had 
become indigenous to the discipline. Contrary to the previous decade, these topics were 
not imported from different disciplines; they were, rather, born into the field of design 
in the first place and became specialist topics in the discipline of ID, such as designing 
for emotions, usability and user experience, and unprecedented attention given to 
the local histories of ID in the periphery. The works of N. A. G. Z. Börekçi (2015), F. 
Korkut, A. E. Kurtgözü (2003), A. C. Özcan (2009) and Ş. Timur (2009) are amongst 
good examples. Transdisciplinary crossings have not diminished, however. We have 
seen the growing popularity of ANT (actor-network theory) and phenomenological and 
post-phenomenological inquiries into design problems and user interactions. Secondly, 
the ID academia in Turkey has become an integral part of the global academic world 
through the international presence of Turkish academics as well as international events 
and conferences organized and held in Turkey.
16.4 The gender balance
One of the unusual aspects of industrial design in Turkey is the gender balance. Women 
industrial and product designers are rather rare in the Western world unlike in Turkey 
where the number of male and female designers are almost equal. Likely, the equilibrium 
is still the same when reputable designers are concerned. Roughly speaking, the number 
of famous women industrial designers is not less than that of men as is apparent in the 
list of designers given earlier. The high number of female students in ID departments 
results possibly from a misconception and misunderstanding that industrial design is a 
profession similar to architecture and interiors, and therefore suitable for women. The 
chief factor creating this prejudice is that ID departments have been institutionally set up 
either under the faculty of architecture or fine arts. Therefore, many students and their 
families do not notice the engineering aspects of the curriculum where metal workshops 
equipped with machinery are part of the course. Apparently, once registered, female 
students stick tightly to the programme and become as successful as male students. 
The research on gender balance in Turkish higher education indicates that the gap has 
vanished among undergraduates. The more interesting fact is that female students have 
lower drop-out rates than male students (Seskir, 2017).
We come across the same balance situation in educational institutions where female 
academicians are well-represented and, in some cases, even outnumber their male colleagues. 
This observation is also valid in some other design fields. For example, in the fashion world, 
famous female designers are well-represented despite a strong male presence. We encounter 
a similar situation in Turkey where designers like Arzu Kaprol, Bahar Korçan, Dice Kayek, Industrial Design in Turkey
193
İdil Tarzi and Özlem Süer are some of the key female figures keeping the gender balance 
intact. I think the problem in gender balance surfaces when administrative and managerial 
posts are concerned. For instance, there are 131 state universities and only five of them are 
governed by female rectors. No need to say that none of them are designers.
16.5 The present situation
Despite many success stories, unfortunately, the economic and political situation 
has changed substantially in recent years. According to the World Bank, developing 
countries face a middle-income trap whereby per capita gross national product has 
remained between $1,000 and $12,000 at constant prices. The OECD’s 2019 report also 
directed our attention to the squeezed middle class (OECD, 2019). Income inequality 
has increased, while, more recently, the Covid-19 pandemic has severely damaged small 
businesses. During the pandemic in Turkey, the government did not support the small 
industry with proper measures. Designers were among those hit most firmly.
During the revision of this chapter, on 6 February 2023, Turkey witnessed a devastating 
series of earthquakes in her southeast region where ten cities were hit severely and ruined 
almost totally. Thousands of people were killed and wounded, buildings collapsed one 
after the other and containers in the port of Iskenderun caught fire and burned emanating 
heavy smoke. While rescue operations are continuing, the state announced a week-long 
nationwide mourning for the victims of the earthquake. Although this is not the place 
to discuss it further, the dimensions of this disaster are immense. The issue from our 
viewpoint is that the southeast region has a well-established, traditional craft and design￾based industry, which was definitely affected, and its negative outcomes are yet to be felt.
Although we can now talk about an established design culture in Turkey, we 
cannot ignore the consequences of natural disasters and current economic stagnation. 
In addition to the impact of the Covid-19 pandemic, sharp currency fluctuations, 
inappropriate economic measures, high inflation, corruption and political and economic 
turmoil seriously threaten Turkish designer initiatives and businesses just before the 
2023 general elections. For example, the Design Week Istanbul, the Design Biennale 
and Turkey Design Award Scheme were cancelled in 2022. Based on these recent 
developments, one may say that the future of industrial design in Turkey is uncertain at 
present and less bright than a decade ago.
Nevertheless, it is necessary to forecast the future despite current negative 
circumstances although it may remain speculative until crucial economic and social 
problems are resolved. Instead, I would encourage all parties to prepare and participate 
in the following action plan to enhance design in Turkey, redrafted for today’s conditions.
16.6 A draft action plan for the development of industrial design in Turkey
I have identified four key areas for the action plan and specified the subjects and 
problems, made suggestions and indicated potential actors. Needless to say, you can On Design
194
add, extract, cut, paste, correct, retype, copy and circulate this action plan as you wish. 
Whatever you do, however, please think about it, develop it, publicize it and fight for it.
Many thanks.
Subjects Problems Suggestions Actors
1. Institutionalization
Design policy and 
strategy of Turkey
One of the main 
weaknesses is the lack of 
a clear-cut design policy 
and strategy applied by 
the state, known about 
and followed by the 
industry and businesses. 
Unsurprisingly, each party 
is currently trying to find 
its own way by trial and 
error.
As a first step, an 
independent committee 
of qualified members 
representing various interest 
groups and parties should 
be appointed to study and 
work on the subject with 
the purpose of developing 
a draft document to put 
before the public for further 
discussion.
Government
Design associations 
Chamber of architects
Business
Universities
Patent office
Industry
Research centres
Design Council
(an organization 
promoting design)
There have been attempts 
to establish a design council 
in Turkey; a few meetings 
have been organized and 
ministers have delivered 
speeches. However, it 
has not been as effective 
as its UK equivalent, 
which promotes design, 
introduces it to the wider 
public, helps medium and 
small-scale firms to develop 
a design perspective, 
supports design projects, 
links industry with 
education, produces 
publications and so on.
The present Turkish Design 
Consultancy Council (Türk 
Tasarım Danışma Konseyi) 
must be restructured as a 
powerful and independent 
body run by an executive 
board reporting to a 
board of governors who 
represent designers and 
design associations, the 
government, universities, 
research centres, the 
patent office, industry and 
business. 
Government
Design associations 
Chambers of 
architects
Business
Universities
Patent Office
Industry
Research centres
Design Museum
(an organization 
collecting and presenting 
design among other 
related activities)
The lack of any design 
museums is a major 
problem, as these are 
essential to enhance 
design ideas, visions and 
perspectives, apart from 
their educational and 
archival functions. 
An independent body 
should be formed to 
undertake this project, 
whether a private initiative 
or a consortium of related 
parties.
Government
Patent Office
Industry
Universities
Industrial designers’ 
associations
Individual sponsors 
and collectors
Design Association: 
Chamber of Industrial 
Designers
(an organization 
representing designers)
While the ETMK’s efforts 
are appreciated, they 
should be expanded by 
giving it legal authority 
and status regarding 
professional conduct and 
the formal representation 
of designers. 
A more powerful, legally 
and financially well￾established, professional 
and influential organization, 
with the support of the 
design community, is 
greatly needed. A Chamber 
of Industrial Designers must 
be seriously considered.
Designers
Design associationsIndustrial Design in Turkey
195
Subjects Problems Suggestions Actors
Design libraries There are a few design￾oriented libraries belonging 
to private initiatives, design 
businesses and offices. 
More are needed in major 
cities, especially where 
local design is expected to 
flourish.
Municipalities may take 
the lead in their region to 
allocate a dedicated space 
for design libraries of any 
size. The main purpose 
is to promote design and 
innovation by making 
quality design more widely 
known to the public.
Municipalities
Design businesses
Design offices
Designers (by 
donating archives, 
books, journals and 
so on)
Design literature Although the level of 
academic and popular 
design publications is 
satisfactory, the inadequate 
number of Turkish design 
books on various aspects 
of design is concerning. 
Understandably, since the 
market is limited with little 
chance of making a profit, 
publishers mostly avoid 
design books.
Although consumption 
power is not currently 
promising, Turkish design 
books should be available 
for the public, educators 
and professionals as much 
as textbooks for students. 
Academicians
Researchers
Writers
Publishers
Design awards Awards are essential to 
encourage designers and 
increase competition. 
Design Turkey’s awards 
scheme is a successful 
project that must continue. 
However, more nationwide 
awards are needed on 
specific aspects of design.
The other issue is the 
prestige of awards because 
there are weak or fake ones 
as well as internationally 
acknowledged excellent 
schemes around the 
world. It is therefore time 
to question the standard 
and quality of awards to 
identify the ones that are 
highly respected rather 
than those which are 
merely established to 
make a business out of an 
award scheme for which 
participants pay money to 
get their award.
Design industry and 
business can further expand 
the awards system and 
create a prestigious Best 
Design Award scheme. 
Competitions are currently 
announced across many 
areas while the awards are 
only given to participants. 
In contrast, the Best Design 
Award scheme suggested 
here would operate 
nationwide to identify the 
best designs regardless of 
whether the designers are 
applied. Although it would 
be hard to identify the best 
designs if their creators 
failed to submit their work 
to the jury, it is the only way 
to create a respectable and 
independent award-giving 
body.
Design business
Municipalities
Design associations
(Continued)On Design
196
Subjects Problems Suggestions Actors
2. Education
Design education While there are dedicated 
ID departments, the 
following areas require 
further curriculum 
development:
new teaching and learning 
methods and techniques, 
including distance learning 
with or without online 
systems and self-assessment 
and quality assurance 
schemes, research, 
feedback mechanisms and 
collaboration.
Actions can include 
feedback mechanisms 
from graduates; integrated 
approaches between 
design departments, 
more collaborative and 
joint projects with other 
departments, institutions 
and industry;
more live projects and 
intense dialogue with 
students, well-prepared 
project briefs and system 
designs;
emphasis on creativity, 
innovation and design 
identity;
further understanding 
of people and society 
as well as technology, 
methods, materials and 
communication.
Administrators
Educators
Academics
Scholars
Designers
Graduates and 
students
Design awareness, 
recognition and 
appreciation
There is a need to educate 
industry, business and 
exporters since industrial 
design, while recognized, 
is not wholly appreciated 
or supported yet. 
Consolidation is the next 
stage. 
Those sectors that are 
not sensitive to design 
and far from appreciating 
designers can be identified 
and a special awareness￾raising programme can be 
implemented.
Government
Patent office
University design 
departments
Professional bodies
Other design 
associations
Design awareness, 
recognition and 
appreciation
There is a need to 
educate the state and 
other governmental and 
administrative authorities 
since design is not well 
recognized or exclusively 
valued and supported by 
local or regional councils, 
and many state authorities.
State offices and local 
councils should consider 
employing designers just as 
they employ architects. 
Government
Patent office
University design 
departments
Professional bodies
Other design 
associations
Design awareness, 
recognition and 
appreciation
There is a need to educate 
the public. Although 
‘design’, ‘dizayn’ and 
‘tasarım’ are used in public, 
these terms are frequently 
worn out, flattened, 
misused or insufficiently 
impactful.
Precautions should be taken 
against overusing the term. 
One way is to continuously 
discuss the changing 
meanings of design, update 
the public and put the new 
use into practice. 
Designers
Media
Institutions and
associations Industrial Design in Turkey
197
Subjects Problems Suggestions Actors
Design awareness, 
recognition and 
appreciation
Clients need educating 
as many lack a clear 
design understanding or 
workable brief. Clients 
also prefer to reduce or 
avoid design costs, which 
leads to dissatisfaction and 
complaints from designers.
In addition to normal 
business meetings, designers 
should spend more time 
properly informing their 
clients about recent 
progress in design, design 
management, designer￾customer relationships and 
so on.
Designers
Design businesses
Design offices
Design consultants
Design awareness, 
recognition and 
appreciation
Children need educating, 
but there are no design￾related teaching units in 
either primary or high 
school curricula.
A teaching unit should be 
incorporated into primary, 
middle and high school 
curricula to introduce 
design concepts with 
some practical elements. 
Handicraft lessons used to 
introduce the craft tradition, 
so why not design today?
Ministry of Education
Design institutions
Universities
Industry
Designers and other 
design pressure groups 
3. Design profession
Research and 
development
The research budgets of 
companies, institutions 
and businesses are 
inadequate while research 
and development are 
insufficiently focused on 
innovation, creativity and 
novelty.
R&D budgets should be 
increased; industry should 
be encouraged to prioritize 
R&D departments and 
employ more researchers, 
scientists and designers.
State departments
Industry
Design businesses
Institutions
Universities
Research centres
Royalty, patent rights, 
contracts, client relations 
and other legal issues
Despite the wishes of 
designers, the designer￾client relationship in 
business is still mostly 
informal rather than 
professional. Consequently, 
contracts are not well 
developed while royalties 
are not even considered in 
many cases. It will take time 
for small manufacturers 
to come to terms with 
designers’ modern working 
methods. Unfortunately, 
although many producers 
now recognize that design is 
essential, they also consider 
it a financial burden. 
Therefore, they prefer 
to minimize the cost of 
design and designers which 
designers are not legally 
protected against.
Solidarity, strong 
professional associations 
and support from 
state departments and 
organizations are essential 
to convince those 
employing or working with 
designers.
Government
State departments
Municipalities
Design associations
Designers
(Continued)On Design
198
Subjects Problems Suggestions Actors
Job opportunities and 
expanding employment 
areas 
There are fields where the 
significance of design has 
not been grasped yet. 
The above-mentioned 
activities to raise design 
awareness will bring new job 
opportunities. In general, 
designers should seek work 
opportunities in any field 
that is related to design. That 
is, designers must identify 
new areas and direct their 
interest to them. For instance, 
Turkey’s marble industry 
is growing and definitely 
in search of design ideas. 
Designers should take more 
initiative to create innovative 
products and systems, and 
develop new areas of work.
Government
Design businesses
Industry
Designers
Universities
Associations of 
industrial designers
Design plagiarism Many developing and 
developed countries, such 
as Japan, Korea and China, 
went through a copying 
period during their early 
industrial development. 
Turkey is no exception. 
Despite a significant 
decrease in copying, 
plagiarism still occurs.
Illegal and unethical 
behaviour needs to be 
identified and exposed 
publicly via the internet 
or similar means. If the 
designers who commit 
crimes are members of 
design associations, then 
their membership should 
be reviewed by the relevant 
authorities regardless of any 
legal actions taken against 
them.
Designers
Design associations
State departments
Professional bodies
Other design 
associations
4. Core issues
Evaluation of design, and 
expansion of its scope 
in line with scientific, 
technological, social and 
economic factors
The world is changing 
faster than ever. We are 
now living with epidemics, 
new business methods, big 
data algorithms, internet 
shopping, working from 
home, distance learning, 
artificial intelligence, 
augmented reality, Zoom 
meetings, virtual reality, 
blockchain, 5G and new 
space exploration. These, 
and many other twenty￾first-century innovations 
are forcing us to redefine 
the areas, content and 
meaning of design. These 
changes require immediate 
action in every field.
The Design Council should 
take the lead by establishing 
a scientific committee to 
monitor developments in 
design-related areas and 
advise industry, businesses, 
associations, universities 
and designers. All parties 
involved in design should 
consider the future of the 
discipline, their responses to 
changes and take action to 
adapt to the evaluation and 
transformation of design.
Design Council
Design associations
Design industry
Design businesses
Academicians
Educators
DesignersIndustrial Design in Turkey
199
Subjects Problems Suggestions Actors
New approaches and 
visions on design history, 
theory and philosophy
Design in Turkey needs a 
strong identity and perhaps 
a more coherent approach. 
The influences of
Bauhaus, Modernism,
Minimalism, 
Traditionalism and so 
on are clear while some 
work is patchy and hardly 
original. While there are 
exceptional, creative and 
innovative designs, they are 
not in the majority yet.
The continuously changing 
characteristics and 
meaning of design should 
be discussed, developed 
and applied to design for 
needs, the future, people, 
life, fun, pleasure and so 
on. Notions that need 
further study and evaluation 
include functional 
creative, innovative, 
politically correct, 
environmentally friendly, 
recyclable, technologically 
sound, sustainable, 
visually, aesthetically 
and intellectually 
pleasing, meaningful, 
communicative, global and/
or local. These are essential 
for any serious work in 
design history, theory and 
philosophy.
Designers
Academics
Educators
Theorists
Thinkers
Philosophers
Design critique The nature of design 
critique is also changing. 
It was possible to write on 
new objects and systems 
in the early years of 
industrialization. However, 
in the era of consumption, 
when millions of objects 
are available, the axis of 
critique has shifted from 
individual items, and 
the form and function 
of systems towards more 
general issues and attitudes. 
The new criteria include 
environmentally and 
user-friendly approaches, 
universal design, 
sustainability and so on. 
Some Turkish designers 
claim that they have 
received no response and 
need critique to further 
develop their designs.
The issue of design critique 
should be considered 
together with the issue 
of design standards. The 
Design Council and design 
associations could set up 
a system, say a committee, 
to review the products 
and give feedback when 
required. An independent 
body as such can also 
respond to designers’ 
individual applications to 
evaluate their work. 
Design Council
Design associations
Design journal
Academicians
Researchers
WritersCHAPTER 17
REDESIGNING TURKISH CULT OBJECTS
FROM TRADITIONAL TO ‘MODERN’?
The first version of this chapter was presented as a paper at the 8th Conference of the International 
Committee for Design History and Design Studies in São Paulo, Brazil, 2012. It was published in 
the proceedings. Farias, P., Calvera, A. Braga, M. da C. and Schincariol, Z., eds. (2012), Design 
Frontiers: Territories, Concepts, Technologies, 130–134, São Paulo: Blucher.
17.1 Introduction: Some problems
At the opening speech of the 4T (Design History Society, Turkey) conference in 2009, 
Jonathan Woodham asked the following question: ‘Will Turkish products conform to 
aesthetic global markets or manage to retain some aspect of local, regional or national 
identity?’ (Woodham, 2010: 17). Although Woodham’s point is perfectly legitimate, 
global market trends appear to be encouraging diversity. In May 2011, the MoMA Design 
Store in New York introduced Turkish products under the title of ‘Destination Istanbul’.1
The heavy orientalist discourse of the store’s advertisement was filled with clichés like 
‘East meets West.’ It reads: ‘The Destination: Istanbul product collection captures the 
aesthetic of a cultural crossroads where East meets West and ancient meets modern. 
Istanbul’s celebrated design history is an amalgam of Byzantine and Ottoman influences, 
blending geometric patterns, rhythmic lines, and vivid colors’ (BOH, 2011). Edward 
Said must have been turning in his grave.
‘[A]n amalgam of Byzantine and Ottoman influences’ and ‘distinctive lifestyle 
products’! Here you are! This is what the global market has been waiting for from 
Turkish designers. The former stands for ‘historical’, (meaning of historical value) while 
the latter signifies ‘exotic’ (meaning attractive and appealing to you). What salesman￾like language! We shouldn’t blame the MoMA Design Store for this though, as they are 
not the only ones. In a recent example, The Telegraph published an article about Turkish 
design on 16 April 2012, with the title ‘Modern Turkish design spreads across globe’ 
(Cumming, 2012). What do we see on the cover page? The Blue Mosque! A mosque 
built 400 years ago. Although the text is about the work of Zeynep Fadıllıoğlu, a woman 
designer, the author falls into the trap of using old rhetoric by repeatedly mentioning 
1
Afer the project of selling Turkish products ended, the MoMa Design Store no longer published the relevant 
web page, although the information was still available on other web pages at the time this paper was rewritten.Redesigning Turkish Cult Objects
201
Byzantines, Ottomans, the Grand Bazaar, sumptuous palaces and Çırağan Kempinski 
Palace in the essay’s introduction. Therefore, answering Woodham’s question, one can 
say that while these orientalist approaches still survive, perhaps, even predominantly, 
designers from Turkey will always have the opportunity to satisfy these expectations 
with products reflecting local, regional or national identity. Nevertheless, this is not 
without its price; on the contrary, it is very costly. Seeking ‘local, regional or national 
identity’ is often a strategy employed by designers operating with particular agendas and 
intentions, which could have worrying political consequences, as explained below.
17.2 The circumstances: Actors demanding design with identity
It is important to underline that the first debates on global versus local took place in 
the mid-1990s with a slightly different vocabulary but with great significance. ‘Cultural 
identity’ was advanced and strongly emphasized. It was recognized as a legitimate 
channel to deal with the objects of global markets as well as a vehicle of survival 
within globalization (Bayrakçı, 1996; Sezgi, 1996). Actually, it was felt at that time that 
globalization was perhaps forcing design towards the production of similar, mundane 
and monotonous objects; valid and functional worldwide, so universal, with no identity 
of belonging to a place. The suggested solution was cultural diversity. Some designers 
had already begun to use, refer to, or be inspired by Turkey’s rich historical culture. 
Since then, aspects of ‘cultural identity’ within globalization have been studied regularly.2
What interests us here is the shift within Turkish design in the last ten to fifteen years. 
A shift derived from a cultural approach and dispersed in many directions: Modernist, 
Islamist, Ottoman Revivalist, Nationalist and so on.
Since 2000, the Islamist right has flourished in Turkey, with the religiously-oriented 
Justice and Development Party (AKP) winning a large parliamentary majority in 
the 2002, 2007 and 2011 elections with almost half of the vote. Thanks to economic 
development, mostly due to measures taken by the previous government and money 
injected from abroad,3
 new right-wing and religious middle-class and high-income 
groups have emerged in Turkey. One such group is the ‘Anatolian Tigers’, a term 
borrowed from the expression attributed to East Asian countries. As a result, it is no 
longer unusual to see a young woman covered from top to toe wearing Gucci or Prada 
and driving the latest Porsche along Istanbul’s main streets. If Italians have Armani, we 
have Armine in Turkey, where one can buy the latest fashion scarf in perfect congruence 
2
In one of these studies, tendencies towards local, regional, national, traditional and cultural designs were 
analysed, described and categorized as the neologistic approach, morphological application, topographical 
execution, formal interpretations, allegorical interpretations and conceptual inspirations. See Section One, 
Chapter 3.
3
The sources of money coming from abroad into the Turkish economy have never been clearly identified and 
have always been a matter of discussion. Some of this cash injection has been labelled ‘Green Money’ in the 
book entitled The Rise of Political Islam in Turkey (Rabasa & Larrabee, 2008).On Design
202
with religious rituals (see http://armine.com). The contradiction is obvious. On the one 
hand, modernization is equated with Westernization and resisted; on the other, the 
desire to become contemporary and civilized is expressed by Islamic fashion products, 
whereby fashion – a phenomenon generated by the West – is accepted! As Kaya writes, 
the search for originality in neo-Islamic design has not gone further than becoming an 
inferior version of Western material culture (Kaya, 2008: 102).
Naturally, the nouveau riche religious bourgeoisie needed various designs to represent 
their ideology and lifestyle: from fashion to decoration, from art to architecture. They have 
found a suitable atmosphere and many tangible examples in the work of those professing 
‘cultural identity’. Turkish culture is so rich that it could provide a basis for all ideologies 
to formulate their own design styles, identity and iconographies. Indeed, nationalists on 
the opposite end of the spectrum from political Islam have also utilized Turkish culture.
According to a Heinrich-Böll Foundation report, ‘nationalism in Turkey has been 
on the increase’ (Dufner, 2008: 1): ‘Nationalism can be functionalised: in Turkey there 
is Islamic nationalism, left-wing nationalism, Ataturk-nationalism, even a liberal wing 
of nationalism’ (Dufner, 2008: 2). Of course, this is not a definitive list; for instance, it 
omits Turkish right-wing nationalists. Nonetheless, this gives us an idea about the level 
of complexity.
All these actors are seeking a design style that reflects their identities and positions, 
and reproduces and disseminates their ideologies. Some are also training and educating 
young designers in accordance with their own ideologies. One example is the Istanbul 
Design Centre, established with the support of Istanbul municipality when it was 
controlled by AKP (see www.istanbultasarimmerkezi.org). Soon, we may witness 
polarization and confrontation between designers from various political and religious 
factions through their work and attitude. Under these circumstances, to what degree can 
designers be autonomous? Jeremy Aynsley asked the same question almost two decades 
ago: ‘Can design resist straightforward alliances with a political regime to construct its 
own autonomous identity? Most commentators agree with the view that design, like 
other cultural manifestations, has a relative autonomy. It is sufficiently independent to 
define its own languages, but nonetheless represent broad tendencies within a political 
economy’ (Aynsley, 1993: 14).
The relative autonomy underlined above has a limited territory, and this limited 
territory is becoming more limited than ever. Unsurprisingly, various left-wing designers 
who are committed to modernist principles and have applied them with integrity and 
success, have sometimes been commissioned by right-wing, religious or nationalist 
business owners. As Kaygan implies, some may have become the producers of a banal 
nationalist attitude, most likely within a context of orientalist prejudices (Kaygan, 2008).
17.3 The designer’s dilemma
The designer’s dilemma is thus clear. On the one hand, there is an inclination to benefit 
from Turkey’s rich cultural heritage; on the other, there is the risk of being categorized Redesigning Turkish Cult Objects
203
as an Islamite, neo-Ottomanist or some kind of nationalist, depending on the work they 
create. Until recently, Turkey’s designers have graduated from a modernist, strongly 
Bauhaus-influenced education. They are striving to define their own design character, 
identity and direction, and probably do not care how they are labelled as long as they 
feel they remain consistent with their own philosophy. However, while not yet clear-cut, 
there are now signs of political divisions among designers. Once each political group 
can educate and accommodate their own designers committed to a certain ideology, 
designers may also split into opposing groups. At present, designers are preoccupied 
with two vital issues as members of the global design community: design identity and 
direction. With these anxieties in mind, the last twenty years have witnessed an extensive 
increase of cultural references in the widest sense of the term, which have been well 
explored and documented. The ways in which designers use traditional objects, historical 
symbols, architectural forms and local values are innumerable. Recent trends suggest a 
predisposition towards redesigning what I call ‘Turkish cult objects’.
17.4 Cult objects
Concepts like fetish, cult, icon, ritual and vintage began to appear in the literature of 
design after Karl Marx coined the term ‘commodity fetishism’ (Marx, [1867] 1983: 77). 
In design specifically, Clive Dilnot was one of the earliest commentators to relate the 
concept to mass-produced objects. He directly associates design with fetish:
That is, the effects of advertising and design styling combine to make ‘things’ less 
things in themselves and more totems, or images or fetishes of other things. And 
the curious situation that has arisen now is that, amongst the values expressed or 
represented by design objects, are those of ‘design’ and ‘style’ themselves. Design 
itself has gradually become a fetish or a value.
(1984a: 10)
John Walker makes a similar remark in his criticisms of design books that ‘present 
industrial products as if they were precious works of art: isolated from people and the 
everyday environment, surrounded by a halo of light, the designed object becomes a 
fetish’ (1989: 58). He thinks this is also supported by design history: ‘In design history 
too a fetish is made of the designed object as indicated by books such as One Hundred 
Great Product Designs (1970) and Cult Objects (1985)’ (Walker, 1989: 58). Actually, the 
author of Cult Objects, Deyan Sudjic, explores the notion and gives various examples 
in the context of product design. For instance, he describes the Jeep as a cult object: ‘It 
belongs to a class of artifact which exercises a powerful, but mysterious fascination. By 
definition a cult depends on a group of insiders, tightly knit and linked by secret signs 
recognizable only to initiates’ (1985: 11). For Sudjic, Jeeps, Barbour jackets and Mont 
Blanc pens are all cult objects ‘appealing to small groups of aficionados’ (1985: 11). 
However, there are also cult objects accepted by almost all people. Zippo lighters, for On Design
204
example, like ‘other cult objects have exerted an immediate mass appeal’. According to 
Sudjic, ‘in the nature of things, a cult object has to be a mass-produced, or at least has 
to be suggested in its shape and finish that it is produced by a machine even if it isn’t’ 
(1985: 16). In his remarks on fashion, he argues that even an old product like Levi’s 
501 is also a cult object because ‘[a] cult object is not necessarily a fashionable one’ 
(1985: 18).
17.5 Cult objects in Turkey: Going in which direction?
The most typical and undisputed cult objects are widely used everyday items. These cult 
objects are an essential part of Turkish tea, coffee and raki4
 drinking, smoking habits 
and social addictions: teapots, tea glasses, tea trays, coffee pots, coffee cups, raki bottles, 
raki glasses, water pipes and so on. They are used daily, consumed and enjoyed. They 
are visible, attractive and the subject of common parlance and mundane conversations. 
They have a similar status to the Zippo lighter described by Sudjic. When people drink 
tea or coffee, they talk about it: its quality, how it is made, where to find the best one and 
so on. These are issues well-studied and published by Turkish scholars. Yet other issues 
have been ignored, such as why cult objects are redesigned, the effect of market demands 
and potential political motivations. Leading Turkish designers, design companies and 
companies generating and selling designs are, one after the other, providing us with 
new products and new versions of cult objects. Arçelik, one of Turkey’s top white 
goods brands, launched an electric Turkish coffee machine. Soon after that, the typical 
traditional coffee pot, which is a simple pot with a handle placed on a hob to boil water 
and coffee, was redesigned. The electric kettle technology turned it into a self-standing 
object. Kunter Şekercioğlu, the designer of the Arzum Cezve, has remained faithful to 
the original form while adding a modern touch that somehow reminds us of the curvy 
lines in Philippe Stark’s works (Figure 40A, 40B). On the shelves of a superstore, it 
conveys the message that it is still a cezve as we know it. Immediately, new versions 
emerged. Homend Pottoman 1803, designed by Ümit Altun, is one example. It looks 
very modern in line, shape and colour, as well as being nicely designed and well made. 
It has the feeling of a perfect German product, such as one from the days of Dieter 
Rams. While it is a Turkish product, its name uses a very clever play of English words 
by combining home and end, and pot and Ottoman: Homend, Pottoman. Despite its 
obviously modernist form, by referring to the Ottomans in its names, it claims a stake in 
tradition and history, as well as the associated status and power. 
Ali Bakova appropriates a different perspective. He keeps almost everything the same 
but changes the material. Thus, the typical traditional copper coffee pot is now made of 
4
Rakı is a strong alcoholic spirit produced in Turkey. It is distilled from grape juice and flavoured with anise. 
Rakı, which tastes like French Pastis or Greek Ouzo, is considered the national Turkish alcoholic drink.Redesigning Turkish Cult Objects
205
transparent glass (Figure 41). While respecting the original form, he adds a new value: 
visibility. This helps the coffee maker to observe the process and decide the right time 
to remove the pot from the hob. Bakova’s contribution is therefore an attempt to control 
and improve the quality of the coffee whereas the other designs try to simplify coffee 
making through elegant redesign.
Figure 40A–B A Traditional coffee pot (40A), compared with Arzum Cezve (40B) designed by 
Kunter Şekercioğlu in 2005. Photo courtesy of Kunter Şekercioğlu.
Figure 41 Coffee pot made out of glass, designed by Ali Bakova in 2010. Photo courtesy of Ali 
Bakova.On Design
206
17.6 Conclusion: Cult objects as an arena of the design battleground
How can we explain designers’ propensity, aspiration and fondness for redesigning 
cult objects? Is this a challenge to history? Is this a desire to contribute to the country’s 
modernization? Knowing that the Republic of Turkey and the early modernists wished 
to move the new state away from its Ottoman roots, are designers now settling their 
account with the past by revisiting cultural and local symbols, beliefs and canons? Or is 
this just another attempt to gain an identity and constitute differences in a world where 
diversity is more appreciated than ever? It is difficult to provide substantial evidence 
and respond to all of these questions within the limits of this paper. However, asking 
questions and speculating can be very revealing, especially at this particular stage of 
design development in Turkey since these issues have not yet been explicitly discussed.
Although the scene is not well-defined, there seems to be a discreet or hidden 
struggle regarding the redesign of cult objects. There are various areas of interest in this 
battleground of cult objects. One hidden actor is Turkey’s current right-wing religious 
government. It is mostly interested in design iconography to disseminate its ideology 
while making its rule and presence strongly felt. Coins, for example, are cult objects. The 
government has altered their design by replacing the bunch of bay leaves symbolizing 
victory (derived from ancient Greek and Roman civilization) with a pattern resembling 
Islamic ornamentation. The current right-wing and religious stance aims to force design 
forms away from modernist, minimalist and mainstream styles towards traditional 
configurations almost in every field. It is not surprising that we see the traces of this 
policy in daily life, even a boiler in a typical Turkish tea house may reflect this tendency 
very successfully (Figure 42).
One of the characteristics of Turkish design circles is that many designers initiate 
their own projects: after identifying a niche, they develop a project and try to get it 
manufactured and sold by known companies. If this does not work, designers rely on 
their own means and capital to get their designs produced, usually in limited editions. 
Once produced, they try to promote and sell them through fairs, exhibitions, websites and 
marketing agents. Since designers control what they want to make, they understandably 
select the most popular, extensively used and widely purchased goods to redesign – 
which are inevitably cult objects. The economic aspect is not the only reason. Designing 
the most prevalent, commonly used things can quickly bring public recognition, even 
appreciation if the work is good enough. It is a prestigious thing to do. Wide publicity, 
respect, acknowledgement and hopefully good sales may follow an immediate success. 
It is also a defiant thing to do – a rebelliousness against the collective memory, norms, 
notions and practices. It is an intrusion and interference. Therefore, each new endeavour 
of redesigning a cult object is inherently risky simply because the result is – strangely 
enough – measurable. In other words, if your design does not sell well, you fail, you feel 
a failure or you are made to feel a failure. Given that cult objects are visible, known and 
followed by many, the risk is obvious. The competition is obvious too.
Let us take the case of typical tea glasses that everybody uses every day in Turkey. 
They are being mass-produced by Paşabahçe Glass Company, which is dominating the Redesigning Turkish Cult Objects
207
market (Figure 43). Paşabahçe has its own in-house designers but occasionally works 
with famous figures depending on the project. In addition to the variety Paşabahçe 
presents, numerous new tea glasses fill the shelves of shops, some of which are products 
of well-known designers such as (in alphabetical order) Ali Bakova (Figure 44A), Can 
Yalman (Figure 44B), Defne Koz (Figure 44C), Faruk Malhan (Figure 44D and 44E), 
Koray Özgen (Figure 44F) and so on.
If many renowned designers design a tea glass one after the other (Figure 44A-F), 
they not only challenge tradition but also defy each other with or without their own 
knowledge, discretely and in disguise. Each glass design deserves a separate analysis 
displaying similarities and differences as well as its relationship with the plate, which 
Figure 42 Boiler providing hot water to make tea or coffee in traditional public Turkish tea 
houses. Photo courtesy of Cevdet Ankun.
Figure 43A–E A few examples of Paşabahçe tea glasses. From left to right: Aida (43A), Etnik 
(43B), Heybeli (43C), İncebelli (43D), Samanyolu (43E). Photos courtesy of Paşabahçe.On Design
208
appears to be a prominent component in these days. Although it is intangible at the 
moment, it is possible that a hidden rivalry exists and has the potential to surface in due 
course. It is not easy to predict which side or which product will prevail in the battle for 
mainstream design. However, design concepts, thought and technologies are steadily 
maturing within this turmoil of variety, and one hopes that the number of good works 
will continue to grow.
Figure 44A–F Tea glasses (from left to right): Ti Te Chai by Ali Bakova (44A), Hisar (two 
glasses) by Can Yalman (44B), Unnamed by Defne Koz (44C), Dervish (saucer and glass) by Faruk 
Malhan (44D), İstanbul by Faruk Malhan (44E) and İncebelli (three glasses) by Koray Özgen (44F) 
Photographs courtesy of the designers.REFERENCES
Turkish spelling is used when reference is made to Turkish names and publications.  English 
spelling is used for Turkish names and references if the original source is in English.
Ağır, A. (2005), ‘Balyanlar’ın Eğitimi Üzerine Notlar’, in A. Ağır, D. Mazlum and G. Cephanecigil 
(eds), Afife Batur’a Armağan. Mimarlık ve Sanat Tarihi Yazıları, 65–71, İstanbul: Literatür.
Akcan, E. (2000), ‘Orientalism and Melancholy: Bruno Taut in the East’, in L. V. Wells-Bowie 
(ed), 88’th ACSA Annual Meeting Proceedings, 263–72, Heterotopolis.
Akcan, E. (2012), Architecture in Translation: Germany, Turkey and The Modern House, Durham 
& London: Duke University Press.
Aldersey-Williams, H. (1992), Nationalism and Globalism in Design, New York: Rizzoli.
Appadurai, A. (1990), ‘Disjuncture and Difference in the Global Cultural Economy’, in M. 
Featherstone (ed), Global Culture: Nationalism, Globalization and Modernity, 295–310, 
London: Sage.
Archer, B. (1974), Design Awareness and Planned Creativity in Industry, London: Office of 
Design, Department of Trade, Industry and Commerce.
Archer, B. (1977), ‘Some Tasks for Design History’, Art Libraries Journal, 2 (2): 4–10.
Arseven, C. E. (1984), Türk Sanatı [Turkish Art], İstanbul: Cem Yayınevi.
Asatekin, M. (2006), ‘ODTÜ Mimarlık Fakültesi, Endüstri Ürünleri Tasarımı Bölümü 
“BAŞLANGIÇ NOTLARI”’, Tasarım+Kuram, (5): 28–32.
Asatekin, M. (1994), ‘Turkish Design Facing the Global Market’, in G. Hasdogan (ed), Design, 
Industry and Turkey, 3–8, Ankara: Middle East Technical University.
Asatekin, M. (1976), ‘Postural and Physiological Criteria for Seating: A Review’, METU Journal of 
the Faculty of Architecture, (1): 55–83.
Asatekin, M. (1975), ‘Endüstri Tasarımı Ölçütlerine Bütünsel Bir Yaklaşım’, ODTÜ Mimarlık 
Fakültesi Dergisi, (2): 247–63.
Ashwin, C. (1978), ‘Art and Design History: The Parting of the Ways?’, Design History: Fad or 
Function? 98–102, London: Design Council.
Aslanoğlu, İ. (1976), ‘Dışavurumcu ve Usçu Devirlerinde Bruno Taut (1880–1938)’, ODTÜ 
Mimarlık Fakültesi Dergisi, 2 (1): 35–48.
Attfield, J. (1985), ‘Defining the Object and the Subject’, The Times Higher Educational 
Supplement (THES), 1 February, 26.
Aynsley, J. (1993), Nationalism and Internationalism: Design in the 20th Century, London: 
Victoria & Albert Museum.
Baker, N. (1990), The Mezzanine, Cambridge: Granta Books.
Balcioglu, T. (1993), ‘A Review of the Emergence of the Term, Concept and History of Industrial 
Design and a Theoretical Analysis of the Major Elements Forming the Structure for a 
Prospective Historiography’, PhD Thesis, Middle East Technical University, Ankara.
Balcioglu, T., ed. (1998), The Role of Product Design in Post-Industrial Society, Rochester: Kent 
Institute of Art & Design; Ankara: Middle East Technical University.
Balcioglu, T. (1999), ‘Problematic of Local and Global Design: Identity in New Industrialised 
Countries with Special Emphasis on Turkey’, in Design Cultures: Proceedings of the Third 
European Academy of Design Conference, 57–71, Sheffield: Sheffield Hallam University. It was 
also published in ArchiScope 4, March–April 1999, 61–65, in English and Turkish.References
210
Balcioglu, T. and Emgin, B. (2014), ‘Recent Turkish Design Innovations: A Quest for Identity’, 
Design Issues, 30 (2): 97–111.
Banham, R. (1989), Theory and Design in the First Machine Age, Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Barthes, R. (1976), The Pleasure of the Text, trans. R. Miller, London: Jonathan Cape.
Baudrillard, J. (1988), Selected Writings, ed. M. Poster, Cambridge: Polity Press.
Bauman, Z. (1998), Globalization: The Human Consequences, Cambridge: Polity Press.
Baxandall, M. ([1972] 1991), Painting and Experience in Fifteenth-Century Italy, Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Bayazıt, N. (2006), ‘İtü’de Endüstri Ürünleri Tasarımı “DENEYİ’mim”’, Tasarım+Kuram, (5): 
41–53.
Bayazıt, N., Çorbacı, F. K. and Günal, D., eds. (1996), Tasarımda Evrenselleşme, İstanbul: İTÜ 
Mimarlık Fakültesi.
Bayazıt, N. (1987), ‘Theoretical Basis of a Computer-Aided Design Education and Research 
Laboratory’, Design Studies, 8 (3): 138–49.
Bayazıt, N. (1984), ‘Scientific Design Decisions within a Changing Society’, in R. Langdon and N. 
Cross (eds), Design and Society, London: Design Council.
Bayly, C. A., Beckert, S. and Connely, M. I. (2006), ‘AHR Conversation: On Transnational 
History’, The American Historical Review, 111 (5): 1441–1464.
Bayrakçı, O. (1996), ‘Yerel Ürün Kimliği - Küresel Dış Pazar’, in N. Bayazıt, F. K. Çorbacı and D. 
Günal (eds), Tasarımda Evrenselleşme, 93–103, İstanbul: İTÜ Mimarlık Fakültesi.
Becher, T., Henkel, M. and Kogan, M. (1994), Graduate Education in Britain, London: Jessica 
Kingsley Publishers.
Benjamin, W. ([1936] 1977), ‘The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction’, in 
Illuminations, 219–253, Glasgow: Fontana/Collins.
Benton, T. (1975), ‘Past Should be Looked at Through Well-Designed Spectacles’, The Times 
Higher Educational Supplement (THES), 10 October, p. 7.
Bertram, A. (1938), Design, Harmondsworth: Penguin Books Limited.
BOH. (2011), ‘MoMA’s “Destination: İstanbul” Features Products from Turkey’, Business 
of Home, 16 May. Available online: https://businessofhome.com/articles/1246/moma-s
-destination-İstanbul-features-products-from-turkey (accessed 26 August 2022).
Bone, J. D. (1999), ‘Institutional Positioning Following the Harris and Dearing Reports’, in N. 
Watts (ed), The International Postgraduate: Challenges to British Higher Education, Lichfield: 
UK Council for Graduate Education – UKCGE.
Börekçi, N. A. G. Z. (2015), ‘Usage of Design Thinking Tactics and Idea Generation Strategies in 
a Brainstorming Session’, METU Journal of the Faculty of Architecture, 32 (2): 1–17.
Bozdogan, S. (1997), ‘Against Style: Bruno Taut’s Pedagocial Program in Turkey’, in M. Pollak 
(ed), The Education of the Architect: Historiography, Urbanism and the Growth of Architectural 
Knowledge, 163–92, Cambridge: The MIT Press.
Braudel, F. (1980), On History, trans. S. Matthews, London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson.
Buchanan, R. (1995), ‘Rhetoric, Humanism, and Design’, in R. Buchanan and V. Margolin (eds), 
Discovering Design: Explorations in Design Studies, 23–66, Chicago: The University of Chicago 
Press.
Buchanan, R., Doordan, D., Justice, L. and Margolin, V. (1999), Doctoral Education in Design: 
Proceedings of the Ohio Conference, Pittsburgh: Carnegie Mellon.
Caban, G. (1998), ‘Work-based Learning and Doctoral Education in Design’, in R. Buchanan, D. 
Doordan, L. Justice and V. Margolin (eds), Doctoral Education in Design: Proceedings of the 
Ohio Conference, 131–43, Pittsburgh: Carnegie Mellon University.
Calvera, A., Woodham, J. and Barbosa, H. (2016), Reflections on Design, Aveiro: University of 
Aveiro Press.
Carr, E. H. (1964), What is History? Middlesex: Penguin Books.References
211
Carrington, N. (1976), Industrial Design in Britain, London: George Allen and Unwin.
Çelikel, S. B. (2015), Endüstriyel Tasarımda Paradigma Kaymaları: Bruno Latour’a Özel bir ilgiyle, 
İstanbul: Nobel Akademik Yayıncılık.
Cerasi, M. (1988), ‘Late Ottoman Architects and Master Builders’, Muquarnas, (5): 87–102.
Chakrabarti, A. and Blessing, L. (2015), ‘A Review of Theories and Models of Design’, Journal of 
the Indian Institute of Science, 95 (4): 325–40.
Chermayeff, S. (1982), ‘New Materials and New Methods’, in R. Plunz (ed), Design and the Public 
Good, Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Childe, G. ([1942] 1964), What Happened in the History, Middlesex: Penguin Books.
Cipolla, C. and Birdsall, D. (1979), Technology of Man, New York: Hold, Rinehart.
Cluster, I. D. (2016), International Design Organisations: Histories, Legacies, Values. Available online: 
http://arts.brighton.ac.uk/research/research-events/internationalising-design-history-events/
international-design-organisations-histories,-legacies,-values (accessed 12 March 2017).
Cole, H. (1884), Fifty Years of Public Work, London: George Bell and Sons.
Conran, T. (1993), ‘Forward’ to Industrial Design: Reflection of a Century, ed. J. de Noblet, Paris: 
Flammarion/APCI.
Conway, H., ed. (1987), Design History: A Student’s Handbook, London: Allen and Unwin.
Council, D. (1978), Fad or Function, London: Design Council.
Crane, W. and Day. L . F. (1903), Moot points: friendly disputes upon art & industry between 
Walter Crane & Lewis F. Day, London: B. T. Batsford.
Crane, W. (1887), ‘The Importance of the Applied Arts, and Their Relation to Common Life’, 
Journal of the Society of Arts, 35 (3): 717–732.
Cross, N. (1998), ‘Editorial’, Design Studies, 19 (1): 1–4.
Cross, N. (1999), ‘Design Research: A Disciplined Conversation’, Design Issues, 15 (2): 5–10.
Cumming, E. (2012), Modern Turkish Design Spreads Across Globe. Available online: https://
businessturkeytoday.com/modern-turkish-designs-spread-across-globe.html (accessed 
27 February 2022).
David, R., ed. (1966), The Arden Shakespeare, Love’s Labour’s Lost, London: Methuen.
Dearing, R. (1997), Higher Education in the Learning Society: Summary Report, The National 
Committee of Inquiry into Higher Education.
Deniz, Ş. (2006), ‘Ortaköy Camii’nin İnşa Sürecinde Gayri Müslim Yönetici, Usta ve Tüccarların 
Rolü’, in K. Kahraman (ed), 150. Yılında Dolmabahçe Sarayı, 693–706, Ankara: TBMM Milli 
Saraylar Daire Başkanlığı.
Design Council. (2022), Our History. Available online: https://www.designcouncil.org.uk/who
-we-are/our-history (accessed 1 September 2022).
Design Innovation Group. (1990), The Benefits and Costs of Investment in Design: End of Award 
Report to the Economic and Social Research Council, The Open University: UMIST, Working 
Paper WP-13.
Design Research Society. (2015), Design Research Society. Available online: https://www.designr
esearchsociety.org/cpages/history (accessed 2 September 2022).
DIA. (1915), Pamphlet about the Establishment of DIA, London: Design and Industries 
Association.
Diez, E. and Aslanapa, O. (1955), Türk Sanatı, İstanbul: İstanbul Üniversitesi Edebiyat Fakültesi 
Yayınları.
Diler, F. G. (2016), ‘Devletin mimarlık tarihiyle imtihanı’, Agos. Available online: https://www
.agos.com.tr/tr/yazi/14478/devletin-mimarlik-tarihiyle-imtihani (accessed 6 August 2023).
Dilnot, C. (1984a), ‘The State of Design History Part I: Mapping the Field’, Design Issues, 1 (1): 
4–23.
Dilnot, C. (1984b), ‘The State of Design History Part II: Problems and Possibilities’, Design Issues, 
1 (2): 3–20.References
212
Dilnot, C. (1999a), ‘The Science of Uncertainty: The Potential Contribution of Design to 
Knowledge’, in R. Buchanan, D. Doordan, L. Justice and V. Margolin (eds), Doctoral Education 
in Design: Proceedings of the Ohio Conference, 65–97, Pittsburgh: Carnegie Mellon University.
Dilnot, C. (1999b), ‘Useful and Critical: The Position of Research in Design’, Conference 
Proceedings, Helsinki: University of Art & Design UIAH.
Dormer, P. (1990), The Meaning of Modern Design Towards the Twenty First Century, London: 
Thames and Hudson.
Dufner, U. (2008), Nationalism and the Turkey - EU relations: Perspectives from both sides, Report, 
Heinrich-Böll-Stiftung.
Durling, D. and Friedman, K. (2000), Foundations for the Future: Doctoral Education in Design, 
Staffordshire: Staffordshire University Press.
EAD. (2017), The European Academy of Design. Available online: https://ead.yasar.edu.tr/ 
(accessed 2 September 2022).
EB: Encyclopaedia Britannica. (1771), Encyclopaedia Britannica or A Dictionary of Arts and 
Sciences by a Society of Gentlemen in Scotland, Edinburgh: A. Bell and C. Macfarquhar, first 
edition, 418–19.
Eldem, E. (2010), ‘Discovering “Other” Architects’, in H. Kuruyazıcı (ed), Armenian Architects of 
Istanbul, 12–17, Istanbul: International Hrant Dink Foundation Publications.
Elmas, D. (2008), ‘Tarihi bir gerçek aydınlığa çıkıyor...“Balyanlar” mimar değildi’, Antoloji.com
. Available online: https://www.antoloji.com/tarihi-bir-gercek-aydinliga-cikiyor-balyanlar
-mimar-degildi-mutlaka-oku-siiri/ (accessed 2 September 2022).
Elton, G. R. ([1967] 1984), The Practice of History, London: Fontana.
Enzensberger, H. M. (1990), ‘Second Thoughts on Consistency’, Political Crumbs, trans M. 
Chalmers, London: Verso.
Er, A. (1997), ‘Development Patterns of Industrial Design in the Third World: A Conceptual 
Model for Newly Industrialized Countries’, Journal of Design History, 10 (3): 293–307.
Er, A. (1995), ‘The State of Design: Towards an Assessment of the Development of Industrial 
Design in Turkey’, METU: Journal of the Faculty of Architecture, 13 (1–2): 31–51.
Er, Ö. (1997), ‘Nature of Design Consultancy Work for Newly Industrialised Country Clients’, 
The Design Journal, 1 (1): 30–40.
Er, Ö. and Er, H. A. (2006), ‘Design Research in the Periphery: A Review of the Foundations and 
Development of Characteristics of Industrial Design Research in Turkey’, A/Z ITU Journal of 
the Faculty of Architecture, 3 (1–2): 85–97.
Er, A., Korkut, F. and Er, Ö. (2003), ‘US Involvement in the Development of Design in the 
Periphery: The Case History of Industrial Design Education in Turkey, 1950s–1970s’, Design 
Issues, 19 (2): 17–35.
Erdem, C. (2003), ‘Sadık Karamustafa: Grafik Sanatının Renkli Yüzü’, Art Decor, Ocak, (118): 36–41.
Erdim, B. (2007), ‘From Germany, to Japan and Turkey: Modernity, Locality and Bruno Taut’s 
Transnational Details from 1933–38’, Lunch 2, Journal of the University of Virginia School of 
Architecture, 103–115.
Erkmen, B. (1987), ‘Yurdaer Altıntaş’la Sohbet’, Grafik Sanatı, 3 (10): 25–48.
Erkmen, B. (1992), Works From 91/92, Istanbul: Ofset Yapımevi.
Erkmen, B. (1994), Works From 93/94, Istanbul: Ofset Yapımevi.
Erkmen, B. (1997a), ISBN 975-342-142-7, Istanbul: Metis Yayınları.
Erkmen, B. (1997b), Works Around Art and Culture, Mainz: Gutenberg-Museum.
Erkmen, B. (1997c), Works From 95/96, Istanbul: Ofset Yapımevi.
Erkmen, B. (1999), Works From 97/98, Istanbul: Ofset Yapımevi.
Erkmen, B. (2001), Works From 99/00, Istanbul: Ofset Yapımevi.
Erkmen, B., Ulay, F. and Altılar, T. (2000), 32 Büst: 32 Fotoğraf İçin Yazılmıs Yalanlar, Istanbul: 
Ofset Yapımevi.References
213
Ertel, M. (1999), Büyültmeler İçin Grafikler /Graphics for Blowups, Exhibition Catalogue, 16–30 
April 1999, Istanbul: Dolmabahçe Kültür Merkezi.
Evans, M., Veveris, M. and Wormald, P. (1994), ‘Modelling Within Product Design Activity: 
Applications and Opportunities’, in PDE 94 Product Design Education, Conference 
Proceedings, Bournemouth: Bournemouth University.
Featherstone, M. (1993), ‘Global and Local Culture’, in J. Bird, B. Curtis, T. Putnam, G. Robertson 
and L. Tickner (eds), Mapping the Futures: Local Cultures, Global Change, 169–87, London: 
Routledge.
Flusser, V. (1999), The Shape of Things: A Philosophy of Design, London: Reaktion Books.
Forty, A. (1986), Objects of Desire: Objects and Society 1750–1980, London: Thames and 
Hudson.
Forty, A. (1993), ‘A Reply to Victor Margolin’, Journal of Design History, 6 (2): 131–2.
Foucault, M. ([1969] 1974), The Archaeology of Knowledge, trans. A. M. S. Smith, London: 
Tavistock Publications.
Frayling, C. (1993), ‘Research in Art & Design’, Royal College of Art Research Papers, 1 (1): 1–5, 
London: RCA.
Frayling, C. (1998), ‘Practice-Based Doctorates in the Creative and Performed Arts and Design’, 
UK Council for Graduate Education Newsletter, n.17, February.
Friberg, K., Hilson, M. and Vall, N. (2007), ‘Reflections on Trans-national Comparative History 
from an Anglo-Swedish Perspective’, Historisk Tidskrift, 127 (4): 717–737.
Fry, T. (1981), ‘Design History: A Debate?’, Block, (5): 14–18.
Fry, T. (1988), Design History: Australia, Sydney: Hale & Iremonger.
Fry, T. (1995), ‘A Geography of Power: Design History and Marginality?’ in V. Margolin and R. 
Buchanan (eds), The Idea of Design, Cambridge: MIT.
Genoways, H. H. (1996), ‘Museum Studies Programs are Not Prepared for the Ph.D.’, Curator, 39 
(1): 6–11.
Ghose, R. (1995), ‘Design, Development, Culture, and Cultural Legacies in Asia’, in V. Margolin 
and R. Buchanan (eds), The Idea of Design, 187–203, Cambridge: MIT.
Giedion, S. ([1948] 1955), Mechanization Takes Command, New York: Oxford University Press.
Ginzburg, C. ([1976] 1980), The Cheese and Worms: The Cosmos of a Sixteenth-Century Miller, 
trans. J. and A. Tedeschi, London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Ginzburg, C. (1980), ‘Morelli, Freud and Sherlock Holmes: Clues and Scientific Method’, trans. 
A. Davin, History Workshop Journal, 9 (1) March: 5–36.
Gloag, J. (1934), Industrial Art Explained, first edition, London: George Allen & Unwin Ltd.
Gloag, J. (1945), Plastics and Industrial Design, London: George Allen & Unwin Ltd.
Gloag, J. (1946), Industrial Art Explained, revised and enlarged third edition, London: George 
Allen and Unwin Limited.
Gloag, J. (1947a), Good Design Good Business, Edinburgh: Published for the Scottish Committee 
of the Council of Industrial Design.
Gloag, J. (1947b), Self Training for Industrial Designers, London: George Allen & Unwin.
Gloag, J. (1947c), The English Tradition in Design, London: King Penguin Books.
Gloag, J. (1950), ‘Identity and Development of Industrial Design I’, Eidos, no: 2, September￾October: 34–43; part II, no: 3, November–December: 34–40.
Gloag, J. (1959), The English Tradition in Design, London: King Penguin Books.
GMK: Turkish Society of Graphic Designers. (1995), Turkish Graphic Designers 1, Istanbul: 
Alternatif Yayıncılık.
GMK: Turkish Society of Graphic Designers. (1998), Turkish Graphic Designers 2, Istanbul: 
Alternatif Yayıncılık.
GMK: Turkish Society of Graphic Designers. (1999), 18th Graphic Design Exhibition, Istanbul: 
GMK.References
214
GMK: Turkish Society of Graphic Designers. (2000), 19th Graphic Design Exhibition, Istanbul: 
GMK.
Gönenç, T. (1985), ‘Books and Illustrations 1: Master Münif Fehim’, Grafik Sanatı, 1 (3), May￾June: 51–3.
Goodwin, G. (1992), A History of Ottoman Architecture, London: Thames and Hudson.
GSD. (1999), The Official Register 1998–1999, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University, Graduate 
School of Design.
Guillerme, J. (1993), ‘Design in the First Machine Age’, in J. de Noblet (ed), Industrial Design: 
Reflection of a Century, Paris: Flammarion/APCI.
Gwynn, J. (1766), London and Westminster Improved, Illustrated by Plans, London: Printed for 
the Author.
Haller, S. and Fili, L. (1998), German Modern: Graphic Design from Wilhelm to Weimar, San 
Francisco: Chronicle Books.
Hannah, F. and Putnam, T. (1980), ‘Taking Stock in Design History’, Block, (3): 25–34.
Hanrahan, S. (1998), ‘The Possibility of Dialogue: The Relationship between “Words” and “Art￾making”, in Fine Art Research’, Drawing Fire, Winter, 2 (2): 29–31.
Hasdoğan, G., Korkut, F. and Börekçi, N. A. G. Z. (2021), ‘Orta Doğu Teknik Üniversitesi ve 
Endüstriyel Tasarım Eğitiminde ‘Ortadoğu’ Ekolü: Yerele ve Dışarıya Sınırdaş bir Türkiye 
Modernleşmesi Örneği’, Tasarım+Kuram, 17 (Özel Sayı: 4): 29–64.
Hasdogan, G. (2009), ‘The Institutionalization of the Industrial Design Profession in Turkey: 
Case Study – The Industrial Designers Society of Turkey’, The Design Journal, 12 (3): 311–38.
Hasdogan, G., ed. (1994), Design, Industry and Turkey, Ankara: Middle East Technical University.
Haug, W. F. ([1971] 1986), Critique of Commodity Aesthetic, trans. R. Bock, Cambridge: Polity 
Press.
Haug, W. F. (1987), Commodity Aesthetics, Ideology and Culture, New York: International 
General.
Heskett, J. (1980), Industrial Design, London: Thames & Hudson.
Hill, T., Acker, S. and Black, E. (1994), ‘Research Students and Their Supervisors in Education 
and Psychology’, in R. G. Burgess (ed), Postgraduate Education and Training in the Social 
Sciences: Process and Products, London: Jessica Kingsley Publishers.
Hogben, C. (1983), ‘Introduction’, in British Art and Design, 1900–1960: A Collection in the 
Making, exhibition catalogue, London: Victoria & Albert Museum.
Holme, G. (1934), Industrial Design and the Future, London: Studio.
ICDHS. (2008), International Conferences on Design History and Studies. Available online: http://
www.ub.edu/icdhs/index.html (accessed 5 September 2022).
Ilhan, A. O. and Er, A. (2016), ‘Existential Antagonisms: Boundary Work and the Professional 
Ideology of Turkish Industrial Designers’, Design Issues, 32 (1): 19–31.
Irwin, D. (1991), ‘Art versus Design: The Debate 1760–1860’, Journal of Design History, 4 (4): 
219–32.
Jackson, F. G. (1894), Theory and Practice of Design: An Advanced Text-Book on Decorative Art, 
London: Chapman and Hall.
Jameson, F. (1998), ‘Notes on Globalization as a Philosophical Issue’, in F. Jameson and M. 
Miyoshi (eds), The Cultures of Globalization, 54–77, London: Duke University Press.
Kalman, T. (1991), ‘Good History Bad History’, Design Review, Spring, first Issue: 48–57.
Karamustafa, S. (1999), ‘Türkiye’de Grafik Tasarımın Son Çeyrek Yüzyılı’, in A. Ödekan (ed), 
Cumhuriyet’in Renkleri, Biçimleri, 82–90, İstanbul: Tarih Vakfı.
Karamustafa, S. (2002), ‘Tasarım Eğitimi ve Grafist’, Arredamento Mimarlık, (6): 120–6.
Karol, E., ed. (2001), Grafist İnadına Afiş & Posters, Relentlessly, 5th International Istanbul 
Graphic Design Week, International Poster Exhibition Catalogue, Istanbul: Mimar Sinan 
University.References
215
Kart, U. (2002), ‘Latif Ariş: Yitik Sanatçıya Saygı’, Art Decor, September.
Katarina, F. M. H. (2007), ‘Reflections on Trans-national Comparative History from an Anglo￾Swedish Perspective’, Historisk Tidskrift, 127 (4): 717–37.
Kaya, C. (2008), ‘Bir Temsil Mecrası Olarak Türbanın Çağdaş Turkiye’de Dönüşümü’, in T. 
Balcıoğlu and G. Baydar (eds), Kim(lik)lerin Tasarımı, 96–109, İzmir: İzmir Ekonomi 
Üniversitesi.
Kaygan, H. (2016), ‘Material Semiotics of Form Giving: The Case of the Electric Turkish Coffee 
Pot’, Design Issues, 32 (3): 78–90.
Kaygan, H. (2019), ‘Performing Turkish Design in Products, Collections and Exhibitions: 
Expanding the Archive, Seeking Depth’, in G. Julier, A. V. Munch, M. N. Folkmann, H.-C. 
Jensen and N. P. Skou (eds), Design Culture: Objects and Approaches, 189–202, London: 
Bloomsbury Visual Arts.
Kaygan, H. (2008), ‘Tasarımda Milli Kimliğin Varoluş Koşulları’, in T. Balcıoğlu and G. Baydar 
(eds), Kim(lik)lerin Tasarımı, 123–30, İzmir: İzmir Ekonomi Üniversitesi.
Khun, T. S. (1970), The Structure of Scientific Revolutions, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Kikuchi, Y. (2014), ‘Transnational Modern Design Histories in East Asia: An Introduction’, 
Journal of Design History, 27 (4): 323–34.
Kimmer, C. (1989), ‘Ph.D. in Pastry’, Connoisseur, March, 101–6.
Kinross, R. (1985), ‘Design History’s Search for Identity’, Designer, November, 12–13.
Kinross, R. (1988), ‘Herbert Read’s Art and Industry: A History’, Journal of Design History, 1 (1): 
35–50.
Klem, F. (1964), A History of Western Technology, Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Krippendorf, K. (1999), ‘A Field for Growing Doctorates in Design?’, in R. Buchanan, D. 
Doordan, L. Justice and V. Margolin (eds), Doctoral Education in Design: Proceedings of the 
Ohio Conference, 207–224, Pittsburgh: Carnegie Mellon University.
Kruft, H. W. (1994), A History of Architectural Theory, From Vitruvius to the Present, New York: 
Princeton Architectural Press.
Kuban, D. (2007), Osmanlı Mimarisi (Ottoman Architecture), İstanbul: YEM Yayınları.
Kubler, G. (1978), The Shape of Time: Remarks on the History of Things, New Haven and London: 
Yale University Press.
Kurtgözü, A. E. (2003), ‘From Function to Emotion: A Critical Essay on the History of Design 
Arguments’, The Design Journal, 6 (2): 49–59.
Küçükerman, Ö. and Şen, S. M. Ö. (2021), ‘Türkiye’de İlk Endüstri Ürünleri Tasarımı 
Bölümünün; İstanbul Güzel Sanatlar Akademisi’nden Mimar Sinan Güzel Sanatlar 
Üniversitesi’ne 50 Yıllık Serüveni’, Tasarım+Kuram, 17 (Özel Sayı: 4): 1–28.
Küçükerman, Ö. (1997), Endüstri Tasarımı: Ürün Tasarımında Adımlar, İstanbul: YEM Yayınları.
Küçükerman, Ö. (1996), Endüstri Tasarımı: Endüstri İçin Ürün Tasarımında Yaratıcılık, İstanbul: 
YEM Yayınları.
Küçükerman, Ö. (1978), Kişi-Çevre İlişkilerinde Çağdaş Gelişimler ve Oturma Eylemi, İstanbul: 
DGSA Yayını.
Kuhn, T. S. (1970), The Structure of Scientific Revolutions, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Kuran, A. (2012), Architecture in Turkey, from the Seljuks to the Republic, İstanbul: Türkiye İş 
Bankası Kültür Yayınları.
Lakatos, I. (1970), ‘Falsification and the Methodology of Scientific Research Programmes’, in I. 
Lakatos and A. Musgrave (eds), Criticism and the Growth of Knowledge, 91–196, Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Lindbeck, J. R. (1995), Product Design and Manufacture, New Jersey: Prentice Hall.
Lucie-Smith, E. (1983), A History of Industrial Design, Oxford: Phaidon Press.
MacCarthy, F. (1979), A History of British Design 1830–1970, London: George Allen & Unwin 
Ltd.References
216
MacCarthy, F. (1982), British Design Since 1880, London: Lund Humphries.
Macdonald, S. (2013), Transnational History: A Review of Past and Present Scholarship. 
Available online: https://www.ucl.ac.uk/centre-transnational-history/sites/centre
-transnational-history/files/simon_macdonald_tns_review.pdf (accessed 6 September 
2022).
Macleod, K. (1998), ‘Research in Fine Art: Theory, Judgement and Discourse’, Drawing Fire, 2 (2): 
33–7.
Maden, S. (1985), ‘Türk Grafik Sanatı Tarihi / History of Turkish Graphic Art’, Grafik Sanatı, 1 
(3), May–June: 58–62.
Maden, S. (1989), ‘Ülkemizde Grafik Sanatının Dünü, Bugünü’/ Past and Present State of 
Graphic Art in Turkey’, Türk Grafik Sanatçıları /Turkish Graphic Artists, Istanbul: Turkish 
Society of Graphic Designers.
Maden, S. (1999), ‘Grafik Sanatının Dünü, Bugünü’, in A. Ödekan (ed), Cumhuriyet’in Renkleri, 
Biçimleri, 74–81, İstanbul: Tarih Vakfı.
Maldonado, T. (1993), ‘Industrial Design: Some Present and Future Queries’, Journal of Design 
History, 1 (1): 1–7.
Manzini, E. and Susani, M., eds. (1995), The Search for Consistency, A Changing World: The Solid 
Side, Projects and Proposals, Netherlands: V+K Publishing.
Margolin, V. (1989), Design Discourse, Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.
Margolin, V. (1992), ‘Design History or Design Studies: Subject Matter and Methods’, Design 
Studies, 13 (2): 104–16.
Margolin, V. (1998), ‘Design and the World Situation’, in T. Balcioglu (ed), The Role of Product 
Design in Post-Industrial Society, 15–34, Ankara & Rochester: METU & KIAD.
Margolin, V. (1999), ‘History, Theory, and Criticism in Doctoral Design Education’, in R. 
Buchanan, D. Doordan, L. Justice and V. Margolin (eds), Doctoral Education in Design: 
Proceedings of the Ohio Conference, Pittsburgh: Carnegie Mellon University.
Marquard, O. (1989), Farewell to Matters of Principle: Philosophical Studies, New York: Oxford 
University Press.
Martin, H.-P. and Schumann, H. (1997), The Global Trap: Globalization & The Assault on 
Democracy & Prosperity, London: Pluto Press.
Marwick, A. (1976), The Nature of History, London: Macmillan.
Marwick, A. (1989), The Nature of History, London: Macmillan.
Marx, K. ([1867] 1983), Das Capital, trans. S. Moore and E. Aveling, ed. F. Engels, London: 
Laurence and Wishart.
Meikle, J. (1979), Twentieth Century Limited, Industrial Design in America, 1925–1939, 
Philadelphia: Temple University Press.
Meikle, J. (1992), ‘On The Mezzanine’, Design History Society News Letter, no: 54, July.
Miller, D. (1987), Material Culture and Mass Consumption, Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Morris, W. (1969), ‘Of the Origins of Ornamental Art’, in E. D. Lemire (ed), The Unpublished 
Lectures of William Morris’ (first recorded delivery of this speech: 1886), Detroit: Wayne State 
University Press.
Mumford, L. ([1934] 1947), Technics and Civilizations, London: George Routledge and Sons.
Mumford, L. (1960), Art and Technics, New York: Columbia University Press.
Naylor, G. (1985), The Bauhaus Re-assessed: Sources and Design Theory, London: Herbert 
Press.
Naylor, G. (1971), The Arts and Crafts Movement, London: Studio Vista.
OECD. (2019), Under Pressure: The Squeezed Middle Class. Available online: https://www
.oecd.org/social/under-pressure-the-squeezed-middle-class-689afed1-en.htm (accessed 
2 September 2022).
Ogut, Ş. T. (2009), ‘Material Culture of Tea in Turkey Transformations of Design through 
Tradition Modernity and Identity’, The Design Journal, 12 (3): 339–63.References
217
O’Shea, T. (1998), ‘How New Technology is Changing the Nature of the PhD’, Annual Summer 
Conference 15 & 16 July 1998, UK Council for Graduate Education, pp. 2–7.
Özcan, A. C. (2009), ‘An Overview of the Early Foundations and Development of Contemporary 
Industrial Design in Turkey’, The Design Journal, 12 (3): 267–287.
Pacey, P. (1992), ‘Anyone Designing Anything? Non-Professional Designers and the History of 
Design’, Journal of Design History, 5 (3): 217–25.
Packard, V. (1964), The Waste Makers, Middlesex: Penguin Books.
Perec, G. (1990), Things: A Story of the Sixties with A Man Asleep, trans. D. Bellos and A. Leak, 
Glasgow: Harvill.
Pevsner, N. ([1940] 1973), Academies of Art: Past and Present, New York: Da Capo Press.
Pevsner, N. (1937), An Enquiry into Industrial Art in England, Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.
Pevsner, N. (1936), Pioneers of the Modern Movement, London: Faber.
Polanyi, M. ([1958] 1974), Personal Knowledge: Towards a Post-Critical Philosophy, Chicago: The 
University of Chicago Press.
Press, M. and Cooper, R. (2003), The Design Experience: The Role of Design and Designers in the 
Twenty-First Century, Hants: Ashgate Publishing Limited.
Pulos, A. (1983), American Design Ethic, Cambridge: MIT Press.
QAA: The Quality Assurance Agency for Higher Education (1998), A Consultation Paper on 
Qualification Frameworks: Postgraduate Qualifications. November.
Rabasa, A. and Larrabee, F. S. (2008), The Rise of Political Islam in Turkey, Santa Monica: RAND, 
National Defence Research Institute.
Read, H. ([1934] 1956), Art and Industry, London: Faber and Faber Limited.
Read, H. (1947), The Future of Industrial Design, London: Design and Industries Association.
Reilly, P. (1987), An Eye on Design: An Autobiography, London: Max Reinhardt.
Renzio, T. D. (1977), ‘Mistaken Identities in the History of Design’, The Times Higher Educational 
Supplement (THES) 11, 4 February.
Robertson, R. ([1992] 1996), Globalization: Social Theory and Global Culture, London: Sage.
Rodgers, P. A. and Bremner, C. (2021), 118 Theories of Design(ing), Wilmington: Vernon Press.
Rousseau, J. J. (1768), Dictionnaire de Musique, Paris: M DCC LXVIII (Chez la VEUE 
DUCHESNE, Libraire, rue Saint Jacques, au Temple du Gout.
Rousseau, Monf. J. J. (1779), Dictionary of Music, trans. W. Waring, London: Printed for J. French.
Sadık, N. (1928), Türk Alfabesi, İstanbul: Akşam Matbaası. Available online: https://tr.wikipedia
.org/wiki/Türk_Alfabesi_(kitap) (accessed 25 February 2022).
Sâdullah, M. (1928), Yeni Türk Harfleri-le İlk Alfabe, İstanbul: İstanbul Tefeyüz Kitaphanesi. 
Available online: https://okumagunlugu.com/yeni-turk-harfleriyle-ilk-alfabe-midhat
-sadullah/ (accessed 25 February 2022).
Segal, W. (1972), ‘About Taut 1880–1938’, Architectural Review, 151 (899): 25.
Seskir, Z. C. (2017), ‘Türkiye’de Yükseköğretimde Nicel Cinsiyet Açığındaki Değişimin Olası 
Nedenleri ve Etkileri’, Yükseköğretim ve Bilim Dergisi, 7 (2): 321–32.
Sezgi, O. (1996), ‘Küresel Bir Dünya İçin Tasarım / Yerel Kimliğin Var Olma Hakkı’, in N. 
Bayazıt, F. K. Çorbacı and D. Günal (eds), Tasarımda Evrensellesme, 105–19, İstanbul: İTÜ 
Mimarlık Fakültesi.
Shakespeare, W. [16th C.] (1988), ‘Love’s Labour Lost’, The Complete Works, London: Michael 
O’Mara Books.
Simon, H. A. (1998), The Science of Artificial, Cambridge: MIT Press.
Snow, C. P. (1995), The Two Cultures, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Sudjic, D. (1985), Cult Objects, London: Paladin Books.
Szélpál, L. (2009), ‘Transnational History: An American Perspective’, Americana: E-Journal of 
American Studies in Hungary, 5 (2). Available online: https://americanaejournal.hu/vol5no2/
szelpal (accessed 10 August 2023)References
218
Taylor, F. W. (1906), ‘On the Art of Cutting Metals’, an address made at the opening of the annual 
meeting in New York, December, New York: American Society of Mechanical Engineers.
Teymur, N. (1981), ‘The Materiality of Design’, Block, (5): 19–27.
Teymur, N. (1982), Environmental Discourse, London: ?estion Press.
Tunstall, D. (2020), ‘Decolonizing Design’, YouTube video. Available online: https://www.youtube
.com/watch?v=jjLV1vVm9bc (accessed 5 August 2023).
The World Bank. (1997), World Development Indicators, Washington: The World Bank.
Thelen, D. (1999), ‘The Nation and Beyond: Transnational Perspectives on United States History’, 
The Journal of American History, 86 (3): 965–975.
Thorne, L. (1998), ‘Developing a Doctoral Framework-Middlesex Experience’, Annual Summer 
Conference 15 & 16 July 1998, UK Council for Graduate Education, 50–2.
Turan, G. (2006), ‘Türkiye’de Endüstri Tasarımı Alanındaki İlk Dernek Üzerine Bir Araştırma: 
Endüstri Tasarımı Derneği – ETD’, Türkiye’de Tasarımı Tartışmak, III. Ulusal Tasarım 
Kongresi Bildiri Kitabı, 374–83, İstanbul: İTÜ.
Tyrrell, I. (2007), ‘What is Transnational History?’ Available online: https://iantyrrell.wordpress
.com/what-is-transnational-history/ (accessed 15 September 2022).
Tyrrell, I. (2009), ‘Reflections on the Transnational Turn in United States History: Theory and 
Practice’, Journal of Global History, (4): 453–74.
UKCGE. (1995), Graduate Schools, UK Council for Graduate Education.
UKCGE. (1996), Quality and Standards of Postgraduate Research Degrees, UK Council for 
Graduate Education.
UKCGE. (1997), Practice-based Doctorates in the Creative and Performing Arts and Design, UK 
Council for Graduate Education.
Walker, J. (1989), Design History and History of Design, London: Pluto.
Walker, J. (1988), ‘Design History: A Student’s Handbook’, (book review) Journal of Design 
History, 1 (1): 79–80.
Watts, N., ed. (1999), The International Postgraduate: Challenges to British Higher Education, UK 
Council for Graduate Education, Lichfield.
Wharton, A. (2010), ‘Mosque Building in the Tanzimat Period’, in H. Kuruyazıcı and H. 
Kuruyazıcı (eds), Armenian Architects of Istanbul in the Era of Westernization, 91–105, 
Istanbul: International Hrant Dink Foundation Publications.
Wharton, A. (2015), ‘Armenian Architects and ‘Other’ Revivalism’, in A. Lepine, M. R. Lodder 
and R. McKever (eds), Revival: Memories, Identities, Utopias, 150–67, London: Courtauld 
Books Online.
Wharton, A. (2016), ‘The Balyan Family and the Linguistic Culture of a Parisian Education’, 
International Journal of Islamic Architecture, 5 (1): 39–71.
Wood, J. (1990), The BA Course in Design Studies (Total Design). Unpublished course outline, 
London: Goldsmith’s College.
Woodham, J. (2010), ‘Design History at the Periphery’, in T. Balcioglu and G. Baydar (eds) 
Tasarım Tarihinin Ötekileri (The Others of Design History), 6–23, İzmir: İzmir University of 
Economics.
Woodham, J. M. (1997), Twentieth-Century Design, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Woudhuysen, J. (1998), ‘Beyond the Dogma of Globalization’, in T. Balcioglu (ed), The Role of 
Product Design in Post-Industrial Society, 93–112, Ankara & Rochester: METU & KIAD.INDEX
4T Design and Design History Society 4, 143–54, 
143 n.1
design historiography, regional and institutional 
diversification in 150–3
design organizations similar to 144–6
development/maturation phases of 149–50
with foreign design organizations 146–7
foundation of 149
framework 143–4
future 153–4
Inter-Cultural Forum for the Arts 147–8
web of relations 146–7
5T (Türkiye Tasarım Tarihi Topluluğu 
Toplantıları) 149
Acıkan Taşlar (Tagore) 122, 126
active objects 24–6
actors demanding design with identity 201–2
Adam, Robert 7
advanced study programmes work
artists and designers, demands of 46
balance between 44
changing nature of professions and practices, 
demands of 47
concept of PhD 47–8
individual identity 44
new professional degree 47
permanency 43
practical part 41–2
theoretical part 41
timing/sequence of realization 41–2
transferability 45
unity 43
Aga Cooker 24
Ağır, Aygül 111–12
Akan, Erdem 190
Akcan, Esra 109–10
Akgün, Fikret 118
Akın, Özlem 173
Akman, Oya 190
Akpınar, Dudu 136–7
Aksu, Bora 61
Aktüre, Teoman 147
Alberti, Leone Battista 7
Alpan, Hüsnü 173
alphabets, Turkish 115–17
Altıntaş, Yurdaer 117–20, 127, 131, 133, 135
Altun, Ümit 190, 204
Alyanak, Şermin 190
Americanization 35–6
Amok (Zweig) 122, 125
Amygdalou, Kalliopi 150
anachronistic repetition 14
Ankara Castle 122
“an-other” model of knowing and doing 53
antiquity 13
Appadurai, Arjun 36
applied art 71
Arçelik 204
Archer, Bruce 54, 62, 99, 191
architecture within framework of design, 
FFAD 161–6
academic staff employment policy 164
awareness of being different 166
common activities 165
common courses 162–4
common first-year studio 162
gradual and controlled growth 165
idea of being team 166
research assistant employment policy 164–5
shared offices 165–6
Armenian architects 111–12
Armenian Architects of Istanbul 111
Arseven, C. E. 111
art and design education 50–60
Art and Humanities Research Board 52
Art and Industry (Read) 80, 88, 91–2
artefacts 52–3
art knowledge 183
Art Nouveau 63
Arzum Cezve 204
Asatekin, Mehmet 190–1
Ashwin, C. 93
Aşkın, Cihat 148
Aslanoğlu, İnci 109–10
Association of Industrial Designers 144
Atatürk, Mustafa Kemal 109, 116, 122
Atkinson, Paul 145
Attfield, Judy 61, 95
awareness 34–5
Aybar, Sedat 147
BA (Hons) degrees 188
Bakova, Ali 190, 204–5
Balcıoğlu, Tevfik 147, 191
Balian, Agop 111Index
220
Balian, Karabet 111
Balian, Nikogos 111, 112
Balian, Sarkis 111
Balians 111–12
Banham, Reyner 97, 110
Barın, Emin 119
Baroque 63
Batur, Afife 112
Baudrillard, Jean 10
Bauman, Zygmunt. 33–4
Bayazıt, Nigan 190–1
Baydar, Gülsüm 149
Bayly, C. A. 108
Belge, Murat 148
Bell, Quentin 70
Benjamin, Walter 9–10
Benton, Tim 91
Bertram, Anthony 67, 91
Beykoz Shoes 121–2
Bir Kadının 24 Saati (Zweig) 122
Birsel, Ayşe 190
Börekçi, Naz. A. G. Z. 192
Bozdoğan, Sibel 109–10
Braudel, Fernand 83 n.7
Breuer, Marcel 30
Brown, Gordon 35
CAD; see computer-aided design (CAD)
Calvera, Anna 146
Can, Selman 112
Canver, Nilgün 147
Carr, E. H. 82 n.6
Carrington, Noel 48–9, 71
Carter, David 62, 147
Çepoğlu, Gülizar 138–9, 141
Chalayan, Hussein 61
Chermayeff, Serge 71
Christie, James 147
Çırağan Kempinski Palace 111, 201
Cole, Henry 7, 70–1
colonization 62
combination furniture 26
combination of objects 26–7
commercial art 75–8
Commission for Architecture and the Built 
Environment (CABE) 8
commitments 56
commodity fetishism 203
commonalities, design 19–20
common objects 28–9
communication 34, 53
computer-aided design (CAD) 16
computer numerical control (CNC) systems 16
computers 16
connotative values of objects 20–1
Conran, Terence 66
consensus-based knowledge 58
consistency 80
Conway, Hazel 61, 96
Cooper, Rachel 145
cooperative education 58
Corbusier, Le 7
Council of Higher Education 156
Council of Industrial Design (CoID) 7–8, 89, 90
coups d’état, Turkey 118–19
Courtauld Institute of Art 148
Covid-19 pandemic 193
Crane, Walter 7, 71
Cross, Nigel 56, 181
cult objects 5, 20–1, 24, 157, 203–8
as arena of design battleground 206–8
in Turkey 204–5
Cult Objects (Sudjic) 203
cultural identity 36–7
cultural infiltration 37
culture, global 35–7
Curtius, Georg 107
Day, Lewis 71
Dearing, Ron 178–9
de Armado, Don Adriono 67
decolonization 62–3
decorative art 71
de Forest, Robert W. 71
del Renzio, Toni 91
dematerialization 18
Democrat Party 118
Deniz, Şerafettin 112
denotative values of objects 20–1
design
commonalities 19–20
conception of 65–6
consciousness 66
definition of 65–6
denotative versus connotative values of 
objects 20–1
Design History Society, Turkey 4, 143–54
expansion of 3
formal qualities, transformations in 21–31
globalization of 2, 33–40
graphic design in Turkey 3–4, 114–42
historiography in UK 3, 61, 86–106
history 61–3
identities 2
industrial design in Turkey 4
Integrated design approach (IDeA) 4, 155, 
159–73
knowledge, nature of 2, 41–9
one-directional transformation in 22–30
personality 3
principles of 19
reproductions 1, 9–18Index
221
in society 61, 143–54
technological transformation 2, 19–32
theory 7–8
transnational 3, 107–13
Turkish design transitions 5, 107–13
two-directional transformation in 30–1
in UK and its transformation 2–3, 61, 65–73
Design and Industries Association (DIA) 7, 49
Design (Bertram) 67
Design Council 8
design discourse 149 n.10
design education 88
designer’s dilemma 202–3
Design for Today 72
design historiography
regional and institutional diversification 
in 150–4
research methods 150–1
style of writing 151–2
topics 152
transnational 3, 107–13
Turkish 3, 107–13, 153
in UK (by end of twentieth century) 86–106
design historiography in UK 3, 61, 86–106
in British higher education 90–2
as dominant term/concept among other related 
nomenclature 88–9
government’s policy 92–3
historical conditions 87–92
historical consciousness, degree of 102–4
identity formation 94–102
aims and objectives 99–101
content of design 96–8
subject matter 95–6
theoretical framework 101–2
market-oriented strategy for design 92–3
negligence, stage of 102–3
official and formal titles, rise in 89–90
overview 86–7
as practice and profession, institutionalization 
of 87–8
problems (in 1960s) of 93–4
prospective 104–6
recognition, stage of 103
study, stage of 103–4
Design History: A Student’s Handbook
(Conway) 96
Design History and History of Design (Walker) 65, 
103
Design History Society, Turkey 2, 4, 61, 63, 93, 
144–54
design literature 96
Design Research Society 144
dessin 3, 69–71
Deutscher Werkbund 7
DIA; see Design and Industries Association (DIA)
Dilnot, Clive 52–3, 56, 61, 65–6, 95, 99–100, 
102–5, 174, 181, 183, 191, 203
Diploma in Art and Design (DipAD) 91
disegno 68, 68 n.6
distribution of investment 34
Doctor of Art (D.Art) 48, 177, 181
Doctor of Design (D.Des) 48, 177, 179, 181, 
187–8
Doctor of Fine Art (D.F.A.) 48, 177, 181
Doğan, Pelin 173
Dormer, Peter 23
DProf 187
Dreyfuss, Henry 72
Düben, İpek Aksüğür 138
Dyce, William 70
EAD; see European Academy of Design (EAD)
eclecticism 63
economic globalization 33–4, 34 n.2
Eczacıbaşı, Şakir 138
Eldem, Edhem 112
electric kettle technology 204
electric shaver 25–6
electronic production 16–17
involvement of original 17
original and its 17
Elton, G. R. 82 n.6
English Tradition in Design, The (Gloag) 78
Enzensberger, Hans Magnus 80
Er, Alpay 62 n.2, 191
Er, Özlem 62 n.2, 191
Erdim, B. 109–10
Erkmen, Aydın 119, 131
Erkmen, Bülent 119, 133, 135–6
Ertel, Mengü 118–19, 126–9, 131–2
Ertürk, İsmail 147
esthétique industrielle 67
European Academy of Design (EAD) 145–6
European Customs Union 189
Evans, M. 17
Faculty of Fine Arts and Design (FFAD) 159–73
academic staff employment policy 164
architecture within framework of design
161–6
awareness of being different 166
common activities 165
common courses 162–4
common first-year studio 162
first year education 160
fourth year education 161
general education strategy 160–1
gradual and controlled growth 165
idea of being team 166
IDeA on new FFAD building, reflections 
of 168–73Index
222
integrated design approach, reflections on 161
overview 159–60
research assistant employment policy 164–5
second year education 160–1
shared offices 165–6
third year education 161
Fadıllıoğlu, Zeynep 200–1
Fallan, Kjetil 61
Falsificationism 53
Farhi, Musa 147
Fehim, Münif 117, 122
Ferebee, Ann 96
Feydeau, Georges 131
FFAD; see Faculty of Fine Arts and Design (FFAD)
Fiat Panda 16
film industry 36
Fine Art 71
Flusser, Vilém 54, 56
foreign food and cuisines 36
Forty, Adrian 14, 61, 95
Foucault, Michel 82–3
fragmentation 97 n.17
Frayling, Christopher 52, 186
Freely, Maureen 148
Friberg, K. 108
Fry, Tony 61, 100–1, 106
Fujita, Haruhiko 149
‘Funded Consultancy Scheme’ (FCS) 92
Gates, Bill 40
Geddes, Norman Bel 72
Gender Perspectives in Design: Turkish and Global 
Contexts 150
Genoways, Hugh H. 187
German fifty-Pfennig coin 126
Giedion, Sigfried 26
Ginzburg, Carlo 79 n.2, 85, 106
Glasarchitektur (Scheerbart) 110
Glass House 110
Gloag, John 61, 74–80
on acceptance of industrial design in UK
78–9
characteristics of method/survey 79–80
concept of industrial design 74–5
English Tradition in Design, The 78
Good Design Good Business 77
Industrial Art Explained 75–6
meaning of industrial design 75–8
Plastics and Industrial Design 76
Self Training for Industrial Designers 75, 77
global history 108
globalization 33–40, 106, 108
globalization of local design 2, 33–40
awareness 34–5
communication 34
culture 35–7
economics 33–4
Turkey 37–40
Göker, Selma 147
Golden Scarab, The 122
Good Design Good Business (Gloag) 77
Görey, İhap Hulusi 115
Grand Bazaar 201
graphic communication 138
graphic design in Turkey 3–4, 114–42
from 1923 to 1950 115–18
1960s, first coup d’état 118–19
1971, coup d’état 119
1980, coup d’état 119
abstract/integrative framework 131–3
after mid-1980s 119–20
analytic framework 120–39
conceptual/referential framework 133–9
Democrat Party (1950s) 118
historical perspective 114–20
realistic/representative framework 121–6
symbolic/illustrative framework 126–31
Great Exhibition (1851) 61
Griffin, Miranda 147
Gropius, Walter 7
Guillerme, Jacques 67
Güven, Gamze 190
Gywnn, John 69
Hasdoğan, Gülay 38, 190, 191
Height, Frank 62, 147
Heskett, John 61, 62, 147, 148, 191
Heynen, Hilde 149
higher education in UK 50–1
Higher National Diploma (HND) 50
Higher School of Applied Industrial Arts, 
Turkey 119
Hilson, M. 108
History of Design from the Victorian Era to the 
Present, A (Ferebee) 96
History of the World or World Architecture 97
History of Things (Kubler) 105
History of Western Technology, A (Klem) 15
Hitchcock poster (Altıntaş) 133, 135
Hogarth, William 69
Hollywood 36–7
Homend Pottoman 1803 204
Hulusi, İhap 116–17, 121–2
ICDHS; see International Committee of Design 
History and Studies (ICDHS)
ICFA; see Inter-Cultural Forum for the Arts (ICFA)
IDeA; see Integrated design approach (IDeA)
identicalness 16
identities, design 2Index
223
IEU; see Izmir University of Economics (IEU)
İlhan, Ali O. 191
inclusive model 47–8, 47 n.6
inconsistencies 80–4, 81 n.3
as emergence of conflict 82–3
function within research 84
in historiography 81–2
Incredible Stories (Poe) 122, 125
industrial architecture 75–8
industrial art 75–8
Industrial Art (Pevsner) 88
Industrial Art Explained (Gloag) 75–6
industrial design 7–8, 69 n.7, 72 n.11, 88–9
acceptance in UK 78–9
concept of 74–5
divisions of 76–7
inconsistency 81–4
meaning of 75–8
versus product design 76 n.1
in Turkey 4, 189–99
in UK 72
in United States 72
Industrial Design Association 144
Industrial Designers’ Society of Turkey 
(ETMK) 144, 189
industrial design in Turkey 4, 189–99
academia 191–2
departments of 190–1
development, draft action plan for 193–9
gender balance and 192–3
present situation 193
rise of 189–90
industrialization 2, 33–40
Industrial Revolution 15, 87
Integrated design approach (IDeA) 4, 155, 
159–73
emergence of 166–8
features 159
FFAD 159–73
IEU 159–73
on new FFAD building, reflections of 168–74
collateral, transparent and open 170
common areas 170–1
corridors and open areas for 
critiques 169–70
from specific to common 173
studio locations 169
zones by functions 171–2
principle of 159
Integrated Design Curriculum 167
Inter-Cultural Forum for the Arts (ICFA) 147–8
International Committee of Design History and 
Studies (ICDHS) 146
International Council of Societies of Industrial 
Design (ICSID) 8
international history 108
international postgraduate students 51 n.1
International Prison Watch (Erkmen) 133, 135
Ionesco, Eugène 131
Iriye, Akira 107
Irmak, Orhan 190
Issigonis, Alec 61
Istanbul Film Festival poster (Karamustafa) 131–2
İzer, Ayşegül 74
Izmir Center of Architecture 153
Izmir University of Economics (IEU) 159–73
Jameson, Fredric 35–6
Japan Design History Forum 150
Japanese House 110
Julier, Guy 61, 191
Justificationism 53
Kalman, Tibor 95, 102, 191
Kaprol, Arzu 192–3
Kara, Meriç 190
Karamustafa, Sadık 119, 127–8, 131–2, 136–8
Karol, Esen 137–8, 140
Kaya, Cem 153–4, 202
Kayek, Dice 192–3
Kaygan, Harun 192
Kent Institute of Art and Design, Rochester, 
UK 148
Keşanlı Ali Destanı (Ertel) 131–2
Kikuchi, Yuko 107, 108
King, Philip 131, 133
Kinross, Robin 80, 84
kitchen tools 24, 24 n3
Klem, Frederick 15
knowledge 2, 43–9, 179
about practice 44
art 183
in art and design practices 4, 50–60
artefactual 53
communication 53
from language perspective 53
by means of practice 44
of object 12
personal 55–6
within practice 44
in SAD 55
scientific 55–7
sensorial 53
value and 56
Koç, Mirzat 190
Koç, Şule 190
Korçan, Bahar 192–3
Korkut, Fatma 192
Korvenmaa, Pekka 146
Koz, Defne 62, 148, 190Index
224
Krippendorff, Klauss 174
Kubler, George 105
Küçükerman, Önder 190–1
Kuhn, Thomas 175–6
Kuran, Abdullah 111
Kurtgözü, Aren E. 156, 191–2
Labrouste, Alexandre 111
Labrouste, Henri 111
Lakatos, Imre 57–8
Langrish, John 62, 191
languages 53
Laugier, Marc-Antoine 7
Lees-Maffei, Grace 61
lemon squeezer 21
Lethaby, W. R. 7, 71
Levet, Füsün 148
Lewis, Bernard 148
Loewy, Raymond 72
Loos, Adolf 7
Lovegrove, Ross 61
Love’s Labour (Shakespeare) 67, 67 n.2
Macbeth (Shakespeare) 137–8, 140
MacCarthy, Fiona 89–90
Macdonald, Simon 107
machine design 75–8
Macleod, Kate 45
Maden, Sait 117–19
Maldonado, Tomas 18
Malhan, Faruk 190
Malhan, Koray 190
Manioğlu, Mesut 118
Mansur, Cem 148
Manzini, Ezio 148
Margolin, Victor 56, 66, 95, 146, 148, 174
Marquard, Odo 19
Marriot, Michael 21
Marwick, Arthur 101
Marx, Karl 203
mass production 15–16, 29
involvement of original 15–16
original and its 16
mass transportation 31
material culture 105
Material Culture and Mass Consumption
(Miller) 105
media 21
Mellor, David 20
memory 12
microcomputer 16
Miller, Daniel 105
Mills, C. Wright 8
miniaturization of components 18
mock-ups 17
modernisation 115
MoMA Design Store 200
Moot Points, Friendly Disputes upon Art & Industry 
between Walter Crane and Lewis F. 
Day 48
Morelli, Giovanni 79 n.2
Morris, William 7, 71, 79
mould-related techniques 13–14
moulds 13–14
multi-authorship 152
multi-functional objects 26–8
multiple production 13–15
involvement of original 13–14
original and its 14–15
Mumford, Lewis 11, 25
Musical Dictionary, A (Rousseau) 68
Muthesius, Hermann 7
Mutver, Cemalettin 119
Myerson, Jeremy 148
Nagel, Karl H. 23
Nakışçı, Tamer 190
National Advisory Council on Art Education 
(NACAE) 91
natural evolution of products 1–2
Nature of History, The (Marwick) 101
Naylor, Gillian 61
Neurotic Realism 176
New Relationship: Design History and Virtual 
Design Museum 150
Non-Reflective Transnational Dissemination of 
Impacts 108, 110–12
non-renewable objects 29–30
objects 1–2
active 24–6
combination of 26–7
common 28–9
connotative values of 20–1
cult 5, 20–1, 24, 157, 203–8
denotative values of 20–1
from easy to difficult 21–2
energy sources 25
multi-functional 26–8
from non-renewable to renewable 29–30
one-directional transformation in 22–30
in our life 98 n.18
passive 24–6
personal 28–9
semi-active 24–6
from single to various 29
social status of 20–1
transformation of 21–2
two-directional transformation in 30–1
Oktay Aslanapa 111
one-directional transformation in design 22–30
from common to personal 28–9Index
225
from functional to multi-functional 26–8
from non-renewable to renewable 29–30
from passive to active 24–6
from single to various 29
‘one-dollar watch’ campaign 28
One Hundred Great Product Designs 203
original 9–10
in discourse of reproduction 10
and its reproductions, relationship 
between 11–17
meanings of 10
in reproduction process 11
and uniqueness 10–11
ornamental art 71
Ortaköy Mosque 111–12
O’Shea, Tim 179
Ottomans 63, 200–1, 204
Önal, Selçuk 118
Özal, Turgut 119–20
Özar, Mithat 117
Özbek, Rıfat 61
Özcan, A. Can 192
Özer, Adem 147
Özgen, Koray 190
Pacey, Philip 100
Packard, Vance 23, 23 n.2
Paker, Saliha 147
Palaeolithic scraper 12
Papaz Kaçtı (King) 131, 133
Parsons, Talcott 8
passive objects 24–6
Peel, Robert 69–70
personal knowledge 55–6
personal objects 28–9
Pevsner, Nikolaus 70, 88
PhD programmes 2, 4, 155, 174–88
attributes of 185
practice-based 41–9, 184–8
research-based education 50–60
work-based learning programs 184–5
Pioneers of Modern Design (Pevsner) 91, 97
Piranesi, Giovanni Battista 7
Plastics and Industrial Design (Gloag) 76
Poe, Edgar Allan 122
Polanyi, Michael 55
polytechnics 50
Popper, Karl 53
potter 12
practice-based learning 58
practice-based PhD programmes 4, 41–9, 174–88
artists and designers, demands of 46
balance between 44
changing nature of professions and practices, 
demands of 47
concept of 47–8
expectations 46 n.5
inclusive model 47–8, 47 n.6
individual identity 44
new professional degree 47
permanency 43
practical part 41–2
theoretical part 41
timing/sequence of realization 41–2
transferability 45
UK Council for Graduate Education (UKCGE) 
on 43
unity 43
prefiguration 12
Preston, Michael 62, 147
principles of design 19
private money 34
production 9
electronic 16–17
mass 15–16
multiple 13–15
repetitive 11–13
versus reproduction process 9–11
product-oriented sophistication 30
product variety 29
professional degrees 47
professional doctorates (PD) 58–60, 178–88
academic level of 180–1
advantages of 181–2
art versus design 182–3
assessment of work 182
characteristics 185
knowledge 179–80
PhD versus 179–80
practice and research 181
Proficiency in Art 156
prototypes 16–17
Pugin, Augustus 7
Pulos, Arthur 71
Putnam, Tim 61
Quality Assurance Agency 180, 186
Rakı 204 n.4
Rams, Dieter 148
RCA; see Royal College of Art (RCA)
Read, Herbert 80, 88
renewable objects 29–30
repetitive production 11–13
involvement of original 12
original and its 13
reproduction process, industrial design 1, 9–18
electronic production 16–17
mass production 15–16
multiple production 13–15
original and its 11–17
original in 11Index
226
original in discourse of 10
overview 9
versus production 9–11
repetitive production 11–13
Research Assessment Exercise 50
research-based education at doctorate level 50–60
background 50–2
educational aspect 58–60
epistemological aspect 52–4
science, art and design 54–8
resemblance, levels of 14
Robertson, Roland 34
Rococo 63
Roden, Claudia 148
Rolex watches 20
Roman cameo glass 14
Roman Portland Vase 14–15
Rousseau, Jean-Jacques 68
Royal College of Art (RCA) 147
Ruskin, John 7
SAD; see science, art and design (SAD)
Said, Edward 200
Şakir, Cevat 117
Salinas, Oscar 146
sameness, original and reproductions 14
Sarıyer, Aziz 190
Sarıyer, Derin 190
Scheerbart, Paul 110
Schick, Irvin Cemil 112
Schools of Design, The (Bell) 70
science, art and design (SAD) 54–8
Science of Design, The (Simon) 8, 54
scientific knowledge 55–7
scissors 20
Segal, Walter 110
Şekercioğlu, Kunter 190, 204
self-referential writing 152
Self Training for Industrial Designers (Gloag) 75, 
77
semi-active objects 24–6
Semper, Gottfried 7
Senan, Emre 139 n.7
sensorial knowledge 53
Serbest, Adnan 190
Siesbye, Alev Ebüzziya 190
similarity, original and reproductions 13
Simon, Herbert 8, 54
Smith, Edward Lucie 26
Snow, C. P. 54, 183
Society of Graphic Artists 119–20
Society of Industrial Artists (SIA) 90
Sokaklardan (Eczacıbaşı) 138, 140
The Solid Side project 30
Somerset House 148
Sony Walkman 28, 28 n.5
Sparke, Penny 61
Speidel, Manfred 109–10
Starck, Philippe 21, 204
Statism 115
Stone Age 11–12
Structure of Scientific Revolutions, The (Kuhn) 175
Sturt, George 88
Suavi, Ali 117
Suda, Orhan 148
Sudjic, Deyan 203
Süer, Özlem 192–3
sumptuous palaces 201
‘Support for Design’ (SFD) scheme 93
Susani, Marco 62, 148
Svengren, Elizabeth 145
Swatch 57
Swiss Army knives 27, 30–1
Tagore, Rabindranath 122
Tarzi, İdil 192–3
Tasarım Gazetesi (Design Newspaper) 139 n.7
Taut, Bruno 3, 108–11
Taylor, Frederick W. 15
Teague, Walter Dorwin 72
Teasley, Sarah 152
technologies 23, 36, 57
Temizan, Kenan 118
Teymur, Necdet 31, 148
Thatcher, Margaret 92, 92 n.11
Thelen, D. 108
Theory and Design in the First Machine Age
(Banham) 91, 97
theory of uncertainty 52 n.3
third domain 60, 156
Thorne, Lucy 186
time measurement systems 28, 28 n.5
Timur, Şebnem 192
tools versus machines 25
Total Design 90 n.8
transformations of design 65–73
in Britain/UK 67, 69–72
design concept/definition 65–8
with dessin 69–71
expressions in field 72–3
mass-produced objects, in context of 68–9
technological progress 66–7
in Western countries 67
transnational design history 3, 107–13
Balians 111–12
overview 107–8
Taut, Bruno 108–11
in Turkey 108–12
trans-national history 108
Tryyell, Ian 108
Tunstall, Dori 62
Türkali, Vedat 148Index
227
Turkey 37–40
Arabic script replaced with Roman 
alphabet 115–17
Armenian architects in 111–12
Balians in 111–12
cinemas 36–7
coup d’état 118–19
cult objects in 204–5
Democrat Party 118
design historiography 153
design transitions 5, 107–13
globalization of local design 37–40
graphic design in 3–4, 114–42
industrial design in 4, 189–99
local culture for new design 39–40
local designers 38–9
overview 37–8
Taut, Bruno 3, 108–11
transnational design history 3, 107–13
Turkish graphic design 3–4, 114–42
from 1923 to 1950 115–18
1960s, first coup d’état 118–19
1971, coup d’état 119
1980, coup d’état 119
abstract/integrative framework 131–3
after mid-1980s 119–20
analytic framework 120–39
conceptual/referential framework 133–9
Democrat Party (1950s) 118
historical perspective 114–20
realistic/representative framework 121–6
symbolic/illustrative framework 126–31
Turkish Patent Institute 189
Turkish product 203–8
Turkish Society of Graphic Designers 120
Türk Mimarisinde İz Bırakanlar (Schick) 112
Two Cultures, The (Snow) 54, 183
two-directional transformation in design 30–1
from large to small or vice versa 31
from simple to complex or vice versa 30–1
typography 119, 138
UKCGE; see UK Council for Graduate Education 
(UKCGE)
UK Council for Graduate Education 
(UKCGE) 43, 155–6, 180, 184
Ünal, Erguvan 173
Ünal, Mahir 173
uniqueness 10–11
Vall, N. 108
Veveris, M. 17
Viollet-le-Duc, Eugène 7
virtual reality 18
VitrA, Turkish company 61, 61 n.1
Walker, John 65, 92 n.11, 94, 96, 103, 
203
Wassily chair 30
Wedgwood, Josiah 14–15
Wegener, Claudia Maria 44 n.2
Westernization 63, 115
Wharton, Alyson 112
Wheelwright’s Shop, The (Sturt) 88
Wood, John 90 n.8
Woodham, Jonathan 61, 146, 149, 200
work-based learning programs 58
World Bank 34
World Design Organization 8
world history 108
Wormald, P. 17
Woudhuysen, James 148
Wright, Frank Lloyd 7
Yagou, Artemis 150
Yalım, Ece 190
Yalman, Can 190
Yavi, Erkal 119, 129–30
Young, Michael Edward 173
Zeitgeist: Farewell to Matters of Principle
(Marquard) 19
Zweig, Stefan 122228229230
