“As early as 1962, John Habraken had discovered that mass housing was based on two incorrect principles: 1) all 
people want the same thing; and 2) professionals know what is good for them. The reality is that no two people have 
the same preferences, and their wishes and possibilities are constantly changing. Based on life-time experiences, John 
and Stephen Kendall discuss in this book the interaction between those people – in their homes, office, schools and 
healthcare centers – and the built environment and who should decide on it.”
Frank Bijdendijk, Former Managing Director of the Housing Association Het Oosten (later Stadgemoot), 
Amsterdam; Founder and President of the National Renovation Platform; Board of Inspiration, 
Re-Born – Circular Real Estate
“This book offers a good opportunity for architects to quickly know what’s happening in Open Building practice 
in different contexts all over the world. The book reflects the impact the Open Building approach can have on the 
relationship among architects, developers and occupants in the whole life of buildings. This reflection should inspire 
and encourage architects to rethink and practice in a more empathic and sustainable perspective.”
Liu Peng, Chief Architect, Senior Architect, First Grade, Beijing Institute of Architectural Design
“This is an extremely useful book that is both theoretical and practical and both for the developed and the developing 
world. It opens discourses on wicked questions of top-down vs. bottom-up approaches, architecture as a product 
vs. process, architects’ control over built form, and straddling the past and the future. A truly one-of-its-kind book.”
Vishwanath Kashikar, Assistant Professor of Architecture, Faculty of Architecture, 
CEPT University, Ahmedabad, IndiaOpen Building is an internationally recognized approach to the design of buildings and building complexes with 
roots in the way the ordinary built environment grows and regenerates. The Open Building approach recognizes that 
both stability and change are realities to be managed in the contemporary built environment. Buildings – and the 
neighborhoods they occupy – are not static during the most stable times or during times of rapid social and technical 
change. They are living organisms that need constant adjustments to remain attractive, safe and valuable.
Using case studies of built projects from around the world, this book explains the Open Building approach and discusses 
important characteristics of everyday built environment that the Open Building approach designs for. It also presents 
a key method that can be used to put the approach into use. It addresses questions such as:
• How can we design large projects for inevitable change?
• How can we balance the demands of large projects for efficient implementation with the need for ‘fine-grained’ 
decision-making control?
• How can we separate design tasks, one task being the design of what should last a century, the other task being 
the design of more mutable units of occupancy?
• How can we identify and share architectural themes and, at the same time, make variations on them?
• How can we use the Open Building approach to steward the earth’s scarce resources and contribute to a circular 
economy that benefits all people?
This book is an essential resource for practitioners, investors and developers, regulators, builders, product manufacturers 
and educators interested in why the Open Building approach matters and how to practice Open Building.
Stephen H. Kendall is Emeritus Professor of Architecture at Ball State University in the United States. He holds a professional 
degree in architecture from the University of Cincinnati, a post-professional degree in architecture and urban design from 
Washington University in St. Louis and a PhD from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. In practice, he designed 
hospitals, schools and residential buildings and before that worked as a carpenter. In his academic career, he taught 
architectural design and urban design studios and courses in building technology and design theory in the US, Taiwan, Italy, 
Indonesia, South Africa, Japan and PR China. He is vice president of the Council on Open Building. He has written more 
than 45 papers and book chapters; is the co-author (with Jonathan Teicher) of Residential Open Building (Routledge, 
2000), available in English, Japanese, Chinese and Korean; and has authored many technical reports and funded research 
projects, including “Healthcare Facilities Designed for Flexibility” for the US Department of Defense Health Agency. 
He has lectured widely to university and professional audiences around the world. His edited books include Healthcare 
Architecture as Infrastructure: Open Building in Practice (2019) and Residential Architecture as Infrastructure: Open 
Building in Practice (2022). With John R. Dale, FAIA, he co-edited The Short Works of John Habraken: Ways of Seeing/
Ways of Doing (2023). All are part of the Open Building Series of books published by Routledge.
N. John Habraken is a Dutch architect and educator. He served as founding director of the SAR Foundation (1965–75) 
and founding chair of the Department of Architecture and Urban Design at Eindhoven Technical University (1967–75). 
He was Head of the Department of Architecture at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (1975–81), and professor, 
where he became Professor Emeritus after his retirement in 1989. He has lectured around the world to academic and 
professional audiences. Habraken is the recipient of many awards worldwide, notably including the BNA Kubus award 
(Dutch Society of Architects) and honorary membership in the Architecture Institute of Japan. He is the author of more 
than 62 published essays, book chapters, research reports and articles and numerous books (many translated into other 
languages) including Supports: An Alternative to Mass Housing; Variations: The Systematic Design of Supports; The 
Structure of the Ordinary: Form and Control in the Built Environment; The Appearance of the Form: Four Essays on the 
Position Designing Takes between People and Things; Palladio’s Children – Seven Essays on Everyday Environment and 
the Architect; and Conversations with Form: A Workbook for Students of Architecture (with Teicher and Mignucci).
Open Building for ArchitectsOpen Building Series
The Routledge Open Building Series is a library of titles addressing the Open Building approach to design theory and 
methods, architecture and urban design with an international perspective. These titles augment a growing literature in 
sustainability and resilience in the built environment by focusing on the fourth dimension.
Open Building advocates separation of design tasks: the design of what is shared (the commons) and what will last 
from the design of what belongs to individual occupancies and is expected to change more quickly. This is both a social/
political and a design skills issue. Urban design projects, office buildings, shopping centers and airport concourses are 
examples of separation of design tasks. The same should become the norm in multi-unit housing, healthcare and edu￾cational facilities and other project types making up our everyday world. The Open Building approach addresses how 
to establish the boundary between what is shared and what is decided independently; how to separate the distribution 
of utility lines between the two; how to evaluate a building’s or urban design’s capacity to accommodate a variety of 
interventions initially and over time; and what shared patterns, types and systems help designers cultivate coherent 
variety. More generally, Open Building helps design professionals work with change and to cooperate in the flowering 
of everyday environment.
This series provides answers to these questions, and more, and is designed to be the go-to resource for anyone seeking 
to understand and practice Open Building.
The Appearance of the Form
Seven Essays on the Position Designing Takes Between People and Things (Routledge Revivals)
N. John Habraken
Supports
An Alternative to Mass Housing (Routledge Revivals)
N. John Habraken
Healthcare Architecture as Infrastructure
Open Building in Practice
Edited by Stephen H. Kendall
Residential Architecture as Infrastructure
Open Building in Practice
Edited by Stephen H. Kendall
The Short Works of John Habraken
Ways of Seeing/Ways of Doing
Edited By Stephen H. Kendall and John R. Dale
Open Building for Architects
Professional Knowledge for an Architecture of Everyday Environment
Stephen H. Kendall and N. John Habraken
For more information about this series, please visit: www.routledge.com/Open-Building/book-series/OBOpen Building 
for Architects
Professional Knowledge for an Architecture 
of Everyday Environment
Stephen H. Kendall and N. John HabrakenDesigned cover image: Getty Images
First published 2024
by Routledge
4 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RN
and by Routledge
605 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10158
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business
© 2024 Stephen H. Kendall and N. John Habraken
The right of Stephen H. Kendall and N. John Habraken to be identified as authors 
of this work has been asserted in accordance with sections 77 and 78 of the 
Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or utilised 
in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or 
hereafter invented, including photocopying and recording, or in any information 
storage or retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publishers.
Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered 
trademarks, and are used only for identification and explanation without intent to 
infringe.
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Kendall, Stephen H., author. | Habraken, N. J., author. 
Title: Open building for architects : professional knowledge for an architecture of 
everyday environment / Stephen H. Kendall and N. John Habraken. 
Description: Abingdon, Oxon : Routledge, 2024. | Series: Routledge open building | 
Includes bibliographical references and index. 
Identifiers: LCCN 2023034061 (print) | LCCN 2023034062 (ebook) | 
ISBN 9781032152141 (hardback) | ISBN 9781032152165 (paperback) | 
ISBN 9781003243076 (ebook) 
Subjects: LCSH: Architectural design—Methodology. | Buildings—Utilization. 
Classification: LCC NA2750 .K47 2024 (print) | LCC NA2750 (ebook) | 
DDC 729—dc23/eng/20230912 
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2023034061
LC ebook record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2023034062
ISBN: 978-1-032-15214-1 (hbk)
ISBN: 978-1-032-15216-5 (pbk)
ISBN: 978-1-003-24307-6 (ebk)
DOI: 10.4324/9781003243076
Typeset in Syntax
by Apex CoVantage, LLCvii
Contents
Acknowledgments xi
Preface xiii
Introduction 1
Focus on Practice 1
Separating Design Tasks 1
Separating Design Tasks Requires Cooperation 2
What We Mean by Everyday Built Environment 3
The Open Building Approach Started with a Focus on Large Housing Projects 4
The Open Building Approach has Broader Applications than Housing 4
Improving Our Skills 5
Who We Hope Will Read this Book 5
The Structure of the Book 6
Built Projects that Exemplify the Open Building Approach 9
Background 9
What Open Building Designs For 9
Examples of the Open Building Approach in Practice 9
Urban or Campus Design 10
Sydhavnen/Sluseholmen: Copenhagen Harbor, Copenhagen, Denmark 10
Westpolder Bolwerk: Berkel en Rodenrijs, the Netherlands 19
Katwijk Inner Harbor Project: Katwijk, the Netherlands 25
Master Plan for the Inselspital Hospital Campus: Bern, Switzerland 29
Residential 37
Molenvliet: Papendrecht, the Netherlands 37
NEXT21: Osaka, Japan 43
Plus-Home: Arabianranta, Helsinki, Finland 51
TILA: Helsinki, Finland 56
TOPUP: Amsterdam, the Netherlands 62
Healthcare 69
INO Intensive Care Facility: Inselspital, Bern, Switzerland 69
Sammy Ofer Heart Building: Tel Aviv, Israel 78
Oregon Health Center: Portland, Oregon, USA 84
Education 96
Shenzhen University Engineering School: Shenzhen, PR China 96
Santa Monica High School Discovery Building: Los Angeles, California, USA 102viii
C ontents
The Open Building Approach Explained 109
The Origins of the Approach 109
The Prototypical Urban Problem, Not Limited to Housing 109
Basic Terminology 111
The Problem of Evaluation 112
The Problem of Coordination 112
Using the Approach: Operations, Communication and Evaluation 113
Designing a Base Building 114
Five Characteristics of Everyday Built Environment that Open Building Designs For 115
Introduction 115
An Explanatory Note 115
Separating Design Tasks: Deciding What Is Shared and What Is Decided Independently 116
Separation of Design Tasks in Urban Design or Campus Planning 117
Separation of Design Tasks Has Been Commonplace in Office Buildings and Shopping Centers 118
Separation of Design Tasks Is Becoming Familiar in Healthcare Facilities 119
Multifamily and Attached Housing Continues to Ignore Separation of Design Tasks 120
Thematic Design: Sharing Themes and Making Variations 121
Enabling Coherence with Variety 121
A Natural Phenomenon 122
Patterns 123
Systems, Variants and Structure 124
Designing with Themes 125
The Importance of Territory 126
Understanding Territory Helps Us with the Distribution of Control 126
Control of Space 127
The Inherent Hierarchy in Built Environment 128
Levels 128
The Levels Model Helps in Several Important Ways 129
Historical Examples of the Use of Levels 129
Levels and Change 130
Relating to a Higher Level 131
Relating to a Lower Level 131
Relations on the Same Level 132
The Disappearance of Levels 133
Levels and Our Modernist Legacy 134
The Emergence of an Infill Level 134ix
C ontents
Balancing Permanence and Change 135
Technical Strategies for Handling Change 136
Change and Large Projects 137
The Importance of Studies of Change in the Built Environment 137
Capacity Analysis – A Key Tool of the Open Building Approach 140
Introduction 140
What Is Capacity Analysis? 140
Capacity Analysis as Part of a Design Process 141
A Methodological Problem 142
Evaluating Possible Uses 143
How Capacity Links Form to Function 144
The Use of Zones and Margins 145
Zones and Margins as Part of Capacity Analysis 146
Zones and Margins in Urban Design 146
Using Zones and Margins in Housing Design 146
Sectors 148
Basic Variants 148
Grids as Design Tools for Buildings and Urban Tissues 149
Kinds of Grids 150
Grids in Urban Design 151
Summary of the Use of Grids in Designing 153
A Detailed Study of Capacity Analysis in Adaptive Reuse – Office to Residential 154
The Challenge of Conversion of Office Buildings to Residential Use 154
Getting the Design Constraints Right 154
Studying MEP Constraints is a First Step for Capacity Analysis 155
DWV Systems in an Open Building Design Strategy 157
Description of Fixtures 157
Toilets 158
Organizing Piping ‘Traffic’ Inside Infill Partitions 159
Capacity Analysis Study of the Kales Building 160
An Open Building Alternative to Conversion 161
Vertical MEP Pipe Shaft Positioning Study 162
A Design Process for Conversion Using Capacity Analysis 164
Step 1 – Initial Floor Plan Study Process 164
Step 2 – Placing Demising Walls to Create Basic Unit Sizes and Margins 165x
C ontents
Step 3 – Developing an Individual Dwelling Unit 165
Step 4 – Placing Rooms Inside the Unit 166
Step 5 – Locate the MEP Stacks 167
Using the Constraints 169
Organizing Drainage Piping in a Bathroom in Three Variants 182
Conclusions 183
How a Residential Infill Industry Will Change the Culture of Building 184
Introduction 184
An Outdated Residential Industry Culture 184
One Developer’s Perspective 185
How Infill Companies Would Work 187
A Question of Business Structure and Culture 188
Developments Toward an Infill Industry in PR China 189
Governmental Initiatives 189
Heneng 190
An Example of a Heneng Installation 191
Problems with Heneng and Recent Developments 193
V3 System Development 193
Photographs of the V3 Industrialized Infill System 194
Redefining Base Building and Infill Contents 196
What We Have Learned 197
Open Building and Government 198
What We Should Be Arguing For 199
Postscript 1: Toward a New Research Agenda 201
Postscript 2: Tools of The Trade 202
The Quality of the Commons 202
APPENDICES 206
Appendix One: A Brief Overview of the International Open Building Movement 206
Appendix Two: Sources of Information of the Open Building Approach, Thematic 
Design and a Glossary of Terms 210
Glossary of Key Terms 213
Index 216xi
We would like to acknowledge the friendship and support of John Dale, FAIA, 
co-founder with Stephen H. Kendall of the Council on Open Building, for his care￾ful reading of early drafts of the book. We also want to express our appreciation 
to all those colleagues around the world who, over many years, have shared their 
experiences and insights about the everyday built environment and how it can flour￾ish. Finally, we want to acknowledge Bas de Bruin for his support in communication 
between the two authors across time and space in the work leading up to the com￾pletion of the manuscript.
We also want to thank those architects, clients and companies who helped us 
assemble the case studies at the beginning of the book. They are listed here:
URBAN OR CAMPUS DESIGN
• Sydhavnen/Sluseholmen Copenhagen Harbor (Sjoerd Soeters)
• Westpolder Bolwerk, Berkel en Rodenrijs, the Netherlands (Henk and Robbert Reijenga)
• Katwijk Inner Harbour Project, Katwijk, the Netherlands (Hans van Olphen)
• Master plan for the Inselspital Hospital Campus, Bern, Switzerland (HENN Archi￾tects and Steve Weissbaum, Inselspital Office of Campus Planning)
RESIDENTIAL
• Molenvliet, Papendrecht, the Netherlands (Frans van der Wer)
• NEXT21, Osaka, Japan (NEXT 21 Design Team (Midori Kamo, Shinichi Chikazumi 
and Osaka Gas)
• Arabianranta, Helsinki, Finland (Esko Kahri and Petri Viita (Open Arch) and 
Tokomon
• TILA, Helsinki, Finland (Pia Ilonen – ILO architects Ltd.)
• TOPUP, Amsterdam, the Netherlands (Tom Frantzen et. al Architecten)
HEALTHCARE
• Inselspital Hospital, INO Intensive Care Facility, Bern, Switzerland (Giorgio Macchi, 
former Chief Architect, Canton Bern Office of Properties and Buildings)
• Sammy Ofer Heart Building, Tel Aviv, Israel (Nirit Pilosof, PhD, Head of Research 
in Healthcare Transformation, Sheba Medical Center)
• Oregon Health Center, Portland, Oregon, USA (Karl Sonnenberg (retired), ZGF 
Architects)
EDUCATION
• Shenzhen University Engineering School, China (Jia Beisi, Partner, BE Architects)
• Santa Monica High School Discovery Building, Los Angeles, California (John Dale, 
FAIA + MRY Architects)
Acknowledgmentsxii
“I am sure that the power of vested interests is vastly exaggerated compared to the gradual 
encroachment of ideas.”
— Robert Heilbroner, 1953. The Worldly Philosophers. Simon and Shuster, New Yorkxiii
We decided to write this book on the encouragement of Francesca Ford, senior pub￾lisher and our editor at Routledge. Her earlier recommendation to launch the Rout￾ledge Open Building Series suggested the need for a primer on the subject. None of 
the other books published in the series so far did the job. This primer would be neither 
a coffee-table book, a theoretical manifesto nor a detailed textbook. Instead, it would 
open with fourteen built projects at various scales from around the world and across 
project types, discuss what the Open Building approach designs for, and present a key 
method that can be used to put the approach into use. It would close with a return to 
one of the major propositions put forward in the book that launched the approach in 
1962 – the development of a residential Infill industry. Finally, the book would reflect 
on the urgent necessity of a new research agenda and how the concept of architects 
sharing themes can re-enliven architectural education.
We hope that this book adds substance to important questions that continue to 
occupy practitioners, investors in real estate developments, regulators, builders and 
product manufacturers as well as educators, such as:
• How can we design large projects for inevitable change, both during design and 
long term?
• How can we balance the demands of large projects for efficient implementation 
with the equally important need for ‘fine-grained’ decision-making?
• How can we learn to separate design tasks, one task being the design of what 
should last a century, the other task being the design of the more mutable parts of 
buildings and neighborhoods?
• How can architects and urban designers, while separating design tasks, learn to 
share architectural themes and, at the same time, make variations on them?
• How can we avoid making a choice between tradition and innovation or between 
mindless conformity and exhausting self-expression?
• How can we do our work in recognition of our responsibilities to steward the 
earth’s scarce resources and to contribute to a circular economy that benefits all 
people?
Answers to these questions will strongly influence our practices, investments and 
teaching, and the quality of everyday built environment in the years to come. We 
hope this book will be a contribution on that journey. 
PrefaceDOI: 10.4324/9781003243076-1 1
Introduction
FOCUS ON PRACTICE
This book is written for architects, urban designers, interior archi￾tects and our engineering colleagues. It’s also addressed to clients 
and investors who make projects happen, the builders who con￾struct what we design and product manufacturers and packagers/
bundlers whose products and product/services we specify.
The Open Building approach aims to make our buildings and 
urban fabric last for a very long time. It also assures a capacity for 
change in large projects – that is, the opportunity for fine-grained 
agency or control. This is very important when projects increase in 
size and complexity, and when the overwhelming tendency is to 
centralize decision-making in the name of risk-reduction and effi￾ciency. This granular capacity for change in turn adds near- and 
long-term value in ways we explain. In a historic perspective, this 
goal can be seen as a return to age-old qualities that largely got 
lost in the movement toward centralized control in modern times, 
across all kinds of political economies, in both the public and pri￾vate sectors. This centralization has resulted in excessive rigidity 
of our physical environment. The recognition of these historic 
roots and their contemporary relevance calls for a fundamental 
shift in attitudes, priorities and skills.
It’s important to say right up front that the approach this book 
discusses is not an end in itself. Rather, it’s a means to sustain and 
invigorate our building stock and our communities, allowing them 
to grow in value over the course of time while also embracing the 
forces of change present in contemporary societies. The approach 
is most effective when it is consciously applied in support of sev￾eral characteristics of thriving everyday built environment which 
we discuss later in the book.
We focus on practice and the importance of developing and 
using methodical ways of working. We show built projects and 
discuss new knowledge and changed attitudes toward what we 
do and methodical skills commensurate with new realities. We 
hope that educators as well as their students will also be inter￾ested, because the future of our professions lies in the coming 
generations of young practitioners attuned to new approaches 
needed to face pressing challenges and often confusing times.
The Open Building approach is rooted in the understand￾ing that everyday built environment is a living, autonomous 
organism. What this means is that built environment exists on its 
own – it doesn’t depend on design professionals or any other class 
of experts. Rather, we all depend on it as a source of knowledge 
and inspiration and, for many of us, for our livelihoods as practic￾ing professionals, developers and builders. In other words, every￾day built environment exists independent of the many professions 
and everyday citizens who work hard every day to steward its 
continuous transformations. We can help bring new buildings and 
neighborhoods into existence and help renew them and sustain 
them. But we can’t invent or control a given built environment 
in its entirety. No one can. Recognizing this limitation is the basic 
attitude we need to adopt if we are to practice Open Building.
The approach we are talking about does not consist of formu￾las or recipes or prescribed performance rules. It is not a style. We 
are talking about changing the rules of the game of making and 
transforming built environment in keeping with our times. When 
the new rules of the game are deeply shared, we will assuredly 
find many ingenious and imaginative ‘plays’ in the game of culti￾vating everyday built environment.
SEPARATING DESIGN TASKS
The Open Building approach calls for separating design tasks. This 
means making a judicious separation in large projects between 
what belongs to ‘the commons’ and will last for generations and 
what is the responsibility of individuals or small social units, and 
that changes every generation or sometimes much faster. To be 
effective, this separation needs to recognize the importance of 
‘territory,’ and must therefore be congruent with the local socie￾ties’ understanding of the freedoms and responsibilities of those 
operating in their own ‘territories.’ The clarity of this separation 
is called for, because, not surprisingly, no single party can or does 
design everything. Cooperation is of fundamental importance. 
Finding a balance between what can be decided on individually 
in the context of collective decisions is one of society’s challenges. 
The manifestation of this balance in the built environment is what 
the Open Building approach aims to support.
One thing is clear. The design of what is short-lived must not 
determine what should last 100  years. In a social sense, this 2
INTRODUCTION
means that individual or small-group freedom and responsibility 
must be exercised in respect to the commons, or what is shared.
There are many pragmatic reasons to separate design tasks. One 
is to provide decision flexibility by assuring that decisions about 
aspects that change (for example, independent units of occu￾pancy and their service systems) do not dominate decisions about 
aspects of projects expected to have a very long life (the shared 
architectural infrastructure). Still another reason is to enable work 
at various levels of intervention – by those engaged in the sep￾arate design tasks – to proceed simultaneously, or in sequence, 
thus speeding the work.
Perhaps most importantly, the Open Building approach of sep￾arating design tasks as we discuss it in the book is a key tool with 
which the building industry can slow the depletion of our scarce 
natural resources. By building solidly for 100  years while pre￾paring for fine-grained change, we can contribute to the urgent 
necessity of fighting climate change and to achieving a circular 
economy.
This separation – and cooperation – can be achieved while 
recognizing the innate hierarchical structure of built environment. 
This structure has been familiar for some time in distinctions made 
within the design professions: we have urban planners, urban 
designers, architects, interior architects, furniture and equip￾ment designers and so on. Each level of decision-making ‘sets 
the stage’ – never neutral, always ‘giving form’ – for the work of 
others operating on the next lower level, whether they are profes￾sionals or nonprofessionals. This separation and this hierarchy are 
the essence of built environment as a living organism, alive and 
sustained and yet continuing to evolve while retaining coherence. 
This principle can be applied to many kinds of projects, as already 
noted.
Separating design tasks also reveals opportunities for working 
out new interfaces – technical, legal and spatial – between actors 
and the territories and building elements they temporarily control.
We hope to show that this way of working is necessary for 
stewarding the quality and resilience of everyday built environ￾ment. We hope that readers will see that it can be inspiring. We 
also hope to demonstrate that it is completely congruent with 
the way infrastructure systems of all kinds are designed, built, 
incrementally updated and managed for long-term viability. In 
this sense, we can say that the Open Building approach is an 
extension of the way infrastructure design is handled – such as 
transport and utility systems – into all aspects of the design of the 
built environment.
SEPARATING DESIGN TASKS REQUIRES COOPERATION
The separation of design tasks is a technical issue, since we are 
dealing with the design of buildings, building complexes and 
neighborhoods. The approach involves core decisions design pro￾fessionals make about built form, technical systems and spaces.
But separation of design tasks also involves work in the social 
sphere: cooperation. The tool of cooperation is method. Methods 
are no more or less than generally accepted ways of working. 
A good method allows each of us to do our own work with a min￾imum of fuss and time-consuming negotiation. Method comes 
into play wherever we have to work together but want and need 
to maintain individual responsibility.
Methods don’t dictate results but facilitate interaction among 
designers, leaving judgment to individuals, allowing each to 
experiment and explore. In architectural or engineering design, 
as in music, methods foster coordination, thereby also stimulat￾ing improvisation. In music, we play together because we accept 
scales, tonalities, harmony and notation. Given an accepted 
theme, each can even improvise as part of a larger evolving 
whole. Methods must not be mistaken for formulae, which are 
ultimately sterile. Momentarily, we may separate the methodical 
from the expressive, but they are never completely isolated and 
should not remain apart for long.
Achieving good relations while separating design tasks 
between designers working on different levels (for example, 
urban design, architecture, interior architecture) demands skill. In 
the same way, designers need skills while working with others on 
the same level – for example, in the design of adjacent units of 
occupancy in a building or adjacent buildings in an urban tissue 
or campus design.
In fact, in designing, we relate in three directions at the same 
time:3
INTRODUCTION
• We must honor and explore the limitations offered by a 
higher-level design,
• We must be stimulating and generous to lower-level design 
that is subject to what we did, and
• We must be able to share architectural values (themes) with 
other designers working at the same level.
In all of these situations, we need to be familiar with the separa￾tion and distribution of design tasks and seek ways of cooperation 
to get the work done effectively.
When we master the skills to practice Open Building success￾fully and learn to thrive with new and evolving methods, we can 
help cultivate varied yet coherent built environment at all levels. 
We can help buildings and communities live and incrementally 
change for centuries, long after our time with them has passed. 
This depends on changed attitudes and on a deepened under￾standing of thematic design – the knowledge of and skill at 
manipulating shared patterns and systems to make variations on 
them. We discuss all of this in this book, in various levels of detail 
and with many examples.
WHAT WE MEAN BY EVERYDAY BUILT ENVIRONMENT
What do we mean when we talk about ‘everyday built envi￾ronment?’ We think of this as the wholeness and continuity of 
buildings and spaces where we work, live, play, learn and move 
about – the ordinary fabric against which we recognize what is 
truly special. We all know that not every building or space can be 
special. It’s a contradiction in terms to think so, although powerful 
incentives exist to push us to try for this. We call built environment 
an autonomous organism because, as with the natural world, it 
follows its own laws. It can live and die, grow and decay. Its many 
parts – neighborhoods, buildings, parts of building and spaces – 
can change over time and have their own lives as well. Built envi￾ronment is, of course, subject to human agency or control as well 
as the forces of nature. Those actors, including many kinds of 
professionals as well as its inhabitants, are part of the organism. In 
that sense, built environment is a socio-physical fabric.
Some design professionals already practice in an Open Build￾ing way and don’t necessarily use that term. That’s perfectly fine 
and important to recognize. However, we think there’s a problem 
when those ‘doing’ Open Building, realizing it or not, choose to 
use very different terms to explain what they do and how they 
work. That’s because, with the resulting lack of common terminol￾ogy and accounting, we as design professionals can’t contribute 
as effectively as we could to build our shared knowledge base and 
tool kit – essential foundations of any profession – while we each 
seek competitive advantage. The challenges now facing the built 
environment demand more than the ad-hoc, ‘Tower of Babel’ 
approach that focuses on self-expression, inventing private and 
trendy terms and languages, and making ‘unique’ designs, ten￾dencies that still dominate the design professions, the public per￾ception of architects and the education of architects. The many 
forces affecting the well-being of our built environment require a 
more systematic, broadly strategic approach based on a common 
language and shared understanding of the laws that govern the 
production and transformation of our built environment.
Just imagine if doctors all had different names for human 
organs, their interactions, diseases and their symptoms and heal￾ing methods, or if farmers described their work in entirely indi￾vidualized ways. Imagine if these professions refused to build on 
the work of their predecessors. So a growing knowledge base is 
critical. Yet as Donald Schön has taught us, there is an artistry 
at work in all professions, a way of working that goes beyond a 
knowledge base. Architecture is not unique in that respect.
While reading this book, we ask you to think about the Open 
Building approach the way farmers work – planting seeds, tilling 
and fertilizing the soil, erecting fences, pulling up weeds, pruning 
early growth. Such an attitude about the everyday environment 
doesn’t come naturally today. Professionals involved in the pro￾duction of the built ‘field’ may never have thought much about 
it in this way. Our professions work hard enough already. To be 
asked to change attitudes to help make everyday environment 
flourish and to plan it for change is a large challenge that goes far 
beyond our design professionals. Yet this may be one of the most 
important things societies – and our design professions – must 
consider and apply ourselves to, with all the imagination and tools 
at our disposal. We hope readers agree that the health and sus￾tainability of our built environment depends on it.4
INTRODUCTION
THE OPEN BUILDING APPROACH STARTED WITH A 
FOCUS ON LARGE HOUSING PROJECTS
Open Building – initially called Supports and Detachable Units – 
started as a radically new approach to the design of large hous￾ing projects. The approach aimed to give architects a renewed 
role in a process in which architects were limited to stacking 
up largely predetermined floor plans and wrapping them with 
a façade. The goal was to overcome the rigidity and uniform￾ity of ‘mass housing’ then being built in Europe and in many 
parts of the world. The remedy had to do with a new pat￾tern of decision-making – the reintroduction of residents into 
a decisive decision-making role in their immediate environ￾ment. Implementing this new decision-making process would 
require a radical change in the way architects and their clients 
worked and a new distribution of power. The question posed 
for architects was simple: how could we design large residen￾tial buildings when the floor plans were not known and would 
change later?
The solution was a design method separating design tasks, 
already referred to; a redistribution of control and a new way to 
harness industry. In contrast, today, throughout the world, multi￾family housing projects or other large projects – with only a few 
exceptions – are organized as single, unified design jobs. As a 
result, they largely ignore the full power of industrial processes, 
the increased individualization of users and the urgent need to 
steward the earth’s natural resources.
Ironically, large or even middle-sized residential real estate 
projects remain outliers up to now in Open Building implemen￾tation. These projects today typically follow a purely professional 
organizational process that centralizes decision-making. But even 
very expensive for-sale condominium projects, as we show later, 
are severely entangled and rigid, making full autonomy of individ￾ual dwelling units impossible. This conventional process allows lit￾tle room for occupants to have more than trivial decision-making 
agency and offers no decision-making flexibility to investors or 
developers. This entanglement also thwarts the capacity of these 
real estate assets to adapt, one unit of occupancy at a time, to 
new technical and energy performance standards, market con￾ditions and lifestyle preferences. This rigidity also runs against 
the urgent necessity of addressing lack of equity and housing 
affordability.
The paucity of examples of residential Open Building in 
the United States is perhaps the most surprising and difficult 
to explain, given the culture’s stress on individual freedom and 
responsibility. Yet similar questions arise in many countries: “Why 
are households in large residential projects denied – or do not 
demand – the freedom and responsibility for their homes that is 
assumed in suburban sprawl?” “Why do developers not demand 
the decision flexibility in large residential projects that comes 
much more easily in single-family detached developments and, 
for that matter, in office and retail real estate investments?”
THE OPEN BUILDING APPROACH HAS BROADER 
APPLICATIONS THAN HOUSING
Today we see the separation of design tasks as a broader, more 
general practice. In office building design and in shopping malls, 
airport concourses and some other large multitenant projects, 
individual occupants or user groups need – and get – a collective 
architectural infrastructure within which to make autonomous 
design decisions and investments within their own territories. In 
fact, what we consider everyday environment is, to a large extent 
with the exception of housing, the result of projects where a dis￾tinction or separation is made between the collective environment 
and individual, fine-grained interventions.
The separation of design tasks in housing has been the subject 
of lengthy discussions and countless reports, books and academic 
papers over the years. Sometimes, this essential principle has been 
called flexibility, adaptability, participation or other similar terms. 
We don’t intend to discuss the history or theory of the idea very 
much. We do, however, discuss the Open Building approach as 
such, introduce one key method, and provide a brief history of 
the Open Building movement in Appendix One and an abbrevi￾ated selection of key writings in English in Appendix Two.
In what follows, we will consider how urban design and archi￾tectural design practice can, along with our consultants, serve 
clients and add value to large real estate projects by explicitly 
and methodically planning them for change.5
INTRODUCTION
We won’t limit our discussion to housing, although since it 
remains the project type that occupies most of our urban areas 
and remains the most significant outlier, we will focus on residen￾tial architecture and the challenges of multifamily housing.
We know from the experience of practitioners around the 
world that separating design tasks along with cooperation among 
the parties involved can be done successfully and with excellent 
results while meeting client and investor expectations. That’s why 
the first part of the book shows some of many such cases.
IMPROVING OUR SKILLS
Finally, we’re writing this book because we believe that to improve 
our practices, it’s often necessary to step back and rethink. It’s also 
necessary to make what is implicit explicit in learning new skills. 
That is to say:
We can usefully spend time formulating the Open Building 
approach and stating clearly what it takes to practice this way. 
That is, we can benefit from being methodical. A  new shared 
language may then emerge, along with new methods of notation 
or practices or ways of working. Afterwards, as with much learn￾ing, the new skills we develop may well go into ‘background’ 
or ‘default’ mode. Readers will therefore notice the emphasis 
on explicit methods and notation rather than ad-hoc ‘one-off’ 
approaches. This may be off-putting, but we know from experi￾ence that working with explicit methods and notation helps – at 
least as we begin learning how to play a new game. When new 
teams come together to solve new problems, having such meth￾ods adds real value.
We see the development of explicit tools happening in the urgent 
drive toward ‘net zero’ building, for example. An entirely new 
lexicon has come into use that, for many, is now taken for granted 
but still faces headwinds. The same thing is needed in the case of 
the Open Building approach.
Since computational tools of all kinds have come into our rep￾ertoire to aid designing, we especially need to explore how these 
powerful tools can be tuned to the Open Building approach. But 
to use computers and artificial intelligence successfully, we need 
to be able to explain very clearly what practicing Open Building 
entails in a methodical way. If we fail to learn to do this, we can’t 
ask experts in the development of computational tools to help us 
and avoid having those powerful tools getting in the driver’s seat. 
Technique for its own sake cannot be our goal.
Some may argue that the business of improving our skills is an 
academic exercise, that busy professionals, who are hammered 
constantly by the many pressures of obtaining jobs and getting 
projects done, have little time for this. Others may say that doing 
this methodical work will blunt creativity and imagination and 
that everyone has their own way of working anyway. Others may 
say that design practice hasn’t really changed much for many 
decades or generations, so what is the fuss all about?
Some might say that designing for change is too difficult 
because it is too complex and that, in some fundamental way, 
change in the built environment is random and inexplicable. But 
we don’t think so. We believe that those are bogus and limiting 
arguments. If our professions are to remain vibrant and relevant, 
we will need a broader view that can’t retreat behind those argu￾ments. There is an orderliness in the way that built environment 
comes into being and transforms. There are universal principles at 
work if we look hard enough in a detached way.
WHO WE HOPE WILL READ THIS BOOK
In addition to designers of all kinds, those who we hope will con￾sider what we have to say includes many kinds of profession￾als involved in shaping everyday built environment. It includes 
investors. In addition, we hope what we offer will be of value 
to those working in the public sector as well as those working in 
private-sector organizations and companies and citizens in volun￾tary associations and those acting alone to steward the inevita￾ble transformations of the built environment. We also hope that 
product manufacturers, product bundlers and building contrac￾tors will find this book useful if not inspiring as a basis for intro￾ducing new product/services and opening new markets.
All of these, individuals and groups, want to take control of 
that small part of the whole over which they have temporary 
responsibility. In doing so, each seeks to enlarge their sphere of 
control, to improve what they control for their purposes and, 6
INTRODUCTION
finally, to conserve their resources. In that play of forces, we 
hope that all these agents – more now than ever – recognize and 
give value to the importance of ‘the commons’ – that is, what is 
shared. This is an urgent necessity, whether we work at the level 
of neighborhoods, buildings or products/systems. Adopting the 
attitude of nurturing ‘the commons’ is, after all, the only way we 
can fight the onslaught of climate change.
Open Building’s most important contribution is, in short, a 
new vision of practice that asks for a shift in attitudes. We know 
from personal experience and from communication with practi￾tioners and clients around the world over many decades that this 
shift can be very difficult to make. This is why we’re writing this 
book – to help those who are open to changing their minds. We 
hope what we’ve written contributes to a continuing dialogue, 
in many voices. In doing so, we acknowledge historical cases, 
research studies as well as exemplary built projects. We’re sure 
readers can think of other cases.
This is not a journey of nostalgia or wishful thinking. We 
believe, instead, that what we discuss is a much-needed addition 
to a growing literature and set of design tools focused on sustain￾ability and resilience.
We believe that any approach to sustainability and resilience 
must be expanded to include the imperative of designing for 
change: not one-off changes but continual change. This new 
imperative is of equal importance to the imperative of designing 
fire-proof buildings, buildings that can withstand earthquakes 
and buildings and neighborhoods that perform at net-zero 
energy consumption.
We are audacious enough to hope that the Open Building 
approach becomes normative in the production and transfor￾mation of everyday environment. We also hope that it can find 
its place in already-packed curricula in the education of the next 
generation of architects and engineers.
THE STRUCTURE OF THE BOOK
Because built work is probably the most powerful way of explain￾ing this rather complex, multifaceted subject, we begin the book 
by showing 14 realized projects. We’ve selected cases from 
around the world out of many hundreds that we know about, at 
various scales and use types, that exemplify the Open Building 
approach in one way or another. Some are decades old, while 
more are recent at the time of writing. As noted, we do not 
include examples of office buildings or retail facilities because they 
are so commonplace.
We then give an outline of basic principles and ‘operations’ of 
the Open Building approach, with its origins in the design of large 
multifamily residential projects. We sketch its relevance for other 
kinds of projects too.
Because the Open Building approach is not an end in itself, we 
explain why we engage in the practice to begin with. This requires 
discussion of five interrelated characteristics that we believe are at 
the core of everyday environments that are sustainable and that 
we are instinctively attracted to. These characteristics are embed￾ded in the projects discussed at the beginning of the book. We 
draw on lessons from everyday and historic built environments 
generally familiar to most readers, in which these characteristics 
are most evident. We invite readers to conjure up in their minds’ 
eyes other buildings and places where these characteristics are 
manifest.
To help readers understand that specific skills or methods can 
be applied in practicing Open Building, we discuss one of them 
in depth: CAPACITY ANALYSIS. In doing so, we introduce three 
concepts and their respective notations – zones, margins and 
grids – and explain how they can be used.
To bring this general discussion of capacity into more practical 
terms, we give a case study of capacity analysis in the conversion 
of an office building to housing. We include this rather detailed 
study not because we want readers to think it is the only way to 
go but because it gives a sense of the sort of issues that need to 
be considered when doing capacity analysis – including the design 
of constraints.
This detailed study of a conversion project had real relevance 
at the time of writing this book. The COVID pandemic (2019–
2021), along with other societal changes in the nature of work, 7
INTRODUCTION
has produced a massive surplus of office space in center and edge 
cities around the world. This is not entirely new, but the sheer 
magnitude perhaps is. The economic and social vitality of cities is 
under stress. Added to the complexity of the issue is the fact that – 
according to some studies – only a relatively small percentage of 
empty office buildings lend themselves directly to conversion to 
housing, at least using conventional thinking and methods. We 
think that the Open Building approach – and, by extension, the 
concept of an Infill industry – has some advantages to offer.
Next, we return to the roots of the worldwide Open Build￾ing approach and explain how a residential Infill industry would 
work in broad terms. We explain why the development of an Infill 
industry to serve the fine-grained transformation of buildings of 
all kinds is important. We discuss the headwinds such a devel￾opment faces. We also offer our view of the role of government 
in this development. As an illustration, we discuss developments 
toward an Infill industry in PR China, and the headwinds it faces.
We conclude with two Postscripts.
The first Postscript suggests the urgency of a new research 
agenda, in which we should be able to frame pertinent research 
questions in a compelling way, based on Open Building principles.
The second Postscript focuses on The Quality of the Com￾mons by way of the introduction and conclusion to a set of ten 
short essays that one of us (John Habraken) wrote summarizing 
a lecture he gave at the Department of Architecture at the Mas￾sachusetts Institute of Architecture in 1996 called ‘Tools of the 
Trade.’ These words are addressed to colleagues in the academy 
where both of us spent many years.
Finally, we offer two Appendices:
• Appendix One offers a brief overview of the worldwide Open 
Building movement.
• Appendix Two offers a list of further reading on Open Building 
in the English language. DOI: 10.4324/9781003243076-2 9
Built Projects that Exemplify the Open 
Building Approach
BACKGROUND
We begin by showing 14 realized projects from hundreds on record 
around the world. All exemplify the Open Building approach in 
one way or another. They are of various scales and use types: 
urban design, housing, healthcare and educational facilities. Sev￾eral were realized decades before we began writing this book, an 
indication of the timespan during which the approach has been 
in use, starting with experimental projects and becoming more 
and more ‘mainstream.’ Many of the projects are discussed in the 
words of the architects or urban designers responsible for them.
We decided not to show cases of office buildings and shop￾ping centers, the most obvious examples of the approach. We 
also do not include mixed-use projects. Those kinds of projects 
are so ordinary and familiar that we don’t think discussion of 
them is needed here. That said, we do refer to these use-types 
later in the book to show how and why many aspects of the Open 
Building approach came into existence in those sectors.
WHAT OPEN BUILDING DESIGNS FOR
We want to reiterate that the Open Building approach is not an 
end in itself. Rather, it’s a way of working that recognizes the 
importance of interrelated characteristics of enduring everyday 
built environment, characteristics that are the raison d’etre of 
using the approach in the first place. We discuss these interrelated 
characteristics in more depth later in the book. In short, they are:
• Separated design tasks
• Thematic design
• The importance of territory
• The inherent hierarchy in built environment
• Balancing permanence and change
We selected the following built cases out of the many hundreds 
on record because they are some of the clearest examples. They 
represent these characteristics in one way or another – some rep￾resent many of them, some less than all of them. All are of high 
quality. This selection enables us to show how all are character￾ized by separation of design tasks. All show the use of themes and 
variations. All demonstrate the use of ‘levels of intervention.’ All 
are cognizant of territorial boundaries as legal constraints as well 
as means of architectural expression. The balancing of perma￾nence and change is evident in most of the cases.
It’s also important for readers to recognize the architectural diver￾sity of these cases, and that the implementation of the projects has 
occurred in quite different social, economic, political and technical 
circumstances. After all, Open Building is not a style, a technology 
or a formula. It’s a way of seeing how everyday built environment 
comes alive and sustains itself and a way of working as well.
We hope readers will refer to these examples as you proceed 
through the book, because they are perhaps the best way to 
explain this approach to practice.
EXAMPLES OF THE OPEN BUILDING APPROACH IN 
PRACTICE
Urban or campus design
• Sydhavnen/Sluseholmen – Copenhagen, Denmark
• Westpolder Bolwerk, Berkel en Rodenrijs, the Netherlands
• Katwijk Inner Harbor, Katwijk, the Netherlands
• Inselspital Campus Master Plan, Bern, Switzerland
Residential
• Molenvliet, Papendrecht, the Netherlands
• NEXT21, Osaka, Japan
• PlusHome – Arabianranta, Helsinki, Finland
• TILA, Helsinki, Finland
• TOPUP, Amsterdam, the Netherlands
Healthcare
• INO Intensive Care Facility, Inselspital, Bern, Switzerland
• Sammy Ofer Heart Building, Tel Aviv, Israel
• Oregon Health Center, Portland Oregon, USA
Education
• Shenzhen University Engineering School, Shenzhen, PR China
• Santa Monica High School Discovery Building, Santa Monica, 
California, USA10 DOI: 10.4324/9781003243076-3
URBAN OR CAMPUS DESIGN
Sydhavnen/Sluseholmen
Copenhagen Harbor, Copenhagen, Denmark
Figure 1 View along a canal (Credit: Soeters Van Eldonk Ponec)11
SYDHAVNEN/SLUSEHOLMEN
Project Data
Client: Municipality of Copenhagen
Planning & Urban Design: Soeters Van Eldonk Ponec architecten (Sjoerd Soeters)
Building Architects: Arkitema
C.F. Møller
C. Stenberg + C. Holgaard
Cubo
Dissing+Weitling
Force 4
Format Arkitekter
Gröning Arkitekter
Hvidt & Mølgård
Juul & Frost Arkitekter
Kasper Danielsen Arkitekter
KHR Arkitekter
Kim Utzon Arkitekter
Ladegård Arkitekter
Marie Kaarøe
ONV
Oscar Breyen Groning
Perlt & Black Arkitekter
Schmidt, Hammer & Lassen
Soeters Van Eldonk architecten
Tage Lyneborg
Thora Arkitekter
Vandkunsten
Vilhelm Lauritzen Arkitekter
Construction Company: Various
Implementation: The design and execution process extended from 
2000 until 2009.
Dwellings: 1310
Support type: Various
Infill provision: Various companies
Website: https://pphp.nl/project/sluseholmen/12
SYDHAVNEN/SLUSEHOLMEN
BACKGROUND
Sydhavnen is the southern harbor district of Copenhagen, located 
south of the historic city. With Java Island in Amsterdam as a 
successful precedent, Sjoerd Soeters was asked by the Munici￾pality of Copenhagen to make a plan for the transformation of 
Sydhavnen into a residential area. This plan consists entirely of 
city blocks, situated so as to be oriented toward the water on all 
sides. In order to achieve this, kilometers of canal were added 
to the area. The size of the blocks in Sydhavnen is based on the 
dimensions of the large city blocks in the center of Copenhagen. 
The twists and curves of the canals create constantly changing 
spatial effects and sight lines.
Sluseholmen was the first application of the Sydhavnen plan. 
The island is characterized by a panoramic view of the surround￾ing water and a more intimate inner side. The inner area is formed 
by a curved main canal and several short lateral canals. Each city 
block is a single structure that contains a variety of dwelling types. 
The façades of the blocks were worked out by different Danish 
architects, supervised by Sjoerd Soeters. Architectural guidelines 
were set for materials, colors, spatial effects and building height to 
ensure that each city block remained coherent and fitted in with 
the greater ensemble.
THE SITE
The south harbor of Copenhagen, Sydhavnen, is situated south of 
the city center. The south harbor area is a set of peninsulas along the 
main water streaming through Copenhagen in a south-southwest 
direction, each of the peninsulas separated by a side canal with minor 
branches or a bigger surface of water, each with three different-sized 
docks. As the harbor activities have been moved out farther north to 
a new and bigger port, the south harbor became redundant.
THE HOUSING PROGRAM
With the prospect of the opening of the Øresund Bridge from 
Copenhagen to Sweden in 2000, modern big high-tech com￾panies set up their head offices in the harbor areas and on the 
waterfront of the city of Copenhagen, thus attracting young, 
highly educated professionals. However, the housing possibilities 
in the old city, mainly small two-room apartments in social hous￾ing projects, didn’t answer the demands of these young urban 
professionals. There was an urgent need for the kind of housing 
that would satisfy them and that would keep them from seeking 
settlement in the suburban districts farther away.
By transforming the southern harbor with its long water￾line into a residential area, the city could offer an alternative. 
Figure 2 Situation before the redevelopment (public source)13
SYDHAVNEN/SLUSEHOLMEN
A primitive illustration therefore was drawn up, showing that the 
plan was aiming at a house on the waterside with a small jetty and 
a boat (havne bolig) instead of the traditional house surrounded 
by a hedged garden (have bolig) – blue instead of green.
THE SYDHAVNEN MASTER PLAN
A concise plan for the four elements of the south harbor was 
designed in a few months. The importance of the water was 
enhanced by the addition of an enormous length of new canals 
in an attempt to give all dwellings a water orientation. Follow￾ing the ideas of French-influenced 18th-century city planning in 
Copenhagen, big perimeter blocks dominated the plan, reserving 
space for first, second and third ‘backhouses’ and creating interior 
courtyards the size of small parks. The second peninsula, Teglhol￾men, posed specific problems of how to deal with the existing 
office building and shed of the ship engine factory and how to 
weave in the green crossing area for bicycles and pedestrians that 
the local planners had foreseen within a pattern of canals and 
waterfronts (Figure 3).
SHRINKING PUBLIC SPACE
The problem of most newly planned city extensions is that 
although they may be beautifully designed, they are completely 
dead. The purist and abstract beauty of design, unity in color 
and in volumetric composition may play a very big part in this 
feeling of deadliness, but this is not the whole story. Big blocks 
generate big in-between spaces that are mostly occupied by 
cars, driving by or parked on the spot. Even when most of the 
cars are stored in underground garages or under buildings, the 
open spaces feel uncomfortable. People see each other at great 
distance, the frequency of meeting one another is very limited 
and the new city feels anonymous. Part of this is caused by the 
extensive unbuilt ground surfaces in modern city planning; the 
other cause is the low population density. Even in traditional 
cities, their built volume kept as they are, the number of peo￾ple per hectare has decreased with a factor of at least 10. In 
19th-century Amsterdam it was common for a family with eight 
children to live in a two-room flat, whereas today, a four-room 
apartment is likely to be used by two people. So while the streets 
of the old city quarters used to be full of human interaction, 
nowadays, they are usually empty.
For these reasons, we tried to reduce the public area as much 
as possible. A limited public surface is the best condition for people 
to meet each other more frequently, for safer dwelling environ￾ments, for more commercial activities nearby, for more pedestrian 
and bicycle movements, for more effective public transport, etc.: 
dense and happy cities are the best and maybe the only answer to 
most of the environmental problems that we face.
Figure 3 Sydhavnen’s overall master plan (Credit: Soeters Van Eldonk Ponec)14
SYDHAVNEN/SLUSEHOLMEN
SLUSEHOLMEN
Attempting in the next phase of development to maximally shrink 
the public area, it was decided to eliminate most streets in the 
Sluseholmen plan. By doing that, perimeter blocks would seem 
to rise up out of the water as much as possible. The main canal 
was laid out in a slow curve so that at the beginning of a walk on 
the quay, the end of it is not yet visible. This principle of ‘serial 
vision’ (ala Gordon Cullen’s Townscape) is applied here to create 
an area in which visitors and users can wander and be constantly 
surprised, experiencing the intimate quality of provisionary closed 
spaces. The concave stretch of buildings facing south is dominant 
and this sunny image is longest in view, while the convex shady 
row of buildings facing north is seen shortened in perspective. 
Because the summer season is short, Scandinavians love to have a 
walk in the sun. That is why the promenade quay is only stretched 
out as compacted public area at the north side of the main canal 
section.
Due to the reduction of public surface area, most of the hous￾ing in the perimeter blocks is entered by way of the interior court￾yards. Because of this, these courtyards become communal urban 
spaces, shared gardens where people who live around them can 
meet one another, have their children play safely, have barbecue 
parties and so on.
As a reference, Java Island in Amsterdam consists of long 
peripheral rows of 27-m wide ‘houses’ (buildings) with rows of 
canal houses perpendicular to them and palazzos of uniform 
dimensions as well. In Sluseholmen, most blocks are not rectan￾gular, and they form an intricate fabric of apartments, stairways, 
elevators, galleries for access, etc. It therefore seemed impossible 
to commission separately designed ‘houses’ of standard dimen￾sions as was done on Java Island. For Sluseholmen, so-called 
block architects were commissioned to sort out the best way to 
organize an entire block with its public access to the courtyard 
and, from there, its varied entryways to different apartments and 
maisonettes, to the parking under the courtyard, to storage units, 
bicycle parking, and so on.
THE URBAN BLOCKS
SEPARATING DESIGN TASKS
Different architects’ offices were commissioned to design the 
floor plans of the blocks: Architema was the most important, 
working for the major client/developer. Gröning architects were 
introduced by and worked for a second developer. These block 
plans were discussed with city officials, developers, and ultimately 
the supervising architect, Sjoerd Soeters (Figure 4). The building 
structures were organized in such a way that the load-bearing 
concrete walls were used as separation between the apartments. 
Within the contours of each apartment, different layouts were 
and will be possible, but crossing the load-bearing walls is not 
Figure 4 Aerial view of the entire redevelopment showing the blocks (Credit: public source-internet)15
SYDHAVNEN/SLUSEHOLMEN
Figure 5 Block plan (Credit: Soeters Van Eldonk Ponec)
Figure 6 Prescribed cross sections through Block 2 (Credit: Soeters Van 
Eldonk Ponec)
Figure 7 Prescribed cross section through a canal (Credit: Soeters Van 
Eldonk Ponec)
Figure 8 Sluseholmen master plan, 
showing different parts of each 
block designed by different architects 
(shown by different colors) (Credit: 
Soeters Van Eldonk Ponec)16
SYDHAVNEN/SLUSEHOLMEN
foreseen in the buildings. The contractors who built the project 
had a contract for the Base Buildings as well as for the outfitting 
of bathrooms and kitchens.
In the urban plan, the exterior size of the blocks was estab￾lished, and so were the sections of the buildings in relation to the 
street and the level of the interior courtyards. Learning from Java 
Island, we positioned the inner courtyard level at a half-floor level 
above street level to get a more or less neutral ground balance. 
Doing that meant also that the ground floor apartments had a 
‘piano nobile’ position (in US terms, the ‘second floor’) with more 
privacy, as they were lifted a half floor above street level with 
better views on the quays and the water. Also learning from Java, 
it meant that the level of the corners on the blocks next to the 
bridges were equal with the level of the bridges and could be used 
for commercial functions. Floor-to-floor heights were according 
to Danish standards, and so were building techniques (prefab 
concrete) and installation specifications, all according to what was 
‘normal’ at that time. The territories of the two developers were 
in whole blocks. Opposite the most eastern canal, the difference 
between two developers and their respective architects is visible 
in the architecture.
The (Base) Building designs were completed first. Then the 
order of the different façade parts was established by the super￾vising architect (see discussion on the separation of design tasks 
for the façades). The separation between apartments per floor and 
the position of balconies is an important item in the designation 
of the separation line between two different façade parts. The 
façade architects first brought together their preliminary sketches 
on paper, glued together in the right order, to discuss the qual￾ity of the composition with the supervisor and fellow architects 
(Figure  9). Adolf Loos once stated that a city is built of simple 
houses (buildings) standing next to each other, very similar to their 
neighbors but still recognizable as individuals. “Architectur isst für 
die Grabdenkmaler und die Palässte.” In that sense, we didn’t 
want extreme architecture and asked architects to tone down their 
too-loud architectural language. I remember Hugh Newell Jacob￾sen, an American architect, explaining that “a building should not 
shout at the neighbors.” As an exception, the supervisor’s office 
designed the floor plans and the façades of two complete blocks.
The technical drawings for building permits were made 
by Arkitema Architects and Groning Arkitekter. They brought 
together the different façade proposals and their detailing in 
these drawings. The city made a contract with me (Soeters) for 
the design process of the urban plan. Also, during the whole pro￾cess of supervising the process, all fees of the supervising architect 
were paid by the city. In that way, they were representing the city 
in steering and evaluating the contributions of the architects who 
worked for the different developers. Support from the side of city 
officials consisted of two planners, who helped the team to under￾stand the bureaucratic problems and upcoming attacks ahead.
According to the supervising architect:
“The process was efficient. Having a supervising architect with a 
strong mandate means that a lot of bureaucratic red tape can be 
cut. Direct interaction took place between developers, architects 
and the supervisor, all intensely involved in the design process: 
proposal, critique, new proposals, etc. This is a very efficient way 
to work because the circle of professionals involved is small. 
Being in such a process, you have to earn your right of decision 
making all the time by being efficient in asking the right ques￾tions and helping the architects to find the proper solutions. The 
developers experienced in the activities within the supervising 
Figure 9 Mock-up model of three blocks (Credit: Soeters Van Eldonk 
Ponec)17
SYDHAVNEN/SLUSEHOLMEN
team the advantage of avoiding the necessity of going to all 
the departments in town hall to collect agreement and permits. 
A  few local planners helped to smooth conflicts with the city 
architect, who didn’t understand the project.”
“For the design of façades, a very primitive set of architectural 
guidelines was drawn up in a cartoon fashion and some thirty 
highly modern and mostly famous Danish architects were invited 
to design ‘only’ the façades of the pseudo parcels into which the 
blocks were divided. The architects were not amused, not to say 
that they felt flatly insulted. But they nevertheless took up work 
and came together to discuss the paper and cardboard models 
(Figure 9) that showed the progress of designs of every block. The 
sometimes strong debates nevertheless resulted in blocks that 
were very satisfactory to the whole team of city representatives, 
developers and the supervising architect.”
ARCHITECTURAL GUIDELINES FOR SLUSEHOLMEN
Main Structure
The main structure of the building blocks (island blocks) is sur￾rounded by canals and harbor basins. The buildings on the indi￾vidual islands must appear homogeneous in size and rhythm in 
order to maintain continuity. Every ‘house’ (apartment building) 
in the block has its own plan, organization and architectural 
expression. The individual dwellings along the cross canals are 
smaller and so have a smaller individual (vertical) expression.
Height
There is variation of height between the individual buildings. 
North, East, West quay: A variation of 5 to 7 floors with an aver￾age of 6 1/2. South quay: a variation of 4 to 5 floors with an 
average of 4 1/2. Canal buildings: a variation of 3 to 4 1/2 floors 
with an average of 3 1/2. Note: The difference in height from to 
another can be one floor.
Elevations
The vertical arrangement in the façade is important for the propor￾tion of the façade. The façades are individual faces of the buildings 
to the public space. The balconies are a part of the architectural 
façades; no balconies project into the public space. The annexes 
and balconies project out from the façade to a maximum of 30 cm 
to 40 cm (12–16 inches). The gates in the block have to be a part 
of the building. The façades should end with a designed trim – a 
finished ‘cornice’ – in a modern way. This subtle element can also 
be used to articulate the height differences. The windows in each 
façade are set back with a specific depth per house or building. The 
variation of windows from house to house or building to building 
are made to avoid continuous horizontal lines in the façade.
Materialization and Colors
The materials of the façades of the buildings should prevent dete￾rioration but instead should age in a nice manner by using mate￾rials such as brick, copper, zinc and wood. Glass only in openings, 
not as a main mass: materials used in the Danish tradition and 
seen in Copenhagen. A color palette had to be worked out. This 
palette maintained the harmony of the area; each area has a spe￾cific color palette.
Roof Landscape
The roof can be penthouses and/or roof gardens. The installa￾tions on the roof are preferably not higher than the height of 
the designed cornice. Individual pipes are grouped and hidden in 
chimney enclosures.
Corner Buildings
The corners of the different urban blocks are designed accord￾ing to the situation with different solutions for different situations 
with the possibility to place public functions there. Therefore, the 
fronts of the buildings are more open. The transition of the corner 
Figure 10 View into one of the internal canals (Credit: Soeters Van Eldonk 
Ponec)
Figure 11 View inside one of the canals (Credit: Soeters Van Eldonk Ponec)18
SYDHAVNEN/SLUSEHOLMEN
building at the cross canals, where the lower meets the higher 
building, are designed individually. The solutions relate to the 
scale of the smaller cross-canal buildings.
Public Space
A proposal had to be worked out for the hierarchy of the different 
places in the public space including functions, activities, etc.
Bridges
The bridges are an important part of the public space. Through 
their heights, the quay is divided into different areas, which 
enriches the experience of the public space. The bridges would be 
as high as possible, with a maximum slope of 1:20, according to 
the rules for people with disabilities.
Parking and Courtyards
The basic idea is that the main part of the courtyard should be a 
green area with incidental hard pavement. A minimum of two￾thirds of the whole area should be green and grass, one-third 
hard pavement. Each courtyard differs. Guidelines for the specific 
landscape in the inner courtyards of the blocks was worked out. 
The exact guidelines for parking based on these ideas followed.
Functions
The ground floors of the buildings following the height level of 
the Sluseholmen have to be filled with public or work functions. 
All of the ground floors of the blocks on both sides of the south￾ern entrance to Sluseholmen are designated to have commer￾cial, cultural and educational functions where the ground floor is 
level with the street. Public functions may also be created on the 
ground floor of the corner buildings. It is very important that the 
kindergarten is integrated in one of the building blocks near the 
main entrance of the area.
Procedure
Every architect had to agree on the guidelines and be willing to 
design a project based on these guidelines.
CONCLUSIONS
According to Sjoerd Soeters, the supervising architect, “Sluse￾holmen has received various architecture and planning awards 
since its completion in 2009. Inhabitants send fan-mail. It seems 
to have become a place that people are proud of and love to 
live in.”DOI: 10.4324/9781003243076-4 19
Project Data
Location: Lansingerland, the Netherlands
Client: Berkel Rodenrijs
Design period: Design was done from 2002 until 2014
Construction: Execution started in 2005 and was still ongoing in 2022
Supervising architect: Henk Reijenga, Urban Design and Architectural Coordi￾nation www.henkreijenga.nl
Architects: Van Manen Architects – Noordwijk
Henk Reijenga – Voorburg
PBV Architects – Wassenaar
Schippers Architects – The Hague
RPHS Architecten
Photography: Photography Robbert H. Reijenga
Drawings: Office of Henk Reijenga
Westpolder Bolwerk 
Berkel en Rodenrijs, the Netherlands
Figure 1 A view of the residential neighborhood. This is an example of a street within the 1,500-home residential extension of Berkel en Rodenrijs20
W E S T P O L D E R B O LW E R K 
BACKGROUND
The township of Berkel Rodenrijs is part of a larger municipality 
called Lansingerland in the Netherlands. It is now the location of a 
large urban development named Westpolder Bolwerk.
The plan discussed here is part of that development. It offers 
an urban environment with 1,500 dwelling units and two primary 
schools. The part of it already executed at time of writing com￾prises more than a thousand inhabited dwelling units, while the 
last phase was in the preparatory stage.
The office of Henk Reijenga was asked to realize a ‘village-like’ 
environment within a growing middle-sized town. ‘Village-like’ 
means small scale, identifiable as a particular location, making 
people feel secure and showing coherent variety.
The architectural environment in response to that task is the 
result of a new way of distribution of architectural design respon￾sibilities in a spirit of well-organized cooperation in the design 
team. No two houses of the 1,000 units are exactly the same, but 
the variety is entirely coherent.
The urban design was also developed in a team spirit. In addi￾tion to the client/developer and the urban designer, various other 
professionals were included who were specialized in infrastructure 
like roads, water, cabling and piping (drainage and supply), etc., 
landscape architecture and traffic planning. Consultation among 
these specialists took place in the design phase every two or three 
weeks. They also met during the execution of the plan, corre￾sponding to the reality that an urban design is never finished. 
A representative of the municipality Lansingerland chaired these 
meetings and reports to the town hall.
THE OVERALL DEVELOPMENT AREA
With the design of subplan 5 and of subplan 4-East (the center 
buildings near the Randstadrail station), a residential area was 
planned with 1,500 homes, two schools, shops and other 
facilities.
The four ‘Golden Neighborhoods’ (Figure 2) together offered 
an unprecedented variety of house types and characteristic living 
situations, thanks to the principles used with regard to architectural 
quality and to an urban fabric of carefully shaped public spaces. 
It has become a residential area that demonstrates a remarkable 
coherence among the various architects each responsible for a 
part of the whole.
ARCHITECTS
Van Manen Architects – Noordwijk
Henk Reijenga – Voorburg
PBV Architects – Wassenaar
Schippers Architects – The Hague
LEGEND
Low-rise housing
Clustered housing
Education
Private green space
Public parks
Public water courses
• Planka Street/example distribution of design tasks (Figure 3)
Figure 2 The overall development 
area ‘Unity in Diversity’ (Berlage)21
W E S T P O L D E R B O LW E R K 
Subplan 5 mainly consists of low-rise housing. Clustered construc￾tion is done in small units of approximately 12 residences through￾out the plan area. The housing program is diverse: buy and rent, 
expensive and low-cost, families, the elderly and starter households. 
The urban design shows a variety of recognizable and characteris￾tic urban spaces: streets, small water channels, canals, avenues and 
squares. Together, these make an interesting and inviting pattern of 
public spaces: the ‘urban fabric.’ Parking is not allowed in residential 
streets or along canals or small water channels.
“Houses were designed by a variety of architects. Each architect 
was asked to design several examples for each given residential 
category, such as detached, two-under-one roof, terraced houses, 
canal houses and several other types. One architects’ designs were 
not kept together to make a homogeneous neighborhood designed 
by a single architect. Instead, their designs are distributed across the 
entire project area by the supervising architect.”
A choice of variously colored bricks and roof tiles was available 
to choose from for each individual house. In this way, at the level 
of the individual house, an unprecedented variety is possible, but 
at the same time, residential areas can be identified by selecting 
a shared building typology, while single homes remain different 
from one another.
Windows and doors in façades had to be in wood with the same 
off-white color, while the window and door details were standard￾ized. But their size and the design of their subdivisions could be 
decided by each architect. This made the work of the builders pre￾dictable and efficient while variety in house design remained assured.
KEY
• Housing – low-rise
• Houses – stacked
• Education
• Private green
• Public parks
• Public water
BERKEL STREET/THE GOLDEN NEIGHBORHOODS 
(FIGURE 4)
The assumptions guiding the design of this area and its houses were:
• Village-style buildings
• Small scale
• Encouraging inhabitant identity/recognition of one’s own place
All to be achieved by offering a wide variety in the architecture of 
houses within a coherent unity of the whole urban scene.
The variation takes place on three levels:
1. The public spaces (urban design level)
2. The collective use of the shared building types (Base Building 
design level)
3. The buyer options (at the Infill level)
Figure 3 Planka Street district22
W E S T P O L D E R B O LW E R K 
Distribution of homes per architect
Red RPHS Architecten
Yellow Schippers
Blue V. Manen
• Berkel Street/The housing program
The starting point was a reasonable mixture of the various 
price categories; all categories would be found in the 300 house 
types. Clustered construction is located in characteristic places 
along Stationssingel and Oudelandselaan.
Figure 4 Berkel Street. The houses designed by three different architecture offices23
W E S T P O L D E R B O LW E R K 
The Residential Program
Red: Social Rent 20%
Terraced houses 56
Clustered houses 24
Apartments 19
Total 99 houses
Blue: Midmarket Rent 10.5%
Terraced houses 40
End units 4
Canal houses 8
Total 52 houses
Light blue: Expensive type 1 owner-occupied homes 25%
Terraced houses 103
Patio houses 12
Canal houses 10
Total 125 houses
Yellow: Expensive type 2 owner-occupied homes 44.5%
End houses 20
Canal houses 56
Duplex houses 92
Detached houses 48
Detached ‘reed’ houses 5
Total 221 houses
Total homes 49724
W E S T P O L D E R B O LW E R K 
Expensive type 1 owner-occupied houses are in the price range just 
above the regional median price: (€205,145 for 2002); average 
price approximately €226,000/max. approx. €259,000. Expensive 
type owner occupied houses are in the price range from €300,000.
Figure 5 The housing program
Figure 6 An aerial view of part of the development
Figure 7 One row of houses by different architects sharing many thematic 
elements
Figure 8 A small square within the development Figure 9 Single-family detached houses along a small canal. No two build￾ings are exactly alikeDOI: 10.4324/9781003243076-5 25
Project Data
Location: Katwijk, the Netherlands
Client: Building Contractors Consortium Katwijk (ACK)/Rabo Vastgoed, 
Utrecht
Chronology: Period of design through completion of construction: 1995–2005
Floor space: 400 apartments, 5,000  m2
 of retail and commercial space, two 
parking garages (600 spaces)
Katwijk Inner Harbor Project
Katwijk, the Netherlands
Figure 1 The new development at the head of the canal. This view shows the variety of architectural schemes shown in Figure 4 (Photo credit: Google Earth)26
KATWIJK INNER HARBOR PROJECT
Four parties working together in the project:
• The investor: RABO Vastgoed (owned by RABO Bank Utrecht)
• Contractors Consortium Katwijk” (ACK)
• Five architects and Hans van Olphen as supervisor
• Bouwstart: provided the final drawings, thus forming the link 
between the designers and the contractors
Five collaborating architecture offices:
Jan Poolen (www.zeep.eu)
Theo Verburg (www.theoverburg.nl)
Cees Brandjes (www.brandjesvanbaalen.nl)
Bert Tjhie (www.tekton-architecten.nl)
Gerben van Manen (www.van-manen.com)
Urban design supervisor: Hans van Olphen Architects Partners, 
Amsterdam
Awards: Nomination Incentive Intensive Land Use STIR
BACKGROUND
In the old harbor of Katwijk, local fishing company facilities have 
made room for 400 new apartment units and shops. The require￾ments of the development, dubbed Princehaven, stated that it 
needed to become a place that Katwijk citizens could identify 
with. The residents of Katwijk did not want to experience any 
separation between themselves and the adjacent village of Port 
Prince. This has been considered in the design and architecture 
of the development. The investor, RABO Vastgoed, worked 
closely with local developers and the municipality to negotiate a 
land development scheme that was amenable to all parties. The 
apartment blocks are focused around the harbor and provide res￾idents of the upper floors views of the town of Katwijk. Large 
arcades provide residents with a desirable level of protection 
from inclement weather while maintaining a sense of commu￾nity. The new neighborhood functions as a 6-meter- (20") high 
‘bowl’ that frames the town, whereas portions of the develop￾ment experience direct access from the street level with the older 
fishing cottages. The architecture of the apartments is sensitive 
to the vernacular style and scale of the existing fishing cottages. 
Throughout Princehaven, physical connections have been estab￾lished in the form of stairways, lifts and roads, providing residents 
with easy accessibility to the town. The inner courtyards of the 
development include playgrounds, green space, air movement 
and pedestrian circulation, thereby giving a sense of intimacy 
between the blocks. The new development has become a critical 
component of the success of the town.
NOTE FROM HANS VAN OLPHEN, SUPERVISING 
ARCHITECT
“I was one of three architects invited to propose a scheme for the 
renovation of the inner harbor area of the town of Katwijk in the 
Netherlands, an area close to the town center. The municipality of 
Katwijk was the initiator, working in close cooperation with three 
local building companies (ACK) and a national bank as investor. 
They asked for an integrated plan for a large number of residential 
units combined with facilities like retail space and other commer￾cial space and sufficient parking.
My plan was unanimously preferred after one meeting because 
it combined two important aspects.
1. The proposal offered a vision of the expected kind of environ￾ment without defining the exact final result. It allowed various 
ways of execution by other architects. This satisfied an impor￾tant request from the municipality.
2. The proposal defined the envelope for built volumes while 
differentiating capacity for residential units, parking and com￾mercial functions. This made calculation of the costs for exe￾cution possible before the actual partial designs were done.
3. The harbor area is situated at a lower elevation than the sur￾rounding streets of the town. Because of the limited daylight, 
the lower levels behind the arcade contain the parking facilities 
(underground) as well as shops serving the whole neighbor￾hood, opening onto the arcade.
My task was to design an Urban Plan in the sense of a Master 
Plan. Five architects participated in the project and accepted the 
rules of the Master Plan. My task was to protect the total as a 
whole. That was the reason I designed the 200-meter-long arcade 27
KATWIJK INNER HARBOR PROJECT
to bring unity to the project despite the differences in architecture. 
Architects are generally individualistic, but in this project, they had 
to follow my organizing concept. The variation the architects real￾ized was not in the ultimate façade or structure but in the living 
possibilities: for example, in the design of floor plans.
I was asked to work out the Master Plan within which were 
defined building heights, the parking garage and other infrastruc￾tural elements like stairways and elevators that, in turn, could 
be translated into rules and constraints within which architects 
had to work. After approval of the Master Plan, I was given the 
task of supervision of the designs done by the yet-to-be-invited 
architects.
Together with the municipality and its partners, I organized an 
excursion to several coastal towns in the north of France, to show 
that a general building height of seven floors need not result in 
the massive uniformity that the municipal representatives wor￾ried about as long as the buildings were designed by a variety of 
architects working on a variety of locations while sharing architec￾tural themes. In Le Havre, Honfleur, Rouen, and other towns, we 
could see how narrow parcels make height of buildings a relative 
concept. This, after all, is also typical for the buildings along the 
Amsterdam canals. The excursion also helped to strengthen social 
contacts, which made for a stimulating experience in spite of the 
different interests of the participants.
The architects to design the buildings were selected by the 
various client development parties. I could help steer it as well. 
The invited architects had to accept the detailed constraints of the 
Master Plan. The actual process towards the final design approval 
included workshops chaired by me. I completed the preliminary 
design for the arcade before the workshop with the architects had 
begun. The design of the arcade did not change after discussions 
and my explanations.
At that time, this offered an entirely new concept for the par￾ticipating architects. The designs were discussed every two weeks 
with all architects present, a process which stimulated all partici￾pants. Architects could do proposals for the façades of their build￾ings, etc. But staircases, lifts and other more structural elements 
were collectively decided. The beginning was somewhat difficult; 
the limitations set by the Master Plan and its rules were seen as 
a handicap. Gradually, this was forgotten, particularly when it 
appeared that good architecture usually had its own rules and lim￾itations that were often self-imposed. The architects found their 
way to design their own façades, window frames, balconies, etc., 
something that I stimulated (see Figures 1–5). Variation should be 
possible within my master plan; otherwise, my plan was not good. 
Eventually, everybody subscribed to the final result.
One office (Bouwstart) was selected to make the entire set 
of building construction drawings after the definite design was 
finished by all the architects. Bouwstart finalized the project for 
the contractors, controlled the costs and managed the project 
execution. Parts of the arcade were built together with the adja￾cent residential buildings. The Contractors’ Combination Katwijk 
appointed one of its members as the responsible contractor to 
build the whole project, including the parts on the opposite sides 
of the harbor.
The contracts with the architects included all ownership 
rights and are comparable to other normal jobs. Professional fees 
are paid by RABO bank. Bouwstart and the architects worked 
Figure 2 The new development along the canal with the unifying arcade 
within and behind which different developers and their architects realized 
their own residential and commercial schemes (Photo credit: Hans van 
Olphen)28
KATWIJK INNER HARBOR PROJECT
together, as is usual in our profession, without any exceptional 
guidance.
Using the Open Building principle of separation of design tasks 
and sharing thematic elements, and the ensuing workshops, were 
a great experience in the Katwijk project. This way of cooperation 
points individual efforts to the quality of the whole and away 
from the individual identification of each architect. The project 
as a whole is central. It seems to me a real achievement that a 
residential project combined with shops, offices and hidden park￾ing has become an environment of which no one knows exactly 
anymore who did what exactly.”
The supervising architect predetermined the location of eleva￾tor shafts that allow residents to reach their dwelling units directly 
Figure 5 A view along the colonnade (Photo credit: Hans van Olphen)
Figure 6 A view looking up the stairs from the colonnade to the housing 
over the parking (Photo credit: Hans van Olphen)
Figure 4 Division of responsibilities among the various architects. Each 
architect’s ‘territory’ extended across the water to include both sides of the 
harbor (Drawing credit: Hans van Olphen)
Figure 3 The concept drawing of the site (Drawing credit: Hans van 
Olphen)
from the underground garage. This makes these shafts part of 
the higher-level framework and an extension of public circulation 
around which the actual buildings, designed by different archi￾tects working for different developers, were designed. Apartment 
buildings behind the continuous urban wall interact intimately 
with this public circulation.
More than 25 years after the project was realized, the area 
remains very popular thanks to the collective efforts of all 
participants.DOI: 10.4324/9781003243076-6 29
Master Plan for the Inselspital Hospital 
Campus 
Bern, Switzerland
Project Data
Location: Bern, Switzerland
Client: Canton Bern Office for Real Estate and Public Buildings
User: Inselspital University Hospital
Campus building footprint: Current floor area: 280,000 m² (3,013,900 sq. ft.); growth to 600,000 m² 
(6,458,300 sq. ft.)
Urban designer: HENN Architects, Berlin
Implementation period: 2010 to 2060
Users: Around 44,000 inpatients per year; 6,400 employees, in addition to 900 students
Image 1: Master plan model with spatial frames and example of possible building bulk and massing (Credit: HENN Architects)30
M A S T E R P L A N F O R T H E I N S E L S P I TA L H O S P I TA L C A M P U S 
“The masterplan is valid indefinitely, but is not finite.” (Giorgio 
Macchi, chief architect of the Office for Real Estate and Public 
Buildings, Canton Bern, 2011)
BACKGROUND
Founded in 1354, the hospital has moved several times and was 
located in its current site in 1867. Several master plans were ini￾tiated, the latest in 1956. Then, the accident and emergency and 
surgical center ‘INO’ was built and completed in 2012 to act as a 
new center of gravity for the Inselspital site.
At that time, new facilities were built largely without consid￾eration of the site structure as a whole, which led to a certain 
fragmentation of functions. Existing process-related and organ￾izational restrictions made adjustments to the changing func￾tional requirements of the new buildings impossible. As a result 
of this geographical and functional fragmentation, organizational 
processes became inefficient and insufficient for the qualitative 
requirements of a modern university hospital in both medical and 
operational terms. Due to this, the national and international posi￾tion of the Inselspital was threatened. Significant drivers of suc￾cess, such as interdisciplinary cooperation, impromptu exchange 
of knowledge and a high degree of interconnection appeared 
impossible to realize within the existing infrastructure.
In 2010, an international urban planning competition was held 
to design a ‘Masterplan 2060’ of the Inselspital. HENN Architects 
won the competition. HENN’S master plan created a strategic 
planning tool to steer development of the site. Acting as a rule￾book guiding all future development activities, the master plan 
enables rapid planning decisions. It allows for various forms of 
functional organization while additionally leaving space for flexi￾ble operational decisions. In addition, it supports sustainable val￾ues for urban planning and facilitates with high-density building 
on the site.
Single construction projects were to be facilitated step by step 
without impacting the ongoing hospital functions. Strengthening 
the local identity as a healthcare campus and its positive charac￾teristics was required. Generally, the requirement of ecological, 
economic and social sustainability was set. However, the biggest 
challenge of the competition was the requirement to develop a 
planning tool that remained meaningful and usable for the next 
generation.
Based on all these requirements, the competition master plan 
proposed three key ideas:
TOPOGRAPHY
The bulk and massing increases in density toward the center of 
the site and thus elevates the existing topography. As a result, 
the massing increases its significance in its external appearance 
within the urban context. Towards the site periphery, the building 
volumes and heights reduce to facilitate a connection to the scale 
of the neighboring buildings and urban fabric.
FORMING URBAN QUARTERS
The urban structure of the master plan derives from the idea to 
form small urban quarters within the site. Listed buildings form 
the center of each quarter, each arranged on a new urban square.
KNEADING DOUGH
The required floor area per building plot serves as the so-called 
dough, which can be ‘kneaded’ freely within the limits of a volu￾metric frame. Hence, various volumetric forms can emerge within 
a set three-dimensional boundary. This idea ensures the freedom 
Figure 2 The Inselspital campus, with the INO at the very center of the 
campus (the large building with many skylights) (Credit: Google Earth)31
M A S T E R P L A N F O R T H E I N S E L S P I TA L H O S P I TA L C A M P U S 
to newly interpret and realize future functional, economic and 
architectural demands.
MASTER PLAN
HENN was asked to continue developing the Masterplan 2060 
up to a stage at which it could be transferred into a legally bind￾ing document. The three key ideas – topography, urban quarters 
and kneading dough – continued to build the foundation of the 
Masterplan 2060.
During a time span of two generations, the master plan not 
only has to fulfill social, economic and ecological requirements 
through urban planning, it also has to hold up to unforeseeable 
future requirements of a medical campus. Hence, the master plan 
cannot be a rigid planning document that will lose its relevance 
over the course of time due to changing requirements. On the 
contrary, this master plan is to be a strategic spatial planning tool: 
It defines a frame for structured urban development but does 
not prescribe function or architecture of single building projects. 
This way, an open-scenario structure emerges in which varying 
organizational and functional concepts can be realized on each 
plot, e.g., the arrangement of medical centers or, alternatively, the 
arrangement of functional centers.
All central plots have dimensions designed to accommodate 
various kinds of clinical functions. A largely orthogonal grid sup￾ports flexibility and neutrality of use. Moreover, the plots were 
arranged to maintain existing buildings such as the newly built 
INO so that they remain fully operational and functionally inte￾grated within the master plan until they finish their life cycle.
The Inselspital master plan intends for the site to form a per￾meable, integral part of the urban fabric and to serve as an attrac￾tive public space. Simultaneously, the Inselspital has to exude the 
positive air of a healthcare campus, not just a place to cure sick￾ness. This places high demands on external spaces with regard to 
atmospheric quality, wayfinding and spatial permeability. Never￾theless, it has to be possible to connect buildings in a way to facil￾itate easy transport of people and goods. Currently, the Inselspital 
site offers diversified spatial experiences ranging between busy 
hospital life at its core and nearly bucolic landscape gardens on 
the so-called Englaenderhubel toward the western end of the site. 
The master plan, therefore, intends to not only strengthen these 
characteristics but also to create a connection between these con￾trasting elements.
Master Plan Objectives
The master plan’s legal document consists of a graphic plan of the 
site and a written rulebook. The graphic plan defines the urban 
structure, i.e., future plots, listed buildings, landscaping, etc. and 
quantifies floor area requirements and volumetric limits. Addition￾ally, the rulebook describes in a qualitative manner the overriding 
objectives and key ideas including tangible rules.
The question remained: How to leave a planning document 
for the next generation, describing ideas in an easily retraceable 
Figure 3 Masterplan 2060 showing 
the small ‘urban quarters’ each with 
a listed building at the center of 
each (Credit: HENN Architects)32
M A S T E R P L A N F O R T H E I N S E L S P I TA L H O S P I TA L C A M P U S 
way, thus eliminating the need for the author to be present for 
explanations? The rulebook tries to develop a framework that 
shows how ideas derive from objectives and how these ideas then 
generate rules. This framework, establishing overarching abstract 
objectives which further define the finer details within the mas￾ter plan, has proved to be highly effective in the development 
process.
In detail, the rulebook defines five primary objectives. These 
objectives originated from requirements during the competition.
Identity
The Inselspital site should be strengthened in its uniqueness and 
identity. Preserving and integrating listed historical buildings plays 
a central role.
Structure
The aim is to create an urban quarter with the character of a 
healthcare campus. This puts a focus on the quality of external 
space and landscaping. Hierarchies in the new part of urban fabric 
should be clearly legible and thus enhance orientation and way￾finding on the site and within buildings.
Capacity
This means keeping development perspectives open on the 
long run. Various forms of functional organization should be 
possible as and when required. A  further consideration is to 
facilitate change of use and temporary usability of buildings, 
which requires floor layouts to be functionally neutral to a high 
degree (this complies with the System Separation mandate for 
all public buildings in the Canton Bern – see the case of the INO 
following).
Economic Efficiency
A prerequisite of all planning activity is to make built space eco￾nomically efficient to use. Part of this objective, therefore, is to 
extend the life cycle of buildings in a sense of sustainability. It 
should also be possible to offer spaces for external businesses 
with medicine-related purposes, e.g., med-tech startups emerg￾ing from research departments.
Availability of Building Plots
At any time, there should be a free plot of land available for new 
buildings in the sense of ‘crop rotation’ in order to start new 
building projects easily and quickly, depending on the situation 
and demands at any point in time.
Key Ideas
Based on these five objectives, seven key ideas were formulated. 
Subsequently, these key ideas became the basis for a set of rules. The 
three key ideas at the heart of the competition design were amended 
and extended so that the rulebook now defines seven key ideas:
1. Forming Urban Quarters
Like the competition design, the Masterplan 2060 aims to create 
urban quarters on the site. A  single or group of listed historical 
buildings defines the center of each new quarter. The building is 
located centrally on a new urban square or pocket park. This square 
or park is defined at its boundaries through new building fronts. 
Pedestrian routes and visual connections connect single quarters 
with each other. This supports orientation and wayfinding but also 
strengthens the cultural and historical identity of the Inselspital site.
2. Open Space
A central axis connects the new urban squares and makes it possi￾ble to experience a series of varying ambient atmospheres from the 
busy Murtenstrasse high street through to the Englaenderhubel￾landscape garden. This again supports and enhances the local iden￾tity of the Inselspital site. The appearance and quality of the open 
space significantly influences the perceived amenity of the whole 
site and, as such, plays a leading role for the whole master plan.
3. Density
The density of mass increases toward the center of the site. Along 
the site boundaries, the massing adjusts to match its context and 
to ensure a seamless connection with the overall urban fabric.
4. Kneading Dough
As opposed to the usual approach, the Inselspital master plan 
neither defines nor locates buildings on plots. A given total floor 33
M A S T E R P L A N F O R T H E I N S E L S P I TA L H O S P I TA L C A M P U S 
area per plot can be freely formed within a certain volumetric 
limit, depending on the functional and architectural requirements 
of each building. This allows each building to individually adapt 
to future requirements determined at the time of its development 
and realization.
5. Interconnection
Neighboring plots on the site should be well connected with 
each other in order to ensure maximum capacity as well as func￾tional variability. Through linking elements or passages above and 
below ground, functional areas can be connected and extended 
horizontally between separate buildings.
6. Disentanglement
The aim is to separate motorized and pedestrian traffic as well as 
transport of patients and transport of goods across the site and 
within buildings. Introducing priorities and hierarchies for traffic 
and transport aims to improve the experience of wayfinding, 
especially for patients, visitors and all other users.
7. Crop Rotation
The principle of ‘crop rotation’ intends to offer empty plots for 
fast but nevertheless sustainable development while keeping all 
existing hospital processes intact and operational. This requires 
available empty plots, so-called fallow land, for the next step of 
development. As soon as a construction project is planned for an 
existing fallow plot, a new empty plot must be located. In case a 
plot is too large for the intended building, it can be divided into 
subplots with the prerequisite to achieve the required floor area 
once all subplots have been built.
Rules
In the third and final step, rules were derived from the defined key 
ideas. These can be found at a lower position in the framework, 
becoming rather precise urban planning requirements.
Green Spaces and Routes
As the bulk and massing of future buildings is unknown, it is 
essential that all greenery serves the wayfinding on the site. 
Therefore, all Primary and Secondary routes in the master plan 
are lined by alley trees and linear parks. All linear greenery is inter￾rupted where the route meets an adjacent square in order to open 
up the views toward the square. This also helps to interconnect 
and weave routes into squares.
Building Lines
According to the master plan, each urban quarter has a square 
at its center. However, only certain building proportions 
Figure 4 Eight implementation rules (Credit: HENN Architects)34
M A S T E R P L A N F O R T H E I N S E L S P I TA L H O S P I TA L C A M P U S 
provide the right structure to generate the sense of an urban 
square. Even if form and location of new buildings on plots 
surrounding the square are still unknown, it has to be ensured 
that the volume of adjacent buildings helps to form this square. 
Therefore, building lines were introduced to define the require￾ment for closed building fronts on boundary lines surround￾ing each square. To avoid towering buildings that suffocate a 
square by their sheer vertical dimension, the requirement for 
a closed perimeter only applies to the plinth of each building. 
The building mass above should be set back from the plinth. 
The height of the plinth is not set in absolute terms. Instead, 
the height of the plinth of each building adjacent to a square is 
defined to range between a minimum and a maximum relative 
to a set level for each square. There are two variables on each 
building plot: (1) ground floor location relative to topography 
and (2) free choice of floor-to-floor dimension. Because the 
highest point of the site is 35 m (115") above the lowest point, 
the possible number of stories for each building plinth can vary. 
The objective is to achieve a consistent edge line of building 
plinths around each square.
Plots
By their set dimensions, plots define the space where new build￾ings can be constructed on the site. Buildings can be shaped 
according to project requirements within the extent of a volu￾metric spatial frame (Figure 1). In order to determine the shape 
and appearance of the buildings, a separate competition is to be 
held for each plot. The Plot rule is amended by the Building Line 
rule around squares, requirements of total floor area per plot and 
maximum possible height requirements.
Height Development
One of the three competition ideas, Topography, can be found 
here. By increasing the density and thus building height towards 
the center of the site, which is already located on a hill, a superel￾evation of the topography is achieved. This has significant impact 
on the physical appearance of the site within the urban context of 
Bern. Today, the inpatient tower is the Inselspital’s landmark, as it 
can be seen from most points in the city and its surroundings. As 
soon as it will be replaced, new high buildings at the core of the 
site will take over this role.
Connection Level
Setting a fixed reference level for all plots enables the horizon￾tal connection of new buildings at the core of the site. This rule 
only refers to one floor per plot so that ceiling heights above and 
below the connection level remain unaffected. Therefore, func￾tional and organizational connections across and between build￾ings become possible.
Bridge Connections
A connection between buildings or plots is possible via bridges. 
This adds an efficient system of internal routes to the already-ex￾isting transport tunnels below ground. By this means, patients 
no longer need to be transferred through unwelcoming logistics 
tunnels but can be moved above ground. In addition, internal 
visitor routes can now be offered between buildings. The rule￾book requires these bridges to be designed and proportioned in a 
way that leaves the buildings legible as autonomous architectural 
elements.
Access System
The main aim of the traffic and infrastructure concept is to dis￾entangle traffic flows by prioritizing routes and developing a 
concept of route hierarchies. In the future, all motorized traffic, 
especially emergency ambulance traffic and logistics traffic, is to 
access the site directly from both main roads around the site and 
one historical main road that crosses through the campus. All fur￾ther internal routes are reserved for pedestrian and bicycle traffic. 
A new main pedestrian ‘street’ from East to West will become an 
important feature of the campus.
Technical Infrastructure
The aim of this concept is to simplify the infrastructure network 
on the site by introducing two Primary data and infrastructure 
tunnels below ground. In order to guarantee maximum flexibility 
for the plots, all technical infrastructures including the two main 
tunnels are to be run parallel to plots beneath the roads.35
M A S T E R P L A N F O R T H E I N S E L S P I TA L H O S P I TA L C A M P U S 
Through all these objectives, key ideas and rules, the rulebook 
tries to detail the intent of the master plan. Qualitative descriptions 
have been chosen over quantitative prescriptions (exceptions being 
the total floor area per plot and maximum height per plot) in order 
to give the master plan ‘space to breathe’ in the future.
Spatial/Organizational/Sustainable Master Plan
While HENN developed the master plan that refers to all things 
urban and architectural, a team of operational specialists devel￾oped a master plan that mainly refers to organizational functions. 
Both of these master plans were then additionally amended by 
a third element, the master plan for ecology and sustainability. 
While the spatial masterplan provides a stable urban planning 
tool to ensure structured spatial development through the next 
decades, the organizational masterplan depicts current and acute 
requirements of a complex hospital organization within a highly 
dynamic context. The idea to build a master plan out of three 
components (spatial, organizational and sustainability) emerged 
during the process of shaping the spatial master plan. Both the 
organizational and sustainability master plans were then mainly 
developed by the client (i.e., the Inselspital).
To start the organizational masterplan, an intense quantitative 
analysis of medical data had to be undertaken. The aim was to vis￾ualize patient routes in order to determine the functional depend￾encies and physical proximity between clinical departments.
The Inselspital’s mission statement puts the patient as the cen￾tral focus. Therefore, an executive decision was made to make 
the patient process the key driver for future functional structures. 
The new core idea is interdisciplinary collaboration. This means 
that in the future, clinical departments cannot constitute spatially 
independent centers for specialists. Thus, a new organizational 
form had to be found for the Inselspital.
In the next step of the modelling process, the existing organ￾izational structure was dissolved and replaced by a new model 
of ‘gravitation.’ The model simulated how closely different units 
approach each other when patient movements between them 
amplify the attraction. The result was a clear but not exactly 
surprising picture. The A&E, radiology and diagnostics units and 
operating rooms are medical core functions, which are strongly 
connected with most other disciplines. Consequently, these core 
functions need to be centrally located.
In 2012 the newly opened Accident, Emergency and Surgery 
Center INO with radiology and laboratory medicine houses these 
core functions. There was now a new requirement recognized 
for three medical centers: three other medical centers, i.e., the 
Comprehensive Cancer, Comprehensive Neuroscience and Com￾prehensive Cardiovascular Center should be sited in immediate 
adjacency of the INO. This pragmatic proposal, which reflects the 
day-to-day necessities of clinical process, found fast and broad 
approval among the hospital management. Thus, the first steps 
to develop the Inselspital site were set.
The Inselspital took its first steps toward a structured devel￾opment immediately after the approval of the zoning plan in 
March 2015.
The realization of the Inselspital masterplan has been proceed￾ing steadily. At this writing, at least four plots have been built or 
are nearing completion. Two further plots have also been sub￾ject to architectural competitions in 2020. On two core plots, the 
Organ and Tumor Center and the Swiss Comprehensive Cardio￾vascular Center, are being built. A new Center for Translational 
Research will form the face toward the city center on a plot close 
to the main entry route to the Inselspital site.
The zoning plan requires an architectural competition 
for each plot and the open space of the Inselspital site. The 
Figure 5 Zoning Plan. Source: Stadtplanungsamt Bern (Source: Bern City Council Planning Department)36
M A S T E R P L A N F O R T H E I N S E L S P I TA L H O S P I TA L C A M P U S 
architectural master plan has been complemented by an ‘exte￾rior master plan,’ providing guidance on the structure of hard 
and soft landscaping.
Three project competitions have already taken place (as of 
2021), with additional competitions planned in the near and 
distant future. Each of these project competitions will deal with 
a variety of architectural and organizational requirements for a 
huge, technically complex building project. Each of these compe￾titions will see new participants and new jury members, selecting 
a winner based on different criteria. So not only context but also 
the actors will vary from project to project. Due to this variability, 
the question arises, “How will it be possible to keep in mind the 
bigger picture, i.e., the qualitative aspirations of the master plan?”
An advisory board was formed to steer the implementa￾tion of the master plan, deciding which plot will be built next 
and which function/user it needs to be built for. The advisory 
board consists of the heads of Inselgruppe, Bern city planning 
authorities, city council, Bern University, etc. That is the group 
of persons responsible for all high-level decisions regarding the 
Inselspital area. Even contrasting interests have to be brought 
to the table and discussed until they are resolved, which is a 
great democratic tool. Gunter Henn is part of the board in a 
consulting capacity.
As before in the Inselspital’s long history, the site will continue 
to evolve and develop. Part of this process is to continue ‘curat￾ing’ the master plan in the long term.
Figure 6 Implementation sequence following the master plan (Credit: HENN Architects)DOI: 10.4324/9781003243076-7 37
Project Data
Location: Papendrecht, the Netherlands
Architect: Frans van der Werf, KOKON Architects
Construction: Support: 1976; Infill: 1977 (renovations at intervals since that time)
Owner: Housing Association ‘Papendrecht’
Dwellings: 124 rental dwellings; 4 office spaces
Support construction: Roos Bouw, Rotterdam: Concrete tunnel-formed concrete cast in 
place, with openings in slabs for shared vertical mechanical sys￾tems and internal stairs; kit-of-parts façade prefabricated off-site
Infill provision: Nijhuis Infill System, Rijssen, completed by conventional Dutch 
interior construction
Unless noted, all Frans van der Werf
photo and drawing credits:
RESIDENTIAL
Molenvliet
Papendrecht, the Netherlands
Figure 1 Aerial view of the Molenvliet project with its red-tile roofs in 2022 (Source: Google Earth)38
MOLENVLIET
BACKGROUND
The winner of a competition for 2,800 dwellings at 30 dwell￾ing units/hectare, this project won on the combined merits of 
its urban design, architecture and participatory decision-making 
process. It is organized on four environmental levels: the overall 
urban plan, the tissue or urban design plan, the Support and the 
Infill.
URBAN TISSUE
The principle of the urban tissue is a ‘matrix,’ as indicated in the 
diagram below (Figures 2, 3 and 4). Within that pattern, open￾space ‘courtyards’ are alternately A type (entry courtyards) and B 
type (garden courtyards). The drawing shows a section view of 
the tissue, which also indicates the basic pattern of the Support
(Base Building) vis-à-vis solar access.
The diagram also indicates the idea of ‘zones’ within the tis￾sue diagram: Zone A is consistently built; Zone B is either built or 
open space. The B zone is therefore essentially an indication of 
the position and dimension of variations – a kind of capacity at 
the urban tissue level – evident in what was actually built. Zone C 
is consistently unbuilt/open space.
THE SUPPORT
The project’s 123 realized dwellings surround courtyards in two￾to four-story blocks featuring steeply pitched red-tile roofs. Most 
units are entered via several ‘entry’ courtyards, with backyards or 
rooftop terraces that open onto adjacent ‘backyard’ courts. All 
courts are closed to vehicular traffic (Figure 1).
The Support (Figures 6, 7) consists of a highly uniform cast￾in-place concrete framework, with bearing walls all running in the 
same direction. Regularly spaced openings are provided in the 
slabs for vertical mechanical chases and stairs within individual 
units. To allow for variation and changeability in unit designs, 
placement of Support elements was determined by a series 
of capacity studies. Tunnel forms – reusable steel forms put in 
place and moved by cranes – were used in constructing the Sup￾port. The concrete walls between bays of the building are regu￾larly spaced, with regular ‘block-outs’ making construction fast 
and efficient while still allowing a wide variety of unit sizes and 
Figure 2 Use of Alexander’s Pattern Language in developing the urban 
tissue concept39
MOLENVLIET
Figure 3 The principles of the urban 
tissue as it might be applied over a 
larger area of the town. The real￾ized part of the master plan is to the 
upper left
Figure 4 The principle of the urban 
tissue realized in the Support: a con￾tinuous building, 2 to 4 stories high, 
with alternating entry and garden 
courtyards and the central parking 
street40
MOLENVLIET
configurations. A prefabricated wooden façade framework – an 
updated version of the typical medieval Dutch canal house façade 
comprised of a series of joined wooden frames – was installed as 
part of the Support (Figure 9).
Infill for each unit was determined after arranging units of 
required floor area, or ‘parceling out’ or subdivision of the support 
(Figure 8). This process, like the subsequent fitting out, involved 
user participation. Each household met individually on several 
occasions with the architect, progressing from rough sketches 
to final drawings. Once they had been signed by the occupants, 
these drawings were translated into construction documents. The 
Infill of each unit included interior walls, doors, trim and finishes; 
bathroom cabinets and equipment; kitchen cabinets and fixtures; 
electrical and mechanical equipment for the unit; closets; as well 
as the selection, configuration and color of window and doors 
inserted into the support façade framework.
Figure 5 An aerial view of the project, clearly showing the alternating 
courtyards and the parking street (Courtesy Frans van der Werf) Figure 6 The Support construction
Figure 7 The Support, showing that 
the structure runs in one direction, 
within which dwellings of varying sizes 
can be made. Nonresidential functions 
are indicated in the dark tone, includ￾ing shops and offices, generally on the 
ground level41
MOLENVLIET
Figure 8 Ground-floor layout of dwellings showing the variation in unit sizes and layouts
Figure 9 A view of one of the entry courtyards in 2002. Façades are 
prefabricated wooden frames with panels (color and placement) selected 
by dwellers from a catalog specified by the architect. All courtyards (both 
entry and ‘backyard’) are connected by pedestrian passages, as seen 
here, at ground level and above
FAÇADE
Large, subdivided window frames were part of a fixed design, but 
within each frame, tenants could select a variety of components 
and decide which parts should be transparent and which not, and 
where movable parts like doors and windows would go. More￾over, for each dwelling unit, two colors could be chosen, from a 
total of six, to paint the various façade parts. This way of work￾ing gave identity to the individual units by color and design and 
served their functional requirements. At the same time, it assured 
Figure 10 A resident’s living room (Photo by Stephen Kendall)42
MOLENVLIET
Figure 11 A private rooftop garden (Photo by Stephen Kendall)
an overall harmonious architectural result. It was also technically 
simple and inexpensive (Figure 9).
The project incorporates many traditional elements of Dutch 
urban housing – pitched roofs, wooden windows, doors open￾ing onto courtyards and some mixed use: the project incorpo￾rates doctor’s offices, small shops and commercial offices, even 
a motorcycle parts shop. This project demonstrated that even in 
multifamily housing, the variation characterizing households can 
be expressed easily and beneficially on the exterior of the build￾ing. In this case, inhabitants worked with designers to determine 
window frame color and arrangement to complement the custom 
interior layout of each unit.
PERSONALIZATION OVER TIME
Interiors and rooftop gardens reflect the personal preferences of 
residents (Figure 10, 11).DOI: 10.4324/9781003243076-8 43
NEXT21
Osaka, Japan
Figure 1 NEXT21 in its urban context (Photo credit: Osaka Gas)
Project Data
Location: Osaka, Japan
Planning/Design: Osaka Gas and NEXT21 Planning Team (Utida, Tatsumi, Fukao, Takada, 
Chikazumi, Takama, Endo, Sendo)
Building Architect: Yositika Utida, Shu-koh-Sha Architecture and Urban Design Studio
Construction: Obayashi Corporation
Initial construction: 1994 (continuous ongoing renovations/transformations since)
Design system planning: Kazuo Tatsumi, Mitsuo Takada
Dwelling design rules: Mitsuo Takada, Osaka Gas, KBI Architects and Design Office
Modular coordination: Seiichi Fukao
Owner: Osaka Gas Company
Dwellings: 18 (some have been combined and divided over time)
Support (skeleton): Reinforced concrete + Façade System (the façade has been reconfigured 
over time corresponding to changes in unit designs)
Infill provision: Various companies44
NEXT21
BACKGROUND
Within the context of Open Building, the NEXT21 project intro￾duced a number of innovations, some of which still have not been 
equaled by later initiatives.
Professor Yositika Utida, the leader of the team of architects 
invited by Osaka Gas to design NEXT21, once described the pro￾ject as ‘three-dimensional urban design.” This concept is indeed 
a logical result of the separation of Base Building (Support) and 
Infill (S/I). This large building is no longer a building but becomes 
part of an ‘urban tissue.’ Just like a city is extended by the design 
of streets and squares complete with trees and sidewalks and 
the utility lines underground, NEXT21 provides public space of 
bridges, elevators, stairs and corridors/pathways connecting a 
public garden on the ground floor with another one on the roof. 
The public circulation in three dimensions from the street level 
to roof garden connects individual dwellings to the urban street 
network, and just as in urban design, these individual dwellings 
can be built, changed, removed and replaced like buildings along 
a street.
Although the NEXT21 project fills no more than half a block, it 
is easy to imagine its concept applied on a larger scale, accom￾modating a very large number of individual dwellings in a three￾dimensional urban fabric. The transformation of the large building 
into a neighborhood, offering internal public spaces that give 
access to dwellings that can be shaped individually, is perhaps 
the greatest potential of the Open Building approach. NEXT21 
shows how this can lead to a new architecture and urbanism that 
is different from just ‘flexible buildings.’
PROFESSIONAL COOPERATION ON TWO LEVELS
A design team in collaboration with architect Shinichi Chikazumi 
guided the entire project. Thirteen different architects were ini￾tially invited to design the 18 individual houses contained within 
the NEXT21 framework. This was a logical step once this vision of 
a three-dimensional urban fabric had been adopted.
In all Open Building projects, design decisions are made on 
several levels: the lower level of the interior fit-out (Infill) is to 
accommodate the user, while the higher level contains all that the 
users have in common: the load-bearing structure, the main utility 
systems and the public spaces.
To have separate architects do the lower-level design is consist￾ent with conventional practice in urbanism, office and shopping 
center construction. The traditional urban designer expects other 
architects to do the buildings along the streets and squares she pro￾poses. In the case of office buildings and shopping centers, large 
areas of empty floor space are made available, and leaseholders are 
expected to hire their own architect to design interior layout and 
finishes. The same can work in residential Open Building as well as 
other kinds of buildings shown in this part of the book.
In the case of NEXT21, only a few of the dwellings were 
designed in direct response to the demands of the inhabitants. 
In most cases, Osaka Gas submitted ‘user scenarios’ as ‘guidance 
documents’ for the architects to follow. This was done to obtain 
a wide range of different lifestyles that could demonstrate the 
buildings’ capacity to accommodate a variety of dwelling solu￾tions. It also secured a broad base for ongoing research. Having 
the individual dwellings designed by different architects could 
stimulate variety even more. At the same time, this way of sep￾arating and delegating design responsibility suggested a new 
model of professional cooperation among designers to better 
serve an emerging, consumer-oriented real estate market.
DIMENSIONAL AND POSITIONAL 
COORDINATION GRIDS
Organizing all the different players and all of the piping and cabling 
infrastructure without conflict, in combination with the deploy￾ment of internal partitioning and the equipment of bathrooms 
and kitchens, posed a very difficult methodological problem. The 
NEXT21 design team confronted this problem in a sophisticated 
way. By doing so, they have expanded our knowledge about the 
use of coordinating grids and zoning. Based on the careful stud￾ies of Professor Seiichi Fukao, in close cooperation with Shinichi 
Chikazumi of Shu-koh-sha Design Studio, coordinating grids on 
several levels, closely interrelated, organize the design of all the 
subsystems. This methodological aspect of the NEXT21 project 
should be studied carefully.45
NEXT21
Figure 2 Dimensional coordinating grids used 
to manage the separated design tasks (Credit: 
SHU-KOH-SHA)
Figure 3 Two floor plans showing wide variety of 
dwelling layouts, each designed by a different archi￾tect and utilizing the coordinating grids (Credit: 
Osaka Gas Company)46
NEXT21
PRIVATE GARDENS
Another innovation consistent with the idea of a ‘three-dimen￾sional urban structure’ was to provide individual units with their 
own exterior green space distinct from the common gardens on 
the ground level and on the roof of the building. Several of the 
units had small outside spaces for plantings as part of the private 
residential territory. Of course, the size and number of such little 
‘gardens’ depended on the individual unit designs (which could 
change over time). But the addition of green outside spaces was 
encouraged as part of the overall experiment, and the high space 
available for ducts under the floors made it easier to grow plants.
THE FAÇADE SYSTEM
A façade system was designed specifically for the NEXT21 lower￾level design. Using the system, each architect could design a 
façade reflecting the interior layout of individual dwellings. Keep￾ing in mind future changes, the façade system was designed in 
such a way that it could be taken apart and installed again ‘from 
the inside,’ without need for exterior scaffolding.
In the Open Building experience, the role of the façade has 
been a difficult but important issue. A range of solutions has 
been considered over time. Proposals have been made that 
each unit should be entirely free to publicly express – on the 
exterior – its own interior as well as its owner’s personal stylis￾tic preference. Le Corbusier’s famous Algiers proposal already 
suggested this possibility more than 70 years ago, and among 
the ill-fated Operation Breakthrough ideas for innovative 
housing solutions in the early 1970s in the US was a proposal 
for a minimal load-bearing framework containing a variety of 
house designs.
At the other end of the spectrum are the many OB projects 
that limit themselves to interior variety behind a fixed façade 
designed for the entire building.
Making façade parts demountable and replaceable requires 
sophisticated detailing. If, moreover, the façade’s position must be 
flexible as well, parts of the floor and ceiling that first were interior 
may become exterior or the other way around, posing a num￾ber of difficult technical problems. For practical reasons alone, a 
strong case can be made for a fixed façade design behind which 
interior variety is possible.
In many countries in history, façades always sought to express 
individual dwellings within a given typology, resulting in a rich 
and thematic variety along an entire street wall. In contrast, the 
Parisian boulevards show how uniform and monumental façades 
can shape urban space without expressing interior variety. The 
same can be observed around the Bloomsbury squares in London 
and the public spaces of St. Petersburg. Different cultures seem 
to have different preferences in different times. The question 
whether the façade – or parts of it – should follow higher-level 
design or lower-level design is not just technical but has important 
cultural aspects.
The NEXT21 project offered a new possibility: its façade sys￾tem is part of the higher-level concept intended for overall appli￾cation. But the actual use of the system is part of the lower-level 
design. This combines lower-level variety and change over time 
with higher-level harmony on an urban scale. Here, too, NEXT21 
set a most interesting new precedent.
Figure 4 Private gardens and the public rooftop garden. The façade sys￾tem, designed by one team, is used differently by each architect respon￾sible for each individual dwelling. Some changes to dwelling unit plans 
called for adding outdoor garden space; some required eliminating or 
moving outdoor terraces (Photo credit: Osaka Gas)47
NEXT21
Figure 5 The NEXT21 façade system 
(Copyright: SHU-KOH-SHA)
Figure 6 Complete change of a 
dwelling unit floor plan and the asso￾ciated change in its façade, showing 
that some elements are rearranged, 
some are introduced from a storage 
of façade elements and some are put 
into storage for future use (Credit: 
Shu-Ko-Sha)
CHANGING DWELLING UNIT INTERIORS
Over the years, many of the original dwelling units have changed, 
part of the experiment with adjusting Infill to changing lifestyles 
of a variety of household sizes and preferences. During those 
changes, the interior Infill elements are stripped out, leaving only 
the skeleton and the insulated façade, as shown in Figure 7.
One such change is pictured in Figure 8, in which Unit 404 
changed within the boundaries of the original space.48
NEXT21
Another dwelling (Unit 304) also underwent changes, as 
shown in the following Figures 9 and 10.
AN OPEN BUILDING RESEARCH LABORATORY
In the years after its initial completion in 1994, the NEXT21 pro￾ject has served as a laboratory for a large number of experiments. 
This was consistent with Osaka Gas’s solid reputation for innova￾tive research in building technology and environmental control 
systems in buildings. There is no precedent in the Open Build￾ing experience of a similar long-term commitment to research by 
a single company, and here again, the NEXT21 project sets an 
example.
As already noted, not all research projects done in the NEXT21 
context are specific Open Building issues. Development of new 
heating/cooling sources and waste management systems are 
stand-alone subjects. But the distribution of utility lines, including 
cabling, ducts and piping of all kinds to each unit, is very much an 
Open Building issue. For future ‘three-dimensional urban frame￾works’ to serve future generations, service lines must coincide with 
public spaces in the frameworks to allow their renewal, mainte￾nance or replacement as new technology develops. Moreover, the 
testing of a ‘computerized energy-providing service,’ for instance, 
could be done because users actually participated in it, contribut￾ing valuable feedback information.
Many other parts of the extensive research agenda have direct 
bearing on the Open Building approach. All were related to the 
redesign and change of dwelling units, a process that led to a 
reexamination of many issues.
There are, of course, the experiments dealing with the techni￾cal issues of changeable or flexible Infill and also the displacement 
of parts of the façade system as examples of new product devel￾opment and evaluation.
There are also the lifestyle-oriented social studies in which the 
small-scale interaction between user and equipment and space is 
considered. And there are also design-oriented research items on 
the agenda, like the scenario-based technique of housing plan￾ning and also the study of the capacity of a given floor plan in 
which an entire range of possible use scenarios could be accom￾modated by shifting the position of the kitchen unit combined 
with a few minor alterations of doors and partitions.
It is important to note that for all of these experiments and 
studies, the NEXT21 infrastructure was available and remains in 
continual use. Similar research issues have been conducted in 
the past, but because no real-life experimental environment was 
available, they necessarily had to be done in a more abstract man￾ner. The availability of a real-life adaptable environment offered 
a new and very different context for study and experiment, the 
potential of which we have yet to fully understand.
If we look at the NEXT21 project as a permanent environ￾ment for experimentation, we begin to appreciate its almost total 
‘openness’ as compared to most other Open Building projects. To 
successfully realize an Open Building project in real life within the 
budgets normally available and for the sake of users with average 
needs and preferences, the question as to what can be fixed for 
all the inhabitants and what must be adaptable for the individual 
is crucial. We have learned that ‘maximum’ flexibility is not only 
impractical but also undesirable. What is fixed and common has 
real meaning, and the balance with what is adaptable and indi￾vidual must be studied each time with great care. The answer to 
that question will be different from project to project, depending 
Figure 7 A view of one dwelling space after its Infill was removed, in read￾iness for a new Infill (Photo credit: Osaka Gas)49
NEXT21
on the agents involved and the culture we try to serve. The ques￾tion must remain on the table until enough experience has been 
gained. Only when Open Building has become a general and nor￾mal approach will we understand more fully how that balance 
can work well and will we be able to make predictions. And even 
then, we can safely assume, there will be more than one answer.
For an Open Building project to serve as a laboratory, as in 
the case with NEXT21, an extremely ‘open’ technical solution is 
the right answer; experiments can be done without pre-deter￾mined constraints. The NEXT21 environment is indeed a large 
systemic composition within which the balance between truly 
collective and permanent on the one hand and truly individual 
and adaptable on the other hand can be experimented with.
Figure 9 Unit 304 before renovation (Credit: Osaka Gas)
Figure 10 Unit 304 after renovation (Credit: Osaka Gas)
THE PRESENT AND FUTURE CONTEXT FOR NEXT21
The completion of NEXT21 in 1994 implied a long-term commit￾ment by Osaka Gas Company toward Open Building experimenta￾tion. That commitment continues. This too was a precedent. Many 
earlier projects of an experimental character had been the result of 
extraordinary efforts by architects, clients and government agen￾cies, but so far, they had been one-at-a-time events. It is in the 
nature of the building industry to experiment on an ad-hoc basis 
just as the entire industry operates on a project-by-project basis.
Ad-hoc experimentation allows the demonstration of the 
separation of two levels of design control. NEXT21 did this in a 
rigorous and convincing way. But the development of new and 
more flexible subsystems is another matter. This cannot be done 
as easily on an ad-hoc basis, and here, NEXT21 could do some￾thing entirely new. It offered a stable context for installation and 
comparison of new subsystems that might become available over 
Figure 8 Drawing showing how one 
dwelling unit (404) was changed 
within the same space (Credit: Osaka 
Gas)50
NEXT21
time. The desire for easier installation and better service already 
had moved the market in the direction of the Open Building 
approach. For instance, in the last quarter century, we have wit￾nessed the introduction of flexible and ‘home-run’ water lines, 
snap-together drainage piping with push-fit joints, smaller and 
more efficient hot water units capable of heating a single dwelling 
and small enough to fit in a closet, new space-cooling systems, 
Figure 11 a, b, c: (a) Plan of a typical level showing (in dark gray) the 
‘tables’ for dwellings surrounded by common spaces for horizontal MEP 
distribution; (b) diagram showing the deployment of vertical MEP systems; 
(c) diagram of one ‘cell’ showing the hollow floor under the common 
spaces in which Base Building MEP is placed, and internal to the dwellings, 
under the raised floor and dropped ceiling (Credit: Osaka Gas)
electric cabling by means of click-together connections, easier￾to-be-installed partition systems, 0-slope gray water drainage 
systems and many other improvements.
As the Open Building approach makes progress, it becomes 
increasingly desirable for new products and sub-systems to be tested 
in an Open Building context. Here, the example of the Osaka Gas 
Company may lead to emulation. We may eventually witness the 
emergence of similar experimental sites where new subsystems can 
be demonstrated and tested in a context of real-life inhabitation and 
management. Such permanent experimental sites might be run either 
by the manufacturing industry consortia harnessing pre-competitive 
R&D agreements, government bodies or public/private organizations.
A NOTE FROM SHINICHI CHIKAZUMI, ONE OF THE 
ARCHITECTS OF NEXT21
“Why did the SI concept rapidly lose momentum in Japan? This is 
a question I ask myself.
I continue to experiment with the remodeling of NEXT21 with 
the exact same passion as before, having remodeled 11 units in 
18 years from 1994 to 2022. I am currently planning to remodel 
one unit for 2025. Osaka Gas has not lost any of its ambition, and 
the SI concept still attracts more than 1,000 visitors during the 
open-house period each year.
Everyone says that NEXT21 is exceptional. No other company 
can compete with it. Osaka Gas continues to spend a lot of money 
to maintain the number-one position. I  believe it is possible to 
keep the NEXT21 concept and turn it into a commercially viable 
approach. However, the reason why no Japanese developers are 
willing to ask me to do so is because Japanese developers have no 
challenging spirit to break out of their old framework. They have 
a safe business and make enough profit by selling buildings and 
the land as a set as they always have.
In Japan, the business of building new detached houses in 
large quantities is still successful. People are jumping into the new 
houses and leaving the houses they have lived in unoccupied. 
Millions of vacant houses have already been created. I  do not 
believe that a business and an industry as distorted as this can 
continue much longer.” (Shinichi Chikazumi, President, Shu-Ko￾Sha Architecture an Urban Design Studio, April 2023)DOI: 10.4324/9781003243076-9 51
Plus-Home
Arabianranta, Helsinki, Finland
Figure 1 Garden side of the project, showing large sliding screens on each south-facing balcony that can be used for privacy (Photo credit: Petri Viita, 
ArkOpen Ltd.)52
PLUS-HOME
ARABIANRANTA
Project Data
Project location: Kaj Frankinkatu, Helsinki, Finland
Chronological information: Completed in 2005
Project design team: Architects Esko Kahri and Petri Viita (Kahri and
Co.), Petri Viita, Juhani Väisänen and PlusHome 
Ltd. project team authors; Esko Enkovaara and 
Timo Taiponen (formerly Tocoman)
Number of dwelling units: 77
Project site and building area: Site area: 3,900 m2
/floor area 6,600 m2
Project client: Private developer SATO
Structure type: Steel frame, hollow core slabs + ‘upside-down 
floor system’
Installation utilities: Horizontal piping installation and piping layout 
per dwelling is installed in a ‘wet zone’ in an 
‘upside-down floor system,’ with adaptable elec￾tric distribution system in all partition walls
Infill system/approach: Clear separation of Infill and Support. The infor￾mation system was developed to coordinate 
inhabitants, designers, client and developers.53
PLUS-HOME
BACKGROUND
In 2002, the second of several technology competitions was 
organized by the city of Helsinki. The winning PlusHome pro￾posal was developed by architect Esko Kahri (Kahri and Co.) 
and Tocoman data-cost office with SATO as developer. On that 
basis, Kahri and Tocoman founded the PlusHome company and, 
together with SATO, started a working relationship with a focus 
on customer orientation and implementation of Open Building 
principles.
The pilot project is located in the neighborhood of Arabian￾ranta. This new housing area along the seashore was developed 
starting in 2000. It is located about 5 km (3 miles) from the city 
center.
PlusHome consists of three decision levels: a building structure 
and envelope that allows variations of apartment sizes, different 
layout options within given apartment sizes and a selection of 
surface materials and fixtures that inhabitants can choose from. 
The PlusHome concept enables a high degree of dwelling unit 
variability through technical solutions.
This project consists of one six- and one five-story-high build￾ing with, at time of sale, 77 for-sale dwellings ranging in size 
between 39 and 125 m2
 (420–1,345 ft.2
). There is a 84 m2
 (904 
ft.2
) commercial space on the street level, as well as seven street￾level workshop spaces for artisans, four of which are connected 
directly to the dwellings above by internal stairs.
THE BASE BUILDING
The structural frame differs from traditional building methods in 
Finland. Here, the load-bearing walls are the longitudinal outer 
walls instead of the inner cross-walls dividing the apartment units. 
This allows a higher degree of longitudinal variation of unit sizes 
within the Support. The outer walls are made of steel frames on 
which the precast concrete floor slabs bear. Most of the slabs are 
hollow-core concrete slabs with a 10 m (32.8") span, which is 
popular in Finland. In the ‘zones’ where wet spaces (bathrooms 
and kitchens) are considered likely, a special floor design is used 
in order to allow plumbing to be accessible from the top – i.e., 
from the spaces served. It uses steel beams with regular holes 
for horizontal piping, a concrete ‘bottom’ slab providing fire and 
Figure 2 Detail of the sliding privacy screens on large, south-facing balco￾nies (Photo credit: Petri Viita, ArkOpen Ltd.)
acoustical separation and a removable top concrete slab. The hol￾low-core slabs, steel-frame outside walls, vertical piping in stair￾cases and horizontal zones make the basic structure renewable 
over time. An accessible hollow profile at the top of interior non–
load-bearing metal-stud/gypsum board walls allows free place￾ments of electrical and low-voltage wires, which run down inside 
the walls to switches and plugs, allowing easy change or addi￾tion of terminations later. The exterior load-bearing steel frames 
allowed for off-site fabrication in large elements, as well as an 
almost unlimited option of window placements. Walls between 
apartments are not load-bearing; they are of light construction 
with double plasterboards on steel studs providing standard 
acoustical isolation. The façades are redbrick or clad with thermal 
plastering; some parts use profiled metal plates. Large balconies 
for each dwelling, running across the south façade of the build￾ing, have shading elements on rollers to allow occupants to freely 54
PLUS-HOME
position them as desired. One innovation was the steel building 
frame (which received an award from the Finnish Steel Industry 
Association).
INFORMATION/DATA MANAGEMENT SYSTEM
The other main innovation was the information system developed 
by IT and data consulting company Tocoman, which ensured 
good management of the added complexity for the project.
The data management system allowed the architect to work 
on the model, with real-time project quantity and cost informa￾tion and an online internet platform for inhabitants’ use. Resi￾dents could choose between alternative floor plans, which were 
presented in the premarketing stage via internet. A wide selection 
of floor plans was offered, both different apartment sizes and 
variations within the same size. This stage was open till about 
6 months after the construction started. The building would fill 
up following the sequence of inhabitants’ choices. All the floors 
became individualized. After that, inhabitants had another 3 
months to choose surface materials and fixtures while seeing an 
instant cost estimation of their choices. The buyers could see the 
change in the total price of their apartment directly after mak￾ing their choices and could also go back and revise before finally 
accepting the order. After selections, quantity information was 
Figure 3 A diagram of the information system developed by IT and data 
consulting company Tocoman (Credit: Tocoman)
Figure 4 Drawing showing how, within a simple Base Building structure, 
a large variety of dwelling unit sizes and layouts could be offered (Credit: 
ArkOpen Ltd.)
automatically collected and delivered to the contractors. This sys￾tem allowed smooth implementation on a rather large scale.
CAPACITY FOR DWELLING VARIATION
The design of the project, supported by the PlusHome data man￾agement system, enabled residents to choose from a wide selec￾tion of unit sizes and layouts, as shown in Figures 4 and 5.
THE FLOOR SYSTEM FOR ACCESS TO HORIZONTAL 
DISTRIBUTION OF PIPING
INTERIOR VIEWS OF DWELLING UNITS55
PLUS-HOME
Figure 5 Drawing of part of one floor, showing the variety of dwelling unit sizes and layouts. Of particular interest is the variety of positions of bathrooms 
and kitchens, made possible by the Kvantti-zone floor system (toned area, also Figures 6 and 7). Also shown (in black) are the concrete shear walls around 
the elevator/stairs as well as the steel-frame columns at the building’s façade (Credit: ArkOpen Ltd.)
Figure 6 A drawing of the Kvantti-slab floor system, making piping for 
bathrooms and kitchens accessible from the top, in a zone near the fire 
stair and elevator cores (Credit: ArkOpen Ltd.)
Figure 7 The two-part Kvantti-zone floor system under construction. The 
‘upside-down’ floor – also shown in Figure 6 – was only used in the zones 
where bathrooms and kitchens were expected to be placed. The rest of 
the floor structure used conventional hollow-core precast concrete slabs 
spanning the entire width of the building and resting on the steel façade
(Photo credit: Petri Viita, ArkOpen Ltd.)
Figure 8 Photo of the interior of one of the dwelling units (Photo credit: 
Petri Viita, ArkOpen Ltd.)
Figure 9 Photo of the interior of one of the two-floor ‘mezzanine’ dwell￾ing units at the top of the building (Photo credit: Petri Viita, ArkOpen Ltd.)56 DOI: 10.4324/9781003243076-10
Project Data
Location: Helsinki, Finland
Building architect: Pia Ilonen, TALLI Architects, Helsinki (now ILO Architects Ltd)
Developer: Sato Development
Construction: Support: 1.5 years from 2007–2008. Infill: from 2008 on, requiring from 
1 month to 1 year depending on each occupant’s decisions
Owner: Housing company (Asunto Oy°© the shareholders and inhabitants)
Dwellings: 39 ‘loft’ dwellings
Support: Concrete structure; access balconies of steel
Infill provision: Various DIY and professionally installed Infill
Image credits: ILO architects have all the rights for the images and photos. The exterior 
photos are by KUVIO; interior photos are by Stefan Bremer.
TILA
Helsinki, Finland
Figure 1 View of TILA from the south57
TILA
BACKGROUND
The TILA housing block, comprising 39 loft apartments, is a 
pilot project for neo-loft apartments in the Arabianranta neigh￾borhood of Helsinki. The apartments face southward through a 
fully glazed façade and with a balcony running the whole width 
of each dwelling. The dimensions and structure of the apart￾ments allow for the occupants to build an upper-‐floor mezza￾nine or gallery. The neo- loft concept is based on the concept 
that within the available building frame, the resident determines 
and builds the required subdivision of spaces. The dwellings are 
occupiable at the moment of purchase (they have bathrooms) 
but become completely habitable with the installation of kitchen 
equipment. The residents can build individual rooms or expand 
their dwellings with gallery-‐type spaces, because the height of 
the main space is 5 meters (16.4"). The basic loft unit of the 
TILA housing block is 102 m2
 (1,098 sq. ft.), including two bath￾rooms (Figure 5).
The Base Building is carefully prepared. The bearing con￾crete structure of the floors allow for the occupants to build an 
upper-floor gallery. The dimensions of the unit are such that it 
makes possible a lot of layout variations (capacity). The technical 
connections for the kitchen, which are located on the main room 
side of the bathroom modules, allow for different kitchen layouts, 
especially in the bigger 102 m2
 unit, which has two bathrooms 
installed as part of the Base Building. Because it was obvious 
that people are not so good in knowing all the regulations, the 
architect made a booklet of instructions for how to manage the 
process.
DEVELOPMENT/OCCUPANCY PROCESS
The development-occupancy process was as follows: Base Build￾ing: normal time 1.5 years from 2007–2008. Building (Infill) from 
2008 on: from 1 month to 1 year depending on what each occu￾pant did. In case someone bought a 50 m2
 space with a ready￾made gallery floor, they could just install the kitchen and start 
living. In case of bigger units and bigger families with rooms, it 
took longer.
Figure 2 The empty ‘raw space’ with the layout of the dwelling marked 
on the floor Figure 3a The building cross section58
TILA
Figure 3b Fifth-floor Base Building
Figure 3c Second-floor Base Building59
TILA
Figure 4 a, b (4a) Upper drawing – third floor, finished; (4b) lower drawing – the mezzanine of the third floor, finished (Infill is shown in red)60
TILA
REGULATORY REVIEW PROCESS
The city building official inspected the whole building as usual 
before the ‘moment of purchase,’ that is, before the Sato devel￾oper with their constructors finished their job. That was also 
the end of the architects’ role in the project. Every apartment 
was then ‘habitable,’ a big one-room apartment. The ques￾tion of what is habitable was very important to discuss with 
officials and lawyers in the early stage of the concept-design. 
For them, the fact that there was the so-called wet space with 
water isolations on the floor and walls ready-made (i.e., the 
bathroom) was sufficient. As for kitchens, it was enough to 
show the outlets for electricity, drainage and water supply and 
ventilation for the kitchens, which are located on the main 
room side of the bathroom module (which allows for different 
kitchen layouts – and are of course left for the occupants to 
build themselves).
As for inspectors, after the developer leaves the building, the 
housing company, i.e., the shareholders, inhabitants, own the 
building. It is up to inhabitants what you do and when you do 
it, and which designers and contractors/building companies you 
use if you are not building yourself. The situation is very much the 
same when you buy an old apartment and start renovating it. In 
all housing companies, the company has to take care that if the 
‘shareholders’ make changes, they have to contact the board of 
the housing company.
When you are constructing bearing structures (like the gallery 
floor in TILA), you have to follow the building regulations and 
have all the required building permissions from the city building 
inspections department for that.
In principle, you could just take your mattress and espresso 
machine and start loft living . . .
INDIVIDUALIZATION
In fact, the inhabitants have built individual rooms and gallery￾type spaces as expected. During the concept stage, the architect 
was afraid that if everybody started heavy construction at the 
same time, it would be a mess. To avoid that, they gave the possi￾bility to have the gallery floor structure – with stairs and railings – 
ready-made during the Base Building construction period, before 
the moment of purchase. There were different layouts to choose 
from. In TILA, there were 26 apartment owners who selected this, 
and 13 lofts were without it. There was not an unbearable mess 
during the building period, because the occupants could create 
quite a good communal spirit among the habitants, helping each 
other and such (Figure 6a–f).
Figure 5 The bathroom module in place during construction of the Base 
Building61
TILA
Figure 6 a, b, c, d, e, f: Some of the dwellings’ interiors62 DOI: 10.4324/9781003243076-11
TOPUP
Amsterdam, the Netherlands
Figure 1 TOPUP (center) in its urban context in the Buiksloterham district (Patch 22, also by Frantzen et al.) is to its immediate left, and Blackjack, another 
Open Building project is to its left)63
TOPUP
Project Data
Project location: Buiksloterham, Fonteinkruidstraat, 
Amsterdam
Chronological information: Start of project 2016; completion of 
the Base Building and façade 2020
Project design team: FRANTZEN et al. architecten, 
project architects Tom Frantzen, 
Karel van Eijken, contributor VNDP 
Amsterdam/Enschede
Number of dwelling units: 14 apartments, 14 living–working 
apartments, 3 commercial spaces
Ratio of parking spaces per dwelling unit: 49 parking spaces in a separate 
building
Project site/building area: Site area: 4,844 m2
 + 1,346 m2
parking garage; lettable floor area: 
3,981 m2
 + 49 parking spaces
Project client: Lemniskade projecten (project 
developer), Tom Frantzen and Claus 
Oussoren
New construction
Structure type: Concrete vertical core, timber lam￾inated columns and beams, precast 
concrete floor elements; façade: 
timber frame construction with dou￾ble façade, with indoor balcony on 
southwest and northwest façades
Installation utilities: Central city heating, water and elec￾tricity per dwelling with main con￾nection and meters in central corridor 
on each floor, distributed via vertical 
shafts in the central core; thin raised 
floors for horizontal distribution
Infill system/approach: Clear separation of Infill and Support. 
Partition walls with fully insulated 
metal stud construction with double 
sheeting. The homeowners design 
and build their own Infill (with or 
without an architect and contractor).
Image credits All drawings: FRANTZEN et al/Lemni￾skade. All photos: Isabel Nabuurs64
TOPUP
BACKGROUND
In 2016, Tom Frantzen and his development partner Claus Ous￾soren developed the plot adjacent to PATCH22 (Figure 1). The site 
was occupied by an abandoned industrial warehouse with round 
concrete structures to house huge cable reels. To use as much of 
the existing structure as possible, Frantzen designed a structural 
concept based upon the one in PATCH22, planned it on top of the 
existing foundation and called the new building TOPUP.
LEGAL/REGULATORY CONSTRAINTS
The architect–developer opted for the division of the available 
floorspace into the maximum number of 14 legal units per floor to 
give the prospective buyers the opportunity to create a maximum 
of 6 custom-made dwellings per floor. Compared to PATCH22, 
where the floors are indeed divided into the maximum number 
of legal units possible, this time, the municipality was less flexible 
in approving the number of legal units and the variation in uses. 
It wanted more control over the permitted uses in new projects. 
The municipality prescribed a combination of working and living, 
with the bigger offices and retail functions on the ground floor.
On the upper floors, the municipality limited the number of 
legal units to the actual number of apartments: six per floor on 
floors 2–6, five on floor 7 and four on floor 8. The smallest legal 
units on floors 2 to 7 had to be dedicated workspaces. Moreover, 
because of the high land price, the dwellings on the lower floors 
proved hard to sell for a competitive price, pushing the margins of 
the project to an uncomfortable level. Even with an award-win￾ning, successfully used proof of concept next door (PATCH22), 
this project shows that for each deviation from the ‘conventional,’ 
both developer and architect need to be prepared for a long pro￾cess to be able to accomplish their (short and long-term) goals 
with Open Building. Nevertheless, TOPUP offers at least as much 
capacity, and is as sustainable and energy efficient as PATCH22, 
offering its residents freedom to design their own Infill.
TECHNICAL APPROACH
TOPUP used the CD20 system (lightweight precast concrete 
structural floors) in combination with a laminated timber column 
structure and timber frame construction for the façades of the 
Base Building. The strategy for the Base Building utility installations 
was copied in part from the PATCH22 project: using the vertical 
core of the building for distribution to the different dwellings, this 
time placing the required meter boxes on each floor in the ‘public’ 
corridor. In PATCH22, specific installations were routed inside a 
hollow floor structure (SlimLine floor system), which proved to be 
somewhat of a legal ‘gray zone’ for future adaptations. In TOPUP, 
the horizontal utility installations are installed between the mas￾sive concrete precast floor slabs (part of the Base Building) and 
a thin raised floor (part of Infill) to make a clearer legal division 
between dwelling units on adjacent floors. The height of the thin 
raised floor (24 cm or 9.5') was set by the slope of the black-wa￾ter drainage pipes running from toilets placed at expected dis￾tances to the vertical pipe shafts in the buildings’ core. The raised 
floor is composed of standard building materials available in the 
market (see Figures 3, 4 and 5). Timber framing was used for the 
Infill walls of most of the dwellings, each dwelling being individu￾ally designed by its owner and/or their architect.
CAPACITY FOR A RANGE OF DWELLING UNIT LAYOUTS
As noted, the architect–developer opted for the division of the 
available floorspace into the maximum number of 14 legal units 
Figure 2 A  view of the interior at the completion of the Base Building 
construction: precast concrete planks for the floors; prefabricated concrete 
core (to the right) and laminated-timber columns65
TOPUP
per floor to give the prospective buyers the opportunity to create 
a maximum of 6 custom-made dwellings per floor (Figure 6).
CLASSIFICATION OF TOPUP AS AN OPEN BUILDING
The Dutch Open Building community (www.openbuilding.co) 
has developed a rating system on which various projects can be 
Figure 3 View of the building core, showing connections to Base Building 
MEP systems. Infill MEP will be installed under the raised floor and in the 
ceiling
Figure 4 The Infill floor installation
Figure 5 A detail of the raised floor at a ‘party wall’ separating dwelling 
units. The precast concrete floor slabs are 23 cm (9.4') thick; the raised 
floor is 24 cm (9.5') thick, the thickness determined by the diameter and 
slope of black-water drainage piping from toilets placed at the maximum 
distance from the vertical pipe shaft in the building core
classified in terms of their ability to achieve maximum capacity 
for change. The following matrix (Figure  12) shows this rating 
system. For example:66
TOPUP
Figure 6 A typical ‘empty’ floor of the Base Building, with the central core 
containing all vertical MEP risers, utility meter cabinets and stairs and ele￾vator. Balconies are evident on two sides of the building
• If the division walls are the load-bearing structure and installa￾tions are fully integrated in this structure, the project will only 
be regarded as ‘nonflexible/one-time flexible.’
• If the division walls are the load-bearing structure and instal￾lations are only partly integrated in this structure, the project 
can be regarded as ‘slightly flexible.’
• If the division walls are the load-bearing structure and instal￾lations are  only partly  integrated (buried) in this structure, 
but the project has extra  floor height and a façade that is 
adaptable in the future, so  the project  can  be regarded as 
‘flexible.’
Finding a rating between very flexible and max-flexible is difficult. 
TOPUP scores on many aspects in the Max-flexible range, but 
it does not score on the more legal aspects in the Open Cities 
category.
Figure 7 Sketching in a dwelling unit at one of the sales workshops
Figure 8 Variations in dwelling sizes and layouts on one floor. The figure 
on the upper left shows a floor divided into four units. The seven other 
figures show the variety of layouts actually realized on different floors67
TOPUP
Figure 9 a, b, c, d: Details of four realized Infill layouts in the same unit size and configuration but on different floors68
TOPUP
Figure 10 An interior view of one occupied dwelling, showing the CLT Figure 11 Another interior view of a completed dwelling; ceilings are 
(cross-laminated timber) columns and wooden façade exposed in most cases but also can be lowered, for example, in bathrooms 
to conceal ventilation duct connections
Figure 12 The rating chart showing TOPUP according to the most updated version of the classification system of the Dutch Open Building community. The 
blue fields mean TOPUP scored these aspects. The red x’s show what aspects TOPUP explicitly did not score, making the project ‘only’ very flexible and not 
maximum flexibleDOI: 10.4324/9781003243076-12 69
HEALTHCARE
INO Intensive Care Facility
Inselspital, Bern, Switzerland
Figure 1 Phase One of the INO (Photo credit: Stephen Kendall)70
INO INTENSIVE CARE FACILITY
Project Data
Location: Bern, Switzerland
Architects: Primary System: 4D PLUS General Planner (architect: 
Kamm+Kundig)
Secondary System: Itten and Brechühl AG
Tertiary System: HWP Planungsgesellschaft mbH
Client: Office for Real Estate and Public Buildings of the Swiss 
Canton of Bern (OPB); Giorgio Macchi, Chief Architect and 
Director of the OPB Office (Retired)
Construction: 2007–2013
Building area: 51,000 m2
 (550,000 ft2
) for flexible use
Primary System: The framework is of concrete construction with a column 
grid of 8.4 × 8.4 m (27.5 × 27.5") using precast concrete 
columns, in-situ concrete slabs with ‘knock-out’ panels 
(without reinforcing) at the center of each column bay.
Secondary System: Conventional construction for non–load-bearing walls; 
Secondary System ‘floating’ concrete slab separated from 
Primary System slab by a waterproof membrane71
INO INTENSIVE CARE FACILITY
BACKGROUND
Giorgio Macchi, chief architect and director of the OPB office, 
told one of the authors in a private conversation:
“Instead of being refined over time, what was being built on the 
Inselspital Campus at a specific time, to a large extent, conflicts 
more and more with what ought to be. Dealing with change 
should become a fundamental aspect of how we perceive archi￾tecture, and consequently also how we conceive it. As long as 
time is not a guiding factor, the planning processes will be dom￾inated by stress.”
The INO offers insights into a strategy for overcoming this 
basic dilemma. The strategy is called System Separation (SYS). 
The core principle of this strategy for designing buildings is this: 
fix few things, to keep flexibility, but fix them firmly, to achieve 
reliability. What emerges is high utility value. Buildings of high 
utility value remain useful over a very long time, are effectively 
renewable, convertible and developable, and generate a growing 
cultural identity. SYS fosters sustainability and facilitates change 
necessitated by technical life cycles or by life spans of use.
The Office for Real Estate and Public Buildings of the Swiss 
Canton of Bern (OPB) started developing the strategy in 1998. It 
has since become a binding guideline for all projects (more than 
25 at the time of writing this book). The OPB’s portfolio includes 
approximately 2,000 public buildings worth 5 billion Swiss francs 
($5.6  billion) as well as annual investments of 150  million to 
200 million Swiss francs ($170 million to $225 million).
SYS separates both requirement planning and building design 
into three levels, referring to long-, medium- and short-term per￾spectives. The managerial backbone concept of SYS is divide, allo￾cate and delegate. Components and steps are well defined and 
manageable. The whole maintains complexity at a specific time as 
well as over time. Architecture – conceived and perceived in this 
way – emerges through its use.
Decision-makers generally dislike openness and particularly 
uncertainty. Their job is to eliminate openness and uncertainty by 
means of decisions. However, they are accessible to priorities and 
especially to hierarchies. The idea of SYS used the comparison 
Figure 2 Mind-opening bottle crate – (a) crate (Primary System); (b) bot￾tles (Secondary System; (c) liquid (Tertiary System) (Credit: Canton Bern 
Office of Properties and Buildings)72
INO INTENSIVE CARE FACILITY
with a bottle-crate to communicate the basis ideas of SYS to skep￾tical bureaucrats.
The crate stands for the long term, the bottles for the medium 
term and the drinks for the short term. Crate, bottles and drinks 
are a useful, reliable and proven product and procedure.
SYSTEM SEPARATION’S FIRST PROJECT
The INO project was launched in the mid-1990s. It was the first 
project guided by SYS. As part of the University Hospital of Bern, it 
had to fulfill high-tech requirements in a comprehensive academic 
medical center. INO mainly involved the intensive care units, 
emergencies, surgeries and laboratories. Substantial changes took 
place already during the planning and realization phases. The first 
intensive transformation while the building was in use concerned 
the laboratories.
The PS was the result of an international competition (typical 
for Swiss public projects) and was designed by architects without 
specific experience in hospital planning. Fittingly, the project was 
called Time-Space, showing that the authors had caught on to the 
essential idea of the architectural task that SYS imposed.
The subsequent competition for the SS was open exclusively to 
highly experienced hospital planners. The possibility to compare 
very different solutions for SSs within the same PS was a paradigm 
shift in decision-making. The team for the TS was selected based 
on its experience, as was the team for project management.
The three levels for building design are the Primary System (PS), 
the Secondary System (SS) and the Tertiary System (TS). The PS 
(Base Building) is oriented on the long term and concerns the build￾ing structure, including the façades and the site area’s development 
availability. The SS (the Infill) is oriented on the medium term and 
concerns the internal nonstructural building construction, the tech￾nical installations and mechanical systems. The TS is oriented on 
the short term and concerns the building facilities, devices, equip￾ment and furnishings. Designing and managing the planning and 
building procedure respecting this hierarchy of life spans means 
that replacement or modification of shorter-life elements does not 
affect or damage those of greater durability or longer use.
The PS has no structural complications, a minimum of struc￾tural barriers, high net loads, high floor heights and explicit spatial 
reserves for installations, and it strictly respects the partitioning or 
disentanglement of building components. There are no pipes or 
conduits in the PS. The precautions for site area availability, besides 
guaranteeing a general openness, are justified by the fact that all 
traffic and transport to and from a building has almost the same 
impact on the environment as the building’s operation. The poten￾tial of well-connected areas must therefore be built up to the max￾imum, whether at the time of construction or in the future, even 
if current building regulations do not yet allow this. The robust PS 
therefore enables vertical and horizontal expansions.
The PS has a characteristic shape and comprises 51,000 m2
(550,000 ft2
) on very spacious floors for variable use. The frame￾work is of concrete construction with a column grid of 8.4 × 
8.4 m (27.5 × 27.5"). The lateral stabilizing structural elements 
are limited to four cross-shaped shear walls. Statically, each field 
or cell of the column grid allows for an opening of 3.6 × 3.6 m 
(11.8 × 11.8") to be cut out of the floor slab (Figures 3, 4 and 
5). These ‘knock-out fields’ can be used on the level of the SS 
Figure 3 A typical floor of the INO, showing the connection to the adja￾cent existing building. The drawing also shows the regular 24-foot con￾crete cast-in-place structural grid (using precast concrete columns) with 
the square ‘knock-out’ opportunities in the center of each structural bay, 
where no steel reinforcing would prevent cutting out the slab with no 
danger of damaging the structural integrity of the whole (Drawing credit: 
Canton Bern Office of Properties and Buildings)73
INO INTENSIVE CARE FACILITY
to enable daylight, visual contact, and vertical access during the 
planning as well as later on for transformations (Figure  4). All 
technical installations supplying a given floor are installed on that 
same floor, including drainage and other piping and air-handling 
ductwork. Each column-head has four block-outs (pipe sleeves) 
for vertical outlets for drainage pipes. The concrete floor structure 
is strictly free of installations, in line with the principle of the par￾tition of building components.
Figure 4 Cross section of the INO Primary System, showing how the light shafts can be inserted to introduce natural illumination deep into the building
(Drawing credit: Canton Bern Office of Properties and Buildings)
Figure 5 Image of the top floor of the Primary System showing four drain￾age pipe sleeves at each column. Skylights are indicative of the ‘punch￾out’ panels on all floors in the center of each structural bay for future 
light wells and other vertical services (Photo credit: Canton Bern Office of 
Properties and Buildings)
PARTITIONING BUILDING SYSTEMS: A MANAGEMENT 
STRATEGY
Handling these system levels in a strategic way generates the 
three main principles of SYS: the partition of building compo￾nents – limiting all entanglements on or across the three levels 
to a minimum; flexibility – above all ensured by the structural 
capacity and geometries of the PS and appropriate SSs; and site 
area availability – ensured by appropriate PSs in order to develop 
the building site densely over time.
Tasks and mandates have to be aligned with the principles of 
SYS from the very beginning. Planning in line with SYS is not 
just an additional planning criterion. It is a radical new way to do 
things.
Planners including architects, structural engineers, engineers 
for technical installations and experts for operation domains have 
to cooperate to optimize the whole. Because SYS differentiates 
the whole into long-, middle- and short-term perspectives, the 
organizational structure of the cooperation of the planners must 
be in compliance with this paradigm shift. The strategy of separa￾tion defines new starting positions for all parties involved and for 
all components to be built and installed.
CHANGES
During the planning for the Secondary System, the chief of sur￾gery left for a position at another hospital. His team had worked 
out a surgery suite layout with the Secondary-System architects. 
When the new head of surgery was hired, he insisted on another 74
INO INTENSIVE CARE FACILITY
research equipment. This too was accommodated quickly with no 
disruption to other functions in the building. This was enabled in 
part due to the Secondary System’s ‘floating’ concrete slab, which 
is separated from the Primary System slab by a waterproof mem￾brane. Some conduits are in this floating slab.
Figure 6 The spatial and technical organization per system level (Drawing credit: Canton Bern Office of Properties and Buildings)
layout of the surgery suite. The capacity of the Primary System 
was immediately evident because the new layout was quickly 
adopted and implemented.
After the building was in operation for several years, the med￾ical laboratories needed to be reconfigured to accommodate new 75
INO INTENSIVE CARE FACILITY
Figure 7 Surgery suite layout changes from A to B due to a change of head of surgery (Credit: Canton Office of 
Properties and Building)76
INO INTENSIVE CARE FACILITY
Figure 8 Image of the Primary-System concrete slab and column, a pipe 
sleeve used for drainage piping and membrane separating the Primary￾System slab from the secondary lightweight concrete slab (Photo credit: 
Stephen Kendall)
Figure 9 An image of one of the corridor spaces showing a light well in 
Phase I (Photo credit: Stephen Kendall)
Figure 10 A view of one of the many light wells, looking into a laboratory
(Photo credit: John R. Dale)
Figure 11 A typical exam room (Photo credit: John R. Dale)
PHASE TWO
After the INO had already been in operation for several years, the 
hospital decided to complete Phase II. This time, due to budgetary 
constraints, the original double-skin façade was dropped, but the 
same structural grid and pattern of skylights and light wells were 
maintained (Figure 12).77
INO INTENSIVE CARE FACILITY
Figure 12 Aerial view showing Phase I (upper part) and Phase II (lower portion) (Source: Google Earth)78 DOI: 10.4324/9781003243076-13
Project Data
Location: Tel Aviv, Israel
Architects: Ranni Ziss Architects and Sharon Architects
Client: Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical Center in Israel
Building area: 70,000 m2
 (753,500 sq. ft.)
Design/Construction: Design started in 2005. Primary System constructed in 2008–2011; 
Secondary and Tertiary Systems ongoing construction from 2008
Primary System: Structural grid of 7.6 × 7.6 m (25 × 25"), central core of elevators 
and stairs, distributed MEP shafts and the building envelope
Secondary System: Non–load-bearing walls and MEP systems
Tertiary System: Ward equipment, including medical devices, digital tech, and 
furniture
Case study report: Dr. Nirit Pilosof
Sammy Ofer Heart Building 
Tel Aviv, Israel
Figure 1 Sammy Ofer Heart Center (Source: Ranni Ziss Architects & Sharon Architects)79
S A M M Y O F E R H E A RT B U I L D I N G 
INTRODUCTION
The case of the Sammy Ofer Heart Building at Tel Aviv Sourasky 
Medical Center demonstrates the contribution of the Open 
Building approach to the evolutionary process of a healthcare 
building over time. While most hospital facilities are tailor-made – 
designed for a highly detailed functional program – the design 
team of the Sammy Ofer Heart Building challenged this tradi￾tional practice and proposed a flexible design for unknown future 
functions (Pilosof, 2020; Sharon, 2012). To maximize the value 
of a private donation and expand the hospital capacity to evolve 
in the future, the hospital CEO decided to defer the decision on 
the uses of 7 of its 11 floors for later consideration. Accordingly, 
the need to design a Base Building as a ‘container with capac￾ity’ that could accommodate unknown functional programs led 
to the implementation of system separation (Figures  3 and 4). 
Although the Open Building approach (Kendall, 2008) was not 
explicitly stated by anyone in the design process, its methods of 
system separation and distributed design management implicitly 
supported the construction of the project in phases, enabled the 
design of a variety of changing functional spaces and enhanced 
the management and coordination of the design process by dif￾ferent consultants, designers and contractors.
THE DESIGN PROCESS
The project was designed by Sharon Architects and Ranni Ziss Archi￾tects, a joint venture, and was developed starting in 2005 and con￾structed in 2008–2011. The building, located in the center of Tel 
Aviv, was designed as a monolithic cube clad in glass with prominent 
red recessed balconies. The building was designed to connect to 
an adjacent, historical Bauhaus hospital building through an atrium 
with iconic red recessed balconies (Figure 1). The 70-m- (230") high 
building consists of 55,000  m2
 (592,000 sq. ft.) and includes 13 
medical floors of 3,100 m2
 (33,300 sq. ft.) per floor and four under￾ground parking floors designed with the possibility of conversion to 
an emergency 650-bed hospital. The 15,000-m2
 (161,400-sq.-ft.) 
underground ‘sheltered’ floors were designed in an innovative way 
to be resistant to chemical and biological warfare.
The main force behind the design and construction of the 
building was the generous donation of the Sammy Ofer family 
to the Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical Center in 2005. Since hospital 
development in Israel relies primarily on private funding, hospital 
directors attempt to maximize the potential of each donation. In 
the case of Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical Center, it was clear from 
the start that the hospital would construct the most extensive 
structure possible even by applying pressure on the municipality 
planning guideline limitations (Figure 3). This strategy led to the 
design of a Base Building with seven ‘shell’ floors for future com￾pletion and was even more evident in the last-minute decision to 
add two more shell floors to the building just before construction 
began. This change of the building’s height required redesign￾ing the buildings’ Primary System, including the structure, MEP 
systems and façades and caused a delay of a few months in the 
design and construction process. In 2022, a decade after the 
building was opened, the hospital management decided to add 
three more floors to the top of the existing building to offer more 
space in the highly dense urban site (Figure 3).
The project was programmed and designed by the architects 
in collaboration with the hospital CEO, deputy director, head of 
cardiology units, head nurse and various internal and external 
consultants and project managers. Like most hospital facilities, the 
project was planned under tight budgetary, regulatory and envi￾ronmental constraints. The design process, which began in 2005, 
reflected a variety of concepts. The realization of the project 
depended on finding a solution for an existing (but now obsolete) 
two-story outpatient building that had been constructed on the 
site in the 1960s for use as an emergency department. After much 
discussion, that building was demolished. Because the hospital 
management was undecided regarding its strategy and program, 
the design team developed a method of presenting and evaluat￾ing diverse design options for the new project.
The building, defined as a cardiac care center, was initially 
programmed to relocate all the hospital cardiac units, clinics, and 
surgery division onto three main floors and include an additional 
two floors for internal medicine units and outpatient clinics. Seven 
additional floors were also built but left empty for future program￾ming and Infill. Accordingly, the new building was constructed 
in five main phases: (1) the underground emergency hospital, 
(2) core and envelope (Base Building) of floors 1–10 including a 80
S A M M Y O F E R H E A RT B U I L D I N G 
mechanical roof floor, (3) interior fit-out of floors 0–3, (4) interior 
fit-out of floors 4–6 and (5) interior fit-out of floors 7–10. The 
hospital plans to construct three additional floors on top of the 
existing building in 2023, adding 8,500 m2
 (91,500 sq. ft.) for 
diverse inpatient and outpatient units (Figure 3).
The design process from the beginning included capacity stud￾ies to analyze if the Primary System could accommodate the pre￾dicted development of the building in the future as defined by 
the hospital CEO and medical directors. The preliminary studies 
included schematic drawings of a typical floor with two inpa￾tient medical units to illustrate the capacity for both: two iden￾tical mirrored units versus one major unit with more ICU rooms 
and a minor unit with semiprivate rooms (Figure 2). The client 
also required the architects to prepare a schematic design for 
the research lab and neurology units that were expected to be 
installed in the
shell (empty) floors of the building. The Primary purpose of 
the capacity studies was to analyze if the Primary System (Base 
Building) would support future anticipated programs, the loca￾tion of heavy equipment, possible connections to MEP infrastruc￾tures and efficient configuration of functions. Research on the 
evolutionary process of the building over 13 years revealed that 
the preliminary capacity analysis study drawings were retained 
and were later used to evaluate the potential of the building for 
future change and to analyze the interfaces between the differ￾ent system levels (Pilosof, 2018). In this sense, these drawings 
became a communication tool between the initial design team 
and the following design teams, their importance unknown at 
the time of the initial design, to demonstrate the Open Building 
approach (which at that time had no formal name to the design 
team or client) and to explain the decision-making throughout 
the design.
Figure 2 Preliminary study of schematic design options of a typical floor, 2005 (Source: Ranni Ziss Architects and Sharon Architects)81
S A M M Y O F E R H E A RT B U I L D I N G 
THE EVOLUTION OF THE BUILDING
The Sammy Ofer Heart Building, defined and designed as a car￾diology center, has changed its functional program considerably. 
The cardiology division, in fact, occupies less than 30% of the 
building. The building now contains neurology, dermatology, 
internal medicine and oncology units in addition to research labs 
and outpatient clinics (Figures 3 and 4). The change of program 
can be explained by changing needs since cancer became the 
number-one cause of death and statistically surpassed cardiac dis￾eases. The logic of centralizing the oncology units in one location 
to enhance the hospital efficiency and health services could only 
have been accomplished in the new building. The hospital man￾agement also decided to relocate other functions to the building 
since their previous locations required renovation or extension 
or received funds to reconstruct a specific medical unit. In some 
cases, the decision to relocate medical units to the new building 
Figure 3 Section of the building illustrates the five phases of construction and the dynamic hospital program (Source: Ranni Ziss Architects & Sharon Archi￾tects and the author)82
S A M M Y O F E R H E A RT B U I L D I N G 
was the result of competition with other hospitals or a strategy 
to attract highly accomplished medical directors. Throughout the 
years, the hospital’s dynamic development plan has been driven 
by forces of economics as well as internal and external organiza￾tional politics.
Most of the changes took place after the building was occu￾pied. Although this process of deferred completion of Secondary 
and Tertiary Systems was planned in advance, it still created a 
challenge for both the construction and the operation of the run￾ning units. The phasing stages, divided by the buildings’ floors, 
Figure 4 Architecture plans of the variety of medical programs on different floors (Source: Ranni Ziss Architects & Sharon Architects)83
S A M M Y O F E R H E A RT B U I L D I N G 
created a fit-out process from the bottom upward. This strategy 
might be efficient in order to avoid interruptions of the comple￾tion to the operating units, but it limits decision flexibility during 
the design process. In many cases, the considerations in the fit￾out installation phases overruled the importance of locating some 
medical functions close to other units for process optimization. 
For example, the inpatient internal medicine units under construc￾tion on the ninth floor should have been located on the fourth 
floor above the existing internal medical units (on the third floor) 
to centralize the internal medicine division and enhance staff and 
equipment flows among the four units.
The separation of the building into system levels was also 
useful as a project management and budgeting tool in the 
design process. The long design process of 13  years, which 
was still running in 2018, involved many different profession￾als and decision-makers. Many of the project team members of 
the hospital were replaced, including the CEO of the hospital, 
heads of medical units and head nurses. Each change of per￾sonnel resulted in reconsideration of the design and requests for 
alternative design options. The design team included a collab￾oration of two architecture firms, the replacement of two pro￾ject management firms and consultants who changed over time. 
The development of the project by phases, using system lev￾els, allowed the architects to divide the workload between the 
two offices. Each office was responsible for designing specific 
floors’ Secondary Systems, with minimal need for consultation 
and coordination. The design control was distributed between 
the two firms on each level (e.g., the Primary, Secondary and 
Tertiary System levels) to avoid unequal division between the 
two firms. The study also indicates that capacity study drawings 
that were developed at a preliminary stage were used as com￾munication tools later, among design teams not even known ini￾tially, because they defined the anticipated interfaces between 
the system levels. The recent decision to add three floors to the 
top of the building demonstrates the capacity of the original 
design to grow even beyond its initial build-out. It highlights 
the unpredictability of future needs and the necessity to plan for 
change over time.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was supported by the European Research Council 
grant (FP-7 ADG 340753) and by the Azrieli Foundation. I am 
grateful to the Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical Center management 
and staff and to Ranni Ziss Architects, Sharon Architects, CPM 
and M. Iuclea project managers for their collaboration.
READINGS
Pilosof, N.P. (2018). The Evolution of a Hospital Planned for Change. 
Healthcare Architecture as Infrastructure (editor Kendall, S.H.). 
Routledge, London, pp. 91–107.
Pilosof, N.P. (2020). Building for change: Comparative case study of 
hospital architecture. HERD: Health Environments Research & 
Design Journal. https://doi.org/10.1177/1937586720927026
Sharon, A. (2012). Flexible building design offers future-proofing. 
IFHE Digest, pp. 96–98.84 DOI: 10.4324/9781003243076-14
Oregon Health Center 
Portland, Oregon, USA
Figure 1 View of main entry from the south and across a public park85
O R E G O N H E A LT H C E N T E R 
Project Data
Architects: Zimmer Gunsul Frasca Architects, LLP (ZGF)
Client: Oregon Health & Science University, Portland Oregon, 
USA (OHSU)
Building area: 39,292 m2
 (401,412 sq. ft.)
Primary System: Structural system (steel) grid varies due to existing 
below-grade parking structure. Maximum bay size 
is 42'-9" × 28'-0" (13.03 m × 8.53 m) and smallest 
(at corners) is 20'-5" × 16'-6" (6.22 m × 5.03 m). To 
improve grid spacing, there are some transfers of col￾umns to the parking levels via angled columns. Lateral 
seismic system is a moment frame. Two stair cores are 
off center and grouped with elevators (split between 
public and patient/staff), main mechanical/heating 
ventilation air condition, HVAC, shafts, stacked electrical 
and technology rooms. Smaller plumbing risers are 
adjacent to structural columns.
Floor-to-floor heights: Generally, 15'-0"/4.57 m, increased at podium levels 
(16'/4.88 m), first floor (20'-10"/6.35 m) and the 
interstitial mechanical level (24'/7.32 m)
 Location of primary mechanical and electrical systems, 
those typically found in a central plant, are described 
later under ‘System Organization.’
Secondary System: Non–load-bearing interior walls and mechanical 
electrical plumbing, MEP, distribution
Tertiary System: Medical equipment (movable and fixed), office 
equipment, computer technology, furnishings and art
Sustainability: The project was certified as LEED Gold® by the US 
Green Building Council.
Project schedule: Start of design: 2014
Groundbreaking: 2016
Opening: 201986
O R E G O N H E A LT H C E N T E R 
INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND
Oregon Health  & Science University is a nationally prominent 
research university and Oregon’s only public academic health 
center. It educates health professionals and scientists and pro￾vides leading-edge patient care, community service and bio￾medical research. In 1919, the University of Oregon Medical 
School (OHSU’s predecessor) moved from downtown Portland to 
its present location on Marquam Hill in Southwest Portland. In 
2003, OHSU begin developing a campus along the Willamette 
River connected to Marquam Hill with the Portland Aerial Tram. 
In 2006, OHSU opened its first new building on the South Water￾front campus, the Center for Health & Healing (CHH) including 
new ambulatory services, faculty clinics and underground parking 
below the building and a vacant block to the south. Since then, 
riverfront development has continued with new research, educa￾tion (dental school) and outpatient facilities.
The site for this case study, Center for Health & Healing South 
(now called CHH-2), was on top of a three-level underground 
parking structure and across the street from the original CHH 
(now called CHH-1). The building’s massing was set by City of 
Portland zoning regulations as follows: Levels 1–4 are a full city 
block (200' × 200'/61 m × 61 m) and upper floors are 200'/61 m 
in east–west direction and 115'/35 m in north–south direction.
The building program was varied and included:
• Surgery and interventional procedures suites
• Extended-stay outpatient rooms
• Clinics
• Digestive health
• Preoperative
• Women’s health
• Multidigestive health
• Knight Cancer Institute
• Clinics & diagnostic imaging
• Infusion
• Cancer trial clinics (research)
• Research offices
• Clinical laboratory & outpatient blood draw
• Pharmacy
• Outpatient
• Compounding
• Shelled space (6% of floor area including entire sixth floor plus 
space on the fifth floor)
• Support services including sterile processing, food service, staff 
facilities and central plant/primary mechanical and electrical 
services for the three-building complex
A Primary design challenge was to accommodate these various 
programs (and potential future programs) in a multistory building 
with the uniformly positioned vertical elements (structure, circula￾tion and mechanical risers).
The Center for Health & Healing 2 demonstrates the Open 
Building approach in a healthcare building, although the term 
‘Open Building’ was not used in the design process. A Primary 
project goal was long-term ability of the building to accommo￾date both changes in the initial program’s needs and to allow for 
future new programs.1
THE DESIGN PROCESS
Client goals were clearly stated at the outset:2
1. Incorporate future trends in design with capacity to accommo￾date varied and changing uses.
2. Drive value from each functional and operational component.
3. Maximize the use of products and labor from the state of Ore￾gon to the extent possible.
4. Embrace and push lean design and construction principles.
5. Reap maximum value of a fully integrated team that inspires 
creativity, collaboration and innovation reflective of the ambi￾tious nature of the client’s facilities.
OHSU also was looking for a design team and individuals who are 
willing to bring innovation to project delivery.
OHSU desired an integrated team with a proven track record 
of working together. Therefore, architects, contractors and con￾sulting engineers self-selected to form teams prior to proposal 
submission. The selected team consisted of Zimmer Gunsul 
Frasca Architects LLP, Hoffman Construction, Affiliated Engineers 87
O R E G O N H E A LT H C E N T E R 
Figure 2 Design events: using gameboards and tabletop exercises left and center and full-size mockup of physician/nurse/medical tech teamwork area88
O R E G O N H E A LT H C E N T E R 
Inc. (mechanical and electrical) and KPFF Consulting Engineers 
(structural and civil) plus specialty consultants. The major team 
members had successfully worked together on several projects, 
including for OHSU.
As an extension of the integrated team, a design process was 
developed that had two unique aspects:
1. An integrated project delivery approach was developed by 
OHSU, ZGF and Hoffman. This involved the co-location of the 
owner, architect, engineers, general contractor and major sub￾contractor team members in a co-location space of more than 
100 workstations, from early design through construction, in 
temporary facilities adjacent to the construction site. This facil￾itated rapid and deep analysis of design issues by all parties, 
including capacity to accommodate varied and changing uses. 
The co-location fostered communication among the owner, 
design consultants, general contractor and trade partners who 
were brought onto the project in the design phase.
2. Nine rounds of integrated design events (IDEs) were orches￾trated to develop lean process improvements (LPI) of medical 
operations and building design. Nine IDEs involving hundreds 
of stakeholders resulted in clearly defined goals, operational 
improvements and a better understanding of budget, costs 
and schedule. Early events defined the current state of oper￾ations and then developed future state operations. In later 
events, participants walked through full-scale mockups of 
entire clinical departments in a 30,000 sf (2,800 sq. meters) 
warehouse to get a feel for “a day in the life” and fine tune 
details in individual rooms. A  description of an IDE in early 
schematic design is described below under ‘Space Planning 
Process/IDE Events.’
The result was a design that not only accommodated open￾ing-day clinical processes but is adaptable to both incremental 
medical process improvements and major renovations. Another 
design goal was emphasis on a healing environment, patient 
experience and taking advantage of the excellent views. This 
helped drive floor plans that were more open and understanda￾ble, which in turn meant more adaptable to change.
DEVELOPMENT OF OPEN BUILDING CONCEPTS
As noted previously, the term ‘Open Building’ was not used. 
However, project goals and design processes had many parallels 
to ‘the Open Building approach,’ including capacity analysis and 
separation of Base Building and Infill.
CONCEPT PLANNING
The project team evaluated buildings with similar programs for 
lessons learned, starting with the existing and adjacent Center for 
Health & Healing 1. CHH-1 had identical floorplates and similar 
programs and had experienced some renovations since its design 
in the early 2000s. Strategies to accommodate varied and chang￾ing uses were developed within constraints (e.g., zoning code 
envelope, existing parking structure below and connection points 
via a pedestrian bridge and service tunnels to other OHSU build￾ings). A  Primary strategy was the grouping of building system 
risers (HVAC, system piping, plumbing, electrical and technol￾ogy), with fixed vertical circulation cores (stairs, public and pri￾vate elevators). These fixed elements are located off-center on 
the building floor plate to maximize an open loft-like floor area 
in the center of the building, offering capacity to accommodate 
varied and changing uses. Other strategies considered window 
mullion spacing (~ 5 feet (1.5 m)), with alternating glazed and 
spandrel glass to accommodate a variety of room widths, all with 
daylighting and test fitting of a variety of planning modules for 
initial and potential programs.
SPACE PLANNING PROCESS/IDE EVENTS
The IDE events for each major program lasted up to three days 
and occurred from programming through design development 
phases. The key period for space planning coordination with the 
Base Building was in schematic design; therefore, a simple over￾view of an IDE in that period is provided (Figures 3, 4 and 5).
• IDE events were client focused for OHSU staff, not the design 
team, to develop multiple layouts for each program within the 
proposed Base Building floorplate. OHSU participants included 
physicians, nurses, support and supply staff and patient repre￾sentatives. The design team was there to assist with problems 89
O R E G O N H E A LT H C E N T E R 
Figure 3 IDE event tabletop or gameboard uses cut-out program pieces to develop alternate designs of oncology clinic modules90
O R E G O N H E A LT H C E N T E R 
and assure practicality including code compliance. These 
events, building on the ‘future state’ of operations developed 
in programming, were tightly scheduled with goals and out￾comes for each session (two to four per day) with report-outs 
and discussion at the end of each session.
• For clinical groups, participants included all specialties so that a 
standard clinic layout could be developed to allow clinics to be 
shared. OHSU also wanted new clinic layouts that also could 
be placed in the existing CHH-1 building. Similarly, the two 
procedure floors, surgical and interventional, worked together 
to develop similar concepts on their respective floors.
• A typical IDE began with an overview of current project status 
and goals for the week. In early schematic design, each room 
in the space program was cut out in colored coded illustra￾tion board at 1/8"=1'-0"(~1:100) scale. Five-room program 
sets were provided for development of multiple layouts on 
the given Base Building plan by different teams for tabletop 
or ‘gameboard’ exercises. Options were compared to stated 
goals and data points, e.g., travel distances for patients and 
staff.
• Between IDE days (and events), the design team developed 
plans of the gameboard options for further development. The 
design team also studied whether modifications to the Base 
Building could or should be made that would improve layout 
and would coordinate those modifications between floors. At 
this point in the design process, these Base Building modifica￾tions might include adjusting the shape of a vertical mechan￾ical shaft or changing access to an electrical room or stair to 
accommodate better clinical layouts.
• When the number of options was reduced to two or three, 
full-size models of the clinical floors were built out of card￾board so that staff could walk through their daily operations 
and compare the options.
This is a very simplified description of the IDE process, but it illus￾trates how multiple layouts and programs were developed and 
tested for fit within the proposed Base Building (which could be 
Figure 4 Example of a gameboard plan for an entire floor of oncology, 
showing relation to fixed Base Building elements
Figure 5 Example of comparative plan options for OTO voice/pain clinic 
developed by design team between IDE sessions is illustrative of informal 
capacity analysis depicting two of several plan options91
O R E G O N H E A LT H C E N T E R 
slightly modified), demonstrating its capacity to accommodate 
varied and changing uses.
MEP SYSTEM ORGANIZATION
Regarding MEP system organization, the project team worked 
together to evaluate dozens of system concepts with the goal of 
determining and implementing approaches that represented the best 
value to OHSU. Key considerations in these evaluations included:
• Design systems that minimize operating costs and represented 
responsible use of energy and other resources.
• Maximizing flexibility in the systems to accommodate a variety 
of program elements in the building and minimize the impact 
of future building modifications.
• Locate major equipment in areas that allowed for appropri￾ate service access and minimized disruption to surrounding 
programs.
• Provide vertical distribution through the building that mini￾mizes the number of large vertical MEP shafts on the floor￾plates yet provides appropriate horizontal access to these Base 
Building systems.
• Provide horizontal distribution on the floorplates that allows 
access to above-ceiling equipment and systems that require 
regular maintenance and allows for future system modifica￾tions both without undue disruption to surrounding areas.
The team co-location space and early involvement of major sub￾contractors was an important element in facilitating real-time 
and continuous intertrade concept development and coordina￾tion, allowing for the optimization of both design and construc￾tion and the MEP systems. The existing parking structure below 
and ground-floor program requirements coupled with a lack of 
adjacent land to satisfy MEP requirements necessitated central air 
conditioning plant functions be located higher in the building. The 
central plant also serves existing CHH-1 and the new Gary and 
Christine Rood Family Pavilion. Boilers, chillers and air handling 
units are located on an interstitial level at Floor 5 to directly serve 
downward to surgery and procedure suites (major air users), as 
well as the other adjacent buildings via below-grade connections, 
and upward to other floors. Emergency generators and cooling 
towers are located at the roof level. Besides the grouping of large 
risers noted earlier, smaller risers for plumbing were placed adja￾cent to structural columns to maximize floor plan flexibility, as 
opposed to risers in the middle of structural bays. Because CHH-2 
provided central plant services to two other campus buildings, 
the vertical piping risers were larger than typical for a building of 
this size. Horizontal system runs were above suspended ceilings 
to serve respective floors’ mechanical, electrical and technology 
needs. Exceptions were plumbing drains that served the floor 
above and occasional electrical/technology runs accessing floor 
outlets in the floor above. Raised floors were not seriously consid￾ered due to infection-control concerns about wet areas and body 
fluids getting into the below-floor space.
Specific strategies to provide capacity to accommodate varied 
and changing uses included:
• All systems generally provide 20% to 25% spare service capac￾ity from source to distribution, e.g., spare electrical circuits.
• Horizontal ‘zoning’ of MEP systems pathways in the space 
above suspended ceiling
• Looping of piping (with shut-off valves), supply and exhaust 
ducts provided redundancy and ability to isolate sections for 
modifications.
• Plumbing location below floor slab and above suspended ceil￾ings strived to avoid placement above sensitive areas (e.g., 
surgery and procedure suites) and above terminal HVAC units.
• Use of chilled beams in clinical and office areas provide space 
planning options (and energy savings).
To date, the systems have provided consistent and reliable sup￾port to the operation of the facilities. Since opening day, Port￾land has experienced record-high temperatures several times, and 
the building has performed well, as reported to project design 
engineers.
BASE BUILDING CONCEPTS
1. A wide variety of potential future changes were considered to 
test the Base Building’s capacity to accommodate varied and 92
O R E G O N H E A LT H C E N T E R 
changing uses. A retrospective comparison to Open Building 
concepts follows, referring to the main principles of capac￾ity analysis. Each area allows for several different layouts. 
The presence of many ambulatory programs in the building 
demonstrates provision for different layouts. Furthermore, for 
each program, the project team in IDE events was required to 
develop a number of functional layouts. For the few ambu￾latory programs not present, the project team experience 
determined if good layouts were possible and even hospital 
program layouts were tested. Some programs if considered in 
the future, e.g., magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and audi￾ology booths would require specific structural modifications as 
typical for such renovations. Radiation oncology would not be 
feasible due to extreme weight of radiation shielding.
2. It must be possible to change the floor area, either by addi￾tional construction (vertical or horizontal) or by changing the 
boundaries of the units of occupancy: Within CHH-2, there 
are programs that occupy full and partial floors. Program or 
suite boundaries and corridor locations can easily change as 
program space needs change. Horizontal expansion is not 
possible at the lower levels due to property lines and public 
rights-of-way, nor at upper levels where the building is at the 
maximum dimensions according to the existing zoning code. 
Future vertical expansion is not provided for, though one floor 
was added during design. The ever-tightening seismic require￾ments of the Pacific Coast have left many buildings planned 
for vertical expansion unable to do so without disruptive 
upgrade renovations. Therefore, building owners have gener￾ally declined to use this strategy.
3. Buildings should be adaptable to both residential and nonres￾idential functions, within reason: OHSU is a client with build￾ings more than 100 years old that are still in original use, and 
the university seldom demolishes buildings. Therefore, it is not 
anticipated that residential use would be sought. The presence 
of research offices demonstrates the building works well as 
general office use.
It should be noted that the project team did study potential 
conversion to other hospital uses at varying times in the design 
process (driven by reimbursement changes), but each time, such a 
potential conversion was not pursued due to programmatic-type 
issues, e.g., need for emergency department on first floor, which 
was not available due to other necessary ground-floor functions, 
fire life safety upgrades, increased seismic code requirements for 
hospitals as ‘essential-use facilities’ and impact on the project 
business case.
In conclusion, based on capacity to accommodate varied and 
changing uses of similar buildings and CHH-2’s design and plan￾ning improvements, it is fully anticipated the building will serve 
OHSU’s ambulatory needs for decades.
FINAL DESIGN
unit clinic and pharmacy
SINCE COMPLETION
Since opening in 2019, post occupancy evaluation has occurred, 
with the caveat that COVID restrictions closed the facility down 
in early 2020, and utilization has been impacted since reopening 
later in that year. There has not been a need for renovations to the 
facility to test its ability to accommodate change. Early staff and 
patient feedback was positive, before COVID impacts. Patient 
satisfaction scores met or exceeded project goals.
Figure 6 Cross section illustrating stacking of various program types (6 of 
15 floor plans below). New CHH-2 on left and existing CHH-1 on right 
and existing parking below93
O R E G O N H E A LT H C E N T E R 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Project major team members:
• Owner: Oregon Health & Science University
• Architect and interiors: Zimmer Gunsul Frasca Architects, LLP
• General contractor: Hoffman Construction Company
Figure 7 Full block plan at Level 2, interventional
Figure 8 Level 4, surgery suite
Figure 9 Upper-level plan at Level 7 outpatient stay
Figure 10 Level 8 typical clinic unit
Figure 11 Level 11 Knight Cancer Institute infusion
Figure 12 Level 12 Knight Cancer Institute research94
O R E G O N H E A LT H C E N T E R 
Figure 13 Upper floor level (typical) empty Base Building
Figure 14 A variety of programs are accommodated within CHH-2. Top: surgery, interventional, extended-stay outpatient rooms. Bottom: clinics, infusion, 
pharmacy95
O R E G O N H E A LT H C E N T E R 
• Structural and civil engineers: KPFF Consulting Engineers
• Mechanical and electrical engineers: Affiliated Engineers, Inc.
• Landscape architects: Place
Contributors: Karl Sonnenberg AIA ACHA, ZGF
Photography & Graphic Credits:
• Figure 1: Courtesy of ZGF Architects LLP; © Eckert & Eckert
• Figures 2–13: Courtesy of ZGF Architects LLP
• Figure 14: Courtesy of ZGF Architects LLP; © Eckert & Eckert
• Figure 15: Courtesy of ZGF Architects LLP; © Eckert & Eckert
• Figure 16: Courtesy of ZGF Architects LLP; © Bruce Damonte
NOTES
1 Designed and built simultaneously by the same team on the block to 
the east is the OHSU Gary and Christine Rood Family Pavilion, which 
includes guest rooms for out-of-town patients and families, parking, 
conference center and receiving docks for the three-building complex 
(CHH-1, CHH-2, and Rood Family Pavilion). The three buildings are 
connected by tunnels and/or skybridges. This document focuses on 
the CHH-2 building.
2 From the Oregon Health and Science University Request for Proposal 
Packet for Architectural/Design Professional Services for Center for 
Health & Healing-South August 2014.
Figure 15 CHH-2 viewed from north with skybridge to CHH-1 (at right)96 DOI: 10.4324/9781003243076-15
EDUCATION
Shenzhen University Engineering School 
Shenzhen, PR China
Figure 1 View of the project in the campus setting97
S H E N Z H E N U N I V E R S I T Y E N G I N E E R I N G S C H O O L 
Project Data
Location: Shenzhen, China
Client: South China University of Science and Technology, and Bureau 
Public Works of Shenzhen Municipality
Architect: BE Architects – Hong Kong office
Design Phase: January 2017 – January 2020
Completed: August 2020
Gross built area: 115,000 m2
 (1,238,000 sq. ft.)
System Lifetime 
(in Years)
Explanation
Infrastructure 200–1,000 All outdoor public infrastructure stand longer than 
buildings. A city’s infrastructure may have a history of 
1000 years. We have to be extremely careful about this 
when we design a building.
Load-bearing 
structure
100 The load-bearing structure, combined with staircase and 
elevators, related to all safety requirements, can stand 
more than 100 years without any change (unless an error 
has occurred in design).
Façade and 
service core
50–60 The façade and main interior MEP (mechanical, electrical 
and plumbing systems) should last 50 to 60 years. We do 
not frequently change façades in our culture because it is 
extremely expensive.
Functional 
layout
20 Interior partitions, utilities specific to each occupant 
territory.
Interior 10 Ceilings, lighting, cabinets, wall and floor finishes98
S H E N Z H E N U N I V E R S I T Y E N G I N E E R I N G S C H O O L 
BACKGROUND
The Engineering School, which is situated at the boundaries of the 
northwest campus, follows the overall concept structure of the 
campus – ‘two-axis, three-corridor, and one-ring.’ The massing 
emphasizes the boundary on the northwest. It has two U-shaped 
courtyards, which have openings toward the landscape on the east 
and south, hosting outdoor activities for the campus. The sloping 
roof, which is lower at the east/south and higher at the west/north, 
fully reflects the consideration of the terrain characteristic of the site.
The design of the Engineering School fully reflects the dignity, 
simplicity and economic features of the university architecture. 
Nine departments are found in the facility. Each of them intends 
to accommodate research laboratories, administrative spaces and 
offices for professors with assistants in a ratio based on their own 
preferences. However, a concrete program could not be provided 
at the design stage. On the technical aspects, the research labo￾ratories are extremely different from one department to another. 
The project adopted a Base Building design (Figure 2) with capac￾ity for variable departmental and laboratory sizes, efficient floor 
plans, sufficient service cores for research laboratories and capac￾ity for various room layouts.
FAÇADE
In the Engineering School, the university – the user – addresses 
the identity in appearance and also focuses on views to the land￾scape from the windows of the building. The client – the con￾struction department of the city – addresses the implementation 
of budget and safety. Considering that the budget was adjusted 
several times in the design process, approximately half of the 
meetings in the entire design process were about the façade. The 
façade was designed on the basis of the collective decision of the 
university. BEA architects provided technical services. A consist￾ent character of neutrality is typically maintained to insure a large 
capacity for variable internal use and subdivisions.
CHANGE IN DEPARTMENTAL GROUPINGS AND 
CAPACITY FOR VARIABLE FLOOR PLANS
As with the newly planned university, the Engineering School 
is constantly changing in department composition, faculty 
members, budget, leadership and requirements through the 
design and construction processes. These changes are ongoing 
(Figure 3a, b). However, the design and construction processes 
operated smoothly. In the design process, the constant changes 
in requests raised by departments were easily accommodated 
by separating the Base Building and the Infill (reflecting evolv￾ing departmental demands). Among the four projects under 
construction at approximately the same time on the campus, 
the urban layout, structure and general plan of the engineering 
Figure 2 Typical Base Building floor99
S H E N Z H E N U N I V E R S I T Y E N G I N E E R I N G S C H O O L 
school remain largely unchanged. The final project will be 
exactly the same as the initial competition project submitted five 
years previously. This is possible because of the strategic layout 
of the BEA Project Book, where functional issues are independ￾ent of the Base Building (Figure 4). Through careful design of 
every functional requirement at the appropriate time (just before 
occupancy), the project fulfills highly diversified research labo￾ratories of different departments and specialties and constant 
changes of the faculty and considers the quality of architectural 
space by the well-elaborated indoor and outdoor spaces and 
green architecture strategies.
INTERIOR DESIGN
The interior design was conducted with two local interior design 
firms in addition to BEA’s design team. BEA’s design covers the 
common areas of the school, the entrances, corridors, lounges, 
sanitary facilities, auditorium and faculty and administrative 
offices. A  special consultant was in charge of the technical 
arrangements and the fittings of the laboratories in accordance 
with the specific requirements of departments (Figure 5).
Nine departments are currently located in the faculty. Each of 
them intends to accommodate research laboratories, administra￾tion spaces and offices for professors with assistants in a ratio 
based on their own preferences. However, as noted, a concrete 
program could not be provided at the design stage. On the tech￾nical aspects, the research laboratories are very different from 
one department to another. The project adopted a neutral Based 
Building system with an efficient floor plan, sufficient service cores 
for research laboratories and open design for various room lay￾outs. A consistent character of neutrality is typically maintained to 
Figure 3a, b Engineering School: Changes of departmental locations from early proposal (a) to the final construction (b)100
S H E N Z H E N U N I V E R S I T Y E N G I N E E R I N G S C H O O L 
Figure 4 Engineering School – labs 
in different six prototypes arranged 
by the academic departments, in 
the same empty Base Building form 
(lower right)
Figure 5 Interior fit-out of part of one department101
S H E N Z H E N U N I V E R S I T Y E N G I N E E R I N G S C H O O L 
insure a large capacity for variable internal use and subdivisions 
(Figure 4).
SUMMARY
As a newly planned university, the Engineering School is con￾stantly changing in department composition, faculty members, 
budget, leadership and requirements through the design and 
construction processes. These changes are ongoing. In the design 
process, the constant changes in requests raised by departments 
were accommodated. This is possible because of the strategic 
open floor plan, where functional issues are independent from 
structure and façade. Through careful design of every functional 
requirement at the appropriate time (just before occupancy), 
the project fulfills highly diversified research laboratories of dif￾ferent departments and specialties and constant changes of the 
faculties and considers the quality of architectural space by the 
well-elaborated indoor and outdoor spaces and green architec￾ture strategies.102 DOI: 10.4324/9781003243076-16
Santa Monica High School Discovery 
Building 
Los Angeles, California, USA
Figure 1 Open courtyard entrance viewed from the southeast. Sustainability features include living wall, courtyard, operable windows and solar thermal 
and roof-top photovoltaic arrays103
S A N TA M O N I C A H I G H S C H O O L D I S C O V E RY B U I L D I N G 
Project Data
Architects: HED (Architect of Record and Collaborating Design 
Architects; Principal in Charge: John Dale, FAIA); 
Moore, Rubel, Yudell Architects and Planners (Con￾sulting Design Architects); James O’Connor Consult￾ing Design Principal
Client: Santa Monica-Malibu Unified School District, Santa 
Monica, California
General contractor: McCarthy Building Companies, Inc.
Building area: 260,000 ft2
 (24,155 m2
)
Primary System: • Prefabricated steel moment frame with a uniform 
structural grid. Typical bay size is 32' × 38' (2.97 m 
× 3.53 m). The structural grid extends into the two 
basement parking levels, where the structural system 
is concrete columns and flat slabs. The lateral seismic 
system relies on the steel moment frame with some 
concrete shear walls at the basement levels.
• Three stair cores are positioned around the build￾ing’s perimeter to maximize uninterrupted floor 
area. A fourth stair, combined with bleacher seat￾ing, cascades down through the central outdoor 
courtyard (see Figure 1).
• The main mechanical/HVAC (heating, ventilation, 
air-conditioning) shafts and the stacked electrical 
and computer technology rooms are deliberately 
distributed to avoid large, fixed cores and maximize 
the capacity of the floor plates for reconfiguration.
• Floor-to-floor heights: Generally, 14' (4.27 m), 
increased at ground level to 
15' (4.57 m). • Most of the instructional spaces and ‘commons’ 
spaces are equipped with 21-inch raised floors, 
acting as plenums for supply air and also data and 
power cabling.
Secondary System: Non–load-bearing interior walls and MEP (mechani￾cal, electrical, data, plumbing) 
distribution
Tertiary System: Educational audio-visual equipment, both movable 
and fixed; office equipment and mobile educational 
furnishings
Sustainability: The project meets the equivalent of LEED certification 
following the guidelines of the US Green Building 
Council.
Project schedule: Start of the design process: 2017
Groundbreaking: 2019
Opening: August 2021
Case study report and lead architect: John R. Dale, FAIA, HED
Drawings: By permission of HED
Photo credits” Inessa Binenbaum104
S A N TA M O N I C A H I G H S C H O O L D I S C O V E RY B U I L D I N G 
BACKGROUND
When the design team was commissioned to develop a new 
multipurpose academic building for Santa Monica High School 
(Samohi), they were charged with designing a future-oriented 
facility that would provide a new direction for the redevelopment 
of the entire campus and respond to some key challenges facing 
the school district:
• The Samohi campus is over 100 years old; most of the build￾ings are outdated and inadequate for current needs, requiring 
drastic renovation or replacement;
• Campus land area is at a premium – the campus houses over 
2,800 students on about 26 acres (10.5 ha);
• Typical classrooms are undersized, crowded and rigid, and 
supplementary meeting spaces are inadequate;
• Administrative offices are too few and too small;
• Inadequate, aging athletic and physical education facilities do 
not meet the needs of the student population;
• Inadequate parking puts pressure on limited land resources 
and the accessibility of facilities intended to be available to the 
general public;
• Congested pedestrian circulation networks lengthen walking 
time between classes in dispersed buildings.
In spite of the challenges faced by Santa Monica-Malibu Uni￾fied School District, it is blessed with a remarkably committed 
and supportive community that wants a progressive and well￾equipped educational experience for its students. The key assets 
for the community are:
• A diverse, highly educated and committed community, admin￾istration, staff, faculty and students;
• Wide consensus around a progressive pedagogical approach 
now transforming education across the district;
• A central, prominent site in the heart of the city;
• Ongoing financial commitment on the part of the community 
for improving school facilities resulting from a highly effec￾tive series of local bond (fundraising) campaigns, the latest of 
which raised over half a billion dollars;
• The campus includes some memorable landmarks: the Greek 
Theater (an outdoor amphitheater) and Barnum Hall – a 
remarkable Art Deco auditorium and stage – that frequently 
serve the public as well as local school events.
THE CONCEPT FOR THE NEW BUILDING
The realization of an open, flexible ‘loft’ building enabling con￾tinuous change is at the heart of the design concept for the 
Discovery Building. The exterior of the building is intended to 
establish a permanent sense of place and last a century or more. 
It is characterized by generous bands of windows and undulating, 
white plaster walls that are a contemporary interpretation of the 
campus’s Art Deco heritage. Grand, operable glass storefronts at 
ground level open the building up to surrounding terraces, court￾yard and adjacent plaza. The learning environment is engaging, 
welcoming, comfortable and varied, allowing teachers and stu￾dents alike to feel ‘at home.’
In contrast to single and double-loaded corridor layouts com￾mon in California schools, the six-floor Discovery Building has 
relatively deep floor plates that allow the clustering of spaces 
and activities in a greater variety of sizes and formats, support￾ing different and evolving modes of learning. In addition to 
generous classrooms and science laboratories, there are a vari￾ety of ‘breakout spaces’ that form a series of ‘commons’ for 
project-based learning, small-group sessions, individual research 
and socializing. The program includes a computer graphics 
center, community meeting rooms, a medically ‘fragile suite’ for 
longer-term students with special needs and a large textbook 
distribution center. Two levels of underground parking at the 
base of this building have also been designed for change. With 
open column grids and flat slabs, these spaces can be converted 
to other uses in the future. Maximizing natural light and air has 
led to a healthy building with operable windows, trickle vents 
(that allow natural airflow to be filtered through a baffle sys￾tem built into the window frames), folding glass walls and huge 
overhead doors that emphasize transparency, openness and the 
seamless integration of indoor and outdoor spaces, something 
that can be accomplished in the Southern California climate. 
The central courtyard, with its bleacher stairs and balconies, 105
S A N TA M O N I C A H I G H S C H O O L D I S C O V E RY B U I L D I N G 
connects the new building to the adjacent Centennial Plaza and 
welcomes students in.
The design offers planned learning spaces, varied, inter￾connected spaces, inside and out, connected by external stairs 
and bleacher seating. Centrally located elevators and overhead 
bridges knit this complex together in a way that promotes chance 
meetings and casual socializing as well as a variety of teaching 
and performing opportunities. For example, the courtyard, with 
its open stairs and bridges, has already been the setting for a 
school choral concert; much more is planned.
APPLYING OPEN BUILDING PRINCIPLES
A typical school building is designed for a 50-year life cycle but 
is often obsolete long before it is replaced. Using Open Building 
principles, the design team designed an adaptable building that 
would accommodate frequent changes for at least 100  years, 
allowing teaching spaces to adapt incrementally and continuously 
to evolving pedagogy. The design clearly distinguishing between 
a fixed Base Building and an Infill system of nonstructural parti￾tions. By introducing a raised floor system for horizontal distribu￾tion of conditioned air supply, power and data cabling, change 
is more manageable financially and technically. The building will 
maintain its utility and adaptive capacity for years to come.
The application of Open Building strategies led to the selection 
of two particularly important systems:
• A prefabricated steel moment frame (produced by ConXtech, 
Inc.)
• A raised floor system (by Tate, Inc.)
These components were chosen to achieve long-term resil￾ience and adaptability. While these are premium systems, the 
additional costs of using them represented less than 1% of the 
total construction cost. They have already proven to be valuable 
assets, as changes have been made to the floor plans up until 
almost the conclusion of the construction phase of the project. 
In addition to these strategies, the modular rooftop mechanical 
system distributes conditioned air through a series of decentral￾ized vertical shafts. The stair towers were pushed to the perim￾eter in order to maintain uninterrupted floor area capacity for 
change. At critical stages in the design of the project, the client 
and design team quickly came to consensus about what is essen￾tial to the future resilience of the building. The use of the steel 
moment frame structure means that there are no shear walls 
inside the building footprint (usually used in California’s strict 
seismic design criteria), allowing spaces to be easily reconfig￾ured without obstruction. Data, power and floor diffusers for air 
distribution can be easily repositioned within spaces employing 
the raised floor and can respond readily to incremental change, 
even if it is related to the needs and teaching preferences of a 
single instructor.
Figure 2 Drawings illustrating the 
highly varied program that the Base 
Building can accommodate106
S A N TA M O N I C A H I G H S C H O O L D I S C O V E RY B U I L D I N G 
SEPARATION OF DESIGN TASKS
To be sure that the design process was not dominated by the pres￾sure of current needs only, Discovery was designed with the sep￾aration of design tasks in mind. HED developed the Base Building 
approach with MRY and then invited stakeholders to participate 
in design workshops to develop Infill options with oversight and 
approval from the facilities staff. Facilities staff initiated changes 
during the construction phase of the project, and HED provided 
the documentation to achieve these changes. Teachers individ￾ually then had a direct say before completion of the project to 
adjust power and technology based on how they wanted to lay 
out their classrooms. In this case, the raised floors facilitated these 
changes by the contractor. Presumably, in the future, the facilities 
staff will respond to faculty needs to adjust the floor plan. Will 
they document the changes in-house or seek architects to help 
with the changes? Probably the latter, but it will depend on the 
experience and expertise of the decision-makers at the time.
RESILIENCE AND SUSTAINABILITY
Sustainability strategies have been incorporated into this project. 
They ensure the building’s resilience and reduction of its carbon 
footprint while establishing a distinctive presence on the cam￾pus. The building’s orientation, massing and layout have, in turn, 
shaped these strategies. The courtyard, with its two-story living 
green wall, combines passive strategies that allow the building to 
breathe and achieve natural cooling. The courtyard also brings 
daylight deep into the building. At the same time, it creates a 
versatile social gathering space and extends the gathering space 
of the adjacent Centennial Plaza, providing supplemental pro￾gram space in the most economical way possible. The rooftop 
Figure 3 Open Building strategies for the Discovery Building. Clockwise from upper left corner: a: A 38' × 32' grid accommodates a typical plus/minus 
1,200-sf classroom as well as other multiple uses. b: The building footprint is defined as two connected loft buildings with a courtyard preserving light, air, 
views. c: Modular rooftop mechanical units feed air supply from above through distributed shafts to minimize the size of fixed cores in the building. d: Access 
floor for power, data and air supply are provided in all potential learning spaces. e: Stairs and elevators are located at the perimeter of the building and in 
the courtyard to allow horizontal circulation to be reconfigured as internal spaces are reshaped over time. f: A distinct building envelope responds to the 
immediate historic Art Deco context and establishes a sense of place
a
c
e
b
d
f107
S A N TA M O N I C A H I G H S C H O O L D I S C O V E RY B U I L D I N G 
photovoltaic arrays, which offset power from the electrical grid by 
34%, take the form of a highly visible canopy 15ft above the roof 
and provide economical shelter for the rooftops outdoor class￾room. The visibility and clarity of its exposed systems becomes an 
important teaching tool. Similarly, the solar thermal array (which 
offsets 13% of heating demands of the large swimming pool that 
is part of the project) became a prominent cap to the living green 
wall and points to a more extensive array, which helps to reduce 
the heating load of the 50-meter swimming pool below. All of the 
outdoor spaces are accessible to students with physical disabili￾ties, are well connected to adjacent indoor spaces and are readily 
available to all students and staff and are designed with the same 
palette of hardscape and plant materials.
UNANTICIPATED BENEFITS
From the time it was occupied, popularity as a new campus 
focal point has grown. It quickly became a home base for the 
Figure 4 Capacity study illustrating potential variations on the configuration of classrooms, labs, seminar spaces and common areas on an upper floor of 
the building
Figure 5 Central cafeteria with large overhead doors connecting to out￾door dining terraces working comfortably within the prefabricated steel 
moment frame system108
S A N TA M O N I C A H I G H S C H O O L D I S C O V E RY B U I L D I N G 
northeastern corner of the campus. Its courtyard extends from 
Centennial Plaza to expand outdoor venues for gathering, perfor￾mances and socializing. The cafeteria, placed at the intersection 
of two major pedestrian routes, has expansive overhead doors 
and is open all during the day, thereby creating a seamless con￾nection between well-populated indoor and outdoor spaces. The 
varied spaces defined within and outside the building to learn or 
just mingle informally quickly became well used and popular with 
students. To quote the high school’s principal, “When they first 
walked into the new building, many said, ‘Wow, this is like a col￾lege campus!’” and he adds that, at the end of the day, “We have 
to tell them, ‘Hey, it’s time to go home!’”
Figure 6 Typical flexible lab space with movable lab benches, raised floor 
with power, data and air supply and ceiling cloud providing easy access to 
perimeter return air ducts Figure 7 Commons area learning spaces on a typical upper floor with 
glazed walls connecting to perimeter classrooms. All interior walls are non–
load-bearing and easily reconfigured
Figure 8 The prefabricated moment frame allowed major floor penetra￾tions such as this bleacher stair connecting second and third floors
Figure 9 The moment-frame structural grid extends to the rooftop out￾door classroom space and provides a framework for visible photovoltaic 
arraysDOI: 10.4324/9781003243076-17 109
The Open Building Approach Explained
Since some readers may not know much about the Open Building 
approach and its origins, in what follows, we discuss the following 
topics.
• The Origins of the approach
• The prototypical urban problem, not limited to housing
• Basic terminology
• The problem of evaluation
• The problem of coordination
• Using the approach: operations, communication and 
evaluation
• Designing a support
THE ORIGINS OF THE APPROACH
The ‘Supports’ concept out of which the term Open Building 
emerged is based on the proposition that, in large housing pro￾jects, dwellings should not be understood as products that can be 
designed and produced like any other commodity. Instead, units 
of habitation should be understood as a result of action, a process 
in which decisions about each dwelling are made independently 
within a larger architectural infrastructure of communal services 
known as a ‘Support’ or Base Building. In its initial formulation, 
this ‘commons’ or architectural infrastructure would become a 
physical form when the philosophy was applied as an alternative 
to ‘mass housing’ in urban environments.
The fundamental principle of the Open Building approach is 
that large housing projects should be the result of action in two 
spheres and that these spheres of action require separation of 
design tasks.
While the original design methods for the design of ‘Supports’ 
focused on multifamily housing, the approach has shown its rele￾vance for many kinds of buildings with multiple occupancies, and 
urban design projects as well, as the projects already discussed 
demonstrate.
The approach, as we know it today, has been adopted world￾wide not as a defined goal but as a direction of developments 
in the design of everyday built environments. As already noted, 
the approach seeks to work with several interconnected char￾acteristics of everyday built environment. It addresses profes￾sional design skills and ways of building. It is political, because it 
addresses distribution of decision-making power and challenges 
conventions in the regulatory environment and in project man￾agement and financing. It was never about style.
When the concept of ‘Supports’ was first introduced in the 
early 1960s, it was obvious by that time that it was not possible 
to think of housing only in terms of separate lots and individual 
houses. Larger structures containing large numbers of dwellings 
were being built everywhere by the thousands; they were mon￾olithic, centrally controlled, rigid and turned out to be unsustain￾able, both in terms of their social fabric and management and 
physically. What the new approach sought to do was to provide 
the same opportunity for individual freedom and responsibility, 
investment and adaptation-per-unit-of-occupancy in higher-den￾sity situations that had been available for centuries in single-fam￾ily low-density environments.
THE PROTOTYPICAL URBAN PROBLEM, NOT LIMITED 
TO HOUSING
The Open Building approach addresses the fact that if they are 
to retain value, large buildings outlive their original uses and their 
internal territorial boundaries and, just as often, their original floor 
plans and accompanying fixtures and utility systems. This fact, 
borne out in statistics and everyday experience of those involved 
in regulating, financing, design and construction work, as well as 
building managers and users, is the prototypical urban problem. 
To retain value, large buildings and neighborhoods adapt. This is 
not limited to housing.
This fact of life of a living building stock is why the Open 
Building approach separates the design of the long-lasting Sup￾port or Base Building from more mutable Infill. This is, in fact, the 
definition of a Support: any building intended to contain multiple 
occupancy units, each of which can be independently adapted 
to changing needs and preferences or changes in the market, 
building and energy standards, etc. These changes can and do 
occur during design and construction as well as over the long 
term. These changes must be possible not once but repeatedly as 110
THE OPEN BUILDING APPROACH EXPLAINED
needed. This is the problem that has to be faced in any environ￾ment in which large numbers of people have to share a limited 
amount of space.
The basic proposition made in Supports: An Alternative to 
Mass Housing in 1962 was radical. The proposition was that the 
redirection of a country’s housing efforts (public and/or private 
sector) toward the large-scale building of Supports and the indus￾trial production of Infill systems (by many certified companies) 
could be justified on many grounds: social, industrial, economic 
and organizational. The Dutch Foundation for Architects Research 
(SAR) was charged, in 1964, with developing the methods archi￾tects would need to design Supports. Other experts in other fields 
would be needed to investigate financial, regulatory and other 
critical aspects of the concept.
From the beginning of their work, the SAR hoped that the 
design of Supports would help solve some of the problems tradi￾tionally associated with the design of mass housing. The design 
process in mass housing is based on the floor plans. Once the 
units (or unit types) are designed, they are repeated and arranged, 
woven together by structure and utility systems and wrapped in 
a façade, to create the larger building as an ‘integrated’ or unified 
whole and to be approved and built as such. In a situation in which 
costs must be minimized and standards and codes followed, while 
complex problems of space and utilities must be accommodated 
in a restricted area, the basic floor plan is always a compromise. 
It is the result of complex negotiations between architect, client, 
lender, builder, structural and mechanical engineers and other 
professionals. In fact, most of the design effort is directed toward 
finding a good-enough solution to justify continuous repetition of 
the floor plan(s).
This is reversed in the case of the design of a Support. The 
floor plans will not be predetermined; floor plans are not known 
at the initiation of the design process. The Support is designed to 
provide potential (capacity) to accommodate varying floor plans, 
initially and over time, in such a way that a change to one terri￾tory will not intrude on another territory or force change to the 
Support.
Such potential is not neutral. A well-designed Support offers 
inspiration and direction. At the same time, a Support must be 
capable of accommodating dwellings or other uses that meet 
the standards normally accepted in any particular society or mar￾ket. The problems of limited resources, money and space are still 
present. Adaptability and variety must be available to those who 
finally occupy the support building. Maximum choice – with asso￾ciated responsibilities – is a goal, without requiring technical or 
architectural expertise or excessive effort or cost. The range of 
choice offered to the Infill level corresponds to the view society in 
that locale holds as to the freedom and responsibility of individual 
occupants.
The use of this approach has its advantages, but its introduc￾tion in practice have been slow to happen. Because it stresses 
coordination and communication in the design process, it is of 
little use for an individual working in isolation to apply it. Its utility, 
therefore, is inevitably related to the organization of design as a 
decision-making process, as already noted. It is useful if those 
involved really want to separate design tasks and yet coordinate 
and communicate. This, of course, is not always the case. The 
desire to coordinate and communicate usually becomes apparent 
only when individual efforts start to yield diminishing returns.
Faced with complex problems, we tend to try to simplify them. 
This is a fruitful strategy when purely technical problems are 
involved, but if human social, economic and psychological needs 
are oversimplified, the result is a reduction of human life itself. 
This is what mass housing in the Netherlands taught the SAR 
team, and it is a lesson that must be learned elsewhere as well, 
either by example or by experience.
Simplification of the design problem led, in mass housing, to the 
elimination of the user/inhabitant in the decision-making pro￾cess. The reintroduction of users created problems that needed 
solutions. To avoid oversimplification of the organizational and/
or technical aspects of creating a decent living environment, new 
design methods were needed: means to coordinate and commu￾nicate during design and construction while respecting the need 
for continuous exercise of value judgments at all levels.
One way to simplify the problem and still create good 
housing solutions is to use large areas of land and extensive 111
THE OPEN BUILDING APPROACH EXPLAINED
physical infrastructures to make that land accessible and useable 
for detached dwellings or buildings. This approach has resulted in 
the typical suburban sprawl that is evident around the world. The 
suburban example offers a solution that assumes a degree of user 
control and future adaptability in combination with a relatively 
simple design and planning process that everyone can under￾stand. It is a process, moreover, that offers each participant – user, 
builder, regulator, developer or investor – a clear role and a certain 
balance between their interests.
The problem is inevitably complicated when complexity 
increases either due to a change in the balance of interests or 
when space is limited. The more people who have to share a given 
amount of space, the more complex the problems become. When 
this happens, individual dwellings must be clustered, and a much 
more intricate interweaving of spaces, systems and functions is 
needed. One way to arrive at a solution is to eliminate the indi￾viduality and independence of the dwellings – that is what mass 
housing does – in either public- or private-market housing. But this 
oversimplification also eliminates the user as an active, responsible 
participant with economic interests, and the balance of interests 
that, throughout history, has been vital for the process of creating 
an acceptable and regenerative human habitat is broken.
The Open Building approach, exemplified in projects shown 
earlier and many more besides, recognizes the importance of 
balancing interests in the typical urban situation, where higher 
density should not reduce but enhance the duality of private and 
public life and shared responsibility for its flourishing.
BASIC TERMINOLOGY
Three basic terms are worth reviewing.
Urban tissue is used to describe a level of intervention – and 
a separate design task – between the stage set by urban struc￾ture and planning (largely two-dimensional urban infrastructure 
and land use) and individual buildings or building complexes. It 
is the domain of urban designers, who set a 3-D stage of public 
space, basic building form and thematic qualities that lower-level 
interventions will follow. In this book, we do not spend very much 
time on this level of work except to show exemplary cases at 
the beginning of the book, several historical examples and the 
way in which grids can be helpful to urban designers. This subject 
deserves a new book in its own right.
A Support. A Support belongs, legally speaking, to the immov￾ables. It is real property. It is for habitation and use of various 
kinds and is designed in such a way that within it, occupant 
spaces can be designed in which the layout and the equipment 
of each can be independently specified and can change over time 
without forcing the Support to change. In this way, a Support is 
an architectural infrastructure. It is not an empty or neutral struc￾tural skeleton. A Support is architecture. Designing a support is a 
separate design task.
Around the world, there are many words for Support, includ￾ing Skeleton, Primary System and Base Building. We will use the 
term ‘Base Building’ instead of ‘Support’ from this point on in 
the book.
The Infill. Infill constitutes a set (or system) of elements belong￾ing, legally speaking, to the movables. Infill is specified per unit 
of occupancy, in such a way that by means of those elements, 
the layout and the equipment of each occupancy within the Base 
Building can be independently decided and changed without 
forcing change to neighboring ‘territories’ or the Base Building. 
The design of Infill is a separate design task.
There are also many terms around the world for Infill, including 
Secondary System, tenant work and fit-out. We will use the term 
‘Infill’ from this point on in the book. This is to be distinguished 
from ‘filling-in’ an empty parcel on a city block.
The concept of Base Building and Infill was introduced in the 
design process in order to translate the independence of each 
unit of occupancy and the separation of design tasks into material 
terms.
• The Base Building contains all that does not fall within the 
competence of those parties controlling individual occupan￾cies (e.g., dwellings) and about which they have no responsi￾bility. It is ‘the commons.’112
THE OPEN BUILDING APPROACH EXPLAINED
• The Infill contains all about which those controlling indi￾vidual occupancies have competence and about which they 
therefore hold responsibility.
We want to reiterate that the question of what belongs to the 
Base Building and what belongs to the Infill should be answered 
not only on technical grounds but on the opinion that society 
has of the role of the individual occupancy (family, office tenant, 
healthcare operating unit, etc.). That is, a judgment is needed on 
the amount of freedom and responsibility occupants can exer￾cise within their territory. This is why we say – and explain in 
more detail later – that conforming to social structure is a key 
characteristic of everyday built environment that Open Building 
recognizes.
In each design process, large or small, territorial boundaries
need to be clarified and division of responsibilities understood. 
Boundary setting and division of work will differ from region to 
region, country to country and project to project. In times of rapid 
change and with an increase in international practices, territorial 
boundaries and other aspects of design practice benefit from 
explicit specification and a common language. Territorial bounda￾ries, it’s important to emphasize, can have important architectural 
manifestations, such as gates of various kinds, ‘margins’ separat￾ing public and private space, division of façades and so on.
The separation between Base Building and Infill is different 
from the distinction between coarse building and finish build￾ing. That distinction is made entirely on technical grounds. Those 
terms refer to two phases of the production process. In contrast, 
a Base Building is a certain kind of architectural infrastructure; it 
can be a finished product within itself, but, again, it is not a raw 
structural skeleton (Figure 1). In the production/construction of a 
Base Building, a distinction can be made between a coarse build￾ing phase and a finishing building phase.
In the Open Building approach, therefore, every physical ele￾ment and every space belongs either to the Base Building or to 
the Infill. Some kinds of elements, such as doors or pipes, can 
obviously appear in both: that is, we can and usually do have 
doors and pipes in both Base Building and Infill, but they will be 
different doors and pipes. Public corridors, fire stairs and elevators 
and the building façade (or parts of it) are typically part of the 
Base Building. The building façade can belong entirely to the Base 
Building, or some parts may belong to the Infill. The Infill does 
not necessarily have to be industrial products. Masonry walls can 
belong to the Infill if those walls can change independent of the 
Base Building and without impacting other occupant territories.
The cases at the beginning of the book show a range of inter￾pretations of such distribution between Base Building and Infill.
THE PROBLEM OF EVALUATION
In conventional practice, the evaluation and regulatory approval of 
a building is heavily influenced if not determined by its floor plans. 
But in the case of the Open Building approach, it’s not possible 
to evaluate the design of a building by examining the occupancy 
unit floor plans, since there are none. The Base Building has to be 
judged in a different way. This presents a problem of evaluation. 
The Base Building must be judged on its capacity to accommodate 
dwelling (or other occupancy) plans, which satisfy the individual 
requirements of different (and changing) users, throughout its life 
span. To solve this problem, a systematic way had to be found to 
evaluate Base Building designs by generating a series of represent￾ative possible floor plans and judging them by a set of general cri￾teria. The method for this developed by the SAR (SAR65) provides 
tools to cope with the problem of evaluation. One of the central 
methods – capacity analysis – is discussed in detail later in the book.
THE PROBLEM OF COORDINATION
There is another important aspect to the design of Base Buildings 
and the Infill systems or products to be used in them. When a Base 
Building is designed – or even a system that lends itself to their con￾struction – it is expected that Infill elements will be used that have 
been designed and produced independently. This is no different 
than the way that all manufactured products are made available 
in the market – from bricks to toilets and refrigerators. They are 
produced independent from the projects in which they will be used.
Figure 1 A support is not a skeleton (Source: from Habraken (1970)113
THE OPEN BUILDING APPROACH EXPLAINED
There will also be two production processes: one for the Base 
Building and one for the Infill. It is impossible to foresee the 
kinds of Infill elements or Infill packages that will eventually be 
used in a particular building. To enable these different processes 
to independently produce compatible systems or elements, the 
problem of coordination must be solved. This is the same prob￾lem that is addressed by industrywide interface standards in, for 
example, plumbing and electrical components manufactured by 
different companies but that are expected to fit together in a 
fully functioning building. Such interface standards push prod￾ucts into the category of commodity products and, with com￾petition, enable providers to seek competitive advantage while 
lowering per-unit cost, knowing that specifiers have substitutes 
available to choose from.
Some like to call the relationship between Base Building and 
Infill ‘loose fit.’ That is only accurate up to a point. Eventually, Infill 
material must meet Base Building material. If the two material 
‘systems’ are independently produced and yet must go together 
in a project, meeting high quality and safety standards, reduced 
and quiet on-site work and offering solutions at a range of price 
points, ‘fitting’ dimensions need to be described and addressed. 
That is also what SAR65 dealt with.
The method developed by the SAR provides the necessary 
principles and notation to arrive at such evaluation and coordi￾nation. But it is also clear that these are principles that require 
further development as the industry and society evolve and as AI 
and computational tools are brought to bear.
USING THE APPROACH: OPERATIONS, 
COMMUNICATION AND EVALUATION
We can explain briefly some of the ways the Open Building 
approach can be used. To do this, a few words must be said about 
the nature of the approach itself. As noted, in the design of large 
building projects – not limited to housing – the process of evalu￾ation must test what is possible within a given architectural infra￾structure – for example, the possible final floor plans – against 
what is generally desirable – that is, explicitly stated standards.
The same evaluation process is needed for building complexes, 
neighborhood and urban design as well as product design.
The Open Building approach basically offers a series of oper￾ations that give such comparisons, in increasingly complex situa￾tions. For example:
• Given the width of a building’s structural bay, what meaningful 
combinations of spaces or functions can be accommodated?
• Conversely, given certain necessary relationships between 
functions, what bay width offers an optimum solution within 
certain technical and financial constraints?
• In what specific areas of a structure can certain desirable 
activities be located?
• Where should common installations (for example, piping of 
various kinds, wiring, ducts, etc.) be positioned to enable a 
suitable range of layout variations while respecting the territo￾rial autonomy of each occupancy and meeting cost constraints?
• Where should fixed elements for fire egress and vertical cir￾culation be placed?
• What façade design will be most satisfactory for the expected 
variety of interior layouts? Should some façade elements be 
Infill elements?
The result of each separate operation within the method is always 
what is called a series of variations. Variations are a number of 
possible solutions that give us the information we need to make 
decisions and proceed in the design process.
In order to make the resultant variations comparable with 
other variations that result from other operations, generating and 
notating them in a systematic way is very helpful. This means that 
the way we notate the variations and the way that the system of 
notation is arrived at must be formalized in order to avoid ambi￾guity and facilitate easy communication. Essentially, the opera￾tions that constitute the approach deal with the kinds of questions 
always raised in any design process:
• What consequences do certain decisions about physical form 
have in terms of possible uses and layouts?
• If we want to facilitate a range of uses and layouts, what 
forms can be found which will not only accommodate them 
but also inspire them?114
THE OPEN BUILDING APPROACH EXPLAINED
When a single individual faces such questions, and the problem is 
not too complicated, an intuitive approach may suffice. No formal 
analysis or formal communication with other people is necessary. 
But if several participants are involved in the decision-making pro￾cess, if the problem becomes more complex, if accountability is 
required, or if the norms and standards to be applied must be 
made more explicit and decisions made transparent, we need for￾mal methods of analysis and notation.
Generally speaking, the need for a systematic approach 
becomes more apparent when:
1. Several participants, with different values, experience, inter￾ests and skills, are involved in the decision-making process;
2. Matters of quality must be made explicit in terms of stand￾ards and norms to be understood and agreed upon by the 
different participants;
3. Decisions must be made incrementally in such a way that 
each decision leaves open a number of options to be dealt 
with at a later stage;
4. Several participants need to be able to operate independently 
but simultaneously in a coordinated way;
5. And different participants need to be able to operate inde￾pendently and sequentially in a coordinated way.
In other words, if the design process becomes a process of deci￾sion-making about physical forms in which different participants 
have to make coordinated decisions, formal communication con￾ventions are very helpful if not absolutely necessary. This is crucial 
in order to record decisions and evaluate such decisions in terms 
of use, feasibility of implementation and cost. Without such con￾ventions, communications can easily break down, and a struc￾tured process becomes very difficult to achieve.
DESIGNING A BASE BUILDING
The basic concept of a Base Building presupposes that at least two 
participants are making decisions independently and sequentially. 
First, there is the designer of the Base Building, who provides an 
architectural infrastructure in which, at a later date, a dwelling (or 
other use) will be designed and installed using an independent 
decision-making process.
The idea of a Base Building is quite different from an empty 
structural skeleton, as already noted. Many misunderstand this 
point. A Base Building is architecture. This is the reason that one 
of the defining drawings explaining the Open Building approach 
is the one shown earlier (Figure 1).
At least three participants are involved: the architect (or 
design team), the regulatory power and the client/investor. 
Active citizens’ groups are also involved in many cases. All par￾ticipants have to comply with clearly formulated norms and 
standards in such a way that these can be effectively applied 
to compare different series of possible uses of the Base Build￾ing. Finally, the design of a Base Building involves a number 
of technical experts: architect, structural engineer, builder and 
electrical, mechanical, sanitary, heating and ventilating engi￾neers, etc. As in any other building, their various efforts have 
to be combined, but in this case, they all operate within famil￾iar cost and space constraints while having to arrive at a Base 
Building solution that offers capacity (discussed in more detail 
later).
Thus, the problem of Base Building design forces the consid￾eration of design as a two-step decision-making process in which 
the decisions result in physical built forms, while the criteria are 
based on technical and economic feasibility and adaptability in 
use. This problem led the SAR team to develop tools to aid in the 
solution of problems that can be recognized in many other design 
situations, totally unconnected with the problems of adaptable 
housing. Even the design of urban fabric must address these 
issues.
READINGS
Habraken, N.J. (1970). 3R’s for Housing. Scheltema  & Holkema, 
Amsterdam.DOI: 10.4324/9781003243076-18 115
Five Characteristics of 
Everyday Built Environment that 
Open Building Designs For
INTRODUCTION
We’d now like to step back from the specific operations of an 
Open Building approach to discuss five interrelated characteristics 
of everyday built environment, mentioned earlier, that the Open 
Building approach designs for. We discuss these characteristics – 
which may seem overly abstract on first reading – because we 
want to emphasize once again that the Open Building approach is 
not an end in itself. That’s true of any method. By discussing these 
characteristics, we want to be clear that the approach goes well 
beyond such limited technical concepts such as ‘flexibility,’ ‘adapt￾ability,’ ‘disentanglement’ and so on. It also goes well beyond style.
We hope readers will agree that these characteristics – or attrib￾utes – are evident everywhere that ordinary built environments 
flourish and sustain themselves over many generations. They are 
not the only such characteristics, but they are, in any case, what 
the Open Building approach designs for. To explain them in what 
follows, why they matter and how they interconnect, we draw on 
personal experiences studying and visiting diverse environments 
around the world that we believe many readers will also be famil￾iar with. We also use examples from historical environments we 
hope are already familiar, and refer from time to time to the built 
projects shown earlier in the book.
• Separating design tasks: This may be the most important 
characteristic. It is most evident and effective in large building 
projects and in urban or campus design. This means that we 
separate the design of what is shared and thus long-lasting 
from what is tuned to individual or small-group requirements 
and thus likely to change at the pace of generations, or more 
quickly. In doing so, we conform to the local society’s concept 
of the distinction between the ‘commons’ and the freedom 
and responsibility of individuals or small groups to control their 
own territories.
• Thematic design: Especially because design tasks tend to be 
or are separated in large interventions, sharing architectural 
themes such as patterns and systems and types is very impor￾tant. Further, not only is this sharing important, but making 
variations on shared themes brings richness, complexity and 
coherence to our built environment.
• The importance of territory: Decision-making control – as with 
design tasks – is inevitably distributed to enable environments 
to sustain themselves. An understanding of territory is key to 
avoid conflict but, of equal importance, presents wonderful 
opportunities for new ideas in architectural form-making.
• The inherent hierarchy in built environment: Built environ￾ment is universally structured into ‘levels of intervention.’ This 
has found its counterpart in the way we organize our design 
professions (urban planning, urban design, architecture inte￾rior architecture and so on). Working with knowledge of these 
levels helps us manage complexity and change.
• Balancing permanence and change: Finally, since change is 
inevitable in any truly alive and sustainable built fabric, knowl￾edge of the balance of permanence and change is a key to 
gaining insight into and working with the behavior of build￾ings and neighborhoods.
We hope readers will agree that together, these characteristics are 
very important to fully alive and regenerative buildings and urban 
fabric. They help make the places we want to live and work in 
have value and endure. Of equal importance, they need to be at 
the center of our creative energies as we cooperate with others 
and conduct our practices.
AN EXPLANATORY NOTE
Before explaining these characteristics, several notes about 
them are in order. First of all, as we said before, we need to 
dispel the myth that the Open Building approach can become a 
formula. We have heard many times that the operations of the 
approach could be turned into one or more algorithms. Algo￾rithms may be useful. However, what we are discussing here 
is a new game with new game rules rather than some kind of 
fixed performance. In games, there are rules to be studied and 
followed, but players can be and are expected to use their imag￾inations and skill in making moves. This is true in soccer, chess 
and designing. But analogies can only go so far; designing is 
not a game of winners and losers but a process we undertake 
in which reaching agreement with others about what to build 
is the outcome.116
F I V E C H A R A C T E R I S T I C S O F E V E RY D AY B U I LT E N V I R O N M E N T T H AT O P E N B U I L D I N G D E S I G N S F O R 
Second, these five (of many) characteristics are frequently 
taken for granted as passé when they are considered at all or 
are ignored completely in our discussions among ourselves or 
with our clients. Or they are thought to be in opposition to ‘good 
design.’ We find this particularly true in the case of the idea of 
thematic design. Sharing themes and making variations on them 
in the design of buildings or urban complexes goes against atti￾tudes that are so ingrained that only a major shift will be able to 
unlock the potential of sharing patterns, systems and types to 
make a lively and coherent built environment. This is particularly 
important when tasks are separated and control distributed, thus 
making cooperation ever more important. Themes and variations, 
as in music, need to become familiar to us in our practices.
We believe that these characteristics deserve serious consid￾eration because of the widespread – and we believe misguided – 
belief among architects and clients that:
• Projects we design will not need to change if we do a good job 
in the first place;
• To achieve good results, full unified control of projects is 
needed, exercised across as many levels of the environmental 
hierarchy as possible;
• Architecture has the power to shape social structure and 
behavior rather than what is more often the case that social 
conventions shape what we do;
• Originality is paramount.
We think these beliefs produce a troubling disconnect between 
the actual forces at play in shaping contemporary built environ￾ment and how we discuss our work, conduct our practices and 
make investments. This disconnect renders us less able than we 
should be to contribute to the stewardship and resilience of the 
quality of everyday environment. These attitudes undermine 
needed cooperation in meeting the urgent challenge of climate 
change and achieving a fully circular economy.
At the same time, thankfully, we see colleagues, especially 
those in a younger generation of practitioners, who are work￾ing diligently to close that distance and overcome those obsolete 
attitudes, often under the radar and too seldom recognized and 
celebrated for their efforts.
Helping our professional culture overcome this distance and 
applauding those whose work recognizes these interconnected 
characteristics is why we have written this book. When these 
characteristics are familiar to readers, we hope to add to what is 
already understood and applied in practice. For those for whom 
they seem strange or contrarian, we hope you will read on with 
inquiring minds and trust that you may find something useful for 
your work.
SEPARATING DESIGN TASKS: DECIDING WHAT IS 
SHARED AND WHAT IS DECIDED INDEPENDENTLY
As discussed throughout the book, the Open Building approach 
is based on the separation of design tasks. When we talk about 
buildings, the first question to ask is this: what belongs to the 
more permanent architectural infrastructure or Base Building 
and what belongs to the Infill – that is, what can be expected 
to change every generation or sooner? This question can be 
answered not only on technical grounds but on the opinion that 
society has of the role of the individual occupancy (household, 
office tenant, healthcare operating unit, discrete building, etc.), 
i.e., on the amount of freedom we can exercise in shaping the ter￾ritory we occupy. This is why we say that separating design tasks 
must conform to social structure. In each design, this division 
must be explicitly stated. There is no formula for this. Nor will one 
way of separating design tasks necessarily reflect social structure 
in another locale, another project type or country or another time.
There is no ‘correct’ answer about what physical elements 
belong to each of the several design tasks. For example, one 
question that is incessantly – and rightly – debated in multifamily 
residential design is whether bathrooms are part of the Base Build￾ing’s design or, instead, are part of the Infill. It ought to be clear 
by now that such decisions about what belongs in the scope or 
responsibility of each of the separate tasks has very important 
design, technical, financial and legal consequences.
For a long time, perhaps since the advent of modernism and 
the hubris that accompanied it, professionals believed that their 
designs could and would shape lives and transform society. Many 117
F I V E C H A R A C T E R I S T I C S O F E V E RY D AY B U I LT E N V I R O N M E N T T H AT O P E N B U I L D I N G D E S I G N S F O R 
held this dream with the best of intentions. But to a greater extent 
than we may wish, things work the other way around. Society 
eventually puts its stamp on the built environment.
While we say that design tasks should be separated in large 
projects, we don’t mean that this separation necessitates dis￾tribution of design tasks to multiple design offices, although 
that usually happens, especially over long periods of time. One 
design firm or even one designer responsible for everything in a 
project can and should learn the skills needed to manage sepa￾ration of design tasks, too. The separation should therefore mir￾ror the distinction of different life cycles of parts of sustainable 
environments.
Separation of Design Tasks in Urban Design or 
Campus Planning
Urban designers, working on large urban extensions, new towns 
or academic campuses or industrial parks have long understood 
that one party cannot and does not ‘do it all.’ This, of course, is in 
contrast to the speculative and evocative proposals such as Frank 
Lloyd Wright’s Broadacre City.
Broadacre City represents an astonishing vision that specifically 
eschewed separation of design tasks. Wright personally designed 
everything from the placemats on the table, the dining room table 
and the buildings, the streets to the automobiles in the streets and 
the helicopters flying in the air, and everything in between. Tony 
Garnier’s Cite Industrial was another vision of this sort, as were 
most of Le Corbusier’s city planning projects. These and many 
other visionary built environments were never – or rarely – real￾ized, for practical if not political reasons. However, the vision of 
unified design of large urban projects remains very strong.
But in general, the job of urban designers has always been to 
set the stage for individual architectural interventions, on terri￾tories controlled by diverse parties. Working with separation of 
design tasks is, for them and their clients, a matter of course. We 
know from history that it is quite normal that sizable territories 
are planned, functions distributed, public spaces defined and their 
‘build-out’ accomplished over time by many different architects 
and other design professionals, working for different property 
owners. We have countless examples in historic urban areas in 
which an initial build-out was undertaken to less than the full 
capacity of the available site, to be later added to incrementally 
by successive owners and occupants.
One result of ignoring separation of design tasks appears in many 
if not most contemporary suburban developments which entirely fill 
their allowed buildable ‘footprints’ or establish regulations built-in 
to the projects’ rules that prohibit additions or exterior alterations, 
even within private territories. In these cases, the original designers 
and their clients do everything they can to control, from the top 
down, any possible changes, including changes in density.
Yet we also know of countless urban environments that 
gradually intensify in density over time, by subdividing territo￾ries, filling in empty space by adding built volume to meet new 
market demands and get higher utilization of expensive public 
infrastructure.
Sometimes, these urban design or campus design schemes 
involving separated design tasks have been and continue to be 
implemented with remarkably little controversy or explicit meth￾odology. Conventions guide actions. In the best cases, the results 
can be sustained by their ability to change and adapt, part by 
part, over time. These are exemplary built fields that engage pub￾lic and private interests and governance and that balance archi￾tectural variety as well as urban coherence, mentioned later when 
we discuss thematic design. Large sites are often developed with 
no explicit guidance for individual architects each doing a project, 
other than by the developer’s individual selection of design firms, 
trusting them to do a good job by following accepted contempo￾rary conventions and local building and zoning regulations. We 
know of too many such environments that are banal and well 
below the highest quality.
We also know of time-consuming but highly productive nego￾tiations around large models where all parties can see the work 
of others and agree to adjust their own design under the leader￾ship of a thoughtful and respected supervising architect. (See the 
Figure 1 Broadacre City by Frank Lloyd Wright (Credit: Sdoutz, F. 2011)118
F I V E C H A R A C T E R I S T I C S O F E V E RY D AY B U I LT E N V I R O N M E N T T H AT O P E N B U I L D I N G D E S I G N S F O R 
Sydhavnen/Sluseholmen case at the beginning of the book and 
what follows.)
Separation of Design Tasks Has Been Commonplace 
in Office Buildings and Shopping Centers
Commercial office architecture has experienced the separation of 
design tasks since the latter half of the 19th century. The advent of 
large high-rise buildings was, for example, enabled by the inven￾tion of steel construction, the elevator and the vented-trap toilet. 
This accompanied rapid urbanization and a boom in the forma￾tion of small private enterprises needing space for their offices but 
not wanting responsibility for entire buildings. Emerging technical 
and economic opportunities and evolving building regulations 
led to the separation of design tasks as a pragmatic response. 
Architectural texts discuss the new building type focused on the 
“warehouse-like building interiors with continuous, unbroken 
floor areas, waiting to be subdivided according to tenant require￾ments.” (See Figure 3)
It’s fair to say that no one paid particular attention to the ben￾efits of separating design tasks – it ‘came with the territory.’ Of 
course, new problems emerged. Boundary frictions in contracts, 
learning to divide large floor areas into independent territories, 
management of a host of new subcontractors moving in and out 
of already-occupied buildings, new financing tools, new regu￾lations, incorporating new technical products and their various 
suppliers and specialists, new heating, electrical and plumbing 
systems were all dealt with as circumstances arose. While this is 
now conventional practice, all problems arising from this practice 
have not been solved, as any facility manager will tell us. Of par￾ticular relevance to the Open Building approach is the continuing 
and problematic practice, discussed frequently in what follows, 
of running drainage piping from plumbing fixtures dispersed on 
one floor plate downward through the floor slabs into the ceiling 
of tenant spaces below. This, of course, violates the principle of 
territorial autonomy.
But something very important was happening during the 
evolution of office properties. A new decision-making level was 
emerging in the production and transformation of a building 
stock. We can say that this new level – and with it the natural 
Figure 2 Sydhavnen/Sluseholmen Copenhagen Harbor renovation pro￾ject. Planning  & Urban Design:  Soeters Van Eldonk Ponec architecten 
(Sjoerd Soeters). Working model that showed the progress of designs 
of every block (Source: Soeters Van Eldonk Ponec architecten (Sjoerd 
Soeters))
separation of design tasks – became a powerful reality in office 
buildings. In the late 1950s, several large furniture companies, 
seeing a growing market for their products and opportunities to 
expand the definition of ‘furnishings’ in the office sector, began 
to market what came to be known as ‘systems furniture’ (Propst, 
1968). These products accompanied changes in depreciation 
rates in the tax code, allowing an entire class of ‘movable’ prod￾ucts not attached to the building as real estate to be ‘written off’ 
in a much shorter time than the buildings in which they were 
installed. These new products/services included various kinds of 
raised floors for horizontal distribution of cabling and air-handling 
systems within the legal and fire boundaries of demised spaces, 
new partitioning and ceiling and lighting systems, quick-connect 
power and data cabling and so on.
Since then, the ‘systems furniture’ market has expanded to 
include more than a dozen multinational companies, with fran￾chised subsidiaries and dedicated installation teams. A Secondary 
market for used systems furniture grew, as did many subsidiary 
product/systems and services. This period also saw the emergence 
of separate divisions within large design and general contracting 
offices specializing in ‘tenant work’ or ‘fit-out.’
This was also the period during which the rapid rise of the 
interior design profession took place to take charge of this new 119
F I V E C H A R A C T E R I S T I C S O F E V E RY D AY B U I LT E N V I R O N M E N T T H AT O P E N B U I L D I N G D E S I G N S F O R 
level of intervention. This new professional practice quickly came 
into conflict with the architecture profession’s understanding of 
professional licensing and its professional ‘sphere of control.’ Uni￾versity degree programs in interior design and interior architecture 
had emerged. In North America, more than half the states in the 
US, Puerto Rico and the Canadian Provinces passed some form 
of interior design legislation. A certification examination (www.
cidq.org) became the industry’s recognized indicator of profi￾ciency in interior design principles and a designer’s commitment 
to that profession.
The inability and reluctance of the architecture profession to 
recognize and help clarify the emergence of this new ‘level of 
intervention’ was, of course, at the root of the conflict.
Over time, task separation took on a kind of normalcy in the 
real estate sector for office buildings. General contractors and sub￾contractors knew their roles, as did architects and interior archi￾tects, product manufacturers, building code officials and lenders. 
On a few occasions, a singularly powerful party tried to recon￾figure these roles. One was an initiative by the large furniture 
company Steelcase, which, in partnership with a large real estate 
investment firm, embarked on an ambitious development called 
Workstage. In the late-1990s, it organized itself to provide a ser￾vice to clients of a systematized Base Building of standard steel 
structural components organized on a 40" grid, a raised floor for 
horizontal distribution of cabling and conditioned air (provided 
by Tate, a large company specializing in this kind of product), 
and also provided all interior tenant work or fit-out using a pat￾ented (and astonishingly complex) ‘closed’ system called Path￾ways (which was subsequently withdrawn from the market). 
Each building using this system had an exterior skin designed by 
a separate architect to fit the particular features of each site. The 
approach was used for medical, office and educational facilities 
before closing down during a severe economic downturn. To our 
knowledge, this example has never been studied to draw lessons 
from it (ftp://ftp.steelcase.com/pub/158D/_pdfdocs/Pathway￾sTechWalls.pdf).
Governmental facilities in the United States such as office 
buildings also began to apply separation of design tasks as a 
practical measure, because the ‘churn’ of uses in these buildings, 
as in the commercial sector, is frequent and could not be man￾aged without this strategy. There remains little current difference 
now between office buildings constructed for government agen￾cies and offices in the private market. One initiative in particular 
pushed this development. In the 1970s, the U.S. General Ser￾vices Administration (the arm of the US government responsible 
for procuring space for government agencies worldwide) made 
a concerted effort, in the GSA/PBS Building Systems Program, 
to adopt a two-step procurement process that distinguished the 
building’s core and shell from the more systematized parts that 
go inside to form office spaces (Ventre, 1983). Again, this initia￾tive has not been subjected to thorough longitudinal studies for 
lessons learned.
Separation of Design Tasks Is Becoming Familiar in Healthcare 
Facilities
Application of the principle of separating design tasks is increas￾ingly evident internationally in healthcare facility construction, as 
discussed in the three projects presented at the beginning of the 
book and in previous work (e.g., Kendall, 2019).
More than any other building type, hospitals are function￾ally diverse and financially and technically complex. Changes in 
demographics, diseases and their treatment, equipment, doctors’ 
practices and preferences, insurance programs and regulations are 
forcing the emergence of a shorter use-life Infill level, correspond￾ing directly to healthcare functions that are the basis for the fiscal 
management and insurance reimbursements of most healthcare 
organizations.
This emergent Infill level is, in many instances, now under￾taken by design teams and contractors other than the teams 
which designed the Base Buildings. This happens as a matter of 
course even if the initial project was not planned for change. It is 
also occurring when clients order ‘shell spaces’ to be constructed 
in the initial investment (when financing, interest rates, etc. are 
Figure 3 Holabird and Roche Marquette Building, Chicago, 1894. In most 
of these buildings, large portions of every floor were left without parti￾tions so that they could be subdivided later to suit the tenants’ changing 
requirements (Source: Gideon, 1963)120
F I V E C H A R A C T E R I S T I C S O F E V E RY D AY B U I LT E N V I R O N M E N T T H AT O P E N B U I L D I N G D E S I G N S F O R 
supportive). Later, when the time comes to occupy these spaces, 
design firms other than the original firm often win the contracts 
to do the work.
Currently, it is not exceptional that a five- to seven-year period 
elapses between initiating the planning process for a large medi￾cal facility and start of operations. Much of that time is normally 
spent determining the specifics of the Infill and equipment in con￾sultation with doctors, nurses, administrators and others, during 
which time progress on overall design is difficult, if not put on 
hold. The evidence is that departmental requirements (e.g., sur￾gery, pediatrics, laboratories, emergency) and equipment specif￾ics evolve during the design phase in any case, in part because 
heads of departments are transient and new leadership demands 
something different than their predecessors, but also because of 
innovation in products, competition, changes in reimbursement 
policies and so on.
To some extent, these projects are obsolete when they are first 
occupied. However, if a healthcare Base Building is conceived of 
(and financed and approved) as a design task by itself, using a 
well-organized capacity analysis (discussed later), construction 
can commence and functional layouts and equipment acquisition 
can be deferred without disturbing the construction schedule. 
There is already a partial distinction of this kind of separation of 
design tasks in the procurement of healthcare facilities for the 
United States Defense Health Agency called initial outfitting and 
transition (Military Standard 1691, 2016).
During 2019–2022, the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic shone 
a glaring light on the importance of medical facilities capable of 
rapid adaptation to new health services delivery demands. What 
is not clear is whether the separation of design tasks is explicitly 
or methodically employed in the initial design process within a 
single design firm doing a large healthcare project. We suspect 
methodical approaches are rare, making their improvement more 
difficult. This deserves much more study.
Multifamily and Attached Housing Continues to Ignore 
Separation of Design Tasks
Multifamily residential architecture remains an outlier in terms of 
separation of design tasks. This is in spite the fact that it makes 
up a much larger part of urban fabric – and aggregate real prop￾erty investment – than any other building use. In many countries, 
in aggregate, more human and material resources are consumed 
in adjustments to this building stock than new residential con￾struction to meet new requirements and market conditions in any 
given year.
As any building official, contractor, architect or occupant can 
explain, the work of adjusting residential buildings is too full 
of conflict, too expensive, too wasteful and takes too long. We 
believe that in large measure, these problems result from the fact 
that this project type follows an obsolete paradigm. Multifamily 
housing is conceived of, financed, designed, approved, built and 
managed as a single, unitary professional product.
It is interesting to note, however, that there were early exper￾iments pointing in another direction. The advent of the high￾rise buildings of ‘the Chicago School’ in the second half of the 
19th century did see some apartment buildings constructed 
with removable partitions “so that a suite of five rooms could 
be thrown together into one” (Gideon, 1963). Yet this observa￾tion of change in Gideon and other writings of that time was not 
framed systemically and was never taken as something to study; 
no mention of design task separation or levels of intervention or 
independent units of occupancy is made. The same is generally 
true for most of the literature and reporting on ‘flexible housing.’
Earlier in the book, we presented several exemplary cases from 
a growing number of multifamily projects in which design task 
separation was central. At the end of the book, we return to the 
roots of the Supports concept and discuss how the emergence of 
an Infill level and with it an Infill industry could reshape the cul￾ture of the residential building industry, enabling the separation 
of design tasks to begin to replace the unitary single design task 
model dominating the field so far.
Figure 4 AZ Groeninge Hospital, Belgium. The empty Base Building (Photo 
credit: Toon Grobet Architect: Baumschlager Eberle Architects)121
F I V E C H A R A C T E R I S T I C S O F E V E RY D AY B U I LT E N V I R O N M E N T T H AT O P E N B U I L D I N G D E S I G N S F O R 
THEMATIC DESIGN: SHARING THEMES AND MAKING 
VARIATIONS
Enabling Coherence with Variety
Once we take seriously the idea of separating design tasks, both 
in initial design but also over time, it is almost inescapable that 
we will have to recognize that sharing thematic qualities is the 
glue that helps assure coherent variation. We can share thematic 
qualities such as patterns (such as the margin or way of pass￾ing between public and private space or the design of façades 
on a street) and systems (both stylistic and technical) of various 
kinds. Sharing these themes, we can make variations on them. 
This is exciting and creative work. Doing so means that we can’t 
keep insisting that our work must be wholly unique, special and 
invented anew each time.
Just to be clear: advocating that architects share themes does 
not argue for uniformity – stylistic or otherwise – which is an oft￾heard criticism of such movements as New Urbanism. Nor does it 
sanction the opposite and recurrent propensity to design entirely 
without connection to context. Sometimes, thematic qualities are 
largely implicit or are conveyed informally. Sometimes, they must 
be methodically documented to assure that they are really under￾stood. This begs the question of how these qualities are repre￾sented. Also, the number of thematic qualities is not fixed. But 
what we insist on is that the quality and longevity of everyday 
environment is only successful when we recognize the impor￾tance of shared thematic qualities – that is, what is held in com￾mon. If other characteristics we are discussing appear to focus on 
technique, this one focuses on matters of environmental coher￾ence and quality. (See, for example, the Westpolder Bolwerk case 
shown earlier.)
We might assume that architects and other design profession￾als working on separated design tasks all understand quite well 
what we’re saying. We may be told that colleagues understand 
intuitively how to design in a neighborly way, sharing some archi￾tectural qualities while differentiating their work by using variants 
on the shared themes or introducing new ones. But it’s obvious 
when we look around that the skill at making variants is not well 
developed.
It’s important to address sharing thematic qualities directly 
because it goes against the grain of much that we have been 
taught to value in our architectural education and that some 
part of the general public has come to expect. It goes against 
the grain of the widespread misunderstanding that architecture is 
an art form. Architectural education in general stresses individual 
self-expression, invention, breaking the rules and the production 
of unique projects.
We also recognize that the growth of historic preservation 
movements around the world and the adoption of style-based 
‘form-based codes’ in the US are all, in part, a revolt against the 
ethos of hyper individuality in design. We need to say that we 
have absolutely no desire to thwart invention or self-expression, 
only to say that everything can’t be unique.
Today, there are always explicit governmental regulations con￾cerning use, height, bulk, setbacks and other stipulations such 
as ground-level/street-front transparency and use, energy and 
seismic codes, etc. In some cases, there are detailed stipulations 
requiring adherence to historic features of the context when an 
area has been declared a historic district. That said, the habit of 
being resistant to the regulatory environment is passed on from 
the academic training of architects, when students are encour￾aged quite frequently to ‘break the rules.’ When asked what a 
better set of ‘rules of the game’ might be, most students and 
practitioners will not be prepared to give a coherent response.
It’s therefore important to study the way large sites are devel￾oped and evolve over many decades with a balance of both gov￾ernmental regulations and largely implicit themes. In everyday 
environment, if we watch long enough, and in the best cases, 
new work picks up themes, patterns and systems ‘baked in’ to 
the conventions characteristic of the surrounding urban fabric. 
Variants on regulation-imposed themes or themes agreed to by 
architects and their clients may appear that introduce a new ele￾ment or a new arrangement, at which point the social body in 
favor of the overall system can reject the new idea as an incidental 
occurrence or adopt it as an attractive innovation, thereby chang￾ing the structure of the underlying ‘thematic system’ somewhat. 
Thanks to their being socially embedded and adaptable, thematic 122
F I V E C H A R A C T E R I S T I C S O F E V E RY D AY B U I LT E N V I R O N M E N T T H AT O P E N B U I L D I N G D E S I G N S F O R 
systems – either publicly mandated or privately adopted – can live 
a very long time, albeit always evolving. The balance between 
theme and variations is the most fascinating aspect of any built 
fabric.
A Natural Phenomenon
Everyday environments that we admire and love to visit – and 
live in – have always been highly thematic. We have no trou￾ble recognizing Venetian Gothic palaces, Amsterdam canal 
houses (Figure  5), London’s Georgian terraced houses, Kyoto’s 
Machiya dwellings (Figure 9) or Philadelphia row houses as just a 
few examples of form families. More humble examples abound. 
Other built fabrics, on first sight, may seem chaotic and difficult to 
read – for example, any suburban commercial strip development 
– but on closer scrutiny, we always find thematic aspects even if 
we judge them to be banal or poorly handled. They are insepara￾ble parts of the urban fabrics that were shaped with them.
In the past, biased Western observers thought traditional Mid￾dle Eastern urban environments were disorganized. In fact, they 
have a highly structured thematic complexity. Their coherence in 
variety came about in a largely informal manner. There are many 
other examples.
The famous ‘Crescents’ in 18th-century Bath, by father and 
son Wood, were originally designed as identical houses behind 
a common monumental façade. But since home ownership was 
dispersed, individual houses changed in time: expansions were 
made in ‘the back’ spaces, and interior spaces were altered. But 
the façades remained largely unaltered by common consent. The 
result, eventually, was similar to the Place Vendome distinction: 
variation behind an urban screen. Eventually, similar projects with 
unified façades came about in English domestic architecture. Most 
of them were built for speculation. Variations in the house plan 
might be made already when a house was sold before building 
started but otherwise would surely come later.
Boston’s Back Bay is another example of a thematically coher￾ent mixed-use environment. Stately row houses along straight 
streets exhibit a few important thematic qualities, with many 
variations (Figure 6a). Stretching along several blocks, a ‘margin’ 
is evident between the sidewalk and the building’s façade. In 
that ‘margin’ are steps up to the main floor, raised 2 m or 6". 
about the public sidewalk. In that margin are steps leading to a 
lower level that is now sometimes a separate dwelling or rented 
flat, or was at one time a service entry (Figure 6b). That lower 
level opens out to a garden in the rear, sometimes accessed by 
an alley and garages for cars. This pattern is not unique; it can 
be found in London and Glasgow’s 18th- and 19th-century 
urban fabrics.
Antonio Gaudi’s famous apartment building, La Pedrera, in 
Barcelona is rightly considered unique  (Figure  7). But it is also 
part of the famous 19th-century Barcelona fabric. Like most other 
buildings in that neighborhood, it has ground-floor spaces that 
are accessible from the street for shops, workplaces and offices, 
a formal carriage entrance that penetrates the building and leads 
Figure 5 Amsterdam canal houses and stoops (Photo credit: John 
Habraken)
Figure 6a Boston’s Back Bay showing the thematic variety that, over more 
than a century, has made this part of the city one of the most desirable 
places to live. Dominantly residential, large homes have often been subdi￾vided into apartments for rent or sale or for professional offices. Ground￾level commercial enterprises line some streets (Source: Open source)123
F I V E C H A R A C T E R I S T I C S O F E V E RY D AY B U I LT E N V I R O N M E N T T H AT O P E N B U I L D I N G D E S I G N S F O R 
visitors to an open stairway which leads toward the main floor 
above and service courtyards that bring light into the back rooms 
of the apartments. Moreover, building height, floor heights and 
bay sizes are comparable with those of the other buildings in the 
neighborhood and thereby maintain a consistent architectural 
scale. In short, Gaudi’s contribution fits into the urban fabric that 
it is part of as much as it stands out.
Throughout history, professional designers have always 
worked with familiar built environments, often cultivating/work￾ing with what they found in their context to design variations 
on existing themes. Or they have drawn lessons from them to 
make the few special buildings that, in their variation and excep￾tionalism, reinforced by contrast the thematic coherence of the 
place. It’s wonderful to recognize that every culture has its own 
conventions, habits, ways of building and ways of working and 
using space. Recognizing this – and working with it – can quiet 
our anxieties that the world is becoming more and more homo￾geneous. Designers never invented built environments. But with 
modern times, we thought we could do that. We hope that read￾ers understand why that belief can no longer hold.
In what follows, we briefly discuss two thematic qualities of 
many: patterns and systems.
Patterns
Not long after Christopher Alexander’s Pattern Language came to 
our attention in the 1970s (Alexander, 1977), an architect friend 
Figure 6b The ‘margin’ separating the public sidewalk and the continuous 
row of stately houses in Boston’s Back Bay (Photo credit: Paul Lukez)
Figure 7 La Pedrera. Architect: Antonio Gaudi (Photo credit: Maria Laura 
Jofre)
Figure 8 Kyoto Machiya. In the historic fabric of Kyoto, we can see street 
after street of houses sharing the same architectural themes but each dif￾ferent (Photo credit: Stephen Kendall)124
F I V E C H A R A C T E R I S T I C S O F E V E RY D AY B U I LT E N V I R O N M E N T T H AT O P E N B U I L D I N G D E S I G N S F O R 
talked about a job designing a neighborhood for a housing asso￾ciation. At the first work session, when the client team expected a 
first sketch plan, he showed images of all kinds of streets, building 
types, parking solutions and so on. He did so to start a conver￾sation: “Is this the kind of streets you have in mind? Or is this a 
closer example? How about parking like this? How about front 
yards, and what about trees and sidewalks?”
He came to the next meeting with alternatives for street–
house relations, parking solutions, playgrounds, house types, 
street profiles (setbacks) and landscaping. He made it clear that 
he was seeking to reach an understanding as to what the client 
and he would work on next.
Similar sessions were repeated in this way. The client team 
became restless, afraid that time was being wasted. Finally, they 
were shown a detailed plan for the neighborhood. Thanks to the 
preceding process, nothing in it was foreign to them. A mean￾ingful, in-depth discussion could follow. Obviously, the client 
team did not accept everything proposed, but there was common 
ground, and therefore, no one was shy in suggesting changes, 
confident that they knew what they were talking about. The pro￾cess turned out to be efficient and productive.
This example makes us think of the use of patterns in the way 
Alexander suggested. There are similarities, but there is an impor￾tant difference. In the case described, the decision as to what pat￾terns should be used was the outcome of a dialogue. The ‘good’ 
pattern was the pattern accepted by both architect and client, not 
something delivered as an a priori solution based on ‘scientific’ 
research, as Alexander seems to suggest.
Another colleague uses Alexander’s patterns in a more formal 
manner. He used patterns when designing a teaching hospital. 
Asked to interview medical doctors and their staff to find out 
what their needs were, he wrote patterns and submitted them 
to the users for discussion and approval. He asked users to sug￾gest patterns themselves. This provided a structured format for 
what otherwise might have been a discussion that was too open￾ended or too technical a process for the users to be comfortable 
with. Sharing the principles of pattern formulation, both architect 
and user group could generate proposals and judge those put 
forward. Jointly accepted patterns became part of a ‘program’ or 
‘brief,’ acquiring contractual status.
It seems that the power of patterns is exactly that people 
know them and agree to apply them and, by doing so, make the 
built environment a collective endeavor in which architects would 
benefit by participating. Without this conventional dimension, 
patterns are at risk of becoming catalogue items for architects to 
pick and choose from.
Seen this way, patterns are good instruments for coming to 
agreement on qualities in the environment. They are limited 
in scope, usually comprising a few parts in a certain spatial 
relationship, and therefore lend themselves to clear description 
and focused discussion. Patterns help to establish common 
ground with those who inhabit, pay for, and manage what we 
design. This provides much-needed help because, in today’s 
pluriform world, we meet different environmental preferences 
from place to place and problem to problem. We need ways 
to find our bearings and connect to the social body we serve 
rather than coming with a set of predetermined patterns or 
solutions.
Systems, Variants and Structure
Systems occur where a number of parts, chosen from a predeter￾mined set, are distributed following rules of selection and relation. 
All systems have thematic qualities. Although we make instances 
of our own within a system, the system itself is a collective prop￾erty shared by a social body.
Systems can have a highly architectural content. Archi￾tects and builders in 17th-century Amsterdam, for instance, or 
19th-century Bilbao, Spain, produced façades of strong and con￾sistent kinship (Figures 5 and 9). Everyone uses the same set of 
parts – windows, doors, gables, bays – detailing them in a similar 
way and arranging them, according to shared rules, into instances 
of the same thematic system. While each façade has its individual 
identity, and designers of many are known, the system of which 
they are instances is a collective creation of great sophistication.
The façade system of NEXT21, a project shown at the begin￾ning of the book, is a good example of this.125
F I V E C H A R A C T E R I S T I C S O F E V E RY D AY B U I LT E N V I R O N M E N T T H AT O P E N B U I L D I N G D E S I G N S F O R 
These façades are systems with a high architectural content. 
The same is true of other examples like, for instance, the classicist 
system of architectural orders. Technical systems are more mal￾leable – post-and-beam structures, for example, or load-bearing 
masonry walls combined with timber floors and roofs. These are 
systems within which we can build a wide variety of forms. They 
each allow a range of possible architectures. But nevertheless, 
they are not neutral and are able to inspire architectural articula￾tion. Purely technical systems like those for plumbing or various 
utilities impose their constraints on form-making as well, but at a 
much larger distance from architectural form-making.
If the systems concept can be interpreted so widely as to range 
from the classical orders to plumbing, we need to appreciate that 
in all cases, there is a kind of social contract among those apply￾ing these systems. The purpose may vary from the aesthetic and 
symbolic to the purely practical, but the mechanism is the same: 
certain parties agree to work with certain parts in certain relations. 
They shape the parts accordingly and deploy them following rela￾tional rules. To operate in a system is to join a social body. To 
change a system is to convince others to change their mode of 
operation.
Because systems must live in a social body willing to sustain 
them, most successful examples have not been invented but were 
gradually developed within a society of actors. In that sense, 
systems have vernacular properties. What we normally call ‘ver￾nacular’ systems – suggesting a lack of formal authorship or pro￾fessionalism – are among the most resilient and durable. The story 
of Hassan Fathy’s study and advocacy of the mud-brick vaulting 
systems of upper Egypt gives us a good example of how a tech￾nical system of strong architectural quality, in use for millennia, 
can die out, not for want of performance but because the social 
body sustaining it shifts its allegiance to other ways of building for 
largely social reasons.
All systems, even the very high-tech ones, develop, change 
and come alive through use. To learn about them, we should con￾nect to the group that applies them. Books will only tell us what 
is no longer in discussion, what is conventional. The fully docu￾mented system may well be a dead system.
In premodern times, designers and builders, as well as their 
clients, operated within a limited and well-established range of 
systems. There were fixed ways to build and to design. Although 
we may be sure that over time, such systems changed like all 
living entities do, their change was incremental, and the sys￾tems endured. One could operate for a lifetime within the same 
systemics.
Today’s world is astonishingly pluriform. The range of environ￾mental systems has expanded dramatically, as noted before. At 
the high end, we have a large number of infrastructures for trans￾portation and utilities that were unknown one or two generations 
ago. At the low end, we have an extension of these utilities – 
heating, ventilation, telephone, television, computing, electric 
power, gas, plumbing and so on – bringing conduits of all kinds, 
navigating the built environment to serve each nook and cranny 
of it. In the midrange where habitable space is made, we have 
steel, concrete, masonry, timber structures and a host of hybrid 
cases to work with.
Designing with Themes
The Open Building approach means cultivation of the five char￾acteristics of everyday environment we’ve been discussing. This 
implies designing with themes and exploring variations on them. 
For many of us, this requires a change in attitude as well as devel￾opment of particular skills. Many questions certainly arise. How 
are we to find a good balance between theme and variation, 
between what we share and what we do individually? How do 
themes come about in the first place? How to decide, for instance, 
on the consistent adoption of a building type or entryway pattern, 
or familiar issues like setback rules and height restrictions? Is it by 
top-down rules, collective ad-hoc agreements or implicit common 
understandings among designers? This balance can be studied 
and discussed and skills learned to artfully handle it.
Figure 9 Bay windows in Bilbao, an example of the use of a pattern by 
different architects in great variety (Photo credit: Stephen Kendall)126
F I V E C H A R A C T E R I S T I C S O F E V E RY D AY B U I LT E N V I R O N M E N T T H AT O P E N B U I L D I N G D E S I G N S F O R 
Often a single higher-level design offers a shared context for 
many lower-level designs and, by doing so, sets thematic con￾straints for them that, to endure, are considered reasonable and 
representative. Urban design, for instance, makes a shared con￾text for individual architectural designs, assuming they will follow 
certain architectural types or patterns. In a similar way, a Base 
Building design makes a shared context for individual units of 
occupancy of a certain kind. How do we know if a higher-level 
design offers the right context for lower-level design preferences? 
How do we inspire lower-level variety?
All of the cases presented at the beginning of the book show 
responses to these questions, demonstrating the wide variety of 
technical and architectural approaches that are possible.
All such questions have to do with relations among designers. 
These relations are relations of forms; forms sharing certain 
aspects, forms interpreting a given context, forms setting a con￾text for others. In fact, all designing is intervention, and each 
intervention triggers response. Change of form is the language 
we share.
Nevertheless, we face a conundrum. For one thing, given the 
fierce search for competitive advantage among architecture firms, 
there is scant evidence today of a desire to build an evolving, 
renewable and shared architectural knowledge base consonant 
with the new realities of the built environment: sustainability, 
resilience and the need to plan our buildings and neighborhoods 
for longevity and, at the same time, incremental change.
THE IMPORTANCE OF TERRITORY
We know instinctively – and from practical experience – that 
when they are contested, territorial boundaries are the source of 
friction. But when boundaries are settled and respected, we can 
fruitfully do our work and distribute control in sensible ways. In 
one sense, this is already well understood in everyday practice – 
we always have ‘contract boundaries,’ defining the physical scope 
of a design project and of each consultant.
We can’t emphasize enough the importance of under￾standing territory – and, with it, the control of space – as a 
key characteristic we need to understand for successful Open 
Building design. We instinctively understand what it means to 
control space. We know what it means to lock a door to keep 
others out, but we also understand that we are always free to 
leave the space we control. Otherwise, we are prisoners. We 
also instinctively understand that to enter a neighbor’s territory, 
we move ‘upward’ in the environmental hierarchy into a shared 
or ‘public’ space, then knock on the neighbor’s door and, on 
entering, move ‘downward’ in the environmental hierarchy into 
our neighbors’ private territory. (This concept is fully explained 
in Habraken, 1998.)
The technical implications of territorial boundaries are very 
important to successful separation of design tasks and implemen￾tation of large projects of many kinds. We explain this further 
on. It is also clear that understanding such boundaries supports 
innovative technical and legal solutions such as new utility infra￾structure systems, new façade systems and the emergence of an 
Infill industry – discussed later.
Understanding Territory Helps Us with the Distribution of 
Control
When we think about it, the question of ‘who controls what 
and when’ is related to territory and is therefore crucial when 
we design large projects. Control is, by definition, the exclusive 
Figure 10 A  gate into a Hutong in Beijing (Source: Photo by Stephen 
Kendall)127
F I V E C H A R A C T E R I S T I C S O F E V E RY D AY B U I LT E N V I R O N M E N T T H AT O P E N B U I L D I N G D E S I G N S F O R 
ability of a party to transform some part of an environment in 
their ‘territory.’
Control is the central operational relationship between human 
beings and everything (space and material) that is the stuff of 
built environment. Control, to be clear, does not imply owner￾ship; it does, however, imply the exclusive power of a party to 
change some physical part or limit access to a territory over some 
period of time. Control can be and often is delegated.
Territory and the distribution of control reveals itself most clearly 
when we observe change. In this sense, a study of control in the 
built environment is akin to how scientists understand the behav￾ior of social and natural systems. In our considerations, we can 
never really know why control is exercised in one way or another 
or, for that matter, the ‘meaning’ of that exercise. Everyone, 
not only experts, exercises some control over built environment 
to make it come alive. It’s the action that counts. We see this in 
people – individually or acting together – arranging books on a 
bookshelf, moving furniture around, tearing down or adding a 
wall to open or divide a space, enclosing a balcony, building a new 
building or opening up space for a park in an existing urban fabric.
For some strange reason, the word ‘control,’ or even ‘power,’ 
is seldom heard or used in professional design discourse. Yet cen￾tralizing or unifying control has been a dream of architects and 
clients for a very long time. We only have to think about Frank 
Lloyd Wright’s or Le Corbusier’s audacious plans, mentioned 
before. Unified control is now euphemistically called ‘integration.’ 
The argument is that integration will make the decision-making 
process more efficient and assure quality. What it really means is 
eliminating decision-makers. But there are consequences of cut￾ting out parties from having a voice. Attempts at top-down uni￾fied control usually produce a governance and technical rigidity 
that can cause difficulties later. Cutting ordinary citizens off from 
having control of their immediate dwelling space in multifamily 
projects, for example, has caused many severe problems too well 
documented to have to repeat here.
A simple example may suffice to make the idea of territorial 
control palpable.
Consider a room in a retirement home, inhabited by an elderly 
lady. All of her furniture, as well as plants, pictures, photographs 
and other mementos of a long life, have been placed reflecting 
her preferences. She is free to rearrange the furnishings and her 
other things however she pleases. Her right to do so is funda￾mental and indisputable. These disparate objects share a common 
attribute: their placement relative to one another – the very fact 
that they are in the room at all – depends on the inhabitant’s 
action – her control. She can move things around and determine 
their relative position. She can also discard things, give them to 
grandchildren or friends, or add others she receives. These parts 
within her dwelling space are under her control. She may or may 
not have similar control of the color of the walls, the curtains 
on the windows, and most certainly will not have control over 
the size of the bathroom or the selection and arrangement of its 
fixtures. She almost certainly has control of the temperature in 
the room.
The line between what the elderly lady can control and what is 
outside her control constitutes an essential question in the design 
of her environment.
Control of Space
Control of space can’t just simply mean the possibility for trans￾formation of space because, obviously, transforming space 
requires moving the material parts that make that space – that 
is, controlling form. But we know that controlling space is dis￾tinct from controlling form. Everyone understands that a com￾plex form, for example, an office building, can harbor a variety of 
territorial claims of space in a given form, claims that can and do 
change as tenant spaces get bigger or shrink. From that, we can 
see that space – and territory – and material configurations (form) 
are inseparable.
Territorial control is the ability to close a space, to restrict 
entry – the ability to defend a space against unwanted intrusion. 
Nation-states exercise territorial control, and when it is violated, 
Figure 11 A living room in the Molenvliet project shown earlier (Photo 
credit: Stephen Kendall)128
F I V E C H A R A C T E R I S T I C S O F E V E RY D AY B U I LT E N V I R O N M E N T T H AT O P E N B U I L D I N G D E S I G N S F O R 
the intrusion can cause war. On a more domestic scale, Oscar 
Newman wrote about ‘defensible space’ in his book of that title. 
He brought the concept of territory into discussions of public 
safety in housing environments in the 1970s (Newman, 1973). 
However, this work was forgotten and did not enter the general 
architectural discourse.
Space under control is territorial. Distinguishing territory is 
apparently a universally understood part of culture, yet it is mani￾fested quite differently in different cultures. It is too often forgot￾ten or ignored as a generator of form. Our generation doesn’t 
think much about territory as something architectural. In history, 
territory was well understood. We used gates, front yards no mat￾ter how small (spatial margins, examples of which follow later) 
and formal elements of spatial hierarchy. We made space at the 
front door in apartment buildings to decorate and where a baby 
stroller could be parked safely. Perhaps starting in modernist times, 
signs of territory were eschewed in favor of uninterrupted flow of 
space. Now we too often handle territory by invisible electronic 
means devoid of architectural significance. We seem not to think 
of territory as inspiring. Ubiquitous glass façades of buildings of 
all kinds are one result of a lack of territorial understanding, as is 
the placement of front doors immediately on the property line on 
the sidewalk or apartment building corridor, lacking any margin 
for variation.
THE INHERENT HIERARCHY IN BUILT ENVIRONMENT
Levels
When we say that there is a hierarchical structure to the built 
environment, we need to mention again the concept of ‘levels.’ 
This concept is not really new. As we noted before, it is borne out 
in the names we have developed for different kinds of profession￾als, each responsible for a certain ‘domain’ or ‘scope’ of work. We 
are very familiar with the idea that urban designers ‘operate on 
another level’ than architects. This means, in this instance, that 
the built environment can be divided into two groups of things: 
those that are decided by urban designers and those that are the 
concern of architects.
When urban designers are doing their work, they look ‘up’ 
in the environmental hierarchy to see the stage set by urban 
planners. At the same time, they look ‘down’ in the hierarchy in 
setting the stage for those that design buildings that come and 
go on the urban design stage. Those designing buildings similarly 
look ‘up’ to understand the constraints and themes set out by the 
urban design, and ‘down’ in the hierarchy in setting the stage for 
the more mutable building parts, spaces and functions (the Infill); 
and so on.
We need designers to put themselves on these different lev￾els to become familiar with how this environmental hierarchy 
works – both ‘vertical’ relations, as noted, and ‘horizontal’ rela￾tions, such as, for example, designers working at the same level as 
other architects, each designing part of a master-planned campus 
or a neighborhood (see, for example, the urban design projects 
shown at the beginning of the book). Recognizing these levels – 
in their formal, technical and territorial sense – makes clear that 
we need good skills and methods to help us to manage com￾munication and to handle the complexity and the distribution of 
control effectively.
The use of levels is another way to explain the work of design￾ers of any conventionally defined infrastructure system such as 
an electrical grid, public wastewater system or transit system. 
They, too, need good methods to design and manage these 
complex-adaptive physical/spatial systems. In such infrastructure 
systems, clear delineation of levels of intervention and effective 
interfaces enable substitution of higher-performing parts and 
Figure 12 A  typical front door in a high-rise apartment building. This 
example is at the end of a corridor, giving a small opportunity for the 
resident to place personal possessions outside the door and in the ‘public’ 
space (Photo credit: Stephen Kendall)129
F I V E C H A R A C T E R I S T I C S O F E V E RY D AY B U I LT E N V I R O N M E N T T H AT O P E N B U I L D I N G D E S I G N S F O R 
Figure 13 The concept of levels, showing both physical systems and terri￾torial units and their relationships (Source: Habraken, 1998)
improved performance of the whole system. Most such infra￾structure systems cross numerous territorial boundaries. And 
most operate by way of distributed control – that is, no single 
party finances, approves, constructs or manages the entirety of 
the system.
Sometimes, certain levels aren’t in evidence. For example, 
traditional Japanese houses have no ‘furniture’ level. Sometimes, 
new levels are born, as with the emergence of an Infill level in 
the design, production and adaptation of large, complex build￾ings. We discuss this in several places in the book and how, in the 
industry producing multifamily residential projects, an Infill level 
is still missing.
The Levels Model Helps in Several Important Ways
The Levels concept allows us to choose the right process: we con￾sider the different parties involved and can decide how respon￾sibilities are best distributed. We also see how different projects 
can be structured differently with their own patterns of control 
distribution. As such it is a planning tool.
In the levels model, both professionals and nonprofessionals 
can have a place. The need to arrive at the most effective solution 
with the best possible use of resources will determine the control 
distribution. In some cases, users can do a better job; in others, 
professionals must do it. The most important point is that on each 
level, for each subsystem, the responsible parties can be clearly 
identified and roles documented to avoid misunderstandings.
As already noted, change over time can be related to levels. 
Change on a lower level is easier and can occur more frequently 
than change on a higher level.
To fit a project into the local urban context is always the 
responsibility of professional urban designers and architects. Their 
expertise should particularly be occupied with this question, leav￾ing the lower-level decisions to those who live and work in the 
buildings, possibly, if not necessarily, hiring professionals to do the 
work. Several of the cases presented at the beginning of the book 
provide good examples, such as the TILA and TOPUP residential 
projects.
Uniformity can be efficient when one party has to do many 
things. To build a Base Building, for instance, repetition of the 
same bay, structural grid or mechanical shaft is most efficient. 
But when using levels, when spatial and physical systems operate 
on their own levels, different parties can use the same system 
simultaneously and work in parallel. Separation of the lower-level 
systems from the higher level allows for their change without dis￾turbing the higher level. If that condition is fulfilled, adaptation 
to individual needs on the lower level is easy and efficient. In 
those instances, variety is not the purpose but the result. Molen￾vliet/Papendrecht, shown at the beginning of the book, is a good 
example.
The Base Building level can be designed to respond to local 
lifestyles, environmental conditions, work patterns and cultural 
values. This is what determines the quality of the everyday urban 
environment. This level can also use specific building types that 
people prefer. The still lower Infill level provides the evolving 
amenities that have become international preferences: good 
workspaces, good bathrooms and kitchens, more energy-efficient 
appliances, electricity and internet connectivity. Adaptation to 
higher standards is possible – and much easier – over time.
Historical Examples of the Use of Levels
Many of the cases shown at the beginning of the book are good 
examples of the use of levels.
One example from history helps explain levels. In 1699, Jules 
Hardouin Mansart, Superintendent of Buildings and Premier 
Architect to Louis le Grand, King of France, put his signature to 
the design for what we now know as the Place Vendome (Fig￾ure 15). His design included a monumental façade wall of exqui￾site proportions in the neoclassical manner. The square, including 
the façade wall, was subsequently built by the city of Paris on 
the request of the King. But no buildings were constructed at 
Figure 14 An electrical grid is an example of a utility infrastructure that 
operates on ‘levels’; each of the elements (transmission, distribution and 
generation) can be and often is designed, financed and operated by a 
different party. www.ucsusa.org/clean-energy/how-electricity-grid-works
(Source: www.ucsusa.org)130
F I V E C H A R A C T E R I S T I C S O F E V E RY D AY B U I LT E N V I R O N M E N T T H AT O P E N B U I L D I N G D E S I G N S F O R 
that time behind the façade. The land behind was for sale. In the 
next two decades, noblemen, bankers and other prominent and 
wealthy citizens who served the king in various administrative and 
financial functions built their houses there with their own archi￾tects. These buildings kept changing and adapting over time. But 
the façade as Mansart built it is still what we see today.
Mansart’s scheme was a remarkable interpretation of what 
happens when one designer provides the spatial framework 
within which other designers subsequently can do their own 
thing. This is also an example of design task separation. A num￾ber of the built projects shown at the beginning of the book are 
contemporary examples of the use of levels as well.
In this and other historical examples, we can understand how 
large contemporary buildings built today will eventually estab￾lish their own hierarchy of changeable subsystems. The very 
size and permanence of such large built frameworks make their 
façades, for example, a relatively short-term garb. At the same 
time, interior flexibility is now responding to a large and varied 
population. By their sheer bulk, high-rise and other large projects 
de facto become three-dimensional extensions of urban fabric. 
Inside, public space becomes increasingly important as a perma￾nent framework around which day-to-day use, either residential 
or commercial or administrative, or some mixture of uses, may 
settle in. Seen in this way, it’s not hard to understand the exciting 
latent architectural potential of such new environments without 
historic precedent in project types such as educational, healthcare 
and multifamily projects.
Levels and Change
To better understand levels and the distinction between levels, 
we can study what happens when change occurs. Architects 
design buildings within the spatial and formal context set by the 
urban designer and local regulations. Their work requires them to 
respect, for instance, the layout of streets, the size of blocks, the 
division of lots in the block and architectural themes of various 
kinds (discussed earlier). But within that context and the regula￾tory environment, they are free to act. They can adjust the design 
of the building in many ways. Indeed, different architects can 
build buildings in different places in an urban tissue but will share 
the street network and other thematic qualities set by the urban 
designer. Although the urban design constrains their work, they 
are free within those constraints to do their own thing. While this 
oversimplifies an often-complex choreography, it remains a basic 
principle.
However, when the street network or the configuration of 
public spaces changes, the designs of the buildings have to adjust. 
The urban designer cannot act without affecting the designs of 
the architects. The relation between levels is, therefore, asymmet￾rical. Change on the level of the building does not (generally) 
affect the higher level of the urban design, but change in the 
urban design affects the lower level of the buildings.
It’s clear that this distinction is independent of the identity of 
the parties involved. We can talk about architects designing build￾ings and urban designers designing street patterns, or we can talk 
about homeowners owning buildings and the municipality main￾taining the public streets. In both cases, we make the same dis￾tinction in the physical world between those parts that belong to 
one level (the streets) and other parts belonging to a lower level 
(the buildings). This distinction is so natural that its implications 
are understood by everybody.
From this, it’s clear that the built environment is organized 
in levels, and if we look further, we will find more of them. For 
instance, we talk about urban systems like highways and railroads 
and utility grids, and we understand them to be of a higher level 
than the streets of the neighborhood or the utilities buried under 
Figure 15 Place Vendome, Paris (Photo credit: John Habraken)
Figure 16 Plan of the Place Vendome, Paris. Behind the uniform façade 
are different houses (Source: Aurelli, 2016) (Image credit: Maria She￾herazade Guidici)131
F I V E C H A R A C T E R I S T I C S O F E V E RY D AY B U I LT E N V I R O N M E N T T H AT O P E N B U I L D I N G D E S I G N S F O R 
the neighborhood streets. Here again, the same relationship 
holds. When a major traffic artery has to be cut into an exist￾ing neighborhood network, the lower level of local streets must 
adjust. This kind of intervention, of course, has set off a great 
deal of conflict, as we know from history. But within the given 
structure of highways, we can change the pattern of local streets 
without affecting the higher-level traffic pattern, except where 
they intersect. Here again, the importance of the design of inter￾faces between levels is apparent.
Relating to a Higher Level
The Place Vendome, referred to earlier, was not a unique inter￾vention. Earlier in the 17th century, King Henry IV initiated 
the building of the Place Royale (today known as Place des 
Vosges). Citizens could buy lots around it on the condition 
that the façades of their houses would be built according to a 
preconceived design, including a public arcade on the ground 
floor. The Place des Vosges is larger than the Place Vendome 
and makes a more domestic space with its trees and flower 
beds and its more home-grown architecture. But the square’s 
façade wall is clearly the result of a common set of themes (see 
‘Thematic Design’), although in practice, it was built one lot 
at a time.
Although both squares have uniform or nearly uniform façades 
all around, the distribution of ownership is different. In the case of 
the Place Vendome, the façades were actually part of the urban 
infrastructure, like the pavement of the square or the statue in its 
center. But in Henry IV’s Place des Vosges, the façades are owned 
and erected by the private citizens.
Taken as examples of designing on levels, the difference is sig￾nificant, however. In the case of the Place Vendome, designers 
only decided what to do on their own level of control behind 
the already-erected façade. In the case of the Place des Vosges, 
the higher-level designer established rules or themes to constrain 
lower-level design. He basically told the lower-level designer: “Do 
whatever you want, but make sure you do the façade my way.” 
(See also the NEXT21 case at the beginning of the book.)
The latter case is more complicated but also more flexible, 
because establishing rules or themes for lower-level design can 
be done in many different ways. The setback rule, for instance, 
telling architects to keep houses at a certain distance from the 
street, belongs to that mode of interaction. By the same token, an 
urban designer may impose a building height restriction or stip￾ulate that all façades be done in a given material or that certain 
patterns (e.g., bay windows of a certain projection but of any 
detailed design) should be followed for the sake of a consistent 
and well-conceived public space.
This way of working makes the urban designer reach across 
the level distinction to constrain lower-level design. It introduces 
a certain coherence in the lower level where normally variety is 
the inevitable result of different designers each doing their own 
thing.
Mansart built what was to perform for a long time and to 
serve many. He thereby provided a context for what might 
change more frequently and serve individual clients. In general, 
such a distinction of levels of intervention separates what is rela￾tively permanent from what is relatively changeable. But the way 
Mansart applied this principle challenged conventional notions. 
The façade of a building is normally seen as the expression of that 
particular building. Here, it became part of the more permanent 
urban design.
As a counterpoint to these many historic examples, we can 
see how large contemporary buildings tend to change their 
skins (Figure 17). This is, in many ways, the opposite of Man￾sart’s Place Vendome. Here, the buildings, to prolong their lives, 
shed their skins when the urban environment changed and ener￾gy-efficiency standards increased. The curtain wall façade almost 
acquires autonomy; it may be part of the building, but it may 
also help shape urban fabric. We find examples of this all over 
the world and know that there are specialists in designing and 
constructing these now-autonomous façades. Regulatory instru￾ments and financing have followed suit.
Relating to a Lower Level
As the examples show, relating ‘vertically’ across levels of inter￾vention means looking two ways: upward to inhabit and respect 
the context shaped earlier and downward to frame and stimulate 
the work of other actors who come in later.132
F I V E C H A R A C T E R I S T I C S O F E V E RY D AY B U I LT E N V I R O N M E N T T H AT O P E N B U I L D I N G D E S I G N S F O R 
It is in looking ‘downward’ that we come to a crucial Open 
Building concept: capacity, discussed in more detail later. It’s not 
really a difficult concept to understand. When we walk into an 
empty room, we may say, “This could be a bedroom, but it might 
also be a study or perhaps a playroom for the children.” By say￾ing this, we indicate the capacity of the room for holding low￾er-level designs. In the same way, an urban designer, who decides 
about building lots and street widths, will ask what kind of build￾ings could be built if the lots have certain dimensions. Or they 
may consider what ways there are to park cars in a given street 
width and how trees might be planted in it. In all those cases, the 
designer does not determine the lower-level design decisions but 
must have a fair idea as to the range of solutions possible within 
what is proposed. Capacity analysis is discussed later.
Relations on the Same Level
Those who work in a given location but on different ‘sites’ relate 
‘horizontally’ with each other. In the levels model, they work on 
the same level of intervention. This is what different architects 
each designing a building in a given urban framework do or those 
designing different offices in an office Base Building do. In the lat￾ter case, different architects working at the same level will under￾stand the importance of the ‘demising wall’ in an office building, 
separating one tenant space from another. They will also all share 
the Base Building’s common facilities, utility lines and circula￾tion systems (corridors, stairs and elevators) and, often, building 
design standards established by the Base Building architect/build￾ing owner. But within those constraints, they each do their own 
thing, keeping out of each other’s territory and almost inevitably 
sharing design constraints and ways of building. Individual design 
teams will also understand ‘contract limits’ in a site where various 
designers are each designing a separate building, each respecting 
the property lines of their client. Both are examples of avoiding 
direct horizontal relations. Both have significant legal as well as 
technical ramifications.
Throughout history, monolithic ‘shared party walls’ have sep￾arated individual dwellings and constrained agents relating hori￾zontally and controlling space on both sides. This situation is met 
in one of two ways. First, adjacent inhabitants agree informally 
to respect the interdependence of their territories and, when one 
seeks a change to their dwelling, they take care not to disturb 
their neighbor’s part of the shared wall. Property lines in this case 
run down the middle of these walls.
The second way is that neighbors agree to the introduction 
of a third party who takes responsibility of the shared party wall 
(and, by extension, all such ‘common’ elements). The latter is 
what is called in the United States a ‘common interest develop￾ment’ or ‘condominium.’ In the latter situation, it is only the paint 
on such walls or another layer of some kind that is individually 
and independently controlled. This way of managing control and 
territory is familiar in all building types and has to do with the 
imperative of avoiding what we call ‘horizontal relations’ (rela￾tions at the same level in the environmental hierarchy).
Particularly since the advent of MEP systems (mechanical, 
electrical and plumbing), the ‘territorial crossing’ of parts of 
each of these systems has become extraordinarily complex and 
entangled. The complexity is evident during design, construc￾tion and later when change is involved. Drainage systems are a 
good example. From the shower and water closet in a multifamily 
dwelling or hospital patient room, the drainage pipes drop into 
the ceiling space of the space below and then run horizontally 
until they reach a common pipe shaft and, from there, run to 
Figure 17 An office building in Seoul, Korea, ‘shedding’ its old skin and 
acquiring a new one, meeting new energy standards and giving an archi￾tectural expression in keeping with the time and place (Photo credit: Boris 
Feldblyum and Edward Stojakovic)133
F I V E C H A R A C T E R I S T I C S O F E V E RY D AY B U I LT E N V I R O N M E N T T H AT O P E N B U I L D I N G D E S I G N S F O R 
Figure 18 Drainage piping serving a dwelling unit ‘upstairs’ is visible in the 
ceiling of a yet-to-be-finished unit in a multistory residential condomin￾ium in the United States. This is a typical case of territorial entanglement
(Photo credit: Stephen Kendall)
the sewage pipes under the street and from there to the sewage 
treatment facility serving a city district.
In the case that one party controls the entirety of the route, 
relatively little controversy ensues if part of the system needs to 
be replaced or repositioned – it’s only inconvenient to disturb 
an occupant when the pipes serving the space upstairs leak or 
need replacing. However, if the route these pipes take crosses 
multiple territorial boundaries – either vertically in the envi￾ronmental hierarchy or horizontally, as between neighboring 
territories – boundary frictions and legal disputes are bound to 
occur when one party decides to change (upgrade, relocate or 
remove) their part of the entire system. It is here that interface 
agreements (in space and dimension) that respect territory are 
critical to a well-performing system. The same is true of other 
such utility or installation services or systems (wiring, ductwork 
and so on).
An example of what happens when horizontal relations are 
not understood comes in the entanglement of drainage and other 
piping whose route from each plumbing fixture to the common 
sewage line in the building passes through another territory. This 
is evident in Figure 18 inside a building, but would rarely occur 
at the level of urban design unless specific easements are used.
The Disappearance of Levels
An example of the disappearance of levels will help explain what 
this means. Until his time, Berlage was the last to work with the 
level distinction in urban design in the Netherlands. In contrast, 
Cornelis van Eesteren’s internationally renowned post-WWII 
extension of Amsterdam (Figure 19) was not structured by high￾er-level urban space. Following CIAM ideology, he arranged 
building volumes within free-flowing space. Urban space was no 
longer structuring lower-level design. As a result, urban designer 
and architect both used the same medium, and it was no longer 
clear where urban design stopped and architecture began. This 
confusion still plagues the profession.
The disappearance of levels of intervention was not restricted 
to the distinction between urban design and architecture. It also 
took place within buildings. Modernist architectural ideology 
claimed top-down design control. The masters of the avant-garde 
taught us by example that full vertical control, including even the 
design of furniture, was necessary to achieve good architecture. 
They lived in a time of fundamental change in which all design 
conventions and building habits were rendered obsolete. In such 
uncertainty, it is understandable that those responsible for large 
projects insisted on full vertical control.
However, the upheavals of modernity only reinforced an atti￾tude that already prevailed in the time when architects only did 
Figure 19 A  part of van Eesteren’s extension of Amsterdam (Source: 
Courtesy of KLM Aerocarto)134
F I V E C H A R A C T E R I S T I C S O F E V E RY D AY B U I LT E N V I R O N M E N T T H AT O P E N B U I L D I N G D E S I G N S F O R 
special buildings like churches, palaces and grand houses. It goes 
back to Palladio, whose marvelous villas we tend to understand 
as firmly controlled by a single hand. In that sense, Le Corbusier’s 
Unité d’Habitation, fully controlled too and conceived as standing 
in a park, is very Palladian.
We have been educated in a tradition that was ignorant of the 
uses of levels. Mass housing – government sponsored or built by 
private developers – in which dwelling units are integral to the 
design of the buildings they occupy – and are not independent – 
is part of that ignorance. The Open Building approach seeks a 
remedy to the rigidity and uniformity that comes from excessive 
vertical control and the loss of levels.
Levels and Our Modernist Legacy
Modernist ideology did not recognize architecture in relation to 
levels, either upward in urban design or downward in interior 
organization. Indeed, Modernist environment, for all its novelty, 
can be understood, to a large extent, as the reduction of complex 
urban fabric to a coarse single-level product. The result was its 
inability to make large things without imposing uniform, rigid rep￾etition. In this respect, the 20th-century avant-garde movement 
was a regressive movement. It is truly ironic that our time, which 
calls itself dynamic and full of change and individuality, has pro￾duced an architecture more rigid in its articulation and less capa￾ble of dealing with the dimension of time than any period before 
in human history.
We still suffer the consequences of that tradition. We say that 
we have rejected the Modernist’s dogma of ‘form follows func￾tion,’ yet we still expect each project we engage in to respond to a 
‘program,’ listing in some detail expected functions to be accom￾modated. In contrast, a time-based architecture must assume 
functions to be largely unpredictable except in the most general 
terms. Where architecture cannot follow function anymore, it 
must adopt a new attitude to establish a context for change and 
variety by inhabitation and use. This will lead to an articulation of 
levels of form-making. But that also implies distribution of design 
task responsibility, and we have not yet abandoned the modernist 
opinion that such distribution is a dilution of the architect’s role. 
The dilemma also renders academia clueless. Change and the 
distribution of design tasks are not yet addressed in architectural 
theory, nor do they feature in schools’ curricula. Our regulatory 
environment is equally at odds with reality, a problem demanding 
intense scrutiny and adjustment.
Later, we return to the roots of the Open Building approach 
and discuss how a residential Infill industry will change the culture 
of building. This new industry will bring a new level of interven￾tion into full play in the design, financing, regulation, production 
and long-term usefulness of large residential projects.
Finally, perhaps the most important argument for encouraging an 
understanding of the use of levels is the recognition that it is the 
basis for environmental sustainability.
The lower levels in the built environment hierarchy represent the 
‘fine-grained’ units of control to adjust quickly to rapidly evolving 
technologies and social trends, while the higher levels secure lon￾gevity and stability.
The Emergence of an Infill Level
The idea that the built environment is organized hierarchically, 
discussed earlier in terms of urban design and architecture, also 
extends downward. We find in many buildings how the inner 
non–load-bearing partitions can be changed without effecting 
the basic building structure or its shape, as noted before. Here, we 
can distinguish ‘Infill elements’ like partition walls but also kitchen 
and bathroom equipment – operating on a lower level in the built 
environment relative to the building. The same relationship as we 
found between buildings and local streets is found here. We can 
remodel a building and change the distribution of partitioning of 
spaces and related equipment without changing the larger archi￾tectural infrastructure or its external shape. But when we begin to 
change parts of the building and demolish load-bearing walls or 
extend a façade to get more room inside, we expect adjustments 
in the Infill.
As noted earlier, a matter of terminology comes up here. It can 
be argued that what we call a ‘building’ includes the Infill as much 
as the load-bearing structure, all of the mechanical systems, the 
façades and roof. Therefore, a new term must be coined for what 135
F I V E C H A R A C T E R I S T I C S O F E V E RY D AY B U I LT E N V I R O N M E N T T H AT O P E N B U I L D I N G D E S I G N S F O R 
Figure 20 An Infill or fit-out level of intervention is only now emerging 
in multifamily housing and healthcare facilities, albeit with a great deal of 
resistance (Source: Habraken, 1998)
Figure 21 NEXT21: The façade system was developed by one team. It is 
designed to be used by the architect of each independent dwelling corre￾sponding to changes in the dwelling unit designs. The skeleton remains 
fixed as a 100-year investment (Credit: Osaka Gas Company)
is left when the Infill is taken out. This is called ‘Base Building’ (or 
Support, core and shell, skeleton (in Japan), Primary System, etc.). 
In this way, we can say that a building is comprised of two levels: 
the ‘Base Building’ level and the ‘Infill’ level.
Once we see the concept of levels operating in the built envi￾ronment, we discover the same hierarchical relation in many 
places. So far, we have been looking at environmental forms, but 
within their technical systems, we find the same subdivision in 
levels. Take, for instance, windows in a façade. We can replace 
them with other windows of a different make or design but use 
the same opening in the façade made for the original windows. In 
that case, we do not have to change the façade wall itself. When 
we decide to change the façade wall, however, and make differ￾ent window openings, the window itself, obviously, must adjust. 
In this instance, the façade wall will operate at a higher level (Base 
Building level) and the window at the Infill level.
In all conduit systems (piping, wiring and mechanical ven￾tilation ducts), we find similar hierarchical organizations. In the 
example of buildings and streets given earlier, the sewage system 
follows levels, too: there is the system in the house and there is 
the sewage main running in the public street. On a still higher 
level, there will be the collector and treatment system of the dis￾trict or the city. This is why we can also say that the Open Building 
approach is equivalent to the design of complex adaptive infra￾structure systems such as those mentioned here.
BALANCING PERMANENCE AND CHANGE
Addressing the uncertainty of change and the natural variety of 
use and client and user expectations was the problem that gave 
rise to the Open Building approach in the first place. Although the 
SAR’s initial charge was focused on the Netherlands, the problem 
was general: it arises in any society, within any economic or polit 
ical system, and is independent of technical solutions.
Can anyone seriously argue that the everyday built environ￾ment is ever finished? The transformations of its spaces and built 
forms are, after all, the basis for all our design commissions. We 
always change what was done before, in most cases by someone 
else. This means that the actions we take and what we hand off 
to the future matter a great deal and are fundamental respon￾sibilities, even if we don’t have a crystal ball to know what the 
future holds.
As many of the cases presented at the beginning of the book 
show, change is a reality during our designing, as we learn more 
about the project we’re working on and rethink our own prior 
‘design moves.’ We wouldn’t have to engage in designing if we 
knew everything at the outset: designing is what we do to find 
out – to reach agreement on – what should be made by someone 
else for use by still others. Change is also a reality for clients, as 
their requirements and forces outside their control evolve, during 
the run-up to construction and over time. And we know through 
experience that changes (known as ‘change orders’ in the US 
building industry) are only too familiar during construction. In 
short, although we know too little about it, as noted later, change 
of function, façades, floor plan layouts, technical systems and so 
on is normal, albeit at different cycles, during multiple decades 
of use.
Balancing permanence and change is certainly in accordance 
with our everyday experience. People who own houses know 
they can change their houses, even tear them down to replace 
them with new buildings, without affecting neighbors or the 
street layout of their neighborhood. But when the street layout 
is changed and the municipality decides to cut-in a new street 
or to widen an existing one or to rearrange a street’s location or 
install or change utilities or change zoning designations, inevita￾bly, adjustments must be made on the lower (house) level.136
F I V E C H A R A C T E R I S T I C S O F E V E RY D AY B U I LT E N V I R O N M E N T T H AT O P E N B U I L D I N G D E S I G N S F O R 
Change and permanence, of course, go hand in hand. City 
blocks and streets are stable, lasting for centuries, while the build￾ings and spaces within their boundaries are frequently repur￾posed, demolished, enlarged and replaced, often at densities 
higher than when originally built. It takes more people to agree 
to change the city block than to move an interior partition; that’s 
one reason the urban block is slowest to change. It operates at a 
‘higher level.’ Buildings remain in place, while they may increase 
in volume, either vertically or horizontally. Old doors are filled 
in and new ones cut in; façades are altered to meet changing 
tastes as well as to improve building thermal performance. And 
inside, buildings undergo change all the time – the interior design 
profession and the massive interior remodeling industries in every 
country are a sign of this.
Yet we know of instances where streets and boulevards are 
cut through old tissue. Hausmann exerted top-down control to 
transform Paris between 1853 and 1870, albeit always accepting 
familiar architectural typology. Streets for cars become pedestrian 
zones when a broad consensus emerges to do so, as many cities 
around the world have experienced for a very long time.
While efforts at historic preservation may strive to freeze 
certain characteristics of built environment – whether individual 
buildings, ‘classes’ of buildings, parts of buildings or entire urban 
neighborhoods – environments that are truly alive sustain them￾selves and attain resilience through incremental change and adap￾tation. Much of this change happens inside buildings, invisible to 
the casual observer. In this sense, everyday built environment is 
not so much an artefact as it is an organism, continuously renew￾ing itself and replacing individual parts, spaces and structures, giv￾ing it the capacity to persist.
The balance between what will change and what will remain 
long term becomes increasingly important – and controversial 
– when projects become larger and larger, involving more and 
more people with varying interests. A project of several hundred 
dwelling units or commercial shops or offices or a medical center 
cannot just stay rigid as time goes by. Such projects must adapt to 
life’s variety. A skyscraper in which a few thousand people work 
is not a building but a vertical environment the size of a small 
town, always evolving, often containing a multitude of varied 
and changing functions. A suburban neighborhood of row houses 
that, for various reasons, must increase their footprints or expe￾rience an increase in density faces social (territorial) and physical 
design stresses that are well known.
Technical Strategies for Handling Change
The Open Building approach offers a two-pronged strategy to 
handle change.
From a technical perspective, Open Building seeks products, 
systems specifications and building methods where parts and 
subsystems can be replaced with a minimum of interface prob￾lems. This means that subsystems that are expected to have a 
long life are clearly separated from parts expected to wear out 
more quickly or need to be changed to obtain better performance 
or meet changing preferences. One example is the now-frequent 
replacement of entire façades with new skins as shown earlier, 
increasing thermal performance and giving a building a new 
appearance.
Another example of this, mentioned several times in this book, 
is competitive Infill companies that can fill in empty spaces in 
buildings to meet changing occupancy requirements. Every office 
building project is a good example. Some tenants may use one or 
the other of a variety of competitive ‘systems furniture’ services; 
others may simply have a contractor fill in their space according 
to their interior architect’s specifications.
We call this capacity to substitute parts with those giving 
higher performance technical ‘disentanglement.’ That and the 
design of interfaces are a key to innovation in the building indus￾try. The design of interfaces goes well beyond such common 
interfaces as those between electrical appliance plugs made by 
various companies and the terminations where they are inserted, 
also made by competitive companies.
This desired ‘disentanglement,’ however, meets the reality that 
in the long history of building, new systems have been introduced 
one after the other without a view to the consequences, produc￾ing a kind of creeping entanglement. Understanding the history 
of such technical entanglement, mirrored by those working with 
these systems in the field, can help us. Up to the third quarter 
of the 19th century, the major systems of interest to architects 137
F I V E C H A R A C T E R I S T I C S O F E V E RY D AY B U I LT E N V I R O N M E N T T H AT O P E N B U I L D I N G D E S I G N S F O R 
and builders were structural systems – concrete, masonry, wood 
and then steel and cast iron. Beginning in the latter part of the 
19th century and quickly accelerating since then, we have expe￾rienced an explosion of systems to make contemporary buildings 
habitable and to perform according to changing building stand￾ards (e.g., seismic, fire and net-zero energy) and changing social 
preferences and economic drivers. Now, multiple piping, wiring, 
ductwork systems are enmeshed – entangled – into every build￾ing, from their point of entry at service points to every outlet, 
plumbing fixture and appliance.
Open Building has something to say about how to handle 
these issues in practice. A  number of the cases presented ear￾lier show exemplary cases of handling entanglement in the pro￾cess of designing and building and in the long-term life of the 
environment.
In a sociopolitical perspective, handling change requires the 
recognition of territory and territorial boundaries. Put most sim￾ply, this means distinguishing the parts, both physical and spatial, 
that are shared (‘the commons’) from the parts, both physical and 
spatial, that are under the control of individual agents (individual 
persons, social groups, companies, etc., depending on the ‘level’ 
of the environment we’re discussing).
Change and Large Projects
Large projects are with us to stay. But to be sustainable, they must 
become increasingly fine-grained and planned for change. As 
noted before, commercial office buildings have, for many decades, 
offered tenants empty floor space to be fitted out by specialized 
fit-out companies according to a design done by a designer of the 
tenant’s choice. In shopping malls and even airport concourses, 
retail space is left empty for the retailer to take care of. These are 
utterly conventional, if not always smoothly operating or of high 
quality. Major international corporations with large portfolios of 
such buildings steer a large array of other players to be sure that 
their assets remain agile and valuable, either to sell or to hold. We 
believe this is a phenomenon that is a harbinger of things to come 
across all kinds of ‘everyday’ buildings.
One of the most striking examples of a large building designed 
for higher education that exemplifies the principle of designing for 
change and that we can learn from is the very large main building 
complex of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in Cam￾bridge, Massachusetts. Designed by the engineer William Welles 
Bosworth and built in 1916, it borrowed from large industrial 
buildings in its highly repetitive concrete structural frame. Rooms 
and departments were intended to be formed using, in the words 
of the civil engineer designing the project (Bosworth), “curtain 
walls” of lightweight materials that could be built or removed 
to make classrooms or offices as needed (Jarzombeck, 2004). It 
has since undergone many large and small changes, including 
changes to the interior façades of corridors, relocation of aca￾demic units, filling in of previously open courtyards, upgrading of 
mechanical systems, etc.
Balancing permanence and change in the built environment 
is, therefore, one of the most important and difficult things 
society has to do, and we – design professionals – are part of 
that work. This regenerative capacity is leading us to recognize 
the critical importance of a circular economy, shifting from lin￾ear material consumption toward a circular economy within an 
industrialized construction industry. A  circular economy, simply 
put, is ”a systemic approach to economic development designed 
to benefit businesses, society, and the environment. In contrast 
to the ‘take-make-waste’ linear model, a  circular economy  is 
regenerative by design and aims to gradually decouple growth 
from the consumption of finite resources”  (the Ellen MacAr￾thur Foundation, https://ellenmacarthurfoundation.org/topics/
circular-economy-introduction/overview).
The Importance of Studies of Change in the Built Environment
Finally, serious longitudinal studies of how a building stock or 
everyday built environment change are important but, unfortu￾nately, quite rare. Five examples are worth citing. One focuses 
on multifamily residential buildings, another on educational facil￾ities, the third on the healthcare environment. A fourth is work in 
the morphogenetic tradition in geography, and a fifth is a study 
Figures 22 MIT’s main group, with the dome at the head of the com￾plex of building wings and courtyards now embedded in the much larger 
campus (Photo credit: Dave MacKenzie)138
F I V E C H A R A C T E R I S T I C S O F E V E RY D AY B U I LT E N V I R O N M E N T T H AT O P E N B U I L D I N G D E S I G N S F O R 
on incremental development of self-built housing in Mexico City, 
typical of many urbanizing areas in the Global South.
Minami, Kazunobu. (2016). The Efforts to Develop Longer Life 
Housing with Adaptability in Japan, BE16 Tallinn and Helsinki 
Conference; Build Green and Renovate Deep, 5–7 October
2016.
This paper discusses efforts to develop longer-life housing with 
adaptability in Japan beginning in the late 1970s. The Japanese 
government, in cooperation with private-sector and academic 
entities, started research and development projects to design and 
build longer-life housing that is adaptable with time. Early exam￾ples include the Kodan Experimental Housing Project (KEP) and 
the Century Housing Project (CHS). Research has been conducted 
on the outcomes of those experimental projects to determine 
whether the attempted adaptability has worked or not over the 
30-plus years that people have been living in them. The research 
found that the housing with adaptable Infill has been able to 
adjust to changes in family size and lifestyles in the KEP and CHS 
projects.
Lee, Joshua. (2019). Flexibility and Design: Learning from the 
School Construction Systems Development (SCSD) Project. New 
York, NY: Routledge
This book reports on a longitudinal analysis of a particularly 
robust midcentury modern experiment, involving a number of 
school buildings, called the School Construction Systems Devel￾opment (SCSD) project. It draws conclusions for the challenges 
facing clients and design professionals in meeting the evolving 
demands of education.
Pilosof, N. P. (2020). Building for Change: Comparative Case 
Study of Hospital Architecture. HERD, 14(1), https://doi.
org/10.1177/1937586720927026
This study assesses how architectural design strategies impact 
the flexibility of hospitals to change over time. Most hospitals 
are designed for highly specialized medical functions, which is 
often in conflict with the need to design the hospital facility to 
accommodate evolvement and change of functions over time. 
Architectural design strategies provide different approaches to the 
need to design for a specific medical program while planning for 
its future change. The study compares two hospital buildings with 
very similar configurations and medical programs but with signifi￾cantly different architectural design strategies: One was designed 
for an unknown future medical function, and the second was 
designed for a specific medical function. The study analyses the 
two hospital buildings by their design strategy, planning, design 
process and construction by phases and compares their change in 
practice over the 12 years before the paper was written.
The ISUF (International Seminar on Urban Form) was formed 
in 1994. The publication of its journal, Urban Morphology, began 
in 1997. The various ‘schools’ of urban morphology working both 
within and between academic disciplines and national intellectual 
traditions began to cross-fertilize. This is sometimes known as the 
morphogenetic tradition in geography. A key figure in introducing 
German scholarship to the latter was M. R. G. Conzen (2004). He 
developed terminology, techniques of analysis and concepts that 
other researchers have subsequently developed further. Interdis￾ciplinary research has also led to new analytical techniques and a 
growing international body of research on the form of towns and 
their incremental transformation (www.sciencedirect.com/topics/
earth-and-planetary-sciences/urban-morphology).
Andrade-Narváez, J. (2016). Viviendas en Proceso. Unidad 
Habitacional Cohuatlan, Ciudad de México 1973–78. 
Arquitectura Social. TAVI 30 años de Experiencias (editors 
Martin, A. and Andrade, J.). UAM-X, México.
Jorge Iván Andrade Narváez has studied housing growth through 
time. The purpose of his studies was to develop and apply a 
method that was developed to detect and measure the physi￾cal changes over time to self-produced dwelling units. The study 
was done on the information collected in Santa Ursula, a popular 
neighborhood located in the south of Mexico City. The method 
is based on the assumption that dwellings in a popular, informal 
neighborhood have an order in their way of growth and change; 
they do not appear randomly. Professor Andrade has designed 
and presented three examples of the application of this method. 
The first one in Santa Ursula, the second one in the Palo Alto 139
F I V E C H A R A C T E R I S T I C S O F E V E RY D AY B U I LT E N V I R O N M E N T T H AT O P E N B U I L D I N G D E S I G N S F O R 
house complex and the third one in the Xacalli house complex. All 
three are located in Mexico City.
There is also the book How Buildings Learn (Brand, 1994).
These are just a few examples. But we know far too little about 
how our building stock and built field change. We know too little 
about the forces acting at work, the agents involved, the technical 
systems at play, and the territorial boundaries that force us to rec￾ognize that the built world is not monolithic or subject to unitary, 
top-down control.
READINGS
Alexander, C., et al. (1977). A Pattern Language, Towns, Buildings, 
Construction. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Andrade-Narváez, J. (2016). Viviendas en Proceso. Unidad Habita￾cional Cohuatlan, Ciudad de México 1973–78. Arquitectura 
Social. TAVI 30 años de Experiencias (editors Martin, A. and 
Andrade, J.). UAM-X, México.
Aurelli, P.V. (editor). (2016). The City as a Project. Ruby Press, Berlin.
Brand, S. (1994). How Buildings Learn; What Happens after They’re 
Built. Viking, New York.
Conzen, M.P. (editor). (2004). Thinking about Urban Form: Papers on 
Urban Morphology, 1932–1998/M.R.G. Conzen. Peter Lang 
Publishing, Bern.
Ellen MacArthur Foundation. https://ellenmacarthurfoundation.org/
topics/circular-economy-introduction/overview
Gideon, S. (1963). Space Time and Architecture. Harvard University 
Press, Cambridge, MA, pp. 374, 386.
Habraken, N.J. (1998). The Structure of the Ordinary: Form and Con￾trol in the Built Environment. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Jarzombek, M. (2004). Designing MIT. Northeastern University Press, 
Boston.
Kendall, S. H. (editor). (2019). Healthcare Architecture as Infrastruc￾ture: Open Building in Practice. Routledge, London.
Lee, J. (2019). Flexibility and Design: Learning from the School Con￾struction Systems Development (SCSD) Project. Routledge, 
New York, NY.
Military Standard. (1691). Section  2.5.2. www.wbdg.org/FFC/
M1691/MIL-STD-1691_2016.pdf
Minami, K. (2016). The Efforts to Develop Longer Life Housing with 
Adaptability in Japan. BE16 Tallinn and Helsinki Conference. 
Build Green and Renovate Deep, 5–7 October 2016.
Newman, O. (1973). Defensible Space: Crime Prevention through 
Urban Design. MacMillan Publishing, New York
Pilosof, N.P. (2020). Building for change: Comparative case 
study of hospital architecture. HERD, 14(1), https://doi.
org/10.1177/1937586720927026
Propst, R. (1968). The Office: A Facility Based on Change. The Busi￾ness Press, Elmhurst, IL.
Sdoutz, F. (2011). Broadacre City: FFLW and His Vision for the 
Urban Future. www.mediaarchitecture.at/architekturtheorie/
broadacre_city/2011_illustration_004_en.shtml)
Ventre, F. (1983). NBSIR 83–2662: Documentation and Assessment 
of the GSA/PBS Building Systems Program – Background and 
Research Plan.140 DOI: 10.4324/9781003243076-19
INTRODUCTION
One question always comes up when we discuss the Open Build￾ing approach in new construction: “If we don’t have a detailed 
program of requirements (or brief), then how do we go about 
designing a building or an urban tissue?” Or, for that matter, 
“How does an investor know how to invest or a regulator know 
how to approve building plans without the details of unit mix, 
unit layouts, all mechanical systems drawings and so on?”
The other question that always comes up has to do with what 
has to be done to explore the accommodation capacity of exist￾ing buildings. Interior architects often get this request from cli￾ents: “Help us find a space in an existing building where we can 
relocate and that can accommodate not only our organization’s 
current needs but our future needs when we expect to add staff.”
Another question concerns how an investor can make a deci￾sion to convert an existing asset to a new use or mix of uses, 
or to reconfigure it in a significant way. As we noted before, at 
the time of writing, this question was facing building owners, 
financial institutions and city officials due to huge vacancy rates 
in city centers as well as suburban office buildings driven by 
changes in work patterns. Converting office buildings to hous￾ing became a very important topic. The question faced by the 
investors and city officials and financial institutions was: “Is this 
office building well suited for conversion to another use, particu￾larly residential – and is that conversion economical now and in 
the long term?”
To address the second question, we go into some depth in the 
next part of the book in addressing the problem of an office-to￾housing conversion and how capacity analysis can help.
In what follows in this part of the book, we give a broad 
overview of capacity analysis. We then discuss a formal opera￾tion using zones, margins and grids. A more complete discussion 
of these design aids can be found in Variations: The Systematic 
Design of Supports (Habraken et al., 1972). These are aids in the 
formulation of standards for the planning of units of occupancy 
within a designed or yet-to-be-designed Base Building or a build￾ing that needs to be converted to another use entirely.
Zones, margins and grids are also useful in the design of urban 
tissues, but that subject is touched upon only briefly. This use 
is discussed more fully in SAR73, Deciding on Density and The 
Grunsfeld Variations (see Appendix Two).
In this part of the book, we discuss the following:
• What is capacity analysis?
• Capacity analysis as part of a design process
• A methodological problem
• Evaluating possible uses
• How capacity links form to function
• The use of zones and margins
• Zones and margins as part of capacity analysis
• Zones and margins in urban design
• Using zones and margins: an example in housing design: sec￾tors and basic variants
• Grids as design tools for buildings and urban tissues: kinds of 
grids; grids in urban design
• Summary of the use of grids in designing
WHAT IS CAPACITY ANALYSIS?
Visiting a house offered for sale, we will usually walk into an 
empty room and say, “This could be a guest room” or “here is 
where I could put my study.” And we imagine how the furniture 
could be arranged and may even consider alternative furniture 
layouts. When we do this, we are assessing the capacity of the 
space to hold certain activities.
In a similar way, an urban designer may subdivide a city block 
into lots or parcels of certain sizes, because those sizes allow build￾ing types of a certain kind to be built. The lot sizes and resulting 
block size, street width and location and size of other public uses 
and spaces are set and together, they offer the desired capacity to 
hold lower-level interventions (i.e., discrete buildings).
On the building level, the architect of an office building is faced 
with a decision about the distance between columns and distance 
between the central core(s) and the façade. These factors, along 
with site constraints coming from the higher level (zoning and 
other site conditions) are the basis for first design moves. The 
design team will compare possible tenant layout alternatives by 
sketching how a structural bay allows subdivision into worksta￾tions or smaller rooms. They will also study how multiples of that 
Capacity Analysis – A Key Tool of the Open 
Building Approach141
CAPACITY ANALYSIS – A KEY TOOL OF THE OPEN BUILDING APPROACH
bay may also produce a useful floor surface for expected sizes of 
occupancies. Variable sizes of tenant spaces can also be considered 
along with alternative layouts. Considerations are given for natural 
illumination and perhaps ventilation as well as access to mechan￾ical systems (heating, air conditioning, mechanical ventilation, 
cabling and piping). Egress and fire safety are also considered.
Or a client may ask their design team to evaluate an exist￾ing nonresidential building for possible conversion to residential 
occupancy or other use. In this case, several things have to be 
considered, such as floor-to-floor height, the pattern of struc￾tural elements, façade-to-core (corridor) depth, how to handle 
the placement and size of new vertical pipe shafts, whether to 
use raised floors to handle horizontal distribution of drainage and 
other conduits (and with this, the needed adjustment of existing 
exit stairs and elevator stops) and so on.
Analysis of capacity assumes the distinction of levels, dis￾cussed earlier. For example, a room is the higher-level form; the 
furniture arrangement, by which we assess the rooms’ capacity, 
makes another (lower) level. In building design, the bay size, as 
determined by party or shear walls or distance between columns, 
makes space on the (higher) building level, along with the fixed 
MEP (mechanical, electrical and plumbing) infrastructure. The 
partitioning used to subdivide that space operates on a lower or 
Infill level, along with the variable (Infill) parts of the MEP infra￾structure. Some or all of the façade may be part of the higher 
level, and some may be part of the lower (Infill) level (as in street￾level façades of mixed-use urban buildings).
CAPACITY ANALYSIS AS PART OF A DESIGN PROCESS
The design of a Base Building is a matter of evaluation and optimi￾zation, as discussed before when we outlined the Open Building 
approach. Here, we need to state a very important question and 
principle:
How can the greatest variety in use and functional idiosyncra￾sies (and changes over time) be accommodated using as few 
infill elements as possible? Generally speaking, the best and 
most economical solution will be one in which the only variable 
(Infill) elements are those that, at some time in the future, will 
require adaptation. If there are too few variable elements, the 
Base Building will not be able to accommodate changes and will 
become an anachronism and an economic burden for its owner. 
If too much is made variable, money and effort will be wasted in 
providing possibilities which will never be used.
The same is true for Infill elements. For the designer, it’s important 
to know the factors that play a role in the optimization process in 
order to evaluate them properly. But it is also necessary to explore 
the changes that may be made in the future; what will have to 
last a long time, and what will be replaced or moved at certain 
intervals?
Yet, everyone knows that nobody can predict the future. Added 
to that fact is that despite a few studies mentioned before, we 
know far too little about the lifestyles of future generations or the 
impulses that lead people to change something in their homes 
or about future technology supporting evolving occupancy 
demands. There is no definitive answer to the question of when 
or for what reason buildings are altered or reconstructed. In any 
case, the design of alterations will, in almost all cases, be accom￾plished by design teams and their clients, which are different from 
those who designed the Base Building to begin with.
One of the reasons why we know so little about the factors 
that may lead to change and variation – in housing in particular 
but more generally – is that, except as pointed out before in office 
buildings, present-day design and development practices (both 
public and private investments) leave only the most superficial 
opportunities for change. People use the buildings as they come. 
In the case of housing, the perennial shortage of housing pre￾vents the expression of preference through the natural workings 
of market choice. Further, technical entanglement of occupancy 
units one above the other in multistory buildings is a major deter￾rent to change. As discussed elsewhere, when drainage piping 
and other utilities of one unit are only accessible from the ceiling 
space of units below in multitenant buildings, rigidity is the result.
Of course, we can make some generalizations; there are cer￾tain trends. There are still people and organizations who own their 
own buildings and have the means to alter them at almost any 
cost, even if they were not originally built for adaptation.142
CAPACITY ANALYSIS – A KEY TOOL OF THE OPEN BUILDING APPROACH
So the answer to the question of how much capacity for 
change and variety to build in is not easy to answer. Gradually 
accumulated experience is often the best rule. Longitudinal stud￾ies of how buildings change and the cost of change are therefore 
greatly needed, as noted. An exception is the work done in the 
Netherlands in the office and healthcare sectors by Dekker using 
a sample of facilities over a 20-year period (Kendall et al., 2012).
Four principles for the design of Base Buildings follow from 
observations of buildings that have undergone incremental changes.
• First, each demised ‘territory’ in a Base Building must allow 
for a number of different layouts. A  demised territory is a 
legally separated space (often fire separated as well) in a 
building.
• Second, it must be possible to change the total floor area, 
either by additional construction (vertical or horizontal) or to 
change the size of demised territories by shifting the bound￾aries of the units of occupancy.
• In the third place, Base Buildings or parts of a Base Building 
should optimally accommodate both residential and nonresi￾dential functions within reason (thus the concept of ‘beyond 
single use’).
• Fourth, to the greatest extent possible, the parts filling in a 
Base Building, as well as the parts used to build it, should 
be capable of being recycled or put into a secondary market￾place. This is how the Open Building process can most clearly 
contribute to a circular construction industry and economy.
Clearly, not every Base Building will have to satisfy all these criteria. 
The relevant criteria will have to be determined according to each 
situation. When all the basic layout variations that a Base Building 
can accommodate are documented, then we can study the rela￾tionship between the possible uses, their realization and their cost.
A METHODOLOGICAL PROBLEM
Everyone knows that in the design of new buildings, skilled 
designers never start their design process with an entirely blank 
slate. There are always constraints and assumptions, such as 
the size and shape and topography of the site; any natural or 
man-made features that should be recognized; the likely build￾ing typology; the local zoning and building regulations; a rough 
budget and with it a rough building area; a rough idea of what 
function or functions the building should be able to accommo￾date; a general idea of the construction methods; financing tools 
available and so on.
The Open Building approach addresses a recurrent and impor￾tant methodological problem. When confronted with two alter￾native proposals, how can a client know which one serves a given 
target population or market best? This question is also valid in 
any ‘vertical’ design relation: that is, higher-level decisions are 
always based on assumptions of lower-level use. On the urban 
design level, plot size and setback rules are based on expected 
and desired types of buildings. On the residential building level, 
more than a century of housing design has yielded a range of 
familiar unit types that can help shape the design of a residential 
Base Building. But in each case, the designer of a Base Building 
must assess its capacity for a representative range of Infill varia￾tions. Casual ‘back-of-the-envelope’ studies won’t suffice.
Design studies over the past few decades have provided for￾mal methods that can help well-trained design teams analyze a 
building’s capacity for Infill variations of a desired quality. This 
formal method is particularly relevant when the problems out￾lined above recur – that is, when they are repetitive. Instead of 
approaching the problems as if they only present themselves to 
an office once or twice, a method can save time, provide account￾ability and transparency and aid communication.
This part of the book introduces a formal way of assessing 
capacity. There are likely to be others. Some readers will certainly 
declare that formalization of an approach to addressing the above 
problems is overkill and is not needed. We also recognize that 
once a formal way of working is learned and repeated enough 
times within a firm or among team members who work together 
frequently, it can ‘go into the background’ or ‘default mode.’ Yet 
when team members change, having a more formal method can 
be a real time-saver.
We also think that, if for no other reason, the effort to formalize 
a way of working enables computational tools to be developed 143
CAPACITY ANALYSIS – A KEY TOOL OF THE OPEN BUILDING APPROACH
to help us. In any case, we suggest that the concept of capac￾ity should be taken seriously because this kind of assessment 
requires the ability to think about design constraints and to think 
in variations.
On each level of the environmental hierarchy (urban planning, 
urban design, architecture, etc.), we need to be able to gener￾ate a representative range of possible variants to assess what our 
design offers to those who will inhabit what we have created. The 
ability to think in variations is an empowering skill. We can’t zero 
in on a single ‘best’ lower-level solution and repeat it to shape our 
higher-level form. Instead, we need to be able to consider the￾matic variations that we want to design for. As we outlined in the 
last part of the book, types, patterns and systems are venerable 
concepts – or themes – with which we develop variations that can 
be sketched out or notated quickly. Any formal method to assess 
capacity is only a tool to use this basic skill more efficiently.
EVALUATING POSSIBLE USES
As noted above, in optimizing the design of Base Buildings, and 
in doing so efficiently and cost-effectively, there are two technical 
problems that have to be approached systematically. First, there is 
the evaluation of possible uses. How can one be sure the design 
of the Base Building is best for a specific situation? By definition, 
a Base Building is an architectural infrastructure which allows 
choice and decision flexibility in the layout of fully independent 
occupancy units in it. To avoid mistakes and to facilitate commu￾nication, our evaluation process should be based on a method 
that checks what layout alternatives can be accommodated that 
satisfy the criteria and design constraints. This is a complicated 
process involving the comparison of a series of layouts. The evalu￾ation is even more difficult when, rather than wait until the whole 
process has been completed, the designer wants to ascertain at 
the sketch design stage whether the Base Building will accommo￾date the preferred layout alternatives.
As we design, we may work in two directions, upward or 
downward in the ‘levels’ hierarchy. When we walk into a room 
and assess its uses by imagining the arrangement of furniture, 
we operate on the lower level (imagining what furniture can be 
accommodated) to evaluate the usefulness of the higher-level 
form. This is a familiar activity somewhat akin to site evaluation.
But when we operate on the higher level looking ‘downward,’ 
capacity analysis becomes a tool to justify the decisions we make 
relative to what is offered to the lower level. The urban designer 
will conduct a study of building types and their dimensions, street 
layouts and dimensions and the position of public functions in 
order to settle on lot sizes, block configurations, public spaces and 
so on. This is done without, of course, designing the buildings – a 
separate design task undertaken by someone else (see the urban 
design cases at the beginning of the book). At another level, an 
architect will conduct a study of typical arrangements of office 
furniture and partitioning to settle on the column spacing and 
other aspects of a Base Building for an office building. In this way, 
we conduct lower-level design explorations, not to determine 
what will be done there but to make sure that decisions made on 
the level we operate on provide the adequate context for lower￾level interventions by others at a later stage.
Capacity analysis links designing on different levels. It offers a 
means to assure the hierarchical continuity of the urban design 
or building design we are working on without freezing it from 
top to bottom.
With the separation of Base Building from Infill, a new interface 
between designers is introduced. For instance, the designer of a 
Base Building cannot just show a few floor plans to justify their 
proposal. They must find out what range of possible plans – given 
certain requirements, constraints and values – might be possible 
in the proposed Base Building and at what cost.
This is where capacity analysis comes into play. In the Open Build￾ing approach, capacity analysis means that a design team will make 
a design and, during each of its various iterations during schematic 
design, will be able to demonstrate how it will accommodate a vari￾ety of Infill decisions without forcing the design to change. In sim￾ple terms, this means ‘fixing’ a form and studying what lower-level 
variants it can accommodate. After evaluating the results, what is 
‘fixed’ can be revised and ‘tested’ again until everyone agrees that 
the design is good enough to meet all stakeholder requirements. 144
CAPACITY ANALYSIS – A KEY TOOL OF THE OPEN BUILDING APPROACH
The design team might use two colors in their drawings – one for 
the Base Building elements and their configuration and another 
for the Infill elements and their layout. This is an iterative process. 
If there is a team of consultants, each will be asked to follow the 
same logic and ways of documenting this conversation, importantly 
including the MEP and structural engineering consultants.
It needs to be said that for a form – a building or an urban 
block – to have meaningful capacity at all, it should not be neu￾tral. A well-articulated higher-level form suggests possible uses. 
It is an inspiration in the way the landscape – a water’s edge, a 
stone outcropping or a beautiful row of trees – may enhance the 
capacity of a building site. Different parts of the site can have dif￾ferent qualities. This is a kind of dialogue between levels. To enter 
into a dialogue, someone must say something to get started. In 
our case, we must make a tentative design to get started. Here, 
we find an opportunity for architectural articulation not apparent 
in the case of top-down or unified design control.
HOW CAPACITY LINKS FORM TO FUNCTION
Assessing the capacity of a given space is such a common opera￾tion that we hardly pause to think about it. Yet it is worth attention 
as well as formalization. Capacity of a space links a given form to 
function. But it differs in two ways from the form-follows-func￾tion routine. To begin with, the form must be there first. We have 
to propose a form (e.g., a Base Building design), then evaluate it 
against a variety of layouts or functions. Then we adjust the form 
based on what we learned, test it again and so on until we get 
agreement. This can become quite involved, as already noted. 
Second, it relates the form not to one function but to a number 
of possible alternative functions or layouts. Our assessment of a 
room, for instance, concludes that it can be either a guest room 
or a study. The chosen lot size may hold a residential building as 
well as a shop or small office building.
We don’t decide on function but evaluate the proposed form for 
what it can accommodate.
An architectural or urban design office might maintain a capac￾ity database in its shared computer library. Building up such 
a reference from scratch is a good way to acquire a sense of 
spatial dimensions and dimensions of building elements of all 
kinds. New members of the firm can be encouraged to con￾tribute to the database. Ultimately, all designers must end up 
knowing capacity of a human size by heart. After all, a skilled 
designer knows what can be done in, say, five feet: a corri￾dor, a small bathroom, a sidewalk, three seats in an airplane, 
etc. From such basic knowledge, a talented designer can be 
expected to quickly come up with capacities for dimensions 
and room sizes in their designs. We want a relatively inex￾perienced architect or urban designer to understand exactly 
what is gained or lost when a street or block size, a structural 
bay or a room size is increased or reduced by 1 foot (or even 
4  inches). Working on a single building, they may compare 
parking capacity in the basement with capacity for variable 
living spaces and healthcare or educational spaces on upper 
floors to find an optimum bay size.
It should be evident by now that capacity analysis itself is 
based on certain assumptions, conventions and rules or con￾straints. Defining and ‘designing’ these constraints is therefore 
an important part of capacity analysis. Studying and develop￾ing design constraints and rules before undertaking a specific 
design is akin to making and learning rules before playing a 
game or sport. For instance, in playing tennis, rules must be 
known such as serving rules, scoring rules, what is off-side or a 
violation, etc. After knowing all the rules, players can develop 
plays and many strategies without violating the rules. Similarly, 
studying and making design constraints equals making and 
learning rules in tennis, and capacity analysis equals strategy 
analysis.
Again, the concept may seem intuitively familiar to seasoned 
practitioners, but we suggest that its more systematic use in 
both new construction and conversion of buildings to other uses 
will greatly enhance any project’s design process. This process 
will facilitate often-complex exchanges between client, design 
team and consultants and financial lenders, especially as projects 
become larger and more complex and fast-paced, and as office 
and design teams undertake work in cultures other than their 
home territories.145
CAPACITY ANALYSIS – A KEY TOOL OF THE OPEN BUILDING APPROACH
THE USE OF ZONES AND MARGINS
At the SAR, in the mid-1960s, design methods were developed for 
architects to use in designing large residential projects using the 
principle of separating the tasks of designing a Base Building from 
the Infill (SAR65). At that time, the concept of zones and mar￾gins was developed. The tool is more generally useful, however. 
For example, the tool is helpful in the design of urban tissues, in 
healthcare, administrative, retail and educational buildings.
In what follows, we offer a discussion of the use of zones and 
margins as a possible way to conduct systematic capacity analysis 
(Habraken et al., 1972).
In the pair of drawings (Figure 1), examine the lower draw￾ing first. It shows a simple structural layout of a residential Base 
Building, in which a number of extra (horizontal) lines have been 
drawn. These horizontal lines form a system of zones and margins 
which aid in the systematic development of variations in layout 
that satisfy one specific set of criteria. Zones and margins can be 
used as aids in the design of buildings within which independent 
occupancy units can be built that conform to such criteria. Zones 
and margins, then, are aids in the formulation of standards for the 
planning of units within a designed or yet-to-be-designed Base 
Building.
In the top drawing (Figure 1), the hypothetical Base Building 
with its variable Infill is shown, with a question mark. The exam￾ples show that the spaces are placed in the zone/margin system 
according to certain conventions. Certain rooms may overlap one 
or more zones but end in margins. Other areas can be completely 
within one zone or one margin. Note that the question of Infill 
access to MEP systems is not addressed yet.
The examples shown are of a building constructed with 
load-bearing walls with openings between bays, placed strate￾gically to allow multiple bays to be combined into larger ‘territo￾ries’ or filled in to make a series of smaller demised spaces. Other 
structural systems are, of course, possible. The layout examples 
in the top drawing are not chosen at random; they are part of a 
larger group of layout alternatives, in which the arrangements of 
the rooms conform to specific rules which reflect the standards 
of the designer. Zones and margins are fixed bands (independent 
of the specific layouts) of certain dimensions within which spaces 
can be placed according to certain conventions. The design of a 
Base Building is based on a set of standards that are incorporated 
in a specific zone/margin system.
In the following discussion, we will explore the development 
of the method and the underlying concepts, rules and techniques 
which can be used as part of capacity analysis for the design and 
evaluation of Base Buildings.
Figure 1 An example of zones and margins in a design study of a Base 
Building using parallel bearing walls with openings to allow separate bays 
to be combined into larger units (Source: Habraken et al., 1972)
Figure 2 In the development of an urban tissue, we can use zones for 
what is regularly built (B), another zone for what is regularly open (O) and 
a margin (ob). The drawing at the right shows how these can be used to 
show maximum and minimum B and O zones. Note: An ob margin can 
have a dimension of 0 (Source: SAR73) (Source: SAR73)146
CAPACITY ANALYSIS – A KEY TOOL OF THE OPEN BUILDING APPROACH
ZONES AND MARGINS AS PART OF CAPACITY ANALYSIS
With the design of Base Buildings of any kind, designers have 
to make decisions about the position and dimension of material 
without knowing the floor plans that eventually will be built 
in. This means that they cannot make decisions on the basis of 
floor plans. They have to work from possibilities of floor plans – 
that is, the capacity to accommodate variety and change of 
floor plans and functions. To be able to do so, they must be 
able to make general statements about the possible distribu￾tion of spaces in the Base Building and to compare alternative 
designs.
Zones are areas with specific architectural significance but with 
only general spatial qualities. The principle of zones can be used 
on all levels of the built environment, but on each level, we will 
define different kinds of zones.
By the arrangement of zones, the designer determines the 
most general organization of spaces. For instance, offices in office 
buildings each have their own specific combinations of zones, 
depending on the concept of office involved. The same goes for 
residential buildings, healthcare facilities and schools. The distri￾bution and ‘shape’ of zones is a first general ordering of space, to 
be specified in later stages of the design process. That is, zones do 
not have to be ‘straight’ but can curve, for example.
It should be obvious that if any function can go anywhere, the 
use of zones loses its purpose.
With the help of such zones and assumptions for possible posi￾tioning of functions, it is possible to quickly generate a series of 
candidate ‘basic variants’ that give a good idea of the capacity 
of the Base Building to hold a variety of occupancies within the 
assumed values. With zones mediating between the two levels of 
intervention (Base Building at the higher level, Infill at the lower 
level), it is possible to efficiently evaluate the relation between 
floor plan values and Base Building capacity and to tinker with 
either the values or the Base Building design to arrive at a desired 
solution.
The use of zones thus helps a design team to formulate rules 
and agreements between the parties involved. In a design project, 
more specific agreements can be attached to the zones: designers 
can propose what kinds of spaces and what kinds of elements 
are allowed in a given zone. They make rules about the way the 
zones can be used. These agreements may serve to coordinate 
the work of different designers, including structural and mechan￾ical engineers, cooperating in complex projects.
ZONES AND MARGINS IN URBAN DESIGN
Before going into more depth on the use of Zones and Margins 
in building design, we can briefly discuss this notation method in 
urban design. In that case, the zones indicate areas to be built or 
to be left open and are used to show the capacity of an urban 
design to hold certain architectural solutions that can be studied 
by varying either the urban design or the assumed building typol￾ogy (Figures 2 and 3).
USING ZONES AND MARGINS IN HOUSING DESIGN
When separating design tasks is actually put to work, the party 
designing the Infill will be offered a space within a Base Building 
which has certain characteristics. They will value certain parts of 
the space more than others. These differences can be important 
when the building designer makes decisions about the location of 
different kinds of spaces or functions. Every building will have dif￾fering arrangements of components (for example, bearing walls 
or columns) and will offer its own characteristics and potential. 
(See drawing on the left in Figure 4 as an example of a structure 
using uniformly spaced bearing walls.)
It is up to the designer of the Infill to choose where certain 
types of spaces are located. A typical question that the designer 
might ask is this: Is it necessary for a bedroom to be on an external 
wall? Within a Base Building, two areas can be distinguished: one 
on the perimeter and one totally internal. Each of these is suitable 
to a different purpose. (Note: In some jurisdictions, bedrooms are 
not permitted without windows; in other places, in spaces with 
Figure 3 Here is a sample document showing in plan and section how a 
four-block part of an urban design can be represented using zones and 
margins (Source: SAR73). Note: This ‘tissue model’ can, of course, be 
transformed, bent or cut to fit the specific conditions of a site (Source:
SAR73)147
CAPACITY ANALYSIS – A KEY TOOL OF THE OPEN BUILDING APPROACH
very high ceilings, bedrooms on elevated platforms and with low 
walls can be placed internally.) (See middle drawing in Figure 4; 
openings have been made in one bearing wall, explained later.)
In general, what rooms should be located on an external wall? 
To answer this question, we could study a large number of plans 
drawn up by residents themselves. Observations would show, for 
instance, that bedrooms are (almost) always placed on an out￾side wall. Two lines can be superimposed on the plan of the Base 
Building indicating the minimum and maximum depth of such 
rooms. These lines define an area within which a certain kind of 
room can be located (see drawing on the right in Figure 4).
Conversely, before the space is divided up, two lines can be 
drawn parallel to the façade (see drawing to the right in Figure 4). 
The following convention will apply concerning the location of 
rooms within the area bounded by these lines: A room behind the 
façade will never be shorter than the width of the first band and 
never longer than the width of both bands together. Later, we will 
show that such a convention is especially useful when applied to 
certain kinds of rooms.
The areas described by these lines are called zones and mar￾gins. These are areas within a Base Building in which certain kinds 
of spaces are located according to specific rules. Which kinds of 
spaces relate to which zones will be discussed later, when the 
relationship between the size of a zone and the size of spaces is 
examined (see drawing on the left in Figure 5).
The zone adjacent to the façade is called the alpha zone. In 
the illustration (middle drawing in Figure 5), there are two alpha 
zones because there are two façades. There are three basic char￾acteristics to an alpha zone: It is an area within a dwelling unit; 
it is an internal space; and it is an area which is adjacent to an 
external wall. The location of the alpha zone within a dwelling 
unit means that it is part of a larger private area, that is the whole 
of the dwelling unit, and is distinguishable from the public area in 
which the unit is located. The definition of an alpha zone is this: 
an alpha zone is an internal area, intended for private use and is 
adjacent to an external wall.
Based on this definition, alpha zones can be identified in 
any space that is used for housing. The second area that can be 
identified in the illustration (drawing on the right of Figure 5) is 
that area with no direct relationship to the outside. This area is 
called the beta zone. The beta zone is also suitable for the location 
of certain yet-to-be-defined kinds of spaces. In accordance with 
the definition of an alpha zone, we can now define a beta zone: a 
beta zone is an internal area, intended for private use, and is not 
adjacent to an external wall.
In Figure 5, there are two alpha zones and one beta zone. The 
example also shows that the two zones do not touch. Between two 
zones, there is always an area called a margin, which is defined as 
follows: a margin is an area between two zones, with the charac￾teristics of both these zones and taking its name from them.
Because a margin has the characteristics of the two adjacent 
zones, we name it after these zones: between an alpha and a 
beta zone, there is an alpha/beta margin (see left-hand drawing 
in Figure 5).
Within a Base Building, the area that is used for the planning 
of the dwelling can always be divided into alpha and beta zones. 
But there are, in addition, other spaces that are outside the dwell￾ing itself, which can also be classified into zones. The building that 
has been chosen as an example could have spaces for balconies 
or porches, outside spaces that are really part of the dwelling unit 
and are intended for private use. These are called delta zones. A 
delta zone is an external area intended for private use.
According to this definition, a garden, for example, will be 
located in the delta zone. Between the alpha zone and the 
delta zone is the alpha/delta margin (see middle drawing in 
Figure 6).
The separation between inside and outside occurs in the 
alpha/delta margin; in other words, the façade is in that mar￾gin. So, when a designer indicates the alpha/delta margin, they 
indicate the area in which the façade must be located. When this 
margin is wide, it means that the façade does not have to be in a 
uniform plane from dwelling to dwelling or bay to bay.
In the illustration on the right side of Figure 6, the area on 
the other side of the dwelling unit provides public access to the 
dwelling. This zone is the gamma zone, thus: A gamma zone can 
be internal or external but is intended for public use.
Figure 4 In a hypothetical Base Building, we ask what it can accommo￾date. To assist, we add the idea of minimum and maximum depth of 
spaces – the basis for zones and margins (drawing on the right) (Source: 
Habraken et al., 1972)
Figure 5 Alpha and beta zones and margins in between them (Source: 
Habraken et al., 1972)148
CAPACITY ANALYSIS – A KEY TOOL OF THE OPEN BUILDING APPROACH
An alpha/gamma margin occurs between the alpha and 
gamma zones. From top to bottom, we can identify the delta, 
alpha, beta, alpha and gamma zones with margins between 
them. This zone distribution represents either a row house or gal￾lery access apartment, with a street or open access gallery on one 
side and a private balcony, porch or yard on the other.
It should be clear that other types of housing (e.g., dou￾ble-loaded corridor type) can also be characterized by indicating 
their own zone/margin distribution.
The designer of a Base Building uses an arrangement of these 
zones as a base to draw conclusions in the design process. The 
zones also enable a design team to find the best location for 
ducts, openings in floors and walls, places to connect wiring and 
piping from the Base Building to those in the Infill, and so on.
At the same time, the zones allow the designers to judge the 
implications of these decisions on the possible arrangements of 
remaining spaces. One might say that each decision that adds 
elements to the Base Building will limit the number of variations 
possible in the building’s design.
Each decision in the design of a Base Building must therefore be 
judged on its impact on the possibilities it gives and the possi￾bilities it eliminates. In other words: the zones are a tool that 
enables the designer to relate each technical decision to possi￾bilities of use and, vice versa, to relate each general requirement 
of use to its technical implications.
The general rule formulated in what has been explained so far 
– that specific living/working spaces should end in two succeed￾ing margins – leaves so much open that experienced designers 
will feel the need to add other rules in the course of the design 
process. Such additional rules can be a great help in further organ￾ization of a Base Building framework and give the parties involved 
in the design process the means to translate more specific require￾ments into the same language.
Examples of such additional rules could be:
• Sanitary cells will be found only in β zones
• Or sanitary cells will be found either in β zones or α β margins
• Bedrooms (in housing or healthcare facilities) will be found 
only in α zones
• Load-bearing elements will not be found in α zones
• Vertical MEP shafts will be found only in α β margins
It is precisely this possibility to add specific rules as the design 
process proceeds that makes good communication possible. Each 
general decision can thus be formulated, and its implications can 
be studied by the parties involved.
Sectors
A sector is a certain free length of a set of zones with their adja￾cent margins. For example, the space between two load-bearing 
walls or between other structural columns in a Base Building can 
be called a Sector. Zones give only one dimension; sectors give 
two. A Sector can be analyzed on its possibilities of use for differ￾ent combinations of functions. Base Buildings may have material 
(e.g., columns or bearing walls or partial bearing walls) that inter￾sect the zones. Therefore, the analysis of the resulting sectors is 
an important exercise in the evaluation process.
The sectors are the built spaces given to the occupant (house￾hold, medical department, classroom grouping, etc.) for further 
partitioning or combination into a specific functional unit (e.g., 
a dwelling, an office suite, a classroom cluster, a medical depart￾ment, etc.). We can say that, for example, a dwelling in a Base 
Building is a Sector group. In that case, in principle, each group of 
adjacent sectors can be a functional unit.
Basic Variants
If a given sector group can be seen as an area for a functional 
unit, then a great many possible floor plans can be expected in a 
Figure 6 Alpha, beta, delta, gamma zones and their adjacent margins
(Source: Habraken et al., 1972)
Figure 7 A diagram of a zone and its adjacent margins and possible use 
that can be accommodated in various ways (e.g., bedroom) (Source: 
Habraken et al., 1972)149
CAPACITY ANALYSIS – A KEY TOOL OF THE OPEN BUILDING APPROACH
building composed of many sectors. Even if we only consider the 
floor plans according to the rules on which the building is designed, 
in most cases the number of possible variations is very great.
To get an idea of the number of variations in a given sector 
group, the concept of basic variations is important. A basic vari￾ant is a notation of the position of functions for specific living/
working spaces and general living/working spaces.
As shown in Figure 9, the different functions attached to the 
spaces can be coded (e.g., LR, BR, ER (exam room), etc.). In the 
drawings of sectors, the codes for the space functions are noted. 
This notation does not give the dimension of the space required. 
It only states that the function stated can be located in that place. 
Such a notation in the area of one functional unit (sector group) 
gives a basic variant.
In any given area, the series of possible basic variants can be 
written out. They give a considerable amount of information on 
the different living/working patterns possible in the given area. 
Each basic variant gives a great many possible subvariants: that 
is, specific floor plans that all have the same functional pattern.
An analysis of the basic variants gives valuable information on 
the properties of a given design.
GRIDS AS DESIGN TOOLS FOR BUILDINGS AND URBAN 
TISSUES
The purpose of grids is to help position objects in space. Dimen￾sion follows from where things are. In using grids as design 
tools, it’s good to remember that position comes first, followed 
by dimension. Positioning of parts relative to grid lines can be 
Figure 9 Diagrams of basic variants in one dwelling (sector group) (Source: Habraken et al., 1972)
Figure 8 A diagram of several sector groups with indications of possible 
uses shown, such as L for living, K for kitchen, B1/B2 for different sizes of 
bedrooms, etc. (Source: Habraken et al., 1972)150
CAPACITY ANALYSIS – A KEY TOOL OF THE OPEN BUILDING APPROACH
subjected to rules. For instance, we can stipulate that an element 
is on the center line of a grid line or between two lines. Each 
system may have its own positioning rules, determining how the 
relations of parts will be decided. Knowing position rules of two 
systems, we know how these systems may relate. With the help 
of grids, traffic of parts in space can be organized in three dimen￾sions. (See the NEXT21 case for example)
Kinds of Grids
Some regard Lucien Kroll as an anarchist architect. He is known 
for his renovations of massive housing blocks first built in the 
1960s and 1970s in Europe. He partially erodes these monolithic 
blocks to then graft onto them domestic elements like bay win￾dows, gables, dormers, French balconies and windows like strange 
weeds growing from rocks. He first gained fame for his design 
of the student union building in Louvain – La Neuve University. 
The façade of the building is a collage of varied elements, each 
designed by another member of his team. Some of the masonry 
work is the result of free improvisation by masons encouraged by 
the architect to exercise their creativity. Inside, students designed 
dormitories by themselves, producing spaces no architect ever 
dreamed of.
Few know that this idiosyncratic complexity is governed by 
well-ordered modular principles with which the architect was 
thoroughly conversant. Kroll understood early on that freedom 
thrives on the systemic – that indeed, systems spawn complexity 
and variety. Not surprisingly, he used the computer long before 
most of his colleagues did.
Unfortunately, grids have become confused with architectural 
shapes, giving both architecture and grids of all kinds a bad 
name. But the purpose of modular grids is not to make grid-like 
forms.
As Kroll and others such as Frank Lloyd Wright demonstrate, the 
modular grid is a tool for positioning building parts and commu￾nicating their position in an efficient manner. With this under￾standing, grids as such do not dominate the forms they serve. 
After all, we do not expect the coordinates used to map the earth 
to be visible in the waves of the ocean, nor would we expect 
coastlines, mountain ridges, rivers and ships to follow those grid 
lines on any consistent basis. Of course, there are exceptions. For 
instance, the surveyors involved in the settlement of the Ameri￾can West used the rectangular coordinates of longitude and lat￾itude to lay out vast areas for settlement. We can still see the 
evidence of this flying over the mid-western United States. Yet 
we can determine without error where all objects are located on 
the earth’s surface and what distance they are from one another. 
Today, discrete global grid systems (DGGS) are used to index 
data on the spherical earth as a basis for GIS (geographic infor￾mation systems).
In the past, spatial coherence among parts in the composi￾tion of buildings was related to the size of common elements. 
Northwestern European architecture was measured by the size of 
the bricks. All dimensions of windows, doors, walls and buttresses 
were expressed in ‘headers’ derived from the short side of the 
brick. In Japan, of course, the tatami is the unit of design in tradi￾tional architecture, albeit with two predominant sizes, one prev￾alent in the Tokyo region, another in the Osaka/Kyoto region. In 
North American balloon or platform frame building, the distance 
between studs served as a module: three of them to fit in 4 feet, 
the latter being the size of drywall and plywood or other kinds of 
sheet material.
We know that dimensions of building parts were never exact 
multiples of either bricks or tatami or center-to-center distances 
between studs or posts. Bricks have mortar joints, and therefore, 
a header is a brick width plus a joint, and physical sizes derived 
from the header are plus or minus joints. Likewise, rooms b a s e d 
o n tatami mats are separated by walls and wall thickness is to be 
either added to or subtracted from the multiple of tatami to arrive 
at a true size of a space or a wall.
The point is that traditional building practice used sophis￾ticated systems of dimensioning, understood by all parties 
involved, from producers to users. Their value was not in stand￾ardization of parts – tatami may vary in exact dimension from 
region to region, and bricks of all sizes are available – but in 
efficiency of communication among parties. When carpenters 
were told what size of brick was to be used and how many 151
CAPACITY ANALYSIS – A KEY TOOL OF THE OPEN BUILDING APPROACH
headers the window size was to be, they could make a window 
that would fit. Vernacular dimensional language was a device to 
coordinate work by the trades.
Today’s pluriform environment doesn’t allow a single product 
like a brick to support all communication in the field anymore. 
The building is now a composition of systems, each with its own 
modular principles. Different buildings may contain different sys￾tems and materials. We therefore would benefit from new means 
to keep track of the distribution of parts in space and of their 
dimensional interdependence. Grids help us do this. They serve to 
locate parts in space and to determine how shifting of one part 
may affect the size of another.
In the early work at the SAR, when work was underway to 
develop methods for architects to design Base Buildings when 
floor plans were not known, the problem of coordination was 
quickly identified as a crucial issue. At the same time, studies 
in modular coordination were underway in Europe. SAR pro￾posed the use of a band grid such as in the two figures below, 
based on the international standard of a 4" (10-cm) planning 
module.
In fact, for a single large project, more than one grid may be 
used (again, refer to NEXT21 at the beginning of the book). Start￾ing from a basic grid, other grids, serving their own systems, may 
have modules derived from the base grid module by multiplica￾tion or subdivision.
Interrelated grids may operate on different levels of interven￾tion as well. A building’s structure, for instance, may be based 
on a module of 5 feet, while a single foot or even 4 inches may 
be best for the deployment of partitioning and other fit-out 
subsystems.
Grids in Urban Design
In urban design, on the other hand, modules of 10 or 20 feet may 
be in order. Such modules can be coordinated with building-level 
grids of finer grain. In no case, however, are grids meant to ‘give 
form’ or in other ways define the architectural or urban qualities. 
Grids are meant to position elements in space relative to other 
elements. Grids can be useful in establishing the parameters of 
building design done by other parties, as the following diagrams 
show (Habraken et al., 1981). (These are just 6 diagrams from a 
series of 12 from this study.)
Figure 10, 11: A band grid with 30 cm (12") center-to-center spacing and a diagram showing that rules can be set for positioning material elements. E.g., 
Base Building walls can be placed in or end in a 20-cm band, while Infill walls can be placed in or end in the 10-cm band (Source: Habraken et al., 1972)
Figure 12 Multiple related grids used in planning NEXT21 (Source: 
Shu-Ko-Sha Architecture and Urban Design Studio)152
CAPACITY ANALYSIS – A KEY TOOL OF THE OPEN BUILDING APPROACH
This particular street is raised 6½" above the normal street 
level. A sidewalk is again 3½" higher. This creates a garage level 
under the building that can be reached from the street. The 
street itself, however, stays in close relation with the first floor 
of the building proper. The whole cross section is laid out on a 
band grid of 4" × 8" intervals in a rhythm of 4", 8", 8", 4", 8", 
8", 4", etc. In the other direction, there is a straight rhythm of 
8" intervals not shown here. This rhythm creates a larger inter￾val of 20". from the center of one 4" band to the center of the 
next 4" band.
An important principle of the method followed here is that 
each element within the agreements of the urban design theme 
must follow clearly defined position rules. In this case, for 
instance, one rule implies that a building’s façade will always be 
placed within a 4" band and that, unless explicitly stated other￾wise, all columns will be placed in the 4" bands. It follows from 
this that there is a certain margin of variation for the façade but 
that it is a narrow one. The face of the façades – as we will see 
later on – can, within that margin, step back and forth a few feet. 
Had the rule been chosen that the façade would be in the 8" 
band, the freedom to stagger the façade would obviously have 
been much greater.
Although within these position rules it is not yet known exactly 
where a façade wall will be, it is known ‘nominally.’ In the discus￾sion of the rules, we will work within the nominal dimensions. For 
instance, the building here is nominally two 20" modules deep. 
With the rule adopted here, that the face of the façade must lie in 
the 4" band, the actual distance between the two outer faces of 
the front and back can vary 2" × 4". In the same manner, we see 
that the street is 8" × 20" wide nominally.
With the profile from Figure 13 as a given, we can develop 
a series of alternative cross sections of a superblock of which 
the raised residential road is the spine (Figure  14). Cross 
section A1 is perhaps the most ‘normal’ one. Behind the build￾ings along the residential spine, we see backyards over the 
garage. Another building faces the outside of the block. From 
there, A2 follows by adding a pedestrian street with another 
building.
There is, however, another alternative in which the pedestrian 
street is placed immediately behind the first buildings along the 
spine B1. From there, B2 and B3 follow. Obviously, in these alter￾natives, the backyard spaces of the buildings along the spine will 
be on the side of the raised residential street that forms the spine. 
In these instances, backyards will take the position of the side￾walks in A1 and A2. Note that the grid lines given in this sketch 
are 40" apart (see also Figure  13). The pedestrian streets are 
therefore nominally 20" wide.
The cross sections of Figure 14 are minimal cross sections. 
They give a backyard space – including the fire lane – from 
building to building of 80" nominally with four large modules. 
Other larger dimensions could have been chosen. Each dimen￾sion includes from four to seven large modules and gives its own 
possible arrangement of cars and lanes in the below-grade park￾ing space.
On the left-hand side of Figure 16, we again have the building 
along the raised residential street. If the ground floor is for com￾mercial use, it should be at sidewalk level. The right-hand sections 
give the same building but this time with a raised floor along the 
sidewalk. This should be adopted if dwellings are to be on the 
ground floor. The distribution of other floor levels is devised in 
such a way that dwellings can have two floors – always with at 
least one room of greater height that connects both floors. Verti￾cal dotted lines are 20" modules.
This sketch illustrates the possible interplay of urban spaces 
and buildings. The sketch is done on the 40" module. It also illus￾trates how the ‘thematic’ position of the elements (the buildings 
Figure 13 This diagram gives a cross section through a building and half of 
a street (Source: Habraken et al., 1981)
Figure 14 Alternative cross sections of a superblock (Source: Habraken 
et al., 1981)153
CAPACITY ANALYSIS – A KEY TOOL OF THE OPEN BUILDING APPROACH
in this example) can be interrupted to create a recognizable and 
site-specific tissue.
Summary of the Use of Grids in Designing
In summary, grids are tools for positioning elements in space – 
buildings, streets, partitions, mechanical systems and so on. 
They are not meant to dictate built form or dimensions. Even 
on a single level (e.g., urban design, building design, Infill, 
etc.), we always find ourselves coordinating a variety of sub￾systems. We know that each may have its own positioning 
rules for deployment. Using position rules for building parts 
in space is not unlike using a beat in music. It gives a base for 
modulation. The grid may be rigid and repetitive like a single 
beat, but positioning rules may allow for a variety of place￾ments of the same part, and we are always free to ignore rules 
or to deviate from them for the sake of the overall composition. 
Even a deviation is a known position in the grid, as longitude 
and latitude are used to position us on the earth’s surface. In 
this way, the grid becomes a design tool; not a form but a 
means for making form.
Figure 17 This diagram gives possible positions of party walls at grid lines 
8" apart. Building widths will be increments of 8" (Source: Habraken 
et al., 1981)
Figure 18 Sketch of the A2-type tissue (Source: Habraken et al., 1981)
Figure 15 Cross sections of Figure 14 (Source: Habraken et al., 1981) Figure 16 Rules on vertical dimensions shown in a cross section diagram
(Source: Habraken et al., 1981)
It’s worth noting that when SAR65 was developed, computers 
as design aids did not exist. Now, with powerful computational 
tools at our disposal, it remains to be seen what can be done with 
the use of grids as tools.
READINGS
Habraken, N.J., et al. (1972). Variations: The Systematic Design of 
Supports. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Habraken, N.J., Aldrete-Hass, J., Chow, R., Hille, t., Krugmeier, P., Lamp￾kin, M., Mallows, A., Mignucci, A., Takase, Y., Weller, K., Yok￾ouchi, T. The Grunsfeld Variations: A Report on the Thematic 
Development of an Urban Tissue. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Kendall, S.H., Kurmel, T.D., and Dekker, K.D. (2012). Healthcare facil￾ities design for flexibility. Final report. Cost Modeling Work￾shop: Analysis of Initial Capital Asset Investment and Future 
Costs of Adaptation. Prepared by the National Institute of 
Building Sciences, Washington, DC, pp 153–174.154 DOI: 10.4324/9781003243076-20
A Detailed Study of Capacity Analysis in 
Adaptive Reuse – Office to Residential
In what follows, we present a study of how the Open Building 
approach can be used in the conversion of an obsolete office build￾ing to residential use. We should note that the Capacity Analysis
process discussed in what follows is not what actually happened.
• The Challenge of Conversion of Office Buildings to Residential 
Use
• Getting the Design Constraints Right
• Studying MEP Constraints is a First Step for Capacity Analysis
• DWV Systems in an Open Building Design Strategy
• Description of Fixtures
• Organizing Piping Traffic Inside Infill Partitions
• Capacity Analysis Study of the Kales Building
• An Open Building Alternative to Conversion
• Vertical MEP Pipe Shaft Positioning Study
• A Design Process for Conversion Using Capacity Analysis
• Organizing Drainage Piping in a Bathroom in Three Variants
• Conclusions
THE CHALLENGE OF CONVERSION OF OFFICE 
BUILDINGS TO RESIDENTIAL USE
In 2023, at the time of writing this book, a great deal of attention 
was being paid to the huge stock of downtown office buildings 
around the United States – and much of the world – that have 
become underutilized due to a widespread shift to working from 
home and other fundamental changes in the nature of work. This 
current reality presents a problem for building owners who have to 
carry real estate portfolios at a substantial financial loss. It also means 
that the economic and social life of downtowns face new pressures 
to adapt to the new realities. Some writings cast this as a tipping 
point in the way we invest in real estate: from design for single use 
to design beyond single use – or design for change more generally.
This is not an entirely new problem, having been recognized 
decades ago, leading to a number of research projects and confer￾ences in many countries. However, the magnitude might be new, 
at least in some locales. In any case, the rapid upsurge of office 
building vacancy rates has forced think tanks, city planners, build￾ing owners, financial institutions and others to ask the question if 
these buildings could be quickly and cost-effectively reconfigured 
or converted to other uses. Conversion to residential use is now 
the prime but not the only targeted new use. Urban designers, 
architects and engineers are taking this seriously, along with 
investors, developers, affordable housing advocates as well as 
construction companies and manufacturers of building elements.
But because most buildings have not been designed for change 
and are largely designed and financed for single uses, the whole￾sale conversion of office buildings to other uses remains confused 
and expensive. Conversion is often complicated by excessively 
‘deep’ floor plates, obsolete regulations, design practices and 
construction methods. This fact is belied of course in the case 
of such buildings as the former John Hancock tower in Chicago 
and many other very large buildings, which have, over time, seen 
many uses occupying them. But, as we noted before, we know 
next to nothing about this because there are so few longitudinal 
studies examining what takes place when such changes occur.
One thing we can be sure of: the issue of territory – discussed 
earlier in the book as the needed territorial autonomy of occupan￾cies in multi-occupant buildings – is always present as a challenge 
but is rarely addressed.
GETTING THE DESIGN CONSTRAINTS RIGHT
Before embarking on a full capacity analysis, a few words are 
necessary about getting the design constraints right. There are 
hundreds of design constraints guiding us when we are designing. 
There are two basic kinds of constraints in all design processes: 
implicit and explicit.
Firstly, there are always, in a design situation, a large number 
of implicit constraints that are so obvious to us that we do not 
bother to formulate them. No one would propose to place the 
bed in front of the door. This indicates that we always operate in 
an implicit solution space that is already much smaller than the 
one bounded by the explicit constraints . . .
Secondly . . . there are additional constraints that must be made 
explicit . . . constraints can only come from the consideration of 
possible – desirable or undesirable – alternatives. Without such 
alternatives there is nothing to approve of or to reject, and we 
cannot learn about our values and preferences. (Habraken, 2019)155
A DETAILED STUDY OF CAPACITY ANALYSIS IN ADAPTIVE REUSE – OFFICE TO RESIDENTIAL
STUDYING MEP CONSTRAINTS IS A FIRST STEP FOR 
CAPACITY ANALYSIS
Of the hundreds of constraints involved in any design process, 
of both kinds noted, we think that there is little doubt that 
constraints having to do with mechanical, electrical/data and 
plumbing (MEP) systems and pathways have become increas￾ingly complex in all kinds of buildings as well as at the level of 
urban planning and design. These elements of infrastructure 
wend their way inside buildings and under streets, connecting 
daily life to both supply and disposal systems that have come 
to dominate our infrastructure planning at all levels. They cross 
territorial boundaries and levels of interventions, from furnishings 
to Infill walls and ceilings to Base Building parts of these systems, 
to power generation plants and waste treatment facilities at the 
city or regional level.
In the design of projects in which each unit of occupancy is 
fully independent (a basic Open Building principle), the design 
of the pathways for these elements of infrastructure plays a 
dominant role. Unfortunately, they are too often left to be 
solved after floor plans are decided or are decided in detail on 
the site by the subcontractor who gets there first. When we 
implement a project using the Open Building approach – either 
a new project or a conversion such as the study discussed here – 
we can’t afford to be casual about these pathways and their 
interfaces.
In the case study of the capacity analysis that follows, there￾fore, figuring out the MEP pathways constraints is a central focus.
Experience is showing that a raised floor of varying thickness in 
tenant spaces (for horizontal pathways of drainage and other pip￾ing, wiring and ducts) is often very helpful to achieve full floor plan 
autonomy in multistory buildings, including allowing the position 
of bathrooms and kitchens to part of Infill. If the placement of 
bathrooms is fixed, then such raised floors are not such a neces￾sity. (See the TILA case at the beginning of the book.) Use of a 
raised floor or a hollow floor allows floor plan layout decisions on 
one floor to be made without entangling the spaces below. (See 
PlusHome, TOPUP and NEXT21 at the beginning of the book.)
In new construction, we now see a trend toward ‘depressing’ 
the floor elevation of tenant spaces some distance below the floor 
elevation of public spaces/corridors. This provides pathway space 
under raised floors in tenant spaces (usually classified as Infill ele￾ments) for horizontal MEP systems (see TOPUP).
However, the use of such raised floors, no matter how thin, is 
not possible in an adaptive reuse or conversion project unless one 
of several design strategies is implemented:
1. Installation of a raised floor throughout the entire floor plate 
on each floor. This may require installation of new fire stairs to 
align with the new ‘raised floor’ elevation of the public corri￾dors and, at the same time, adjustment of the elevator stops 
to align with the new elevation of the public corridors.
2. Maintain the fire stairs and elevator stops at their existing ele￾vations along with the public corridors. Once inside the front 
door of each occupant space, enter a ‘foyer’ whose floor is at 
the same elevation as the public corridor. Then, one or two 
steps (depending on the thickness of the new raised floor) 
or a ramp leads up onto the new raised floor of the unit of 
occupancy, under which unit-specific (Infill) horizontal piping 
and other mechanical systems are installed. This is problem￾atic because ramps consume space but may be needed when 
handicapped accessibility is required.
3. Adopt a ‘thick-wall’ strategy for horizontal routing of drain￾age and other piping inside tenant spaces, thus avoiding 
any change in the floor elevations of either public space 
or occupancy spaces but necessitating the placement of a 
number of strategically positioned vertical ‘pipe’ shafts in 
the floor plate.
The latter strategy (#3) is a design constraint used in the conver￾sion study that follows. It presents certain very specific issues that 
are explained.
In conventional residential high-rise buildings, drainage pipes 
of an individual sanitary fixture, bathtub or shower penetrate ver￾tically through the floor at or near each fixture (see Figure  1). 
During conventional design processes, such penetrations are 
determined after the layout plan is fixed. There are few or almost 
no horizontal connections between fixtures inside the same dwell￾ing unit. Horizontal drain lines serving fixtures in one dwelling are 1
A DETAILED STUDY OF CAPACITY ANALYSIS IN ADAPTIVE REUSE – OFFICE TO RESIDENTIAL
That is, when there are 20 sanitary fixtures, tubs and showers in 
one floor, it might require 20 penetrations of the floor slab. It’s 
no wonder that there are always many dozens of penetrations 
in a residential high-rise building. The challenges are many: each 
penetration must be fire-stopped; the exact position of the pen￾etration is critical to align with fixtures and partitions; errors are 
very expensive to correct and may come into conflict with struc￾tural elements.
After a building is designed and built in a conventional way, 
plumbing pipes are fixed to and through the floors. This results in 
a kind of dependency and rigidity among stacked vertical dwelling 
units, making dwelling unit layouts heavily dependent on other 
floors above and below. Once a typical floor is designed, there is 
very little freedom to obtain a significantly different unit layout for 
other floors – or to change layouts at any time – because of the 
drainage piping entanglement.
The entanglement between piping and the building construc￾tion causes trouble in at least four ways – from preconstruction to 
postconstruction use and future changes.
1. First of all, for architects, this entanglement causes multiple 
redesigns before construction begins and results in the like￾lihood of change orders later, often without fee compensa￾tion unless this is understood when writing the agreement 
for professional services. The problem is that layout deci￾sions are interdependent among floors. Once a floor layout 
is determined (or changed), especially in regard to drainage 
plumbing, the other floor layouts have to correspond. With￾out confirming the architectural plan, other consultants such 
as mechanical and electrical and even structural engineering 
can’t work independently or efficiently. The excessive interde￾pendency causes design delay and conflicts. Decision flexibility 
is severely reduced.
56
Figure 1 Floor penetrations for each plumbing fixture are indicated in red in an actual multifloor building in the United States (Source: Li, 2004)
Figure 2 Two ways of handling drainage piping in stacked occupancy 
territories: The top (upper level) is problematic because drainage pipes 
penetrate the floor slab, causing significant limitations on future fixture 
relocations and causing potential legal disputes during maintenance, 
or when changes are made in that unit, implicating the dwelling unit 
below. The preferred solution is shown in the "Main Level" in which all 
horizontal drain lines remain within the unit's territorial boundaries before 
attaching to the Base Building's common vertical shaft (Source: Li, 2004)
conventionally hidden in the ceiling of the dwelling unit immedi￾ately below (see Figure 2).
As a result, there are usually the same number of penetrations 
in the floor as there are plumbing (bathroom or kitchen) fixtures. 157
A DETAILED STUDY OF CAPACITY ANALYSIS IN ADAPTIVE REUSE – OFFICE TO RESIDENTIAL
2. Second, these plumbing entanglement problems produce 
high-rise residential building designs that can offer only a very 
few unit plans or mix variations from floor to floor. There￾fore, conventional multifloor residential buildings cannot offer 
variation corresponding to real variation found in the market. 
Again, decision flexibility is severely reduced, both in rental 
projects and in for-sale projects.
3. Third, the entanglement of pipes causes boundary conflicts 
and legal disputes between dwelling units. In the US, con￾dominiums are well known to be the most legally troubled 
building type, perhaps due in part to this problem. For exam￾ple, when a drainage pipe serving the upper floor is leaking, it 
causes inconvenience for the lower-floor unit and violates ter￾ritorial autonomy. Individual fixture penetrations on the floor 
can increase the potential of floor leaking issues.
4. Finally, these entanglements cause difficulties for future adap￾tations. Once a conventional building is built, it is almost 
impossible to have a bathroom on a given floor move to 
another location or even to be enlarged in the same location 
with additional or upgraded fixtures and layouts.
In the Open Building approach, dividing a building into two design 
tasks also means dividing the design of drainage system (and other 
MEP systems). Drainage pipes and other MEP infrastructure parts 
positioned inside an MEP shaft (including the floor penetration) 
should be regarded as a part of the Base Building, because these 
elements serve multiple occupancy units and require replacement 
only at 30- to 50-year intervals – lasting longer than the Infill 
portions of these same systems. All drainage pipes inside a unit of 
occupancy’s territory belong to the Infill. The largest of these are 
pipes requiring a slope, carrying black wastewater to their corre￾sponding drainage pipes located inside MEP shafts.
This is quite different from conventional projects where the 
distinction between ‘common’ and ‘individual’ drainage piping is 
confused, as the above shows.
DWV SYSTEMS IN AN OPEN BUILDING DESIGN 
STRATEGY
Drainage piping (DWV or drain, waste, vent) is more difficult than 
other MEP system in housing compared to ventilation, cabling or 
water supply systems. In residential DWV systems, waste is car￾ried via water by means of gravity, but in ventilation, electrical or 
domestic water systems, gravity obviously does not apply.
In Open Building projects, there are several design restrictions 
in designing residential DWV systems. Dividing the plumbing sys￾tem into two decision levels requires knowledge of design con￾straints to guide design.
To accomplish this goal, initially, some fundamental rules or 
constraints are set as part of an Open Building strategy, a number 
of building codes are applied and some conventional practices are 
assumed as evaluation criteria. Accordingly, this study uses the 
following criteria:
1. Horizontal drainage pipes slope @ 1/8" per foot (a standard 
US code requirement)
2. All sanitary fixtures are above floor (rear-discharge) rough-in 
(OB principle)
3. All horizontal drainage pipes go into fit-out partition walls (but 
cannot cross doors) (OB principle)
4. All wastewater discharges into vertical MEP stacks inside the 
territorial unit (OB principle)
5. There are no floor penetrations except Base Building MEP 
shaft openings (OB principle)
6. The use of code-approved ‘air-admittance valves’ is assumed 
for all plumbing fixtures (except toilets)
7. HEPvO waterless waste valves (or their equivalent) are used for 
gray water drainage lines (replacing conventional ‘P’ traps)
8. We assume a separation of black- and gray-water drainage piping.
9. All products must be available in the US market.
DESCRIPTION OF FIXTURES
NOTE: In the following, the discussion of the alternative Open 
Building strategy, and all illustrations, are taken from a study 
by Li, Jing Qiang. 2004. Designing Constraints for Capacity 
Analysis of Residential Floor Areas; MARCH thesis under the 
supervision of Stephen Kendall, Ball State University.
There are typically seven fixture types in a residential dwelling 
unit. These fixtures are HVAC units, water heaters, washing 
machines, sinks, toilets, bathtubs and showers. In what follows, 158
A DETAILED STUDY OF CAPACITY ANALYSIS IN ADAPTIVE REUSE – OFFICE TO RESIDENTIAL
individual fixtures are briefly described and analyzed for the pur￾pose of developing design constraints.
Toilets
There are two kinds of flush systems in toilets. One is a pres￾sure-assisted flush system and the other is a gravity-flush system. 
The former is usually used in transportation vehicles (e.g., boats) 
or facilities with a lack of water, in installations where water con￾servation is important for reasons of economy or water scarcity or 
in installations where effluent must be pumped to a higher eleva￾tion. Increasing numbers of toilets in commercial establishments 
use pressure-assisted toilets. The second – gravity-flush – is the 
most conventional.
The second distinction in toilets is the direction of the out￾let or discharge. The conventional type in residential and many 
other applications is the downward outlet. This kind of fixture 
is floor mounted. The other type is rear discharge. This is availa￾ble in wall-hung (e.g., Geberit) and floor-mounted versions. The 
wall-mounted rear discharge type is familiar in institutions, public 
facilities and other situations were maintenance personnel like the 
absence of obstructions to cleaning the floors. Finally, we have 
the floor-mounted rear discharge type (see Figure 3).
Downward-discharge toilets cannot be applied in an Open 
Building installation because their waste outlet passes through the 
floor. It does not meet one of the criteria set earlier. The exception 
to this rule is the use of a raised Infill floor of sufficient height, 
under which horizontal drainage piping with required slope can 
be installed. This study does not utilize this approach. Further 
studies are needed using the raised-floor strategy.
In the floor-mounted rear-discharge type (Figure  3), the 
center-line of the outlet is 4" above the floor. This is an impor￾tant dimension, because it presents constraints in deciding the 
distance from the toilet to a MEP shaft and also the interrelations 
within partition walls, as the following sections show.
Similarly, water in bathtubs and showers is drained out by means 
of gravity. This causes difficulties in installing bathtubs or showers 
in an Open Building way because there is no space for a horizon￾tal pipe under the tub or shower, set at conventional elevations, 
to have enough slope to the main vertical drainage pipe in the 
MEP shaft. The only way to solve the problem is to raise the tub 
or shower base to get a reasonable height to slope the drainage 
pipe above the floor.
According to research of products on the market conducted 
for this study, there are basically two kinds of drain installations 
for bathtubs. One is the conventional way for bath drain instal￾lation, in which a pipe penetrates the floor at the fixture, with a 
‘P’ trap in the ceiling of the space below, therefore violating a key 
Open Building requirement. The second is called a ‘back-outlet’ 
Figure 3 Toilet product with the center-line of its rear outlet 4" above floor 
rough-in. This kind is available from several companies distributing their 
products in the US market such as Caroma, Inc.159
A DETAILED STUDY OF CAPACITY ANALYSIS IN ADAPTIVE REUSE – OFFICE TO RESIDENTIAL
type, for bath drain installation. It drains water horizontally with￾out a floor slab penetration at the fixture.
The rear-outlet drain installation of the bathtub and shower is 
selected for use in this study. To eliminate the problem of the ‘P 
trap’ for a tub or shower, the study uses a waterless waste-valve 
Figure 4).
ORGANIZING PIPING ‘TRAFFIC’ INSIDE INFILL 
PARTITIONS
In this study, all wastewater from each sanitary fixture goes 
through horizontal drainpipes placed inside Infill walls to verti￾cal drainpipes located in a Base Building MEP shaft. (Note: The 
actual enclosure of Base Building MEP shafts is part of the Infill.) 
For reasons of appearance, horizontal drainpipes in the Infill are 
placed inside partition walls (rather than surface mounted). In 
addition, electrical wiring, low-voltage wiring, and other wires 
go inside partitions and above dropped ceilings. Partitions in res￾idential units are typically very full of piping, wiring and ducts. 
In an Open Building installation, it is critical that these MEP lines 
be very carefully organized and not left to on-site decisions by 
plumbing subcontractors.
The following partition wall study was done as part of the 
study (Figures 5a, b, c). The goal is to design an Infill partition wall 
system that applies in Open Buildings Infill installations, that is
Figure 4 A waterless waste valve eliminates the need for a conventional 
‘P trap.’ (www.wavin.com/en-gb/catalog/waste-water/waterless-traps/
wavin-osma-hepvo-waste-valve)
a. Capable of carrying piping and wiring;
b. Can contribute to off-site kiting and on-site installation (not 
part of this study) but also
c. Makes future reconfigurations less costly and wasteful than 
today’s methods.
Infill partition walls with MEP carrying capability are interior 
nonbearing, light-gauge steel stud walls. They are also ‘wall-lin￾ers’ against demising walls between dwellings which do not 
include MEP systems.
Normally, in conventional partition walls, there are several 
openings in the studs for horizontal channel bracing. Wiring and 
piping run somewhat randomly through these openings. These 
openings are pre-punched; several models are available on the 
market. Some manufacturers offer customized punching for cus￾tomers’ special needs. Since there is already a service available in 
the market, a clear method regarding the position and dimension 
of these openings is needed.
In this study, wiring, drainage pipes and water supply piping 
all go into the Infill partition walls (and some above dropped 
ceilings). Therefore, it is important to have well-located and 
-dimensioned openings in studs to carefully organize the ‘traf￾fic’ consisting of drainage-pipes, water supply lines and wiring. 
All fixtures producing wastewater can be categorized in two 
partition zones based on their outlet height (Figure  6), large 
enough for drainage pipes to pass through and high enough 
to get the necessary slope inside the wall to reach the MEP 
stack. As known, 5½” studs with acoustical isolation material, 
are widely used as framing for Infill partition walls. Including 
½” gypsum board in both sides, the partition wall is 6½” thick. 
3½” studs are also used to accommodate smaller pipes and 
cabling.
Usually, toilet discharge pipes are 3" in diameter and other 
drainage pipes are 1½” or 2". Toilet drainage pipes (and drains 
from bath and shower tubs) are positioned in the lower drain zone 
(LDZ – see Figure 6). The higher drain zone (HDZ – Figure 6) is for 
lavatory and sink drain lines. Another ceiling zone is not shown.
After determining the openings in studs, a full description 
is possible regarding the organization of drainpipes inside the 160
A DETAILED STUDY OF CAPACITY ANALYSIS IN ADAPTIVE REUSE – OFFICE TO RESIDENTIAL
Figure 5a, b, c These diagrams use a digital model to help design the 
partition wall. In these diagrams, openings on studs are specified. Green 
pipes represent 1½"- or 2"-diameter drainage pipes serving fixtures with 
‘high’ outlets (e.g., kitchen sinks, lavatory bowls, etc.) They run through 
the higher opening (Figure 6). Purple pipes represent 3"-diameter drain￾age pipes which serve toilets and accept waste from green pipes. Dark￾brown pipes are vertical 5"-diameter drainage pipes that belong to the 
Base Building, gathering waste from all dwelling units and transporting the 
waste to the city drainage system. Figure 5b gives a 3-dimensional detail
partition walls in different circumstances. This can help in design￾ing better bathroom and kitchen layouts in which fixtures are 
given appropriate locations.
During the development of these design constraints in this 
study, difficulties and problems always occurred in the LDZ zone. 
One of the difficulties is solving piping connections in the lower 
drain zone (LDZ). For high drain zone (HDZ) and ceiling drain 
zone (CDZ, not shown), drainage pipes from fixtures can sim￾ply drop down to connect with the horizontal pipe below at an 
appropriate angle (Figure 6).
However, situations in the LDZ are different, because LDZ fix￾tures are only 1" to 2" higher than the LDZ horizontal discharge 
pipe. Therefore, angles from an LDZ fixture to a horizontal drain￾age pipe vary depending on the fixture’s location. The various 
angles and elevations are only predictable within a range. To give 
order to these conditions, an Open Building approach’s constraint 
is set for LDZ piping as follows: In LDZ, there will be an extra wall 
layer when drainage pipes from two LDZ fixtures discharge into 
the same partition wall.
CAPACITY ANALYSIS STUDY OF THE KALES BUILDING
Following an explicit determination of constraints (so far, the 
focus has been on the MEP systems; but many other constraints 
would ordinarily have to be established), a capacity analysis can 
be undertaken. The study that follows attempts to demonstrate 
the importance of ‘designing constraints’ when doing capacity 
analysis. It used the Kales Building, an historic 20-story office 
building in Detroit, Michigan, which was planned for conversion 
to residential occupancy (Figure 7).
The narrative that follows explains what actually happened, 
then follows with what an Open Building approach could have 
offered. We need to be clear that what is presented here was not 
implemented but was intended to show an alternative to conven￾tional practice.
Figure 6 The ideal stud design to accommodate both the LDZ and HDZ 
drain lines161
A DETAILED STUDY OF CAPACITY ANALYSIS IN ADAPTIVE REUSE – OFFICE TO RESIDENTIAL
A real estate development company began the process of pur￾chasing the property in question (an abandoned historic 20-story 
office building in Detroit) and obtained the approvals and financ￾ing to proceed with its conversion to 80 apartment units for the 
rental market. The development company began organizing the 
financing, including a mix of state and national historic tax credits 
and bank loans. In the beginning of the project, it conducted a 
market analysis to make a unit count decision, unit mix and unit 
layouts, as well as the rents. The first conversion design was based 
on those projections. Cost estimates were determined based on 
the roughly sketched architectural scheme and engineering 
designs (Figure 8).
However, the financing scheme had some difficulties, and 
other conditions in the market changed in terms of interest 
rates and competition in the local market. These uncontrollable 
changes caused the marketing plan for the building to change. 
The architect completely revised the unit mix and floor plans 
(Figure 9), with the same effect to the mechanical, electrical and 
plumbing designs and cost estimates. This happened three times 
(Figure 10) with no additional design fees. At a certain point, a 
Figure 7 The Kales Building in downtown Detroit, Michigan (Photo credit: 
Stephen Kendall)
Figure 8 This drawing shows the first schematic design of one typical 
lower floor with seven apartments (Source: BVH Architecture, Inc. Detroit, 
MI.)
decision was made to ‘freeze’ the design to enable building per￾mits to be granted, construction bids to be obtained and con￾struction undertaken.
AN OPEN BUILDING ALTERNATIVE TO CONVERSION
What follows is a methodical process, based in large part on the 
MEP constraints discussed earlier, in which a typical floor plate is 
analyzed to determine an optimum variety of unit sizes, given a 
‘reasonable’ target suited to the market. This involves a series of 
design studies in which two things are assessed.
• First, alternative placements of demising walls separating units 
are studied.
• Second, vertical MEP shafts are positioned.
Given an initial or trial layout of demising walls and shafts, the 
capacity of the floor plate to accommodate a range of unit sizes 
and the capacity of each demised space to accommodate a range 
of layouts is evaluated. Then MEP stacks are re-positioned, and the 
same capacity analysis is repeated. These studies are done using 162
A DETAILED STUDY OF CAPACITY ANALYSIS IN ADAPTIVE REUSE – OFFICE TO RESIDENTIAL
a test-fit process, in which accommodation capacity is evaluated 
given certain clearly defined technical and market constraints.
Before and during the test-fit process, some technical con￾straints need to be set up as criteria that can be used in evaluating 
the interim designs. As discussed, the focus in this study was on 
the development of design constraints in the plumbing system and, 
more specifically, in the DWV (drain, waste and vent) elements, 
with specific reference to the vertical MEP shafts and the ‘traffic 
management’ of DWV lines within individual units. We chose this 
focus because it is the most difficult of all of the utility systems.
In the test-fit process, many layouts were developed, using 
constraints derived from conventions in the industry and from a 
variety of technical studies based on Open Building principles. 
In this test-fit process, some layouts were inevitably found to be 
unacceptable (comparing them to conventional layouts and the 
layouts proposed by the project architect), while some others 
were satisfactory. Then, based on lessons learned, the MEP stacks 
are repositioned and the test-fit process repeated. This design 
process continues until an agreement is reached about optimum 
unit mix layout variety.
This design process is a trial-and-error process that eventually 
can become intuitive and may, in time, be supported by advanced 
computer-aided design once the problems and constraints are 
clearly formulated.
VERTICAL MEP PIPE SHAFT POSITIONING STUDY
In conventional building design processes, as noted, plumbing 
pipes penetrate floors in ‘sleeves’ depending on each fixture’s 
locations and the structural system design. This is because the 
plumbing design is done after the layout plan design is fixed and 
the practice of routing drain lines through dwelling unit territories 
below (hidden in ceilings) has been accepted.
However, as already noted, in the Open Building strategy cho￾sen for this study, potential layout plans are studied in advance 
by means of capacity analysis, including the Base Building MEP 
shaft locations. In this process, all reasonable and potential layout 
plans that a MEP shaft can accommodate are explored. However, 
it is difficult to position MEP stacks at the beginning of the design 
process, especially for those new to the Open Building approach.
To study the positioning of MEP shafts, a number of condi￾tions must be defined, including the organization of the (pro￾posed – in the case of a new building) floor plate of the building 
into zones adjacent to the façade(s), zones with no natural illumi￾nation and so on, oriented parallel to each other in one direction 
Figure 9 This drawing shows the second design round with six apartments 
(Source: BVH Architecture, Inc. Detroit, MI.)
Figure 10 Shows the third redo of the design due to the developer’s new 
market analysis. Now there are again seven units in a typical floor from the 
3rd to the 15th floor (Source: BVH Architecture, Inc. Detroit, MI.)163
A DETAILED STUDY OF CAPACITY ANALYSIS IN ADAPTIVE REUSE – OFFICE TO RESIDENTIAL
on a building floor plate. In addition, sectors can be defined. Sec￾tors are basically sections of the zones of a certain size, making 
up potential dwelling units (dwellings can consist of one or more 
sectors) or partial sectors. A given zoning can be divided into a 
variety of sectors. Within a given sector, the idea is that a number 
of functional area distributions (living room, kitchen, etc.) can be 
made.
Note: The basic strategy for zones, margins and sector analysis and 
related methods is given in the previous section of the book.
Once this basic zoning is done, more detailed issues such as MEP 
stack locations can be examined, as follows. Of the many con￾straints or conditions requiring consideration in this decision pro￾cess, two are mentioned and one is discussed in more detail.
• First, it is assumed that no drain piping serving an individual 
unit will penetrate the unit’s floor into the lower unit’s ‘terri￾tory’ or ceiling space.
• Second, it is assumed that no horizontal pipes within the unit 
will cross a doorway, as mentioned previously.
• Third, it is assumed that the location of MEP stacks is directly 
related to the structural system.
To demonstrate one condition in which the latter consideration is 
accounted for, we use the idea of a ‘space cell’ in a building using 
a column-and-beam structural system. This is the structural sys￾tem found in the Kales Building. This assumes either a steel beam 
and column or concrete two-way slab with reinforcing primarily 
between columns (Figure 11).
In Figure 11, five different zones are defined based on their 
spatial and structural system relations. Black stands for the Col￾umn Zone. Gray is added to zones between each column where 
beams or the main slab reinforcing are positioned, known as 
Beam Zones. There are always two light-gray zones on both sides 
of a Beam Zone: Along Beam Zones. Also, there are usually four 
orange zones located diagonally around a column, Around Col￾umn Zones. The rest of the space is the Center Bay Zone, which 
is shown in pale yellow.
When an architect subdivides such a space cell, Figure 12a is 
one normal way to make a smaller space. In Figure 12b, c, alter￾nate placements of the same subdivided space are regarded as 
unusual or less acceptable, especially in residential projects, 
because both create spaces around the space cell that may cause 
spatial inefficiencies.
In order to explore general constraints for positioning MEP 
stacks, Figure 11 is merged with Figure 12 to make Figure 13, in 
which an MEP stack is located in different zones to explore spatial 
capacity given alternative stack positions (shown with an X).
In Figure 13a, an MEP stack is located in the Center Bay Zone. 
In this circumstance, there are two locations that optimize access 
for bathroom placement: two good access locations and two 
unacceptable access locations.
Figure 11 Diagram of structural constraints for positioning vertical MEP 
shafts164
A DETAILED STUDY OF CAPACITY ANALYSIS IN ADAPTIVE REUSE – OFFICE TO RESIDENTIAL
In Figure 13b, an MEP stack is located in the Along Beam Zone. 
In Figure 13c, an MEP stack is located in the Around Column Zone. 
In both of these latter circumstances, there are four optimum access 
locations for the bathroom and two good access locations.
From the capacity analysis in this example, it is clear that 
Around Column Zone and Along Beam Zone are appropriate 
places for locating MEP stacks, and the Center Bay Zone is not as 
favorable. But in Figure 13a, after partition walls are removed and 
the MEP stack remains, it causes an awkward situation in which 
the space cannot be designed as a living room because the stack 
is standing in the middle of the space cell defined by the building’s 
columns. This greatly reduces the capacity of the space to accom￾modate a range of functional layouts. Similarly, in Figure 13b, the 
MEP stack’s position eliminates the possibility of combining two 
adjacent construction bays as one big open space such as a living 
room or combining two smaller dwelling units into one.
In other words, MEP stacks located in the Center Bay Zone 
or the Along Beam Zone eliminate important layout variations. 
The study concluded that Around Column Zones – but diagonally 
around the column – are always the priority locations for position￾ing MEP stacks. This principle appears to be generally applicable. 
However, in some specific circumstances, Along Beam Zones are 
also suitable for placing MEP stacks. Only in a few circumstances 
can Center Bay Zones be considered as suitable for placing MEP 
stacks.
Note: This kind of analysis will produce different results in, for 
example, wood- or steel-framed floors with one-way joists 
and beams, post-tensioned concrete slab floors or floors 
made of precast concrete elements or mass-timber panels.
A DESIGN PROCESS FOR CONVERSION USING 
CAPACITY ANALYSIS
The following is a step-by-step demonstration of how to design 
a floor plate in a high-rise building being converted to residential 
uses. In retrospect, the design process initially involved a great 
deal of trial and error. The following is an attempt to revisit the 
design process and therefore to clarify how capacity analysis is 
done for others who may get into the field and who may be 
asked to provide decision and design flexibility. However, resi￾dential design work is complex, requiring a certain level of pro￾fessional training and knowledge beyond what is explained here. 
This chapter does not try to explain every step. Many principles 
of common sense to professionals are assumed as conventional 
knowledge, for example, the arrangement of sanitary fixtures, 
normal room sizes and arrangements and so on. Many standards 
exist in handbooks and references, such as the proportion and 
layout of different-size rooms.
Step 1 – Initial Floor Plan Study Process
The developer was attempting to have the 20-story building listed 
as a historic building to obtain more lenient financing terms for its 
conversion to residential occupancy. An architectural firm (BVH 
Figures 12 a, b, c: Alternative positions of a given space cell
Figure 13 Positioning a space cell with plumbing fixtures vis-à-vis the 
column/beam diagram165
A DETAILED STUDY OF CAPACITY ANALYSIS IN ADAPTIVE REUSE – OFFICE TO RESIDENTIAL
Architecture Inc., Detroit, Michigan) had already developed a 
series of floor plate layouts and unit designs, as the Figures  8, 
9 and 10 show. It is probably a good idea to avoid studying the 
original plan drawings too closely except to understand the basic 
unit sizes and types. However, it is recommended that conven￾tional plans be reviewed after some variations are explored. They 
can provide baseline rationale as to “Why didn’t I use these unit 
plans?” “Are these plans better for the market?” and so on.
All interior non–load-bearing partitions and fixtures should be 
deleted from the original plan drawings, leaving the skeleton of 
the building (columns, floors, exterior walls) and the public cir￾culation (stairs, elevators, public corridors and walls and building 
risers and equipment rooms) (Figure 14).
Step 2 – Placing Demising Walls to Create Basic Unit Sizes and 
Margins
Using demising walls (walls separating different occupant spaces 
or legal ‘territories’), the floor plan can be divided into a num￾ber of average-size units. In this example, the average unit size is 
between 800 and 1,000 ft2
 (75–93 m2
), resulting in five basic units 
(Figure  15). Margins or ‘swing spaces’ can be placed between 
each unit based on the column arrangement and the openings in 
the exterior walls (Figure 16). Other demising wall distributions 
and margins in the same Base Building are possible based on dif￾ferent assumptions about unit sizes. It should be noted also that 
in the proposed unit distribution that follows, other variations of 
unit sizes are possible, such as very large units on the same floor 
as well as even smaller units.
Step 3 – Developing an Individual Dwelling Unit
Once a tentative distribution of unit ‘territories’ is made (Step 2), 
it is possible to explore the capacity of each territorial unit in terms 
of the floor plans it can accommodate. In this demonstration, Unit 
A is selected. Three dwelling unit sizes are found to be possible by 
placing the demising wall in three locations that share the same 
entry door to the unit (fixed as part of the Base Building decision).
Note: The decision to make the entry door to each dwelling unit 
part of the Base Building decision – therefore ‘fixed’ – is 
not always necessary but is a design constraint used in this 
demonstration.
It is highly recommended to choose the medium-sized unit to 
develop variations at the beginning. After developing the medi￾um-sized unit variations (most of these variations on layout ideas 
Figure 14 The Base Building after partition walls and fixtures are removed: 
the ‘shell’ of the building remains and is ready for capacity analysis studies 
and MEP stack location decisions
Figure 15 Five basic units are defined by using demising walls166
A DETAILED STUDY OF CAPACITY ANALYSIS IN ADAPTIVE REUSE – OFFICE TO RESIDENTIAL
are similar), they can be simply modified by enlarging or eliminat￾ing rooms.
Step 4 – Placing Rooms Inside the Unit
a. Rooms & unit shape study
Before starting this step, it’s necessary to study the relations 
between different functional areas (rooms) and the unit shape and 
size. In a typical residential unit, there are basically seven different 
kinds of spaces: living rooms, bedrooms, kitchen, bathroom(s), 
dining room, utility room and storage rooms or closets. Among 
these rooms, some (by code or convention) need to be next to 
an exterior wall; these are living room and bedroom (in some 
jurisdictions, for some buildings such as conversions, bedrooms 
need not be adjacent to the façade in cases in which high ceilings 
allow light and ventilation in bedrooms with partial-height walls 
or bedrooms built on a raised platform with lower walls). Some 
rooms are preferred to have exterior openings, such as the din￾ing room and kitchen. Bathrooms and kitchen do not necessarily 
have exterior openings; utility room, laundry room and storage 
room require no exterior openings (Table 1).
b. Study the capacity of the space
In order to understand the unit space and locate MEP stacks in 
suitable places serving a range of floor plans, the unit space is 
Figure 16 Margins or ‘swing spaces’ are created by shifting demising 
walls, giving a variety of unit sizes on a floor
Figure 17 Among three sizes, the medium-sized unit (A-b) is chosen for 
further study and development
studied and analyzed in different ways. In Figure 18, the func￾tional division of the space is analyzed. Based on the shape of 
the unit and also the depth and width, two zones are defined. 
One is the service zone and the other is a living zone. Living 
rooms and bedrooms are placed in the living zone, in which 
they can have exterior openings. Utility room, laundry room 
and storage rooms are placed in the service zone. Kitchen and 
dining room are placed between zones because they can be 
placed in either zone depending on the design circumstance.
c. Study the relation between rooms and MEP stacks
The second move is to categorize rooms by their relations 
with MEP stacks, yet to be positioned. Basically, there are 
three kinds of rooms. (1) Rooms that need to be directly next 
to an MEP stack. These are ‘public’ bathrooms and master 
TABLE 1
Relationship of spaces to exterior openings
Required to 
have exterior 
opening(s)
Prefer to 
have exterior 
opening(s)
Not necessary 
to have exterior 
opening(s)
Require no 
exterior 
opening(s)
Figure 18 Different rooms are placed in two zones inside a unit167
A DETAILED STUDY OF CAPACITY ANALYSIS IN ADAPTIVE REUSE – OFFICE TO RESIDENTIAL
bathrooms. (2) Rooms that need to have at least one contin￾uous wall without door openings connecting to a MEP stack; 
these are utility room, laundry room and kitchen. The distance 
from these rooms to the MEP stack can be further (up to 50') 
based on constraints introduced earlier. Rooms that need no 
wall and connections with MEP stacks include living rooms, 
bedrooms, dining room and storage room (Table 2).
d. Study the circulation flow inside the unit
The circulation of the layout plan also affects the locations of 
MEP stacks. Normally, in high-rise residential buildings, public 
spaces that are part of the Base Building – such as fire stairs, 
elevators and public corridors – are located in the core of the 
building. The result is that the entrance of the dwelling units is 
always located on the side of the dwelling unit’s service zone. 
Typically, there is always a circulation flow across the service 
zone distributing to each room (see Figure 19).
Step 5 – Locate the MEP Stacks
Note: In some countries or jurisdictions, MEP stacks must be 
placed adjacent to public corridors for easy access for pur￾poses of maintenance and upgrading. This limitation was not 
followed in this study.
a. Deciding on the number of MEP stacks in a unit
Theoretically, one MEP stack can serve one dwelling unit and 
a variety of layouts in it. However, there are two constraints 
in that case. (1) There are not many variations to be offered 
when there is only one MEP stack in one unit. (2) As shown in 
Figure 20, there is always a corridor crossing the service zone 
and dividing it into two parts. This crossing ‘cuts’ the service 
zone into two parts in which one MEP stack cannot connect 
to the other side of the corridor. Therefore, we decided that 
there should be two MEP stacks, located on both sides of 
the corridor. Subsequent drawings demonstrate these points 
more fully.
TABLE 2
Spaces in relation to adjacency to the MEP stack
Rooms needing to be 
directly adjacent to an 
MEP stack
Rooms needing to 
have a continuous 
wall connected to an 
MEP stack without 
door openings
Rooms with no need 
to connect to an MEP 
stack
Figure 19 A circulation zone passes through the service zone to each room 
inside the unit
b. Define suitable zone for MEP stacks
In this step, comprehensive knowledge is required as well 
as the sense of different room sizes. During this part of the 
design process, the layouts of different-sized rooms have been 
studied Knowledge of technical rules and design constraints 
proved to be useful in making MEP stack location decisions.
After studying various circumstances in terms of shape of 
the unit, circulation paths and so on, two zones suitable for 
placing MEP stacks are defined (Figure 20).
However, only defining suitable MEP zones is not enough 
to find the exact spots to locate MEP stacks. After the posi￾tioning zone diagram is overlaid on the appropriate construc￾tion bay diagram, 11 positions are defined. Those located at 
the intersections of the two diagrams can be defined as the 
more optimum MEP positions. In Figure  21, A, B, C, F, are 
located at the intersections of two overlapping diagrams. L, 
H, J, K are therefore not so suitable for placing MEP stacks. 
Figure 20 Two zones that are suitable for placing MEP stacks are shown168
A DETAILED STUDY OF CAPACITY ANALYSIS IN ADAPTIVE REUSE – OFFICE TO RESIDENTIAL
(Trial-and-error processes are already applied in those loca￾tions, demonstrating that they are not suitable for placing 
MEP stacks.)
Thus, A, B and C are defined as suitable locations for the 
MEP ‘below’ the circulation flow. Two (E and F) are suitable 
positions for the MEP stack on the other side of the circulation 
flow (Figure 21). These optional positions are suggested also 
in light of the earlier discussion of MEP stacks in relation to 
building structure.
c. Eliminating unsuitable MEP locations
In this step, optimal MEP locations can be selected by elim￾inating others based on the kind of ‘dialogue’ as follows. In 
Figure 21, A can be eliminated because it narrows the space 
of potential circulation flow; it creates a ‘not too big, not too 
small’ space in which a bathroom and a door entrance cannot 
fit; and it is too large only for an entrance doorway. When 
locating MEP stacks, it is recommended to think about or fore￾see (if not explicitly sketch) potential rooms around the MEP 
stack. Theoretically, an MEP stack should be surrounded by 
rooms that need to connect to it. Therefore, potential living 
Figure 21 Two diagrams are overlapped to define optimum locations for 
placing MEP stacks
Figure 22 After studying alternative locations of MEP stacks, the positions 
are fixed. Note: This study did not examine the precise dimension of the 
MEP stacks, which may vary in size from top to bottom in a tall building
room, dining room, storage rooms are better when they avoid 
MEP stacks.
A C position can also be eliminated because this is located on 
the ‘right’ side of the service zone, making the stack inaccessible 
to possible ‘plumbing-dependent’ spaces to the left side of the 
service zone in the diagram. Nevertheless, there are two poten￾tial circulation flows between the left side and C. In conclusion, 
they are not suitable locations for placing a MEP stack.
Similar to the situation of C and D, F can be eliminated.
Therefore, B and E are defined as suitable MEP locations to 
develop unit layout variations in this instance. Moreover, the 
orientation and size of a MEP stack should be determined dur￾ing the process of developing more detailed variations. Sizing 
the MEP stack is another design process not discussed here 
(Figure 22).169
A DETAILED STUDY OF CAPACITY ANALYSIS IN ADAPTIVE REUSE – OFFICE TO RESIDENTIAL
USING THE CONSTRAINTS
The following discussion demonstrates the use of these con￾straints in the Kales Building.
Note: It appears that these constraints are general and system￾atic enough for application in other high-rise residential floor 
plan capacity analysis. They are thus proposed as useful tools 
for practitioners who want to design Open Building projects 
under similar circumstances.
Figure 23 A diagram shows possible layout variations that the Kales Base Building can offer. For each dwelling size, a number of floor plans are possible170
A DETAILED STUDY OF CAPACITY ANALYSIS IN ADAPTIVE REUSE – OFFICE TO RESIDENTIAL
In Figure  23, MEP stacks are located as a part of the Base 
Building. As noted, demising walls can be positioned to create 
margins between units and result in units of various sizes (size var￾iations), for instance, A-a, A-b, . . . B-a, . . . For each size variation, 
various layout plans (unit layout variations) can be developed, for 
instance, A-a-1, A-a-2, . . . Therefore, there are approximately 60 
variations. Thirty variations have been developed for all three of 
the unit types (A, B and C).
In order to fully demonstrate the approach, four variations are 
selected out of a total of 30 to present more technical details. In 
these diagrams, the dark- and light-blue color stands for the Base 
Building; red zones are where MEP stacks can be located. (Actually, 
Figure 24 This is variation A-b-1 layout floor plan
MEP stacks belong to the Base Building, but are shown in red in order 
to emphasize them and make them easily visible). Walls in green are 
Infill walls; magenta walls are demising walls which separate unit ter￾ritories. The color cyan indicates areas that do not need MEP stacks. 
Orange areas indicate they have pipes going to the MEP stacks.
Note: In all cases, a heating and cooling unit is situated above 
a dropped ceiling in the entryway to the dwelling unit, sup￾plied by piping in the Base Building but thermostatically con￾trolled by each occupant.
a. Variation example: A-b-1171
A DETAILED STUDY OF CAPACITY ANALYSIS IN ADAPTIVE REUSE – OFFICE TO RESIDENTIAL
The layout floor in Figure 24 shows no differences to conven￾tional designs. However, the significant difference is that all 
drainage pipes have no entanglements with the building floors 
(or the Base Building). To approach these criteria, sanitary 
fixtures must follow the constraints developed earlier and use 
the technical methods for installation. The flowing diagrams 
show more details of the piping system for this unit.
Figure 25 Piping diagram A-b-1 layout floor plan172
A DETAILED STUDY OF CAPACITY ANALYSIS IN ADAPTIVE REUSE – OFFICE TO RESIDENTIAL
Figure 26 Horizontal pipe routing zones in A-b-1 layout floor plan173
A DETAILED STUDY OF CAPACITY ANALYSIS IN ADAPTIVE REUSE – OFFICE TO RESIDENTIAL
b. Variations example A-b-2
Figure 27 A layout variation for the A-b-2 size unit174
A DETAILED STUDY OF CAPACITY ANALYSIS IN ADAPTIVE REUSE – OFFICE TO RESIDENTIAL
Figure 28 Piping diagram A-b-2 layout floor plan175
A DETAILED STUDY OF CAPACITY ANALYSIS IN ADAPTIVE REUSE – OFFICE TO RESIDENTIAL
Figure 29 Horizontal pipe routing zones in A-b-2 layout floor plan176
A DETAILED STUDY OF CAPACITY ANALYSIS IN ADAPTIVE REUSE – OFFICE TO RESIDENTIAL
c. Layout variation for unit B-b-1
Figure 30 Variation B-b-1177
A DETAILED STUDY OF CAPACITY ANALYSIS IN ADAPTIVE REUSE – OFFICE TO RESIDENTIAL
Figure 31 Piping diagram for Variation B-b-1178
A DETAILED STUDY OF CAPACITY ANALYSIS IN ADAPTIVE REUSE – OFFICE TO RESIDENTIAL
Figure 32 Horizontal pipe routing zones in B-b-1 layout floor plan179
A DETAILED STUDY OF CAPACITY ANALYSIS IN ADAPTIVE REUSE – OFFICE TO RESIDENTIAL
Figure 33 Variation B-c-1
d. Variation B-c-1180
A DETAILED STUDY OF CAPACITY ANALYSIS IN ADAPTIVE REUSE – OFFICE TO RESIDENTIAL
Figure 34 Piping diagram for Variation B-c-1181
A DETAILED STUDY OF CAPACITY ANALYSIS IN ADAPTIVE REUSE – OFFICE TO RESIDENTIAL
Figure 35 Horizontal pipe routing for Variation B-c-1182
A DETAILED STUDY OF CAPACITY ANALYSIS IN ADAPTIVE REUSE – OFFICE TO RESIDENTIAL
Figure 36 These four situations are taken from the case study
ORGANIZING DRAINAGE PIPING IN A BATHROOM IN 
THREE VARIANTS
The following composite Figure 36 gives the relations between 
bathroom fixtures and a MEP shaft in the previous demonstration 
layouts. Four typical bathroom layouts are given (top to bottom in 
Figure 36) in order to describe a series of technical rules in organ￾izing the ‘traffic’ inside partition walls to satisfy the criteria. It is 
important to note that the study here focuses on fixture distances 
to a MEP shaft and fixture arrangements in a bathroom.
In the top diagram, a toilet and a bathtub discharge into the 
same partition wall, and the toilet is closer to the MEP shaft. 
Because toilet and bathtub belong to the LDZ, both of their 
drainpipes go through the LDZ opening in the stud. Moreover, 
they need to be separated in two drainpipes, because the toilet 
drains black water and the bathtub drains gray water. Therefore, 
an additional Infill wall is needed, to allow each drainpipe its own 
route to the MEP stack without interruption or collision.
The question of how to decide which pipe goes through which 
partition wall needs to be answered. In order to get more use￾ful floor space, additional wall thickness should be minimized. To 
approach this goal, another constraint is set: when toilet and other 
LDZ fixtures share one partition wall to route the drainpipes to the 
same MEP shaft, the discharge pipe of the fixture closer to the 
MEP shaft drains goes through the additional wall. As shown in 
the top diagram, toilet and bathtub share the same partition wall 
in draining, while the toilet is closer to the MEP stack. According 
to the draining rule, one additional wall is attached to the par￾tition wall between the toilet and the MEP shaft. Similarly, one 183
A DETAILED STUDY OF CAPACITY ANALYSIS IN ADAPTIVE REUSE – OFFICE TO RESIDENTIAL
additional wall is attached but for the bathtub to drain because 
the bathtub is closer to the MEP shaft than the toilet. However, 
in the third diagram, the toilet and bathtub are using different 
partition walls to drain. The ‘extra wall’ constraint does not apply 
to this circumstance.
CONCLUSIONS
Four findings emerged from studying the problems encountered in the 
conventional design process used for the Kales Building conversion:
1. The problem of unnecessary and uncompensated work for 
architects and engineers when the developer’s requirements 
are uncertain or changing
2. The problem of the insufficient decision flexibility for the 
developer
3. The problem of the severe limitation of dwelling unit variations 
to offer to a shifting market, and
4. The problem of lack of provision for long-term adaptability.
The Open Building approach was studied as an alternative, giv￾ing answers to these four problems. The unit variations were 
developed by using the methods and following the technical 
constraints outlined earlier. From the architectural layout draw￾ings, there appear to be no significant differences to conventional 
high-rise residential unit layouts; however, these unit layouts are 
developed based on the Open Building approach.
We believe that the Open Building approach, demonstrated 
here, has some significant advantages. It offers:
• Decision deferment or decision flexibility for the developer.
• Various unit options for future occupants (in a for-sale 
market) or the building owner (in the case of a rental 
property).
• Reduced territorial entanglements between units of occupancy.
• Clarity in how Infill can be effectively delivered as a unified 
service per unit of occupancy, suggesting what is discussed 
at the end of the book as a residential Infill industry with a 
sizable market.
• A way toward a systematic approach to MEP systems that 
can be very effective in delivering variety, no matter who is 
deciding on the variants.
Conventional design processes can never achieve these results. 
More such studies are needed, of course, under additional real￾world constraints.
READINGS
Habraken, N.J. (2019). The Appearance of the Form. Routledge 
Revivals. Routledge, London.
Li, J. (2004). Designing Constraints for Capacity Analysis of Residen￾tial Floor Areas. March thesis under the supervision of Stephen 
Kendall, Ball State University.184 DOI: 10.4324/9781003243076-21
INTRODUCTION
We’ve noted earlier in the book the emergence of an Infill level as 
a general trend first appearing in contemporary times in the office 
building sector. This level has many names: tenant work; fit-out; 
fit-up; Secondary System; Infill and so on. Accompanying this trend 
has been the growth of the interior design profession and many 
players in the product manufacturing sector whose products can 
‘count’ as ‘equipment,’ as well as specialized divisions of large con￾struction companies. Until now, this new level has had no generally 
accepted name but has become a de facto convention in many sec￾tors: office buildings, shopping centers and airport concourses have 
evolved with a clear separation between the long-lasting part of 
these real property assets and the more mutable parts. It’s worth 
noting that some industry standards such as the LEED certifica￾tion system of the US Green Building Council make a separation 
between ‘core and shell’ and ‘tenant fit-out work’:
Building Design and Construction: Core and Shell: This rating 
system is designed for projects where the developer controls 
the design and construction of the entire mechanical, electrical, 
plumbing and fire-protection system – called the core and shell – 
but not the design and construction of the tenant fit-out. Recog￾nizing that the division between owner and tenant responsibility 
for certain elements of the building varies, LEED BD+C: Core and 
Shell is designed to complement both the LEED ID+C and LEED 
O+M rating systems. (US Green Building Council)
Educational and healthcare facilities as well as housing, however, 
remain outliers in this more general trend. In those sectors, no 
such separation exists except in a very limited number of cases, 
discussed elsewhere.
While this separation has become conventional in some real 
property sectors, no Infill industry in the sense we mean it has 
emerged. For this reason, we believe it is appropriate to conclude 
the book where the Open Building approach began: a residential 
Infill industry as a key basis for a regenerative residential building 
stock. This is not intended to ignore the importance of a move￾ment toward a mature Infill industry in serving all real property 
sectors.
Everyone knows that housing is ‘different.’ Our residential 
building stock constitutes the largest proportion of the totality of 
everyday built environment. It has the largest social and economic 
impacts and, to a large extent, ‘makes a culture.’ Non-residential 
buildings become residential, and vice-versa. Yet, when this part 
of our everyday environment becomes rigid and unresponsive to 
life’s changing dynamics, the ripple effects are felt everywhere: 
in our daily lives, in the ways we organize our investments and 
building activities and on the ability of people at all income levels 
to be well housed.
Living in a responsive (residential) building stock is too impor￾tant in too many ways to be left to chance. Because of these 
reasons, we address the following topics in what follows:
• An outdated residential industry culture
• One developer’s perspective
• How residential Infill companies would work
• A question of business structure and culture more than 
technology
• Open Building and government
• Developments toward a residential Infill industry in PR China
• What we have learned
• A shift in emphasis
• What we should be arguing for
AN OUTDATED RESIDENTIAL INDUSTRY CULTURE
A little history helps put our present situation in perspective. 
From the early to mid-1900s onward, residential construction 
projects on an unprecedented scale became an important subject 
for professional design practice. Often, these took the form of 
large multifamily housing blocks, often called ‘mass housing,’ in 
the extensive extensions to and redevelopment of urban centers, 
funded by central governments. This happened in many countries 
in the post-WWII decades, independent of political economy: in 
Western and Eastern Europe, Russia, South America, Japan, Korea 
and PR China, among other places.
Such extensive single-use, high-density developments 
occurred to a very limited extent in the United States, largely 
funded by various levels of government as ‘public housing’ in 
How a Residential Infill Industry Will Change 
the Culture of Building185
HOW A RESIDENTIAL INFILL INDUSTRY WILL CHANGE THE CULTURE OF BUILDING
what was ironically called ‘urban renewal.’ Privately developed 
low-density suburban sprawl – supported by favorable govern￾mental incentives, cheap gasoline and investments in highway 
infrastructure – was the dominant form of urbanization, with the 
home building and banking industries (and all levels of govern￾ment) in full support.
Administrators of government subsidy and pension funds as 
well as private-sector developers expected architects and engi￾neers to tell them how to build large numbers of housing projects 
at once as a secure investment. This meant that for the first time 
in the history of human settlement, everyday environment, both 
urban and suburban, became a dominantly professional product. 
This professionalization of housing is now considered the proper 
formal way to make urban environment. Everything else, the 
improvised products of a millennia-old way of incremental urban 
growth, is still alive in a productive way around most megacities 
today and is known as ‘informal settlements’ or ‘DIY culture.’ In 
a building, regulatory and financing culture dominated by profes￾sionals (architects included), it is considered an anomaly and often 
scorned despite its ubiquity and economic (and environmental 
and resource consumption) implications.
Since the early years of the 20th century, this formal way of 
delivering single-family attached and multifamily housing has 
become a complex network dominated by technical and design 
professionals including government administrators, lending insti￾tutions, regulators, product manufacturers, builders and politi￾cians. But despite this, it has failed to ‘solve the housing crisis.’ 
Perhaps one reason is that it has also failed to successfully harness 
the full power of industrial production, logistics, data manage￾ment software, despite the continual enlargement of the technical 
repertoire of hardware and software, off-site prefabrication and 
other improvements.
Most telling, from an Open Building perspective, has been its 
refusal – or inability – to accept – as general matter – a direct and 
instrumental role for inhabitants in the process. These dual fail￾ures are related: this was the insight that led to the concept out of 
which the Open Building approach emerged in the early 1960s. 
The result of the widespread inability of the professional class to 
grasp the relationship between these dual failures is that while 
everything else today can be made in large quantities for less and 
less money and at increasing levels of quality, serving a sophis￾ticated market at all income levels, dwellings in large residential 
projects and in the single-family market – for that same society 
are more expensive every year – and too often of lesser quality.
In other words, contemporary housing remains the result of an 
outdated professional culture that has little incentive to change its 
ways. This is not difficult to understand, because it is always a risk 
to change your way of working, and there is no reason to do so as 
long as you make money. But we believe the change in attitudes 
and ways of working is crucial if our goal is – as it must be – a truly 
living, affordable and resilient built environment.
ONE DEVELOPER’S PERSPECTIVE
Frank Bijdendijk, one of the most astute and experienced housing 
developers in the Netherlands (and founder of the National Ren￾ovation Platform in Europe) is an advocate of the Open Building 
approach. He has clear things to say regarding the challenges in 
the policy arena to the widespread adoption of Open Building 
(Bijdendijk, 2022).
1. “First, we have to look at ownership rights in the real estate 
sector. This is based on the principle that everything above 
and below a piece of land and that associated with it is the 
property of the landowner; within the real estate sector, this 
also applies to everything attached to it. So, at first glance it 
might seem that it is difficult to reconcile full ownership over 
the INFILL to the inhabitant. We could determine juridical 
constructions that solve this problem in part. But for an ade￾quate and universally usable legal separation of ownership 
of BASE BUILDING and INFILL, many legislative changes are 
necessary.”
2. “Secondly, we have to consider environmental law (or regional 
planning). This gives local Government the ability to deter￾mine the use of land. An exhaustive list of permitted uses can 
therefore stand in the way of allowing a much-needed use 
for the land in question. It would be better to have a list of 
things which are not possible so that there is unlimited space 
for everything else. That is much wiser in a dynamic society, 186
HOW A RESIDENTIAL INFILL INDUSTRY WILL CHANGE THE CULTURE OF BUILDING
in which no one knows what will happen or what the require￾ments are in the market.”
3. “Thirdly we have to consider the building codes and regu￾lations. One of the most pressing questions that may arise 
from the application of the regulations is what is the stand￾ard that applies to renovations? Are they the same stand￾ards as in current new construction or are they the same 
standards that prevailed in the initial development of the 
real estate? The latter seems more reasonable than the first, 
because existing buildings undergoing renovation or trans￾formation and having to adapt to new build standards are 
often unenforceable.”
4. “A fourth category of regulations that we have to consider 
are shaped by the legislation that covers gas, water, electricity 
as well as the connection requirements of utility companies. 
The legislation and connection requirements give the utility 
companies a kind of monopoly position. And there might be, 
in terms of user control, significant complications making it 
very costly.”
“The degree to which all of these regulations work prohibitively 
is not only an objective truth as a direct result of the content 
of the rules themselves, but also depends to a large extent on 
the smoothness with which they are applied. And that is a sub￾jective matter, because with good will, it is also evident that 
within current legislation, regulations and local ordinances a lot 
is still possible. But if this good will is lacking, there are count￾less opportunities to greatly reduce user-control. Even on that 
point there is still a lot to do. On the one hand we need to work 
on raising awareness on the enforcement of regulations, on the 
other hand we have to work hard to be convincing and put for￾ward convincing arguments.”
“Furthermore, flexible use of existing real estate does not 
always fit within the traditional financial parameters. This is 
especially the case in change of use, which costs not only addi￾tional investment resources but also often just leads to a new 
acceptable return when the first existing value is written off. That 
problem is often apparent with vacant offices, shops and indus￾trial buildings. Investors have long been reluctant to implement 
these write-offs in the hope of an improvement in the market. 
And curiously enough, the commonly used valuation methods 
on write-offs also stood in the way, because these methods 
often came out from the fictional assumption that the real estate 
within a certain time (e.g., two years) will be entirely rented. 
In such a case the methods were not appreciated by the reality, 
so writing-off was unnecessary. Large write-offs suddenly also 
raised questions. And therefore, most investors opted for gradual 
change despite the fact that the real and current market value 
was now much lower than that of the book value.”
“This can create barriers to redevelopment. This was espe￾cially true in the early years of the economic crisis (2008–2010). 
But meanwhile investors have accepted the new reality. In 
completely vacant office areas, for example, residual values 
of around €200 ($242)/m2
 floor space are already taken into 
account. Some talk of offices as having m2
-price equal to that of 
the floor covering!”
“If the write-off is accepted, the problem is whether as a 
result there is additional investing that has an appreciation that is 
higher than the investment. The appreciation depends of course 
on the rental possibilities, the rental price level and the expected 
rent price development after transformation. The problem is then 
to finance that investment if the necessary equity is missing. Here 
we can come up against the ingrained approaches of the banks. 
They are used to finance only after rental. They finance then on 
the basis of guaranteed cash flow. This can be quite difficult at 
the present time because the traditional markets fail, and build￾ings need to be specifically made suitable for variable and chang￾ing use. The demand for such capacity is a feature of the market 
of today and tomorrow. That means a new vision is needed for 
the financier who was accustomed to single-tenant contracts for 
five to ten years. For it is precisely small-scale rental to changing 
users and rental contracts with short terms that have a future. It 
seems controversial, but in this market, it is wise to offer leases 
for workspaces that can be cancelled on a monthly basis, the 
same as with living spaces. That is totally against tradition, but 
by opening the back door like this we may stop the resistance 
at the front door. This new way of thinking in the world of real 
estate financing must be accepted.”187
HOW A RESIDENTIAL INFILL INDUSTRY WILL CHANGE THE CULTURE OF BUILDING
“If the financier goes into this, then they finance no guaran￾teed cash flow but a market-conforming building. Guaranteed 
cash flow and market conforming buildings have two entirely dif￾ferent magnitudes. In the latter case, other criteria are taken into 
account, such as location, capacity for variety and change, and 
the appearance of the building. Unlike the signed leases of repu￾table parties, they are far more difficult to put across to the back 
office. But there are clear signs of a change in forward thinking 
financiers and where they are going to take this.”
HOW INFILL COMPANIES WOULD WORK
In time, we see a residential Infill industry consisting of competitive, 
government-certified companies, operating in a particular market. 
These companies will deliver everything that can be decided inde￾pendently per dwelling as a single-source service under a unified 
design-production-installation contract. Their service will be com￾petitive based on cost, service, brand and quality. These compa￾nies will draw upon the worldwide availability of always-improving 
products and subsystems, and some may develop and patent their 
own products to distinguish their ‘brand.’
These companies will be competitive with the more ‘tradi￾tional,’ disjointed mode of operation in both new construction 
and repositioning existing non-residential buildings for residen￾tial use or in upgrading existing multifamily residential projects 
one-unit-at-a-time.
To be sure, this business practice won’t displace the ongoing 
piecemeal work of upgrading existing buildings when only a new 
set of kitchen cabinets is being installed, a dwelling’s floor fin￾ishes are being replaced, upgraded electrical service is required 
or a new toilet is to be installed. Such ‘granular’ improvement 
of an existing housing stock should and will continue, introduc￾ing new products and methods incrementally as is now the case 
internationally.
At a certain point, however – decided both technically and in 
terms of cost – as any remodeling contractor will tell us, it makes 
more sense to fully ‘gut’ (clean-out) a dwelling unit rather than to 
remodel in a piecemeal way.
The service of Infill companies involves organizing all work 
and products per dwelling unit, accounted for per dwelling, 
under one contract. In new construction, this service engages 
a project’s critical path when decisions are to be made about 
the specifications of each dwelling, whether by the developer 
or by the future occupant, but after the Base Building has been 
designed. In the reactivation or conversion of existing buildings – 
either upgrading residential properties or converting buildings 
to residential use – the service offered is to fill in fully ‘gutted’ 
spaces one at a time, on-time and on budget. In reactivating 
existing buildings, all ‘common’ infrastructure elements, includ￾ing the mechanical, electrical and plumbing (MEP) parts of the 
Base Building, will have been upgraded and reconfigured as 
needed for long-term capacity (not just a one-off renovation), 
ready for each unit’s Infill to be installed and connected to Base 
Building infrastructure.
Infill companies prepare well-organized ‘packages’ or ‘kits’ 
of parts off-site. The parts and small assemblies are delivered in 
the correct number, sequence and dimension, using the latest in 
laser tools for accurate site measurements. These packages, along 
with the coordinated delivery of other parts straight from man￾ufacturers or suppliers, are bar-coded and delivered to the site 
and brought into the empty space through a balcony window 
by a boom truck or, on tall buildings, using a boom lift (also used 
for window washing) or via the service elevator and through the 
unit’s front door. Once inside, they are installed by a multiskilled 
team of workers who stay with the job until it is finished. Only 
minimal cutting of parts is required, thus producing very little 
on-site waste, debris and noise. Such companies will compete on 
their ability to use the latest enterprise management software and 
the latest consumer-oriented products from the market and their 
ability to deliver on-time and on-budget. They deliver at various 
price points and hand over a user’s manual and multiyear main￾tenance agreement.
Working this way means an end to choreographing separate 
subcontractors, with all the familiar scheduling, blame-shifting 
and quality-control problems. This new mode of operation means 
implementing true teamwork into residential construction. Infill 
company product/service solutions are truly systematic, which 188
HOW A RESIDENTIAL INFILL INDUSTRY WILL CHANGE THE CULTURE OF BUILDING
does not mean uniform solutions but quite the opposite, because 
good systems enable rather than block variety.
A complete Infill package will include everything making that 
space habitable – the thousands of discrete parts including parts 
for making walls, doors, door frames and hardware, all wiring, 
piping and plumbing fixtures, lighting, cabinets, appropriate 
heating, air conditioning, ventilation equipment and so on. The 
space may be rented and the Infill purchased. The Infill may even 
include the front door as well as part of the building’s façade 
directly related to each independent dwellings’ floor plan. (see 
NEXT21 at the beginning of the book)
As already noted, social structure and conventions and the 
local market will dictate which parts of a multifamily residential 
building will be ‘fixed’ or common and which will be ‘movable’ or 
decided per dwelling unit.
It’s quite reasonable to question how such businesses can 
operate when a building stock is highly varied. In many countries 
and regions, building technology (wood-frame vs. concrete vs. 
heavy timber vs. steel structure, etc.) varies considerably, as do 
access types and dimensions (e.g., floor-to-floor; column spacing; 
façade-to-elevator core, etc.). Given these variables, Infill com￾panies will have developed systemic solutions, with variations. 
Experience world-wide shows that the routing of piping (drain￾age and domestic water supply), cabling and ventilation ducts 
within demised spaces requires special attention and offers the 
best opportunity for systemic product solutions.
A QUESTION OF BUSINESS STRUCTURE AND CULTURE
As we’ve already noted, the residential building industry today 
is, after more than 100  years of delivering large projects, still 
dependent on having floor plans decided first. Everything else 
follows – financing, construction documents, zoning and building 
approvals, construction and certificates of occupancy.
Construction today depends on organizing ad-hoc contracts 
among many subcontractors, each delivering labor and products 
to complete the specified work. This is the mode of operation 
whether the project is an entire building, a building complex or 
a single unit of occupancy. Both the conversion of existing build￾ings to new uses and new construction are organized in a similar 
way. As more subsystems have come into residential construc￾tion over time, conforming with technical innovation, market 
demand and to successively increased performance standards, 
each with its own specialized trade, this mode of operation has 
become the Achilles’ heel of construction and its management. 
Partly as a result, most large general contractors have become 
project managers with no workforce of their own, allowing them 
to apply downward pressure on subcontractors to lower project 
costs. While this may be a prudent business model for general 
contractors and subcontractors in an industry that is notorious for 
its up-and-down swings directly related to swings in the general 
economy – hiring when the market is hot and laying off workers 
when business is slow – it is not reliable. This is particularly prob￾lematic when the labor pool of skilled workers is shrinking. It is 
unable to deliver affordable housing, nor does it deliver accept￾able quality on any regular basis.
Because the existing building industry has been unable to 
break out of its obsolete habits and mode of operation, an Infill 
industry of many competitive, certified companies is likely to 
come into being by outside actors entering the stage because 
they see untapped opportunities with fresh eyes.
There is precedent for this in other industries. IBM, for exam￾ple, developed a culture and a clear set of corporate rules well 
suited for handling the demands of clients of its mainframe com￾puters. But when the personal computer came into existence and 
individuals rather than corporations became the customer base, 
IBM was awkward and slow to adapt. Its rules and processes did 
not match the new realities. Dell and then Apple were born with 
business models targeted to the individual consumer. Henry Ford 
is another example, having had the insight that a market existed 
for something better than horse-drawn carriages. The automo￾bile industry with its supply chains was born. At first, he offered 
only black cars, utterly uniform in design. But as this new mode 
of transport became familiar and showed its advantages, he was 
able to introduce variety while maintaining quality and holding 
down costs. Many competitive companies joined the market. 
A ubiquitous infrastructure of roads, highways, expressways and 
all the ancillary land-use functions associated with transporta￾tion followed, coming into being to support the automobiles and 189
HOW A RESIDENTIAL INFILL INDUSTRY WILL CHANGE THE CULTURE OF BUILDING
other vehicles being produced. Elon Musk introduced the Tesla, 
coming out of nowhere, and, at the time of writing, leads the 
way in the movement toward the electric vehicle, with most large 
automobile companies playing catch-up.
Sometimes, established companies recognize the disjuncture 
between their origins and the market and move internally to acti￾vate something like this innovation process. They create subsid￾iaries or divisions, sometimes known as ‘skunkworks,’ to try out 
new models of business operation to meet new challenges and 
opportunities. This happened in the commercial construction sec￾tor, when large construction companies spawned new divisions 
specializing in tenant fit-out for the office and shopping-center 
markets. The same thing happens in architecture firms when mar￾ket opportunities are recognized by either the acquisition of niche 
companies or hiring new people to spearhead a new corporate 
posture.
In the same way, we think that some ‘design-build’ compa￾nies may well develop successful residential Infill services, which 
will stimulate competition and innovation and which, in turn, will 
lower costs. This, in turn, will put residential Base Buildings, as a 
new kind of architectural infrastructure, in demand as the prag￾matic basis for a regenerative building stock. Of course, the head￾winds are very very strong.
DEVELOPMENTS TOWARD AN INFILL INDUSTRY 
IN PR CHINA
Governmental Initiatives
In 2010, at the China-Japan Long-Life Sustainable Housing 
International Summit Forum, the China Real Estate Association 
launched the Initiative to Build Long-life Sustainable Housing for 
the whole society and industry. On May 18, 2012, the China Real 
Estate Association and the Japan-China Association for Building 
and Housing Industry jointly signed the Letter of Intent for Coop￾eration in the Construction of China-Japan Housing Demonstra￾tion Projects. Both sides reached an agreement to support China 
and Japan to further deepen exchanges and cooperation in the 
development of demonstration projects.
Japan had for years been studying and building prototypes 
of what they call S/I housing (S/I meaning skeleton/Infill). This 
development has been extensively discussed elsewhere (see 
Appendix Two). In fact, a Long-Life housing law had been passed 
by the Japanese parliament in 2009, providing incentives to devel￾opers to build such residential projects. Millions of single-family 
detached houses have been built using this law and its technical 
provisions, but very few multifamily projects have been realized.
This agreement for cooperation, signed in 2012 between 
China and Japan, proposed to build a new type of Chinese Long￾life Sustainable Housing featuring long life, high quality and low 
energy consumption. The means to achieve this goal was to har￾ness the power of industrial production in the support of new 
methods of construction. The China Institute of Building Standard 
Design & Research of China Construction Technology Consult￾ing (CCTC) was entrusted to conduct organizational and man￾agement research, technology research and development, and 
to design and implement demonstration projects. A number of 
contracts were agreed to, to carry out the first series of demon￾stration projects.
In 2014, the first long-life sustainable housing demonstration 
project, Greenland · Nanxiang William Mansion, was completed. 
It attracted wide interest from the building and housing industry 
and society. The second series of demonstration projects in 2015 
and the third in 2017 were completed one after another. By the 
end of 2019, the total construction area of the national demon￾stration projects has reached over 1 million m2
 (10.8 million ft2
). 
Long-life sustainable housing has led the transformation and 
upgrading of China’s contemporary new housing construction 
methods with new concepts, new models, new standards and 
new systems. At the time of writing, despite a serious downturn in 
the Chinese real estate sector, these advances appear to be help￾ing to solve the bottleneck of China’s urban and rural living envi￾ronment construction. They may help realize the future-oriented 
green and sustainable development construction by breaking 
through the barriers of China’s long-standing traditional produc￾tion and construction methods.
Guided by S/I (Japanese term for skeleton/Infill) and Open 
Building methods, the coordination of the design and construc￾tion of the Primary structure, exterior building envelope, installa￾tion pathways and interior decoration (Infill) is being realized. This 190
HOW A RESIDENTIAL INFILL INDUSTRY WILL CHANGE THE CULTURE OF BUILDING
is also reflected in the coordination of architectural, structural, 
MEP and interior fit-out specialists, as well as the whole process 
of overall planning, design, production, construction, operation 
and maintenance.
One outcome of these developments is that a growing num￾ber of Chinese companies began to enter the Infill business, called 
‘industrialized interior decoration’ in China. This was stimulated 
by the release in 2018 of the Design and Assessment Standard 
for Long-Life Sustainable Housing. This standard was developed 
and is being promoted by the China Institute of Building Standard 
Design and Research (CBS), a national government agency (Liu 
and Wu, 2022).
Heneng
An early leader in industrialized interior decoration was Heneng￾home (Heneng). The president of Heneng started in business 
investing in, developing and selling software to manage hotel 
reservations (reportedly used in 75% of Chinese hotels in 2016) 
and manufacturing a pharmaceutical for children (now used 
by most hospitals). He later got into real estate development. 
Around 2008, seeing a market in the interior decoration business, 
he started Heneng, a company that supplied thousands of com￾plete Infill packages to public rental housing projects in several 
large cities in China, and began supplying the single-family lux￾ury market and the for-sale condominium market, healthcare and 
educational facilities.
Their logistics strategy involved delivering as much as possible 
from their own factories. Their goal was to deliver exactly the 
right quantity of each subsystem, with each delivery bar coded 
as to which building, which floor and into which dwelling unit a 
given bundle of parts was to be delivered.
By mid-2020, after just five years in full operation, the com￾pany had completed over 100,000 apartment units, 4,000 hotel 
rooms and over 60,000  m2
 (646,000 ft2
) of public buildings 
including hospitals, schools, commercial chain stores, offices and 
renovation of existing buildings. Some clients are government 
controlled, such as public housing projects. Projects like residen￾tial condominiums, schools, hotels, gyms and hair salons were all 
privately owned. By 2020, about 90% of their work was in new 
construction, about 10% in improving existing buildings. They 
recognized that improving existing buildings is a bigger market, 
so their leadership intended to expand in that market.
Heneng developed their own manufacturing facilities in sev￾eral parts of China to make everything: metal studs of various 
sizes, all finish panel materials for walls and floors, doors and 
steel door frames, door hardware, etc. Their ‘quick-connect’ 
water piping system did not require licensed plumbers. At the 
height of their success, they could complete a mid-sized apart￾ment in seven days – from a raw space to installed furnishing – 
with a trained multiskilled installation team of four workers. In 
2020, they had five factories in China, each with the produc￾tion capacity of 50,000 apartment units per year, with a sup￾ply radius of 300  km (185 miles). This supply ability allowed 
them to be competitive in renovating existing buildings, and 
beginning in 2020, they intended to face customers directly in 
showrooms.
They use technologies such as big data, cloud computing and 
AI to connect their BIM+ERP+MES system – what they call their 
Heneng digital fabrication platform. They developed their own 
design software (based on BIM – building information system), 
which allowed designers to freely design (they have over 2,000+ 
wall surface patterns and finishes to choose from: wood, fabric, 
marble, etc.) and avoid worrying about drawing details of their 
Infill system (the software does that itself). When designs are fin￾ished, they automatically generate orders to their ERP (enterprise 
resource planning) system and send the orders directly to their 
production line (MES or manufacturing execution system) with￾out human interference. This means all data comes from the same 
origin; the same model is used from design to manufacture to 
installation and maintenance; and every project has a digital twin. 
This combination of the digital and industrial worlds maximizes 
efficiency and connects the whole industrial supply chain.
In 2023, the company reported that it had 102 patents and 
a 100% factory production rate. For large-scale projects, they 
reportedly saved 50% time; on small-scale projects, they save 
75% time. Also, they saved 65% on material waste, and the 
repair rate was lowered 95% compared to traditional construction 
methods. They continued to upgrade their software and logistics 191
HOW A RESIDENTIAL INFILL INDUSTRY WILL CHANGE THE CULTURE OF BUILDING
systems. The developers they worked with saved money and time 
using their services.
An Example of a Heneng Installation
The following figures show some of the technical solutions 
offered by Heneng followed by a sequence of images of their 
typical seven-day process of filling in an empty dwelling unit.
Figure 1 An example of a Base Building built by the Beijing city govern￾ment and filled in by Heneng (Source & image credits: Heneng)
Figure 2 A mock-up of the Heneng w all and floor system for bathrooms 
(Source & image credits: Heneng)
Figure 3 A  mock-up of the Heneng wall and floor system showing an 
early version of hydronic (hot water) raised floor system (Source & image 
credits: Heneng Inc.)
Figure 4 An example of a space ready for fit-out installation (Source & 
image credits: Heneng Inc.)
Figure 5 Day 1 (Source & image credits: Heneng Inc.)192
HOW A RESIDENTIAL INFILL INDUSTRY WILL CHANGE THE CULTURE OF BUILDING
Figure 6 Day 2 (Source & image credits: Heneng Inc.)
Figure 7 Day 3 Installing warm floor pipes (Source  & image credits: 
Heneng Inc.)
Figure 8 Day 4 (Source & image credits: Heneng Inc.)
Figure 9 Day 5 Overhead piping and ducts. (Source  & image credits: 
Heneng Inc.)
Figure 10 Day 6 (Source & image credits: Heneng Inc.)
Figure 11 Day 7 (Source & image credits: Heneng Inc.)193
HOW A RESIDENTIAL INFILL INDUSTRY WILL CHANGE THE CULTURE OF BUILDING
The executive director of Heneng, in private correspondence 
with the author in 2021, said,
“Some traditional construction companies are trying to do what 
we do, but it is hard for a construction company to transform 
their whole system from construction management to produc￾tion. These are two different fields, and it takes time to shift to 
a new mode. The market is huge; we hope there are more com￾panies to join us so we can make the industry better together.”
Problems with Heneng and Recent Developments
In the first decades of the 21st century, the Beijing city govern￾ment initiated massive urban extensions to the east and south 
of the city. They were meant in part to house city government 
employees who work in government offices being relocated 
there, and they were being offered for-sale dwellings in multi￾family high-rise projects.
As mentioned, Heneng had already, by that time, launched its 
Infill system and had been improving it step by step. By the time 
the Beijing city government started to implement the new urban 
extensions in 2020, Heneng, which had largely served govern￾mental ‘social housing’ (rental) housing projects (in Beijing and 
other cities), began offering an updated product/service to devel￾opers of these for-sale projects. But residents began refusing to 
buy them due to quality-control problems caused by problems 
of leaking pipes in its patented water supply piping system and 
acoustical problems with the hollow raised floors and hollow walls.
As a consequence, and needing a suitable Infill system, the 
R&D section of the Beijing Housing Industrialization Group Co. 
Ltd. (BHIG), one of Heneng’s former clients, was ordered by the 
Beijing city government to initiate research to produce a new Infill 
system in 2020. The goal was to fix the problems of Heneng’s 
Infill system. Three parties invested in BHIG. The Beijing Govern￾ment Social Housing Center (Beijing Urban Housing Corporation’s 
proper name) was the biggest and main party among the three 
investors.
Figure 12 Day 7 Installing furniture (Source & image credits: Heneng Inc.) In what follows, ‘Infill V1/V2/V3’ is a definition from the Beijing 
Housing Industrialization Group (BHIG), not from Heneng or 
from a common industry standard. Earlier Infill systems, largely 
copied from the Japanese industry with high raised floors, which 
had no hydronic floor heating, was known as V1. Heneng’s Infill 
system, with its hollow (raised) floor with hydronic floor heat￾ing, was regarded as V2 according to this definition by BHIG.
In a role reversal, BHIG expected to complete the work of revis￾ing Heneng’s Infill system and to have a satisfactory V3 system 
(see note above) by the middle of 2022 that corrected the prob￾lems of Heneng’s Infill system. The new V3 was the result of 
cooperation among several private companies including Zhong￾Zhu Jian-Ke (Infill company name). However, Heneng did not 
participate because it was so busy in the market selling its own 
Infill system.
Wang Qiang, CEO of Zhong-Zhu Jian-Ke, was CEO of Heneng 
before 2019, when he left to start his own company. Wang Qiang 
became co-owner of the new V3 wall and floor systems as well 
as the improved water supply and quick-connect electrical wir￾ing systems. Other cooperating companies included producers of 
kitchens and bathroom units. Because the proprietary parts are 
not very complex, they are not difficult to copy. Therefore, Wang 
Qiang reported that he must keep improving, updating and 
developing the elements to keep ahead of competitors.
It is important to note that once development is complete, V3 
will be available immediately to any company to include in their 
own competitive Infill product/service, including such compa￾nies as Zhong-Zhu Jian-Ke, Inc. and Qing-Zhou Hong-Mei Dec￾oration Company, Heneng and others. However, BHIG will wait 
for several years to put V3 into its for-sale projects, in both the 
developments to the East and South of Beijing, after several 
demonstration projects are evaluated and proven to be accept￾able to residents.
V3 System Development
The principle underlying V3 is shown in the following diagram 
and photos of the showroom.194
HOW A RESIDENTIAL INFILL INDUSTRY WILL CHANGE THE CULTURE OF BUILDING
Note: The two element groups – 2 and 3 – in Figure 13 are 
identified as such because they represent two parts of Infill in 
the Chinese market. (1) Main structure corresponds to the Base 
Building; (2) and (3) correspond to Infill components.
TABLE 1
Summary of improvements undertaken in V3 (1st column) to correct 
problems in Heneng’s V2 Infill system (2nd column) (Credit: Liu Peng)
Improvement of Infill V3.0 Purpose
(The problems of Infill V2.0 solved)
1 Separate the manufacture 
of decoration layer and the 
base substrate (the invisible 
part), which means con￾necting the decoration layer 
onto the substrate is no 
longer done in the factory 
but on site.
• Provide much more choices to the 
occupants, designers, contractors 
and all related parties.
• Except for Infill factories, more 
manufacturers like various decora￾tion layer manufacturers could be 
involved, so that both the speed 
and quality could be improved.
2 Make the substrate more 
modularized
To improve the speed and quality.
3 Make the substrate more 
solid by changing some 
materials, including sup￾porting and filling materials
• To reduce the deformation of the 
substrate.
In Infill V2.0, ceramic floor tiles could 
not be used or could easily crack 
due to the deformation of the floor 
substrate
• 2. To improve the user experience.
In Infill V2.0, occupants complain 
that the floor and partition wall sound 
hollow when walking or knocking on 
them, which is regard as low quality, 
influenced by traditional experience, 
habit or culture.
4 Change the floor system 
of washroom from one 
waterproof layer into two 
spaced layers
To solve the leaking problem
5 Make wiring cable inte￾grated and modularized with 
easy quick-connect joints
Photographs of the V3 Industrialized Infill System
Figure 14 V3 Infill floor base module: Concrete, factory-produced 
floor-heating module, replacing the earlier version used by Heneng. The 
user feedback was that the V2 floor sounded ‘hollow’ to residents, indicat￾ing ‘cheap’ construction. The floor heating pipes are visible, snapped into 
place in the floor module (Source and Photo credit of the following figures
(Figures 14–21): Liu Peng, Senior Architect; First Grade. Beijing Institute of 
Architectural Design)
Figure 15 V3 Infill washroom floor module on adjustable legs: bathroom/
washroom floor now has two layers of waterproofing
Figure 13 Diagram by Liu Peng, First Grade Architect, Studio Leader, Bei￾jing Institute of Architectural Design195
HOW A RESIDENTIAL INFILL INDUSTRY WILL CHANGE THE CULTURE OF BUILDING
Figure 16 V3 Infill wall base module: Here, the inside construction of the 
base Infill wall module is shown. The finished module is solid, filled by 
casting foam concrete among the studs. This was a response to criticism 
by users, who thought that the hollow stud walls of previous versions 
sounded ‘cheap.’ The surface of the finished module is cement board, 
ready for any finish surface.
Figure 17 V3 Infill quick-connect cabling system: This photo shows the 
position of electric wiring along the ceiling and entering the wall base 
module from the top
Figure 18 V3 Infill quick-connect cabling system: This photo is a detail of 
one connection of the quick-connect electrical wiring system196
HOW A RESIDENTIAL INFILL INDUSTRY WILL CHANGE THE CULTURE OF BUILDING
2. The second development is that the vertical pipe shafts have 
become Base Building elements, with ‘smart’ connections 
for Infill piping connecting to the Base Building pipes in the 
shaft.
What this means in essence is that in this new development, the 
principle of separating Base Building and Infill remains a central 
strategy, while more of the total building has moved into the Base 
Building category of decision-making. There are several goals:
1. To reduce on-site work,
2. To reduce reliance on human labor,
3. To increase quality control, and
4. To reduce costs
Figure 19 V3 Infill quick-connect cabling system: This is a photograph 
of the electrical switch panel inside the wall base module at about 2.5 m 
above the floor. Electrical wiring is fed through the white plastic conduits, 
which are eventually buried in the foam concrete inside the stud walls
Figure 20 V3 Infill quick-connect cabling system: This is a photograph of 
the electrical wall panel inside every wall base module
Figure 21 V3 Infill quick-connect cabling system: This photo shows the 
quick-connect cabling system at the ‘breaker panel’ (top), the washer/
dryer connection (lower left) as well as at the control of the hydronic floor 
heating system (bottom right)
Redefining Base Building and Infill Contents
In March  2023, BHIG (Beijing Housing Industrialization Group) 
announced that it had launched a new development. The goal 
was to increase the speed of industrialized housing in general as 
well as Infill installation. This was to be accomplished by doing 
more work in the factory, with less on-site assembly work.
Of particular note were two decisions:
1. The first is to stop using the modular raised-floor heating 
elements (Figure 7). Instead, the floor heating pipe pathways 
would be incorporated as grooves in factory-produced pre￾cast concrete floor elements, installed as part of the Base 
Building construction.197
HOW A RESIDENTIAL INFILL INDUSTRY WILL CHANGE THE CULTURE OF BUILDING
There is no decrease in dwelling unit layout variety and capacity 
to change layouts over time. Further, V3, with its concrete mod￾ular raised floor elements, will continue to be used in renovation 
projects. Other technical innovations are expected.
Industrialization in the building industry in PR China is being 
driven by the dramatic increase in demand for housing, the 
decrease in availability of human resources in the building indus￾try and the need to meet the demand for a building stock with 
100-year life spans. The S/I (Open Building) model appears to 
have demonstrated its ability to deliver housing that is not only 
less expensive, faster and of higher quality to deliver initially but 
also adaptable – one unit at a time – to changing household and 
demographic requirements over time. Reports from PR China 
indicate that the Open Building model also contributes to reduc￾ing the massive demolition of tens of thousands of apartment 
buildings that generates waste, pollution and the disruption of 
urban life and creates a drain on the national economy.
As of late 2023, as the real estate market in China was in a 
period of serious decline, contacts informed the authors that the 
impact on Infill was hard to predict. On one hand, as the mar￾ket was in a downturn, the investments and improvements in 
this industry could very well be reduced. On the other hand, the 
shortage of skilled manpower is a national problem, because of 
the sharply reduced birthrate and the disinterest on the part of 
young, educated people to enter the construction sector, despite 
high levels of unemployment. At the same time, higher building 
quality is required due to the depressed but competitive market, 
so continued innovation in the direction of ‘industrialization’ in 
the construction sector and investments in an Infill industry will 
be especially important in such a context. That may well push the 
development of Infill. High quality and low cost are the opportu￾nity in any downturn. If the further development of Infill could 
be successful in pushing the building process to have both high 
quality and low cost, it would have a big future China.
WHAT WE HAVE LEARNED
In the European context, post-WWII mass housing became possi￾ble when governments decided to make money available to sub￾sidize not-for-profit residential construction. The Netherlands was 
ahead of its time and was one of the first to do this, even in 1902. 
Before that date, workers sometimes started to collectively save 
money to build houses that were made available to participants 
by lottery. Churches and socialist parties made money available as 
well, but all that effort did not match the rapid growth of cities. To 
make sure that government money was well spent, bureaucrats, 
being asked to distribute the subsidy money, wanted profes￾sionals to be responsible for its use. Inhabitants were not invited 
into the process, and this shaped a well-established professional 
housing culture. The housing industry is now a purely professional 
culture in which, a full century later, government negotiates with 
architects, bankers, sociologists, politicians and other profession￾als but not the inhabitants.
Something very much like this happens presently in most 
countries around the world, even when the role of government 
is minimal and the role of private developers is dominant. The 
inhabitants are not part of the decision-making process except 
in the luxury market. Even there, it is rare to invite inhabitants 
to take control and take responsibility, because the habits of the 
industry continue to ignore the value of full independence of indi￾vidual dwelling units in large projects.
From its beginnings, Open Building proposed reintroducing 
inhabitants in that culture. This would happen by shifting respon￾sibility to occupants for the design of their individual dwelling 
interiors with everything needed to make dwellings habitable. 
This never happened except in a few hundred instances that are 
now well publicized.
Open Building has always focused on reestablishing the role 
of inhabitants. This came from a reading of history that showed 
that complex living environmental fields always were bottom-up 
technical results. Small-scale initiatives could become rich and 
beautiful environments that could live and renew themselves 
for centuries. Uniformity was rare, but when it happened, it was 
always the result of top-down visions and belonged, for the most 
part, to special monumental projects.
Today, both top-down unified control and contemporary tech￾nology produce rigidity and uniformity. We believe that this is 
a temporary problem that the Open Building approach can deal 
with. The fact that everyday uniformity is only happening in the 198
HOW A RESIDENTIAL INFILL INDUSTRY WILL CHANGE THE CULTURE OF BUILDING
world’s richest and technically most advanced cultures (and not 
in informal settlements) tells us again that the thrust of the orig￾inal Open Building approach was not basically a technical but a 
political one.
Introducing the Open Building approach as a technical inno￾vation aimed at making the building stock sustainable, as in the 
case of PR China, without getting the inhabitant involved, was 
an important shift in emphasis. It was also a brilliant thing to do. 
This has allowed a new industry to demonstrate how it deals with 
each dwelling unit, even when the design is repeated many times, 
as an independent job in which all parts are defined, produced, 
packaged, shipped on time, delivered and installed on-site by 
a multiskilled team per dwelling or other occupancy. At the same 
time, it does not demand any change in the larger project design 
or execution, operating like any other subsystem company hired 
by the familiar project management.
We have learned that Open Building Infill companies have two 
agendas they can choose to deal with:
• The first agenda is to make dwelling users independent 
actors in an entirely new market
• The second agenda is to develop and establish an industrial 
Infill technology
We now see that Infill companies (called ‘industrialized inte￾rior decoration’ companies in PR China) are entering the mar￾ket, making the second agenda demonstrate its power. These 
companies, encouraged and incentivized by various methods of 
governmental ‘pushing’ and normal efforts to seek competitive 
advantage, are serving both rental social housing and the mar￾ket of condominium home buyers. They are also serving other 
sectors, such as healthcare, schools and commercial real estate. 
They deliver everything to make an empty space habitable, in one 
integrated process, from factory to multiskilled installation teams. 
These companies save their clients’ money, reduce waste, deliver 
a completed unit in 7 days or less and offer a multiyear warrantee. 
They are now beginning to meet the market of individual buyers 
in their showrooms for both new construction and the reactiva￾tion of existing buildings.
Given this information, we believe that in time, the first 
agenda is inevitable.
Based on what we now see at the time of writing, for Infill 
companies to get into business, it is not important for them to 
consider the social and political management of a market of 
autonomous inhabitants. It is not important to talk about user 
control. Inhabitants still remain outside the professional network. 
The power to change that reality is simply missing.
In time, however, with the separation of design tasks (one to 
design Base Buildings and another to design and deliver the Infill), 
inhabitants will be able to take care of their own units of occu￾pancy. They will be able to change their dwellings with the help 
of the INFILL company that installed the unit they currently live 
in, or they can replace what they have by an entirely new design, 
possibly by another competing Infill company.
OPEN BUILDING AND GOVERNMENT
Governments at several levels (national, regional, state, local) 
have key roles to play if an Infill industry is to emerge and 
become established. We think their key role is to establish certifi￾cation criteria for Infill companies and regulatory instruments for 
buildings constructed by separating the long-lasting parts from 
those that change more regularly and frequently. There is also 
a role for private-party/third-party certification systems, such 
as LEED, BREEAM or other energy-related systems now in wide 
use. This is a larger subject that deserves its own careful study, 
related to each country where the Open Building approach has 
potential.
Over time, the century-old professional network will find rea￾son to adapt and will be able to serve a true Open Building envi￾ronment. All this suggests a straightforward government policy:
Encourage the development of industrial Infill systems.
These will be product/service system companies that do not need 
to argue for user control. Instead, they can compete with ongo￾ing housing companies for fitting out of new or existing housing 
projects, or convert obsolete buildings to new uses, with econom￾ically competitive services.199
HOW A RESIDENTIAL INFILL INDUSTRY WILL CHANGE THE CULTURE OF BUILDING
If they become available, the market for autonomous Infill 
units will develop by itself, as we see it happening in PR China.
WHAT WE SHOULD BE ARGUING FOR
The many hundreds of successful residential Open Building pro￾jects that are already on record show that the Open Building 
approach applied to residential architecture does not depend 
for success on advanced Infill systems. The variety of examples 
shown earlier and in other published books and reports shows 
that there are many reasons to adopt the Open Building approach 
and that they take various architectural, social/organizational and 
technical forms. But progress is slow and resistance to change 
remains strong.
It’s a familiar fact that productivity in the building industry has 
declined over the past half century. The current infatuation with 
the century-old idea of building fully fitted-out boxes in factories 
and trucking them to a site to be stacked up with cranes is only 
producing rigid buildings with a marginal first-cost savings. The 
proposition made here is that to successfully turn around the out￾dated professional housing culture and to improve productivity, 
commercially successful Infill systems and competitive compa￾nies delivering them are needed. And, in the long run, keeping 
a national housing stock up to date, affordable and sustainable 
– and efficiently converting buildings to new uses – requires the 
availability of many certified Infill companies.
The proposal to separate Infill design from Base Building 
design and to make each dwelling unit fully independent was usu￾ally considered to be too expensive compared to the traditional 
mode of tying the design of the Base Building to the initial Infill 
design, uniform or not. Despite evidence to the contrary (the yearly 
expenditures on remodeling residential buildings or converting 
nonresidential to residential often equals or exceeds investments 
in new construction), no one believed that change or variety at the 
level of the individual dwelling was important to consider. This was 
the case even though no one argued against the idea that being 
able to decide on your own dwelling design was a good idea.
So it is not surprising that it is only in the last decade or so 
that pioneering companies have appeared, in several countries, to 
offer the service of delivering and installing each residential unit 
as an integrated, single-source and separate task. An early initi￾ative (MATURA – reported on elsewhere) in the Netherlands in 
the late 1980s and early 1990s finally closed down due to lack of 
sustained investment. A few companies have struggled in Japan 
against strong headwinds of the major construction companies 
that dominate the building industry. These fledgling companies 
have based their business models not on the fragmented con￾struction industry model of organizing labor and materials per 
project but on an industrial systems model.
An Infill industry based on an industrial model – the basis 
of the success in the automotive and other complex consumer 
products industries – is rooted in the understanding that a robust 
system is not a limitation on variety but enables variety and does 
so efficiently. Marketing directly to consumers ultimately makes 
sense.
There is no doubt that systematically organized Infill systems 
far exceed other existing ‘building systems’ in number of discrete 
parts and in the complexity of accurately fitting into a building 
that is already in place. But the contemporary tool kits in the 
design and building and product manufacturing industries now 
have what is needed for this job.
The same imbalance of forces identified in Supports: An Alter￾native to Mass Housing, first published in English in 1962 and 
reissued in 2021, is still present today. As was true then, assur￾ing a clean separation of tasks between what is common in large 
residential projects and what is decided per unit of occupancy 
was identified to be not a technical problem but a problem in the 
political and policy arenas.
The absence of user control of the entirety of their own dwell￾ings in large projects produces its own culture and policy environ￾ment. This stands in sharp contrast to, for example, the automotive 
industry, consumer electronics and even the proliferation of individ￾ual products used in constructing housing. In the present culture, 
deep innovation in building processes is retarded, reaching a circu￾lar economy is more difficult and large building companies are less 
likely to figure out less expensive ways of building. As long as soci￾ety excludes the household unit from a direct – disintermediated 
– economic role in the production of large housing developments, 
Open Building would be unable to expand more broadly.200
HOW A RESIDENTIAL INFILL INDUSTRY WILL CHANGE THE CULTURE OF BUILDING
We refer again to the imbalance of control. Companies leasing 
space in offices have economic power, while users in large, mul￾tifamily housing projects are, even in market economies, largely 
passive recipients and have no direct voice. Whereas in office 
buildings, users (i.e., companies signing office-space leases) con￾trol Infill, in housing, there is no Infill to begin with – no Infill level 
and no separation of design tasks.
But even though we believe it to be crucial, we – architects 
and other design professionals – should be careful about putting 
too much weight on declaring that inhabitants and users must 
be able to choose. That makes it a political discussion for which 
we – in our roles as design professionals – are not, in general, well 
equipped, nor do we carry much credibility in that arena. That is 
why we need allies in the financing, political and policy arenas.
It is probably futile to attempt to reorganize existing develop￾ment and building companies. We won’t succeed. They are not 
motivated to change, even when their profits shrink in economic 
downturns, and certainly not when their businesses are booming 
in good times. The professional class – worldwide – sees no advan￾tage in a residential Infill industry at present. In most cases, the 
existing players in the building industry make money now and do 
not see advantage and only assume greater risk trying a new way.
Existing development and construction companies in the hous￾ing sector – as noted by many observers, including the executive 
director of Henning in China, discussed earlier – do not under￾stand the full power of industrial production as a complementary 
mode of productive activity in the residential building stock, a 
misunderstanding that inhibits innovation and cost reduction.
It is time to shift priorities: rather than arguing for user control 
as the driver, we should show that an Infill industry can and does 
deliver higher quality at lower cost compared to the traditional 
way of building. It is a better path toward a circular economy.
One important lesson can be learned from the last 50 years of 
attempts to introduce Infill as a concept in residential projects. 
Initially, the argument was that users must have control of their 
personal environments. This was, in essence, a political position 
impacting distribution of decision-making control and only indi￾rectly subject to design decisions. The argument was that once 
a new pattern of decision-making would be in place, design 
decision-making would need to adjust accordingly. This has not 
happened.
What we should be arguing for, therefore, is the clear separation 
of design tasks: this separation is the key, not the identity of the 
parties’ making decisions.
In conclusion, we should say only one thing:
User control need not be the primary driver. Open Building 
makes the act of building more economical: you get more for 
your money, not just initially but over time, because property 
assets gain value, even if occupants do not initially have a say. 
We should instead show that an Infill industry can deliver higher 
quality at lower costs and that this will, in time, produce an 
Open Building environment. In such an environment and indus￾try restructuring, user control can follow naturally.
READINGS
www.usgbc.org/discoverleed/certification/bd-c-core-and-shell/
Bijdendijk, F. (2022). The Future of Open Building Resides in the Exist￾ing Stock. Residential Architecture as Infrastructure: Open 
Building in Practice (editor Kendall, S.). Routledge, London.
Liu, D., and Wu, Z. (2022). Research, Development and Implemen￾tation of Long-life Sustainable Housing in China. Residential 
Architecture as Infrastructure: Open Building in Practice (edi￾tor Kendall, S.). Routledge, London.DOI: 10.4324/9781003243076-22 201
Postscript 1
Toward a New Research Agenda
Donald Schön has argued that each profession – medical doc￾tors, as much as engineers, lawyers and architects – must go 
beyond their knowledge base and exhibit a certain artistry to be 
good professionals. Architects don’t need to be reminded of that. 
Nevertheless, if creativity is an essential ingredient for all profes￾sional expertise, it is, by itself, not enough to define a profession’s 
expertise. A profession needs to have a specific domain of knowl￾edge by which to be identified. It also must have the specific skills 
needed to intervene successfully in that domain.
For contemporary architects, we believe that domain is every￾day environment in its full complexity. In this way of thinking, 
there are two large areas of inquiry that relate exactly to these 
two conditions for true professionalism. One has to do with our 
knowledge of environmental form. The other has to do with 
design methodology – or ways of working. The knowledge of 
environment as an autonomous and living organism, following its 
own laws, can provide us the basis on which our design acts will 
inevitably rest. The study of methods pertains to the design skills 
we need in order to do our part in a larger field of interventions. 
The two together suggest a domain of knowledge and skills par￾ticular to the architectural design profession.
We hope readers will agree that research along the lines of the 
Open Building approach and the five interconnected characteris￾tics discussed in this book is relevant for the architectural profes￾sion at large today. With the appropriate skills and knowledge, 
our profession will be better equipped for the realities that large 
projects present and for the increasingly complex distribution of 
design control in contemporary practice. Equally important, it can 
contribute to the creation of urban fabric of a fine-grained quality 
compatible with large projects of all kinds. Such fine-grained large 
undertakings will make them more resilient to change, more sus￾tainable in the face of the existential threat of climate change and 
more responsive to human life in all of its rich diversity.
Perhaps more than answers, our research should be able to 
frame the pertinent questions in a compelling way. The Open 
Building approach has some answers but certainly not all, and 
ultimately, what is needed are changed attitudes, incentives and 
practices – both in the public sector and the private sector, both 
on the demand side and on the supply side. Inventive architects, 
planners, engineers and others will be able to find new strategies, 
but unless we ask the right questions and take a long view, we 
can’t make the needed progress.202 DOI: 10.4324/9781003243076-23
We close the book with the introduction and conclusion to a set 
of 10 short essays that one of us (John Habraken) wrote summa￾rizing a lecture he gave at the Department of Architecture at the 
Massachusetts Institute of Architecture in 1996 called ‘Tools of 
the Trade.’ The 10 essays addressed a number of concepts and 
tools that will be familiar to readers of this book and is a kind of 
summing up:
1. Managing Parts
2. Against Program
3. Systems – Collective Properties
4. Patterns – Engaging the Client
5. Types – Sharing Wholes
6. Transformations
7. Levels of Intervention
8. Capacity vs. Function
9. Geometry and Abstraction
10.Positioning
11.Teaching Thematics
These essays were addressed to John Habraken’s colleagues 
and students at MIT. We conclude the book with these words 
addressed to colleagues in the academy where both of us spent 
many years.
THE QUALITY OF THE COMMONS
“On various occasions, most recently in a lecture for the Depart￾ment of Architecture at MIT, I have argued that our profession’s 
avant-gardist attitude is at odds with our claim that everything to 
be built is a legitimate subject for architecture. That claim was first 
put forward in the heroic days of Modernism and is now generally 
accepted. Our profession is fully immersed in the everyday envi￾ronment. This fact implies a new task for architecture, radically 
different from its historic mission. We have failed, so far, to take 
the measure of it.
The everyday environment is something continuous, both 
in time and space. It is also something we have in common: 
convention is its guide and consensus its mode of operation. 
These are issues of little value to a profession preoccupied with 
what is exceptional and new. Hence the new task demands a 
shift of attitude that does not come easily. The difficulty is not 
a matter of quality. The conventional can be of very high qual￾ity as many extant environments demonstrate. This quality of 
the common, in fact, is the benchmark against which individual 
interventions are measured. The merely exceptional and the 
merely new may fall short of it. The outstanding, of course, 
must surpass it.
The way we see ourselves as architects determines the knowl￾edge we seek, the methods we apply, and the skills we possess. 
In what follows I will point out specific instances of method, skill, 
and knowledge of general value in the making of architecture 
that nevertheless are not part of our discourse today, nor taught 
Postscript 2
Tools of The Trade
Figure 1 From a study for an urban tissue by Christina Gryboyanni, 
M.S. Arch. St. program, Massachusetts Institute of Technology203
POSTSCRIPT 2
with consistency, because they have to do with the quality of the 
common.
Less encumbered by real world constraints, our teaching, 
more so than our practice, reveals our hopes and dreams. It 
sanctifies and magnifies them. Today’s teaching does not see the 
common as a source of architectural skills, methods, and knowl￾edge, and pays little attention to cooperation and coordination 
among designers. Hence today’s architecture students, who will 
be designing places of work, office buildings, schools, hospitals, 
shopping malls, airports, apartments and suburban houses, come 
out less well equipped than they could be.
A rift between our practice and our teaching is often perceived 
by parties from both sides, who seem to be equally perplexed and 
irritated by it. Because neither those practicing nor those teaching 
are in the habit of discussing the quality of the common, the latter 
will not figure in their dispute. Yet, this negligence may well be 
the cause of the rift, its symmetry keeping the dialogue off target.
Those among us eager to improve it, too often find that the 
everyday environment, driven by everyday practice, refuses what 
we want to contribute. Our expectations are not met, our hopes 
disappointed, our good intentions not honored. We may be jilted 
suitors because we do not know the object of our devotion for 
what it truly is. As long as we ignore how conventions and com￾mon values make the everyday environment work, it may elude 
us, regardless of the sincerity of our attempts and the nobility of 
our motivations.
In more than a century of upheavals, innovations, and trans￾formations, the wholeness of the built environment has often 
been declared at risk, a concern easy to sympathize with. Yet 
this does not justify thinking ourselves designated saviors. The 
problem is comprehensive. We may well be part of it. Moreover, 
what is perceived as incoherent may be only unfamiliar. The built 
environment may be more structured than we think. In any case 
the everyday world will, eventually, impose its ways on us, rather 
than the other way around.
Hence our motivation can be selfish. The everyday world may 
or may not need us, but we need the everyday world, being already 
dependent on it for the bulk of our efforts. In our single-minded 
pursuit of the special we have forgotten that excellence grows 
from what is shared and that quality has its roots in common 
soil. What feeds on its own must eventually atrophy for want of 
substance. Architecture, no matter how one may define it, cannot 
afford to ignore where it comes from.
To facilitate saying what I have to say, I use two words in a 
special way. They must be explained.
I speak of ‘a field’ to evoke the wholeness of a certain built 
environment in all its variety and richness of form. A field is both 
the physical context for, and the subject of our designing. A field 
is built form as a continuity, known not by its outer boundaries, 
but by its inner properties.
Properties found in any field may be put in two categories. 
Some are peculiar and related to a single intervention only. Others 
are common to the field at large and expressive of the conventions 
and agreements governing it. Those held in common I will call the 
‘thematic’ properties of the field. I  call them thematic because 
they are sustained by actors accepting them as a ‘theme,’ making 
their own variations with them. Any intervention we make reveals 
qualities derived from both categories. It can be safely said that 
there is no such thing as a wholly thematic intervention nor a 
wholly un-thematic one. The most exceptional building will share 
some thematic aspects with the field it is located in. The most 
thematic building will have some unique features setting it apart.
I discuss ten ways in which the thematic is manifest in the 
field and connects to our designing. These do not, by any means, 
exhaust the thematic. Nor are they necessarily the best selec￾tion from it. I point them out because they come from my own 
experience, but I  trust most of them, if not all, are familiar to 
my colleagues. All are a mixture of concepts (ways of seeing the 
built environment) and methods (ways of designing). The two, of 
course, are mutually dependent. Some of them have already been 
part of workshops done, at one time or another, by faculty of the 
MIT Department of Architecture. Others are less familiar. Several 
were the subject of a course in Thematic Designing I taught in the 
years before my retirement from MIT. Some I learned about from 
colleague architects, others from personal experience in research 
and practice.
On first sight the ten issues may seem disparate. Yet they all 
belong to the realm of the thematic, a territory largely uncharted, 204
POSTSCRIPT 2
but not necessarily unknown. I offer no map of it but argue it 
habitable and nourishing and therefore worthy of further explora￾tion. All its features have to do with cooperation and coordination 
among designers and other decision makers in the field.
My exposition of the ten ways must necessarily remain brief 
and general. It would be easy to expand on each, but that would 
defeat the main purpose of this report, which is to argue a link 
between our neglect of thematics and the weakness of our meth￾ods and skills in teaching and practice. I should make it clear, too, 
that I report on my own experiences and insights and not based 
on any objective survey. It is hazardous to generalize about the 
built environment. While I am foolhardy enough to do so never￾theless, I try to reveal the prejudices and experiences my general￾izations come from.
I draw lessons from historic environments where fine-grained 
fields of great beauty and richness still can be observed. But I try to 
pay particular attention to design tasks typical for our times: The 
large building – institutional, commercial, or residential – and the 
large project, where urban design and architecture merge. There 
the everyday environment assumes shapes never seen before, 
and the need for thematic knowledge and skills is most urgent. 
Large-scale interventions are here to stay and may only become 
larger in the future. We must accept them as the true challenge 
they are, but should be capable to make them, inside their large 
volumes, fine grained and resilient like our historic references.
Nobody builds alone. The very act of building is one of coop￾eration. Making a design is to communicate what is to be put 
together by others, for others. There is a limit to innovation. The 
world cannot be re-invented with every project. When designing, 
we must deal with what we consider peculiar to the job at hand. 
All else must necessarily remain in the realm of convention.
Indeed, there is only a profession to the extent that we can 
formalize a common base of knowledge, method, and skills. We 
know as much, but do not speak of it. It somehow does not fit in 
the way we explain ourselves. We must hence explain ourselves 
anew. We need theories that throw light on the thematic roots of 
architecture, and a historiography that traces them.
The study of thematic form will liberate us from self-imposed 
limitations that have become counterproductive. Knowledge, for 
instance, is by definition shared. When individual expression is the 
dominant concern, it will not accrue. Skills must first be appreci￾ated as applied by others. When we are reluctant to borrow, the 
effort of acquiring them seems excessive. Skills come from meth￾ods and methods also are thematic by nature. When we only wish 
to do our own thing, they easily seem unnecessary constraints.
Likewise, forms like patterns and types, as I  will discuss in 
chapters Four and Five, are vehicles for the coordination of our 
designing. When we do not seek common ground, we do not 
need them. Levels of intervention, as discussed in chapter Seven, 
hierarchically relate design responsibilities (for urban design, 
architectural design, and interior design, for instance). If the 
project is seen as a top to bottom job in the hands of a single 
party, the articulation of levels is easily ignored; the distinction 
becomes blurred and the product monolithic. Systems, discussed 
in chapter Three, are pre-determined sets of parts the spatial rela￾tions among which are rule based. We will only honor systemic 
constraints when we are prepared to accept rules and selections 
already used by others.
Thematic properties are valuable when designing is seen as 
a cooperative effort. Without such a view they remain unattrac￾tive. They demand dedication and exercise to be mastered prop￾erly, while no such discipline seems necessary when designing is 
primarily seen as a form of self-expression. Moreover, they lack 
glamour. But their application will make fields prosper.
What is shared needs to be taught – it is the very substance 
of curriculum. We expect the individual teacher to contribute 
something unique – rightly so. Nevertheless, an education must 
first of all be an initiation in common skills and their architec￾tural application. The quality and scope brought to that task are 
what should distinguish a good school from a poor one. A gifted 
teacher, of course, will also be able to teach a gifted student how 
to transcend the thematic, not only rendering the field healthy, 
but making it bloom.
In the last chapter I  expand a little on aspects of teaching 
thematics and how it relates to teaching studio. I draw from my 
experience with the Thematic Design course already mentioned 
earlier. This was not a course about designing, but a design 
course. Students were given assignments requiring them to make 205
POSTSCRIPT 2
form. The emphasis, however, was on skill and method, not on 
meaning and expression. As thematics is the source of complexity 
and richness in the field, my hope was to make students feel at 
ease with complex form and the transformation of it. This, to my 
mind, constitutes the essence of our design abilities.
Finally, these being the days of the computer, a word should be 
added about the use of this instrument. Experience has convinced 
me that the professional pursuit of thematic qualities needs the 
computer. This is not surprising. The problem of thematics is a 
problem of our time. The tools of our time should be in sympa￾thy with it. Thematics is based on principles of transformation. 
The computer can transform easily. Thematics produces complex 
forms. The computer helps to render complexity transparent and 
to make it manageable. Thematics implies the sharing among 
designers of data on form. Computers are good in making data 
accessible. In short, the computer is highly compatible with the￾matic designing.
••••••••••
I have spoken of thematic qualities in the field and of tools derived 
from them. Accepting my specific suggestions requires a shift of 
perspective. The way we see architecture, and hence ourselves, is 
involved. My report, first of all, wants to be a contribution to that 
re-examination.
Architecture, when all is said and done, pursues the beauty 
and autonomy of built form. We must consider how that worthy 
quest is to be conducted. Beauty in the built environment needs 
to be cultivated. Thematics is where cultivation of architectural 
form begins. It does not guarantee good architecture but provides 
a fertile soil for it.
Autonomy arises where architecture is no longer expressing 
its maker but touches universals. It belongs first of all to the field, 
which is too large, and too complex, to be the invention of a single 
party or the product of a single moment. The autonomy of the 
field governs the autonomy of architecture by lending it thematic 
order. Architecture’s autonomy, to be sure, should not be confused 
with the autonomy of the architect, which does not exist. We are 
beholden to the field. Our work may be guided, it is hoped, by a 
desire for personal integrity. But we cannot demand acceptance of 
it for that reason only. Our task is to contribute to the field.
Those imbued with (post)modern values may find it difficult 
to take seriously the idea that the fate of architecture depends 
on the contemplation of the ordinary and the cultivation of the 
common. Moreover, the academic mind, trained to ask questions 
and mistrust convictions, may be reluctant to accept a proposed 
direction. Yet the latter may appreciate that, to see the way I sug￾gest, some hard questions must be dealt with first. The former 
may remember how, not long ago, the avant-garde took pride in 
pursuing what many thought was beyond the pale. 206
THE ORIGINS IN THE NETHERLANDS
In 1964, 10 well-known architecture firms in the Netherlands, all 
fully involved in designing housing projects, decided to set up and 
finance a research office to study what the implementation of the 
Support/Infill idea would involve for architects. They worried that 
the national debate about housing focused on costs and produc￾tion  (prefab concrete panels, etc.), not about social and archi￾tectural issues. They felt increasingly marginalized. They hoped 
a research program in architecture for housing might make pol￾iticians and technocrats listen to them. Known as SAR (Stichting 
Architecten Research or Foundation for Architects Research), this 
was, as far as we know, the first broadly supported and focused 
research entity in the history of the architecture profession.
The initial research at the SAR focused on design tools (SAR65) 
to help architects design ‘Supports’ with the capacity to accom￾modate a variety of independent dwelling units initially and over 
time. The underlying concept was that control over the design of 
personal environments should rest with occupants. This meant 
separating design tasks, one task being focused on the archi￾tectural infrastructure all occupants share, the other task being 
the design of individual, independent dwelling units. Additional 
research on technical, regulatory and building economics issues 
through the 1970s and 1980s helped pave the way for continued 
developments toward Open Building implementation. That work 
also included extension of the ideas to urban design (e.g., SAR73; 
Deciding on Density, etc.).
A few pioneering architects were learning to design, and 
a few general contacting companies were willing to construct 
Support projects in the Netherlands in the early 1980s that did 
not cost more than the traditional way, although there was 
heavy resistance. Economic studies demonstrated that supports 
could in fact cost less (Dekker, 1982). This in itself was a break￾through, because builders were generally reluctant to change 
their habits and give up what they saw as their way of assuring 
unified control and profit – the completion of an entire project 
from foundation to setting the tile and the fixtures and cabi￾nets in the bathrooms. When given a set of drawings with the 
Infill taken out, they had the tendency to make cost proposals 
for construction that did not fairly represent the true value of a 
building without its Infill.
Several experimental projects during those decades were built 
as ‘tests of concept.’ Now, years later, many hundreds of multiunit 
housing projects based on separated design tasks are on record in 
various parts of the world, the results of clients wanting them for 
pragmatic reasons. More come to light every year, many under￾taken by parties with no idea that there is a theoretical foundation 
and no idea of precedents. In a predictable fashion familiar to 
the field, a number of projects have been realized by architects 
who do not want to be seen as doing something like someone 
else has done before. A few exemplary residential Open Building 
projects, among many others, were discussed earlier in the book, 
and in two books: Residential Open Building (Spon, 2000) and 
Residential Architecture as Infrastructure: Open Building in Prac￾tice (Routledge, 2022). Many other published reports, academic 
studies and many professional journal articles in many languages 
have been published as well (see Appendix Two).
A number of formal organizations were launched in the Neth￾erlands starting in the 1980s to carry the work of the SAR forward 
and to advocate for wider implementation. These included the 
Open Building Foundation (Stichting Open Bouwen or SOB) and 
OBOM (Open Building Development Model), the latter being a 
research group at the Technical University Delft launched by Pro￾fessor Age van Randen in the mid-1980s. The OBOM research 
group undertook systematic technical studies in close collabora￾tion with building industry partners and building regulators. Their 
work focused on questions of MEP systems deployment at both 
the support and the Infill levels, and their interfaces. In the 1990s, 
SAR-International Network was launched to lend structure to the 
informal, worldwide network of those who advocated the SAR 
ideas. These are chronicled in Housing for the Millions (Boosma 
et al., 2000).
But after a period of time, these organizations receded from 
an active role and were disbanded. Only now, at the time this is 
being written (2023), a new generation of academics and prac￾titioners in the Netherlands is showing interest in these develop￾ments (www.openbuilding.co) (Kruit, 2022).
Appendix One
A Brief Overview of the International 
Open Building Movement207
APPENDIX ONE: A BRIEF OVERVIEW OF THE INTERNATIONAL OPEN BUILDING MOVEMENT
JAPAN
Between the 1970s to around 2000, a number of major research 
efforts were also launched in Japan, led by Professor Kazuo Tat￾sumi and his colleagues at Kyoto University and Professor Yositika 
Utida and his colleagues at the University of Tokyo. This work was 
undertaken with broad participation of government, academic 
and corporate entities. This led to a number of experimental pro￾jects (called S/I housing, standing for ‘Skeleton/Infill’), the most 
notable being NEXT21 in Osaka, in 1994, shown earlier in the 
book. Many hundreds of projects are on record by private devel￾opers and public agencies.
In 2009, the Long-Life Housing Law was issued by the Japa￾nese government based on the initiative of a now retired minister. 
It created a new certification system for residential buildings clas￾sified as excellent long-term housing.
The law assumed that a building is a combination of techni￾cal subsystems each of which has its own use-life, depending on 
wear-and-tear or user preferences. The most adaptable building 
is one in which each subsystem can be changed or replaced with 
minimum disturbance of other subsystems, based on the separa￾tion of what in the Japanese industry are called skeleton and infill.
The law offered technical solutions on the basis of which cer￾tification would be based. An easy-to-remember example is the 
requirement that vertical drainpipes must be renewed after about 
50 years, while the building is expected to live more than a cen￾tury. To meet the requirement, the law suggests that an empty 
space next to the functioning drain is made available during ini￾tial construction in which to install the replacement pipe. When 
a building meets all such conditions, the owner gets a predeter￾mined tax break.
As it happened, many single-family homeowners took advan￾tage of the law, but so far few if any of the large developers 
building large multifamily condominium projects have done so. 
The law is considered unsuccessful at least for the latter mar￾ket. The Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism 
(MLIT), which administers the certification process, is, at the time 
of writing this book, frustrated with the so-called excellent long￾term housing system, as only 2% of the 800,000 condominiums 
for sale between January 2010 and December 2020 have been 
certified.
Although the tax break, in theory, enables the producer to ask 
more money from the owner, there is no appreciation or incentive 
among the professionals to change their ways of working. Japan 
was the first where several Infill companies were founded, but to 
judge from what we know, while it promoted change, the 2018 
law did not encourage innovation. Instead, it told the professions 
what solutions to implement (Minami, 2022).
FINLAND
The principles of Open Building were first studied in Finland in the 
1990s. However, the concept did not spread widely within Finnish 
housing design practice for a number of years. Architect Ulpu Tiuri 
was among the first to study Open Building implementation in 
the Finnish context. In 1993, the city of Helsinki and the National 
Technology Agency TEKES organized an Open Building Technol￾ogy competition to find new solutions towards citizen-oriented 
homes with the capacity to change over time. Esko Kahri (Kahri & 
Co. Architects at the time) submitted one of the winning propos￾als and built a block of rental dwellings together with VVO as the 
developer. Kahri was among the first architects in Finland to adopt 
the Open Building approach in his practice. In 2001, Helsinki City 
and the Finnish Technology Agency arranged a second Open 
Building competition in Helsinki. For their winning competition 
entry, Ark Open (formerly Kahri & Co.) architects, in cooperation 
with SATO (a developer), Tocoman (a data management com￾pany) and TEKES (the National Technology Agency), developed 
an online project management system called PlusHome for dwell￾ing unit sales, customer service, and material quantities. This sys￾tem allowed the smooth communication of every party’s interests 
and needs. The main features of the PlusHome project were the 
use of Open Building methods (i.e., separation of design tasks), a 
variety of layouts and apartment sizes and a selection of surface 
materials, fixtures and appliances from which the future residents 
could choose, with immediate feedback on costs. As the project 
was successfully implemented and finished in 2005, SATO started 
shifting their own housing developments toward Open Building. 208
APPENDIX ONE: A BRIEF OVERVIEW OF THE INTERNATIONAL OPEN BUILDING MOVEMENT
Between the years 2005 and 2013, SATO realized, together with 
architect Esko Kahri, seven projects with over 700 dwelling units 
using the PlusHome concept.
The TILA (2007–09) and Harko (2019) projects were realized 
in Helsinki by SATO developers and designed by architect Pia 
Ilonen. The core idea of her approach provided residents with a 
5-m- (16.4") high ‘raw-space’ unit of either 50 m² (538 ft2
) or 
102 m² (1,100 ft2
). The small units could be merged or larger units 
separated in the future, according to the inhabitants’ demands 
(from a legal perspective, this is not difficult). (See two Finnish 
projects presented earlier in the book.) (Franke, 2022).
KOREA
For decades, the Korean government has pursued a mass hous￾ing policy in its multifamily housing supply, accounting for almost 
75% of all housing units, in order to solve the problems of a hous￾ing shortage. As a result, although the general building technol￾ogy has developed over the years, the current housing process 
has generated a number of problems. These problems include 
lack of diversity to meet resident’s diverse needs, absence of any 
concept of resource conservation to meet urgent global environ￾mental issues and methods of construction that do not consider 
maintenance or change. As a result, the housing stock is rapidly 
aging. Demolition and rebuilding are required in only 30–40 years 
following initial construction. A new paradigm for housing design 
and construction is needed.
Given this background, Korea’s national government research 
unit has been conducting research for more than 20 years on new 
design methods and building technology for apartment buildings 
and long-life housing. Based on these studies, the government 
implemented a housing performance indicator system in 2006. 
Despite this, the performance measures such as durability, var￾iability and ease of maintenance did not improve. At that time, 
100-year housing research and mock-up housing were con￾structed, and the results were provided to the private sector. 
However, the construction costs were 10–20% higher than the 
conventional approach. In order to solve this problem, a long￾life housing (100-year) certification system was implemented in 
2014, and research was conducted to reduce construction costs 
and to verify the technology and the delivery system. At the same 
time, a pilot project was built based on the results of the research, 
with completion expected in 2019. This work continues in the 
mission of 100-year housing in Korea (Kim and Yang, 2022).
PR CHINA
In PR China, a large but still informal network of architects, gov￾ernment agencies and researchers continues to write, produce 
design guidelines, and build projects in the long search for 100-
year sustainable housing, planned for incremental change. This 
work started in the 1980s, led by Bao Jaisheng, at that time a pro￾fessor at Nanjing University School of Architecture. He designed 
the Hui Feng Xin-Cun in Wuxi in 1987. Numerous postoccupancy 
studies have been published on this project. There were early con￾tacts with Dutch and Japanese proponents of the Open Building 
approach. Architects Ma Yunyue and Zhang Qinnan led an early 
experimental project to encourage Infill companies to come into 
the market in Beijing. These were singular initiatives that had little 
influence at the time.
The most recent major governmental effort, led by Dr. Liu 
Dongwei, chief architect of the China Institute of Building Stand￾ard Design and Research, was launched in 2018, called Long-Life 
High-Quality Housing. This followed several years of intensive 
cooperation and professional exchanges with colleagues in Japan. 
(See Chapter 9, Residential Architecture as Infrastructure: Open 
Building in Practice.) This, in turn, has stimulated a rapid increase 
in so-called ‘industrialized interior decoration’ companies, which 
is the Chinese name for Infill systems companies. At the time of 
writing this book, several competitive companies were delivering 
tens of thousands of Infill packages per year. These developments 
are outlined earlier in the book when we discuss developments 
toward an Infill industry (Liu and Wu, 2022).
THE EMERGENCE OF INTERNATIONAL AND NATIONAL 
COUNCILS
In the belief that these ideas, practices and research supporting 
them needed a more formal international platform, an interna￾tional Open Building Implementation network was formed in 
1996, meeting in Japan, under the umbrella of CIB. CIB stands for 209
APPENDIX ONE: A BRIEF OVERVIEW OF THE INTERNATIONAL OPEN BUILDING MOVEMENT
the International Council for Research and Innovation in Build￾ing and Construction (https://cibworld.org). By 2022, this largely 
academic Open Building network (CIB W104) had more than 300 
people in its contact list from more than 20 countries and had 
accumulated a substantial record of published, academic peer-re￾viewed papers, presented at yearly conferences in many countries 
around the world since its founding. Unfortunately, this body of 
work is not easily accessible at this time.
In 2017, the Council on Open Building (www.councilonopen￾building.org) was launched in the US, with the goal of expanding 
the sustainability agenda to include the proposition that build￾ings and neighborhoods must be planned for incremental change, 
based on separating design tasks and cooperation among design￾ers. In 2019, the Council held an international conference in Los 
Angeles – Open Building for Resilient Cities – with peer-reviewed 
papers from many countries and moderated panels including US 
and international practitioners in urban design, housing, health￾care and educational facilities design. The council organizes pro￾fessional conferences, webinars, interdisciplinary design exercises 
and case studies demonstrating that the principle of separation of 
design tasks as a basis for planning for change is already conven￾tional in some project types (e.g., urban design, commercial and 
retail real estate) but needs to become a general practice in all 
large, complex real property investments.
As of this writing (2023), a number of large architectural and 
engineering firms and clients are members of the council, which 
has a board of directors of 16, representing prominent architec￾tural, engineering, and urban design firms as well as clients and 
academic researchers. A series of design workshops and webinars 
was ongoing in 2021–2023, organized in four ‘strands’: urban 
design, healthcare, educational facilities and housing. A second 
international conference under the theme Beyond Single Use was 
held for Boston, Massachusetts, in 2023.
At about the same time (2018), a group of architects in the 
Netherlands already designing large residential and mixed-use 
projects in an Open Building way organized themselves into 
a cooperative network (www.openbuilding.co), organizing 
research, teaching and other promotion activities around the 
theme of Open Cities, Open Architecture and Open Systems. The 
TU Delft and other Dutch architecture schools had faculty and 
students involved. The members of this group actively pursue this 
approach in practice, primarily in urban design, housing, mixed￾use and adaptive-reuse projects, sometimes combining the roles 
of architect and developer.
Another network of architects and governmental agencies in 
PR China continues its advocacy of long-life housing. And a net￾work of researchers in what is called the Global South continues 
its work to find breakthroughs and to collaborate with govern￾ment agencies and practitioners in working toward Open Building 
Implementation under circumstances very much different from 
the initiatives in the so-called developed world (Osman, 2022).
READINGS
Boosma, K., van Hoogstraten, D., and Vos, Martijn. (2000). Housing 
for the Millions: John Habraken and the SAR (1960–2000). 
NAI Publishers, Rotterdam.
Dekker, K. (1982). Supports Can Be Less Costly. Dutch Architect’s 
Yearbook, Amsterdam.
Franke, C. (2022). Open Building in Finland. Residential Architecture 
as Infrastructure: Open Building in Practice (editor Kendall, 
S.). Routledge, London.
Kim, S., and Yang, H. (2022). Plan for 100-Year Housing in Korea. 
Residential Architecture as Infrastructure: Open Building in 
Practice (editor Kendall, S.). Routledge, London.
Kruit, C. (2022). Open Building’s Recent Developments in the Nether￾lands. Residential Architecture as Infrastructure: Open Build￾ing in Practice (editor Kendall, S.). Routledge, London.
Liu, D., and Wu, Z. (2022). Research, Development and Implemen￾tation of Long-life Sustainable Housing in China. Residential 
Architecture as Infrastructure: Open Building in Practice (edi￾tor Kendall, S.). Routledge, London.
Minami, K. (2022). Japan’s Act Concerning the Promotion of Long￾Life Quality Housing. Residential Architecture as Infrastruc￾ture: Open Building in Practice (editor Kendall, S.). Routledge, 
London.
Osman, A. (2022). Open Building in the Global South. Residential 
Architecture as Infrastructure: Open Building in Practice (edi￾tor Kendall, S.). Routledge, London.210
Appendix Two
Sources of Information of the Open 
Building Approach, Thematic Design 
and a Glossary of Terms
Related books and publications in English (listed chronologically by 
publication date)
Habraken, H.J. (1962). Supports: An Alternative to Mass Housing. 
Published in Dutch under the title: De Dragers en de Mensen. 
Scheltema en Holkema, Amsterdam.
Habraken, N.J., and van Olphen, Hans. (1965). SAR 65, Brief Out￾line of the SAR Principles and Methodology (SAR65). First 
Publication of the Basic Principles of SAR Method for Support 
Design. SAR, Eindhoven (Available in The Short Works of John 
Habraken. Routledge, London, 2023).
Habraken, N.J., and van Olphen, Hans. (1965). SAR65: Rules for 
Design: A Summary. One of the Two Fundamental Reports on 
the Work of the SAR, Eindhoven.
Propst, Robert. (1968). The Office: A Facility Based on Change. Busi￾ness Press International, Elmhurst, IL.
Habraken, N.J. (1970). Three R’s for Housing. Scheltema & Holkema, 
Amsterdam, originally published in Forum, vol. XX, no. 1, 
1966.
Habraken, N.J. (1972). Supports: An Alternative to Mass Housing. 
English edition, Praeger, New York (1999) Reissue (editor 
Teicher, J.). Urban International Press, UK (2021) Reissued 
Under the Routledge Revivals Open Building Series (2019) 
(editor Kendall, S.).
Habraken, N.J., Reyenga, Henk, and van der Werf, Frans. (1973). SAR 
73, the Methodical Formulation of Agreements in the Design 
of Urban Tissues. First Publication on Basic Principles of SAR 
Method on Urban Tissue Design, SAR, Eindhoven.
Habraken, N.J., Boekhold, J.T., Thijssen, A.P., and Dinjens, P.J.M. 
(1976). Variations: The Systematic Design of Supports. MIT 
Press, Cambridge, MA.
Dluhosch, E. (editor). (1976). The Cultivation of the Ordinary. IF 
(Industrialization Forum), Université de Montréal, Montreal, 
Canada.
Habraken, N.J., Kapteyns, Joop, and Carp, John. (1977). Deciding on 
Density: An Investigation into High Density, Low Rise, Allot￾ment for the Waldeck Area, the Hague. SAR, Eindhoven.
Utida, Y. (1977). Open Systems in Building Production. Shokoky-Sha 
Publishers, Tokyo.
Van der Werf, F. (1980). Molenvliet-Wilgendonk: Experimental Hous￾ing Project, Papendrecht, the Netherlands. Beyond the Mod￾ern Movement: The Harvard Architecture Review. MIT Press, 
Cambridge, MA, vol. 1, pp. 160–169, Spring.
Habraken, N.J., Aldrete-Haas, J.A., Chow, R., Hille, T., Krugmeier, P., 
Lampkin, M., Mallows, A., Mignucci, A., Takase, Y., Weller, K., 
and Yokouchi, Y. (1981). The Grunsfeld Variations: A Demon￾stration Project on the Coordination of a Design Team in 
Urban Design. MIT Laboratory for Architecture and Planning, 
Cambridge.
Dekker, K. (1982). Supports Can Be Less Costly. Dutch Architect’s 
Yearbook, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
Hatch, C. Richard. (1984). The Scope of Social Architecture. 
Van Nostrand Reinhold, New York, part 1, chapters  2–6, 
pp. 22–77.
Carp, J.C. (1985). Keyenburg: A Pilot Project. Stichting Architecten 
Research, Eindhoven, The Netherlands.
Habraken, N.J. (1985). The Appearance of the Form: Four Essays on 
the Position Designing Takes Between People and Things. 
Awater Press, Cambridge (Reprinted as Part of the Routledge 
Open Building Series – Revivals, 2019).
Habraken, N.J. (1988). Transformations of the Site. Awater Press, 
Cambridge (The Precursor of The Structure of the Ordinary. 
MIT Press, Cambridge, 1998).
Templemans P.H. (1990). Towards a Flexible Stock of Buildings: The 
Problem of Cost Calculations for Buildings in the Long Run. 
Proceedings, CIB World Congress, New Zealand.
Prins, M., Bax, C., and Plat, T. (1990). A Decision Support System for 
Building Flexibility and Costs: Design and Decision Support 
Systems in Architecture. Kluwer Academic Publishers, Amster￾dam, The Netherlands.
Hamdi, N. (1991). Housing Without Houses: Participation, Flexibil￾ity, Enablement. Van Nostrand Reinhold, New York.
Van Randen, A. (1992). Entangled Building . . .? Werkgroep OBOM, 
Delft, The Netherlands.
Fassbinder, H., and Proveniers, A. (1992). New Wave in Building: 
A Flexible Way of Design, Construction and Real Estate Man￾agement. Eindhoven University of Technology, Eindhoven, The 
Netherlands.
Iselin, D., and Lemer, A. (editors). (1993). The Fourth Dimension in 
Building: Strategies for Minimizing Obsolescence. Building 
Research Board, National Research Council, National Academy 
Press, Washington, DC.
Van der Werf, F. (1993). Open Ontwerpen (in Dutch). 010 Publishers, 
Rotterdam.
Reijenga, Postma Haag. (1993). Renovation by Open Building Sys￾tem, Princes Beatrixlaan, Voorburg (editor Yagi, Koji). Process 
Architecture, Tokyo, vol. 112, pp. 44–46.
Hasegawa, A (editor). (1994). SD 25: Collective Housing of the 
Near Future: NEXT21 – Experiments in Symbiotic Living with 
Nature. Kajima Institute Publishing Company, Tokyo.
Dekker, K. (1998). Consumer Oriented Renovation of Apartments: 
Voorburg, The Netherlands. CIB Best Practices Papers. CIB 
Web Site. www.cibworld.nl.211
APPENDIX TWO: SOURCES OF INFORMATION OF THE OPEN BUILDING APPROACH AND A GLOSSARY OF TERMS
Beisi, J. (1998). Adaptable Housing Design. Southeast University 
Press, PRC, Nanjing.
Lahdenperä, P. (1998). The Inevitable Change: Why and How to 
Modify the Operational Modes of the Construction Industry 
for the Common Good. The Finnish Building Center, Helsinki.
Tiuri, U., and Kendall, S. (1998). Characteristics of Open Building 
in Experimental Housing: Proceedings of the Open Build￾ing Workshop and Symposium. CIB Report Publication 221, 
Rotterdam.
Tiuri, U., and Hedman, M. (1998). Developments Towards Open 
Building in Finland. Teknillisen korkeakoulun arkkitehtiosaston 
julkaisuja 50, Helsinki.
Habraken, N.J. (1998). The Structure of the Ordinary: Form and Con￾trol in the Built Environment (editor Teicher, J.). MIT Press, 
Cambridge, MA.
Gann, D. (1999). Flexibility and Choice in Housing. The Policy Press, 
University of Bristol, UK.
Kendall, S., and Teicher, J. (2000). Residential Open Building. Spon, 
London.
Boosma, K., van Hoogstraten, D., and Vos, Martijn. (2000). Housing 
for the Millions: John Habraken and the SAR (1960–2000). 
NAI Publishers, Rotterdam.
Kendall, S. (editor). (2001). Infill/Fit-Out Systems: Toward a Residen￾tial Infill Industry. Open House International. Urban Interna￾tional Press, Gateshead, UK, vol. 26, no. 3.
Kahri, E., Anttonen, S., Esko Enkovaara, E., Illonen, P., Juha Kämäräi￾nen, J., and Viita, P. (editors). (2001). Resident View to Urban 
Living. Rakennustieto Oy, Helsinki.
Tarpio, J., and Tiuri, U. (2001). Infill Systems for Residential Open 
Building; Comparison and Status Report of Developments in 
Four Countries. Helsinki University of Technology, Department 
of Architecture 75, Helsinki.
Goldhoorn, Bart. (2001). The Free Plan. Russia’s Shell and Core 
Apartment Buildings. Project Russia 20. A-Fond Publishers, 
Moscow and Amsterdam.
Friedman, A. (2001). The Grow House. McGill-Queen’s University 
Press, Montreal & Kingston.
Friedman, A. (2002). The Adaptable House: Designing Homes for 
Change. McGraw Hill, New York.
Leupen, B., Heijne, R., and van Zwol, J. (editors). (2005). Time Based 
Architecture. 010 Publishers, Rotterdam.
Habraken, N.J. (2005). Palladio’s Children: Seven Essays on Everyday 
Environment and the Architect (editor Teicher, J.). Taylor and 
Francis, London.
NEXT21 Editorial Committee. (2005). NEXT21: All About NEXT21. 
Osaka Gas Co., Ltd., Osaka, Japan.
Kendall, S., and Office of Properties and Buildings (editors). (2006). 
Systems Separation-Open Building at the Inselspital Bern, 
INO Project; A Symposium Focused on the INO Hospital Pro￾ject New Center for Intensive Care, Emergency and Surgery. 
Stampfli Verlag AG, Bern, Switzerland.
Ellingham, Ian, and Fawcett, William. (2006) New Generation Whole￾Life Costing: Property and Construction Decision-Making 
Under Uncertainty. Taylor & Francis, New York.
Kendall, S. (2006). A New American Townhouse. Trafford Publishing, 
Victoria, Canada.
Till, J., and Schneider, T. (2007). Flexible Housing. The Architectural 
Press. Oxford, UK.
Adaptability and Innovation in Healthcare Facilities: Lessons from the 
Past for Future Developments. (2008). The Howard Good￾man Fellowship Report. The Health and Care Infrastructure 
Research and Innovation Centre (HaCIRIC), London, UK.
Friedman, A. (2011). Decision Making for Flexibility in Housing. 
Urban International Press, Gateshead, UK.
Ilonen, Pia, et al. (2011). TILA Housing, Helsinki. Arkkitehti (Finnish 
Architectural Review). Finnish Association of Architects, Hel￾sinki, vol. 4, pp. 28–39.
Jia, Beisi (editor). (2011). Architecture Beyond Space: Time, People 
and Architecture. New Architecture 6/2011. New Architecture 
Magazine Publishers, PRC, Shenzhen, pp. 6–88.
Kendall, S.H., Kurmel, T.D., and Dekker, K.D. (2012). Healthcare 
Facilities Design for Flexibility. Final Report. Cost Modeling 
Workshop: Analysis of Initial Capital Asset Investment and 
Future Costs of Adaptation. Prepared by the National Institute 
of Building Sciences, Washington, DC, pp. 153–174.
Kahri, E., Illonen, P., Juha Kämäräinen, J., and Viita, P. (2014). Helsinki 
Seaside Sustainable Quarter. Proceedings, UIA Architect Con￾ference, Durban, SA.
Habraken, N.J., Mignucci, A., and Teicher, J. (2014). Conversations 
with Form: A Workbook for Students of Architecture. Rout￾ledge, London.
Kahri, E., et al. (editors). (2016). Construction in Residential Design, 
General Criteria. Rakennustieto Oy © Building Information 
Foundation, Helsinki.
Kahri, E. (editor). (2016). Guide RT 93–11232 Transformation in 
Housing Design: Status and Main Design. Rakennustieto Oy 
© Building Information Foundation, Helsinki.
Lifschutz, A. (editor). (2017). Loose-Fit Architecture-Designing Build￾ings for Change. John Wiley and Sons, Oxford, UK, AD 05, 
vol. 87.
Kendall, S. (editor). (2019). Healthcare Architecture as Infrastructure: 
Open Building in Practice. Routledge, London.212
APPENDIX TWO: SOURCES OF INFORMATION OF THE OPEN BUILDING APPROACH AND A GLOSSARY OF TERMS
Matsumura, S. (2020). Open Architecture for the People: Housing 
Development in Post-War Japan. Routledge, Oxford and New 
York.
Kendall, S. (editor). (2022) Residential Architecture as Infrastructure: 
Open Building in Practice. Routledge, London.
Akbar, Jamel. (2021) Crisis in the Built Environment: The Case of the 
Muslim City. Insan Publications, Istanbul, Turkey.
Kendall, S., and Dale, J. (editors). (2023) Short Works of John 
Habraken. Routledge, London.
Kendall, S., and Habraken, N.J. (Forthcoming, 2024). Open Building 
for Architects: Professional Knowledge for an Architecture of 
Everyday Environment. Open Building Series, Routledge.
A FEW KEY WEBSITES
www.thematicdesign.org
www.habraken.com
www.drstephenkendall.com
www.councilonopenbuilding.org
www.openbuilding.co
www.top-up.amsterdam/gebouw-top-up/
https://marckoehler.com
https://mei-arch.eu/en//213
Open Building: The international movement committed to mak￾ing the Open Building approach normative. Open Building design 
seeks to deal with the proper separation of design tasks, recogniz￾ing the hierarchical organization of built environment already well 
understood in the distinction of the professions of urban planner, 
urban designer, architect, interior architect, furniture and equip￾ment designers, etc. This is the essence of the built environment 
as a living organism. Separation of design tasks is an essential 
aspect of built environments that are alive and sustained and yet 
continue to evolve and retain coherence. For example, in design￾ing a large office building project, the task of designing independ￾ent units of occupancy is separated from the task of designing 
what all the units of occupancy share. The same principle can be 
applied to many other kinds of projects, including laboratories, 
shopping centers, medical and educational facilities, large residen￾tial projects, campuses and neighborhoods. One of the reasons to 
separate design tasks is to reduce costs and distribute risk and to 
provide decision flexibility; another is to enable work at various 
levels to proceed simultaneously; another is to enable independ￾ent units of occupancy to change without disturbing other units 
of occupancy or the shared infrastructure. This requires that each 
unit of control (e.g., a dwelling unit in a building or a building 
in an urban tissue) is in fact fully independent, technically and 
legally.
Thematic design: Everyday environments always have been 
highly thematic. We immediately recognize a Venetian Gothic 
palace, an Amsterdam canal house, a Georgian London terraced 
house, or a Pompeiian courtyard house as members of particular 
form families, inseparable parts of the urban fabrics that were 
shaped with them. Other built fabrics, on first sight, may seem 
chaotic and difficult to read, but on closer scrutiny, we always 
find thematic aspects. Every culture has its own conventions, hab￾its and ways of working and using. In the past, biased Western 
observers thought traditional Middle Eastern urban environments 
disorganized while, in fact, they have a highly structured thematic 
complexity. The architectural themes have different names like 
pattern, type, style or system. As in music, we recognize a theme 
by what is constant in the variations that we hear or, in this case, 
see. Form themes are what designers operating in a given location 
share, while the individual variations are their own. The balance 
between theme and variations is the most fascinating aspect of 
any built fabric.
Cultivation of everyday environment implies designing with 
themes. This demands particular skills and ways of working. How 
to find a good balance between theme and variation, between 
what we share and what we do individually? How do themes 
come about? How to decide, for instance, on the consistent 
adoption of a building type or entryway pattern or familiar issues 
like setback rules and height restrictions? Is it by top-down rules, 
collective ad-hoc agreements or implicit common understandings 
among designers? Often, a single higher-level design offers a 
shared context for many lower-level designs and, by so doing, 
sets thematic constraints for them that are considered reasonable 
and representative. Urban design, for instance, makes a shared 
context for individual architectural designs, assuming they will 
follow certain architectural types or patterns. In a similar way, a 
Base Building design makes a shared context for individual resi￾dential units of a certain kind. How do we know if a higher-level 
design offers the right context for lower-level design preferences? 
How do we inspire lower-level variety?
Levels: The concept of levels is directly related to the design of 
Infrastructure systems. For example, urban designers ‘operate on 
another level’ than the architect. In this case, the built environ￾ment is divided into two groups of things: those that are decided 
about by the urban designer and those that are the concern of the 
architect. This distinction is evident in explaining what happens 
when things change on one level or another. The architect designs 
a building within the context established and documented by 
the urban designer. She must respect, for instance, the layout of 
streets and rights-of-way and the division of lots in the block and, 
for example, certain patterns, themes and typologies. But within 
that context, she is free to act and make her own variations. She 
can change the design of the building in many ways. Indeed, dif￾ferent architects can build different buildings in different places 
in an urban tissue but will share the street network and the types 
Glossary of Key Terms214
GLOSSARY OF KEY TERMS
and patterns that are meant to yield coherent variety, explicitly 
notated in the urban designers’ plan. Although the urban design 
constrains their work, they are free within those constraints to 
do their own thing. However, when the street network must be 
changed for whatever reason, the buildings may have to adjust. 
The urban designer cannot act without affecting the designs of 
the architect. The relation, therefore, is asymmetrical and hier￾archical. Change on the level of the building does not affect the 
higher level of the urban design, but change in the urban design 
affects the lower level of the buildings.
Those who work in a given location relate ‘horizontally’ on the 
same level of intervention. Those who relate ‘vertically’ do so 
from different levels of intervention: looking upward to inhabit 
and honor the context shaped earlier, or downward to frame 
and stimulate the actions of those who come in later. These rela￾tions are relations of forms; forms sharing certain aspects, forms 
interpreting a given context, forms setting context for others: All 
designing is intervention, and each intervention triggers response. 
Change of form is the language we share. This is the meaning of 
a hierarchical structure of the built environment.
Capacity: Capacity means that something can accommodate 
something else, often an unknown something. This is a familiar 
concept; for example, when we walk into a room in an apartment 
we are considering buying, we think to ourselves, “I could use 
this room as a home office or perhaps a bedroom” or “We’re 
thinking of our future family needs, so I’m wondering if I can add 
a second bathroom and divide this big room into two bedrooms” 
or “I wonder if I could buy the apartment next door when my 
elderly parents come back to live with us, since we don’t want to 
move.” We are doing an informal capacity analysis or exploration 
when we think this way. Beyond this informal way, more formal 
and precise methods are available and needed to assure clients of 
the proposed design. In architectural terms, a building that offers 
capacity will have a ‘higher-level’ configuration of spaces and 
physical forms that can accommodate a variety of configurations 
on a ‘lower level.’ That means that the configuration on the lower 
level (e.g., walls and piping) can change without forcing change 
on the higher level (the system of physical elements belonging 
to the Base Building decisions), but a change on the higher level 
will force an adjustment to the lower level. In the context of the 
separation of Base Building and fit-out, capacity refers to a range 
of variations in floor plan and use within the constraints of a given 
Base Building.
Sharing thematic qualities: When design tasks are separated (a 
basic principle of the Open Building approach), and yet a fully 
alive coherence is desired from the work of multiple players over 
time, shared values are essential. We might call these conven￾tions. For example, in urban design, it makes sense that certain 
patterns, themes and typologies are agreed upon to be shared – 
to harmonize various interventions, each of which can make its 
own variation on these shared architectural values. We might call 
this thematic design. Historic fabrics that have sustained them￾selves for centuries are good examples (think of Boston’s Back 
Bay, Amsterdam’s canal environment, Bologna’s arcaded streets, 
Kyoto’s historic Machia neighborhoods, etc.), contemporary 
urban tissues less so because we have developed an unfortunate 
tendency to emphasize how each intervention can be as different 
as possible from the next; the only thing bringing about coher￾ence then is coercive regulations.
Design methods for Open Building: The built environment as an 
autonomous and complex living entity that we want to cultivate 
(it will be there whatever we professionals do) raises questions of 
the skills we need to do so successfully. Once we recognize that 
we must cooperate and interrelate among designers working on a 
common task, design methodology – the study of how we design 
and the development of new and more effective ways of design￾ing – becomes an urgent and necessary subject. For instance, 
the straightforward and reasonable question of how we can find 
out whether an empty Base Building can allow the kind of unit 
designs that we (and our client) value triggers various method￾ological responses (e.g., capacity analysis). How we can best 
reach and notate agreements about shared form (e.g., themes 
and types and dimensional constraints) in a given urban fabric is 
a methodological question as well. A few methodological design 215
GLOSSARY OF KEY TERMS
tools are already available, such as capacity analysis, the use of 
zones, sectors, basic variants and band grids and the principle of 
sharing values and reaching agreements about such elements of 
architecture as typology, patterns, systems, variants and structure.
Infrastructure: Infrastructure is the general term for the basic physi￾cal systems of a business, region or nation. Examples of infrastruc￾ture include transportation systems, communication networks and 
sewage, water and electric systems. In respect to the Open Build￾ing approach, infrastructure is the hierarchical organization of 
basic elements of a complex system in which higher levels of the 
system dominate lower levels, but lower levels are free to change 
or be replaced by more up-to-date parts performing the same 
function. For example, electrical service constitutes an infrastruc￾ture system in itself. From the power generation facility to the lap￾top or electrical appliance, there are many ‘levels,’ each deployed, 
owned, leased and managed by a different party, crossing many 
territorial boundaries and each capable of being replaced with 
higher-performing parts while maintaining the entire system’s 
functionality. The same can be said for a public water supply or a 
public sewage/wastewater system, all dependent on good inter￾faces between levels of intervention. In Open Building, the urban 
design dominates the buildings, and the buildings dominate the 
interior fit-out, each a level of decision-making that can be sepa￾rated to good effect, when good interfaces are used.
Base building (sometimes called Support, Primary System or 
skeleton ): A Base Building is a complete architectural infrastruc￾ture (not a structural skeleton), with capacity for variable size and 
layout of units of occupancy, ready for independent fit-out. It 
consists of all spaces and building elements that are common to 
all units of occupancy. These common elements generally include 
the building’s structure, enclosure (or most of it), elevators, fire 
egress stairs (and perhaps corridors) and all common or shared 
MEP systems serving independent units of habitation. Walls or 
parts of walls separating units of occupancy (called demising walls 
in the US) are considered to be part of the Base Building once 
fixed but are generally able to be changed (with obvious impli￾cations to adjoining territories) without disturbing the permanent 
Base Building.
Infill (sometimes called fit-out or Secondary System): Refers to 
a what is decided independently for each unit of occupancy. An 
Infill system is the integrated bundle of products and services used 
to fill-in a ‘serviced’ space in a building, to make it ready for use 
or habitation. Infill includes everything installed within the legal 
(and fire) boundaries of a single unit of occupancy, that is, within 
the walls or floors separating that unit of occupancy from other 
such units. The Infill bundle includes the MEP (mechanical, elec￾trical and plumbing) systems specific to and within the occupied 
space, as well as walls, doors, cabinets, plumbing fixtures, lighting 
fixtures and most if not all surface finishes. The Infill might include 
some of the façade (e.g., windows) if legally defined to be part 
of the unit of habitation. Whether part of a building’s façade is 
Infill or Base Building is a technical as well as a cultural question; 
whether the Infill includes the bathroom is another question to be 
resolved in each case.
Infill business: An Infill company offers the service of designing 
and fitting out a legally defined space in a Base Building, under a 
unified contract with all the installers and products required (i.e., 
not the use of independent subcontractors). This unified con￾tract assures a good product/service, delivered on time for the 
agreed-upon price. Certified Infill companies meet recognized 
performance standards governing all similar companies in a given 
governmental jurisdiction.216
Note: Boldface page references indicate tables. Italic references indicate figures.
access system 33, 34
adaptive reuse study (office to residential): alternative to conversion 
161–162; capacity analysis in 154; challenge of 154; design 
constraints 154, 160; drainage piping in bathroom 182–183, 
182; DWV systems 157; fixtures 157–159, 158; Kales 
Building 160–161, 161, 162; MEP constraints 155–157, 
156; overview 154; piping traffic inside walls 159–161, 160; 
problems encountered in 183; toilets 158–159, 158; vertical 
MEP pipe shaft positioning study 162–164, 163, 164; waste 
piping 157–159, 159; see also design process for building 
conversion using capacity analysis
Alexander, Christopher 123–124
alpha zone 147–148, 147, 148
Amsterdam canal houses (the Netherlands) 122, 122
Amsterdam extension (the Netherlands) 133, 133
Arkitema Architects (building architects) 14, 16
Back Bay (Boston, Massachusetts, USA) 122, 122, 123
Base Building: capacity and 112; concept 19, 111; definition 111; 
designing 114, 142, 145–148, 145; Infill separation and 
111–112, 116; lifestyles and, designing to 129; Oregon 
Health Center 91–92, 92; Plus-Home 53; principles for 
designing 142; production process 113; redefinition 196–197; 
Santa Monica High School Discovery Building 105; separation 
of design tasks and 116; Shenzhen University Engineering 
School 99, 100; space allocation in 147; TILA 57, 58; see also
Support
bathroom drainage piping 182–183, 183
Beijing Government Social Housing Center 193
Beijing Housing Industrialization Group Co. Ltd (BHIG) 193
beta zone 147–148, 147, 148
Beyond Single Use conference (2023) 209
Bijdendijk, Frank 185–187
Bosworth, William Welles 137
bottle-crate image 71–72, 71
Broadacre City development concept 117
built projects see specific name
capacity: Base Building and 112; concept of 132; for dwelling 
variation 54; linking form to function 144; question 
about 140
capacity analysis: in adaptive reuse study 154; definition 140–141; 
design process and 141–142; evaluation and 112, 143–144; 
grids and 149–153, 151, 152, 153; of Kales Building 
160–161, 161, 162; margins and 145–149, 145, 146, 147, 
148, 149; MEP constraints and, studying 155–157, 156; 
methodological problem of 142–143; overview 6, 140; zones 
and 145–149, 145, 146, 147, 148, 149; see also design 
process for building conversion using capacity analysis
change: balancing permanence with 115, 135–139; in everyday 
built environment, importance of studying 137–139; large 
projects and 137; levels and 130–131; longitudinal studies of 
137–139; technical strategies for handling 136–137
Chicago School 120
Chikazumi, Shinichi 44, 50
China see Infill industry in PR China; PR China; specific built project 
name
China Construction Technology Consulting (CCTC) 189
China-Japan Long-Life Sustainable Housing International Summit 
Forum (2010) 189
China Real Estate Association 189
‘commons, the’ 6, 202–205
control of space 127–128, 128
Conzen, M. R. G. 138
cooperation and separation of design tasks and 2–3
Council on Open Building 209
COVID-10 pandemic 120
crop rotation 32–33
Dale, John R. (architect) 76, 103
defensible space 128
delta zone 147–148, 148
Design and Assessment Standard for Long-Life Sustainable Housing 
(2018) 190
design constraints 154
design process for building conversion using capacity analysis: 
advantages of 183; demising walls placement for basic unit 
sizes/margins 165, 165, 166; floor plan study 164–165, 165; 
individual dwelling unit development 165–166, 166; MEP 
stacks location 167–171, 167, 168, 169, 170, 171, 172, 173, 
174, 175, 176, 177, 178, 179, 180, 181; overview 164; room 
placement inside unit 166–167, 166, 166, 167, 167
disentanglement 33, 72, 115, 136
‘dough,’ kneading 30–33
downward relations 131–132
drainage piping 133, 133, 182–183, 182
Dutch Foundation for Architects Research (SAR) 110, 113–114, 206
DWV (drain, waste, vent) systems 157
Index217
I ndex
education built projects: longitudinal study of 138; Santa Monica 
High School Discovery Building 102–108; Shenzhen 
University Engineering School 96–101; see also specific 
name; urban/campus built projects
Engineering School (PR China) see Shenzhen University Engineering 
School
everyday built environment: balancing permanence and change 
115, 135–139; change in, importance of studying 137–139; 
characteristics, overview 9, 115; definition 3; longitudinal 
studies of change in 137–139; note about characteristics 
115–116; Open Building approach designs and 115, 
125–126; separating design tasks 115–120; territory, 
importance of/understanding 115, 126–128; thematic design 
115, 121–126; see also hierarchy, inherent in everyday built 
environment; specific characteristic
façades: glass 128; Molenvliet 41–42; NEXT21 46, 47, 124–125, 
135; Place des Vosges 131; Shenzhen University Engineering 
School 98; Sydhavnen/Sluseholmen 16–17
Finland 207–208; see also specific built project names
fixtures 157–159, 158
floor plans/systems: INO Intensive Care Facility 72–73, 72; 
Molenvliet 41; NEXT21 45, 47; Oregon Health Center 93, 94; 
Plus-Home 55; Sammy Ofer Heart Building 81, 82; Shenzhen 
University Engineering School 98–99, 98, 99; TOPUP 65, 66
form-based codes, adoption of 121
Frantzen, Tom 64
Fukao, Seiichi 44
Garnier, Tony 117
Gaudi, Antonio 122–123
government and the Open Building approach 198–199
green spaces 26, 33, 33, 42, 46, 46
grids 45, 149–153, 151, 152, 153
Grönig Arkitekter 16
Habraken, John 202
Hassan Fathy’s mud-brick vaulting systems 125
healthcare built projects: COVID-19 pandemic and 120; INO 
Intensive Care Facility 69–77; longitudinal study of 138; 
Oregon Health Center 84–95; Sammy Ofer Heart Building 
78–83; separation of design tasks in 119–120; see also 
specific name
HED (building architects) 106
Heneng (Heneng-home) 190–191, 191, 192, 193, 193
HENN Architects 30, 35
hierarchy, inherent in everyday built environment: change and levels 
130–131; concept of levels and 128–129, 129; disappearance 
of levels 133–134; higher level, relating to 131; historical 
examples of use of levels 129–130, 130; Infill level 134–135, 
135, 184; levels of intervention and 9, 115; lower level, 
relating to 131–132; modernist legacy and levels 134; 
process selection and 129, 129; same level, relating to 
132–133
historic preservation movement 121
Holabird and Roche Marquette Building (Chicago, Illinois, USA) 119
horizontal relations 132–133
Hutong gate (Beijing, PR China) 126
Infill: Base Building design from 145; Base Building separation and 
111–112, 116; definition 111; Heneng Infill system 190–191, 
191, 192, 193, 193; layouts 67; level 134–135, 135, 184; 
production process 113; Santa Monica High School Discovery 
Building 105; V3 system 194–195, 194, 195, 196; see also
residential Infill industry
Infill industry in PR China: Base Building redefinition 196–197; 
government initiatives 189–190; Heneng and 190–191, 191, 
192, 193, 193; V3 system development 193–194, 194, 194, 
195, 196
information/data management system 54, 54
Initiative to Build Long-life Sustainable Housing 189
INO Intensive Care Facility (Inselspital, Bern, Switzerland): aerial 
view 77; background information 71–72; bottle-crate 
comparison 71–72, 71; changes to Secondary System 73–74, 
74; corridor spaces 76; exam room 76; floor system 72–73, 
72; light wells 76; partitioning building systems 73; Phase 
One 69, 77; Phase Two 76, 77; Primary System 72, 73, 
74, 76; project data 70; Secondary System 72, 74; spatial 
organization 74; surgery suite layout 73–74, 75; System 
Separation and 71–74, 76; technical system organization 74; 
Tertiary System 72, 74
Inselspital Hospital Campus Master Plan (Bern, Switzerland): aerial 
view 30; background information 30; ‘dough,’ kneading 
30–33; ideas, key 32–33; implementation sequence 36; 
model 29; objectives 31–32; overview 31; project data 
29–30; requirements, implementation 33–34, 33, 36; 
rulebook 31–32; sustainability and 35–36; topography 30; 
urban quarters 30, 31, 32; zoning plan 35
interior design profession 118–119
International Council for Research and Innovation in Building and 
Construction (CIB) 208–209
International Seminar on Urban Form (ISUF) 138I ndex
218
Japan 207; see also specific built project names
Japan-China Association for Building and Housing Industry 189
Kahri, Esko 53, 207–208
Kales Building (Detroit, Michigan, USA) 160–161, 161, 162
Katwikjk Inner Harbor Project (Katwikj, the Netherlands): aerial 
view 25; background information 26; collaborators 26, 
28; colonnade 28; concept drawing 28; project data 25; 
separation of design tasks and 28; street view 27; Van 
Olphen’s comments 26–28
Korea 208
Kroll, Lucien 150
La Pedrera apartment buildings 122–123, 123
large housing projects 4; see also residential built projects; specific 
name
Le Corbusier 46, 117, 127
LEED certification system 184
Lee, Joshua 138
levels: change and 130–131; connection 33, 34; Infill 134–135, 
135, 184; of intervention 9, 115; Oregon Health Center 93, 
94; see also hierarchy, inherent in everyday built 
environment
Liu, Dr. Dongwei 208
longitudinal studies of change in everyday built environment 
137–139
Long-Life High-Quality Housing 208
Long-Life Housing Law 207
Loos, Adolf 16
Macchi, Giorgio 71
Machiya dwellings (Kyoto, Japan) 122, 123
Mansart, Jules Hardouin 129–131
margins 145–149, 145, 146, 147, 148, 149
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) complex 137, 137
MEP (mechanical, electrical/data and plumbing): constraints 
155–157, 156; in Oregon Health Center 91; organization 91; 
stacks location 167–171, 167, 168, 169, 170, 171, 172, 173, 
174, 175, 176, 177, 178, 179, 180, 181
Minami, Kazunobu 138
Molenvliet (Papendrecht, the Netherlands): aerial view 37, 40; 
background information 38; courtyard entry 41; entry 
courtyard 41; façade 41–42; garden, rooftop 42; ground￾floor layout 41; interior view 127; personalization over time 
42, 42; project data 37; Support 38, 40, 40; urban tissue and 
38, 38, 39
Narváez, Jorge Iván Andrade 138
Netherlands, the 206; see also specific built project names
Newman, Oscar 128
NEXT21 (Osaka, Japan): background information 44; Chikazumi’s 
comments 50; cooperation on two levels 41; coordination 
grids, dimensional/positional 44, 45; as experimental project 
207; façade 46, 47, 124–125, 135; floor plans 45, 47; future 
context for 49–50; gardens, private 46, 46; interiors of units 
47, 47, 48, 49; levels/‘tables’ 50; as open building research 
laboratory 48–50; present context for 49–50; project data 43; 
urban context 43
office building design 118–119, 118, 119, 131, 132
Open Building approach: applications of 4–5; argument for 
199–200; communication 113–114; contribution of, most 
important 6; coordination, problem of 112–113; councils, 
emergence of international and national 208–209; definition 
of 9; evaluation 112–114; everyday built environment designs 
and 115, 125–126; examples of 9; in Finland 207–208; 
fundamental principle of 109; government and 198–199; 
in Japan 207; in Korea 208; large housing projects and 4; 
movement 4, 206–209; in the Netherlands 206; operations 
113–114; origins of 109; overview of 6–7; practice and, 
focus/improvement 1, 5; in PR China 198, 208; purpose of 
1–2; research agenda, new 201; separation of design tasks 
and 1–2, 109, 116; sources of information on 4, 210–212; 
sustainability and 1; terminology 111–112, 213–215; ‘Tools 
of the Trade’ and 202–205; urban problem and, prototypical 
109–111; see also specific built project example
Open Building Development Model (OBOM) 206
Open Building Foundation (Stichting Open Bouwen or SOB) 206
Open Building Implementation network 208–209
Open Building for Resilient Cities conference (2019) 209
Open Building Technology competition 207
open space 32, 35, 38, 164
Oregon Health Center (Portland, Oregon, USA): background 
information 86; Base Building 91–92, 92; concept planning 
88; design process 86, 87, 88; final design 92; floors/levels 
93, 94; main entry 84; MEP system organization 91; northern 
view 95; Open Building concepts 88; post-completion 92; 
project data 85; space planning 88, 89, 90–91, 90
Osaka Gas 44, 48
Oussoren, Claus 64
PATCH22 residential housing 62, 64
permanence, balancing with change 115, 135–139219
I ndex
Pilosof, N. P. 138
piping: bathroom 182–183, 183; drainage 133, 133, 182–183, 
182; DWV systems 157; traffic 159–161, 160; vertical 
MEP pip shaft positioning study 162–164, 163, 164; waste 
157–158, 159
Place des Vosges 131
Place Vendome (Paris) 122, 129–131, 130
plots 32–36, 33
Plus-Home (Arabianranta, Helsinki, Finland): background 
information 53; Base Building 53; capacity for dwelling 
variation 54, 55; floor system 55; garden side 51; 
information/data management system 54, 54; interior views 
55; privacy screens, sliding 53; project data 52
PR China 198, 208; see also Infill industry in PR China; specific built 
project name
public space, shrinking 13
quality of the commons 202–205
RABO Vastgoed 26
Reijenga, Henk 20
residential built projects: longitudinal study of 138; margins in 
146–149, 147, 148, 149; Molenvliet 37–42; NEXT21 43–50; 
PlusHome 51–55; separation of design tasks in 120; TILA 
56–61; TOPUP 62–68; zones in 146–149, 147, 148, 149; see 
also large housing projects; specific name
residential Infill industry: argument for 199–200; Bijdendijk’s 
perspective 185–187; business structure/culture and 
188–189; companies’ roles in 187–188; culture of building 
and 134; lessons from 197–198; outdated residential industry 
culture and 184–185; overview 184; in PR China 189–197; 
see also Infill industry in PR China
resilience 106–107
Sammy Ofer Heart Building (Tel Aviv, Israel): background 
information 79; design process 79–80, 80; evolution of 
building 81–83; floor plans with medical programs 81, 
82; phases of building 81–83, 81; project data 78; urban 
context 78
Santa Monica High School Discovery Building (Los Angeles, 
California, USA): background information 104; Base Building 
105; benefits, unanticipated 107–108; bleacher stairway 
108; cafeteria 107, 108; commons area 108; courtyard 
entrance 102; Infill system 105; lab space 108; new building 
concept 104–105, 105; Open Building principles and 105, 
106, 107; project data 103; resilience and 106–107; rooftop 
outdoor classroom 108; separation of design tasks and 106; 
sustainability and 106–107
SATO (private developer) 53, 208
Schön, Donald 3, 201
School Construction Systems Development (SCD) project 138
sectors 148, 149
separation of design tasks: Base Building and 116; cooperation and 
2–3; in government facilities design 119; in healthcare built 
projects 119–120; ignoring, results of 117; importance of 
115; Infill and 116; ion shopping center design 118–119; 
Katwikjk Inner Harbor Project and 28; large housing projects 
and 4; life cycles of parts of sustainable parts and, mirroring 
117; in office building design 118–119, 118, 119; Open 
Building approach and 1–2, 109, 116; opportunities for 
working out new interfaces and 2; relations and 2–3; in 
residential built projects 120; Santa Monica High School 
Discovery Building and 106; social structure and 116; 
Sydhavnen/Sluseholmen and 14, 16–17; urban/campus built 
projects and 117–118
Shenzhen University Engineering School (Shenzhen, PR China): 
background information 98; Base Building 99, 100; campus 
setting view 96; departmental groupings 98–99, 99; façade 
98; floor plans 98–99, 98, 99; interior design 99, 100, 101; 
overview 101; project data 97
shopping center design 118–119
Sluseholmen see Sydhavnen/Sluseholmen
Soeters, Sjoerd 12
space: control of 127–128, 128; defensible 128; empty ‘raw’ 57; 
green 26, 33, 33, 42, 46, 46; open 32, 35, 38, 164; public, 
shrinking 13
Steelcase (furniture company) 119
Support: concept 109; definition of 109, 111, 112; Molenvliet 38, 
40, 40; SAR and 110; see also Base Building
sustainability: Inselspital Hospital Campus Master Plan and 35–36; 
Open Building approach and 1; Santa Monica High School 
Discovery Building and 106–107
Sydhavnen/Sluseholmen (Copenhagen Harbor, Copenhagen, 
Denmark): aerial view of 12, 14; awards 18; background 
information 12; canal view 10, 15, 17; façades 16–17; 
guidelines, architectural 17–18; housing program 12–13; 
master plan 13, 13; project data 11; public space and, 
shrinking 13–14; separation of design tasks and 14, 16–17; 
site 12, 12; Sluseholmen 12, 14, 15, 17–18; urban blocks 14, 
15, 16–17, 16, 17
System Separation (SYS) 71–74, 76
systems furniture market 118I ndex
220
technical infrastructure 33, 34–35
technical strategies for handling change 136–137
territorial boundaries, clarifying 112
territory, importance of/understanding 115, 126–128
thematic design 115, 121–126; coherence with variety, enabling 
121–122, 122; designing with themes 125–126; importance 
of 115; as natural phenomenon 122–123; patterns 123–124; 
systems 124–125
TILA (Helsinki, Finland): background information 57; Base Building 
57, 58; bathrooms 57, 60; development/occupancy process 
57, 59; empty ‘raw’ space 57; individualization 60, 61; 
interior views 61; project data 56; recognition received 208; 
regulatory review process 60; southern view 56
Tocoman data-cost office 53
toilets 158–159, 158
‘Tools of the Trade’ 202–205
TOPUP (the Netherlands): background information 64; building core 
65; capacity for unit layouts 64–65, 64, 66; floor systems 65, 
66; infill layouts 67; interior views 64, 65, 68; legal/regulatory 
constraints 64; as open building 65–66; project data 63; 
rating chart 68; sketching unit 66; technical approach 64; 
urban context 62
unified control 127
University of Oregon Medical School (OHSU) 86, 88, 90–91
upward relations 131
urban/campus built projects: grids in 151–153, 152, 153; Inselspital 
Campus Master Plan 29–36; Katwijk Inner Harbor 25–28; 
margins and 145, 146, 146; separation of design tasks and 
117–118; Sydhavnen/Sluseholmen 10–18; Westpolder Bolwerk 
19–24; zones and 145, 146, 146; see also specific name
urban fabric 1, 20–21, 30–32, 44, 114–115, 120–121, 123, 127, 
130–131, 134, 201
urban problem, prototypical 109–111
urban quarters 30, 31, 32
urban tissue 38, 38, 39, 111, 145
US Green Building Council 184
Utida, Yositika 44
V3 system development (PR China) 193–194, 194, 194, 195, 196
van Eesteren, Cornelis 133
Van Olphen, Hans 26–28
variants, basic 148–149, 149
vertical MEP pipe shaft positioning study 162–164, 163, 164
Wang Qiang 193
waste piping 157–159, 159
Westpolder Bolwerk (Berkel en Rodenrijs, the Netherlands): 
architects 20; background information 20; Berkel Street/The 
Golden Neighborhoods 20–22, 20, 22; development area 
20–21, 20, 21, 24; Planka Street 20–21, 21; project data 19; 
residential program 23–24, 24; street view 19
Workstage development project 119
Wright, Frank Lloyd 117, 127
zones 145–149, 145, 146, 147, 148, 149
