The Inner Beauty of Electronic Components Open CircuitsSan Francisco
Eric Schlaepfer & 
Windell H. Oskay
Open Circuits
The Inner Beauty of Electronic ComponentsOpen Circuits. Copyright © 2023 by Eric Schlaepfer and Windell H. Oskay. 
All rights reserved. No part of this work may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or 
by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or by any infor￾mation storage or retrieval system, without the prior written permission of the copyright 
owner and the publisher.
First printing
26 25 24 23 22 1 2 3 4 5
ISBN-13: 978-1-7185-0234-5 (print)
ISBN-13: 978-1-7185-0235-2 (ebook)
Publisher: William Pollock
Managing Editor: Jill Franklin
Production Manager: Rachel Monaghan
Production Editors: Rachel Monaghan and Hilary Mansfield
Developmental Editor: Nathan Heidelberger
Cover Design: Monica Kamsvaag and Susan Brown
Interior Design and Composition: Maureen Forys, Happenstance Type-O-Rama
Technical Reviewer: Ken Shirriff
Proofreader: Scout Festa
For information on distribution, bulk sales, corporate sales, or translations, please contact 
No Starch Press, Inc. directly at info@nostarch.com or:
No Starch Press, Inc.
245 8th Street, San Francisco, CA 94103
phone: 1.415.863.9900 
www.nostarch.com
Library of Congress Control Number: 2022015611
No Starch Press and the No Starch Press logo are registered trademarks of No Starch 
Press, Inc. Other product and company names mentioned herein may be the trademarks 
of their respective owners. Rather than use a trademark symbol with every occurrence of a 
trademarked name, we are using the names only in an editorial fashion and to the benefit of 
the trademark owner, with no intention of infringement of the trademark.
The information in this book is distributed on an “As Is” basis, without warranty. While every 
precaution has been taken in the preparation of this work, neither the author nor No Starch 
Press, Inc. shall have any liability to any person or entity with respect to any loss or damage 
caused or alleged to be caused directly or indirectly by the information contained in it. 5
About the Authors
Eric Schlaepfer runs the popular engineering Twitter account @TubeTimeUS, 
where he posts cross-section photos, shares his retrocomputing and 
reverse engineering projects, investigates engineering accidents, and even 
features the occasional vacuum tube or two. Some of his better-known proj￾ects include the MOnSter 6502 (the world’s largest 6502 microprocessor, 
made out of individual transistors), the Snark Barker (a retro recreation of 
the famous Sound Blaster sound card), and the Three Fives and XL741 
transistor-scale replica chip kits (available from Evil Mad Scientist Laborato￾ries). His diploma—a BS in electrical engineering from California Polytechnic 
State University, San Luis Obispo—was signed by Arnold Schwarzenegger.
Windell H. Oskay is the author of The Annotated Build-It-Yourself Science 
Laboratory and is the cofounder of Evil Mad Scientist Laboratories, where 
he designs robots for a living. He holds a BA in physics and mathematics 
from Lake Forest College and a PhD in physics from the University of 
Texas at Austin. He has been shooting photos since high school and likes 
cats, except when their hairs become visible on electronic components 
at high magnification.
About the Technical Reviewer
Ken Shirriff restores old computers and electronics and writes about com￾puter history. In his blog (righto.com), he looks inside everything from char￾gers to integrated circuits. Ken was formerly a programmer at Google and 
holds a PhD in computer science from the University of California, Berke￾ley. He has received 20 patents and added seven characters to Unicode. He 
frequents Twitter as @kenshirriff.6
Contents in Detail
Acknowledgments 9
Introduction 10
1 Passive Components 13
32 kHz Quartz Crystal 14
Carbon Film Resistor 16
High-Stability Film Resistor 18
Wirewound Power Resistor 19
Thick-Film Resistor Array 20
Surface-Mount Chip Resistor 22
Thin-Film Resistor Array 23
Wirewound Potentiometer 24
Trimmer Potentiometer 26
15-Turn Trimmer Potentiometer 28
10-Turn Potentiometer 30
Ceramic Disc Capacitor 32
Glass Capacitor 34
Multilayer Ceramic Capacitor 36
Aluminum Electrolytic Capacitor 37
Film Capacitor 38
Dipped Tantalum Capacitor 40
Polymer Tantalum Chip Capacitor 42
Polymer Aluminum Chip Capacitor 43
Axial Inductor 44
Surface-Mount Inductor 46
Sintered Ferrite Inductor 47
Ferrite Bead 48
Three-Terminal Filter Capacitor 49
Toroidal Transformer 50
Power Supply Transformer 52
Low-Power Cartridge Fuses 54
Axial Lead Fuse 56
Liquid Power Fuse 57
Compact Power Fuse 58
Thermal Fuse 60
2 Semiconductors 63
1N4002 Diode 64
Glass-Encapsulated Diodes 66
Rectifier Bridge 68
2N2222 Transistor 70
2N3904 Transistor 72
LM309K Voltage Regulator 74
Dual In-Line Package (DIP) ICs 76
ATmega328 Microcontroller 78
Small Outline Integrated Circuit 80
Thin Quad Flat Pack 82
Ball Grid Array 84
Microprocessor SoC 86
Through-Hole Red LED 88
Surface-Mount LED 90
Red Green Bicolor LED 91
White LED 92
Laser Diode 94
Optocoupler 96
Optical Tilt Sensor 97
Optical Encoders 98
Ambient Light Sensor 100
CMOS Image Sensor 1027
3 Electromechanics 105
Toggle Switch 106
Slide Switch 108
Pushbutton Switch 109
DIP Switch 110
Tactile Switch 112
Microswitch 114
Electromagnetic Relay 116
Thermal Switch 118
Brushed DC Motor 120
Stepper Motor 122
Magnetic Buzzer 124
Speaker 126
Smartphone Camera 128
Inside the Camera Module 130
Rotary Voice Coil Motor 132
Optical Drive Focusing Motors 133
Electret Microphone 134
4 Cables and Connectors 137
Solid and Stranded Wire 138
AC Power Cable 139
IDC Ribbon Cable 140
Modular Telephone Cable 141
DIP Sockets 142
Barrel Plug and Jack 144
Quarter-Inch Audio Plug and Jack 146
3.5 mm Audio Connector 148
LMR-195 Coaxial Cable 150
Laptop Power Cable 151
RG-6 Coaxial Cable 152
Cable TV RG-59 153
F Connector 154
BNC Plug and Jack 156
SMA Connector 158
DE-9 Connector 160
Category 6 Ethernet Cable 162
SATA Cable 163
HDMI Cable 164
VGA Cable 166
Basic USB Cable 168
USB Jack 170
SuperSpeed USB Cable 172
5 Retro Tech 175
Neon Lamp 176
Nixie Tube 178
Inside the Nixie Tube 180
12AX7 Vacuum Tube 182
Vacuum Fluorescent Display Tube 184
Cathode Ray Tube 186
Inside the CRT 188
Mercury Tilt Switch 190
Vintage Wirewound Resistors 191
Carbon Composition Resistor 192
Cornell-Dubilier 9LS Capacitor 194
Dipped Silver Mica Capacitor 196
Axial Multilayer Ceramic Capacitor 197
IF Transformer 198
Incandescent Light Bulb 2008
Camera Flashbulb 202
Photoresistor 204
Point Contact Diode 206
Germanium Diode 207
µA702 Integrated Circuit 208
Windowed EPROM 210
Core Memory 212
IBM SLT Module 214
Analog Panel Meter 216
Magnetic Tape Head 218
Thin-Film Hard Drive Head 220
GMR Hard Drive Head 222
6 Composite Devices 225
LED Filament Light Bulb 226
Single-Side Printed Circuit Board 228
Two-Layer Printed Circuit Board 230
Multilayer Circuit Boards 232
Flex and Rigid-Flex Circuit Boards 234
Elastomeric Connector 236
MicroSD Card 238
Glob-Top Packaging 240
EMV Credit Card Chip 241
NFC Key Card 242
Smartphone Logic Board 244
Inside the Logic Board 246
Ethernet Transformer 248
DC-DC Converter 249
Seven-Segment LED Display 250
Thick-Film LED Numeric Display 252
5×7 LED Dot Matrix Display 254
Vintage LED Bubble Display 256
Alphanumeric LED Display 258
Temperature-Compensated Clock 260
Crystal Oscillator 262
Avalanche Photodiode Module 264
3656HG Isolation Amplifier 266
Inside the Isolation Amplifier 268
Afterword 271
Cutting and Polishing 272
Cleaning 274
Potting 275
Mounting 276
Photographic Equipment 278
Retouching 280
About Macro Photography 281
Focus Stacking 282 
Glossary 285
Index 2919
Acknowledgments
Special thanks to the following who helped with the creation of this book:
Thanks to John McMaster for decapping some of the chips that we photo￾graphed. Ben Wojtowicz graciously provided his old Nexus phone for us to 
tear apart. Ken Sumrall let us pick through his extensive HP calculator col￾lection, looking for particularly photogenic LED displays. Greg Schlaepfer 
loaned us the vintage guitar amplifier. Ken Shirriff, besides inspiring us 
with his detailed technical teardowns, also reviewed the book for techni￾cal accuracy. Jesse Vincent provided us with some keyboard keyswitches 
that ultimately didn’t make it into the book, but that we are nonetheless 
genuinely grateful for. Thanks also to Brian Benchoff for a circuit board 
that provided a great context shot. Thanks to Philip Freidin for some fruit￾ful discussions. And to Lenore Edman for acting as a springboard for ideas 
and as an occasional hand model, and for allowing Windell to go on sab￾batical for this work. 
Thanks to the staff at No Starch Press for making this book a reality.
Finally, thanks to all the folks on Twitter for their enthusiastic responses to 
the original cross-section photos that inspired this book.10
Introduction
Form ever follows function.
—Louis Sullivan, after Vitruvius
We cradle our seamless phones in our hands like 
cool, river-smoothed stones. They feel pleasing to 
touch. One kind of phone might seem better than 
another not because of its technological merits but 
because of how it looks and feels. This is by design. 
This is design. Industrial designers, engineers, and 
artists spend countless hours adjusting every curve, 
color, and texture. Good design appeals to our phys￾ical senses—and ultimately, to our sense of elegance.
Less obvious is that every constituent part of our devices—every electronic 
component—is also an object that was designed. Many components are 
themselves composite devices, made up of even smaller parts, each of 
which represents countless hours of design and engineering.
In this book, we’ll take a close look at a number of interesting electronic 
components. As we look at each, we’ll learn a little bit about three things: 
how it works, how it was manufactured, and how it is used. But what makes 
these components interesting in the first place doesn’t always fit within 
those three categories. Often it’s simply enough that we get to look at them.11
Sometimes the most mundane components reveal surprising artistry 
and intricacy. A nondescript rock, cracked by the geologist’s hammer, 
reveals a geode of mineral brilliance. A hammer is a particularly apt meta￾phor since this book is an unabashedly destructive tour of electronics. To 
reveal what’s inside, our tools included saws, sandpaper, solvents, polishing 
wheels, end mills, and (yes) an occasional carpenter’s hammer.
To an engineer, an electronic component consists of three parts: its 
interface, active area, and packaging. The interface connects the com￾ponent electrically and mechanically into a circuit, as with connecting 
wires and mounting holes. The active area makes the component useful. 
For example, there are doped areas of silicon in a transistor that allow it to 
amplify signals. Packaging provides structural support, environmental pro￾tection, and the external shape of the component.
Viewing a component as a sum of these three parts provides a useful per￾spective for understanding its technical design. Often, the active area is 
utterly dwarfed by the interface and packaging. That’s absolutely reasonable 
in many cases, like when you want to make a tiny light-emitting diode—the 
size of a grain of sand—big enough to handle with your fingers.
It’s another thing altogether to contemplate the aesthetic design of com￾ponents. While teams of designers and artists collaborate on the outward 
appearance of consumer electronics, the same cannot be said about the 
outward appearance of each interior component. A typical smartphone 
owner will never see what the parts inside that phone look like.
This book is not about accidental design. Every single wire, resistor, capac￾itor, and chip we’ll study was intentionally designed to meet specific tech￾nical needs, in terms of precision, usability, and cost. This book is about 
accidental beauty: the emergent aesthetics of things you were never 
expected to see.1
Passive 
Components
Resistors, capacitors, and inductors are basic building 
blocks found in essentially all electronic devices. All three 
are common examples of passive components, a broad cat￾egory of components that don’t add energy to a circuit. 
Instead, they dissipate, store, or transform energy in some 
way. These are some of the most varied and visually striking 
components, adorned with stripes, dots, glossy coatings, 
and cryptic labels. Let’s take a look.14
Deep within a quartz wristwatch lies 
a tiny tuning fork, cut from gleaming 
quartz crystal, that keeps the watch 
running on time. The tuning fork is 
plated with mirror-like electrodes on 
its surfaces and protected inside a 
tough metal tube. 
A musician’s tuning fork might be cut to 
ring at “A 440,” the musical note A at 440 
hertz (Hz), or 440 oscillations per second. 
The resonant frequency of this quartz 
tuning fork, however, is beyond the range 
of human hearing, precisely tuned to 
32,768 Hz. (Keep dividing 32,768 Hz by 2 
and you eventually get 1 Hz.)
Quartz is piezoelectric: it flexes ever 
so slightly when a voltage is applied to 
it and also produces a voltage when 
flexed. The watch circuitry applies a tiny 
voltage to the electrodes, causing the 
quartz to flex and ring at its resonant 
frequency. As it does so, it produces an 
oscillating voltage. Every second, a digi￾tal circuit counts out 32,768 oscillations, 
then drives the second hand forward a 
single tick.
32 kHz Quartz Crystal15
What appear to be scratches on the 
tips of the tuning fork are actually 
laser trim marks from a process that 
fine-tunes the frequency.16
Carbon film coating
Ceramic rod
Resistors are devices that restrict or limit 
the flow of electricity. They’re used wher￾ever a controlled amount of current is 
needed in a circuit. Everyday carbon film 
resistors like these are used in electron￾ics like appliances and toys, where cost is 
more important than precision or size.
A carbon film resistor is made from a 
ceramic rod coated with a fine layer of 
carbon film that conducts electricity 
with some resistance. A helical groove 
is cut through the film, leaving a long 
narrow path of carbon that corkscrews 
from one end of the rod to the other. 
Metal caps are crimped onto the two 
ends, and wire leads are added. The 
resistor is then dipped in a protective 
coating and painted with color-coded 
stripes to indicate its resistance value.
Resistors of this shape are called axial 
through-hole resistors, meaning they 
have wire leads (intended to go through 
holes in a circuit board) arranged along 
the resistor’s axis of symmetry.
Carbon Film Resistor17
The spiral groove can clearly be seen 
after the protective coating has been 
removed. 
The carbon film is relatively thin. In 
cross section, the grooves are visible 
only as indentations in the ceramic rod.18
This high-stability film resistor, about 
4 mm in diameter, is made in much the 
same way as its inexpensive carbon film 
cousin, but with exacting precision. A 
ceramic rod is coated with a fine layer 
of resistive film (thin metal, metal oxide, 
or carbon) and then a perfectly uniform 
helical groove is machined into the film. 
Instead of coating the resistor with 
an epoxy, it’s hermetically sealed in 
a lustrous little glass envelope. This 
makes the resistor more robust, ideal 
for specialized cases such as precision 
reference instrumentation, where long￾term stability of the resistor is critical. 
The glass envelope provides better 
isolation against moisture and other 
environmental changes than standard 
coatings like epoxy. 
High-Stability Film Resistor19
As current flows through a resistor, the 
resistor converts a certain amount of 
electrical energy into heat. Most general￾purpose resistors have little ability to 
dissipate heat, as they cannot withstand 
elevated temperatures. This limits the 
amount of power they can handle.
Power resistors like this one are made 
without temperature-limiting materials 
like solder or epoxy, enabling them to 
handle more power. Some power supplies 
use them to limit the rush of current that 
occurs when you plug them in. The active 
element is a resistive metal wire wrapped 
around an insulating core. The resistive 
assembly is placed in a heat-tolerant 
ceramic shell and filled with cement grout.
The resistive wire is wrapped around a 
fiberglass core, but because this resistor is 
cut in half, all you see are the wire ends.
Wirewound Power Resistor20
Thick-Film Resistor Array
Many circuits require multiple identical 
resistors. For example, a digital data 
bus might need a termination resis￾tor connected in series with each data 
line, or each I/O pin on a microcontrol￾ler might need a pulldown resistor
between the pin and ground. A resistor 
array eliminates the need for multiple 
discrete resistors: it consists of sev￾eral resistors fabricated as a single 
component. 
Shown here are thick-film arrays, 
named for the fabrication technology, 
which uses silkscreened conductive and 
resistive films that are fired like pottery 
glazes onto a ceramic substrate. 
After metal terminal pins are fitted and 
soldered, a laser burns away part of 
the resistive material to fine-tune each 
individual resistor to its correct specifi￾cation. Finally, the array is dipped in an 
epoxy coating for protection.21
Straight cuts in the greenish 
resistive material mark the path 
of the trimming laser. 
This is a single in-line resistor array, 
or SIL, where all the terminals are 
arranged in a straight line. It has four 
independent resistors that aren’t 
connected to each other.22
The most common discrete resistors 
today are thick-film surface-mount 
resistors, also known as chip resistors
after their tidy rectangular packages, 
which lack wire leads. Billions of chip 
resistors are produced annually, and are 
found in every type of mass-produced 
consumer electronics.
These are surface-mount resistors, 
designed for soldering directly to the sur￾face of a circuit board, as opposed to sol￾dering wire leads that go through holes 
in the circuit board. They’re constructed 
much like the resistors on thick-film 
arrays, right down to the laser trimming. 
Surface-Mount Chip Resistor
Several surface-mount chip resistors, 
with the epoxy coating peeled back to 
show the thick film element below23
Thin-Film Resistor Array
Thin-film resistors, such as the eight 
in this array, are precision devices man￾ufactured by etching a pattern into 
an ultra-thin layer of sputtered (vac￾uum deposited) metal oxide or cermet
(ceramic-metal composite). Thin-film 
arrays are used when a circuit requires 
precisely matched or calibrated resis￾tors, such as for scientific or medical 
equipment.
Each serpentine track of resistive mate￾rial has several areas that can be laser￾trimmed to fine-tune the resistance 
value with increasing exactitude. 
The solder ball terminals at the end of 
each resistor allow this array to be sol￾dered directly to a circuit board. 24
A potentiometer, or pot, is an adjust￾able resistor. Pots are used as front 
panel control knobs on everything from 
laboratory instrumentation to guitar 
amplifiers—anything where you turn a 
knob to adjust a setting.
This large pot is made of resistive wire 
wrapped around a ceramic form, an old 
design, essentially unchanged since 1925 
and still in production today.
There are two terminals connected 
to either end of the resistive wire 
and a third terminal connected to a 
spring-loaded contact called a wiper. 
The wiper touches the wire windings, 
making an electrical connection that can 
be moved around by rotating the shaft. 
As the wiper moves away from or toward 
a terminal, the resistance between the 
wiper and that terminal increases or 
decreases because electrical current 
has to flow through a different amount 
of resistive wire. An amplifier circuit 
translates this changing resistance into 
a louder volume, or a hot plate inter￾prets it as a temperature set point.
Wirewound Potentiometer25
Most of the wrapped wire is covered with 
vitreous enamel, similar to a pottery 
glaze. Only the surface that contacts the 
wiper has exposed wire.
The wiper of a standard pot can be 
rotated about 2
⁄3 to 3
⁄4 of a turn, 
between the two fixed terminals.26
Trimmer potentiometers, often referred 
to by the trademark name Trimpot,
aren’t meant to be manipulated by the 
end user. Instead, they’re designed for 
initial calibration and rare adjustment. 
You can find them in precision electron￾ics that require fine-tuning at the factory 
or by service technicians. The typical 
service life of a trimmer is only a few 
hundred adjustments.
This colorful trimmer has a horseshoe￾shaped section of resistive cermet film 
instead of a coil of wire. From the out￾side, you use a plastic adjustment tool 
or a screwdriver to turn the yellow plas￾tic rotor. Inside, the rotor moves a flex￾ible metal spring that acts as the wiper, 
connecting the center terminal to the 
resistive cermet film, changing the resis￾tance between that center terminal and 
the two other terminals. 
Trimmer Potentiometer
Cermet
element
Wiper
spring
Rotor
Center terminal & 
connecting lead
End terminals &
connecting leads
Ceramic
disc
O-ring27
An orange O-ring underneath the 
rotor seals dust and debris out and 
provides friction to keep the rotor in 
place after adjustment.28
15-Turn Trimmer Potentiometer
Plastic case
Wiper
Cermet
strip
Adjustment screw
Terminals
Ceramic substrate
Epoxy fill
It takes 15 rotations of an adjustment 
screw to move a 15-turn trimmer poten￾tiometer from one end of its resistive 
range to the other. Circuits that need to 
be adjusted with fine resolution control 
use this type of trimmer pot instead of 
the single-turn variety.
The resistive element in this trimmer 
is a strip of cermet silkscreened on 
a white ceramic substrate. Screen￾printed metal links each end of the 
strip to the connecting wires. It’s a flat￾tened, linear version of the horseshoe￾shaped resistive element in single-turn 
trimmers.
Turning the adjustment screw moves a 
plastic slider along a track. The wiper 
is a spring finger, a spring-loaded 
metal contact, attached to the slider. 
It makes contact between a metal strip 
and the selected point on the strip of 
resistive film.29
While it isn’t obvious from the outside 
of the device, the adjustment screw is 
electrically insulated from all three pins 
of the component.30
A 10-turn potentiometer is much like a 
wirewound pot, but its adjustment range 
is 10 full turns instead of less than one 
turn. This is a specialized device, occa￾sionally found as an input knob on sensi￾tive instruments where high adjustment 
resolution is required.
The wiper on a 10-turn pot keeps contin￾uous contact with a helical track, moving 
up or down as the shaft is rotated. The 
track consists of resistive wire tightly 
wrapped around an insulated copper 
form. The wire ends connect to two of 
the terminals.
The connection between the wiper and 
the third terminal is through a vertical 
strip of brass that rotates with the shaft. 
As the wiper moves up and down, it main￾tains contact with the strip through a 
spring finger. Another spring finger keeps 
contact between the brass strip and the 
third terminal as the strip rotates.
10-Turn Potentiometer31
The body of this pot was filled with 
clear resin to hold the contents in 
place while cutting it open.32
Capacitors are fundamental electronic 
components that store energy in the 
form of static electricity. They’re used 
in countless ways, including for bulk 
energy storage, to smooth out elec￾tronic signals, and as computer memory 
cells. The simplest capacitor consists 
of two parallel metal plates with a gap 
between them, but capacitors can take 
many forms so long as there are two 
conductive surfaces, called electrodes, 
separated by an insulator. 
A ceramic disc capacitor is a low-cost 
capacitor that is frequently found in 
appliances and toys. Its insulator is a 
ceramic disc, and its two parallel plates 
are extremely thin metal coatings that 
are evaporated or sputtered onto the 
disc’s outer surfaces. Connecting wires 
are attached using solder, and the whole 
assembly is dipped into a porous coating 
material that dries hard and protects 
the capacitor from damage.
Ceramic Disc Capacitor
Solder
Wire lead
Plastic foam coating
Ceramic disc
Metal electrode33
The metal layers on the surfaces 
of the ceramic disc are so thin 
that it can be hard to see them 
in cross section.34
Glass Capacitor
A capacitor’s amount of capacitance—
the electric charge it can store at a 
given voltage—depends on the surface 
area of the conductive plates, how close 
together they are, and the type of insu￾lator used between them. The insulator 
is called a dielectric. While almost any 
insulator—even air—can be used as a 
dielectric, certain materials provide far 
more capacitance than an air gap would.
This glass-packaged capacitor has mul￾tiple sets of aluminum foil plates inter￾digitated with each other. This layered 
arrangement augments the available 
surface area and increases the capaci￾tance. Thin layers of glass, an excellent 
insulator, function as the dielectric.
Eight foil layers on the left and eight 
foil layers on the right are connected 
to their respective terminals and are 
precisely interleaved without touching.35
For robustness, the same type of glass 
used between the foil layers is also used 
as the outer packaging of the device, 
about 5 mm thick.36
Multilayer Ceramic Capacitor
The color of an MLCC is chiefly determined 
by the particular grade of ceramic used. This 
capacitor is made with a high-stability ceramic 
called C0G.
Multilayer ceramic capacitors (MLCCs)
are the single most common discrete 
electronic component in production 
today; a smartphone may contain hun￾dreds, most of which are used to ensure 
power supply stability at different points 
in the circuitry.
MLCCs are surface-mount chip capaci￾tors, consisting of interleaved layers of 
deposited metal between layers of spe￾cialized ceramic. 
The one shown here in cross section is 
1.5 mm long and has five interleaved 
metal layers, with two layers connected 
to one terminal and three to the other. 
Other MLCCs with different properties 
may have thousands of layers in a device 
of the same size.37
Aluminum Electrolytic Capacitor
Aluminum electrolytic capacitors pack 
a large amount of capacitance into a small 
space, and are very common in power 
supplies. The outer metal can is filled with 
an electrolyte—an electrically conduc￾tive fluid. The fluid itself serves as one of 
the capacitor’s conductive surfaces. The 
other is a long, thin, rolled-up strip of alu￾minum foil submerged in the fluid.
The aluminum foil is anodized, produc￾ing an aluminum oxide on its surface 
that acts as the dielectric between the 
foil and the fluid. A second rolled-up alu￾minum foil strip, separated from the first 
by paper insulators, serves as a terminal, 
connecting the fluid to the wire leads.
Before it’s anodized, the aluminum foil is 
etched in such a way as to substantially 
increase its surface area, and thus its 
capacitance.38
Film Capacitor
Film capacitors are frequently found in 
high-quality audio equipment, such as 
headphone amplifiers, record players, 
graphic equalizers, and radio tuners. 
Their key feature is that the dielectric 
material is a plastic film, such as poly￾ester or polypropylene.
The metal electrodes of this film capac￾itor are vacuum-deposited on the 
surfaces of long strips of plastic film. 
After attaching leads, the films are 
rolled up and dipped into an epoxy that 
binds the assembly together. Then the 
completed assembly is dipped in a tough 
outer coating and marked with its value.
Other types of film capacitors are made 
by stacking flat layers of metalized plastic 
film, rather than rolling up layers of film.
Film capacitors fit a large surface 
area into a compact space by using 
many overlapping layers of thin 
plastic film.3939
The plastic film is transparent 
and remarkably thin.40
Dipped Tantalum Capacitor
At the core of this capacitor is a porous 
pellet of tantalum metal. The pellet is 
made from tantalum powder and sintered, 
or compressed at a high temperature, 
into a dense, sponge-like solid. 
Just like a kitchen sponge, the resulting 
pellet has a high surface area per unit 
volume. The pellet is then anodized, cre￾ating an insulating oxide layer with an 
equally high surface area. This process 
packs a lot of capacitance into a com￾pact device, using sponge-like geometry 
rather than the stacked or rolled layers 
that most other capacitors use.
The device’s positive terminal, or anode, 
is connected directly to the tanta￾lum metal. The negative terminal, or 
cathode, is formed by a thin layer of 
conductive manganese dioxide coating 
the pellet.
Sintered
tantalum
Silver epoxy Tantalum
anode wire
Manganese dioxide41
Connecting a tantalum capacitor 
backward causes chemical changes 
that damage the thin oxide layer. The 
label on the dipped plastic coating 
indicates the anode lead with “++.”42
Polymer Tantalum Chip Capacitor
Polymer tantalum chip capacitors are 
closely related to dipped tantalum capac￾itors. They’re similarly based around an 
oxidized slug of tantalum metal with a 
high surface area. The slug is coated with 
a conductive polymer electrolyte, which 
flows into all its irregularities. Layers of 
carbon and silver paste connect the poly￾mer to the cathode terminal. 
The component is packaged in a molded 
epoxy case. It has tin-plated terminals 
for soldering to a circuit board. As a 
polarized device, it’s labeled with both its 
value and a mark to indicate the anode.
Tantalum is used for capacitors 
because its oxide is a particularly 
effective dielectric. 43
Polymer Aluminum Chip Capacitor
Polymer aluminum chip capacitors are 
directly descended from standard elec￾trolytic capacitors, despite how differ￾ent they look both inside and out.
Instead of being rolled up, the etched 
and oxidized aluminum foils are laid flat 
and bonded together. And instead of a 
liquid electrolyte, this capacitor uses a 
conductive polymer as the cathode. 
This newer style of capacitor is com￾monly found in smartphones, tablets, 
and laptops. Its popularity comes in part 
from its low profile, which allows it to fit 
where taller electrolytic caps cannot.
Layers of black conductive carbon paste 
and silver epoxy provide the electrical 
connection between the polymer-coated 
aluminum foils and the cathode terminal.44
Axial Inductor
Inductors are fundamental elec￾tronic components that store energy 
in the form of a magnetic field. They’re 
used, for example, in some types of 
power supplies to convert between 
voltages by alternately storing and 
releasing energy. This energy-efficient 
design helps maximize the battery 
life of cellphones and other portable 
electronics.
Inductors typically consist of a coil of 
insulated wire wrapped around a core of 
magnetic material like iron or ferrite, 
a ceramic filled with iron oxide. Cur￾rent flowing around the core produces 
a magnetic field that acts as a sort 
of flywheel for current, smoothing 
out changes in the current as it flows 
through the inductor.
This axial inductor has a number of 
turns of varnished copper wire wrapped 
around a ferrite form and soldered to 
copper leads on its two ends. It has sev￾eral layers of protection: a clear varnish 
over the windings, a light-green coating 
around the solder joints, and a strik￾ing green outer coating to protect the 
whole component and provide a surface 
for the colorful stripes that indicate its 
inductance value.
Connecting wire
Plastic
outer coat
Ferrite bobbin
core Solder joint
Epoxy
Coating over
solder joints
Copper
windings45
The copper leads are attached to the 
ferrite ceramic core with beige epoxy 
prior to winding the copper wire. 46
Surface-Mount Inductor
This surface-mount inductor, only 5 mm 
across, is designed to be compact, inex￾pensive, and easy for automated equip￾ment to solder. You’d find it in cellphones, 
tablets, and laptops.
While axial inductors have wire leads 
that go through the circuit board, this 
inductor has terminals that sit directly 
atop the circuit for soldering.
The inductor has fine coils of varnished 
copper wire called magnet wire wound 
around a ferrite ceramic bobbin. The 
assembled core is placed inside another 
piece of ferrite to shield it from stray 
magnetic fields.
Small ferrite-core inductors are 
commonly used as a “flywheel” for 
current in DC-DC voltage converters.47
Sintered Ferrite Inductor
This inductor, about 6 mm wide, has only 
two loops of copper wire. While we can’t 
see it, the two ends of the looped wire 
are connected to the copper terminals 
on the left and right.
Unlike the other surface mount inductor, 
this inductor’s copper windings appear 
suspended inside the solid ferrite as if 
by magic. It was manufactured in a sin￾tering process: a fine ferrite powder was 
compressed into its final shape around 
the windings. Look closely and you’ll see 
the copper windings have been pushed 
up against each other and deformed 
slightly as a result of this process.
The wound copper magnet wire 
is outlined with a thin layer of 
translucent varnish. 48
Ferrite Bead
At first glance, this component may not 
look like an inductor at all. Where are 
the turns of wire? In fact, even a straight 
piece of wire with current flowing through 
it produces a magnetic field. The ferrite 
bead surrounding this piece of wire just 
bumps up the inductance a little bit. 
Ferrite beads can be used to stop stray 
radio waves from sneaking out of one 
electronic device and causing interfer￾ence in another. They’re also used to 
filter the power supply connections of 
sensitive chips, or to prevent electrically 
noisy chips from interfering with other 
chips on a circuit board.
This component is simple: just a bead 
of ferrite ceramic strung on a wire and 
glued in place.49
Three-Terminal Filter Capacitor
This strange-looking component com￾bines two inductors and a capacitor. A 
copper wire passes through two ferrite 
beads. Between the beads, one side of 
a ceramic capacitor is soldered to the 
wire. Another wire is soldered to the 
other side of the capacitor, forming the 
third terminal of the device. 
Together, these parts act as a filter, 
preventing stray radio waves from wan￾dering outside an electronic device 
and interfering with TV or Wi-Fi signals. 
Accordingly, you can find these devices 
on circuit boards next to connectors 
that go to the outside world. 
Electrical engineers 
call this component 
a T filter because its 
schematic symbol is 
shaped like the letter T.50
Toroidal Transformer
A transformer is an inductor wound 
with more than one coil of wire. The coils 
of these toroidal transformers are wound 
around donut-shaped ferrite cores.
Electrical current flowing through wire 
creates a magnetic field. Likewise, a 
changing magnetic field induces an 
electrical current in nearby wires. Thus 
when multiple coils are wound around 
a single core, changing the current in 
one wire changes the magnetic field, 
which creates a changing current in 
the other wire. This provides a method 
of electrical isolation: transmitting 
power or signals between wires without 
an electrically conductive path con￾necting them.
Having a different number of turns on 
the different windings can transform AC 
voltages from low to high or high to low. 
This kind of transformer is often used in 
power supplies for stepping up or step￾ping down voltages.51
This transformer is configured as a 
choke: a special type of transformer 
designed to stop stray radio waves from 
leaking outside of a piece of electronics.52
This transformer has multiple sets of 
windings and is used in a power supply 
to create multiple output AC voltages 
from a single AC input such as a wall 
outlet.
The small wires nearer the center are 
“high impedance” turns of magnet wire. 
These windings carry a higher voltage 
but a lower current. They’re protected 
by several layers of tape, a copper foil 
electrostatic shield, and more tape.
The outer “low impedance” windings are 
made with thicker insulated wire and 
fewer turns. They handle a lower voltage 
but a higher current.
All of the windings are wrapped around 
a black plastic bobbin. Two pieces of 
ferrite ceramic are bonded together to 
form the magnetic core at the heart of 
the transformer.
Power Supply Transformer
Ferrite core
Protective tape
Copper
shield
Plastic bobbin
Terminal wires
Solder
joint
Outer
windings
Inner
windings53
This transformer has five different 
diameters of wires for its different 
windings.54
Low-Power Cartridge Fuses
Fuses are electrical components that 
break or “open” a circuit when more than 
a specified amount of electrical current 
passes through them, protecting other 
components from damage.
Here are a few glass cartridge fuses, each 
0.25 inch in diameter. The two on the left 
are fast-acting fuses rated for 10 and 15 
amperes, respectively. They have round 
or flat metal wire between their ends. 
When the current exceeds the fuse’s rat￾ing, the wire heats up enough to melt and 
quickly break the circuit. 
The two fuses on the right are time-delay, 
or slow-blow, fuses, both rated for 
0.25 A. Time-delay fuses resist spikes 
beyond their rating, requiring sustained 
current above that point to blow. One 
has thin wire wrapped around a fiber￾glass core that takes a while to heat up. 
The other has a resistor and spring. If 
the resistor overheats, it melts a dot of 
solder, releasing the spring and open￾ing the circuit.
Fuses for very low current may have 
a fusible wire much thinner than 
even a human hair.55
Cartridge fuses like these are found 
in equipment where the end user will 
replace the fuse. The glass case makes 
it easy to see when a fuse has blown.56
Axial Lead Fuse
This component might look similar to 
a resistor, but it’s actually a tiny fuse 
packaged with axial leads. Underneath 
the outer plastic coating is a ceramic 
tube containing the fuse wire. The wire is 
soldered to brass end caps pressed onto 
the copper lead wires.
This type of fuse is designed to be sol￾dered to the circuit board, so it isn’t 
meant to be replaced by the consumer. 
They’re frequently used to provide addi￾tional protection to the circuitry if other 
protection circuitry fails.
This fuse has a thin wire, bent in a 
pattern to keep it in a consistent shape 
with consistent thermal properties. 57
Liquid Power Fuse
At very high voltages, breaking a circuit 
gets tricky: long electrical arcs can eas￾ily form between pieces of metal as they 
separate, maintaining the flow of cur￾rent. This huge, liquid-filled power fuse 
solves that problem. 
Although the fuse has only a 15 A rat￾ing, it’s designed to handle up to 23,000 
volts. When the fuse is tripped, the long 
spring retracts below the surface of the 
liquid, pulling the broken ends of the fuse 
wire apart. The liquid insulates the end of 
the wire and quenches the electrical arc. 
The liquid inside this vintage fuse is 
tetrachloroethylene, a chemical widely 
used as a dry-cleaning fluid.58
Compact Power Fuse
Many handheld digital multimeters 
are protected from over-voltage and 
over-current conditions by compact 
power fuses. In fuses like these, an 
unexpected material surrounds the 
fusible element: grains of silica sand. 
The silica absorbs energy and quenches 
any electrical arc that might form when 
the fuse breaks, cutting off the current 
and ensuring that the circuit is fully 
disconnected.
Instead of a wire, these fuses contain a 
ribbon of metal, allowing them to han￾dle higher currents. A dot of solder on 
the ribbon takes time to melt and thus 
acts as a simple time-delay element. A 
tough outer fiberglass tube protects 
the surrounding circuitry from the 
intense heat that can occur when the 
fuse blows.59
Like the fluid in a liquid power fuse, the 
sand inside this fuse prevents arcing.60
Thermal Fuse
A thermal fuse, sometimes called a 
thermal cutoff, is like a regular fuse, 
except it opens an electrical circuit 
when it exceeds a certain temperature, 
rather than a certain level of current. 
Thermal fuses function as safety devices 
in electrical appliances that contain 
heating elements: coffee makers, hair 
dryers, rice cookers, and so on. They 
prevent a fire if some other part of the 
circuit fails.
The thermal fuse makes an electri￾cal connection from one lead to the 
other via a spring wiper that contacts 
the edge of the metal case. The wiper 
is held in place by two springs braced 
against a wax pellet that melts at a 
specific temperature. When the wax 
melts, the springs expand into it, break￾ing the electrical connection irrevers￾ibly, even after the wax cools down and 
solidifies again.
Connecting wire
Epoxy
Ceramic
Brass case
Light spring
Heavy spring
Wax
Spring wiper
Normal Tripped
As a precaution, thermal fuses are sometimes 
packaged with wirewound power resistors, which 
are likely to be one of the hottest points in a circuit.61
Thermal fuses are available with a range 
of different temperature ratings, which 
simply represent different melting 
points of the wax.2
Semiconductors
Every area of modern life has been affected by the devel￾opment of semiconductor devices. Light-emitting diodes 
(LEDs) now provide the light in our buildings and give life 
to animated billboards. Computer chips, camera sensors, 
and solar panels are also semiconductors. They work by 
exploiting the strange and wonderful electrical properties 
of ultra-pure crystalline materials like silicon, once they’ve 
been purposefully “poisoned” with minute amounts of 
impurities. Semiconductor components are often literal 
“black boxes” on circuit boards. Let’s open some up and 
see what’s inside.64
Diodes are components that allow cur￾rent to flow only in one direction, much 
like a check valve in plumbing. They’re 
commonly used in power supplies to con￾vert alternating current to direct current.
The diode itself is a tiny “chip” of sil￾icon, also called a die. The otherwise 
ultrapure silicon is modified to have 
separate regions: one where electri￾cal current is carried by electrons, 
and another with holes, places where 
electrons are missing. The junction 
between the two regions, the active 
area of the device, can conduct current 
only in one direction. 
In a 1N4002 diode, two large, tin-plated 
copper wires are bonded to the silicon 
chip with solder, and the result is encap￾sulated with a black epoxy plastic. The 
“ears” sticking out of the copper wires 
help retain them in the epoxy. The thin 
layers of solder connecting the silicon to 
the leads start out as thin disks that are 
melted during the assembly process.
Epoxy encapsulant
Solder Silicon chip
Silicone fill
Copper wire
Retaining
feature
1N4002 Diode65
The white substance around the die 
is silicone rubber, much like regular 
household caulking. It protects the 
silicon chip during the assembly 
process.66
Glass-Encapsulated Diodes
Low-power silicon diodes are often 
packaged in tubular glass envelopes, and 
they come in many varieties. In each, the 
actual silicon piece is tiny and is sand￾wiched between two contacts. Some 
diodes use a metal spring clip to make 
the connection between the silicon and 
one terminal. In others, both connecting 
wires are in direct contact with the die.
Typically, the outer glass envelope 
comes with one lead preinstalled. 
Before being added to the component, 
the silicon die has a solder dot plated 
onto one side with an alternating-current 
electroplating bath; the diode itself 
ensures that current only passes in 
one direction, so the dot forms only 
on one side.
After the silicon chip is attached to 
the preinstalled lead by solder or con￾ductive epoxy, the other lead can be 
attached.
A glass-encapsulated 1N740 diode 
on a circuit board67
In this 1N914 diode, the tiny square 
die is positioned off center, possibly 
a manufacturing error.
The clear glass has been painted black 
on the outside of this 1N5236B Zener 
diode. An S-shaped spring makes 
contact with the die.
A tiny solder bump on the die of 
this 1N1100 diode connects it to the 
C-shaped spring contact.68
Rectifier Bridge
AC inputs
+ DC outputs -
The rectifier bridge might seem like a 
drab little hockey puck from the outside, 
but once the insulating plastic case is 
stripped away, an elegant circuit sculp￾ture emerges. These components are 
commonly found in power supplies that 
plug into wall outlets. They consist of 
four silicon diodes, connected together 
in a special “bridge” arrangement that 
converts alternating current (AC) volt￾age into direct current (DC) voltage. 
The four shiny gray silicon dies are sand￾wiched between the sets of wires. Two 
are facing up, and two are facing down, 
corresponding to the directions that 
current can flow within this little circuit.69
The wire leads are silver-plated copper. 
Their lower parts were tarnished by exposure 
to the air; the crisp, clean silver part was 
protected by the plastic package.70
2N2222 Transistor
“Collector” terminal
(bottom of can) “Base” terminal
“Emitter”
terminal
Silicon transistor die
Aluminum
bond wire
One of the key inventions of the 20th 
century, the transistor is a semicon￾ductor device that allows one electrical 
signal to control another. Transistors are 
commonly used to amplify signals or as 
logical switches. 
The 2N2222 transistor shown here is a 
classic bipolar junction transistor 
(BJT) in a TO-18 metal “can” package. 
The active part is the shiny but tiny sili￾con die. By weight and volume, a device 
like this is almost entirely packaging.
A BJT has three terminals. Two, the 
base and emitter, are connected to the 
die through hair-thin aluminum bond 
wires that reach from the ends of the 
insulated leads to the top of the die. The 
third connection is made through the 
bottom of the die to a third lead, the col￾lector, that is electrically connected to 
the metal can. All three leads are held in 
place by a glass fill on the bottom of the 
device.717172
2N3904 Transistor
This 2N3904 transistor is electrically 
similar to a 2N2222, but it looks very dif￾ferent because it’s packaged in an inex￾pensive plastic case called a TO-92.
The active part of the transistor is a 
tiny gleaming die of silicon with three 
terminals, constructed much like that 
in the 2N2222. As in other BJTs, the 
base terminal controls the current that 
flows between the collector terminal 
and the emitter terminal, like a tiny 
electronic valve.
The black plastic, which constitutes the 
vast majority of the overall device, is 
molded from an epoxy filled with silica. 
All materials, including epoxy, expand 
or contract with temperature. The silica 
changes the rate of thermal expansion 
of the epoxy to match that of the die 
and the wires within, reducing stress on 
the device at the limits of its tempera￾ture range.In addition to the silicon die, one of the 
two gold bond wires connected to the 
top of the die is visible through the black 
epoxy encapsulation.
7374
The LM309K’s silicon chip is a large but 
relatively simple integrated circuit, or 
IC: a circuit made with many subcompo￾nents like transistors and resistors, fabri￾cated together on a single piece of silicon.
This IC is a voltage regulator. It takes 
voltage within some range as an input 
and provides a stable output at a fixed, 
lower voltage. The large metal pack￾age, type TO-3, helps dissipate the heat 
produced as the regulator operates. The 
three-terminal device has two insulated 
pins and a third terminal connected to 
the case.
In closeup, you can see the circuitry on 
the surface of the silicon die itself. The 
right two-thirds of the chip is taken up 
by a large power transistor that regu￾lates the current flowing from the input 
connection to the output connection. 
LM309K Voltage Regulator
The device is hermetically sealed. 
Two of the terminals are pins that 
are connected through glass-to￾metal seals. 7575
The input and output bond wires are 
configured with two wires each in 
parallel, which doubles their current￾carrying capacity.76
Integrated circuits can have many 
more terminals than the two or three 
on the components that we’ve looked 
at thus far.
The dual in-line package, or DIP, is a 
classic package for ICs with a larger 
number of connecting leads. Two par￾allel (i.e., dual in-line) rows of terminal 
pins are connected to a stiff metal lead 
frame, which connects to the central 
chip through hair-thin bond wires.
Ceramic DIPs are made of two slabs of 
ceramic on either side of a layer of glass 
frit, tiny glass beads that are melted 
together to form an airtight hermetic 
seal around the IC and its bond wires. 
Meanwhile, plastic DIPs are molded, 
usually with black plastic, directly over 
the IC, bond wires, and lead frame. A 
clear plastic DIP gives us a peek inside 
at the spidery shape of the lead frame, 
revealing how it’s attached to the IC 
with bond wires.
Dual In-Line Package (DIP) ICs
Light playing across the glass frit 
creates a rainbow shimmer effect on 
this vintage ceramic DIP, a Motorola 
logic chip from 1985.77
Each active pin on the package is 
paired with at least one bond wire 
that connects to the IC within.
The clear plastic package of this 
ULN-2232A motion detector IC allows 
light to reach a square photosensor in 
the middle of the chip.78
A microcontroller is a simple, slow 
computer on a chip. It’s the electronic 
brain inside many devices: appliances, 
toys, even flashlights and radios.
The ATmega328 microcontroller is 
particularly popular with electronics 
hobbyists and is available in various 
packages including the 28-pin plas￾tic DIP shown here. An “8-bit” micro￾controller, its processing power is 
in the same general class as that of 
early-generation home computers like 
the Apple II.
The black plastic on this device was 
carefully etched away with concentrated 
(“fuming”) nitric acid, revealing the silicon 
die within. The individual transistors on a 
chip like this—there are at least hundreds 
of thousands—aren’t visible at this level 
of magnification. The etching reveals that 
the plastic itself is densely filled with sil￾ica, just like the 2N3904 on page 72.
ATmega328 Microcontroller
This microcontroller is the core 
component of the Arduino Uno 
development board.79
The actual silicon die is quite small 
compared to the overall package.80
Small Outline Integrated Circuit
Some electronics are still manufactured 
in dual in-line packages, but smaller and 
more space efficient surface mount 
packages, such as the small outline 
integrated circuit (SOIC) packages 
shown here, are much more common 
today. The leads on SOICs are packed 
more tightly together, spaced apart by 
only 0.05 inch (1.27 mm), rather than the 
0.1-inch (2.54 mm) spacing used for DIPs.
The difference in scale is so pronounced 
that the silicon chips inside SOIC pack￾ages can appear enormous, even though 
they’re actually about the same size as 
the chips in DIP devices.
One of these SOICs, a color sensor, 
comes in a clear package that lets 
us see exactly how the bond wires 
are connected between the die and 
the leads.
A 24LC64 serial EEPROM chip stores a 
small amount of data, equivalent to about 
50 text messages, in non-volatile memory.81
The silicon die rests on a copper lead 
frame in the middle of the SOIC. Tiny 
bond wires connect it to the various 
leads, but only one of them is visible in 
this cross section.
Red, green, blue, and 
transparent color filters 
help this color sensor 
perceive the same 
wavelengths of light 
as our own eyes. 82
Thin Quad Flat Pack
Another style of surface-mount chip, 
the thin quad flat pack (TQFP), has con￾necting leads on all four sides, instead 
of on two sides like an SOIC. TQFPs are 
quite thin, but we’ll soon be examining 
chips that are even thinner.
We removed material from underneath a 
TQFP so you can see that the actual IC 
die sits in the middle of the package. The 
bond wires aren’t visible, since they’re on 
the opposite side, but you can see some 
interesting shapes in the copper lead 
frame: the profiles are carefully designed 
so that the epoxy locks the leads in place 
and prevents them from falling off.
A transparent TQFP—the jewel-like 
image sensor from an optical mouse—
reveals the location and arrangement 
of the silicon die, lead frame, and 
bond wires.83
The ST VV5353 sensor from a 
Microsoft Wireless Notebook 
Optical Mouse 300084
To save space, many modern chips 
make connections to a circuit board not 
through pins or terminals on their sides, 
but through a grid of tiny balls of solder 
on the underside of the component. These 
ball grid array (BGA) packages are ubiq￾uitous in modern smartphones, laptops, 
and other complex, compact electronics.
The solder balls sit on a thin two-layer 
printed circuit board called a redistri￾bution layer (RDL) that’s embedded into 
the chip’s package. Fine copper traces 
and I-shaped vias connect the solder 
balls on the bottom of the RDL to the 
bond wires on the top, which make the 
final connection to the silicon chip itself.
Ball Grid Array85
During assembly, these solder balls 
are melted, directly connecting the 
component to the circuit board at many 
points—sometimes thousands.86
Microprocessor SoC
Copper heat spreader
Silicon chip
Solder bumps
Thermal compound
Solder balls
FR-4 fiberglass weave
Laser-drilled
microvias
Mechanically
drilled vias
Copper layers
A system on a chip, or SoC, is a high￾end microprocessor, integrating a 
processor and most of the additional 
functionality, such as graphics support, 
that would otherwise require separate 
chips on a computer motherboard. A 
typical smartphone uses a custom SoC 
as its main processor, configured with 
the exact set of features needed for 
that phone. 
The SoC shown here is packaged in 
a ball grid array for mounting to a 
circuit board. Inside, the IC die itself 
is mounted to the redistribution layer 
using tiny solder bumps applied to the 
die itself. 
Using solder bumps instead of bond 
wires makes it easier to scale up the 
number of connections, but a high￾density redistribution layer is needed 
to fan out the connections to the larger 
BGA. This RDL has 10 layers of copper 
with laser-drilled passages, called 
microvias, connecting them.87
The “cap” on this SoC is a large nickel￾plated copper heat spreader. It’s 
attached to the top of the silicon die 
with thermal compound.
The solder bump mounting technique is 
called “flip chip” packaging, since the die 
is placed face down, rather than face up 
and with bond wire connections. 88
Through-Hole Red LED
Epoxy lens
Anode
terminal
LED die
Reflector cup
Bond wire
Cathode
terminal
Consistently charming and deceptively 
simple, light-emitting diodes, or LEDs, 
are filled with subtle design details.
The semiconductor die in an LED isn’t 
silicon, but a tailored semiconductor 
that emits the desired color of light 
when active. For example, AlGaAs (alu￾minum gallium arsenide) is typically 
used to make red LEDs like these.
The odd shapes of the metal connecting 
leads and fine lines scribed into them help 
lock the leads in place, securing them in 
the epoxy molding compound and allow￾ing them to be bent without damaging the 
fragile LED die. The larger cathode lead is 
shaped into a reflector cup under the die 
to direct light forward. A hair-thin bond 
wire connects the smaller anode lead to 
the top surface of the die. 8989
LEDs are planar devices: only the top 
surface of the semiconductor die 
emits light. The dies are cut into neat 
cubes for ease of handling.90
Surface-Mount LED
Surface-mount LEDs are just like 
through-hole LEDs, except for the 
packaging. Rather than wire leads, a 
surface-mount LED sits atop a thin cir￾cuit board with plated terminals that can 
be soldered to a larger board. A clear 
plastic lens is molded directly onto the 
thin circuit board, encasing and protect￾ing the LED die and its bond wire.
The semiconductor formulation of the 
LEDs shown here makes them light up 
green, not red.
This image is a composite of several 
photos with different exposure times in 
order to show additional detail.91
This bicolor LED has two leads and 
two different LED dies inside, con￾nected in parallel with bond wires. 
A red/green LED lights up red when 
current flows through it in one 
direction. If you reverse the voltage, 
so that current flows in the other 
direction, it lights up green. With 
careful circuit design—switching 
the relative time that current flows 
each way—the LED can appear to 
produce red light, green light, yellow 
light, or anything in between. 
LEDs like these are sometimes used 
as “front panel” indicator lights. 
Vast arrays of them were used in 
red/green early-generation LED 
readerboard displays and gas sta￾tion signs.
Red Green Bicolor LED92
White LED
Reflector cup Blue LED die
Bond wire
Phosphor
Anode
terminal
Cathode
terminal
This image, a composite of photos with different 
exposure levels, reveals a hard-to-capture blue 
glow around the LED die.
The device that we call a white LED is a 
chimera: part LED and part clever chem￾istry. The problem is that true white light 
contains every color of the rainbow, but 
an LED can only emit a single color of 
light, determined by the characteristics 
of the semiconductor. As a solution, 
we can fool the human eye into seeing 
white by mixing red, green, and blue 
light together. 
The white LED’s die is located at the 
bottom of a reflector cup, and it actu￾ally emits blue light. The reflector cup is 
filled with a chemical compound called 
a phosphor. It absorbs blue light and 
emits a broad spectrum of colors, tinted 
somewhat toward red. The phosphor’s 
light combines with the blue from the 
LED to generate the bright white light 
that we perceive.93
While nothing suggests this from 
the outside, every white LED 
contains a blue LED at its core. 94
Laser Diode
Laser diode die
Terminal
Photodiode die
Laser emission
Bond wire (gold)
Laser printers are named after the 
lasers they use to form the image to be 
printed on the page. The laser diodes
in the picture below are from a modern 
desktop color laser printer. 
Each laser diode is housed in a TO-56 
metal “can” package fitted with an 
antireflection-coated glass window, a 
heat sink, and a sensitive light detector 
called a photodiode that measures the 
amount of laser output. 
The laser element itself is the small die 
with the red face sitting atop the larger 
silicon photodiode die. Each die is con￾nected to a terminal with a bond wire. A 
third “common” terminal is connected 
through the case of the metal can.
When active, the laser die emits a beam 
horizontally, rather than vertically as an 
LED does. This type of laser emits in the 
near infrared, just beyond the reddest 
red that human eyes can see.95
The laser diode emits light not only 
out the front, but also out the back. 
The angled surface on the rear face of 
the package reduces unwanted direct 
reflections.96
An optocoupler converts an electrical 
signal to light and back again. It provides 
electrical isolation, much like a trans￾former but using light instead of a mag￾netic field.
An LED, which converts an electrical 
signal to light, is mounted at the top, fac￾ing down toward a phototransistor, a 
light sensor that converts the LED’s light 
back to an electrical signal. The LED die 
is protected by a bead of clear silicone. 
The device is molded with a translucent 
plastic to allow light to pass within the 
component, and black plastic over that to 
prevent interference from external light.
Optocoupler
In this four-pin DIP optocoupler, 
years of light from the LED turned the 
surrounding translucent plastic yellow.97
Optical tilt sensors were used in early￾generation digital cameras to determine 
camera orientation when taking a pic￾ture. They contain an infrared LED 
pointed at two phototransistors. 
A small metal ball, free to roll about, sits 
between the LED and the sensors. When 
upright, there’s a clear path over the ball 
from the LED to both sensors. When the 
device is tilted left or right, the ball rolls, 
blocking the light from reaching one 
phototransistor or the other.
Optical Tilt Sensor
The LED, in transparent pink epoxy, 
emits light toward a die with two 
phototransistors, encased in black 
plastic that’s transparent to infrared.98
In a modern computer mouse, a low￾resolution optical sensor (like the one 
we saw on page 83 in a thin quad flat 
pack) measures the mouse’s change in 
position as you move it around. In old￾style ball mice, two optical encoders
sense the motion of a physical ball that 
rolls when the mouse moves.
Optical encoders work like an advanced 
version of the optical tilt sensor. An 
infrared LED shines light through an 
encoder wheel, a wheel with slits that 
alternately block or allow the light to 
pass. Two phototransistors positioned 
on the other side of the wheel detect 
the light as the wheel rotates. Circuitry 
in the mouse decodes the phototrans￾istors’ output signals to calculate how 
far and in which direction to move the 
on-screen cursor.
Today, ball mice are obsolete, but mice 
with scroll wheels still use optical 
encoders to detect the rotation of 
the wheel.
Optical Encoders
This 1990s ball mouse has three optical 
encoders: two for the horizontal and 
vertical motion of the ball, and one for 
the rotation of the scroll wheel.99
The infrared LED is packaged in clear 
plastic, and the dual phototransistor 
receiver is in black plastic that’s 
transparent to infrared.
This picture, taken with a camera 
sensitive to infrared light, shows the 
infrared as a pink color. The infrared 
light is visible shining through the 
otherwise black plastic of the sensor.100
A tiny ambient light sensor, only 1 mm 
wide, sits between the camera and LED 
flash on a smartphone. It measures 
the amount and character of light, so 
the phone can sense and compensate 
for the color temperature of a photo￾graphed scene. The sensor also allows 
the phone to adjust the screen’s display 
color and brightness depending on its 
surroundings.
The device has a six-pin interface, a 
minuscule 2×3 ball grid array. Its clear 
package shows that the die is almost 
the entire size of the overall device. 
The sensor portion of the die features 
25 squares with different optical filters 
for sensitivity to different colors: red, 
green, blue, and also invisible infrared 
and ultraviolet light.
Ambient Light Sensor
The ST VD6281 ambient light 
sensor is dwarfed by an already￾small cell phone camera.101
The sensor sits on a circuit board 
riser that raises it to about the 
same height as the flash on 
the back surface of the phone. 
This gives the sensor the widest 
possible field of view.102
All semiconductor devices are inherently 
sensitive to light. Put an array of them on 
a chip and you get an image sensor that 
can convert a two-dimensional image 
into an electrical signal. Such a chip 
forms the heart of a digital camera. 
The image sensor shown here sees in 
black-and-white, but an optical filter 
with a red, green, and blue checkerboard 
pattern is applied to the image sensing 
matrix, allowing it to perceive color.
Complex circuitry visible at the top of 
the die generates the control signals 
that drive the array, amplifies the small 
signals from the image sensor, and con￾verts them into digital data that can be 
processed, stored, and uploaded to your 
social media accounts.
The designation CMOS (complementary 
metal oxide semiconductor) refers to 
the specific fabrication process used to 
manufacture the device.
CMOS Image Sensor
This image sensor was designed by a 
company called VLSI Vision Ltd. and 
dates from about 1996. Its ceramic 
package has a clear glass cover.1033
Electromechanics
Most of the devices that we’ve looked at so far have no 
moving parts. But many important components strad￾dle the worlds of electronics and mechanics. Switches, 
motors, speakers, electromagnetic relays, hard disk 
drives, and smartphone cameras might seem unrelated 
to each other, but a common thread ties—or wires—them 
together. 106
With the flick of a finger, a toggle 
switch flips back and forth between 
two positions.
Inside, the mechanism is surprisingly 
simple. A metal bar teeter-totters 
between two positions, connecting a 
common center lead to one of two inter￾nal contacts. Electrical current is there￾fore routed to one of two possible paths.
The plastic finger that presses down on 
the metal bar is spring-loaded so that it 
snaps into either position and provides 
consistent pressure between the bar 
and the contact. Being plastic, it keeps 
the lever that you touch electrically 
insulated from any voltage that may be 
on the terminals.
Similar toggle switches may add an 
“off” position in the middle, or addi￾tional poles—independent sets of con￾tacts that are switched in parallel by 
the same lever.
Toggle Switch107
The upper section of the switch is 
threaded for mounting to a panel. The 
pin through the threaded section is the 
pivot point for the lever. 108
The two-position slide switch shown 
here has small ridges on its handle, mak￾ing it easy to grip with your fingertip and 
move it from one position to the other.
Inside, the handle slides a metal con￾tact plate back and forth, completing a 
circuit between the middle terminal and 
one of the two outer terminals. Larger 
and more complex slide switches may 
add additional terminals and positions 
for the sliding handle.
Slide Switch
A compression spring sits between 
the handle and the metal contact 
plate, pressing the plate against 
the terminals as it slides.109
Pushbutton Switch
This basic pushbutton switch is often 
found on the front panels of hobby elec￾tronics projects, though it isn’t typically 
used in commercial products. Still, its 
basic principle of operation applies to 
other, more common types of pushbut￾ton switches.
Pressing down the spring-loaded button 
moves a metal washer down against two 
contacts, connecting them and com￾pleting the circuit. When you let go, the 
spring pushes the washer back up, break￾ing the circuit. This is said to be a “nor￾mally open” switch, since it gives an open 
circuit unless the button is pressed.110
DIP switches set the configuration of 
an Apple Super Serial Card II inside an 
Apple IIe computer.
You may have come across and set DIP 
switches yourself; they’re common in 
alarm control panels, industrial equip￾ment, household heating controls, and 
some older computers. They’re named 
for the familiar dual in-line arrangement 
of their two rows of terminals. Each 
pair of terminals has its own switching 
mechanism. 
There are several different styles of 
DIP switches, based on miniaturized 
slide switches or different toggle and 
rocker switch mechanisms. The one 
shown here uses a simple rocker type 
mechanism.
Inside each switch element are a 
white plastic rocker, a spring-loaded 
metal ball, and two contacts. Chang￾ing the rocker position moves the ball 
so that it’s either tucked away to the 
side or connecting the two contacts 
together. 
DIP SwitchThe gold-plated metal ball is just under 
1.5 mm in diameter. An eight-position 
DIP switch contains eight balls held in 
place by eight springs.112
Tactile Switch
Tactile switches come in many sizes 
and are widely used as responsive but￾tons on electronics and appliances. 
They’re often hidden behind larger cus￾tomized buttons, like the eject button 
on an optical disc drive or the front 
panel buttons on a home entertain￾ment system.
Pushing down on the button causes a 
thin metal dome inside the switch to col￾lapse and complete an electrical circuit. 
As soon as you let go, the dome snaps 
back into shape, breaking the circuit and 
stopping the flow of current. The springy 
metal dome creates a satisfying clicking 
sound and a quintessential tactile feel.113
This tactile switch has a large red button 
cap. Low-profile versions are ubiquitous 
in electronics.114
Microswitch
Movable spring
Moving contact
Fixed
contacts
Terminals
Plunger
Pivot point
Microswitches provide the electrical 
function and clicky feel to the buttons 
on computer mice. They’re remarkably 
reliable switches, designed to work for 
millions of cycles. 
Inside, two stamped metal springs—one 
straight and flat, the other curved—play 
off each other to create a consistent 
snap action when a plunger is depressed 
past a certain tripping point. Releasing 
the plunger snaps the switch back to the 
other position. The snap action moves a 
common electrical contact between two 
fixed contacts attached to the terminals 
of the device.
Beyond computer mice, you can find 
this type of microswitch in any number 
of industrial and automation applica￾tions. Common examples include limit 
switches on 2D and 3D printers.115116
Electromagnetic Relay
Electromagnetic relays are switches 
that are actuated by electrical signals, 
rather than by a button or lever. They 
provide a robust, low-cost method of 
switching substantial electrical power, 
and are used in appliances, cars, ele￾vators, industrial equipment, and even 
traffic lights.
The heart of the relay is a solenoid, a 
type of inductor specifically designed to 
be used as an electromagnet. When cur￾rent passes through the solenoid’s coil 
of wire, it creates a magnetic field that 
attracts a hinged iron plate, moving a 
set of switch contacts from one position 
to another. When the solenoid shuts off, 
a spring retracts the iron plate, pulling 
it and the switch contacts back to their 
initial positions. Thus, the device uses 
electricity to relay electricity. 
This relay has four poles: it uses one 
solenoid to simultaneously actuate four 
switches that can control four indepen￾dent signals.
The solenoid is wrapped in fine copper wire with an 
outer layer of cloth tape. Thick rubber-insulated 
wires connect to the center terminal of each switch.117118
Thermal Switch
Terminals
Glass seal
Ceramic rod
Bimetallic disk
Switch
contacts
Simple devices that need to regulate 
a temperature do so using a thermal 
switch, an electrical switch that opens 
or closes at a given temperature. For 
example, a thermal switch in a coffee 
maker can turn a heater on every time 
the warming plate’s temperature falls 
below a given setpoint.
The active element of a thermal switch is 
a bimetallic strip, a welded sandwich of 
two dissimilar metals with different rates 
of thermal expansion. In the switch shown 
here, the bimetallic element is a thin disk 
that changes shape as it heats and cools.
At room temperature, the disk is flat. It 
pushes up a small ceramic rod, pressing 
two electrical contacts together to con￾nect them. When the temperature rises 
above a fixed setpoint, the disk becomes 
concave, bowing downward so that the 
ceramic rod releases the contacts and 
disconnects the circuit.119
This thermal switch has been cut in half 
to show its mechanism. Normally, a 
switch like this is sealed to prevent dust 
from getting inside.120
This miniature “pager” motor is about 
the same diameter as a pencil. It’s one 
of several types commonly used as the 
vibrating motor inside a phone.
Current flowing through the copper 
windings inside the motor generates 
a magnetic field that pushes against 
another field from a permanent mag￾net. The permanent magnet is called 
the stator since it’s fixed in place. The 
windings are attached to a shaft—the 
rotor—that begins to turn due to mag￾netic attraction and repulsion.
Metal fingers called brushes conduct 
electrical current into the rotating cop￾per windings even as they turn. These 
brushes also act as a commutator, 
reversing the polarity of the current 
through the copper windings every 
half turn. Otherwise, the rotor would 
simply align with the stator magnet 
and stop turning.
Brushed DC Motor
Copper rotor windings
Brushes Offset weight
Stator magnet121
The offset weight on the output shaft 
of the motor causes the motor to 
vigorously wobble when it spins. With 
the motor’s small size and fast rotation, 
we perceive only a vibration in place.
The tube-shaped inner magnet remains 
stationary while the copper windings 
rotate around it.122
Stepper Motor
Shaft
Copper
windings
Stator
laminations
Permanent magnet
Ball
bearings Rotor laminations
While many motors are designed to 
rotate continuously, stepper motors
are optimized for starting and stopping 
quickly in precise rotational increments 
called “steps.”
Steppers are brushless motors, mean￾ing the copper windings are part of 
the nonmoving stator while the per￾manent magnet is part of the moving 
rotor. The stepper motor shown here 
is a common type used in desktop 3D 
printers. It has eight copper windings: 
two opposing pairs of four, wrapped 
around a stator form constructed of 
laminated iron sheets. The rotor has its 
own stacked iron layers that act as the 
pole pieces for a high-strength perma￾nent magnet. 
Toothed structures on both the rotor 
and stator determine the motor’s step 
size, or resolution. This motor can move 
in 200 discrete steps per revolution.123
When assembled, the rotor fits 
neatly inside the stator, with only 
a thin gap between the two. 
In cross section, we can see not 
only the copper windings but 
also the ball bearings and the 
laminated rotor and stator.124
Magnetic Buzzer
Copper
windings
Magnet ring
Iron yoke
Iron core
Epoxy
Resonant
cavity Metal diaphragm
Circuit
board &
terminals
Many different kinds of equipment use 
magnetic buzzers to make all sorts 
of noises: alarm sounds, informational 
beeps, and even simple tunes to alert 
you that, for example, your rice has fin￾ished cooking. A PC motherboard uses a 
magnetic buzzer to alert you when it has 
a low-level failure.
The insides of this drab component 
are unexpectedly vibrant. The most 
eye-catching part is the small solenoid 
of magnet wire wrapped around an iron 
core. When current is applied to the two 
connecting leads, the copper wire gen￾erates a magnetic field in its core. That 
field combines with the magnetic field 
from the ring-shaped magnet around the 
outside of the coil, and pushes against 
the metal diaphragm in the middle. When 
driven with an alternating current signal, 
the diaphragm vibrates at the frequency 
of the input signal, producing a tone.125
This slice through a magnetic buzzer was 
made by first embedding the buzzer in 
clear epoxy resin.126
Speaker
A speaker converts an electrical signal 
into vibrations of air that we perceive 
as sound.
Inside the speaker, a large permanent 
magnet sits at the center. A small coil 
of wire called a voice coil is wound 
around a paper cylinder that fits inside 
a circular groove in the magnet. When 
the voice coil is driven with current in 
either direction, it generates a mag￾netic field that pushes against the field 
of the permanent magnet. The paper 
cylinder moves up or down in response. 
An amber-colored suspension acts as 
a spring to return the cylinder to the 
neutral position when no current 
is present. 
The paper cylinder connects to a black 
speaker cone made of molded paper 
that provides a good surface area for 
pushing against the surrounding air. The 
cylinder’s movements drive the vibra￾tions of the speaker cone, generating 
the sound waves that we hear.
A small speaker mounted to the case of 
a vintage Apple IIc computer127
This thin slice through a speaker was 
cast in transparent resin.
In a close-up view, you can see that 
the red-lacquered copper magnet 
wire and attached paper cylinder 
are precisely positioned within the 
groove of the permanent magnet, 
free to move up and down.128
One of the most mechanically complex 
parts of a smartphone is the camera 
assembly. In addition to an image sensor 
with several megapixels of resolution, it 
contains a multi-element lens, an infra￾red blocking filter, and an auto-focus 
mechanism. 
And all of this fits within about a cubic 
centimeter of volume.
What does a smartphone camera have 
to do with the electromechanical devices 
we've been looking at so far? The answer 
is that the auto-focus mechanism uses a 
voice coil motor to precisely position the 
lens with respect to the sensor, just as 
though the lens were the paper cone in 
a speaker.
Smartphone Camera129
One of this book’s authors used this 
same type of Nexus 5X smartphone 
camera assembly to take his first cross￾section photos and post them on his 
Twitter account.130
The camera uses a copper voice coil 
around the lens assembly to precisely 
position it with respect to nearby 
fixed magnets. Varying the amount 
of current causes greater or lesser 
displacement.
When you take a picture using your 
smartphone and tap on an object to 
get it into focus, a complex interaction 
between software and servo circuitry 
determines the precise magnetic field 
required to position the lenses in just the 
right place relative to the image sensor 
so your image is perfectly in focus.
Beneath the lens assembly is a glass 
filter for blocking infrared light, and 
underneath that is the image sensor, 
sitting on a multilayer circuit board. The 
image sensor is connected to the board 
with an array of bond wires.
Inside the Camera Module
The optical assembly includes six 
precision molded plastic lenses 
with aspherical profiles. The 
focusing mechanism changes 
the distance between the lens 
assembly and the sensor.131
Part of the infrared cutoff filter—which 
preferentially reflects red light—has 
been broken off, revealing the main 
image sensor below.132
Hard drives use a high-performance 
rotary voice coil motor to move their 
read/write heads quickly into different 
positions.
The operating principle is the same as 
that for the voice coil in a speaker. How￾ever, the magnets and coils are arranged 
to cause the coil to rotate about a pivot 
point rather than move in a straight line.
Substantial drive power and complex 
closed-loop servo circuitry allow the 
hard drive to precisely reposition its 
heads in only a few milliseconds. 
Rotary Voice Coil Motor133
This laser assembly from a laptop DVD 
drive uses a clever two-axis voice coil 
motor system to position the lens. Two 
sets of coils and magnets move the lens 
up and down for focus and side to side 
for tracking. A DVD’s data is encoded 
in a spiral of digital 1s and 0s. Coarse 
tracking along the spiral is provided by 
a DC motor that moves the whole laser 
assembly along a linear track. For fine 
adjustments, the tracking coil shifts the 
lens from side to side. 
The lens assembly is suspended in place 
by long, thin spring wires, which also form 
the electrical connections to the coils.
Optical Drive Focusing Motors134
Electret Microphone
Electret diaphragm
Pickup plate
Foam dust cover
Spacers
Rubber
mount
JFET
transistor
Solder
terminals
Circuit
board
An electret microphone is an inex￾pensive device frequently used as the 
microphone in consumer electronics 
applications like phone headsets. It’s 
named after the rather strange material 
that forms its diaphragm. 
An electret has a permanent electric 
charge stored inside the material itself, 
a bit like how a magnet has a permanent 
amount of magnetism. The microphone's 
electret diaphragm and the pickup 
plate form a simple capacitor, perma￾nently charged by the electret. When 
a sound wave impinges on the electret 
diaphragm, it changes its distance to the 
pickup plate, which varies the capaci￾tance, and thus generates an electrical 
signal. The pickup plate is connected 
to a built-in transistor that amplifies 
the signal and sends it out through 
the terminals.135
This cross section was made by 
embedding the microphone in clear 
resin before cutting it. The cut goes 
through the die and bond wires of the 
transistor in the black package.4
Cables and 
Connectors
Cables and connectors link our devices to the world around 
them. They transport electrons, carrying power through our 
homes, delivering the internet to our computers, streaming 
video to our screens, and bringing music to our ears. They 
range from simple strands of wire to incredibly complex 
feats of precision manufacturing.138
Wires are everywhere. They’re at the bot￾tom of the ocean and in distant space 
probes. They move electrical signals 
through our walls, across continents, 
and sometimes even within our bodies. 
There are two basic types of wire: solid
and stranded. Solid wire has a sin￾gle filament of metal, while stranded 
wire consists of multiple smaller wires 
nestled together. Seven-strand wire is 
common because the overall shape is 
roughly circular. For the same reason, 
you can also find wire with 19, 37, or even 
61 strands. Stranded wire is more flexi￾ble, while solid tends to hold a shape but 
break if it’s bent too many times.
Wire can be made with any number of 
different metals, but copper is the most 
commonly used in small electronics. To 
prevent electrical short circuits, wire is 
often covered with insulation, such as 
varnish, PVC plastic, or even cloth.
Solid and Stranded Wire139
A bundle of wires is called a cable. 
Shown here is the type of power cable 
that might come with a desktop com￾puter sold in the USA. It has a grounded 
three-prong plug known as type NEMA 
5-15, rated for 15 amperes of current.
Inside the cable are three stranded cop￾per wires, sheathed in a molded black 
outer jacket. The green wire is the ground 
conductor, and the black and white pair 
carry the single-phase 120 volt, 60 Hz 
alternating current (AC). The black wire 
is “hot,” at roughly 120 V with respect to 
ground, while the white wire is “neutral,” 
at a voltage near to ground.
A little lubrication on the three wires 
helps them slide freely against each 
other and the outer jacket, making the 
cable more flexible.
AC Power Cable140
IDC Ribbon Cable
Ribbon cables—sometimes colorful—
were once very common in computers, 
and are still used in industrial equipment 
and hobby electronics. They’re shaped 
like long, flat ribbons, with many individ￾ual wires side by side.
The plug type shown here is called IDC, 
for insulation displacement connec￾tor. It works by forcing each insulated 
wire between two wedge-shaped metal 
blades. The blades pierce the insulation 
and grip the copper wire tightly, making a 
solid electrical connection. Gold-plated 
fingers inside the connector make con￾tact with the metal “header” pins that the 
connector plugs into.
Every other wire is 
pierced in one row of 
the IDC plug. With 
two rows of blades, 
every wire connects 
to a mating pin.141
Modular Telephone Cable
Older, wired telephones sometimes use 
this type of flat cable to hook up to an 
analog telephone line, or landline. The clear 
connector on the end is a modular plug, 
part of an RJ25 (registered jack) interface 
that can work with up to three phone lines. 
The plug connects to the individual wires 
through insulation displacement, much 
like in the ribbon cable connector.
The center two wires, colored green and 
red, carry the first analog telephone line. 
The other telephone lines are carried on 
the remaining two pairs, yellow/black and 
blue/white. Sometimes the additional wire 
pairs are instead used to supply low￾voltage electrical power to the telephone.
The six wires each have seven 
copper strands in an outer 
protective jacket.142
DIP Sockets
Dual in-line package (DIP) sockets
allow an integrated circuit to be plugged 
into a board and easily removed, with￾out the need for soldering equipment. 
Instead, the socket itself has pins that 
are soldered to the board.
Dual-wipe sockets have flat metal 
springs that push against either side of 
each pin of the IC. These are inexpensive 
to produce, as only a single stamped 
and formed piece of metal is required 
to connect with each pin.
A machined-pin socket is more com￾plex. The metal sockets are individually 
machined to the correct shape using a 
specialized lathe. To grip the pins of the 
IC, a minuscule stamped and formed 
set of spring fingers press-fits into 
each socket.
The socket’s pins are typically tin plated, 
but high-end sockets often have a gold 
plating to prevent corrosion that could 
break the electrical connection.143
Machined-pin sockets are 
manufactured with greater 
precision than dual-wipes. They 
use press-fit spring connections 
to grip each IC pin.
Dual-wipe sockets have springy 
contacts that grip each pin of the 
integrated circuit package.144
Barrel Plug and Jack
Barrel plugs and jacks are commonly 
found on electronics that use a plug-in 
AC adapter.
The plug has an outer metal barrel and a 
center socket. The polarity depends on 
the specific piece of equipment: some￾times the center socket is the positive 
terminal and the outer barrel negative, 
but there’s no consistent standard. The 
jack has a center pin that fits into the 
plug’s socket, and an outer contact that 
touches the plug’s barrel.
Embedded within the jack is a simple 
switch that some devices use to change 
from battery power to external power. 
Inserting the plug into the jack automat￾ically opens the switch, disconnecting 
the internal battery.
Barrel jack on a circuit board Barrel plug on a power cable145
The jack’s springy contact pushes the 
plug against the center pin, ensuring 
consistent contact.
The switch connects the external 
terminal of the jack to a third pin, but 
only when the plug isn’t present.146
The quarter-inch (6.35 mm) audio 
plug, sometimes called a phone plug, 
was one of the first connectors ever 
invented. Originally designed for tele￾phone switchboards, it has remained 
relatively unchanged since the 1890s. 
Operators would connect your call 
by taking your phone line, which had 
such a plug, and plugging it into a jack 
that represented the destination of 
your call.
The jack has a spring finger that locks 
into the groove at the tip of the plug, 
retaining it so it can’t readily fall out. 
Like the barrel jack, quarter-inch jacks 
have a switch that can detect when the 
plug has been inserted.
While phone systems don’t use these 
connectors any longer, they’re still stan￾dard for musical instruments such as 
electric guitars and synthesizers.
Quarter-Inch Audio Plug and Jack
This venerable cable is equally at 
home in a modern guitar amplifier 
or in an antique phone patch bay.147
The tip of the plug is connected to the 
center wire of the cable while the outer 
sleeve is connected to the cable’s 
outer shielding.148
3.5 mm Audio Connector
This familiar audio connector is a min￾iature version of the quarter-inch audio 
plug. It’s commonly known as a head￾phone plug (though it’s also used for 
other audio signals) or as an eighth￾inch plug (though that’s only an approx￾imation of its size). These connectors are 
being replaced by USB-C and Bluetooth 
on smartphones, but they’re still the 
simplest way to get audio in and out of 
a device. 
Other than size, the major difference 
between this plug and the quarter-inch 
audio plug on page 146 is that it has 
three terminals, called the tip, ring, and
sleeve, in order to support two-channel 
stereo audio.
The 3.5 mm jack has two tiny switches 
inside for disconnecting any internal 
speakers when you plug your head￾phones into a device. Some computers 
use the switches to detect when a plug 
is inserted into the jack, bringing up a 
software configuration menu.149
In cross section, we can see how 
the three terminals of the plug are 
constructed. The spaces between the 
brass shapes are filled with a blue 
plastic insulator.
Spring-loaded contacts in the jack 
disconnect two switches, retain the plug 
in place, and make consistent contact to 
the tip, ring, and sleeve.150
LMR-195 Coaxial Cable
A coaxial cable has two conductors 
inside: a central wire that carries the 
signal, and an outer, braided shield that 
carries ground currents and protects 
the signal from interference. The term 
coaxial (“co-axial”), or sometimes just 
coax, signifies that both conductors 
share the same center axis.
The cable is designed to carry radio fre￾quency (RF) signals. It’s easy to think of 
the RF as traveling down the center con￾ductor, but it actually moves along the 
gap between the center conductor and 
the outer shield. 
The shield is more than a loose braid of 
copper wires: there are multiple layers 
of wires laid across one another, and 
there’s an additional aluminum foil wrap 
between those wires and the plastic 
insulation around the center conduc￾tor. These features all help improve the 
characteristics of this high-quality LMR￾195 cable, named for being 0.195 inches 
in diameter.
Between the center conductor and 
outer shield is a polyethylene plastic 
foam dielectric that insulates the two 
conductors from each other. 151
This is the power cable from an Apple 
MacBook Pro computer. From the out￾side, the cable is a soft white rubber 
noodle, flexible and easy to grip. The 
flexibility comes from the immense 
number of thin and supple copper 
strands that can flex and slide a little 
bit against one another.
The straight inner bundle of wires is 
packed around a strength member, a 
cord of high-strength fiber, possibly 
Kevlar. A firm plastic insulator around 
the inner bundle keeps the cable from 
being bent too sharply. The outer wire 
bundle is the ground return for power 
transmission. It consists of opposing 
spirals of copper strands, which can 
more easily adapt to changes in length 
than the straight strands in the middle, 
assisting with flexibility. The outer rubber 
jacket is a tough and textured polymer 
with a rubbery finish.
Laptop Power Cable
This cable is designed to be flexible yet 
tough and strong enough to survive its 
role as an occasional trip hazard.152
RG-6 Coaxial Cable
Between a cable modem and its wall 
outlet runs a coaxial cable such as 
this one.
While the general design of the cable is 
similar to the previous LMR-195 coaxial 
cable, this RG-6 cable is designed to be 
lower cost and differs in the details of its 
construction. For example, it uses alumi￾num wires for shielding instead of cop￾per and the center conductor is plated 
with copper instead of being made from 
solid copper. 
The shielding on this cable has 
two layers of aluminum foil 
around an aluminum-wire braid.153
Cable TV RG-59
The price difference between a mid￾priced cable and the cheapest ones 
available can be substantial, but so too 
can be the quality. You often can’t spot 
any problems from the outside; to really 
see the difference, you have to cut a 
cable in half, like we’ve done here.
In comparison to high-quality coaxial 
cables, this cable TV cable isn’t just inex￾pensive but also poorly manufactured. 
The center conductor isn’t in the middle 
of the plastic dielectric, the outer shield 
is just a few sparse strands of wire, and 
the plastic jacket thickness is quite 
inconsistent. The inconsistent profile 
and poor shielding both suggest that 
this cable will underperform compared 
to its peers.
A consistent cross section and good 
shielding are among the things that 
make a cable perform well. A signal 
passing through this subpar cable will 
appear weak and noisy at the other end.154
F Connector
Coaxial cable Rotating nut
Center contact
Jack shield
Rubber strain relief
Plastic
spacer
An F connector is the threaded con￾nector you can find on the back of a 
TV box or cable modem. A somewhat 
unusual feature of this connector is 
that its center “pin” is actually just the 
protruding center conductor of the 
coaxial cable itself.
When the cable is plugged into the 
jack, the center conductor is pinched 
in a spring-like contact that makes the 
electrical connection and brings the sig￾nal into (or out of) the electronic device. 
A plastic spacer helps guide the center 
conductor into the contact.
The outer hex nut is free to rotate and 
fastens the plug onto the connector. 
Some F connectors use a “push on” 
design with springs that grip the threads 
so that the connector can simply be 
pushed into place.155
An F connector plug and jack are typical 
connectors used for cable TV and internet.
The solid center conductor of the coaxial 
cable serves as the center pin of the 
connector plug. 156
BNC Plug and Jack
The BNC connector is a very popu￾lar coaxial cable connector for radio 
frequency signals and general labo￾ratory use. Unlike the F connector, it 
only takes a quick quarter-twist of its 
bayonet-style mount to connect and 
disconnect.
BNC connectors, like most coaxial 
connectors, use a crimped center pin, 
rather than the bare wire itself, to make 
the central connection. And, like other 
high-quality coaxial connectors, the 
BNC is designed to present a relatively 
constant impedance along its body.
Loosely speaking, impedance refers to 
the amount of effective resistance that 
a circuit presents to both DC and AC 
signals. Cables and connectors with 
constant impedance minimize unwanted 
echoes in transmitted signals.
The two ramped slots in the BNC plug 
grab the two cylindrical pillars on the 
socket, allowing a quick flick of the wrist 
to latch and unlatch the connector.157
BNC connectors are typically 
machined in nickel-plated brass. 
This plug and jack share a fairly 
consistent coaxial profile of the 
center conductor and dielectric in 
the section where they meet.158
SMA Connector
Semi-rigid
coax cable Solder joint
Plastic
dielectric
Center contact
Rotating nut
Rubber
gasket
Spring clip
Fancy high-tech gear like signal gener￾ators use small, precise SMA connec￾tors. They transmit their signal much 
more faithfully than consumer-grade 
connectors.
The cable shown with the connector is 
called “semi-rigid” because its outside 
shield is a hollow tube of tin-plated cop￾per. Semi-rigid coax isn’t flexible, but 
can be bent into the necessary shape 
using specialized tools. Other than the 
solid shield, it’s a regular coaxial cable 
with a center conductor and dielectric 
plastic around it.
An SMA plug has a freely rotating hexag￾onal nut that can be tightened onto the 
matching jack.
In cross section, we can see quite a bit 
of detail thanks to the different types of 
metal used. The outer SMA plug parts 
are stainless steel, while the jack is made 
from gold-plated brass.159
A short semi-rigid coaxial cable 
with two SMA plugs
A tiny hole in the side of the plug’s 
center pin is for soldering that pin to 
the center conductor of the semi-rigid 
coax: molten solder flows into the 
junction and securely fastens the two 
pieces of metal together.160
DE-9 Connector
Older computers used a DE-9 con￾nector for carrying serial data in the 
RS-232 protocol. Since a lot of com￾puters and instruments still use this old 
data transmission standard, DE-9 cables 
and adapters can still be purchased. 
These simple, robust connectors have 
nine pins on the plug that fit neatly 
into nine spring-loaded sockets on the 
receptacle. The trapezoidal metal shells 
guide the connectors into alignment, 
preventing damage to the pins when 
connecting them.
The DE-9 connector is frequently yet 
incorrectly called a “DB-9” connector. 
This is likely because of its similarity to 
the wider DB-25 connector that was 
used for parallel port printers and older 
serial connections. The “B” or “E” refers 
to the size of the connector shell; DE-9 
is the correct name for this smaller 
connector.
A modern adapter converts USB to RS-232, 
which uses a DE-9 connector.161
A DE-9 plug and receptacle in cross 
section. In practice, wires would 
be soldered to each of the nine 
terminals on each side.162
Category 6 Ethernet Cable
The Category 6 (Cat6) Ethernet cable
contains four twisted pairs of copper 
wire. These common cables are used 
worldwide to carry local network and 
internet traffic.
Cat6 cables improve on previous gen￾erations of cables by adding an internal 
X-shaped plastic spacer to keep the pairs 
of wires apart from each other, reducing 
the signal leakage between pairs. They 
also have a metal foil shield around the 
outside to reduce interference from 
external signals, as well as a separate 
“drain” conductor to assist with shielding.163
SATA (Serial AT Attachment) cables are 
used inside computers to connect inter￾nal storage drives to the motherboard. 
Each cable contains two twinaxial
pairs. One pair carries data to the hard 
drive, and the other pair carries data 
from the hard drive.
A twinaxial, or twinax, cable looks like 
two coaxial cables stuck together, shar￾ing the same outer shield. Signals are 
transmitted with differential signaling, 
meaning signals are represented by the 
voltage difference between the two wires. 
This system effectively cancels out most 
electrical interference, since the interfer￾ence adds equally to both signal wires.
SATA Cable
Each twinaxial pair has two main 
wires, foil shielding, and two “drain” 
wires that improve shielding.164
High-Definition Multimedia Interface 
(HDMI) cables connect computers and 
other video devices to monitors and 
televisions.
The cable has four independently 
shielded twisted pairs of wires that 
transmit data, including digital video. 
The stream of video data gets split into 
four separate streams of serial digital 
data, one per pair of wires. At the video 
monitor end, the four streams are 
combined and decoded to generate 
the picture.
Other unshielded wires carry low-speed 
auxiliary signals that identify the make, 
model, and resolution of the display, or 
allow remote control of volume and other 
settings. The overall cable is shielded 
with layers of aluminum foil and a 
copper braid.
HDMI Cable
Aluminum foil
outer shield
PVC outer jacket
Braided
shield
Unshielded wire
Differential
pairs (4)165
Each signal pair is shielded with a foil 
wrap and copper drain wire.166
VGA Cable
Before HDMI and DisplayPort, in the 
old days of analog video, Video Graph￾ics Array (VGA) cables were used to 
carry video signals from computers 
to monitors.
VGA uses analog video signals consist￾ing of three electrical signals, represent￾ing the color components red, green, 
and blue. For the two VGA cables shown 
here, the manufacturers have helpfully 
color-coded the three miniature coaxial 
cables that transmit these signals. One 
of the cables also contains a smaller 
gray coax for transmitting horizontal 
synchronization information, but the 
other VGA cable uses a regular wire for 
the same purpose.
VGA cables also have other wires, used 
for other sync signals and to transmit 
auxiliary information, such as data to 
identify the monitor.
Aluminum foil
outer shield
PVC outer jacket Copper
drain wire
Braided
shield
Red, green, blue
signal coax lines
Unshielded
wire
Horizontal
sync coax167
This cable uses three easily recognizable 
miniature coaxial cables for its red, 
green, and blue components.
The outer shield of this cable is 
aluminum, with a stranded copper 
drain wire added.168
If you’ve used a computer recently or 
even just charged your phone, you’ve 
probably used a USB cable.
Cutting into a USB cable and connector 
reveals a number of interesting details. 
The plug uses insulation-displacing con￾tacts, similar to those that we saw in the 
ribbon cable. A pair of tiny metal teeth 
pops through the insulation of each wire 
and makes electrical contact with the 
conductive copper inside. 
Within the cable, we can identify 
two larger red and black wires that 
carry power, as well as two smaller 
white and green signal wires. All are 
seven-strand wires: the larger wires are 
made with larger strands, rather than 
additional strands. Layers of wrapped 
foil and aluminum braided wire shield 
the signals, preventing interference. 
The outer protective jacket is made of 
PVC plastic.
Basic USB Cable
USB cables are available with a 
number of different connectors. 
This is a USB-A to Micro-B cable.169
The shell of the USB-A plug protects 
the gold-plated contact pins within and 
guides the connector into a jack.
A basic USB cable contains only 
a few wires for signal and power. 
Newer “SuperSpeed” USB cables 
are much more complex.170
Plastic overmold
Gold-plated
contacts
Outer shell
spring finger
Blade contact
Insulation
displacement
contact
Shell of jack
Shell of plug
The gold-plated contact fingers in the 
USB jack act like springs, pressing down 
tightly against the flat metal blade con￾tacts inside the plug. 
Spring fingers on the outer shell lock into 
recesses on the plug, helping to prevent 
the cable from falling out after it’s been 
plugged in. The “clicking” sensation you 
feel when you plug your cable in comes 
from these spring fingers.
If it ever feels like it takes several tries 
to plug in a USB cable, that’s because of 
these spring fingers. (You had it right the 
first time; they were just a bit too stiff.)
USB Jack171
The outer shell of the jack has flanges 
that help guide the shell of the plug 
into place. 
The gold-plated spring fingers in the 
jack press firmly against the matching 
contacts in the plug.172
A top-of-the-line 10 Gbps SuperSpeed 
USB cable is a tiny, precisely con￾structed, dazzling work of art.
Most remarkable are the eight minia￾ture shielded coaxial cables, each just 
1 mm in diameter, with its own color￾coded foil wrap. Each pair of two coax 
cables forms a high-speed data trans￾mission lane. With four lanes total, 
the USB cable can move data up to 
10 gigabits per second.
Near the center, the cable has thick red 
and black wires for powering devices, 
and a shielded green and white signal 
pair. In a sense, these form a low-end 
basic USB cable embedded within the 
high-end SuperSpeed cable for back￾ward compatibility.
Four smaller wires near the outer shield 
carry auxiliary signals. The whole cable 
is wrapped with an outer braided copper 
shield for improved immunity to electri￾cal interference.
SuperSpeed USB Cable173
In addition to electrical connections, 
this cable has a strength member, a 
strong fiber like Kevlar, visible as the 
yellow-colored area near the center, 
between the red and black power 
conductors.Retro Tech
Some of the most iconic electronic components are, 
simply put, obsolete. Photo flashbulbs have given way to 
LEDs, Nixie tubes have (in every sense but aesthetic) been 
replaced by seven-segment displays, and analog panel 
meters have been supplanted by digital displays. Some of 
the retro items we’ll examine, like core memory, have been 
out of use for decades, while others, like incandescent 
light bulbs, are on the cusp of obsolescence. A rare hold￾out is the vacuum tube, still commonly manufactured for 
use in guitar amplifiers.
5176
Neon lamps are often used as indicators for AC 
power—for example, in extension cords, light 
switches, and power switches.
At any given instant, only one electrode is actually 
lit. Because they alternate quickly, it looks as 
though both are lit.
Neon Lamp
Neon lamps contain a small amount 
of the eponymous noble gas. When 
enough voltage is applied between 
the lamp’s two parallel electrodes, 
the gas ionizes and emits a distinctive 
orange glow. 
The outer glass envelope holds the elec￾trodes in place and prevents the neon 
gas from escaping. The blob of glass at 
the tip is where the envelope was sealed 
after introduction of the gas during the 
manufacturing process.
When a DC voltage is applied across the 
leads, only the negative electrode (cath￾ode) lights up. With an AC voltage, which 
alternates between positive and nega￾tive polarities many times per second, 
each electrode lights up in turn. Due to 
persistence of vision, both electrodes 
appear lit.177
This neon lamp is about 6 mm 
in diameter. Its base is stamped 
GE, for General Electric.178
Before seven-segment LED displays 
were common, manufacturers used dis￾tinctive, neon-filled Nixie tubes to dis￾play numeric information.
Like a neon lamp, the gas inside a Nixie 
tube ionizes when the electrodes are 
connected to a high voltage. Unlike a 
neon lamp, each negative electrode 
has been formed into the shape of a 
numeral. The glow around each illu￾minated digit is broad enough that 
the electrodes can be stacked into a 
compact array without occluding each 
other. The Nixie tube shown here has two 
anodes: the hexagonal grid in front of 
the digits and the solid metal backshell 
behind them.
Although the original manufacturers of 
Nixie tubes shut down their factories 
decades ago, so many people love the 
friendly orange glow of this unique dis￾play technology that new factories have 
begun building Nixie tubes again.
Nixie Tube 
This Fairchild 7100 meter, circa 1966, 
has a Nixie tube display, with additional 
neon lamps for decimals and units.179
A ZM1030 Nixie tube has an orange 
coating to increase the display 
contrast.180
With the Nixie tube’s glass envelope and 
hexagonal front anode grid removed, 
we can see the shaped cathodes inside. 
The digits are stacked and separated by 
insulating ceramic washers. 
This Nixie tube has fewer pins than digits. 
The odd numerals are in the front half, 
and are lit via the front anode grid. The 
even numerals are in the back half, and 
are lit via the rear anode, the black metal 
shell behind the digits. The cathodes are 
wired together in pairs such that (for 
example) the 0 and 1 digits are connected 
together, but only one of them lights at a 
time depending on which anode is active.
A transparent screen of almost impossi￾bly fine tungsten wire, roughly 0.01 mm 
thick, spans the tube between the front 
and rear halves to keep the influence of 
each anode limited to its half.
Inside the Nixie Tube181
The wire straps at the top of the tube 
connect each pair of digits.182
12AX7 Vacuum Tube
Known to audio enthusiasts and guitar 
players the world over, the iconic 12AX7 
vacuum tube has been amplifying signals 
since the 1940s. 
In cross section, you can immediately 
see that there are two copies of the 
same thing inside; the 12AX7 is a dual 
triode vacuum tube that can amplify 
two signals at once. Each of the two 
triodes has three elements: the inner 
cylindrical cathode, the wire grid, and 
the outer plate. Underneath is a mica 
washer that insulates and supports 
the elements. 
When operating, the cathodes are 
heated by tiny resistive filaments, emit￾ting the characteristic warm glow of 
vacuum tubes. Electrons emitted by the 
cathode flow toward the plate, but can 
be repelled by a small voltage applied 
to the grid. Thus, small signals applied to 
the grid can be amplified into a larger 
output at the plate.
Plate
Grid wires
Cathode
Glass envelope
Mica washer
Grid Filament
supports
The vacuum in the tube allows the electrons to flow 
freely, without interacting with air molecules.183
A dual triode has two copies of the 
main structure within.
The upper part of this vacuum 
tube, including a second mica 
support washer, was removed 
for photography.184
Vacuum Fluorescent Display Tube
A vacuum fluorescent display, or VFD, 
is a special type of vacuum tube for dis￾playing information. Despite the rise 
of seven-segment displays, VFDs are 
still widely used in car dashboards and 
household appliances.
Thin, wide vacuum tubes with flat glass 
faces, VFDs are low-voltage devices, 
essentially triode vacuum tubes—like 
12AX7s—but their anode plates are 
coated with a phosphor. The cath￾odes are a set of six very fine heated 
filament wires strung tightly across 
the front of the display. Beneath the 
cathodes are control grids etched 
from very thin sheets of metal. Below 
those are the phosphor-coated anode 
plates that form the visible display 
elements.
The filaments release electrons. When 
voltage is applied to a particular 
phosphor-coated anode, it attracts 
electrons and emits the familiar 
fluorescent-green glow.
A Sharp-brand desktop printing 
calculator from 1995 sports a VFD.185
A true gem of sculptural circuitry: the 
display is suspended in the air by an 
array of spot-welded leads.186
A cathode ray tube, or CRT, was once 
the display screen for every television 
set and computer monitor. The name is 
a historical artifact referring to “rays” 
emitted by a heated cathode; we now 
call those rays electrons.
CRTs generate images through the 
same process we just saw in the vac￾uum fluorescent display: electrons 
hitting a phosphor in a vacuum. Specif￾ically, a CRT is a vacuum tube where an 
electron gun generates an extremely 
fine beam of electrons that stream 
toward a phosphor-coated screen, 
which glows wherever the beam hits it. 
Electromagnets around the tube steer 
the beam around the screen to build up 
a complete image one line at a time, like 
someone methodically mowing a lawn.
The black-and-white CRT that we exam￾ine here is quite small, of the type used 
for video camera viewfinders.
Cathode Ray Tube
This CRT viewfinder is from a 
1990s JVC brand camcorder.187
The round CRT inside the viewfinder 
is surrounded by a magnetic yoke. A 
connector brings electrical signals to 
the pins of the tube.
The magnetic yoke contains adjustable 
ferrite pieces as well as perpendicular 
deflection coils for steering the beam 
up, down, left, and right.188
The coiled filament is stretched across and just to 
the right of the gap between the two wires at the 
center of this photo.
At the core of the CRT is an electron 
gun, a specialized vacuum tube compo￾nent that produces a focused beam 
of electrons.
It all begins with a heated filament. For 
this tiny CRT, the filament is made of 
ultra-fine wire about 0.01 mm in diam￾eter. The wire is coiled and stretched 
across a gap of 0.7 mm, about the 
thickness of seven sheets of paper. The 
heated filament throws off electrons, 
which are then focused and acceler￾ated toward the screen using high volt￾ages applied to a series of cup-shaped 
electrodes. As the electrons leave the 
electron gun, they’re deflected by the 
magnetic yoke to the correct positions 
on the phosphor screen. 
Inside the CRT189
The front of the tube is a flat surface, 
coated on the inside with a phosphor.
In cross section, we can see all 
the parts of the CRT, from the 
electron gun on the left to the 
phosphor screen on the right.190
Mercury Tilt Switch 
In this simplest of switches, a tiny blob 
of conductive, liquid mercury metal can 
complete an electrical circuit by mak￾ing contact with the two electrodes, 
but only when the device is upright. 
When tilted downward, the mercury 
falls away from the electrodes, opening 
the circuit. 
These switches are no longer readily avail￾able due to mercury’s toxicity, but years 
ago you could find them in simple elec￾tromechanical thermostats. The mercury 
switch was secured to the end of a coiled 
bimetallic strip. Heating or cooling the 
strip rotated the mercury switch until, at 
a set temperature, the switch closed, and 
the heater or air conditioner turned on.191
Small carbon resistors can’t handle 
much power; beyond a few watts, they 
overheat, and the fragile carbon coat￾ing disintegrates. As we saw on page 19, 
larger power resistors are made from a 
wound resistive wire and encapsulated 
in ceramic packages that can handle 
high temperatures. Both of the wire￾wound resistors shown here are classic 
designs dating back nearly a century, 
though versions of each are still being 
manufactured today. 
The tubular vitreous enamel resistor
is a classic style of robust, low-cost 
wirewound power resistor. Ones like 
this, with no enamel on the side, can 
be used with a clamped-on wiper to act 
as a crude potentiometer.
The mica card resistor is used for highly 
stable circuits that need to work at a 
wide range of power dissipation values. 
It has a length of thin resistive wire that 
can be precisely calibrated, looped many 
times over a heat-tolerant mica form.
Vintage Wirewound Resistors
Tubular vitreous enamel resistor Mica card resistor192
Carbon composition resistors are 
often found in older electronics, such 
as antique radio equipment. The resis￾tive element is a carbon “composition,” 
what we more commonly refer to as a 
composite. It starts as a thick paste 
made from conductive carbon powder, 
non-conductive ceramic clay, and a 
binder resin.
After curing, the composite has the 
appearance of a terrazzo floor. Pale 
grains of clay stand out against the 
dark carbon-bearing resin. The outer 
shell is molded from a phenolic resin 
such as Bakelite. 
Notice how the composite grain is dis￾torted near the ends of the connecting 
wires. The wires were pushed into the 
paste while it was soft, prior to curing.
Carbon Composition Resistor
Carbon composition resistors feature 
prominently on the main circuit board of 
this 1960s tube-based guitar amplifier.193194
The dielectric material in this 1920s 
capacitor is mica, a naturally occur￾ring mineral that can be as transparent 
as glass. Mica is an electrical insulator 
that can readily be cleaved into parallel 
sheets of uniform thinness. 
Soft metal plates form the capacitor’s 
electrodes. To increase the capacitance, 
multiple layers of alternating metal 
plates and mica sheets are stacked 
together. This “sandwich” is compressed 
tightly and impregnated with an insulat￾ing compound before being attached to 
the threaded inserts that act as contact 
points. Finally, the whole assembly is 
molded in Bakelite to protect the fragile 
internal components.
Cornell-Dubilier 9LS Capacitor195
The metal wiring from each end of 
the capacitor is wrapped around the 
screw terminals to make an electrical 
connection. 
With a foreshortened perspective, we 
can see the interdigitated layers of this 
capacitor: shiny silver layers separated 
by darker mica layers. 196
Instead of using separate soft metal 
plates and mica sheets, this type of 
silver mica capacitor, invented around 
the 1950s, uses a special plating pro￾cess to deposit silver directly on the 
surface of the mica insulator. As with 
the Cornell-Dubilier capacitor, multiple 
plated sheets are stacked together for 
more capacitance.
Thin layers of metal foil between the 
mica sheets connect the plated silver 
electrodes to the two large, brass￾colored metal clamps crimped onto the 
stack. The completed capacitor is encap￾sulated in a phenolic resin to protect it.
Dipped Silver Mica Capacitor197
Axial Multilayer Ceramic Capacitor 
On page 36, we examined a multilayer 
ceramic capacitor that mounts directly 
onto a printed circuit board. For a time, 
MLCCs were also available sealed inside 
tiny glass tubes with attached wires so 
they could be installed by soldering the 
wires into the plated through holes of a 
circuit board, much like an ordinary axial 
resistor or diode. 
The glass envelope, connections, and 
sealing techniques used here are similar 
to those used for the glass-encapsulated 
diodes on page 66.
This axial-packaged MLCC, with a 
passing resemblance to a strawberry 
ice cream sandwich, has about 30 
interdigitated metal layers.198
IF Transformer
An IF transformer, short for interme￾diate frequency, is a tunable inductor 
that often has a built-in capacitor. These 
were once very popular in television 
sets and radios, like the 1960s transistor 
radio circuit board in the photo. 
The inductance of an inductor depends 
on the type and position of its magnetic 
core, and the IF transformer’s core is a 
movable, screw-shaped ferrite slug. As 
the slug is rotated—with a special plastic 
tool that won’t crack the brittle ferrite—
it moves up or down within the inductor 
windings. This changes the character￾istics of the IF transformer and adjusts 
the response of the circuit that uses 
it. Having a built-in capacitor allows 
the circuit designer to save an external 
component.
Adjustable ferrite slug
Metal shield
Copper windings
Plastic
cap
Plastic
bobbin
Tubular
ceramic
capacitor199
The cut silvery tube at the bottom 
of the IF transformer is an old-style 
tubular ceramic capacitor, a type 
common in the 1960s.200
The incandescent light bulb is the 
classic light bulb, where a hot tungsten 
filament glows simply because it is hot. 
These bulbs aren’t particularly efficient 
as light sources because so much of 
their power output is released as heat 
rather than light, which is why they’re 
now being replaced by LEDs.
The filament of the bulb, at first glance 
or even under moderate magnifica￾tion, appears to be a simple coil of wire. 
Under high magnification, however, it 
turns out to be a coiled coil of much 
finer wire.
The ends of the filament are cool enough 
that they don’t glow, in part because the 
two vertical supports act as heat sinks, 
wicking heat away from the ends of 
the filament.
Switching on a light bulb generates a 
thermal pulse, which puts a lot of stress 
on the filament. This is why light bulbs 
preferentially burn out right as you 
throw the switch.
Incandescent Light Bulb 201
The filament is a coiled coil of 
remarkably fine tungsten wire.
The first readily available light bulbs 
used a fine wisp of carbon as the 
filament. These were soon replaced by 
tungsten filaments, which last longer 
and are cheaper to manufacture.202
Camera Flashbulb 
While incandescent light bulbs are 
designed to last as long as possible 
before burning out, single-use flash￾bulbs are designed to burn out the 
very instant they’re first turned on—just 
enough time to expose photographic 
film for that glamor shot.
Instead of a tungsten filament, flash￾bulbs contain ribbons, wires, or foils of 
magnesium, packed in an oxygen-filled 
glass envelope. When a pulse of volt￾age is applied, the magnesium heats up 
and ignites, burning very rapidly in the 
oxygen-rich atmosphere and emitting a 
bright flash of light that lasts a fair bit 
longer than our modern strobe-based 
camera flashes.
The outer blue plastic coating on 
these bulbs filters the output light and 
strengthens the glass envelope.
These Press 25B-size flash bulbs 
are about 25 mm in diameter 
and are packaged a dozen per 
wonderful box.203
This flashbulb has a bayonet-style base 
for quick changes in a camera flash unit.204
Photoresistor
A photoresistor is known by a number 
of other names: photocell, CdS cell, or 
light-dependent resistor (LDR). It’s a 
circuit element that acts like a resistor, 
but the resistance changes depending 
on the amount of light that hits it.
Photoresistors are made from a ceramic 
substrate coated with cadmium sul￾fide (CdS) or cadmium selenide (CdSe). 
Metal electrodes are placed on top in a 
distinctive interdigitated pattern. The 
central wiggly line is the long, narrow 
gap between the two electrodes, which 
exposes the cadmium compound below.
The cadmium compound may be bright 
yellow or red; CdS and CdSe are also 
known as the artists’ pigments cadmium 
yellow and cadmium red. Both com￾pounds change their resistivity with the 
presence of light.
Cadmium compounds are toxic, and 
photoresistors like these are gradually 
being phased out in favor of silicon light 
sensors.
Metal electrodes
Terminal
CdS or CdSe coating
Gap between
metal electrodes Ceramic base205
Photoresistors are used in circuits 
that sense light but don’t require fast 
response times, including night-lights, 
streetlamps, and auto-darkening 
mirrors.
A clear coating over the surface 
protects the surface from oxidation 
or physical damage. 206
A point contact diode, sometimes 
called a cat whisker diode or crystal 
diode, can be formed when a thin metal 
wire (the “whisker”) contacts a chunk of 
semiconductor crystal.
This particular point contact diode has 
a steel wire that contacts a piece of 
galena, a naturally occurring lead sulfide 
mineral that happens to be a semicon￾ductor. The wire position is adjustable 
to contact different points on the crys￾tal, allowing the user to hunt for the 
best-performing areas on the surface.
A crude AM radio receiver can be built 
with nothing more than a point contact 
diode like this, a length of wire to form 
an antenna, and an earphone. No bat￾teries are required; a crystal radio is 
directly powered by the radio waves that 
it receives.
Point Contact Diode207
The classic germanium diode can be 
found in crystal radio sets even today, 
but they’ve been largely superseded by 
more modern diode designs. This is a 
point contact diode and the semicon￾ductor is a piece of germanium, rather 
than galena or the silicon found in other 
types of diodes.
The outward construction is very similar 
to the other glass-encapsulated diodes 
that we looked at on page 66. Inside, a 
tiny gray square of germanium is sol￾dered to the copper cathode. 
The “cat whisker” in this diode is a slen￾der gold wire, formed into a spring 
shape and given an extremely fine point. 
The wire is welded to the anode lead and 
inserted into the glass envelope until 
it makes contact with the germanium. 
A current is then passed through the 
cat whisker and the germanium to fuse 
them together.
Germanium Diode 208
This chip, marked µA702, was the first 
analog integrated circuit chip to reach 
the market. It was designed by legend￾ary IC designer Bob Widlar of Fairchild 
Semiconductor and released in 1964. 
There are a grand total of nine transis￾tors on the silicon die.
The µA702 is an operational amplifier, 
a device that subtracts and amplifies 
analog signals. Operational amplifiers 
are basic building blocks for analog cir￾cuits in much the same way that logic 
gates are for digital circuits. 
Inside the type TO-99 metal can pack￾age, we can see evidence that this 
particular device was assembled or 
reworked by hand; it looks like the chip 
was placed off-center and then slid into 
place, leaving a streak of epoxy behind. 
The dark scratches on the right are 
probably marks from a tweezer, perhaps 
the one used to move the chip. Later on, 
chips were assembled with automated 
equipment and bear no evidence of 
human touch.
µA702 Integrated Circuit
Vintage integrated circuits in 
TO-99 metal can packages209
The chip is connected through eight 
bond wires. Seven go to pins insulated 
with glass seals. The eighth pin is 
electrically connected to the can.210
Read-only memory, or ROM, is perma￾nent computer memory that can only be 
read, not written. In practice, many ROM 
devices need to be programmed at some 
initial point. It’s also convenient if devices 
can be erased and rewritten rather than 
being thrown away after one use.
This erasable programmable read-only 
memory (EPROM) chip has a quartz-glass 
window that allows the silicon die to be 
exposed to ultraviolet light, which wipes 
the memory clean, resetting every bit to 
a digital 1. Later, the chip can be repro￾grammed, setting individual bits to 0, to 
store data.
EPROM chips were once frequently used 
as BIOS chips on computer mother￾boards, usually with an opaque sticker 
covering the window. They have been 
superseded by EEPROM, electrically eras￾able programmable read-only memory, 
and its descendant, flash memory. 
Windowed EPROM211
The ceramic DIP of an EPROM has 
a quartz-glass window that allows 
ultraviolet light to erase the memory 
on the silicon die.212
Before cheap memory chips, core 
memory was one of the few reliable 
technologies used for a computer’s 
main memory. Unlike a modern mem￾ory chip, which contains billions of bits, 
core memories contain so few bits that 
you can see every single one. Each 
donut-shaped core is made of a ferrite 
ceramic that can be magnetized in one 
of two directions, representing a binary 
1 or 0.
The grid of red-colored horizontal and 
vertical wires passing through the cores 
is used to address an individual core for 
writing or reading. The diagonal copper￾colored wire through every core is a 
sense line for reading back the infor￾mation stored in the selected core. The 
black wire is an inhibit line that can 
selectively block information from being 
written to a set of cores by counteract￾ing the magnetic field of the red wires.
Core Memory
Column drive lines (14)
Row drive lines (8)
Ferrite core
Column 
Row
Sense line
Inhibit line
The core memory plane from a Casio AL-1000 
calculator, circa 1967, with 448 bits, or 56 bytes, 
of memory213214
IBM SLT Module
In the 1960s, IBM developed a type of 
hybrid circuit module that they called 
SLT, for Solid Logic Technology. These 
compact, rugged modules replaced an 
entire circuit card’s worth of compo￾nents, fitting resistors, diodes, and tran￾sistors into a package smaller than a 
sugar cube. 
SLT modules contain multiple tiny chips, 
each with either a single transistor or 
an array of two diodes. Instead of using 
bond wires, solder bumps on the dies 
connect them to conductive silver cir￾cuits patterned on the module’s ceramic 
substrate. Far ahead of its time, this sol￾der-bump approach was the direct pre￾cursor of the “flip chip” mounting we saw 
in the smartphone SoC on page 87.
It almost seems anachronistic to 
see vintage components like carbon 
composition resistors on a circuit 
board next to these high-density 
SLT modules.
Individual SLT transistor dies. Notice the solder 
bumps on each die.
A bare ceramic SLT module, where the dies have not 
yet been bonded in place215
SLT modules were packaged 
with an aluminum cover over 
the ceramic circuit board.216
Analog Panel Meter
In the years before cheap LCD panels 
and LED displays, analog meters were 
used to indicate voltages and currents 
in a wide range of applications. 
The type of analog meter shown here 
features a fixed permanent magnet 
that pushes against and turns an 
electromagnet in order to rotate 
the attached needle. 
The rotating electromagnet is sus￾pended by and pivots about two taut 
metal ribbons, one above and one below 
the coil. The ribbons conduct electricity 
from the meter terminals to the rotat￾ing coil. They also act as a weak torsion 
spring, returning the needle toward zero 
when the amount of current decreases.
The needle’s angle of rotation is pre￾cisely determined by the current flowing 
in the electromagnet’s copper coil, bal￾anced by the weak spring. This mecha￾nism is called the d’Arsonval movement.217
The permanent magnet is 
made with stacks of thick, 
round pole pieces.
The thin vertical metal ribbon 
is held taut by an arched steel 
spring that also serves as its 
electrical terminal.218
Magnetic Tape Head
Copper windings
C core
Gap
Plastic bobbin
Spring clip Copper spacers
Epoxy
Terminals
Two tape heads are visible in a Panasonic-brand 
cassette tape recorder. The metal one in the center 
is for playback and recording. The white plastic head 
beside it is for erasing a preexisting recording.
Tape heads read or write information, 
like analog music or digital data, to or 
from magnetic tape. They may look 
simple from the outside, but their 
smooth exterior hides a complex 
assembly within.
A tape head’s heart is a coil of copper 
wire. The coil, along with a shaped iron 
“C core” pole piece, acts as an electro￾magnet, concentrating a magnetic field 
at a tiny gap right at the point where the 
head presses up against the magnetic 
tape. The magnet and pole piece work 
much like a common horseshoe magnet: 
putting the two poles close together 
creates a strong magnetic field across 
the gap.
The gap itself is formed by a thin piece of 
copper or gold foil sandwiched between 
the two ends of the iron core. The foil 
ensures that the gap is of a precisely 
controlled and consistent width, giving 
better overall fidelity and performance.219
Copper elements are used to 
separate and position the iron pole 
piece within the head, isolating the 
magnetic circuit components.
The thin foil is pinched between the 
two ends of the ferromagnetic core, 
visible as a light, wispy line against 
the black epoxy.220
Thin-Film Hard Drive Head
This 2 GB Micropolis-brand hard drive from 1992 has 
eight platters for storing data.
A computer hard drive contains a min￾iature version of a magnetic tape head. 
More precisely, it contains many of them.
The heads sit on ceramic sliders that 
are positioned in parallel by a rotary 
voice coil motor. Every disk-shaped plat￾ter of the drive is paired with two sliders: 
one for each surface. When the drive 
spins, each slider glides on an ultra-thin 
cushion of air between it and the surface.
Each individual slider is quite small, only 
about 3.3 mm wide. On its front face 
are metal terminal pads and two tiny, 
ruby-colored heads. The heads are man￾ufactured using thin-film techniques to 
deposit coils that are electrically similar 
to tape heads.
Only one head per slider is actually 
used. They’re given two heads so they 
can be manufactured identically, even 
though the slider underneath each 
platter is flipped over. For these upside￾down sliders, the opposite head is used, 
lining up the heads above and below the 
platter so that each data track has the 
same diameter.221
Extremely fine lacquered magnet 
wire provides electrical connections 
to the slider. The soldered 
connections are visible in the 
reflection off the drive platter.
At high magnification, the 
thin-film coil windings are 
visible within the ruby￾colored head.222
Compare the thin-film hard drive heads 
to this hard drive from 2001. By this 
time, heads were using giant magneto￾resistance (GMR) technology, and 
the sliders had shrunk to only about 
1 mm wide.
Magnetoresistance is a phenomenon 
where the resistance of a material can 
change in the presence of an external 
magnetic field. Sensors based on this 
effect can detect very small magnetic 
domains, allowing drive memory storage 
density to increase. 
As a sensor technology, a GMR-based 
head doesn’t on its own write data to the 
drive. Rather, a GMR “read head” is lay￾ered with a thin-film “write head” like the 
one that we saw previously.
The hard drive industry continues to 
evolve. Current-generation drive heads 
use entirely different technologies to 
achieve even greater storage density.
GMR Hard Drive Head
This 100 GB Western Digital hard drive 
has only three platters. A picture of the 
full drive can be found with the rotary 
voice coil on page 132.223
Incredibly fine flexible circuit 
boards bring electrical signals to 
the heads, which are centered on 
the front face of the slider.
The red thin-film write head 
coil is at the center bottom of 
the slider face. The two copper 
rectangles behind it are part of 
the GMR sensor read head.6
Composite 
Devices
Take apart some electronic components, and you’ll find 
other, smaller components inside them. And inside those 
components? Yes, sometimes, you’ll find even smaller com￾ponents inside those as well. We now turn our attention to 
some of these composite devices. We’ll see all manner of cir￾cuit boards, displays containing multiple LED dies, compos￾ite packages that combine multiple components, and exotic 
hybrid modules with ceramic circuit boards and individual 
semiconductor dies linked by delicate bond wires.226
LED filament bulbs have much of the 
aesthetic appeal of incandescents, 
while converting electricity to light 
more efficiently.
LED Filament Light Bulb
Modern LED light bulbs are available 
in a wide variety of shapes and styles. 
This one is designed to look like an old￾school incandescent light bulb. But how 
can LEDs be made so long and thin?
Each “filament” is actually a ceramic 
strip—essentially a circuit board—with 
dozens of tiny blue LED dies studded 
along its length. Each ceramic strip is 
coated on its front and back sides with 
a yellow silicone rubber filled with 
a phosphor.
As with other “white” LEDs, the phosphor 
absorbs some of the blue light and emits 
a broad spectrum of light that stretches 
into the green and red. The overall light 
that we perceive is a warm white glow, 
like that from an incandescent bulb.227
The ceramic strip and bluish glow 
around each LED die can be seen up 
close after dimming the bulb.228
Single-Side Printed Circuit Board 
Printed circuit boards, or PCBs, 
are everywhere in electronic devices. 
Despite the name, the copper circuitry 
isn’t printed on the board. Rather, the 
board—usually a fiberglass composite—is 
bonded to a sheet of copper and selec￾tively etched, leaving only the desired 
wiring patterns on the board, called 
traces. Holes for component leads are 
drilled through the board as well.
The circuit board shown here, part of 
a power supply, is called a single-sided
board because it has copper traces on 
one side only. The side without copper has 
a number of through-hole components, 
including a DIP chip, a transistor, and film 
capacitors. The reverse side, where we 
can see dark, snaking lines of copper, has 
surface-mount components, including 
chip resistors and chip capacitors.
The green coating on the copper side is 
a thin insulating layer called a solder 
mask. Solder won’t stick to areas cov￾ered by this coating. 229
This board is soldered copper-side down 
by passing it through a stream of molten 
solder. Dots of orange glue beneath 
each component hold them in place 
prior to soldering.230
While single-sided PCBs are cheap to 
manufacture, they’re notoriously dif￾ficult to design because wiring traces 
can’t cross over each other. By bonding 
a sheet of copper to each side of a fiber￾glass substrate and etching circuits into 
both sides, traces on one side can then 
pass over traces on the other side. It’s 
much easier to plan the routes for wiring 
on a two-layer circuit board.
Copper traces on the two layers can 
be connected with plated through 
holes. After a hole is drilled, a chem￾ical process electroplates additional 
copper inside the hole, connecting the 
two sides. Plated through holes added 
to connect traces between layers are 
called vias. Other plated through holes 
are used as locations for soldering 
components.
Two-Layer Printed Circuit Board 
This circuit board has a purple solder 
mask and a thin gold plating on the 
exposed copper surfaces.231232
Multilayer Circuit Boards 
A four-layer circuit board A six-layer circuit board
Densely populated circuit boards often 
need more than just two layers for rout￾ing their wiring. 
A manufacturing plant can build PCBs 
with more than two layers by creating 
more complex sandwiches of copper 
and fiberglass. A four-layer board is 
typically fabricated by etching two thin 
two-layer boards, and then laminat￾ing them to either side of a common 
fiberglass core. The laminating process 
permanently bonds the layers together 
in a high-pressure, high-temperature 
press. The same process, but with dif￾ferent layer choices, can produce circuit 
boards with dozens of layers.
Special features like blind vias and 
buried vias—plated vias that don’t go 
through the entire circuit board—can be 
fabricated by drilling and plating holes 
in the various layers before they’re lami￾nated together.233
This ten-layer smartphone PCB 
has blind and buried vias making 
connections between the different 
layers, visible as vertical copper 
pillars connecting the layers.
Cut at an angle, it’s easier to see the 
three-dimensional nature of the circuit 
board. The circular structures are vias 
that have been cut through.234
Flex and Rigid-Flex Circuit Boards
Flex PCBs are circuit boards that are 
etched on a bendable substrate of poly￾imide film rather than fiberglass. Poly￾imide is a remarkably tough and flexible 
plastic that can withstand the high heat 
of soldering. It has a distinctive rich 
brown color and is frequently referred to 
by the brand names Pyralux or Kapton.
To create structure, flex PCBs are fre￾quently manufactured with stiffen￾ers, flat layers of fiberglass or other 
materials that are cut to shape and 
bonded to the polyimide layers. These 
help the board hold its shape in certain 
places—for example, where components 
are soldered on.
A rigid-flex PCB is a true multilayer 
PCB where at least one of the layers in 
the stack is etched on a flexible polyim￾ide substrate. These remarkable boards 
can behave like full-featured circuit 
boards with built-in hinges and cabling. 
A flex PCB with stiffeners can 
position components at different 
locations and orientations in a 
complex mechanical assembly.235
Carefully designed flex 
PCBs can withstand many 
millions of flex cycles, like 
this flex PCB that brings 
signals to the moving arm 
of a hard drive.
Rigid-flex PCBs like this are often found 
in digital cameras, where complex 
circuitry must fit in narrow spaces 
between motors, lenses, and batteries.236
Elastomeric Connector
This electronics module from a digital wristwatch 
has an LCD connected to the circuit board by two 
elastomeric connector strips.
Two rows of gold-plated contact pads at the top 
and bottom of the circuit board correspond to the 
electrodes on the LCD module.
Elastomeric connectors are a very 
different type of flexible circuit. They’re 
commonly found in the liquid crys￾tal display (LCD) modules of inexpen￾sive devices like wristwatches and 
calculators. 
A typical LCD module features a piece 
of glass patterned with transparent con￾ductive electrodes, and a circuit board 
beneath to drive the display. The elas￾tomeric connector is a squishy rubber 
strip that sits between the electrodes 
and corresponding contact pads on the 
circuit board, providing a reliable and 
gently compliant connection between 
the two.
The connector is composed of alter￾nating parallel layers of insulating white 
silicone rubber and conductive carbon￾filled black silicone rubber. There are 
also thin insulating white silicone 
liners on the top and bottom.237
To work properly, the spacing of the 
conductive elements of the connector 
must be narrower than that of the 
transparent electrodes on the LCD 
module.
The flexibility of the connector provides 
a reliable electrical connection as well 
as protection for the fragile glass.238
MicroSD Card 
A microSD (Secure Digital) memory card 
contains a very thin circuit board with 
a memory chip. Since the whole device 
is encapsulated in black epoxy resin, it 
isn’t immediately obvious that there’s a 
circuit board involved—at least until the 
card is cut in half.
The memory chip looks like a silver gray 
strip. Surprisingly, it fills most of the 
inside of the card, even underneath 
the gold-plated connector fingers. 
Making efficient use of space allows 
manufacturers to maximize the amount 
of storage. This is the polar opposite 
of simple transistors like the 2N2222 
(see page 70), where the package is far 
larger than the active silicon. It’s also a 
natural result of 40 years of evolution￾ary change in electronics manufactur￾ing and packaging. 
MicroSD cards are about the size of 
a dime, yet as of this writing they’re 
available with capacities up to 1 TB.239
The entire back surface of the microSD 
card is a two-layer circuit board. The 
large contact fingers are simply exposed 
copper areas from the upper layer of the 
PCB, with a gold-plated finish.240
Ultra-low-cost electronics, like dollar 
store calculators or unbranded multi￾meters, need to save every cent possible 
in the manufacturing process. Prod￾ucts like these often don’t use chips in 
a traditional epoxy package with metal 
pins that need to be soldered in place. 
To save money, the IC die itself is glued 
to the circuit board and connected to 
the circuitry using very fine bond wires. 
A glob of epoxy covers the fragile wires, 
and the chip is ready for use. 
This technique is called glob-top 
packaging, and we’ve already seen 
an example of it in the wristwatch on 
page 236.
Glob-top packaging is a form of chip￾on-board, or COB, packaging, where 
dies are attached directly to the circuit 
board. COB packaging is commonly 
used in LED lighting; the “filament” 
modules in the LED filament light bulb 
(page 226) are built this way.
Glob-Top Packaging
Several aluminum bond wires can be seen here, 
where the chip is connected to the circuit board.241
EMV Credit Card Chip 
Modern credit cards come embedded 
with a secure memory EMV chip instead 
of just a simple magnetic stripe. The 
name stands for Europay, Mastercard, 
and Visa, the companies that created 
the standard.
Dissolving away the rest of the credit 
card in a solvent, we can see that the 
visible contact pads fill one side of a 
paper-thin circuit board embedded in 
the card.
The rectangular circuit board is made 
out of fiberglass and epoxy. The memory 
chip is glued to the back side, connected 
to the contact pads with hair-thin gold 
bond wires, and protected with a glob 
of clear epoxy. It’s another example of 
glob-top packaging. 
Different credit cards and systems use different 
contact pad patterns. These two examples have 
slightly different contacts.242
Modern hotel doors use near-field 
communication (NFC) technology to 
identify key cards that have permission 
to unlock the door. Molded inside each 
card is a coil of wire connected to a tiny 
smart card integrated circuit.
When the card is tapped against a door 
lock, electronics in the lock interrogate 
the card using a modulated magnetic 
field generated by a coil inside the lock. 
This same magnetic field also provides 
electrical power to the smart card chip. 
Another way to look at it is that bring￾ing the card up to the lock creates an 
ad-hoc transformer, with one set of 
windings in the lock and the other in 
the card.
The chip is on a paper-thin circuit board, 
much like that in the credit card, com￾plete with the black glob-top over the 
IC. Interestingly, the circuit board is 
intentionally bent with a slight curve.
NFC Key Card243
Inside the card is a circuit board with a 
glob-top-packaged IC, as well as four 
copper windings, almost as large as the 
card itself.
The inside of the card is filled with white 
epoxy that encapsulates the windings 
and circuit board. The top and bottom 
surfaces of the card are thin white 
plastic, laminated over the epoxy.244
Smartphone Logic Board 
The reverse side of the board, 
with the metal covers removed, 
showing large black modules.
We often take our smartphones for 
granted, but they’re technological mar￾vels teeming with a remarkable array of 
circuitry and sensors.
Inside this smartphone is a printed cir￾cuit board with a blue solder mask, the 
same one that we saw cross-sectioned 
on page 233. Engineers crafted it to fit 
the mechanical peculiarities of this par￾ticular phone, cutting out a large region 
for the lithium polymer battery pack and 
smaller regions for the camera module 
and various mounting features.
Minuscule components encrust the 
surface of the board, including connec￾tors, crystals, the LED camera flash, and 
various tiny sensor modules, such as a 
microphone and accelerometer. Most of 
the integrated circuits lurk beneath thin 
metal covers, which clip into place to 
provide shielding for the sensitive elec￾tronics within.245246
Inside the Logic Board
Circuitry can be a profoundly three￾dimensional art form. A slice through the 
center of the smartphone logic board 
reveals a thick sandwich of materials, all 
part of different components. 
The top layer is the blue main printed 
circuit board, containing 10 layers of 
copper wiring. Beneath it, connected 
to the board through a ball grid array, 
is a complex system in package (SiP), a 
component containing multiple ICs. The 
SiP starts with a PCB made of six layers 
of copper circuitry. A large, thin chip is 
soldered to this six-layer board using 
microscopic solder bumps. 
Lower down on the SiP is another 
PCB, made of three layers of copper 
circuitry. Mounted to that board and 
connected with fine gold bond wires 
are at least two additional chips. The 
entire SiP assembly is encapsulated in 
black epoxy. 
A pen, for scale, points out the black 
IC visible in the cross section on the 
facing page. This area is normally 
hidden under one of the covers.247
The brown blocks atop the main 
circuit board are multilayer ceramic 
capacitors (MLCCs).248
Networking cable connections need to 
be electrically isolated for safety rea￾sons. Computers and other devices 
that have Ethernet ports use a group 
of toroidal transformers (page 50) to 
achieve that isolation.
Cutting into this Ethernet transformer
reveals eight tiny toroidal transformers 
at various angles, two for each of the 
four twisted wire pairs in an Ethernet 
cable (page 162). One transformer in a 
pair provides electrical isolation, while 
the other is configured as a choke to fil￾ter out noise common to both wires.
Ethernet Transformer249
A voltage regulator like the LM309K 
(page 74) is reliable but power hungry. 
It lowers and controls a voltage by 
converting electrical energy to heat.
A DC-DC converter also changes one 
voltage to another, but does so with much 
greater efficiency. It uses a digital circuit 
to manage the current through an induc￾tor, exploiting its flywheel-like behavior.
This miniature DC-DC converter module 
is meant to replace a similarly shaped 
linear voltage regulator in existing equip￾ment, improving its efficiency.
The module contains a small 
circuit board with surface-mount 
components including capacitors, 
chips, and an inductor.
DC-DC Converter 250
One surprising thing about a seven￾segment LED display is how tiny the 
actual LEDs are in comparison to the 
overall device. At the base of each 
D-shaped colored plastic lens sits a 
small LED chip. These are about the 
same size as the LED dies in the red 
through-hole LED (page 88), but the 
packaging here is much larger.
The LED dies are mounted chip-on￾board style to a small circuit board. Fine 
bond wires make connections from the 
dies to the copper traces on the board, 
which bring the drive signals in from the 
large metal pins. The board itself is single￾sided, made out of a black fiberglass 
substrate to minimize reflections.
The circuit board assembly is placed 
into the white outer frame, made from 
injection-molded plastic with black 
paint on the front surface. Finally, the 
assembly is filled with red-tinted epoxy 
resin that hardens into the visible 
lenses of the device.
Seven-Segment LED Display251
The slightly cloudy red epoxy that forms 
the lenses diffuses the light from the 
LEDs so that each lit segment appears 
evenly illuminated.252
This HDSP-0760 LED display is a 
high-end alternative to the common 
seven-segment LED display. Instead 
of concealing a single LED in each of 
seven lenses, the device features a 
pattern of 20 directly visible LED dies.
The LED display is a thick-film hybrid 
circuit with a ceramic base—there’s no 
plastic involved at all, unlike the seven￾segment LED display. Like the other 
thick-film devices that we’ve seen, the 
display’s fabrication involves multiple 
steps of printing materials like gold traces 
and ceramic inks, with intermediate firing 
steps. A glass cover seals the completed 
assembly so that it can perform well in 
harsh environments that would melt or 
destroy other types of displays.
The chip inside this display converts the 
incoming binary number into the correct 
pattern of lit and unlit LEDs to form the 
matching character to display. 
Thick-Film LED Numeric Display 253
The glass cover of the display provides an 
exceptional view of lit and unlit LED dies, as 
well as the decoder chip and its bond wires.254
Instead of constructing a small range of 
characters with a few dots or segments, 
this HCMS-2904 display uses 5×7 grids 
of individual LED dies to form any alpha￾numeric character.
The display is fabricated as a regular 
multilayer circuit board, with 140 LED 
dies mounted to the top, chip-on-board 
style. The dies and their bond wires are 
protected by a clear plastic cover over 
the top of the device, a low-cost alter￾native to the thick-film LED display’s 
glass-ceramic package.
These dot matrix modules are designed 
to stack seamlessly end to end and top 
to bottom to create larger displays. Each 
module contains a driver chip on the 
underside of its circuit board. The chip 
accepts a stream of pixel data and man￾ages the LED display. 
5×7 LED Dot Matrix Display255
The LED dies are arranged in a matrix, 
with circuit board traces defining the 
columns in this view and daisy-chained 
bond wires defining the rows.256
Vintage LED Bubble Display
Early electronic calculators like this 
HP-67 used seven-segment LED displays 
instead of the now ubiquitous LCD panel. 
Each digit is a single LED chip with seven 
segments and a decimal point patterned 
on it. Because each LED chip is small, 
magnifying lenses molded into the outer 
plastic case of the display enlarge the 
digits, making them easier to see.
In the close-up photo of the digits, you 
may be able to see the array of fine gold 
bond wires that connect the LED digits 
to the rest of the calculator’s circuitry. 
To reduce the number of pins, a tech￾nique called multiplexing is used. Each 
group of five digits shares the same con￾trol pins for each segment—for example, 
all five digits’ “top” segments are wired 
together. Because of the shared wiring, 
only one digit can be lit at a time. The 
circuitry cycles quickly through all the 
digits, making it appear like each digit is 
continuously lit. 
This Hewlett-Packard 67 calculator, 
released in 1976, has a 15-character 
LED “bubble” display, so called 
because of the bubble-like lenses.257
The LED displays are packaged in 14-pin 
DIPs, five digits each. The DIPs are 
molded in a transparent red epoxy that 
forms the bubble lenses.258
While this display has similarities to the 
HP bubble display, its pedigree isn’t from 
consumer electronics but rather from 
military and aerospace applications. It’s 
a ruggedly built LED display, designed 
for cost-insensitive systems that require 
a tough, hermetically sealed display that 
just has to work.
The thick-film module is built with a 
glass cover above a ceramic substrate. 
On top of the ceramic are several layers 
of conductive silver traces. Insulat￾ing material is also patterned to allow 
traces to cross over each other with￾out shorting out. The large 16-segment 
LED dies (17 with decimal) are wired to 
the traces with bond wires.
A chip on the opposite side of the 
ceramic decodes binary information 
representing letters and numbers 
into signals that drive the LED 
segments.
Alphanumeric LED Display 259
The LED chip has an extra decimal point 
and contact pads so it can be rotated 
180 degrees and still be installed 
correctly.260
The DS3231 shown here is a hybrid cir￾cuit real time clock, or RTC. A “clock” 
in electronics usually means an oscil￾lating signal used to synchronize logic. 
By contrast, an RTC counts hours, min￾utes, and seconds as they elapse. It’s a 
digital watch designed to be read by a 
computer.
From the outside, the DS3231 looks like 
a regular IC in a 16-pin SOIC package. 
Inside, it has not only a chip but also a 
32 kHz quartz crystal, molded right into 
the case. The crystal is nearly identical 
to that in the wristwatch on page 14.
The exact frequency of a quartz crystal 
changes with temperature, but a sensor 
on the chip compensates for these vari￾ations automatically. This arrangement 
is called a temperature-compensated 
crystal oscillator, abbreviated TCXO.
Temperature-Compensated Clock261
The gray integrated circuit die can be 
seen on the left, atop the copper lead 
frame, leaving room for the 32 kHz 
quartz crystal on the right.262
The “ticking heartbeat” of many digi￾tal devices comes from an oscillator 
module like this one. Inside, we find a 
paper-thin disc of sawn quartz crystal 
suspended on springs. 
The disc is selectively plated with silver 
electrodes on its top and bottom sides. 
When voltage is applied to the electrodes, 
it stimulates motion in the quartz, turn￾ing it into a tiny, electrically driven clock 
pendulum. Unlike the tuning fork–shaped 
32 kHz quartz crystal on page 15, the 
disc’s oscillation frequency is much higher, 
perhaps 50 MHz. Discs are one of several 
geometries of quartz crystals used to 
achieve higher-frequency oscillations.
The module also contains a thick-film 
ceramic circuit board. On the board, a 
small surface-mount chip and capac￾itor compose the rest of the oscillator 
circuit, providing a clean square wave to 
the output pin. 
Crystal Oscillator263
Tiny metal springs mechanically support 
and isolate the quartz. They also provide 
the electrical connection between the 
electrodes and the ceramic board below.264
This gold-plated avalanche photodiode, 
or APD, module has much higher perfor￾mance than common photodiodes, and 
a corresponding price tag. It’s a fast, 
high-sensitivity light detector with low noise 
characteristics, used in precision optical 
equipment for the communications indus￾try as well as for scientific applications.
The module is packaged in a metal 
can with a glass top. The avalanche 
photodiode die is the gold square in the 
center of the hybrid module. Circuitry 
around the photodiode amplifies the tiny 
signals it generates.
If you look carefully, you can see surface￾mount chip capacitors, diodes, tran￾sistors, and laser-trimmed thick-film 
resistors, all wired together with printed 
thick-film traces and nearly micro￾scopic gold bond wires. 
Avalanche Photodiode Module 265
The triangular black symbol is the logo of 
EG&G, the original manufacturer of this 
device. It’s now made by Excelitas.266
3656HG Isolation Amplifier
Outwardly gray, this isolation ampli￾fier module turns out to be one of the 
most colorful and intricate of elec￾tronic components. It’s a specialty 
part, designed for the medical and 
nuclear industries, which require some 
circuits to be electrically isolated for 
safety purposes. For example, a sen￾sor circuit may need to operate at high 
voltage with respect to a computer 
that controls it. The isolation ampli￾fier can power the sensor, transfer 
the signal from it, and isolate the two 
parts, preventing any currents from 
flowing across the barrier.
Removing the lid reveals some truly 
remarkable internal features. The cen￾terpiece is a toroidal transformer. 
Unlike ordinary wirewound transform￾ers, the upper half of each winding loop 
is an IC bond wire, while the lower half 
is a thick-film trace on the ceramic 
substrate.267
There are no electrical connections between 
the left and right halves of this amplifier 
module. The left side is the input side, and 
the right is the output. 268
Besides the transformer, this hybrid 
circuit features a few IC chips, diodes, 
and transistors. There are two ceramic 
chip capacitors, and quite a few laser￾trimmed thick-film resistors.
A subtle feature of this device is that 
all of the internal surfaces—bond wires 
and all—are coated with a remarkably 
thin and uniform layer of clear insulating 
parylene plastic. You can see it if you 
look closely at the bond wires and cor￾ners of the cubic dies. This is a vapor￾deposited conformal coating, which is 
grown onto all of the surfaces much in 
the same way that ice can form a per￾fectly uniform coating around branches 
and leaves during an ice storm. The 
coating provides general robustness 
and prevents high voltages from arcing 
between components and connections.
Inside the Isolation Amplifier269
The square structure in the foreground 
is a rather large individual transistor. 
Other diode, transistor, and IC dies can 
be seen in this view as well.Afterword: 
Creating Cross Sections
Many electronic components were harmed in the making of 
this book. In this section, we’ll take you through each step 
in the process of creating the book’s images, from cutting, 
cleaning, and mounting the components to shooting and 
processing the photographs.272
Paper
Sand
Flat aluminum plate
Component being polished
Sawing, filing, milling, sanding: these are 
a few of the processes we used to open 
and prepare the various subjects. We 
approached each sample uniquely, exam￾ining it, cutting it apart experimentally, 
and then planning a final cut for maxi￾mum visual impact.
Our equipment included a low-speed 
diamond saw, diamond polishing discs, 
razor blades, power sanders, and a 
5,000-kilogram milling machine, but the 
honest bulk of the work was carried out 
manually, with sandpaper, elbow grease, 
and patience.
We used small sheets of fine but 
conventional sandpaper, wetted 
with alcohol, on a highly flat surface. 
Depending on the nature of the subject, 
the final grit ranged from 600 
to 10,000. 
Cutting and Polishing
A diamond-coated disc cuts through the ceramic 
core of a carbon film resistor.273
A low-speed diamond saw is typically 
used for materials analysis. Here, 
it makes an exploratory cut into 
an EPROM.
A solid carbide cutter in a milling 
machine makes a clean cut through 
the 3.5 mm audio jack. The jack is 
glued to a metal block to hold it 
firmly in place.274
In addition to cutting, a substantial 
amount of prep time went into cleaning 
objects prior to photography. 
Some vintage components came with 
well-preserved dust, trapped in coats 
of lacquer applied half a century ago. 
A more common issue was plastic, 
metal, ceramic, or semiconductor 
dust resulting from the cutting pro￾cess itself. 
For larger parts, we used compressed air 
and a clean, dry toothbrush, followed by 
a dust-cleaning gel. Tiny and sensitive 
parts were cleaned with a light spray of 
pure isopropyl alcohol, followed by dry￾ing with a compressed-gas duster. In 
one difficult case, we cleaned bond wires 
under a microscope with a brush con￾sisting of a single cat whisker mounted 
to a handle of stainless steel tubing.
Even with these sometimes extreme 
measures, it remains the case that dust 
invisible to the eye can be seen at high 
magnification.
Cleaning
This cat whisker brush was useful 
for cleaning and manipulating tiny 
components.275
Some complex or fragile samples would 
have fallen apart had we cut them on 
their own. A good example is the speaker 
(page 126), whose paper cone and thin 
voice coil wouldn’t have survived cut￾ting without something to hold them 
in place. 
In these cases, we potted the subject in 
casting resin—a clear epoxy—to stabilize 
it during the cutting process. We used 
a small vacuum chamber to degas the 
mixed epoxy resin prior to casting, 
greatly reducing the number and size of 
air bubbles.
We tried to minimize the number of pot￾ted samples, since the results tended to 
be less clear, both literally and figura￾tively, than leaving empty space empty.
Potting
The SuperSpeed USB cable (page 172) 
wasn’t fragile, but it wasn’t possible 
to get a clean and clear cross section 
without immobilizing the wires within 
the cable.276
In many of our photos, the subjects 
seem to float in midair. This isn’t the 
result of Photoshop or trickery, just 
careful positioning of the camera 
and subject.
We used a QuadHands-brand “flexible 
vise” with four alligator clips on goose￾neck arms to hold many of our subjects 
in place, often with the clips just out of 
frame. For smaller objects or ones where 
the entire subject needed to be visible, 
we glued them to metal support shafts. 
With carefully chosen angles, the shafts 
become nearly invisible.
The photo below shows the setup for our 
F-connector shot (page 155). Near the 
top left, an alligator clip grips the cable 
directly, while the connector is glued to 
a rigid stainless steel wire that passes 
through a piece of background paper. 
Behind the paper, two more alligator 
clips hold the wire in place.
Mounting277
These components are mounted 
for photography. Not all of them 
made the final cut.278
Photographic Equipment
The images in this book are the result 
of conventional photography, with the 
primary exception that we used focus￾stacking software.
We used the following camera equipment:
• Canon EOS 7D and EOS R camera 
bodies with lenses: 
• RF 24-105mm f/4-7.1
• EF 100 mm f/2.8L Macro IS USM
• EF 28–135 f/3.5–5.6 IS USM
• MP-E 65mm f/2.8 1–5× Macro
• TS-E 24 mm f/3.5L II
• Two softbox flashes and a supplemen￾tary power flash with remote triggers
• Slik Pro 500DX tripod
• Custom linear focusing rail and 
shutter release based on AxiDraw 
hardware
• Software: Helicon Remote, Processing
A sixth lens—not listed—was used 
to take this particular photo.279
The hardware beneath the camera 
is the custom linear focusing rail, 
along with cables for the camera 
power, shutter, and data readout.280
Retouching
The photos in this book were collected 
and processed using Adobe Lightroom. 
Some consistent processes—what would 
have been called “developing” in the old 
days of darkrooms and chemicals—were 
applied to essentially every photo. These 
included corrections for the lens profile, 
as well as cropping, rotation, and adjust￾ments for white balance, brightness, 
contrast, and overall tone.
Most photos had some amount of 
digital spot removal done within 
Lightroom. We used this tool to remove 
individual motes of dust and camera 
artifacts such as sensor dust, and to 
mitigate artifacts from sample prepa￾ration and general blemishes. An 
example is shown in the before/after 
photos below.
Heavy-handed retouching techniques 
such as digital “airbrushing” were used 
sparingly. We worked hard to preserve 
the true visual character of the objects 
presented here.
Before digital spot removal After digital spot removal281
The close-up images in this book are 
examples of macro photography, 
defined loosely as photography where 
the presented image is larger than the 
actual subject. 
In macro photography, the subject sits 
very close to the camera lens, and the 
range of distances that can be in focus 
tends to be very small. This situation is 
referred to as having a shallow depth 
of field. 
At our highest camera magnification, 
even with the camera aperture mini￾mized to give the maximum possible 
depth of field, only about ¼ mm 
(0.01 inches) can be in focus at a time. 
A shallow depth of field is such a well￾known characteristic of macro pho￾tography that large-scale photos with 
a shallow depth of field may appear like 
miniatures to us—the so-called diorama 
illusion.
About Macro Photography
The diorama illusion makes this image, 
with a shallow depth of field, look a bit 
like scenery from a model railroad.282
Many of the images in this book were pro￾cessed with Helicon Focus. This software 
application specializes in focus stacking, 
a computational image processing tech￾nique that combines multiple images with 
a shallow depth of field to produce a single 
image with a greater depth of field. Focus 
stacking works by analyzing the images to 
identify the areas that are in focus, then 
stitching those areas together, similar to 
how software can stitch together photos 
to make a panorama. 
Focus stacking can produce images with 
exceptional sharpness and depth of field, 
but achieving the best results requires 
a complex setup. Multiple images must 
be taken at equally spaced intervals and 
with equal exposures. When the depth 
of field is well under 1 mm, repositioning 
the camera requires great care. We used 
a robotic linear motion stage, along with 
custom software, to move the camera in 
precise, tiny increments and to take pic￾tures at these locations. 
Focus Stacking 
This image is the result of 
combining eight equally spaced 
photos using focus stacking 
software. Slices through four of 
the eight originals are shown on 
the facing page.285
Glossary
ALTERNATING CURRENT (AC)
As opposed to direct current (DC), refers 
to electrical signals that smoothly cycle 
back and forth between positive and 
negative, pushing and pulling current as 
they do so. Most wall power outlets and 
power transmission systems use AC.
ANODE
The positive (“+”) portion of a compo￾nent that has both positive and negative 
parts. The negative portion is referred to 
as the cathode.
ANODIZATION
An electrochemical process, used with 
metals like aluminum and tantalum, that 
converts the outer surface into a textured 
metal oxide with a high surface area.
BAKELITE
A phenolic-based plastic resin fre￾quently used as an insulator or housing 
in vintage electronics.
BALL GRID ARRAY (BGA)
A component package that makes con￾nections to a circuit board through 
an array of tiny balls of solder on its 
underside. 
BIMETALLIC STRIP
A thin metal structure made from two 
dissimilar metals with different rates of 
thermal expansion, such that it bends 
when the temperature changes.
BIPOLAR JUNCTION TRANSISTOR (BJT)
One of the basic types of transistor, typ￾ically used as an amplifier or switch for 
small electrical signals.
BOBBIN
A spool that wire is wound around.
BOND WIRES
Ultrathin metal wires that can attach 
directly to semiconductor dies.
BRUSHES
Spring-loaded assemblies in a DC motor 
that electrically connect the moving and 
stationary parts.
BRUSHLESS
Describes electric motors without 
brushes, which use rotating magnets 
instead of rotating coils.
CAPACITOR
A component that stores energy in the 
form of static electricity. Typically made 
of interleaved metal plates separated by 
a dielectric material.
CATHODE
The negative (“-”) portion of a compo￾nent that has both positive and negative 
parts. The positive portion is referred to 
as the anode.
CERMET
A composite material made from 
ceramic and metal.286
CHIP
A colloquial expression for an integrated 
circuit, after “silicon chip.”
COAXIAL
Describes items that share the same 
center axis.
COMPOSITE
A material or component made up of 
other materials or components.
CURRENT
The rate of flow of electrical charge 
through a circuit. Analogous to the rate 
of water flow (e.g., liters per minute) in 
a pipe.
DIE
The thin rectangular block of semicon￾ductor material, typically silicon, that 
contains the active area of a semicon￾ductor device. Multiple dies are some￾times referred to as dice.
DIELECTRIC
An electrical insulator. Different dielec￾trics may be chosen for their ability to 
withstand higher voltage or to increase 
the amount of electric field that can be 
stored, as in a capacitor.
DIODE
An electronic component that allows 
current to flow through it in one direc￾tion only.
DIRECT CURRENT (DC)
As opposed to alternating current (AC), 
refers to electrical signals where the 
current flows in one direction only. 
Batteries and most plug-in power sup￾plies output DC.
ELECTRODE
An electrical conductor that contacts a 
non-metallic part of a component such 
as a dielectric. It can also refer to elec￾trical conductors that emit or collect 
electrons in a vacuum.
ELECTROLYTE
An electrically conductive fluid.
FERRITE
A ceramic filled with iron oxide.
FILTER
A device, analogous to an air or water 
filter, that allows only certain types of 
electrical signals or wavelengths of light 
to pass through it.
GERMANIUM
A chemical element; a semiconducting 
material similar to silicon.
HYBRID CIRCUIT
A component that consists of multiple 
other components, typically integrated 
circuits and passive components, along 
with a ceramic or fiberglass circuit 
board that connects them.
INDUCTOR
A component that stores energy in the 
form of a magnetic field. Typically made of 
copper wire wound around a ferrite form.
INSULATOR
A material that doesn’t conduct 
electricity.287
INTEGRATED CIRCUIT (IC)
A circuit made with many devices like 
transistors and resistors, fabricated 
together on a single semiconductor die.
INTERDIGITATED
Interleaved, as with interlocked fingers.
ISOLATION, ELECTRICAL
The transmission of power or signals 
between wires without an electrically 
conductive path connecting them. 
Sometimes referred to as galvanic 
isolation.
LASER DIODE
A special type of light-emitting diode 
(LED) that emits laser light.
LEAD FRAME
For integrated circuits packaged with 
pins, for example in DIP or SOIC pack￾ages, the set of metal forms comprising 
the external pins and connected to the 
IC through bond wires.
LIGHT-EMITTING DIODE (LED)
A diode designed to give off light when 
electricity flows through it.
MAGNET WIRE
Solid wire, typically copper, insulated 
with a very thin layer of varnish. Widely 
used in inductors, speakers, and other 
electromagnetic devices.
OSCILLATOR
A circuit element that produces an out￾put signal at regular intervals or with a 
consistent frequency. Often used as the 
source for clock signals.
PHENOLIC
A class of chemical compounds, such 
as Bakelite, commonly used for the 
packaging of early electronic compo￾nents and in circuit boards. Phenolic can 
also refer to certain composite materi￾als, including circuit boards, even when 
they don’t contain any phenolic-based 
resins.
PHOSPHOR
Various chemical compounds that emit 
visible light—some when struck by elec￾trons, and some when struck by visible 
or invisible light. An important part of 
white LEDs, as well as vacuum tubes that 
light up, such as cathode ray tubes or 
vacuum fluorescent displays.
PHOTODIODE
A type of diode that produces an elec￾trical signal when struck by light. Fre￾quently used as a light detector, but also 
the basis of common solar panels.
PHOTOTRANSISTOR
A type of transistor that produces an 
electrical signal when struck by light and 
amplifies the resulting signal.
PLATED THROUGH HOLE
Holes drilled through a printed circuit 
board, where the inside surface of the 
hole is plated with copper to provide 
connections between the sides of the 
board. Vias are examples.
POLE
A contact terminal within a switch 
or relay.288
POLE, MAGNETIC
Regions near the ends of a magnet 
where the magnetic field is the stron￾gest, or pieces of ferromagnetic material 
in contact with those regions.
POTENTIOMETER
A three-terminal adjustable resistor, 
called a pot for short.
RECTIFIER
A diode used to convert AC to DC.
REDISTRIBUTION LAYER (RDL)
A miniaturized circuit board used as an 
alternative to a leadframe in integrated 
circuit packages that have large num￾bers of connections.
RESISTOR
A component that restricts the flow of 
electrical current and dissipates energy 
in the form of heat. Analogous to a nar￾row section of a water pipe.
ROTOR
The part of a motor that turns.
SENSOR
An electronic component that measures 
a physical property, such as tempera￾ture or light level, or that records an 
image, as in a camera sensor.
SHIELD
A barrier, usually of thin metal, used to 
reduce electromagnetic interference. It 
both reduces incoming signals and helps 
reduce emission of signals from within 
the shield. 
SILICON
A chemical element; the semiconducting 
material most frequently used for fabri￾cating integrated circuits.
SILICONE
A synthetic polymer made with a chem￾istry that includes silicon. Silicone rub￾ber is a soft, rubbery material used for 
sealing components but also as bath￾room caulking. 
SOLDER
Any of various low-melting-point metal 
alloys used to establish electrical con￾nections between components on circuit 
boards and sometimes within components.
SOLDER MASK
An insulating resin, often brightly col￾ored, applied to circuit boards to control 
where solder can flow. It’s the layer that 
makes most circuit boards look green.
SOLENOID
A coil of wire used as an electromagnet, 
for example in a relay or speaker.
SPRING FINGER
A spring-loaded electrical con￾tact, arranged to make a consistent 
connection.
SPUTTERING
A precision process, carried out in a vac￾uum chamber, for depositing material 
onto a surface.
STATOR
The stationary part of a motor.289
SUBSTRATE
The underlying surface that something 
is built upon.
SURFACE MOUNT
A method of connecting components by 
soldering them directly to one side of a 
circuit board.
TERMINAL
A connection point on a component, 
from where it can be linked to other 
circuit elements.
THICK FILM
A circuit fabrication technology that 
uses silkscreened conductive and resis￾tive films that are fired like pottery 
glazes onto a ceramic substrate.
THIN FILM
A circuit fabrication technology based 
on etched patterns in ultra-thin layers 
of sputtered conductive or resistive 
materials.
THROUGH HOLE
A method of soldering components to 
a circuit board where the components 
have wire leads that go through holes in 
the board.
TRACE
An individual wire that’s part of a circuit 
board.
TRANSFORMER
A solenoid made with more than one 
winding. Transformers are used for 
electrical isolation or to step up or 
down voltage with a tradeoff in current 
capacity.
TRANSISTOR
A three-terminal semiconductor com￾ponent that allows one electrical signal 
to control another.
UNIVERSAL SERIAL BUS (USB)
A set of computer industry standards 
for cables, connectors, and protocols 
for communication between computers 
and peripherals.
VIA
Plated through holes connecting the 
copper layers of a circuit board, pro￾viding a path for signals that need to go 
from one layer to another.
VOICE COIL
The coil of wires in a speaker that 
moves when current is applied to 
it. Also refers to linear and rotary 
motors that work by the same 
principle.
VOLTAGE
A measure of the electrical poten￾tial available to move electric charge 
through a circuit. Analogous to water 
pressure in a pipe. 
WINDING
An individual wire that may be coiled 
multiple times around a solenoid.
WIPER
A contact point that can move, as in 
the center terminal of a potentiometer.291
SYMBOLS AND NUMBERS
μA702 integrated circuit, 208–209
μA741 integrated circuit, 142
¼” audio plug and jack, 146–147
10-turn potentiometer, 30–31
12AX7 vacuum tube, 174, 182–183
15-turn trimmer potentiometer, 28–29
1N740 diode, 66
1N914 diode, 67
1N1100 diode, 67
1N4002 diode, 64–65
1N5236B diode, 67
2-layer printed circuit board. See two-layer 
printed circuit board
2N2222 transistor, 70–71
2N3904 transistor, 72–73
24LC64 integrated circuit, 80
32 kHz quartz crystal, 14–15, 260–261
3.5 mm audio connectors, 148–149, 273
3656HG isolation amplifier, 266–269
5×7 LED dot matrix display, 254–255
7-segment display. See seven-segment display
702 integrated circuit, 208–209
741 integrated circuit, 142
74F651 integrated circuit, 77
9LS capacitor, 194–195
A
AC power cable, 139
Adafruit circuit board, 82
Adobe Lightroom, 280
AlGaAs (aluminum gallium arsenide), 88
alphanumeric LED display
dot matrix, 254–255
segmented, 258–259
aluminum electrolytic capacitor, 37, 43
for context, 50, 78
ambient light sensor, 100–101
Amiga motherboard, 20, 28, 33, 49, 50, 56, 72
amplifier
guitar, 174–175, 192
isolation, 266–269
operational (op-amp), 142, 208–209
analog
integrated circuit, 208–209
panel meter, 216–217 
telephone cable, 141
video cable, 166–167
analog panel meter, 216–217
anode
capacitor, 40–42 
diode, 67, 207
LED, 88, 92
nixie tube, 180
vacuum fluorescent display, 184
anodizing, 37, 40
APD (avalanche photodiode), 224–225, 264–265
Apple, 110, 126, 151
Arduino, 78
ATmega328 microcontroller, 78–79, 82, 112
audio
capacitor, 38
connector, 146–149
electret microphone, 134–135
guitar amplifier, 174–175, 192
magnetic buzzer, 124–125
speaker, 126–127
vacuum tube, 182–183
avalanche photodiode module, 224–225, 
264–265
axial inductor, 44–45
axial lead fuse, 56
axial multilayer ceramic capacitor, 197
AxiDraw, 279
B
ball grid array (BGA), 62–63, 84–87, 100, 246
barrel plug and jack, 78, 144–145
basic USB cable, 168–171
bearing, 122, 123
bicolor LED, 91
bimetallic strip, 118–119
BIOS chip, 210
bipolar junction transistor (BJT), 70–75, 214
BNC plug and jack, 136–37, 156–157
bobbin, 44, 46, 52, 198, 218
Index
Page numbers in bold refer to subjects in photographs.292
bond wire
chip-on-board, 240–241
cleaning of, 274
in hybrid circuits, 224–225, 253–259, 264–269
in image sensors, 102–103, 130–131
in integrated circuits, 75–77, 79, 80–84, 209, 
246–247
in LEDs, 88–95, 250, 253–259
in transistors, 70–71, 73, 135
bridge rectifier, 68–69
brushed DC motor, 120–121
brushless motor, 122
bubble display, LED, 256–257
button, 109, 112–115
buzzer, 124–125
C
cable
CAT6 Ethernet, 162
guitar, 146
HDMI, 164–165
IDC ribbon, 140
modular telephone, 141
photography of, 275–276
SATA, 163
television, 153–155
twinaxial, 163
USB, 168–169, 172–173, 275
VGA, 166–167
wire, 138
cable, coaxial
with BNC connectors, 156–157
LMR-195, 150
RG-59 cable TV, 153–155
RG-6, 152
semi-rigid, 158–159
cable, power
AC, 139
with barrel plug, 144
laptop, 151
cables and connectors, 137
cadmium compounds, 204
calculator, 184–185, 212–213, 256–257
camera (component)
ambient light sensor for, 100–101 
CMOS sensor, 102–103
flash, smartphone LED, 100, 128, 244, 245
flashbulb, 202–203
flex circuit, 235
smartphone, 128–131, 245
viewfinder, 186
camera (photography of this book)
depth of field, 281
equipment, 278–279
robotic control of, 282
Canon, 278
capacitance, 34, 37, 40, 134, 194, 196
capacitor
aluminum electrolytic, 37
axial multilayer ceramic chip, 197
ceramic disc, 32–33
chip, 36, 42–43, 228, 247, 264, 268
Cornell-Dubilier, 194–195
dipped silver mica, 196
dipped tantalum, 40–41
in electret microphone, 134
film, 38–39, 228
glass, 34–35
mica, 194–196
multilayer ceramic, 12–13, 36, 197
polymer aluminum, 43
polymer tantalum chip, 42
three-terminal filter, 49
tubular ceramic, 198–199
carbon
composition resistor, 192–193, 215, 284
filament, 201
film resistor, 16–17, 272
paste, 42–43, 192–193
silicone rubber with, 236–237
cartridge fuse, 54–55, 185
Casio AL-1000 calculator, 212
cassette tape player, 218
category 6 (CAT6) ethernet cable, 162
cathode
capacitor, 40, 42, 43
diode, 67, 207
LED, 88, 92
neon bulb, 176
nixie tube, 180
vacuum fluorescent display, 184
vacuum tube, 182
cathode ray tube, 186–189
cat whisker, 206–207, 274
CdS cell, 204–205
cell phone. See smartphone
cement, 19
ceramic
capacitor, 12–13, 32–33, 36, 197–199
circuit board, 226. See also thick film
in fuse, 56, 60–61
hard drive slider, 105, 220–223293
integrated circuit package, 76–77, 102–103, 
210–211
magnetic. See ferrite
in Nixie tube, 180
in photoresistor, 204–205
in resistor, 16–29, 191, 192
in thermal switch, 118–119
ceramic disc capacitor, 32–33
cermet, 23, 26, 28
chip (integrated circuit). See integrated circuit
chip capacitor. See capacitor
chip on board (CoB), 236, 240, 241, 243
chip resistor. See resistor
choke, 51, 248
ChronoDot, 260
circuit board
flexible. See flex and rigid-flex circuit boards
multilayer. See multilayer circuit board
single-side. See single-side printed circuit board
smartphone, 233, 244–247
two-layer. See two-layer printed circuit 
board
cleaning, 274
clock, 260–262
CMOS image sensor, 102–103
coaxial cable. See cable, coaxial
CoB. See chip on board
coil
analog panel meter, 216–217
cathode ray tube filament, 188
deflection yoke, 187–189
GMR hard drive head, 223
inductor, 44–47, 198–199, 249
light bulb filament, 200–201
magnetic tape head, 218–219
motor, 14, 120–123, 130, 132–133, 220
NFC card, 242–243
relay, 116
speaker and buzzer, 124–127
thin-film hard drive head, 220–221
transformer, 50–53, 235, 248, 266–267, 269
voice, 126–27, 130, 132–133, 220
color sensor, 80–81, 100–101
commutator, motor, 120
compact power fuse, 58
composite, 192. See also cermet
composite devices, 225
conformal coating, 268
connector
3.5 mm audio, 148–149
barrel plug and jack, 144–145
BNC, 136–37, 156–157
cathode ray tube (CRT), 187 
DE-9, 160–161
elastomeric, 236–237 
F, 154–155, 276
gold fingers, 238–239
IDC ribbon cable, 140
modular telephone cable (RJ25), 141
quarter-inch audio, 146–147
SMA, 158–159
USB, 168–171
copper
foil, 52–53, 218–219
heat spreader, 86–87
lead frame, 73, 81–82, 143, 261
plating, 152, 230
semi-rigid coax, 158–159
terminals, 36, 42, 46–47
traces, 84, 228–230, 231–236, 239–240, 244–
249, 250, 255
wire, 138
wire (other), 30–31
wire, in cables, 139–141, 145, 150–153, 158–
159, 162–169, 172–173
wire, magnet. See magnet wire
wire leads, 44–45, 48, 49, 56, 61, 64–65, 69, 
207
See also coil
core memory, 212–213
Cornell-Dubilier 9LS capacitor, 194–195
credit card, 241
CRT (cathode ray tube), 186–189
crystal, quartz, 14–15, 210–211, 260–263
crystal diode, 206–207
crystal oscillator, 262–263
crystal radio, 206
CUI dc-dc converter, 249
cutting and polishing, 272–273
D
d’Arsonval movement, 216–217
DB-9. See DE-9 connector
DC-DC converter, 46, 249
DE-9 connector, 160–161
depth of field, 281
deflection yoke, 187–189
diaphragm, 124, 127, 134
die. See diode; integrated circuit; transistor
dielectric, 34
coaxial cable, 150, 153, 157–158
metal oxide, 37, 42294
mica, 194, 196
plastic film, 38
differential signaling, 163, 164
diode
1N740, 66
1N914, 67
1N1100, 67
1N4002, 64–65
1N5236, 67
crystal, 206
germanium, 207
glass-encapsulated, 66–67, 207, 284
in isolation amplifier, 269
laser, 94–95
light detecting. See photodiode
light emitting. See LED
point-contact, 206–207
rectifier bridge, 68–69
Zener, 67
diorama illusion, 281
DIP (dual in-line package) 
EPROM with window, 210–211
integrated circuits, 19–20, 72, 76–79, 98, 112, 
126, 142, 185
optocoupler, 96
socket, 142–143
switch, 110–111
dipped silver mica capacitor, 196
dipped tantalum capacitor, 40–41
dot matrix LED display, 254–255
drain wire, 162–163, 165–167
DS3231 real time clock, 260–261
dual in-line package. See DIP
E
EEPROM, 80. See also EPROM
EG&G, 265
eighth-inch plug, 148, 273 
elastomeric connector, 236–237 
electret microphone, 134–135
electrolyte, 37, 42–43
electromagnetic interference (EMI), 48–49, 150, 
162–163, 168, 172 
electromagnetic relay, 116–117
electromechanics, 105
electron gun, 186, 188–189
electrons, 64, 182, 184, 186, 188
EMV credit card chip, 241
enamel, 25, 191
encoder, 98–99
epoxy
for assembly, 28, 44, 60, 107, 124, 208, 
218–219
coating, 20, 22, 38, 40–41
conductive, 40, 43, 66
encapsulation, 42, 64, 72–73, 82, 238, 246
glob-top packaging, 236, 240–243
lens, 88–93, 99, 250–251, 256–257
for photography. See potting (for 
photography)
EPROM (erasable programmable read-only 
memory), 210–211
erase head, 218
Ethernet cable, 162
Ethernet transformer, 248
Excelitas, 265
F
Fairchild, 178, 208
F connector, 154–155, 276
ferrite
bead, 48–49
inductors, 44–47, 198
in magnetic yoke, 187
memory core, 212
in transformer, 50, 52, 248
fiberglass
circuit boards, 86, 228, 230, 232, 234, 241, 250
in fuses, 54, 58–59
in power resistor, 19
See also circuit board
field, magnetic. See magnetic field
filament, 182, 184, 188, 200–201
LED, 226–227
film capacitor, 38–39, 228
film resistor, carbon, 16–17, 272
filter
optical, 81, 100, 102, 128–131
three-terminal capacitor, 49
flash (camera)
flashbulb, 202–3
smartphone LED, 100, 128, 244, 245
flash memory (microSD card), 238–239
flex and rigid-flex circuit boards, 104, 132–133, 
220, 222–223, 234–235
flip chip, 87, 214, 247
focus stacking, 282
foil
aluminum, 34–35, 37, 43, 150, 152, 164–168, 169
copper, 52, 218–219
magnesium, 202–203
dielectric (continued)295
other metals, 162–163, 172–173, 196, 218–219
frit, glass, 76, 211
fuse
axial lead, 56
liquid power, 57
low-power cartridge, 54–55, 185
power, 58–59
thermal, 60–61
G
galena, 206
galvanic isolation. See isolation (electrical)
galvanometer (d’Arsonval movement), 216–217
General Electric, 177
germanium, 207
giant magnetoresistance, 222
glass bulb, 176–177, 200–201, 202–203, 226
glass frit, 76, 211
glass-to-metal seal, 18, 74–75, 118, 209
glass package
capacitor, 34–35, 197
diode, 66–67, 207, 284
filter, 130–131
fuse, 54–55, 57
mercury switch, 190
resistor, 18
vacuum tube, 174–175, 178–189
glass window 
on hybrid modules, 224–225, 252–253, 258–
259, 264–265
on integrated circuits, 102–103, 210–211, 273
on laser diode, 94
glob-top packaging, 236, 240–243
GMR hard drive head, 222
green red bicolor LED, 91
green surface-mount LED, 90
H
hard drive, 104–105, 132, 163, 220–223, 235
HDMI cable, 164–165
head, magnetic, 218–223
header, 33, 72, 78, 82, 86, 112, 140
headphone plug, 148–189
heat spreader, 86–87
Helicon Focus, 282
Helicon Remote, 278
hermetic seal, 18, 74, 76, 258. See also glass-to￾metal seal
Hewlett Packard (HP), 252–255, 256–257
high-stability film resistor, 18
holes and electrons, 64
hotel room NFC card key, 242–243
hybrid circuit
alphanumeric LED display, 254–255, 258–259
avalanche photodiode, 224–225, 264–265
crystal oscillator, 262–263
DC-DC converter, 249
IBM SLT modules, 214–215
isolation amplifier, 266–269
temperature compensated clock, 260–261
thick-film LED display, 252–253
I
IBM SLT modules, 214–215, 284
IC. See integrated circuit
IDC. See insulation displacement connector
IF (intermediate frequency) transformer, 198–199
image sensor
CMOS, 102–103
optical mouse, 82–83
smartphone camera, 128–131
impedance, 52, 156
incandescent light bulb, 200–201
indicator
analog panel meter, 216–217
neon lamp, 176–177
See also LED; numeric display
inductor
axial, 44–45
in DC-DC converter, 249
ferrite bead, 48
IF transformer, 198–199
sintered ferrite, 47
solenoid, 116
surface mount, 46
transformers, 50–53, 235, 248, 266–269
infrared
ambient light sensor, 100
computer mouse sensor, 98–99
filter, 100, 128, 130–131
laser diode, 94
tilt sensor, 97
insulation displacement connector
ribbon cable, 140
in RJ25 plug, 141
in USB plug 168–171
insulator, 32, 34, 37, 149, 151, 194, 196
integrated circuit
ball grid array, 62–63, 84–87, 100–101, 246, 247
DIP packaged, 19–20, 72, 76–79, 98, 112, 126, 
142, 185
EPROM with window, 210–211296
glob-top packaged, 236, 240–243
image sensor, 82–83, 102–103, 128–131
SOIC packaged, 80–81, 260–261
transparent packaged, 76–77, 80–83, 100–101
in thick-film hybrid, 252–253, 262–263, 
266–269
TO-3 packaged, 74–75
TO-99 packaged, 208–209
TQFP packaged, 82–83
See also individual part numbers
intermediate frequency (IF) transformer, 198–199
internet, 155, 162
iron, 44, 116, 122, 124, 218–219
isolation (electrical)
about, 50
amplifier, 266–269
optocoupler for, 96
transformer, 50, 248, 266–269
J
jack. See connector
JFET transistor, 134
JM38510 integrated circuit, 76
JVC camcorder, 186
K
Kapton, 234
Kevlar, 151, 173
L
laptop power cable, 151
laser
diode, 94–95
drilled microvias, 86
in optical drive, 133
printer, 94
trimming, 15, 20–23, 264–265, 268–269
LCD (liquid crystal display), 236–237
LDR (light dependent resistor), 204–205
lead (wire). See under copper
lead frame, 76–77, 81–83, 261
lead sulfide (galena), 206
LED (light-emitting diode)
5×7 dot matrix display, 254–255
alphanumeric display, 258–259
bubble display, vintage 256–257
camera flash, 100, 128, 244, 245
filament light bulb, 226–227
infrared, 97–99
in optical mouse 98–99
in optical tilt sensor, 97
in optocoupler, 96
red green bicolor, 91
seven-segment display, 250–251, 256–257
surface-mount green, 90
thick-film numeric display, 252–253
through-hole red, 88–89
white, 92–93, 226–227
lens (component)
bubble LED display, 256–257
optical drive, 133
seven-segment LED display, 250–251, 256–257
smartphone camera, 128–130
surface-mount LED, 90
through-hole LED, 88–89
lens (photography of this book)
depth of field, 281
equipment, 278–279
light bulb
incandescent, 200–201
LED filament, 226–227
neon, 176–177
light-dependent resistor, 204–205
light-emitting diode. See LED
light filter, 100, 102, 128–131
Lightroom, Adobe, 280
light sensor. See optical sensor
limit switch, 114
liquid crystal display, 236–237
liquid power fuse, 57
LM309K voltage regulator, 74–75
LMR-195 coaxial cable, 150
low-power cartridge fuse, 54–55, 185
M
MacBook Pro cable, 151
Macetech ChronoDot, 260
macro photography, 281
magnesium, 202
magnet (permanent), 120–127, 130, 132–133, 216–217 
magnetic buzzer, 124–125
magnetic field
in core memory, 212–213
in magnetic tape and storage, 218, 222
in NFC card, 242
in relay, 116
in speaker and buzzer, 124, 126
See also inductor; motor; transformer
magnetic pole pieces, 116–117, 122–123, 124–127, 
217–219
magnetic tape head, 218–219
integrated circuit (continued)297
magnetic yoke, 124, 187–188
magnetoresistance, giant, 222
magnet wire, 46
in analog panel meter, 217
in deflection yoke, 187–189
in hard drive head, 221
in inductor, 44–47, 198–199, 249
in magnetic tape head, 218–219
in motor, 14, 120–123, 130, 132–133, 220
in NFC card, 243
in relay, 116
in speaker and buzzer, 124–127
in transformer, 50–53, 248
in voice coil motor, 126–127, 130, 132–133
MDL2416 LED display, 258–259
memory
core, 212–213
EEPROM, 80
EMV credit card chip, 241
EPROM, 210–211
flash (microSD card), 238–239
hard drive, 104–105, 220–223
RAM module (six-layer board), 232
mercury tilt switch, 190
meter, 178, 216–217
mica
capacitor, 194–196
card resistor, 191
in vacuum tubes, 180–181, 182–183
microcontroller, ATmega328, 78–79, 82, 112
microphone, 134–135, 244
microprocessor SoC (system on a chip), 86–87
microSD card, 238–239
Microsoft, 83
microswitch, 114–115
microvia, 86–87, 233, 247
MLCC. See multilayer ceramic chip capacitor
mobile phone. See smartphone
modular telephone cable, 141
monitor (cathode ray tube), 186–189
monitor cable, 164–167
MOnSter 6502, 90
motor
brushed DC, 120–121
rotary voice coil, 132, 220
stepper, 122–23
voice coil, 126, 128, 130, 133
Motorola, 76
mounting (for photography), 276
mouse, computer, 82–83, 98, 114
multilayer ceramic chip capacitor, 36, 197, 247
on circuit boards, 12–13, 86, 228–229, 232, 
235, 249
with pen for scale, 246
in thick-film hybrids, 262–263, 264–265, 267, 
268–269
multilayer circuit board, 130, 232–233, 240, 
244–247
multimeter, 58
multiplexing, 256
N
neon, 176–178
neon lamp, 176–177
Nexus. See smartphone
NFC card key, 242–243
night-light, 204–205
Nixie tube, 178–181
numeric display
alphanumeric, 254–255, 258–259
LED dot matrix display, 254–255
Nixie tube, 178–181
seven-segment LED, 250–251, 256–257
thick-film LED display, 252–253
vacuum fluorescent display, 184–185
O
op-amp (operational amplifier), 208–209
optical drive focusing motors, 133
optical filter, 100, 102, 128–131
optical lens assembly, 130
optical mouse, 82–83
optical sensor
ambient light 100–101
color, 80–81
encoder, 98–99
photodiode, 77, 94, 264–265
photoresistor, 204–205
phototransistor, 96–99
tilt, 97
ULN-2232A motion detector, 77
See also image sensor
optocoupler, 96
O-ring, 26–27
oscillator, 260–263
oscilloscope, 30
OSH Park circuit board, 230
oxygen, 202
P
pager motor, 120–121
Panasonic tape recorder, 218298
panel meter, 216–217
parylene, 268
passive components, 13
PCB (printed circuit board). See circuit board
phenolic, 192, 196
phone. See smartphone
phone plug, 141, 146–149
phosphor, 92, 184–186, 188–189, 226–227
photocell, 204–205
photodiode, 94, 264–265
photographic equipment, 278–279
photoresistor, 204–205
phototransistor, 96–99
piezoelectricity, 14. See also quartz
pigment, 204
plated through holes, 230
plug. See connector
point contact diode, 206–207
pole (magnetic), 122, 217–219
pole (switch), 106, 116
polyester film, 38
polyethylene foam, 150
polyimide, 234
polymer, conductive, 42–43
polymer aluminum chip capacitor, 43
polymer tantalum chip capacitor, 42
polypropylene film, 38
pot. See potentiometer
potentiometer
10-turn, 30–31
15-turn trimmer, 28–29
trimmer 26–27
vintage wirewound resistor as, 191
wirewound, 24–25
potting (for photography), 275
potted samples, 31, 61, 121, 125, 127, 135, 172
See also epoxy: encapsulation
power cable, 139, 144, 151
power fuse, 57–59
power resistor 19, 60, 191
power supply
aluminum electrolytic capacitor in, 37
circuit board 228–229 
dc-dc converter, 249
optocoupler in, 96
transformer, 52–53
voltage regulator, 74
printed circuit board. See circuit board
printer, laser, 94
Processing (software), 278
pulldown resistor, 20
pushbutton switch, 109
PVC plastic, 138, 164, 166, 168
Pyralux, 234
Q
QuadHands vise, 276
quarter-inch audio plug and jack, 146–147
quartz, 14–15, 210–211, 260–263
R
radio, crystal, 206
radio, transistor, 198
radio frequency (RF), 150, 156
RAM. See memory
Raspberry Pi, 84, 86
RDL (redistribution layer), 62–63, 84–87, 247
read-only memory, 210–211
real time clock, 260–261
rectifier. See diode
rectifier bridge, 68–69
red green bicolor LED, 91
redistribution layer, 62–63, 84–87, 247
reflector, 88, 92
regulator, voltage, 74–75, 249
relay, electromagnetic, 116–117
Residence Inn, 242
resin. See epoxy; phenolic; potting (for 
photography)
resistor
carbon composition, 192–193, 215, 284
carbon film, 16–17, 272
chip (surface mount), 22, 228
high-stability film, 18
pulldown, 20
termination, 20
thick-film array, 20–21
thin-film array, 23
variable. See potentiometer
wirewound power, 19, 60, 191
retouching (photography), 280
retro tech, 175
RF (radio frequency), 150, 156
RG-59 (cable television) cable, 153
RG-6 coaxial cable, 152
rheostat. See potentiometer
ribbon cable, 140
rigid-flex, 234–235
RJ25 connector, 141
ROM (read-only memory), 210–211
rotary voice coil motor, 132, 220
rotor, 26–27, 120, 122–123299
RS-232, 160
RTC (real time clock), 260–261
S
sand, silica 58–59, 72, 78
sanding, 272
Sandisk microSD card, 238–239
sandpaper 272
SATA cable, 163
screw
adjustment for trimmer, 28–29
ferrite, 198
terminal, 195
semiconductors, 63
galena, 206
germanium 207
tailored for LED, 88
See also diode; integrated circuit; LED; 
silicon; transistor
semi-rigid coax, 158–159
sensor
hard drive head, 220–223
magnetic tape head, 218–219
microswitch, 114–115
optical. See optical sensor
sound (microphone), 134–135
temperature, 260
thermal switch 118–119
tilt, 97, 190
seven-segment display,
LED, 250–251, 256–257
vacuum fluorescent, 184–185
Sharp calculator, 184–185
shield
cable, 147, 150, 152–154, 158, 162–168, 169, 
172, 173
copper foil, 52–53
ferrite, 46
metal, 198, 244, 245
SIL (single inline) resistor array, 20–21, 262
silica, 58–59, 72, 78
silicon chip. See integrated circuit
silicon diode. See diode
silicone rubber, 64–65, 96, 226, 236
silicon transistor. See transistor
silkscreening, 20, 28
silver epoxy, 40, 43
silver mica capacitor, 196
single in-line resistor array, 20–21, 262
single-side printed circuit board, 37, 52, 96, 98–
99, 125, 185, 228–229, 250–251
sintered ferrite inductor, 47
sintering, 40, 47
slider (hard drive), 105, 220–223
slide switch, 108
SLT modules, 214–215
SMA connectors, 158–159
small outline integrated circuit (SOIC), 80–81
smartphone
ambient light sensor, 100–101
camera, 128–131
logic board, 233, 244–247
SoC (system on a chip), 86–87
socket
DIP dual in-line package, 142–143
See also connector
SOIC (small outline integrated circuit), 80–81
solder
on cables, 147, 149, 158–159
on fuse, 54–56, 58–59
terminals, 20–21, 32, 44, 46, 49, 52, 64, 134, 
207, 221
wave process, 229
solder ball, 23, 62–63, 84–87
solder bump, 66–67, 86–87, 214, 246–247
solder mask, 228, 230, 244
solenoid
in relay 116
speaker coil, 124
See also inductor; transformer
solid wire, 138
speaker, 124–127 
spring
clip, 158, 218
contact in connector, 142–149, 154–155, 160–
161, 170–171
in diodes, 66–67, 206–207
finger, 28–31, 120–121, 140, 142–143, 146–147, 
170–171
in fuse, 54–55, 57, 60–61
suspension, 126, 133, 262–263 
in switch and relay, 106–117
torsion, 216–217
wiper in potentiometer, 24–31 
sputtering, 23, 32
static electricity, 32
stator, 120, 122–123
stepper motor, 122–123
stiffener, flex, 234–235
ST Microelectronics, 83, 100
stranded wire, 138
strength member, 151, 173300
SuperSpeed USB cable, 172–173, 275
surface mount, 22
ambient light sensor, 100–101
capacitor, 36, 42–43
on flexible circuit boards, 234–235
green LED, 90
in hybrid modules, 249, 262–265, 267–269
image sensor, 102–103
inductor, 46–47
integrated circuits, 80–87, 260
resistor, 22–23, 228–229
on single-side circuit board, 228–229
on smartphone, 128, 244–247
See also multilayer ceramic chip capacitor
switch
in connectors, 144–149
DIP, 110–111
electromagnetic relay, 116–117
mercury, 190
microswitch, 114–115
optical tilt sensor, 97
power, 176
pushbutton, 109
slide, 108
tactile, 112–113
thermal, 118–119
toggle, 106–107, 136–137
Sylvania flashbulbs, 202–203
system in package (SiP), 246–247
system on a chip (SoC), 86–87, 244, 246, 247
T
tactile switch, 112–113
tantalum capacitor, 40–42
tape recorder, 218
TCXO, 260–261
telephone cable and connector, 141
television (cathode ray tube), 186–189
television cable
coaxial cable and connectors, 153–155
monitor cable, 164–167
temperature compensated clock, 260–261
termination resistor, 20
thermal fuse, 60–61
thermal switch, 118
thick film
alphanumeric LED display, 258–259
avalanche photodiode module, 224–225, 
264–265
chip resistors, 22
crystal oscillator, 262–263
IBM SLT modules, 214–215
isolation amplifier, 266–269
LED numeric display, 252–253
resistor array, 20–21
thin film, 23, 220–223
thin-quad flat pack (TQFP), 82–83
three-terminal filter capacitor, 49
through-hole red LED, 88–89
tilt sensor, 97, 190
TO-3 package, 74
TO-18 package, 70
TO-56 package, 94
TO-92 package, 72
TO-99 package, 208
toggle switch, 106–107, 136–137
toroidal transformer, 50–51, 248, 
266–267, 269
TQFP (thin-quad flat pack), 82–83
trace. See under copper
transformer
in digital camera, 235
Ethernet, 248
IF (intermediate frequency), 198–199
isolation, 266–269
power supply, 52–53
toroidal, 50–51, 248, 266–267, 269
transistor
2N2222, 70–71
2N3904, 72–73
bipolar junction (BJT), 70–75, 214
in circuits, 228, 264–265, 269
JFET, 134–135
radio, 198
on voltage regulator IC, 74–75
transparent integrated circuits, 76–77, 80–83, 
100–101
trimmer potentiometer, 26–29
Trimpot, 26–29
triode, 182–184
Triplett analog panel meter, 216–217
tube, vacuum. See vacuum tube
tubular ceramic capacitor, 198–199
tungsten, 180, 200–201
twinaxial cable, 163
two-layer printed circuit board, 230–231
in a module, 249, 257
redistribution layer, 84
other examples, 36, 170–171, 208, 236, 
239, 260301
U
ULN-2232A integrated circuit, 77
USB, 160, 168–169, 172–173, 275
V
vacuum deposition, 23, 38
vacuum fluorescent display, 184–185
vacuum tube
12AX7, 182–183
cathode ray tube, 186–189
guitar amplifier, 174–175, 192
vacuum fluorescent display, 184–185
variable resistor. See potentiometer
varnish, 44, 47, 138
VD6281 ambient light sensor, 100–101
VFD (vacuum fluorescent display), 184–185
VGA cable, 166–167
via, 80, 84, 86, 102, 230, 232–233, 240, 257
vibrating motor, 120–121
video
cable, 164–167
monitor (cathode ray tube), 186–189
viewfinder, 186–189
vintage LED bubble display, 256–257
vintage wirewound resistors, 191
vitreous enamel, 24–25, 191
VLSI Vision, 102
voice coil, 126–128, 130, 132–133, 220
voltage regulator, 74–75, 249
VV5353 optical mouse sensor, 83
W
watch, 14, 236
wax, 60–61
whisker, 206–207, 274
white LED, 92–93, 226–227
Widlar, Bob, 208
windings. See coil
windowed EPROM, 210–211
wiper, 24–31, 60
wire
bond. See bond wire
copper. See under copper
fusible, 54–56, 58–59
leads, copper. See under copper
magnet. See magnet wire
resistive, 19, 24, 30–31, 60, 191
solid and stranded, 138
tungsten, 180, 200–201
See also cable; cat whisker; coil; filament
wirewound
potentiometer, 24–25
power resistor, 19, 60, 191
wristwatch, 14, 236
Y
yoke, magnetic, 124–125, 187–189
Z
Zebra strip (elastomeric connector), 236–237
Zener diode, 67
