Lecture Notes in Management and Industrial Engineering
Rahul S Mor
Sachin S. Kamble
Kuldip Singh Sangwan   Editors
Operations and 
Supply Chain 
Management 
in the Food 
Industry
Farm to ForkLecture Notes in Management and Industrial
Engineering
Series Editor
Adolfo López-Paredes, INSISOC, University of Valladolid, Valladolid, SpainThis book series provides a means for the dissemination of current theoretical and
applied research in the areas of Industrial Engineering and Engineering Management.
The latest methodological and computational advances that can be widely applied by
both researchers and practitioners to solve new and classical problems in industries
and organizations contribute to a growing source of publications written for and by
our readership.
The aim of this book series is to facilitate the dissemination of current research
in the following topics:
• Strategy and Entrepreneurship
• Operations Research, Modelling and Simulation
• Logistics, Production and Information Systems
• Quality Management
• Product Management
• Sustainability and Ecoefficiency
• Industrial Marketing and Consumer Behavior
• Knowledge and Project Management
• Risk Management
• Service Systems
• Healthcare Management
• Human Factors and Ergonomics
• Emergencies and Disaster Management
• Education
More information about this series at https://link.springer.com/bookseries/11786Rahul S Mor · Sachin S. Kamble ·
Kuldip Singh Sangwan
Editors
Operations and Supply Chain
Management in the Food
Industry
Farm to ForkEditors
Rahul S Mor
National Institute of Food Technology
Entrepreneurship and Management
Kundli (Sonepat), India
Kuldip Singh Sangwan
Birla Institute of Technology and Science
Pilani, Rajasthan, India
Sachin S. Kamble
EDHEC Business School
Roubaix, France
ISSN 2198-0772 ISSN 2198-0780 (electronic)
Lecture Notes in Management and Industrial Engineering
ISBN 978-981-16-5554-8 ISBN 978-981-16-5555-5 (eBook)
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-16-5555-5
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature
Singapore Pte Ltd. 2022
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are solely and exclusively licensed by the Publisher, whether
the whole or part of the material is concerned, specifically the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse
of illustrations, recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on microfilms or in any other physical way, and
transmission or information storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar
or dissimilar methodology now known or hereafter developed.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this publication
does not imply, even in the absence of a specific statement, that such names are exempt from the relevant
protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.
The publisher, the authors and the editors are safe to assume that the advice and information in this book
are believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication. Neither the publisher nor the authors or
the editors give a warranty, expressed or implied, with respect to the material contained herein or for any
errors or omissions that may have been made. The publisher remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional
claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
This Springer imprint is published by the registered company Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd.
The registered company address is: 152 Beach Road, #21-01/04 Gateway East, Singapore 189721,
SingaporeForeword
Food supply chains across the globe are operating under increasing pressure to keep
feeding the world’s growing population. In this context, one of the most impor￾tant challenges faced by operations and supply chain professionals concerns how to
improve the sustainability of food supply chains, while simultaneously managing
the competitiveness of complex food systems. In the outstanding book Operations
and Supply Chain Management in Food Industry: Farm to Fork, several of the
most talented researchers in the fields of food operations and supply chains provide
readers with unique insights into the ways in which emerging technologies, such
as blockchain, can unlock more sustainable food supply chains in order to achieve
the challenging target of feeding the globe while contributing to meeting Sustain￾able Development Goals. The book has been carefully edited by some of the most
respected researchers in the field, with many years of both practical and academic
experiences. It is a must-read book for any scholar, practitioner, or food policymaker
who is committed to creating a fairer and more sustainable world.
Charbel Jose Chiappetta Jabbour
Global Chair Professor in Sustainable
Supply Chain and
Operations Management
Lincoln International
Business School (LIBS)
University of Lincoln
Lincoln, UK
Professor, Emlyon Business School
Ecully-Lyon, France
vPreface
The Indian food supply chain is highly complex, involving government and private
traders, big and small players, traditional as well as modern systems. All parts
of the Indian food supply chain—procurement, storage, transportation, processing,
packaging, and delivery—involve different systems and are not dependent upon a
single system. It partially explains why the Indian food supply chain shows strong
resiliency during the current pandemic lockdown. Food waste/spoilage and pilferage
need to be brought down during post-harvesting, harvesting, and pre-harvesting to
feed the growing world population at a reasonable cost. The agility and traceability
in food supply chains are critical factors to be improved using modern techniques
like blockchain and data analytics. However, more research is required to study these
losses, their quantification, root causes, and mitigation techniques. The requirement
of modern and digital technologies in storage, processing, and packaging; better
coordination among government agencies, traders, and farmers; and improved IT
and transportation infrastructures provide entrepreneurial opportunities for the IT
savvy young Indians in this field. This book essentially presents these aspects of the
food supply chain in the Indian context.
Chapter 1 highlights the essence of an agile agricultural supply chain management
leading to higher productivity, profitability, and customer satisfaction. A perishable
food supply chain is analyzed in Chap. 2 to identify the risk factors involved in the
storage and transportation of perishable foods. In Chap. 3, forecasting methods are
illustrated by a case study to provide an accurate judgment to the people involved
in food supply chain management. The procurement and value chain models of the
black pepper market are identified in Chap. 4, where identification and mapping
of stages involved, intermediaries’ functions, and value chain mapping thus lay the
foundation for the study. In Chap. 5, a study has been conducted at a coffee and bakery
shop in Bangkok, Thailand, to understand the supply chain and various food safety
measures being taken at its scale and highlight the food supply chain threats. The
need to identify, understand, and resolve the traceability and transportation issues for
an efficient and responsive food supply chain is highlighted in Chap. 6. The critical
success factors that can facilitate the successful adoption of blockchain technology in
the food supply chain are presented in Chap. 7. The identified hierarchical structure
viiviii Preface
and contextual relationships among these factors are expected to help policymakers
drive the use of blockchain technology in this area. Chapter 8 highlights the sustain￾ability enablers in the agricultural supply chains, and these sustainability enablers are
mapped with the United Nation’s Sustainable Development Goals (UNSDGs). The
application of digital technologies such as cloud computing for better and effective
services in a food supply chain is discussed in Chap. 9. Chapter 10 describes various
green technologies for better safety and quality in the food supply chains. Chapter 11
entails that a communication-based packaging system is an important technique that
improves or indicates product safety in the supply chain using smart devices in the
food packaging system. Finally, Chap. 12 provides an entrepreneurial policy frame￾work and guidelines for developing agri-food entrepreneurship with successful case
studies.
Sonepat, India
Roubaix, France
Pilani, India
Rahul S Mor
Sachin S. Kamble
Kuldip Singh SangwanAcknowledgements
We acknowledge all those people who were involved and helped in completing this
book project. Firstly, we would like to thank the authors for contributing their valued
time and expertise. Special thanks are due to the reviewers’ valuable contributions
regarding the improvement of quality, coherence, and content demonstration of the
chapters. We also appreciate the referees for reviewing the manuscripts and scholars
for editing and organizing the chapters. Finally, the editors are grateful to their parent
institutes (National Institute of Food Technology Entrepreneurship and Management,
Kundli (Sonipat) - 131028, India; EDHEC Business School, Roubaix, France; Birla
Institute of Technology and Science, Pilani - 333031, India) for providing essential
facilities to conduct this research work smoothly.
Rahul S Mor
Sachin S. Kamble
Kuldip Singh Sangwan
ixContents
1 Agile Agriculture Supply Chain Management (AASCM)
for Managing Shifting Consumer Food Preferences:
Framework Development Using Grounded Theory Approach ..... 1
Neeraj Pandey
2 Modeling of Risk Factors in Transportation of Perishable
Goods Using ISM Approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
Gajanand Gupta, Satyendra Kumar Sharma,
Kuldip Singh Sangwan, and Anil Jindal
3 Forecast Modelling in Supply Chain Management of Food
Processing Industry: A Case Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
P. M. Kulkarni, Sarat Kumar Jena, and Prayag Gokhale
4 Cost Competitiveness Through Value Chain Analysis:
A Study About Black Pepper . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
Avanish Shandilya, Disha Gulia, and Sapna Arora
5 Sustainability in Food Supply Chains: Case of Southeast Asia . . . . . 53
Modisa and Thappasarn Jaikaew
6 Traceability and Transportation Issues in the Food Supply
Chain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73
Akshay Patidar, Monica Sharma, Rajeev Agrawal,
and Kuldip Singh Sangwan
7 A Framework for Blockchain Technology Adoption in Food
Supply Chain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 95
Ashish Dwivedi, Ajay Jha, Vikas Yadav, Manisha Bansal,
and Harsh Srivastava
8 Blockchain Technology for Enhancing Sustainability
in Agricultural Supply Chains . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 115
Rohit Sharma, Anjali Shishodia, and Sachin S. Kamble
xixii Contents
9 Cloud Computing: Technological Innovations in the Food
Industry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 127
Kumar Rahul, Rohitash Kumar Banyal, Vijay Kumar,
and Darshana Hooda
10 Green Technological Approaches for Food Quality and Safety
in Food Supply Chain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 143
Owais Yousuf and Anupama Singh
11 Communicative Packaging Systems for Safety of Food
Products . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 159
Pushpendra Kumar, Anand Kishore, Khushbu Kumari,
and Rahul S Mor
12 Entrepreneurial Opportunities in Agri-Food Supply Chains . . . . . . . 169
Anupama Panghal, Tribhuvan Nath, and Priyanka Vern
Index . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 191Editors and Contributors
About the Editors
Dr. Rahul S Mor is a faculty and researcher of operations management, supply
chain & logistics, industrial engineering & management, manufacturing systems,
etc., and has over four years of experience, primarily at NIFTEM Kundli. He holds
a Ph.D. in Industrial and Production Engineering, specializing in Supply Chain &
Operations Analytics. He has been teaching and mentoring the students of UG & PG
courses, and has also taken the lead in various academic, outreach and administrative
assignments. Dr. Mor has authored/co-authored over 50 publications in international
refereed SCI, ABDC, CABS ranked journals of high impact factor, & many chap￾ters, books, conference papers. One of his MoFPI (Govt. of India) funded research
projects supports the agri-food supply chain digitalization through disruptive tech￾nologies, among other R&C projects in the manufacturing and agri-food sector. He
is supervising research at the doctoral and masters levels. Dr. Mor has edited various
books on ‘Agri-Food 4.0, ‘Circular Economy’, ‘OSCM’, ‘Industry 4.0’ with Springer,
Emerald, EAI-Springer, etc. He is the Area Editor and Managing Guest Editor: Opr.
Mgmt. Res. (Springer), Int. J. Logi. Res. & Appl. (T&F); Guest Editor: IEEE Trans.
on Engg. Mgmt. (IEEE), Int. J. Transp. Eco.; Associate Editor: Supply Chain Forum:
An Int. J. (T&F); Editor: IJSOM; Editorial Board: JDS, FSFS, IJCEWM, IJLT,
etc., and reviewer for numerous int. journals. He is a member of many professional
societies.
Dr. Sachin S. Kamble is Professor of Digital Transformation at EDHEC Busi￾ness School, France. He holds a Ph.D. in Management, MBA in Operations, and
bachelor’s degree in Mechanical Engineering. In academics, he has been associ￾ated with various institute of repute such as National Institute of Industrial Engi￾neering (NITIE) Mumbai, Hyderabad Central University and Karnatak Univeristy.
Dr. Sachin’s teaching and research interests include Operations Management, Supply
Chain Management, Big Data Analytics, Industry 4.0, and Blockchain Technology.
xiiixiv Editors and Contributors
He has more than 50 authored/co-authored publications in referred international jour￾nals and includes high-impact journals such as International Journal of Production
Economics, International Journal of Production Research, Computers in Industry,
Computers and Operations Research, International Journal of Information Manage￾ment etc. Dr. Sachin has completed 27 consultancy assignments for leading manu￾facturing organizations that include TNT Logistics Ltd., Parle Limited, ACC Ltd.,
Intas Pharma, Mundra Ports and SEZ Ltd., Indogulf Fertilisers Ltd., TTK-LIG Ltd,
BPCL-Mumbai, Gujarat State Fertiliser Corporation, Kochi Refinery, Indian Rayon,
RCF Ltd, AICTE and Glaxo Smithkline. He has also conducted various MDP’s for
the senior-level executives from ACC Ltd., HDFC Bank, BEL, HMT, L&T, Apollo
Tyres Ltd, TMT Ltd., etc. in Operations and SCM. Dr. Sachin has also conceptu￾alized special certificate program on SC and Logistics Management for Larsen and
Toubro (one-year duration) and Manufacturing Excellence Program for Apollo Tyres
Limited.
Dr. Sachin is presently guest editing special issues for International Journal of
Production Research in Industry 4.0 and supply chain finance, and for Journal
of Global Operations and Strategic Sourcing on the applications of Blockchain
technology in global operations.
Dr. Kuldip Singh Sangwan is a Senior Professor of Mechanical Engineering at
Birla Institute of Technology and Science Pilani (BITS Pilani), Pilani campus. He is
the recipient of prestigious Shri B. K. Birla and Shrimati Sarala Birla Chair Profes￾sorship. He is an active researcher in the field of sustainable manufacturing, green
supply chain management, energy-efficient machining, industry 4.0, life cycle engi￾neering, and application of artificial intelligence in manufacturing system design. He
has to his credit 13 completed, 8 ongoing PhDs, three edited books and more than
160 research papers in journals like IJPR, PPC, IJOPM, JCLEPRO, Ann. Oper. Res.,
IJLCA, IJAMT, JMTM, etc. He has established Joint Indo- German Experience Lab,
Sustainable Manufacturing & Life Cycle Engineering Lab, and Advanced Precision
Lab at BITS Pilani, Pilani Campus. He has projects worth more than 0.9 million e
with international agencies (DAAD, IGES), industry and Indian Government agen￾cies. He is a fellow of the Institution of Engineers (India), and a life member of Indian
Institute of Industrial Engineering (IIIE) and Society of Operations Management
(SOM). Professor Sangwan is the current editor of Industrial Engineering Journal
published by Indian Institute of Industrial Engineering. His named has featured in
the top 2% world scientists in the area of Industrial Engineering and Automation
published by Stanford University researchers.
Contributors
Rajeev Agrawal Department of Mechanical Engineering, Malaviya National Insti￾tute of Technology, Jaipur, IndiaEditors and Contributors xv
Sapna Arora Department of Food Business Management and Entrepreneurship
Development (FBMED), National Institute of Food Technology Entrepreneurship
and Management (NIFTEM), Kundli, Sonipat, Haryana, India
Manisha Bansal Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, New Delhi, India
Rohitash Kumar Banyal Department of Computer Sciene and Technology,
Rajasthan Technical University, Kota, India
Ashish Dwivedi Jindal Global Business School, O. P. Jindal Global University,
Sonipat, India
Prayag Gokhale Department of MBA, KLE Dr. M S Sheshgiri College of Engi￾neering and Technology, Belagavi, Karnataka, India
Disha Gulia Department of Food Business Management and Entrepreneurship
Development (FBMED), National Institute of Food Technology Entrepreneurship
and Management (NIFTEM), Kundli, Sonipat, Haryana, India
Gajanand Gupta School of Mechanical Engineering, Vellore Institute of Tech￾nology, Chennai, Tamil Nadu, India
Darshana Hooda University Computer Center, Deenbandhu Chhotu Ram Univer￾sity of Science and Technology, Murthal, India
Thappasarn Jaikaew School of Environment, Resources and Development, Asian
Institute of Technology, Bangkok, Thailand;
Department of Food Technology and Nutrition, Faculty of Home Economics
Technology, Rajamangala University of Technology Krungthep, Bangkok, Thailand
Sarat Kumar Jena Xavier Institute of Management, Bhubaneswar, India
Ajay Jha Operations Management, Jaipuria Institute of Management, Lucknow,
India
Anil Jindal Department of Mechanical Engineering, Giani Zail Singh Campus
College of Engineering and Technology, Bathinda, Punjab, India
Sachin S. Kamble EDHEC Business School, Roubaix, France
Anand Kishore Department of Food Engineering, National Institute of Food
Technology Entrepreneurship and Management, Kundli (Sonepat), India
P. M. Kulkarni Department ofMBA, KLS Gogte Institute of Technology, Belagavi,
Karnataka, India
Pushpendra Kumar Department of Food Engineering, National Institute of Food
Technology Entrepreneurship and Management, Kundli (Sonepat), India
Vijay Kumar Department of Basic and Applied Science, National Institute of Food
Technology Entrepreneurship and Management, Kundli (Sonepat), India
Khushbu Kumari National Dairy Research Institute, Karnal, Indiaxvi Editors and Contributors
Modisa School of Environment, Resources and Development, Asian Institute of
Technology, Bangkok, Thailand
Rahul S Mor Department of Food Engineering, National Institute of Food Tech￾nology Entrepreneurship and Management, Kundli (Sonepat), India
Tribhuvan Nath Institute of Management Studies, RGSC, Banaras Hindu Univer￾sity, Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh, India
Neeraj Pandey National Institute of Industrial Engineering (NITIE), Mumbai,
India
Anupama Panghal Department of Food Business Management and Entrepreneur￾ship Development, National Institute of Food Technology Entrepreneurship and
Management (NIFTEM), Sonipat, Haryana, India
Akshay Patidar Department of Management Studies, Malaviya National Institute
of Technology, Jaipur, India
Kumar Rahul Department of Basic and Applied Science, National Institute of Food
Technology Entrepreneurship and Management, Kundli (Sonepat), India
Kuldip Singh Sangwan Department of Mechanical Engineering, Birla Institute of
Technology and Science Pilani, Pilani, India
Avanish Shandilya Department of Food Business Management and Entrepreneur￾ship Development (FBMED), National Institute of Food Technology Entrepreneur￾ship and Management (NIFTEM), Kundli, Sonipat, Haryana, India
Monica Sharma Department of Management Studies, Malaviya National Institute
of Technology, Jaipur, India;
Department of Mechanical Engineering, Malaviya National Institute of Technology,
Jaipur, India
Rohit Sharma Jaipuria Institute of Management, Noida, India
Satyendra Kumar Sharma Department of Management, Birla Institute of Tech￾nology and Science Pilani, Pilani, India
Anjali Shishodia LMTSM, Thapar University, Patiala, India
Anupama Singh Department of Food Engineering, National Institute of Food
Technology Entrepreneurship and Management, Kundli (Sonepat), India
Harsh Srivastava Organization Design, GMR Group, New Delhi, India
Priyanka Vern Department of Food Business Management and Entrepreneur￾ship Development, National Institute of Food Technology Entrepreneurship and
Management (NIFTEM), Sonipat, Haryana, India
Vikas Yadav Indian Railway, New Delhi, India
Owais Yousuf Department of Bioengineering, Integral University, Lucknow, IndiaChapter 1
Agile Agriculture Supply Chain
Management (AASCM) for Managing
Shifting Consumer Food Preferences:
Framework Development Using
Grounded Theory Approach
Neeraj Pandey
Abstract Consumer food preferences are changing. These changes have both
temporal and spatial dimensions. An agile agriculture supply chain management
(AASCM) is required to cope up with this shifting trend in food consumption. The
AASCM would ensure an uninterrupted supply of agricultural produce from farm
to fork. This would also contribute to the Sustainable Development Goal (SDG)
of achieving food security, leading to zero hunger. This study adopts an inductive
grounded theory approach to develop an AASCM framework to match the changing
consumer food preferences seamlessly. This is the first attempt to develop the
AASCM framework in the supply chain literature. The results showed that consumer
insights, market sensing, decisiveness, state-of-the-art IT infrastructure, top manage￾ment support, and strong vendor relationship are essential for achieving AASCM.
The implementation of the framework will aid agility in supply chain management
produce leading to higher agriculture productivity, profitability, and customer satis￾faction. The study is useful for supply chain management professionals, agriculture
entrepreneurs, and policymakers in the agri-food domain.
Keywords Agile agriculture supply chain management (AASCM) · Food
preferences · Agriculture · Farm to fork · Agile supply chains · Grounded theory
1.1 Introduction
The twenty-first century has witnessed a growing interest in “agility.” This is evident
from the number of articles and research papers published on this topic. According
to Google Scholar search results, more than 0.22 million research papers have been
published on agility and related topics since 2000. The popularity of research on
N. Pandey (B)
National Institute of Industrial Engineering (NITIE), Vihar Lake Road, Powai, Mumbai 400087,
India
e-mail: npandey@nitie.ac.in
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2022
R. S Mor et al. (eds.), Operations and Supply Chain Management in the Food Industry,
Lecture Notes in Management and Industrial Engineering,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-16-5555-5_1
12 N. Pandey
“agility” may be estimated from the fact that it took just twenty years to publish 45%
of articles on agility, whereas the other 55% came in more than a hundred years.
Agility has taken center stage due to the growing unpredictability in the business
environment. The volatility was brought by new competitors in the industry, change
in regulations, smaller product life cycles, and unpredictable demand and supply
situations. The recent COVID-19 pandemic underlined the need for agile supply chain
management for products and services. Organizations like Asian Paints, Mahindra
Tractors, CEAT Tyres, and Uber Eats, which were more agile to adapt to the changing
situations, were able to survive and grow during the COVID-19 pandemic [1].
There is a need for agile agriculture supply chain management (AASCM) given
the industry’s dynamic nature, including changes in the ongoing consumer food pref￾erences. The agility would build flexibility in AASCM to respond to the customer and
markets’ requirements in a seamless manner. The agriculture supply chain manage￾ment has also embraced technologies like blockchain [2, 3], machine learning [4],
and the Internet of things (IoT) [5, 6]. The government of many countries has brought
in reforms to modernize the agriculture supply chain management and free it from
shackles of archaic rules. For example, the Government of India has passed Farms
Bill in 2020, which would provide freedom to farmers for choosing any kind of
agriculture supply chain management, pricing, and storage facilities.
The changes in consumer food preferences had a direct impact on agriculture
supply chain management. The shift in consumption basket has altered the agriculture
supply chain management, including the burden on the cold supply chain facilities.
Consumers have become more aware of their health [7–9]. This awareness has an
impact on food practices. The changing food preferences may be due to lifestyle
changes, food trends, cultural or psychological factors [10]. There is a growing
intention to purchase organic food products among the consumers in the emerging
markets [11]. The safety concerns regarding quality are also making consumers
alter their food habits [12]. These shifts in food consumption require AASCM to
provide uninterrupted supplies from farm to fork. There are hardly any studies that
have captured agility issues in the agriculture supply chain domain. The remaining
paper is organized as follows. The next section has a literature review followed by
the methodology, data collection, analysis, and results. The final section consists of
discussions and conclusions besides highlighting the limitations and future scope of
work on AASCM.
1.2 Literature Review
Consumers have got multiple food options. This information about packaged food
ingredients, advertisements about organic cereals, and awareness about healthy food
habits is making people shift their food preferences. Many organizations get patent
on novel food items to safeguard against imitation of the same product by other
competing firms [13]. A large study in Poland found that people were shifting to
novel healthy foods. This has led to improve state health indicators. There was a1 Agile Agriculture Supply Chain Management (AASCM) for Managing … 3
growing interest of citizens for advertisements having positive health content [14].
The customers especially Millennials have become more vocal about their various
likings including food preferences on social media sites like Facebook [15, 16]. The
consumers in emerging markets like India were preferring fresh food items over
packaged food. The purchase from nearby small stores was preferred to buy fresh
food [17].
The changing food preferences of the population were evident from consistently
declining lamb consumption in Canada and USA. Stanford et al. [18] found that
this change in food consumption habits was due to the rising supply chain cost,
availability of cheaper food alternatives, and lack of government support to this
sector. The supply chain has to cater to the retail outlets, which have witnessed
a shift in consumer demand for products [19]. There has been a growing interest
of consumers in green commodities and organic food products [20, 21]. This has
led to forced adjustments in local supply chains. The products in high demand and
those with higher margins, especially bought by wealthier consumers, were given
high priority. These products were given precedence in supply chain planning and
execution [19].
Aging is another factor contributing to change in food preferences [22, 23]. This
has been witnessed in both the younger and older population. The European Union’s
aging population has become more conscious of food’s health and nutritional values
[23]. The growing preference for local and organic food in the USA also changed
the supply chain networks in North America [24]. This willingness to pay (WTP)
is an important parameter to measure actual purchase behavior [25, 26]. Adams and
Salois [24] found that there was a high WTP by USA consumers for local foods.
This highlighted that the supply chain needs to realign to adjust to the paradigm shift
in food preferences.
Zu et al. [27] proposed operation research (OR) models as one of the solutions
to realign the supply chains to manage these changes in food preferences. However,
few of the supply chain issues cannot be empirically modeled as the real world is
too complex and may require a hybrid approach. Various agri-food organizations,
including US poultry industry, had adopted vertical coordination in supply chain
management by leveraging contracting and technology [28]. Various authors [29, 30]
have emphasized that AASCM should also ensure that there should be traceability
in the agriculture supply chains.
1.3 Methodology
The study uses inductive grounded theory approach to develop a framework on agile
agriculture supply chain management (AASCM) in the context of changing food
preferences across the globe. The grounded theory is useful in developing frameworks
where there is a lack of sufficient literature. It helps build a fresh perspective and
bring in new technologies, context, and constraints that were not considered in the
earlier models [31, 32]. The grounded theory helps construct a framework from the4 N. Pandey
first data set and iterates it with the subsequent data [33]. The exercise continues
till the data is saturated, and there is no new insight from the fresh responses. The
grounded theory has its origin in pragmatism and symbolic interactionism [33].
This study collected data from supply chain professionals. The respondents had
experience in managing supply chains in the agri-food industry, tire, fast-moving
consumer goods (FMCG), chemicals, and pharmaceutical industry. The industry
diversity of respondents brought fresh perspectives in developing a framework for
agile agriculture supply chain management (AASCM).
1.4 Data Collection and Analysis
The first respondent had more than seven years of experience in agri-food supply
chain management in an MNC. The respondents were not revealed the actual purpose
of the exercise to avoid any social desirability bias. The questions started with
the state of the industry and issues with the supply chain and led to discussions
regarding changing consumer preferences, agility in supply chains, coping mecha￾nism, building agile agriculture supply chain management, etc. The literature review
helped build the initial set of questions for grounded theory research. The subsequent
interview questions used the knowledge gained in the previous interactions regarding
issues in agriculture supply chain management. The theoretical memos were jotted
in each session with the respondents. The analysis started just after collecting data
from the first respondent. The snowballing technique was used to get a reference from
the first respondent regarding other supply chain professionals. The responses were
analyzed using content analysis. Each respondent had a unique identity number. The
analysis involved open coding, axial coding, and selective coding, as suggested by
Corbin and Strauss [33]. The saturation of responses was achieved after twenty-three
responses.
1.5 Results
The key factors for achieving AASCM emerged from the grounded theory exercise.
Table 1.1 provides the six AASCM key dimensions and three outcome variables. The
outcome variables are goals that the agri-food company chase while building agile
supply chains. The six input factors for AASCM are:
Consumer Insights: The consumer insights not only help to know about the current
consumer preferences but also provide knowledge about how food preferences are
changing. It tracks consumer food purchase baskets, food search habits, and will￾ingness to pay for different food items. It relies heavily on data to provide consumer
insights so that the supply chains may realign their resources to meet the changing1 Agile Agriculture Supply Chain Management (AASCM) for Managing … 5 Table 1.1 AASCM key dimensions S. No. Sample memos [respondent ID] Open coding Axial coding Selective coding
1 We keep a close eye on the market through various
databases and use our marketing intelligence inputs. It
gives us a sense of demand patterns, and accordingly,
we align our supply chain to meet the predicted
demand [7]
Data (3) Data Consumer insights
Information (3)
Software (2)
Insights (3) Insights
Consumer behavior (3)
Intelligence (1)
Predictions (3)
2 My company has one of the best IT systems and
software. It helps us to leverage various data
opportunities to predict demand shifts. I believe that
the latest digital technologies should be used by
supply chain professionals. Soon, drone and sensors
would become common in agri-food supply chain
management [15]
Business (9) Marketplace Market sensing
Market (1, 3, 10)
Demand (1,2, 4)
Intelligence (1) Visualize change
Demand patterns (1)
3 We have a heavy focus on data and use it for market
predictions. The changing consumer food
consumption behavior is impacting the supply chains.
The food industry is now using data from various
sources to get consumer insights. We also receive
useful information from our dealers and other channel
partners [23]
Choices (4) Decisions Decisiveness
Decision (4)
(continued)6 N. Pandey Table 1.1 (continued) S. No. Sample memos [respondent ID] Open coding Axial coding Selective coding Changes (4) Agile Responsive (4) Timely (6,7, 10) 4 There are many food choices for consumers. The consumer food preferences are changing. The supply chain should be agile to be responsive to these changing demands. The decision making should be data-driven and fast to match the demand changes [12] IT (2) IT infrastructure State-of-the-art IT infrastructure Digital (2) Drone (2) Technology Latest technology (2) Sensors (2) 5 Today, the competition is not between company A and company B but between its value chains. A close rapport with the vendor besides their training is a must in this competitive world. The close cooperation with vendors helps us in getting through the thick and thin of the business [9] Top management (7) Management support Top management support Support (7) Ownership (7) Resource availability (7) Facilitation Funding (7) 6 The food category B2B customer looks for quality, variety, and traceability through existing supply chains. If the customers get the desired quantity and quality on time, the buyers are satisfied [14] Close rapport (5) Relationship Strong vendor relationship Training (9) Vendor development Cooperation (5) 7 Our agility in the supply chain management is due to the top management support. We are able to deliver in short lead times with varying volumes due to complete support and resource availability, including required funding by the management. The team feels ownership for their respective projects [4] Quality (6) Customer expectation Customer satisfaction (B2B) Variety (6) Traceability (6) Quantity (6) Delivery Quality (6) (continued)1 Agile Agriculture Supply Chain Management (AASCM) for Managing … 7 Table 1.1 (continued) S. No. Sample memos [respondent ID] Open coding Axial coding Selective coding On time (6)
8 Profit is the acid test for a company. Profit means
revenue received from the customer minus the cost to
serve that customer. In my view, agility in supply
chains helps in reducing cost and enhancing revenue
[19]
Year-on-year (10) Growth Organizational productivity
Growth (10)
Expand (10)
Productivity (10) Efficiency
Faster (10)
Delivery (10)
10 The agile supply chains in agriculture would lead to
higher productivity for all stakeholders. It helps to
expand to the newer markets. It would mean faster
on-time delivery with year-on-year growth [21]
Profit (8) Profit Company profitability
Revenue (9)
Cost (8) Cost to serve
Cost to serve (8)8 N. Pandey
local and global demand. The respondents emphasized this as one of the critical
inputs for building AASCM.
Market Sensing: The majority of the respondents emphasized that market sensing
was very important in the quest for building agile agriculture supply chains. It is
critical for agri-food supply chains as the food consumption patterns keep shifting.
The shift has both temporal and spatial dimensions. The channel partner inputs have
been helpful in connecting the dots about the demand shifts in agricultural products.
The market sensing provides time to agriculture produce-based organizations to
plan and reorient resources as per the consumption shifts in the marketplace. The
market sensing also involves innovative ways of generating market intelligence like
inputs from agriculture salesperson conferences, competitor social media campaign
analysis, competitor new product development data analysis, channel partner inputs,
international agriculture trade reports, competitor supply chain shifts, etc.
Decisiveness: The speed of decision making is a key aspect in developing AASCM.
The support from the team members and top management is essential in taking
and executing AASCM-related decisions. The decisiveness is a critical element of
AASCM as agility would require bold and quick decisions as per the demand and
supply of agricultural produce in a particular region.
State-of-the-art IT Infrastructure: The technologies of today have made it possible to
plan and execute AASCM. Each respondent referred to technology, including tech￾niques like machine learning, blockchain, optimization, and automation, in her/his
discussions for bringing agility in given supply chains. The state-of-the-art IT infras￾tructure is an essential prerequisite for building a robust AASCM by leveraging
technology.
Top Management Support: The support by top management is an essential condition
for developing AASCM. The agile supply chains require a strong central team to plan
and execute various demand scenarios. The top management support will ensure that
the teams would get the required resources within the specified time besides flexibility
to build and sustain agile agriculture supply chains.
Strong Vendor Relationship: The agri-food organizations not only are strengthening
themselves but also focus a lot on developing strong vendor relationships to build
agile agriculture supply chains. The vendors are the most credible source of market
intelligence data that goes into building AASCM. The vendors are in touch with
the farmers, consumers, competitors, and other large agri-food organizations on
a day-to-day basis and have the latest information. The vendors ensure supplies,
replacements, and update about market data. It helps in building agile agriculture
supply chains. Therefore, the organizations invest in vendor development in terms of
training, sharing of information, co-creation of products and services, and lending
of resources on mutually agreed terms.
The outcome variables of AASCM are:
Customer Satisfaction (B2B): The AASCM aids in building a strong relationship with
the B2B customers. It was witnessed that the organization which had an agile supply1 Agile Agriculture Supply Chain Management (AASCM) for Managing … 9
chain shifted their supply of agriculture produce raw material through trains when
the road transport was stopped due to the pandemic. The liaison with local authorities
helped in the transportation of these raw materials within the city. The agile supply
chains minimized pandemic impact as the customer was able to receive raw material
even in the time of crisis. This not only helped in achieving customer satisfaction but
also helped in building a stronger business relationship with the buyers.
Organizational Productivity: The agility as a culture in the organization aids in
enhancing the productivity of employees. The agile agriculture supply chains respond
quickly to changing food consumption demands, thereby achieving organization
targets and profitability. It also leads to catering to newer markets where there is a
better opportunity to upsell the agri-food products. The implementation of blockchain
and IoT is further adding to the agility and organizational productivity.
Company Profitability: The AASCM leads to higher profitability of an organization.
The agility in agriculture supply chains leads to higher customer satisfaction. This
leads to increased business and network for the organization.
1.6 Discussion and Conclusions
The study has developed a framework for building agile agriculture supply chain
management (AASCM) for managing agri-food demand shifts. The agile supply
chains would require relevant and timely information to reorient the planning and
execution. This AASCM model would be sustainable only if there is a high degree
of automation in demand planning and supply chain management. This agile digital
supply chain would be highly data-driven decisions without any bias. The COVID-19
pandemic has reinforced the importance of building agility in the agriculture supply
chain to ensure food security for the people.
The AASCM framework emphasizes on leveraging the power of data. This agri￾food data would be drawn from various sources, including inputs from channel part￾ners, trade reports, government agriculture and food-related reports, survey, company
historical data, marketing intelligence, and experiment data. The data analytics output
would help to get the customer insights about the upcoming agri-food demand shift.
These insights go as input for resource planning and allocation for supply chain
realignment for the coming week, month, or quarter (Fig. 1.1).
The AASCM would require strong top management commitment and close
vendor involvement. The top management support would ensure timely allocation of
resources, including requisite manpower, to the team involved in managing AASCM.
The vendor support is essential in AASCM to ensure the timely availability of agri￾food raw material, semifinished goods, and delivery of finished food products. There￾fore, the development of close vendor relationship is crucial for building AASCM.
The study also highlighted that the AASCM would help attain higher agriculture
productivity, profitability, and customer satisfaction.10 N. Pandey AASCM Decisiveness State-of-art IT Infrastructure Top Management Support Strong Vendor Relationship Consumer Insights Market Sensing Organizational Productivity Customer Satisfaction Company Profitability Fig. 1.1 Agile agriculture supply chain management (AASCM) framework for managing consumer food preferences Source Author1 Agile Agriculture Supply Chain Management (AASCM) for Managing … 11
1.7 Limitations and Future Scope
This study has a few limitations, which may become an exciting work scope for future
scholars. The study has focused on agriculture supply chains. Future researchers may
adapt this model for developing agile supply chain management in other industries
like chemical, pharmaceuticals, health care, e-commerce, and FMCG sector using
grounded theory. The AASCM should be tested empirically using standard scales
and primary data to refine it further. The role of the latest techniques like machine
learning, blockchain technologies, IoT, cloud computing, and artificial intelligence
(AI) in building AASCM should be explored by future researchers.
References
1. Pandey N (2021) Digital marketing strategies for firms in post covid-19 era: insights and future
directions. In: Chaturvedi H, Dey AK (eds) The new normal: challenges of managing business,
social and ecological systems in the post COVID-19 era. Bloomsbury Publishing, New Delhi,
pp 107–124
2. Kamble SS, Gunasekaran A, Sharma R (2020) Modeling the blockchain enabled traceability in
agriculture supply chain. Int J Inf Manage 52. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2019.05.023
3. Kamble S, Gunasekaran A, Arha H (2019) Understanding the blockchain technology adoption
in supply chains-Indian context. Int J Prod Res 57(7):2009–2033
4. Kamble SS, Gunasekaran A, Kumar V, Belhadi A, Foropon C (2020) A machine learning based
approach for predicting blockchain adoption in supply Chain. Technol Forecast Soc Change
120465
5. Kamble SS, Gunasekaran A, Parekh H, Joshi S (2019) Modeling the internet of things adoption
barriers in food retail supply chains. J Retail Consum Serv 48:154–168
6. Luthra S, Mangla SK, Garg D, Kumar A (2018) Internet of things (IoT) in agriculture
supply chain management: a developing country perspective. In: Emerging markets from a
multidisciplinary perspective. Springer, Cham, pp 209–220
7. Nayal P, Pandey N (2021) Role of social media in hospital branding: insights for marketing
practitioners. In: New techniques for brand management in the healthcare sector. IGI Global,
pp 1–16
8. Pandey N, Raina A (2019) Five decades of research in healthcare pricing: future directions for
academia and policymakers. Int J Manag Pract 12(3):301–320
9. Pandey N, Thombal AE (2018) Why stents are expensive: drivers of high prices in emerging
markets. Health Mark Q 35(4):298–312
10. Asp EH (1999) Factors affecting food decisions made by individual consumers. Food Policy
24(2–3):287–294
11. Pandey N, Kaushik S (2012) Factors affecting consumer’s green product purchase decisions:
an empirical approach. Int J Bus Compet Growth 2(4):341–356
12. Rimal A, Fletcher SM, McWatters KH, Misra SK, Deodhar S (2001) Perception of food safety
and changes in food consumption habits: a consumer analysis. Int J Consum Stud 25(1):43–52
13. Pandey N, Dharni K (2014) Intellectual property rights. PHI Learning Pvt. Ltd.
14. Wadolowska L, Babicz-Zielinska E, Czarnocinska J (2008) Food choice models and their
relation with food preferences and eating frequency in the Polish population: POFPRES study.
Food Policy 33(2):122–134
15. Pandey N, Gudipudi B (2019) Understanding ‘what is privacy’ for millennials on Facebook in
India. J Data Protect Priv 2(3):224–23312 N. Pandey
16. Pandey N, Jha S, Singh G (2020) Promotion of green products on Facebook: insights from
millennials. Int J Manag Pract 13(3):275–294
17. Ali J, Kapoor S, Moorthy J (2010) Buying behaviour of consumers for food products in an
emerging economy. Brit Food J 112(2):109–124
18. Stanford K, Hobbs JE, Gilbert M, Jones SDM, Price MA, Klein KK, Kerr WA (1999) Lamb￾buying preferences of Canadian abattoirs and producer marketing groups: implications for the
Canadian supply chain. Supply Chain Manage: An Int J 4(2):86–94
19. Codron JM, Grunert K, Giraud-Heraud E, Soler LG, Regmi A (2005) Retail sector responses
to changing consumer preferences. New Direct Global Food Markets 794:32–46
20. Tripathi A, Pandey N (2018) Does impact of price endings differ for the non-green and green
products? Role of product categories and price levels. J Consum Mark 35(2):143–156
21. Tripathi A, Pandey N (2019) Promotional framing of green products: mediating role of sale
proneness. J Promot Manag 25(7):983–1008
22. Criss S, Horhota M, Wiles K, Norton J, Hilaire KJS, Short MA, Blomquist KK (2020) Food
cultures and aging: a qualitative study of grandparents’ food perceptions and influence of food
choice on younger generations. Public Health Nutr 23(2):221–230. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijinfomgt.2019.05.023
23. Koehler J, Leonhaeuser IU (2008) Changes in food preferences during aging. Ann Nutr Metab
52(1):15–19
24. Adams DC, Salois MJ (2010) Local versus organic: a turn in consumer preferences and
willingness-to-pay. Renew Agric Food Syst 331–341
25. Pandey N, Singh G (2012) Marketing issues in SMEs: cases from India. Pearson Education
India
26. Singh G, Pandey N (2018) The determinants of green packaging that influence buyers’
willingness to pay a price premium. Australasian Market J (AMJ) 26(3):221–230
27. Zhu Z, Chu F, Dolgui A, Chu C, ZhouW, Piramuthu S (2018) Recent advances and opportunities
in sustainable food supply chain: a model-oriented review. Int J Prod Res 56(17):5700–5722
28. Hobbs JE, Young LM (2000) Closer vertical co-ordination in agri-food supply chains: a
conceptual framework and some preliminary evidence. Supply Chain Manag Int J 5(3):131–143
29. Aung MM, Chang YS (2014) Traceability in a food supply chain: safety and quality
perspectives. Food Control 39:172–184
30. Bosona T, Gebresenbet G (2013) Food traceability as an integral part of logistics management
in food and agricultural supply chain. Food Control 33(1):32–48
31. Creswell JW, Poth CN (2016) Qualitative inquiry and research design: choosing among five
approaches. Sage publications
32. Goulding C (2005) Grounded theory, ethnography and phenomenology. Eur J Mark
39(3/4):294–308
33. Corbin JM, Strauss A (1990) Grounded theory research: procedures, canons, and evaluative
criteria. Qual Sociol 13(1):3–21Chapter 2
Modeling of Risk Factors
in Transportation of Perishable Goods
Using ISM Approach
Gajanand Gupta, Satyendra Kumar Sharma, Kuldip Singh Sangwan,
and Anil Jindal
Abstract Transportation is most well defined as a catalyst of progress. This holds
true especially in the case of transportation of perishable food items. Hence, it is
tough to viably protect transient products and confirm extreme freshness during
blistering and moist climate. In India, the most basic requirement in development of
the nourishment preparing industry is the absence of included cold chain facilities.
The objective of this research is to present the readily available facts about transport
and storage of perishable foods and outline the risk factors involved in this activity.
Through research, various risk factors in transportation have been analyzed using
ISM technique.
Keywords Supply chain risk · Perishable goods · Interpretive structural
modeling · Transportation
2.1 Introduction
Transportation embodies a significant area of human action but surprisingly it is
neglected in every business carried out. Transportation plays a vital role in a nation’s
economy and makes every social and economic activity feasible. It is most well
G. Gupta (B)
School of Mechanical Engineering, Vellore Institute of Technology, Chennai, Tamil Nadu 600127,
India
S. K. Sharma
Department of Management, Birla Institute of Technology and Science Pilani, Pilani 333031, India
K. S. Sangwan
Department of Mechanical Engineering, Birla Institute of Technology and Science Pilani, Pilani
333031, India
A. Jindal
Department of Mechanical Engineering, Giani Zail Singh Campus College of Engineering and
Technology, Bathinda, Punjab, India
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2022
R. S Mor et al. (eds.), Operations and Supply Chain Management in the Food Industry,
Lecture Notes in Management and Industrial Engineering,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-16-5555-5_2
1314 G. Gupta et al.
defined as a catalyst of progress. This holds true especially in the case of trans￾portation of perishable food items. For the ever growing food industry, the demands
for fine cooking and tastes have developed, so have the chances for smaller nour￾ishment organizations. In any case, with this comes the significant test of shipping
crisp refrigerated and frozen things carefully to their destinations. As per industry
estimations, around 100 million tons of perishable freight move by means of non￾refrigerated vehicle, and it is evaluated that each year somewhere in the range of 25%
of nourishments delivered go surplus because of absence of appropriate stockpiling
practices and transportation units. Nourishment wastage at that point makes another
arrangement of ecological issues as it changes over into water wastage and prompts
host of ozone depleting substance emanations.
Nourishment items regularly disintegrate, because of expanded travel times and
incessant stops to serve providers, during the get procedure. It is tough to viably
protect transient products and confirm extreme freshness during blistering and moist
climate. In India, the most basic requirement in development of the nourishment
preparing industry is the absence of included cold chain facilities. The cool chain
circulation is a scheme to keep temperature touchy items in prime condition from the
purpose of takeoff till it arrives at its last goal. India’s most prominent need starting
today is for a successful and financially practical cool chain arrangement that will
thoroughly incorporate the supply chains for all items, directly from the production
facilities to the consumption facilities, in this manner diminishing physical waste and
loss of estimation of perishable products. The objective of this research is to present
the readily available facts about transport and storage of perishable foods and outline
the risk factors involved in this activity.
2.2 Literature Review
In this section, the articles related to risk factors involved in transportation and vehicle
routing issues for perishable products have been reviewed. Given the significance
of intake of retailers in order to model the stock of perishable products, the authors
presented a series of constant demand, the variable demand over time; dependent
demand archives and dependent price. Numerous authors have created stock models
for crumbling things with variable end-time consumer requirement utilizing linearly
or exponentially reduction in requirement [1]. Tarantilis and Kiranoudis [2] presented
an edge tolerating calculation to take care of dissemination issue of milk for a dairy
organization in Greece. They concentrated on a steering issue with heterogeneous
vehicles. Tarantilis and Kiranoudis [3] settled the circulation of items produced using
crisp meat in Greece with an open VRP multi-store. They did not consider the extra
requirements mirroring the transient idea of the item. Hsu et al. [4] have established
a stochastic VRP model for optimum distribution ways, fleet shipping loads and
takeoff times for the dissemination of perishable foods. Their aim was to reduce the
expense of cargo forwarding vehicles, just as stock costs, energy and fine for violating
the time windows requirements. Osvald and Stirn [5] presented an empirical method2 Modeling of Risk Factors in Transportation of Perishable Goods … 15
for the issue of crisp vegetables dispersion in which the effect of the perishable
kind of the products has been measured as a piece of the worldwide conveyance
costs. Federgruen et al. [6] are among the pioneers researchers who have coordinated
directing and stock distribution in a solitary period issue taking irregular retailer’s
interest for perishable products. They categorized perishable goods in old and new
components. The old products would perish in the present timeframe, while new
products would be viewed as fresh for as a minimum a period before getting obsolete.
Le et al. [7] displayed a multi-period IRP model for perishable goods with fixed life
in which client request was deterministic and unsold products with no worth were
disposed of. A plan stream way for this issue was proposed, and a lower bound for
the issue was accomplished utilizing segment age.
Contrasted with principle things supply chains, sustenance supply chains are
consistently dynamically complex and progressively difficult to regulate considering
the way that the sustenance thing is transient and has a short time period of practical
ease of use. Since nourishments can be time and temperature touchy in nature, they
should be appropriately dealt with as far as gathering, readiness, bundling, trans￾portation and taking care of. Temperature is the most significant factor in drawing
out or keeping up the timeframe of realistic usability of perishables. Aung and Chang
[8] addressed the simulation and wireless sensor network methods to improve the
capacity to characterize an ideal objective temperature for multi-product refrigerated
stockpiling. From the literature, a total of 9 risk factors are identified, i.e., discussed in
following section as the important risk factors involved in transportation of perishable
goods.
2.3 Risk Factors Involved in Transportation of Perishable
Goods
From the literature review, following comprehensive list of risk factors involved in
transportation of perishable goods have been identified. These factors will serve as
the input for this further study and modeling.
(1) Lack of security
(2) Improper holding practices for food products and awaiting shipment or
inspection
(3) Improper temperature control
(4) Cross contamination
(5) Improper loading practices, conditions or equipment and sanitation
(6) Accident during transportation
(7) Infrastructure problems
(8) Improper transportation unit design
(9) Incorrect usage of packing material or improper packing of transportation unit.16 G. Gupta et al.
2.4 Methodology
2.4.1 Interpretive Structure Modeling (ISM)
ISM is an interactive management method used to assist research groups in complex
issues. ISM is an approach for distinguishing and a bridging connections among
explicit components, which characterize an issue and give a methods by which request
can be forced on the intricacy of such components. ISM distinguishes the structure
inside an arrangement of related components and give a chance to investigate it from
a few perspectives. This approach is interpretive as the judgment of the gathering
chooses whether and how the various components are connected. It is basic based on
shared relationship; a general structure is extracted from the intricate arrangement of
components. It is a demonstrating method, as the particular connections and generally
structure are depicted in a digraph model.
2.5 Steps Involved in ISM Methodology
Step 1: The first step in ISM involves identification of relevant variables to this issue
from literature.
Step 2: This step involves establishing contextual relationships among all the
variables by understanding the influence of each element on the other. Overall, it
represents which element leads or follows.
Step 3: Structural Self-Interaction Matrix (SSIM) for the variables involved is
developed.
Step 4: A reachability matrix from the SSIM is developed using the method of
ISM.
Step 5: Different levels of the identified elements determined using the reachability
matrix.
Step 6: The levels determined for all the factors in the previous step used to make
a digraph.
Step 7: Final ISM is developed.
2.6 ISM on Risk Factors
Step 1: A total of nine elements for risk factors involved in transportation of perishable
goods are identified.
Step 2: Contextual relationship among the identified factors was developed based
on the assumptions. Each factor is analyzed, and a contextual relationship of “leads
to” or “influences” type is chosen, which means that one factor influences the other.
On the basis of this, the contextual relationship among all the factors is developed.2 Modeling of Risk Factors in Transportation of Perishable Goods … 17
Step 3: Based on contextual relationships discussed, the SSIM is developed and
finalized, by considering each of the nine factors with respect to the other factors,
considering two factors at a time. SSIM shown is Table 2.1.
Step 4: Using the SSIM, the final reachability matrix is determined and presented
in Table 2.2.
Step 5: Reachability, antecedent and intersection set are generated using the reach￾ability matrix and presented in Tables 2.3 and 2.4 showing the final level of elements
in ISM.
Step 6: Variable hierarchy diagram is generated and shown in Fig. 2.1.
Step 7: Variable hierarchy is converted into an ISM and presented in Fig. 2.2.
Table 2.1 SSIM
Variables 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2
1 O V X O O O O O
2 A V X O O X X
3 A V X O O X
4 X X X O V
5 A X V X
6 O X O
7 V V
8 V
9
Source Author
Table 2.2 Final reachability matrix
Variable 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
1 1 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 0
2 0 1 1 1 0 0 1 1 0
3 0 1 1 1 0 0 1 1 0
4 0 1 1 1 1 0 1 1 1
5 0 0 0 0 1 1 1 1 0
6 0 0 0 0 1 1 0 1 0
7 1 1 1 1 0 0 1 1 1
8 0 0 0 1 1 1 0 1 1
9 0 1 1 1 1 1 0 0 1
Source Author18 G. Gupta et al.
Table 2.3 Reachability,
antecedent and intersection
set
Variable Reachability set Antecedent set Intersection set
1 1,7,8 1,7 1,7
2 2,3,4,7,8 2,3,4,7,9 2,3,4,7
3 2,3,4,7,8 2,3,4,7,9 2,3,4,7
4 2,3,4,5,7,8,9 2,3,4,7,8,9 2,3,4,7,8,9
5 5,6,7,8 4,5,6,8,9 5,6,8
6 5,6,8 5,6,8 5,6,8
7 1,2,3,4,7,8,9 1,2,3,4,5,7 1,2,3,4,7
8 4,5,6,8,9 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8 4,5,6,8
9 2,3,4,5,9 4,7,8,9 4,9
Source Author
Table 2.4 Level of elements
in ISM Variable Reachability set Antecedent set Level
1 1,7,8 1,7 Level 2
2 2,3,4,7,8 2,3,4,7,9 Level 4
3 2,3,4,7,8 2,3,4,7,9 Level 4
4 2,3,4,5,7,8,9 2,3,4,7,8,9 Level 6
5 5,6,7,8 4,5,6,8,9 Level 2
6 5,6,8 5,6,8 Level 1
7 1,2,3,4,7,8,9 1,2,3,4,5,7 Level 6
8 4,5,6,8,9 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8 Level 3
9 2,3,4,5,9 4,7,8,9 Level 5
Source Author
Fig. 2.1 Variable hierarchy
diagram. Source Author
9
7 4
2 3 
8
6
1 5 2 Modeling of Risk Factors in Transportation of Perishable Goods … 19
Infrastructure problems Cross contamination 
Incorrect usage of packing material or improper 
packing of transportation unit 
Improper temperature 
control
Improper holding practices for 
food products and awaiting 
shipment or inspection 
Accident during transportation 
Improper loading practices, conditions 
or equipment and sanitation
Lack of Security 
Improper transportation unit 
design 
Fig. 2.2 Final ISM. Source Author
2.7 Conclusion
With the help of interpretive structure modeling, an ordered directional framework
for the issue pertaining to risk factors involved in transportation of perishable goods
is developed. This procedure gives us a realistic picture of the situation and the
variables (risk factors) involved. This model helps us in determining the key factor
related to the problem. The model essentially indicates that accidents is the biggest
risk factor in transportation of perishable goods as they occupy Level 1 in the ISM.
Moreover, it also indicates the immediate need to cope with the risk associated with
accidents in order to avoid loss of perishable products in future. Lack of security and
improper loading practices are the tier 2 threats during the transportation process.
Lastly, cross-contamination and infrastructure problems occupy the base positions
in the mode (Level 6) indicating that they carry minimum risk during transportation.20 G. Gupta et al.
References
1. Chung KJ, Ting PS (1993) A heuristic for replenishment of deteriorating items with a linear
trend in demand. J Oper Res Soc 44(12):1235–1241. https://doi.org/10.1057/jors.1993.202
2. Tarantilis CD, Kiranoudis CT (2001) A meta-heuristic algorithm for the efficient distribution of
perishable foods. J Food Eng 50:1–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0260-8774(00)00187-4
3. Tarantilis CD, Kiranoudis CT (2002) Distribution of fresh meat. J Food Eng 51:85–91. https://
doi.org/10.1016/S0260-8774(01)00040-1
4. Hsu CI, Hung SF, Li HC (2007) Vehicle routing problem with time-windows for perishable food
delivery. J Food Eng 80:465–475. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfoodeng.2006.05.029
5. Osvald A, Stirn LZ (2008) A vehicle routing algorithm for the distribution of fresh vegetables
and similar perishable food. J Food Eng 85 285–195 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfoodeng.2007.
07.008
6. Federgruen A, Prastacos G, Zipkin PH (1986) Allocation and distribution model for perishable
products. Oper Res 34:75–82. https://doi.org/10.1287/opre.34.1.75
7. Le T, Diabat A, Richard JP, Yih Y (2013) A column generation-based heuristic algorithm for
an inventory routing problem with perishable goods. Optim Lett 1481–1502. https://doi.org/10.
1007/s11590-012-0540-2
8. Aung MM, Chang YS (2014) Temperature management for the quality assurance of a perishable
food supply chain. Food Control 40:198–207. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodcont.2013.11.016Chapter 3
Forecast Modelling in Supply Chain
Management of Food Processing
Industry: A Case Study
P. M. Kulkarni, Sarat Kumar Jena, and Prayag Gokhale
Abstract Supply chain management has grown into one of the most vital elements
of the food industry. The main reason for this is, the nature of food which has a
short shelf life forecasting the elements of the food supply chain has turned out to be
inevitable. The study focuses on the several quantitative and qualitative approaches
that are comprehensively adopted for forecasting in the food processing industry;
the study also takes account of the scenarios under which each of these approaches
can be effectively adopted. In this study, the primary focus is on the methods of fore￾casting viz. moving averages, exponential smoothening, and the methods allied to the
calculation of the error rate in forecasting, like the mean squared error, mean absolute
deviation, and mean absolute percentage error are also being illustrated through the
use of a case study of Ideal Food Products, Belgaum. According to the calculations,
it is found that the error rate for exponential smoothening is comparatively less than
that of the moving averages, and it is being observed that the use of multiple methods
in forecasting will provide a more accurate judgement to the people involved in the
process of food supply chain management.
Keywords Food supply chain · Forecasting · Forecasting error · Moving
averages · Exponential smoothening
P. M. Kulkarni (B)
Department of MBA, KLS Gogte Institute of Technology, Udyambag, Belagavi, Karnataka, India
e-mail: pmkulkarni@git.edu
S. K. Jena
Xavier Institute of Management, Xavier Square, Bhubaneswar 751013, India
P. Gokhale
Department of MBA, KLE Dr. M S Sheshgiri College of Engineering and Technology,
Udyambag, Belagavi, Karnataka, India
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2022
R. S Mor et al. (eds.), Operations and Supply Chain Management in the Food Industry,
Lecture Notes in Management and Industrial Engineering,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-16-5555-5_3
2122 P. M. Kulkarni et al.
3.1 Introduction
Prediction of the future happenings is known as forecasting. However, speculation
and forecasting are two different terms, wherein speculation is based on personal
experience, while forecasting is an application of scientific methods for predicting
the future. These future predictions with regards to the business organization include
a change in prices of a commodity, demand for production, production forecasting,
inventory forecasting, etc., which happens because of uncertain market demand,
dynamic business environment, the short life cycle of the product, technological inno￾vation, and globalization. Similarly, a company tries to predict the future demand for
its product in the market. These predictions are based on various tools and techniques
of forecasting [1].
Forecasting in supply chain management includes planning, evaluation, and deci￾sion making with regards to inventory, production, scheduling, design, and distri￾bution of products to retailers, distributors, and consumers. This forecasting is
supported by long-term, medium-term, and short-term strategic plans for effective
implementation and achievement of higher customer satisfaction [2].
3.1.1 Importance of Forecasting in Supply Chain
Management
Forecasting plays a significant role in several areas of the enterprise, especially for
supply chain decisions. For instance, in the case of procurement of raw materials, the
supply chain supports in forecasting and procurement of raw material for production.
Therefore, forecasting in supply chain management is important for the organization.
The importance of forecasting in supply chain management is as follows;
1. Customer’s needs and demands change; hence, it is important to understand
these changing needs and forecasted inventory for the production [3].
2. Inventory for production includes durable and non-durable products. The fore￾casting technique supports the identification of the right quality of inven￾tory required for production and reduced the cost of inventory storage in the
organization [4].
3. Recent technology is influencing supply chain management. These technolo￾gies include artificial intelligence, blockchain, and big data analytics. These
technologies support the inventory forecasting for production [5, 6].3 Forecast Modelling in Supply Chain Management of Food Processing … 23
3.1.2 Challenges of Forecasting in Supply Chain
Management
The main objective of supply chain management is to achieve a smooth flow of
inventory to achieve a higher level of production. This is possible through the imple￾mentation of best practices concerning demand forecasting, lead times, and stock
quantities. However, there are challenges with regards to the implementation of best
practices as follows;
1. Forecasting is influenced by demand, changing consumption patterns of
consumers, and the influence of the unorganized competitive market. Therefore,
attaining accuracy in forecasting is a challenge to the organization [7].
2. Companies invest heavily in marketing and communication to attract consumers
and retain consumers; this influences supply and demand in the market. Hence,
the marketing and sales strategies of competitors influence the forecasting of
the inventory [8].
3. Storage of raw material and storage of final finished products need effective
collaboration with the inventory department and production department. In
the event of a lack of collaboration and coordination with these departments,
accuracy of forecasting is reduced and influences the production process [9].
4. Forecasting is greatly influenced by the effective strategy of supply chain
management, especially for the food industry, as they operate in perishable
products. Food manufacturing companies need to develop strategies that are in
coordination with organizational strategy [10].
5. Supply chain strategy includes food products, manufacturing or processing,
vendor management, and logistics management. All these factors need to be
included in the supply chain management strategy of a food company [11].
6. Strategic supply chain management needs to be supported with the latest tech￾nology which includes artificial intelligence and the Internet of things; these
technologies support in providing real-time data with regards to products logis￾tics, vendor sales, and distributions, and warehousing, which is essential for
effective supply chain management strategic decisions [12].
3.1.3 Supply Chain Forecasting Methods
Forecasting methods in supply chain management are influenced by several factors
such as seasonal demand for food inventory, labour cost, change in consumer buying
habits, and distribution and logistics challenges. Selection of the right method for
supply chain forecasting is important. There are various methods of forecasting, these
methods are presented in Table 3.1.24 P. M. Kulkarni et al.
Table 3.1 Methods and selection of supply chain forecasting in the food industry
S. No. Method of forecasting Application of forecasting
1 Delphi Method: It is a process to arrive at
an opinion or decision through survey of
panel of experts. Opinion and decision are
collected through a questionnaire and
shared with the panel of expert after each
round [13]
Long-term forecasting which includes
food product demand, food products
sales forecasting, and new food product
demand analysis
2 Market Research: This method of
forecasting identifies new markets, new
products by contacting the future customers
for the company. This method provides
information with regards to perception of
the customers towards the products and
services [13]
Long-term forecasting which includes
identification of new areas of food
ingredients for food production, changing
supply chain channels, future demand for
food product, consumer preferences
3 Panel Consensus: In this method, internal
experts from cross-functional areas are
involved and discussion related to services
and activities feedback is collected, and
finally, they reach a conclusion through
discussion [13]
Forecasting of long-range and new
products, and sales forecasting
4 Visionary Forecast: Future consequence of
the event is analysed through data and
forecasting is undertaken in the company
[13]
Forecasting future logistic management,
distribution channels, sales of food
products, new market for food products,
changing pattern of consumers
5 Historical Analogy: Past sales related to
battery of products and services are
considered for forecasting of products and
services [13]
Forecasting of long-range and new
products, and sales forecasting
6 Moving Average: In this process, average
price is considered for a period of time,
days. This is applied to understand the
average price for the product or service [13]
Inventory control for low-volume items
7 Exponential Smoothing: In this tool,
exponential method is applied and an
average data of price is collected for
forecasting [13]
Production, inventory control, forecasts
of margins and financial data
8 Box–Jenkins: It is a mathematical
technique for forecasting based from a
range of time duration. The technique of
autoregressive integrated moving average
(ARIMA) is related to this technique [13]
Production and inventory control for
large volume its
9 X-11: In this method time series in
estimation of trends with regards to
seasonal variation is provided by applying
right weightage for end results of the
forecasting [13]
Logistics, department forecasts of
company sales
(continued)3 Forecast Modelling in Supply Chain Management of Food Processing … 25
Table 3.1 (continued)
S. No. Method of forecasting Application of forecasting
10 Trend Projection: In this method, huge
data is used for forecasting, the data related
to past information with regards to sales or
production is applied for forecasting [13]
New-product forecasts (particularly
intermediate and long term)
11 Regression Model: In this method,
dependent and independent factors are
considered for forecasting is applied to
understand the factors influencing the
forecasting [13]
Sales by products, inventory by class,
margins
12 Econometric Model: In this technique,
forecasting related to economic factors is
considered to project the future demand for
products and services in the organization
[13]
Sales by products, inventory by class,
margins
13 Intention to Buy: New products and
services sales are forecasted through this
method. In this method, likely intention of
buying is forecasted through this method
[13]
Sales by products, inventory by class,
margins
14 Economic Input–Output Model:
Influence of economic factors is analysed
and forecasted through this method; the
results are positive and negative with regard
to influence on economic aspects of
business [13]
Industry sector sales, company sales
15 Diffusion Index: This is an index which is
applied to understand the common trend
through a mathematical technique [13]
Forecasting of sales by inventory class
16 Leading Indicator: Business factors and
influence on indictors are predicted and
forecasted through this technique [13]
Forecasting of sales by inventory class
17 Life-Cycle Analysis: It is a tool which
considers production to sales of a products
and forecasting is undertaken through this
method [13]
Forecasting of new product sales
Source Author
3.1.4 Forecasting Duration And Its Application Models
Modelling for forecasting is influenced by time duration that is short-term, medium￾term, and long-term forecasting. There are different modelling methods of forecasting
based on the time duration; the details with regards to methods based on time duration
are presented in Table 3.2.26 P. M. Kulkarni et al.
Table 3.2 Time duration and modelling of forecasting[14]
Application Short term (0–3 months) Medium term (3
months–2 years)
Long term (more
than 2 years)
Forecast quality Individual products and
services
Sales forecasting Total sales
Decision area Inventory forecasting
Production scheduling
Logistic forecasting
Distribution
forecasting
Production planning
Inventory purchase
planning
Inventory capacity
planning
Storage location and
planning
Forecasting models • Moving average
• Exponential smoothing
• Box–Jenkins
• X-11
• Trend projections
• Regression model
• Econometric model
• Intention to buy and
anticipations surveys
• Economic input–output
model
• Diffusion index
• Leading indicator
• Life-cycle analysis
• Exponential
smoothing
• Delphi method
• Market research
• Panel consensus
• Visionary forecast
• Historical analogy
• Regression model
• Econometric model
• Intention to buy
and anticipations
surveys
• Economic
input–output
Model
• Diffusion index
• Leading indicator
• Life-cycle analysis
judgement
• Delphi method
• Market research
• Panel consensus
• Visionary forecast
• Historical analogy
• Regression model
• Econometric model
• Intention to buy
and anticipations
surveys
• Economic
input–output model
• Diffusion index
• Leading indicator
• Life-cycle analysis
judgement
3.1.5 Models of Forecasting and Levels of Accuracy
in Forecasting
Forecasting models are influenced by the level of accuracy that means, any forecasting
has a component of error. Therefore, while understanding the forecasting, the error
level needs to be reduced to reach actual forecasting; there are three most popular
methods of understanding the errors in forecasting [15]. These three methods of
forecasting error are (1) mean squared error (MSE), (2) mean absolute deviation
(MAD), and (3) mean absolute percentage error (MAPE) [15].
3.1.5.1 Mean Squared Error (MSE)
In this method of forecasting error, the standard deviation of forecast error is
considered while forecasting. The formula for calculating mean squared error [16].
MSE = 1
N

T
t=1
(yt − ft)
2 = SSE
N (3.1)3 Forecast Modelling in Supply Chain Management of Food Processing … 27
where
yt = is the actual outcome value at time t.
f t = is the forecast value at time t.
SSE = is the sum of squared errors.
N = No. of observations.
3.1.5.2 Mean Absolute Deviation (MAD)
It is a set of datasets that shows the average distance between each data point and
the mean value. This method shows the variability in a dataset. The formula for
calculating mean absolute deviation (MAD) is as under [14]
MAD = n
i=1
|ei − e| (3.2)
where
• ei = performance value for period i
• e = average Value
• n = number of observations.
3.1.5.3 Mean Absolute Percentage Error (MAPE)
This is a measure to forecast the accuracy through percentage. The MAPE is calcu￾lated by taking an average absolute per cent error minus the real value which is divided
by the real value. The formula for mean absolute percentage error is as under;
MAPE = 1
n
n
i
=|
v(t) − P(t)
V(t)
∗ 100 (3.3)
where V(t) = Actual value, P(t) = Forecast value and n = Number of ex-post periods.
3.2 Case Study on the Effective Forecasting of Supply
Chain Decisions of Ideal Food Products, Belgaum,
Karnataka-India
3.2.1 Background of the Company
Ideal Food Products established in the year 1950 to manufacture and sell edible
syrups and fruit pulps. At the opening of this unit, there were very few companies28 P. M. Kulkarni et al.
manufacturing these two products. The location of the unit was an added advantage
to Ideal Food Products, as they were able to cater to the needs of customers in the
region of North Karnataka, Goa, and South Maharashtra.
3.2.2 Problem Statements
The sales of the company have shown an increase and decrease in the last decade due
to the entry of new companies and changing consumer needs and demands. Further,
there was pressure on the inventory cost due to an increase in the price of inventory,
especially specific key fruits such as mango, strawberry, and dry fruits. In the last
few years, the cost of logistics and storage has increased by 15%. The challenges
with regards to Ideal Food Products are as follows;
1. The total income in April 2019 was 150,000 and in March 2020; it is reduced
to 141,000. Hence, there was a reduction of 9000 income reduction from April
2019 to March 2020(Annexure 1)
The production cost has increased by 39,500 in April 2019 to 52,900 in
March 2020. However, the cost of raw material has shown fluctuation in cost
due to the influence of seasonal demand for fruits.
2. Factors that have influenced the supply chain management shows that the
average inventory cost is 42,500; this has led to an increase in the production
cost to 43,000. Therefore, inventory cost has influenced the overall production
cost of Ideal Food Products. (Annexure 2)
3.2.3 Forecasting Modelling for Ideal Food Products
The following forecasting models are used to understand sales forecasting and inven￾tory cost forecasting. The moving average method is applied to understand the fore￾casting of sales. While exponential smoothing modelling is applied to forecast the
inventory cost of Ideal Food Products
3.2.4 Calculations of Forecasting
In this section, the study presents the results with regards to two models of forecasting;
they are moving average forecasting and exponential smoothing forecasting.3 Forecast Modelling in Supply Chain Management of Food Processing … 29
Table 3.3 Three-month
moving average forecasting Period Sales (Rs. ‘000) Forecasts (Rs. ‘000)
July 150 –
August 120 –
September 151 –
October 95 (150 + 120 + 151)/3 =
140.3333
November 99 (120 + 151 + 95)/3 = 122
December 112 (151 + 95 + 99)/3 = 115
January 102 (95 + 99 + 112)/3 = 102
February 98 (99 + 112 + 102)/3 = 104.3333
March 95 (112 + 102 + 98)/3 = 104
April – (102 + 98 + 95)/3 = 98.3333
Source Author
3.2.4.1 Sales Forecasting Through Moving Average Model
of Forecasting
Moving average is calculated as under
T t ˆ = 1mkj = −kyt + j (3.4)
where m = 2k + 1, i.e. t is obtained by calculating the average of values in the time
series within k periods of t. The observations are likely to be near in value which
are proximate in time. Therefore, the randomness in the data is eliminated by the
averages, leading to a smooth trend cycle. It is called as moving average of an order
m. The calculations with regards to the sales of Idea Food Products are presented in
Tables 3.3 and 3.4 depicts the error metrics for moving average forecasting.
Therefore, the forecast for April using a three-month moving average is 98.3. The
MAD (mean average deviation) = 14.44, the MSE (mean square error) = 452.37,
and the MAPE (mean average percentage error) = 14.93%.
3.2.4.2 Inventory Forecasting Through Exponential Smoothing Model
of Forecasting
The cost of higher inventory influences the profitability of the company; to understand
the influence of inventory cost, an exponential smoothing model of forecasting is
applied in the study as shown in Table 3.5, whereas Table 3.6 shows the error metrics.
The exponential smoothing is calculated as follows
yTˆ + h|T = yT, for h = 1, 2,... (3.5)30 P. M. Kulkarni et al.
Table 3.4 Calculations of the corresponding error metrics for moving average forecasting
Period Sales
(Rs.
‘000)
Forecasts
(Rs. ‘000)
Abs. error Error2 Abs. % error
July 150 –
August 120 –
September 151 –
October 95 140.3 |95 −
140.3333|
= 45.3333
(95 − 140.3333)2 =
2055.11
|95 −
140.3333|/95
= 47.72%
November 99 122 |99 − 122|
= 23
(99 − 122)2 = 529 |99 − 122|/99
= 23.23%
December 112 115 |112 − 115|
= 3
(112 − 115)2 = 9 |112 −
115|/112 =
2.68%
January 102 102 |102 − 102|
= 0
(102 − 102)2 = 0 |102–102|/02
= 0%
February 98 104.3 |98 −
104.3333|
= 6.3333
(98 − 104.3333)2 = 40.11 |98 − 140|/98
= 6.46%
March 95 104 |95 − 104|
= 9
(95 − 104)2 = 81 |95 − 140|/95
= 9.47%
April – 98.3
Source Author
Table 3.5 Exponential
smoothing (ES) forecast with
smoothing constant α = 1
Period Inventory (Rs. ‘000) Forecasting (Rs. ‘000)
January 45 45
February 38 45 + 1·(45 − 45) = 45
March 56 45 + 1·(38 − 45) = 38
April 35 38 + 1·(56 − 38) = 56
May 39 56 + 1·(35 − 56) = 35
June 45 35 + 1·(39 − 35) = 39
July 42 39 + 1·(45 − 39) = 45
August 41 45 + 1·(42 − 45) = 42
September 39 42 + 1·(41 − 42) = 41
October – 41 + 1·(39 − 41) = 39
Source Author3 Forecast Modelling in Supply Chain Management of Food Processing … 31
Table 3.6 Exponential smoothing (ES) forecast corresponding error metrics
Period Inventory (Rs.
‘000)
Forecasting (Rs.
‘000)
Abs. error Error2 Abs. % error
January 45 45 |45 − 45|
= 0
(45 − 45)2
= 0
|45 − 45|/45
= 0%
February 38 45 |38 − 45|
= 7
(38 − 45)2
= 49
|38 − 45|/38
= 18.42%
March 56 38 |56 − 38|
= 18
(56 − 38)2
= 324
|56 − 38|/56
= 32.14%
April 35 56 |35 − 56|
= 21
(35 − 56)2
= 441
|35 − 56|/35
= 60%
May 39 35 |39 − 35|
= 4
(39 − 35)2
= 16
|39 − 35|/39
= 10.26%
June 45 39 |45 − 39|
= 6
(45 − 39)2
= 36
|45 − 39|/45
= 13.33%
July 42 45 |42 − 45|
= 3
(42 − 45)2
= 9
|42 − 45|/42
= 7.14%
August 41 42 |41 − 42|
= 1
(41 − 42)2
= 1
|41 − 42|/41
= 2.44%
September 39 41 |39 − 41|
= 2
(39 − 41)2
= 4
|39 − 41|/39
= 5.13%
October – 39
Source Author
Hence, the raw technique adopts that the most current observed values are the
only significant, and all earlier interpretations offer no evidence for the future. This
can be understood as a weighted average in which all the weightage is set to the
terminal observed value. Using the average technique, all future forecasts are equal
to a simple average of the experimental data.
yTˆ + h|T = 1T Tt = 1yt, for h = 1, 2,... (3.6)
So, the average technique accepts that all observed values are of equal significance
and provides these observed values equal weightage while making a forecast.We time
and again need something amid these two limits. For instance, it might be practical to
assign higher weightages to most current observed values than the values observed
from the past. This exactly is the context governing the simple exponential smoothing.
The forecasts are made through weighted averages, in which the weightages will
reduce exponentially as the observed values originate from further in the past—the
minimum weights are related to the oldest observed values:
yTˆ + 1|T = αyT + α(1 − α)yT − 1 + α(1 − α)2yT − 2,... (3.7)32 P. M. Kulkarni et al.
Table 3.7 Application forecasting modelling and level of accuracy for forecasting
Application Short term (0–3 months) Medium term (3 months–1 year)
Forecast quality Food products sales Inventory cost
Decision area Sales forecasting Sales forecasting
Forecasting models Moving average Exponential smoothing
Forecasting error MAD = 14.44
MSE = 452.37
MAPE = 14.93%
MAD = 6.89,
MSE = 97.78
MAPE = 16.54%
Source Author
where 0 ≤ α ≤ 1 is the smoothing parameter. T + 1 is the weighted average of all
of the observed values in the progressions y1, …, yT. The rate at which the weights
drop is controlled by the parameter Alpha (α).
Therefore, for the given time series data, the forecast for October is 393939 using
an exponential smoothing technique with α = 1. MAD = 6.89, MSE = 97.78, and
MAPE = 16.54%
3.2.5 Outcome of the Forecasting Modelling for Ideal Food
Products
In the above case study, different models of forecasting were adopted. Sales and
inventory cost were considered an important construct for forecasting. Therefore,
considering the case situation, moving average and exponential smoothing modelling
were applied for the study for short term forecasting and medium-term forecasting.
The results and outcomes are presented in Table 3.7
The forecasting modelling indicated that Ideal Food Products needs to use
measures to reduce distribution costs by identifying areas of cost such as transport
cost, labour cost, and application of technology, which would improve these costs.
Finally, sales of the company need to be improved by identifying new markets and
identify new channels of distribution such as online marketing websites, e-retailers,
which would provide additional revenue to the company.
3.3 Conclusions
The increasing rate of inflation and its pressure on the supply chain elements has
led the enterprises to strategically adopt the best practices in the supply chain and
to forecast and optimally reduce the cost on the elements of the supply chain and
increase its profitability.3 Forecast Modelling in Supply Chain Management of Food Processing … 33
The study presented various forecasting tools that can be adopted by the enter￾prises depending on the type of product, the duration of projection, and the accuracy
that the firm accepts from such projections. The various methods as suggested in this
study can be adopted by the enterprises as per their needs and requirements, and it
is always beneficial to employ more than one method of forecasting for generating
more dependable results.
The best supply chain practices with regards to the food industry include demand
forecasting and collaborative planning, forecasting, and replenishment. In this
chapter, we have focused on forecasting the elements of supply chain decisions
with special reference to the food processing industry.
It is being put forth from the study that the strategic decisions concerning supply
chain decisions in the food processing industry need to be accurate, driven by
real-time data for effective strategic implementation, and match the customer’s
expectations to achieve a higher level of customer satisfaction.
The study covers various quantitative and qualitative methods of forecasting that
are extensively used in the food processing industry, along with the scenarios under
which each of the methods can be effectively adopted for forecasting. It also focuses
on the accuracy of the results through the various techniques and discusses the mean
absolute deviation which is the average deviation between the actual and the estimated
results and the cumulative error is the summation of all the errors.
Lastly, the case study on the Ideal Food Products benefits in understanding the
application of various techniques of forecasting in the food processing sector. The
illustrations, shown through company data, related to the moving averages and
exponential smoothening models provide a better insight into these methods in
forecasting.
3.4 Disclosure
Conflict of Interest Dr. P.M. Kulkanri and co-authors declare that there is no conflict
of interest and have not received any funds from the company under study and the
company under the study has issued required permissions for publication of data and
information in the book chapter.
Annexure 1—Income Statement of Ideal Food Products
(Source Author)34 P. M. Kulkarni et al. Particulars Apr 19 May 19 June 19 July 19 Aug 19 Sept 19 Oct 19 Nov 19 Dec 19 Jan 20 Feb 20 Mar 20 Income Sales Cash sales 112.50 90.00 113.25 71.25 74.25 84.00 76.50 73.50 71.25 109.50 68.25 89.25 Credit sales 37.50 30.00 37.75 23.75 24.75 28.00 25.50 24.50 23.75 36.50 22.75 29.75 Total income (A) 150.00 120.00 151.00 95.00 99.00 112.00 102.00 98.00 95.00 146.00 91.00 119.00 Expenditure Raw materials Purchase cost 36.00 30.40 44.80 28.00 31.20 36.00 33.60 32.80 31.20 41.60 30.40 35.20 Inventory cost 9.00 7.60 11.20 7.00 7.80 9.00 8.40 8.20 7.80 10.40 7.60 8.80 Total cost of raw materials 45.00 38.00 56.00 35.00 39.00 45.00 42.00 41.00 39.00 52.00 38.00 44.00 Other expenditure Storage cost 4.80 2.20 5.10 2.80 2.70 4.80 4.70 3.90 3.70 5.40 2.20 4.60 Production cost 33.00 38.00 55.00 41.00 48.00 43.00 46.00 39.00 41.00 49.00 42.00 49.00 Distribution cost 1.20 1.30 1.80 1.50 1.70 1.60 1.50 1.40 1.50 1.30 1.50 1.40 Marketing cost 0.50 0.80 1.10 1.30 1.60 1.90 2.20 2.80 2.40 3.10 3.50 3.90 Cost of production 39.50 42.30 63.00 46.60 54.00 51.30 54.40 47.10 48.60 58.80 49.20 58.90 Total cost (
B) 84.50 80.30 119.00 81.60 93.00 96.30 96.40 88.10 87.60 110.80 87.20 102.90
Profit before interest and tax (A
−
B) 65.50 39.70 32.00 13.40 6.00 15.70 5.60 9.90 7.40 35.20 3.80 16.10
Tax (30%) 19.65 11.91 9.6 4.02 1.8 4.71 1.68 2.97 2.22 10.56 1.14 4.83
Profit after tax 45.85 27.79 22.40 9.38 4.20 10.99 3.92 6.93 5.18 24.64 2.66 11.273 Forecast Modelling in Supply Chain Management of Food Processing … 35
Annexure 2—Supply Chain Management Cost of Ideal Food
Products (Source Author)
Months Sales
(Rs.
‘000)
Inventory
cost (Rs.
‘000)
Storage
cost (Rs.
‘000)
Production
cost (Rs.
‘000)
Distribution
cost (Rs.
‘000)
Marketing
cost (Rs.
‘000)
Total cost
of
production
(Rs. ‘000)
Apr-19 150.00 45.00 4.80 33.00 1.20 0.50 84.50
May-19 120.00 38.00 2.20 38.00 1.30 0.80 80.30
Jun-19 151.00 56.00 5.10 55.00 1.80 1.10 119.00
Jul-19 95.00 35.00 2.80 41.00 1.50 1.30 81.60
Aug-19 99.00 39.00 2.70 48.00 1.70 1.60 93.00
Sep-19 112.00 45.00 4.80 43.00 1.60 1.90 96.30
Oct-19 102.00 42.00 4.70 46.00 1.50 2.20 96.40
Nov-19 98.00 41.00 3.90 39.00 1.40 2.80 88.10
Dec-19 95.00 39.00 3.70 41.00 1.50 2.40 87.60
Jan-20 146.00 52.00 5.40 49.00 1.30 3.10 110.80
Feb-20 91.00 38.00 2.20 42.00 1.50 3.50 87.20
Mar-20 119.00 44.00 4.60 49.00 1.40 3.90 102.90
Annexure 3—Sales Forecast of Ideal Food Products36 P. M. Kulkarni et al. Year Apr 19 May 19 June 19 July 19 Aug 19 Sept 19 Oct 19 Nov 19 Dec 19 Jan 20 Feb 20 Mar 20 Apr 20 May 20 June 20 Sales (Rs. ‘000) 150.00 120.00 151.00 95.00 99.00 112.00 102.00 98.00 95.00 146.00 91.00 119.00 141.00 110.38 114.773 Forecast Modelling in Supply Chain Management of Food Processing … 37
References
1. Korpela J, Tuominen M (1996) Inventory forecasting with a multiple criteria decision tool. Int
J Prod Econ 45(1–3):159–168
2. Zhong R, Xu X, Wang L (2017) Food supply chain management: systems, implementations,
and future research. Ind Manag Data Syst 117(9):2085–2114
3. Gružauskas V, Gimžauskien˙e E, Navickas V (2019) Forecasting accuracy influence on logistics
clusters activities: the case of the food industry. J Clean Prod 240:118225
4. Ilbery B, Maye D, Kneafsey M, Jenkins T, Walkley C (2004) Forecasting food supply chain
developments in lagging rural regions: evidence from the UK. J Rural Stud 20:331–344
5. Behnke K, Janssen MFWHA (2020) Boundary conditions for traceability in food supply chains
using blockchain technology. Int J Inf Manag 52:101969
6. Luo J, Ji C, Qiu C, Jia F (2018) Agri-food supply chain management: bibliometric and content
analyses. Sustainability 10(5):1573
7. Luthra S, Mangla SK (2018) When strategies matter: adoption of sustainable supply chain
management practices in an emerging economy’s context. Resour Conserv Recycl 138:194–206
8. Dellino G, Laudadio T, Mari R, Mastronardi N, Meloni C (2018) A reliable decision support
system for fresh food supply chain management. Int J Prod Res 56(4):1458–1485
9. Priyadarshi R, Panigrahi A, Routroy S, Garg GK (2019) Demand forecasting at retail stage for
selected vegetables: a performance analysis. J Model Manag 14(4):1042–1063
10. Emamisaleh K, Rahmani K (2017) Sustainable supply chain in food industries: drivers and
strategic sustainability orientation. Cogent Bus Manag 4(1):1345296
11. Vodenicharova MS (2020) Supply chain study in food industry in Bulgaria. Int J Retail Distrib
Manag 48(9):921–938
12. Kumar V, Chibuzo EN, Garza-Reyes JA, Kumari A, Rocha-Lona L, Lopez-Torres GC (2017)
The impact of supply chain integration on performance: evidence from the UK food sector.
Procedia Manuf 11:814–821
13. Chambers JC, Mullick SK, Smith DD (1971) How to choose the right forecasting technique.
Harvard University, Graduate School of Business Administration
14. Pham-Gia T, Hung TL (2001) The mean and median absolute deviations. Math Comput Model
34(7–8):921–936
15. Mahmoud E (1984) Accuracy in forecasting: a survey. J Forecast 3(2):139–159
16. Hyndman RJ, Koehler AB (2006) Another look at measures of forecast accuracy. Int J Forecast
679–688Chapter 4
Cost Competitiveness Through Value
Chain Analysis: A Study About Black
Pepper
Avanish Shandilya, Disha Gulia, and Sapna Arora
Abstract Black pepper has long been an important commercial spice in many parts
of the world. In recent times, the surplus of supply and rising proportion of spice
imports have harmed prices in major markets. India is a good example of this, where
farmers have been offering their produce at exceptionally low prices. This study
covers Sulthan Bathery, Kalpetta, Mattancherry, Ernakulam, and Kochi of Kerala and
Gudaloor of Tamil Nadu to identify the procurement and value chain models of these
markets. Identification and mapping of stages involved, intermediaries’ functions,
and value chain mapping thus lay the foundation for this chapter. The supply chain
models shown in the chapter help to understand how the supply chain looks like and
what are the nodes the commodity touches while in the value addition process. Also,
the cost sheet was studied to understand the financing of the value chain of black
pepper. The cost sheets will help an entrepreneur in coming to a fair deal with the
traders during the procurements. When it comes to choosing a procurement market,
the proprietor should understand its capability and standards to satisfy the goals of
the enterprise.
Keywords Cost sheet · Value chain · Black pepper · Procurement · Wholesaler
4.1 Introduction
The spices production in India has increased tremendously over a period of time.
The matter of fact is that 75 varieties of the 109 identified by International Standard
Organization (ISO) are produced in India. India is the world’s largest producer and
exporter of spices, contributing for half of global spice trade and exporting more
than 60% of its output [1]. Spices and seasoning mixes market were net valued at
Rs. 40k in 2017. The black pepper is designated as “King of Spices” due to its anti￾oxidant and nutrient property and is used for flavoring the food because of pungent
A. Shandilya · D. Gulia · S. Arora (B)
Department of Food Business Management and Entrepreneurship Development (FBMED),
National Institute of Food Technology Entrepreneurship and Management (NIFTEM), Kundli,
Sonipat, Haryana 131028, India
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2022
R. S Mor et al. (eds.), Operations and Supply Chain Management in the Food Industry,
Lecture Notes in Management and Industrial Engineering,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-16-5555-5_4
3940 A. Shandilya et al.
hot tasting spice as well as medicinal to cure stomach ache, bronchitis, and tumors
and is commonly used as a pain reliever. The market is dominated by many domestic
masala companies which include many local and regional players. The increasing
demand for the pepper is providing new market opportunities for the vendors to
enter with a hope to gain more margin as prices are continuously increasing. Even
though the production of black pepper is not increasing from last few years, yet
Indian black pepper is available at the highest prices [2]. As per the current market
scenario, the new crop of black pepper is expected to account for about 30–35% of
the market. Retail, commercial, and grocery or kirana shops are the three general
categories in which the industry can be divided. The quick service restaurant (QSR)
segment has also grown at a very good pace over a decade and is still growing at
a very decent pace. The Indian QSR market was valued at Rs. 20k Crores in 2016
and is expected to reach Rs. 50k Crores by 2021. There are a lot of opportunities for
young entrepreneurs in India to start a venture in the spices and seasonings segment.
4.1.1 Black Pepper Process
Black pepper is grown in the Western Ghats [1] covering Kerala, Karnataka, and
Tamil Nadu. The crop is grown, harvested, and preprocessed at the farm level. The
berries are washed and cleaned post-harvesting and then dried in shade for 48 h or
blanched and then dried. The blanched berries have a very less microbial load, and
hence, the berries are not contaminated and safe from contamination. The shade￾dried berries give the highest volatile oil yield. A standardized process of blanching
to make good quality black pepper was given by CFTRI, Mysore. The process is
simple and can be easily done by the farmers at the farm level, which will cut down
freight, labor, and other resources.
The freshly harvested berries are plucked from the spikes and cleaned. After
cleaning, the berries are passed into a perforated aluminum trough and dipped in a
vessel of boiling water for almost a minute. Berries are thereafter drained and poured
onto a concrete floor to dry in sun. Post this process, the berries are packaged and
transported from the farm to the collectors.
The collectors collect the berries from the farmers and do primary pre-cleaning
and drying (if required). The collected lots of berries are then sold to the suppliers
or manufacturers who procure based on the customer’s requirements.
4.1.2 Procurement
The procurement of black pepper is not easy as it seems. The market for the
commodity is very volatile and shows ups and downs due to many factors. Earlier, the
pepper market in India was concentrated in the southern part of the country but now4 Cost Competitiveness Through Value Chain Analysis … 41
black pepper is available all across the country whether one wants to buy cheaper Viet￾namese low-quality pepper or superior quality Idduki pepper; the commodity is avail￾able everywhere, increasing the concerns for adulteration, mixing, black marketing
and many more. The Vietnamese black pepper was routed to India via. Sri Lanka as
the import duty if a trader in India imports from Sri Lanka is far less than the import
duty on Vietnam imports,
Moreover, the SAFTA agreement of SAARC countries had supported the traders
in India to procure black pepper from Sri Lanka at 8% import duty instead of paying
54% from Vietnam. In case of demand up to 2500 tons, need not to pay any import
duty to Sri Lanka. This has created turmoil among the Indian pepper growers slowly;
India will become a net importer of black pepper. Recently, the government enforced
a minimum import price of Rs. 500 for black pepper imports irrespective of the source
to curb the misuse of the SAARC treaty and assured farmers to continue production
of the crop as the growers had no choice but to stop cultivating the black pepper.
The present chapter deals with the procurement of raw unground spices by the
industrial sector. With the view that the spices market will attain very high growth
soon, a lot of big players of FMCG and food segments like HUL, ITC, TATA,
NESTLE, McCormick, etc. are trying to or has entered the market hitting the B2B
and retails section. As is evident from market research conducted by P&S Market,
research showing that the spices and seasonings market may attain $30,412.8 in 2023
growing at a growth rate of 6% during the period of the forecast (2018–2023).
4.1.3 Meaning of Value Chain
The term “value chain” describes the entire set of tasks that are essential for bringing a
product from conception to completion (which requires a mix of physical and digital
processes), delivery to final customers, and final transition and feedback from various
producer services). Food value chains are created to gain a competitive advantage
by collaborating in a business venture. Producers, manufacturers, distributors, food
service providers, retailers, and supporting organizations are all linked by the food
value chain [3].
4.2 Review of Literature
The crop “black pepper” is one of the high-value spices, and the quality of Indian
spices is also superior in comparison to other markets. The authors reviewed the
various articles available on the value chain or supply chain of black pepper, however,
found very few relevant studies which are summarized here:
Sharangi and Acharaya [4] studied supply chain of the chosen orchard and plan￾tation crops such as banana and spices. The people’s participation in value addition
after post-harvest processing was also analyzed for the same crops. Hema et al.42 A. Shandilya et al.
[5] conducted research to determine the factors that influence its production, assess
farmer profitability, and investigate the price behavior of black pepper. The increasing
input cost and depressed prices in domestic or global markets discouraged farmers to
continue the production of black pepper [6]. Over the years, the domestic and export
prices have moved at lockstep and prices have appeared to reach equilibrium sooner
in the long term than before liberalization. Later, Paulrajan [7] looked at the routes
and distances spices traveled from the field to the market in both conventional and
coordinated retailing.
Prabhavathi et al. [8] discussed the practices involved, supply chain models and
their nodes, the price spread across the supply chain, and the efficiencies of the supply
chain models. The work provides a theoretical percentage of the price spread across
the supply chain for the red chili. Further, Yogesh et al. [9] have also conducted
a study on black pepper production and export performance. Ganpathy et al. [10]
identified that the study of manufacturing methods and quality control at the farm
level, as well as the evaluation of the black pepper value chain, are not different
from, but rather a component of value chain analysis. Value addition takes place at
each stage of the supply chain process starting from production, processing, storage,
and finally selling to the end consumers. Dessie et al. [11] studied the red pepper
value chain to determine the factors for supplying to the Abshire Woreda market.
The study suggests a measure to increase the producer share through an active role of
cooperatives and resulting in more production for the red pepper. Majo and Elsa [12]
identified that the Spice Board of India must amp up the promotion and development
activities at the grass-root level to help the small farmers engaged in the production of
cardamom. It must focus on creating new strategies to increase demand potential and
prospects, to assist cardamom growers and exporters in maintaining market linkages,
and to expand both domestic and foreign markets by increasing consumer aware￾ness and assisting farmers in producing high-quality Cardamom. Further, Cristiano
Mandinga Bonfim et al. [13] pointed out that the local agribusiness for black pepper
is still in its infancy. They proposed pepper seller certification, a collaboration among
independent producers who are unable to join the cooperative, a public–private part￾nership to establish structured trade route with neighboring countries, and a program
to improve supervisory skills among small traders. Krishnaraj et al. [14] studied the
existing logistical route of the spice trade to find food mileage for both the tradi￾tional and organized retailers. They concluded that, as a result of logistical changes,
nutritional miles for coordinated and organized stores have risen fairly. The major
factor responsible for higher food miles’ for the organized retailer is the availability
of more supply sources nearby the harvesting areas that are away from retail centers.
Friesenbichler et al. [15] explored how value chain integration affects the price fluc￾tuations at the sector level for European Union. Producer price inflation is lower in
sectors that become more backward integrated. Forward integration in the supply
chain is weaker as compared to the backward integration for these sectors.
The intended work gives an overview for new entrepreneurs to understand the
supply chain model, procurement strategies, and procurement cost of high valued
spices namely black pepper. The cost sheets are made considering in-depth processes
involved in the supply chain. It was inevitable to make the cost sheets without4 Cost Competitiveness Through Value Chain Analysis … 43
understanding the processes involved, and hence, the cost sheets have been made
in synchronization with the processes involved.
4.3 Problem Formulation
4.3.1 Objectives
The chapter aims to develop the cost sheets related to the processing and manufac￾turing of black pepper and to understand the strategies involved in maintaining the
supply chain and procurement decisions. The rationale of the study is to look at each
aspect of cost to achieve cost competitiveness even if the procurement cost could be
minimized with little change.
4.3.2 Research Methodology
The present study is exploratory in nature. The primary data was collected through
structured questionnaires prepared from farmers, suppliers, and brokers involved in
the supply chain of the black pepper crops. The sample units include the markets
surveyed and investigated under the project. The number of persons interviewed for
the project is 23 of which 16 are wholesale traders and exporters, 4 cultivators, and
3 employees of Spices Board of India.
4.3.3 Data Collection
The following markets have been selected for data collection: Sulthan Bathery,
Kalpetta, Mattancherry, Ernakulam, and Kochi of Kerala and Gudaloor of Tamil
Nadu.
The data collected was used in developing the cost sheets giving a full-length
view of the costs incurred at every activity by the bearer. The cost sheet makes
us understand at which node what amount of capital is involved to optimize the
procurement for a new enterprise. The questionnaires were also filled personally by
meeting the suppliers’ in-person.44 A. Shandilya et al.
4.3.4 Data Analysis
Percentage and tabular representation were used as statistical techniques for data
analysis. The percentage costs incurred out of total operational losses are analyzed
by using simple percentages. The supply chain models and procurement models are
also made with the help of the data collected.
4.4 Results and Discussions
This section explains the procedure for the supply chain of black pepper along with its
cost at each node of the supply chain for Mattancherry Market and SulthanBathery,
Kalpetta, and Gudaloor Market. In many cases, the masala companies tend to procure
the collector quality pepper to process it in their manufacturing facility and make
use of the by-products also. The suppliers collect the berries from the collectors and
pay the required commission and margin to the collectors. The manufacturers or
suppliers process the lot as per the customer’s specifications.
4.4.1 Mattancherry Market
The lot undergoes a series of processes required for making different grades of pepper.
Each process in the series carries a cost with it. The processes followed for making
different grades of the pepper berries are as follows:
• Varal—It means to lift with hands.
• Kuttu—It means to hit with any instrument.
• Navari—It means the lot name.
The nodes involved in the supply chain are as follows:
• Farmers/cultivators/producers
• Brokers/agents
• Collectors—who procure at a local level in small quantities and supply to
wholesale traders
• Manufacturers/Suppliers—who buy stock from the collectors and in some cases
directly from the farmers and sell to masala companies after transforming the
stocks as per their customer’s specifications.
After receiving the order from the collectors, the bags are unloaded and stacked.
The labor charges vary from market to market. In Kerala, labor charges are based
on a piece-work system wherein the charges are paid by the number of piece-works
performed by the worker and not by a fixed payment. The market has its labor union.
The pepper trade is regulated by an association named Indian Pepper and Spice Trade4 Cost Competitiveness Through Value Chain Analysis … 45
Fig. 4.1 Procurement model for black pepper (Mattancherry Market). Source Author
Association (IPSTA). The entity is composed of the giant suppliers of the market.
The Mattancherry market works on a broker model. Wherein every activity apart
from processing, ensuring standards, and dispatching the order to the customers
is done by the brokers. The brokers make sure that the desired quality, quantity,
time, credit period, etc. are maintained, and the delivery is done at the required time
for which they charge a percentage commission out of the total trade. This adds
another additional screen to the supply chain. The procure model for black pepper
of Mattancherry Market is explained in Fig. 4.1.
The manufacturers perform the desired processing required to generate the
customer grades. The processing converts the collector’s quality or ungarbled pepper
to garbled pepper. The ungarbled pepper has an inferior quality as it is less clean.
The dried berries may contain a fungus named phytophthora usually during rainy
seasons and require water-washing leading to an increase in operational loss percent￾ages. The water-washed berries are sun-dried or dried in mechanical driers based on
the lead time and the dispatch date. The dried berries are graded by the traders into
different grades based on the bulk density, black color, pungency, moisture content,
dia. of a berry, volatile oil content, piperine content, etc.
The most common grades for Indian pepper available in the Mattancherry market
are
• TGSEB—Tellicherry Garbled Super Extra Bold
• TGEB—Tellicherry Garbled Extra Bold
• MG1—Export Grade.
After the grading is done, the by-products are also separated as they fetch a good
economic value, for example, the Black pepper husk or spent, light berries, pest￾infected berries, pin-heads, etc. The by-products are exported to many countries and
oleoresins manufacturers. The percentage loss during the entire processing cycle
starting from water-washing the dried berries to packaging in a specified packaging
system by the customer depends on the weather conditions, supply, maturity of the
berries, crop status, and many more factors. During the seasonal times in the market,
the percentage loss in the entire processing is 2.5–3.0% of the total lot size processed.46 A. Shandilya et al.
During the off-season timings, the percentage loss can be as high as 4.5–5%. The
loss incurred in terms of volume is added by multiplying the percentage loss factors
with the value of per kg pepper. The certification from the laboratories is also a
requirement of the customers and is fulfilled by the suppliers. The testing is usually
done by an outsourced laboratory that certifies the lot with specifications given by
the suppliers. The specifications are mentioned in the agreements of the purchase
made between the suppliers and any other B2B entity, usually a masala company.
The market involves brokers at the two nodes of the supply chain. This procure￾ment model helps those companies who do not have a good idea about the market,
have communication barriers, etc. This procurement model provides the customer to
order by staying at their location, the broker takes care of the quality, lot size, and
delivery timings. The negotiation done is quite satisfying but in certain cases, the
brokers may not sell some material at a time to purchase for earning a better deal
from somewhere else, the masala companies face issues. The companies need to
completely rely on the brokers. The flow diagrams of the black pepper supply chain
(owned laboratory facilities and outsourced laboratory facilities) for this market are
depicted in Figs. 4.2 and 4.3, respectively.
The value addition along the supply chain decreases as we go from the farmer’s
end toward the supplier’s end. The value addition again increases and becomes the
highest in the retail sector wherein the product is made available near the residential
areas. The supply chain has a higher total cost than the one without brokers.
Most of the procurements by the masala companies happen to be from January
to April. During these four months, the Mattancherry market supplies black pepper
to almost the whole world. The supplies from other Indian states Karnataka, Tamil
Nadu, and other countries like Vietnam, Sri Lanka, Indonesia, Brazil, etc. hit the
Fig. 4.2 Supply chain models for black pepper (owned laboratory facilities), Mattancherry Market.
Source Author4 Cost Competitiveness Through Value Chain Analysis … 47
Fig. 4.3 Supply chain models for black pepper (outsourced laboratory facilities), Mattancherry
Market. Source Author
market post-April of year. The purchases during the rainy season are often ignored
because of unfair prices, disturbances in distribution channels, and hoarding. The
crop has a very volatile market and has shown many up and downtrends over a
decade irrespective of the government interventions. It is ideal to purchase during
the starting 4–5 months of the year. The credit period in this model was 30–45 days
after the purchase date. The lot dispatches once the customer has been sent a mail
containing the soft copy of a laboratory certificate. The cost sheet for the procurement
model is made using MS Excel. The cost sheet explains each cost incurred at every
node of the supply chain which is exhibited in Table 4.1.
The cost of procurement is less than the Mattancherry market as the region has
low labor charges, less number of buyers, and uncertainty of the crop. The buyers and
sellers are lesser in number than the Mattancherry market. Unlike the Mattancherry
market, this market also possesses traders who just sell the garbled uncleaned black
pepper at a very low rate. Some masala companies like to procure this kind of pepper
to process it in their facilities and to make use of the by-products also.
4.4.2 Sulthan Bathery, Kalpetta, and Gudaloor Market
The market established in Kalpetta and Sultan Bathery, Kerala, offers a mixed
procurement model, wherein a model without the broker’s intervention also exists.
The market is flooded with suppliers and small collectors and offers good quality
produce all over the year. The labor charges in these cities are different from the
Mattancherry market and influence the final cost as well. The flow diagram of the48 A. Shandilya et al.
Table 4.1 Cost sheet for black pepper whole (Mattancherry Market)
Source Author
black pepper procurement model and supply chain for these markets are depicted in
Figs. 4.4 and 4.5 respectively. The supplies to this market come from Wayanad and
Idduki, Kerala, and Kodagu in Karnataka. Most of the suppliers in these markets own
their plantations of pepper, clove, and cardamom. Gudaloor in Tamil Nadu is also a
big production center of black pepper. The market has a decent number of suppliers
but the capacity levels that factory owners require are a bit less with the suppliers.
The cost sheet of the black pepper value chain is exhibited in Table 4.2.
The black pepper markets in these areas are a bit cheaper than the Kochi market, as
all the varieties of black pepper are not available like the Kochi market. The brokers
engage at only one node of the supply chain, unlike the broker model.4 Cost Competitiveness Through Value Chain Analysis … 49
Fig. 4.4 Procurement model for black pepper (Sulthan Bathery and Kalpetta Market). Source
Author
Fig. 4.5 Supply chain model of black pepper (Sulthan Bathery and KalpettaMarket). SourceAuthor
4.5 Conclusion
The present work provides aid to the new enterprises in devising their strategies,
procurement model, and supply chain for black pepper procurement. Black pepper is a
very volatile commodity and highly dependent upon weather conditions. Sometimes,
due to extreme weather conditions, black pepper production gets affected, and this50 A. Shandilya et al.
Table 4.2 Cost sheet for black pepper (Sulthan Bathery and Kalpetta Market)
Source Author
drop in production results in the increase in the average annual price of black pepper
which can be seen in prices of a few years back.
This increase in the black pepper prices influenced the Indian manufacturers,
traders, and wholesalers to import more and more black pepper from around the
world, increasing the annual imports. This shows that black pepper procurement is a
tough decision when it comes to new entrants who want to enter the market. The new
enterprises may face problems in such situations as they would not be having enough
penetration in each market for pepper. The models discussed in the chapter namely
the supply chain models of Mattancherry, SulthanBathery, and Kalpetta show that
procurement from the Mattancherry market was a bit costlier than any other procure￾ment centers as the market operates with the involvement of brokers but provides a
better quality and food safety options than other markets. The cost sheets will help
an entrepreneur in coming to a fair deal with the traders during the procurements.
When it comes to choosing a procurement market, the proprietor should understand
its capability and standards to satisfy the goals of the enterprise. Every market has its
pros and cons. The procurement decision becomes very dynamic when it comes to4 Cost Competitiveness Through Value Chain Analysis … 51
procuring black pepper which is an agricultural commodity dependent on numerous
factors.
The market is the focus of all activities in a given chain. It is important to recognize
that all stakeholders involved in a supply chain must work together and align their
activities to meet the needs of the end customer.
4.6 Limitations and Future Scope of Work
The procurement market for black pepper is unorganized, and due to this, data
regarding the processes varies among traders. Further, the study is limited to few
markets, whereas too many small markets are also there. The trader played a bigger
role in the black pepper supply chain but these traders are not concentrated around a
region but are scattered across India. The sample units used in the report are chosen
based on the arrivals, sales, demand, technological capabilities, capacity, and ability
to supply supplies to factories.
The study can be further extended for other high values spices like green
cardamom and clove, saffron, cinnamon, etc. The study can be done from the
producer’s point of view regarding the investigation of increasing producer share
as the black pepper process requires lots of time and effort to reach the market.
References
1. Thangaselvabal T, Gailce Leo Justin C, Leelamathi M (2008) Black pepper (Piper Nigrum L.)
‘The king of spices’—a review. Agric Rev 29(2):89–98
2. Krishnakumar PK (2019, October 29) Black pepper prices lowest in a decade. The
Economic Times. https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/markets/commodities/news/black￾pepper-prices-lowest-in-a-decade/articleshow/71799047.cms
3. Food value chain partnerships—end to end approach (2020). ASSOCHAM. https://www.ass
ocham.org/userfiles/Food%20Value%20Chain%20Final-min.pdf
4. Sharangi AB, Acharaya SK (2007) Performing supply chain in banana, black pepper, capsicum
and seed spices: status, issues and scopes. J Crop Weed 3(2):47–51
5. Hema M, Kumar R, Singh NP (2007) Volatile price and declining profitability of black pepper
in India: disquieting future. Agric Econ Res Rev 20:61–76
6. Kuruvila A, Sabu SS, Manojkumar K (2019) Price behaviour of black pepper in Indian and
international markets: a comparative analysis. J Spices Aromat Crops 28(1):27–33. http://doi.
org/10.25081/josac.2019.v28.i1.5741
7. Paulrajan R (2012) Spice route: logistic journey of spices in retail supply chain perspective.
UTMS J Econ 3(1):9–20
8. Prabhavathi Y, Krishna Kishore NT, Seema (2013) Analysis of supply chain of spices in India:
a case study of red chilies, vol 2, no 9. http://www.ijsrp.org/research-paper-0913/ijsrp-p21101.
pdf
9. M S Y, Mokshapathy S (2013) Production and export performance of black pepper. Int J
Humanit Soc Sci Invention 2:36–44
10. Ganpathy MS, Naveenkumar HS, Murthy MM, Rajshekaramurthy S (2014) Value chain
analysis of black pepper in Karnataka. Int J Sales Mark Manag (IJSMM) 3(2):13–1852 A. Shandilya et al.
11. Dessie M, Woldeamanuel T, Mekonnen G (2017) Value chain analysis of red pepper: the case
of Abeshge District, Guragie Zone, South Ethiopia. Int J Environ Sci Nat Resour 2(3). http://
doi.org/10.19080/IJESNR.2017.02.555590
12. Majo G, Elsa C (2017) Emergent global marketing challenges for Kerala cardamom producers
Vis-à-Vis the role of the spices board of India. Int J Community Dev Manag Stud 1:39–62
13. Cristino Mandinga Bonfim F, José Castro C, Fernando Brito S, Augusto Manuel Nogueira
Gomes C, Zélia Maria Gonçalves S (2020) The organic pepper (Piper nigrum L.) value chain
in São Tomé e Príncipe under a value chain analysis for development methodology perspective.
Direct Res J Agric Food Sci 8(4). http://doi.org/10.26765/DRJAFS40252693
14. Krishnaraj S, Gunaseelan R, Arunmozhi M, Sumandiran CSP (2020) Supply chain perspective
and logistics of spices in Indian retail industry. Mater Today Proc S2214785320314474. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.matpr.2020.02.681
15. Friesenbichler KS, Kuegler A, Reinstaller A (2021) Does value chain integration dampen
producer price developments? Evidence from the European Union. World Econ 44(1):89–106.
https://doi.org/10.1111/twec.12993Chapter 5
Sustainability in Food Supply Chains:
Case of Southeast Asia
Modisa and Thappasarn Jaikaew
Abstract Food products go through a chain of various markets and companies
to be approachable for human consumption; this phenomenon is termed as food
supply chain. With the demands of information about the food from farm till it gets
to consumers, food supply chains worldwide have opted newer ways to function,
allowing consumers to control what they eat. Most of the Southeast Asian countries
are making their way toward getting into the race of developed economies, where food
supply chains contribute to the countries’ economies by the export business. With the
food chains, food safety is one of the major concerns that can bring damage to whole
export systems; therefore, various technologies and better practices are introduced.
In this chapter, a study was conducted at a coffee and bakery shop in Bangkok,
Thailand, to understand the supply chain and various food safety measures being
taken at its scale. Moreover, every resource has limits, and if exploited, it can result
in scarcity of the same resource. Careless production and processing practices of food
products can pose threats to the sustainability of various other natural resources; food
waste is one of such major threats; therefore, various possible ways of food waste
management from various literature are enlisted in this chapter.
Keywords Sustainability · Food supply chains · Coffee and bakery · Food waste
management
Modisa · T. Jaikaew (B)
School of Environment, Resources and Development, Asian Institute of Technology, Bangkok,
Thailand
e-mail: thappasarn.j@mail.rmutk.ac.th
T. Jaikaew
Department of Food Technology and Nutrition, Faculty of Home Economics Technology,
Rajamangala University of Technology Krungthep, Bangkok, Thailand
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2022
R. S Mor et al. (eds.), Operations and Supply Chain Management in the Food Industry,
Lecture Notes in Management and Industrial Engineering,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-16-5555-5_5
5354 Modisa and T. Jaikaew
5.1 Introduction
The supply chain (SC) is the process used by companies for creating and distributing
its products or services to the end consumer. Supply chain action begins at the point
of demand creation and works toward fulfilling that demand with efficiency and
efficacy [22]. An efficient supply chain can help a company avoid expensive recalls
and customer complaints [12]. In addition, Lu [14] has defined SCM as simply
the business management with a relevant and specific supply chain viewpoint. A
food supply chain typical consists of players like producers, processors, distributors,
retailers, etc. Retailers help the producers for their promotional activities, too [2, 7].
Nowadays, many countries in the Southeast Asia region are interested in food
supply chain because food and agribusiness are of increasing importance to the
region. The region’s diverse markets include some of the world’s largest agricultural
exporters such as Thailand and Vietnam, as well as innovative centers of research
and development such as Singapore. Although rice is still the region’s main crop,
other commodities such as maize, coffee, cocoa, and fruits and vegetables are also
important. Some member states are also specialized in fresh and canned fish or in
livestock. Besides, palm oil is one of the main agricultural products for both Malaysia
and Indonesia [15].
Consequently, this chapter aims to review the state of food supply chains in South￾east Asia with a focus toward sustainability and to present case study of food supply
chain of a coffee and bakery shop in Bangkok, Thailand.
5.2 Literature Review
For southeastern Asia, food and agribusiness have greater value as it contributes to
the large proportion of the economy in each region. For example, Thailand being the
biggest exporter of rice, shrimp, and rubber, Malaysia ranks first in palm oil export
in the world. In contrast, Indonesia occupies the second position in palm oil and
rubber export, Malaysia is also third largest rubber exporter, and fifth for the cocoa,
with Indonesia on third position for cocoa production; moreover, Philippines has the
highest exports of sugar and pineapple. Vietnam has the second largest exports of rice
and coffee in the world. But there are some issues highlighted by FAO for the exports
of Southeast Asia countries, such as 20–30% loss of harvest during transportation,
demands from developed economies for quality check of the products, and lesser
control of governments over regional logistics and infrastructures for the sake of
improvement [15]. In order to know more about the food supply chains of Association
of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), following are some of the areas highlighted
for food supply chain management.5 Sustainability in Food Supply Chains: Case of Southeast Asia 55
5.2.1 Partnerships
The food supply chains of SEA region are continuously changing, which includes
strong relationships between all the members within a supply chain and with members
of other food supply chains. These relations can be partnerships and alliances with
competition replaced by joint-projects and deals. Partnerships, instead of having
solitary supply chains, strengthen the resources of each participating organization.
On the other hand, consumers are benefitted by reduced costs, enhanced availability
of products of desire and better quality. For example, a local dairy firm of Thailand
cooperated with Danone (French multinational food product company) and both of
them are in symbiotic relationship, getting benefits from each other’s strengths and
their cooperation is experiencing continuous rise [15].
Another successful example of modernization of food systems in SEA is Thai￾land’s top supermarket chain which understood the global movement of fresh
produces. Businesses (Tops, Ahold Thailand), research institutes such as Kasetsart
University, the Netherlands, and government and semi-governmental corporations
worked together in this project to develop better fresh products’ chain by using
“preferred supplier approach” to reduce the number of suppliers and using good
agricultural practices (GAP) and GMP throughout the supply chain. Moreover, lead
time was reduced significantly, which allowed for greater accuracy and JIT (just in
time) to reach to 98% [3].
On the other hand, Singapore, being a small country with limited resources,
imports 90% of the food items, and the import is just from one or two countries;
hence, if there is any disturbance in the trade, then it will have adverse effects
on Singapore. For this reason, Singapore has made decision to concentrate her R
and D departments on finding ways to increase the production of fish, eggs, and
leafy vegetables. The International Enterprise (IE) and Agri-Food and Veterinary
Authority (AVA) of Singapore are working mutually to find new ways of production
and find new agribusiness opportunities with other nations worldwide. As stock￾piling of important food products is helpful and easily implantable in local markets,
Singapore is looking at substituting the important dietary items with their liquid or
powder forms, such as powdered or liquid eggs, frozen pork cuts in place of fresh
chilled pork meat [24].
Although some SEA countries are opting to adopt new technologies and introduce
modern ways into the food supply chain, some others still face the issues of delays
by the administrating laws and regulations, which in turn affect the costs of circle
of trade and logistics. One such example is the Indonesian food supply chains. As
per World Bank report, the processing of some Indonesian products, such as shrimp
and pineapple, is done abroad while 10% of exports are sent with greater lead time
and cannot make up to the regional shipment ports on time. As the main mean of
transport is trucks which spend 75% time at customs, warehouses, lift queues and
logistics and trade are still paper-based [5].56 Modisa and T. Jaikaew
5.2.2 Technology
The infrastructures of a country have huge influence on supply chain management.
Use of newer technology is on trend in the supply chains of Southeast Asia (SEA).
Modern tools such as, electronic, resource planning (ERP) software in place of MS
Excel spreadsheets, are being widely used in food business to update the inventories
and data from suppliers and customers records. Secondly, newer technology of radio
frequency identification (FRID) is finding its way in SEA countries’ food chains for
quicker and more accurate tracing of the product from the product arriving at the plant
till it reaches the international consumers in Japan EU and USA. This technology
uses automated or electronic tracking devices to decrease the costs associated with
labor used for paper-based tracking. And if recall is needed, RFID will provide aid
through saved information of origin of the food, processing, and expiry data. One such
system was used in a study in Korea for the traceability of beef, starting from the live
animal’s identification until the beef steaks’ packaging was obtained by slaughtering
the animal and further processing the meat. The systems gave a serial number called
RF chip to each package with the animal ID [23]. Moreover, the green productivity
philosophy is the innovative idea implemented to reduce transaction costs, wastes
throughout the supply chain, and delayed deliveries [15]. Like Malaysia, traditionally
an agricultural country but is converted into an industrial country, it has focused on
trade and foreign investment for years. The logistic sector is given much importance
in the ninth Malaysian plan and third Industrial master plan (IMPT3), to achieve
competitiveness globally. Moreover, in 2009, electricity and telecommunication was
major problem of all the supply chains of Malaysia which was overcome by 2012
[5].
Thailand is an important exporter of frozen shrimp products worldwide, which
earns her a great amount of revenue (with 305,807 tons of export in 76,036 million
baht in 2006), is trying to embrace modern techniques to gain the trust of large
international markets. And with the funding from National Innovation Agency, Thai
exporter uses RFID for better traceability which dominates Thai seafood exports over
their competitors. A study on the strategic development of supply chain management
of Thailand showed shrimp stakeholders applying modern management techniques
in various sector of their businesses such as customer relationship management,
order-cycle time management, product flow, and development of products [15].
5.2.3 Food Safety
According to Othman [16], the Vice-Chairperson of the Codex Alimentarius
Commission, the production, processing, and marketing systems of SEA countries
comprise small to large scale in range the product goes through several steps and
handlers in the chain. There is a lack of knowledge and expertise about modern ways
and technology usage (in some of the ASEAN member countries) and lack adequate5 Sustainability in Food Supply Chains: Case of Southeast Asia 57
infrastructure. The major source of food in this region is the street food vendors, which
is accessible and cheaper, but this sector hires unskilled or semi-skilled employees
posing a risk to the safety, hygiene, and sanitation of food processes and product.
Moreover, there is lack of concern about national food safety problems and knowl￾edge about the effects of contamination of food on health and the economy. There is
lack of cooperation among agencies for food safety due to political reasons. There￾fore, food safety policies are either not existing or low primacy in some of the coun￾tries situated in the SEA region. Furthermore, the constituents and main concerns
of food safety control systems vary among the countries, including food control
management, services for food inspection, legislation for food safety, laboratory
testing services and information, training, education and communication.
The Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) is taking initiatives to
address the food safety issues in supply chains of food items sold locally or
exported. Various groups are created in this regard, such as ASEAN Expert Group
on Food Safety (AEGFS), which works on facilitating and coordinating food safety
in ASEAN, and ASEAN Food Safety Improvement Plan (AFSIP), which functions
in the implementation and improvement of food safety policy and plan of actions. Of
above-mentioned food safety concerns, five areas are considered to be most impor￾tant for food safety, which are assigned to five ASEAN countries to work on for
implication and further betterment, which includes Malaysia, for the inspection,
monitoring, and surveillance of food and certification; laboratory testing for Singa￾pore. Consumer participation and empowerment are assigned to Indonesia, Thailand,
to share information in the food network of ASEAN and, finally, Philippines, for the
legislation.
Secondly, the cooperation program between EU and ASEAN deals with food
quality, standards, and conformational assessment of the products exported interna￾tionally from all the member countries of ASEAN, which also works on the major
areas of food safety along with implication of HACCP, GMP, GHP in Small and
Medium Enterprises (SMEs). This cooperation has led to the development of labo￾ratory networks such as microbiology in Vietnam, pesticide residues and mycotoxin
testing in Singapore, heavy metals and trace elements in Thailand, and genetically
modified organisms (GMOs) in Malaysia [16].
5.2.4 Green Supply Chain Management
Green supply chain managements are trending in the food industries of SEA region,
through which various companies show their sincerity toward sustainability [15].
Green supply chain initiatives taken by food industries of SEA countries include
reduction of waste, substitution of material by environmental friendly raw mate￾rial, recycling, low density packaging, and biodegradable packing. It also includes
reduction of operating cost and better services for customers [19].58 Modisa and T. Jaikaew
5.2.5 Packaging and Transportation
In ASEAN area, the food products are packaged in boxes with grooves and ridges,
and plastic crates that can be returned or reused, replacing the traditional packages
such as baskets and wooden crates. The plastic packages are used for local high-end
markets and institutions while ridged and corrugate boxes are used for food products
going for exportation. Plastic bags recently replace these packages once they reach
wholesale markets because plastic bags are cheaper, easy to handle, and available.
But these bags cause environmental sustainability problems because these are not
biodegradable and decrease the shelf life of products due to insufficient availability
of air and provide lesser protection against mechanical damages. Moreover, the retail
packaging has grown due to consumer demands for quality and supermarkets, where
fresh produce is also sold with branding in high-end supermarkets.
For example, Philippines has the highest use of plastic bags. Fresh produce is not
given much priority, and to reduce the expenses of transportation, the fresh vegetables
and fruits are transported in large containers which can cause damage to the produce
due to compression. Like, papaya is shipped in large wooden crates from Mindanao
and eggplants are shipped in large but overfilled kaing/bamboo baskets and woven
polypropylene (WPP) sacks from Iloilo which is a province in Visayas [6].
Whereas, in Thailand, the fresh vegetables and fruits are distributed by loaded
pickup vans and trucks directly without any packaging and at wholesale market,
purchasers receive their orders in bulk containers like plastic crates, bamboo baskets,
or plastic bags. The damaged commodities are sold at low prices. Some produce can
also be packaged in plastic bags or containers manually before loading into the
truck; this depends on the distance to the destination. Moreover, for bulk packaging,
mostly trapezoid plastic crates are used which contain handles made of steel. The
trapezoid shape helps in storing the empty crates in nested piles. The exporters and
large retailers also use round and rectangular plastic crates for fresh vegetables and
fruits which can be nested. Apart from these, some other types of packaging material,
such as net bags, paper bags, cartons, wooden crates, trays, and film wraps, are used
depending on the type of produce.
In case of Vietnam, similar types of packaging material are used depending on
the type of produce but the transportation means may vary depending on the distance
from the delivery point. Like, transport of products from farm to farmhouse or shed
is done by hauling carts, single-wheeled carts, and bicycles. In contrast, delivery
to a farther destination is carried out either through motorbike, bicycle or three￾wheeled carts. Traders make use of motorbikes, pickups, boats, and trucks to receive
their orders from suppliers. Vietnam has set regulations for the exporting products,
including suitable packaging in particular type and size of packaging material, appro￾priately labeled with complete instructions written in two languages of English and
French, along with name of product, quantity, and address of manufacturer country
of origin. Additionally, if the package has direct contact with the food product, only
certified wrapping needs to be used. The packages are examined by Vietnam Food
Administration [21].5 Sustainability in Food Supply Chains: Case of Southeast Asia 59
5.2.6 Urbanization
Furthermore, in Asian-Pacific areas, people migrate to urban regions for better
lifestyles, which cause rapid increase in the spread of supermarkets. And in the next
twenty years, these regions’ urban population will increase by half a billion, which
is more than half of the total area [15]. Although the channels of food marketing in
SEA are changing from shops to supermarkets and hypermarkets, still a great deal
of fresh food is sold as wholesale markets, which is speedily evolving in Bangkok
through the government’s policies for food supply chains and interactions between
shareholders [15].
Another study shows that supermarkets are expanding rapidly in whole Asia,
starting with more developed countries such as Taiwan, Korea, Hong Kong, and
Japan. The supermarket chain includes both the international names such as Walmart,
Big C, Tesco and those developed locally. Some local supermarkets also expended
to other Asian countries such as the chains from Hong Kong and Japan expended to
Malaysia, Indonesia, and even the supermarkets from Vietnam spread to Cambodia.
Although such international chains of supermarkets have not targeted Myanmar but
the local supermarkets developed in the country are relatively advanced, such as City
Mart, K-Mart, Super-One. These supermarkets contain the local goods along with
imports from ASEAN, China, and India [25].
5.2.7 Diet Transformation
It has been observed that the diet has been transforming gradually in whole Asia
including countries in the Southeast Asian region. The main reasons for this trans￾formation are income-induced diet modification. Higher-income people tend to pay
for more convenient food and include a variety of food items rather than on a typical
list of affordable food products. Secondly, adoption of more western style diet as
consumers have shown more preference for McDonald’s, Starbucks, etc. along with
protein-rich foods such as meat and fish, temperate zone food items such as apples and
processed products and drinks. Traditionally rice preferring societies are consuming
wheat products such as bread, pizza, pastry, and cakes, due to which more and more
supply chains are adapting to changing diet styles and focusing on such products to be
readily available for the customer. A report showed that major rice-consuming coun￾tries of SEA have seen a decline in rice consumption, like between 1981 and 2001,
Thai diet saw fall in rice consumption from 60 to 43%, while wheat consumption
tripled [11]. Moreover, the consumption of potato has also increased ten times since
1981. Due to such dietary evolutions, the supply chain systems are also changing,
and a study of FAO on agriculture from 2015 toward 2030 shows that SEA countries
have shifted from net exporters to net importers of food products which may grow
in the future [18].60 Modisa and T. Jaikaew
5.2.8 Effect on Food Supply Chains Due to Natural Disasters
Sustainable environment has been seen to have greater impact on supply chains.
And the unstable environmental conditions are one of the major issues hindering the
success of food supply chains in SEA countries [5].
According to a study, the unsustainable environmental conditions have caused
great losses to all types of businesses. For example, the infrastructure in Indonesia
is affected by flood from time to time. And according to the chairman of Indone￾sian Employers Association, Sofjan Wanandi, the businesses on land of Indonesia are
facing losses because of disturbed supply chains which in turn cause reduced produc￾tion and 300 factories situated in East Jakarta had to stop their productions because
of interrupted power supply and higher costs [5]. Secondly, in 2011, World Bank
mentioned in their report that due to blocked sewer and drainage systems because of
garbage, water stayed at facilities for months which caused many large-scale manu￾facturers to stop their production, and most of the uninsured production systems
showed adverse effects on the food supply chains globally [17]. On the other hand,
due to floods, the two main problems of Thailand’s food supply chain are energy
expenses and human labor cost [5].
5.3 Case Study of Food Supply Chain
To understand the dynamics of food supply chain, a case study was carried out for a
coffee and bakery at Bangkok, Thailand. The same is discussed further in this section
ahead.
5.3.1 About “Coffee Moona and Bakery”
The information of Coffee Moona and bakery is described below. First of all, it will
come up with general information of the business;
The Coffee Moona and bakery was established by Ms. Sasikarn Thuenprom in
2013 at her house, situated at 244 Moo 3 Krathum Rai, Nong Chok, Bangkok,
postcode 10530, Thailand. We came to know about Ms. Thuenprom and her shop
from her daughter, Miss. Nichakarn Thuenprom, who studies at Asian Institute of
Technology.
Ms. Thuenprom received her bachelor degree in Business Administration (B.B.A)
with specialization in Marketing. After her graduation, she started working at the
marketing department of Adidas brand. Later, she got interested in learning baking
and received certificate of baking from one private school and another government
school (The Vocational Training Center, Nong Chok, Bangkok) and opened her own5 Sustainability in Food Supply Chains: Case of Southeast Asia 61
coffee and bakery shop by using her savings. She did not get any kind of support
from the government.
One of the reasons to open the shop was to be independent and work as she likes
to; secondly, she wanted to excel over her interest in baking and provide newer and
innovative product for the customers. Therefore, she selects all raw materials for the
products by herself.
Presently, the products sold at the shop are beverages (such as coffee, chocolate
drinks, Thai milk tea, and Italian soda), bakery products (such as egg tart, butter
cake, and brownie, Chinese spring rolls), and also bakes cakes based on pre-orders
for various occasions, such as birthdays, New Year, and valentines. The price for
beverages ranges from 25 to 30 ฿ (TBH) and 10 to 30 ฿ for bakery products.
5.3.2 Supply Chain of Bakery
Food supply chain for Coffee Moona is shown in Fig. 5.1. Supply chain map shows
the starting point of suppliers from whom the raw material is bought till the final
products presented to the customers. Overall, there are four main suppliers of raw
material, among which, the coffee beans are ordered from Nan Duo Coffee Limited
Partnership under brand Phu coffee at Nan province. The Phu coffee is a local Thai
brand located at the Northern part of Thailand. The brand owner also owns coffee
farms for the coffee beans to be cultivated for the brand, which produce enough beans
Fig. 5.1 Map of food supply chain for Coffee Moona. Source Authors62 Modisa and T. Jaikaew
for the product but if the cultivar is not sufficient then the beans are obtained from
trusted contract based coffee farms in the same province. The brand’s coffee beans
processing plants are certified for food safety and quality control from Thai-FDA
approved Notification of the Ministry of Public Health (No. 197) B.E. 2543 (2000)
Re: Coffee and also Halal food certified by the Central Islamic Council of Thailand
(CICOT). Secondly, chocolate and cocoa powder are bought from an online website
called Dee.com which sells products certified by international food standards such
as GMP and HACCP. Furthermore, some basic ingredients for bakery and beverages
(like concentrated fruit juice, soda, eggs, sugar, milk, etc.) are shopped from Makro
food services, a wholesaler registered for its food safety concerns at Thai-FDA. The
selected raw materials bought from Makro foodservice are also certified by GMP,
HACCP and Halal food. Lastly, a shop situated across Coffee Moona under the
name of “Baker station” supplies some basic bakery ingredients, such as flavoring
agents, food colors, flour, and butter, along with packaging services for the products
of the bakery. Goods from the Baker station are certified by GMP and HACCP under
Thai-FDA.
By using all these ingredients, various bakery products and beverages are prepared
at the shop and sold directly to consumers. The products are prepared from ingredients
which are safe for consumption, and Ms. Thuenprom showed greater concern about
customers’ health.
5.3.3 Application of Food Safety Regulations at the Bakery
On asking about the food safety regulations, she was unaware of certifications and set
of the specified rules to be followed while preparing the consumable food products.
As according to her, she was neither asked about it by any government officials or
non-government agencies nor was instructed to follow certain rules in her seven years
of being in food business.
Besides, she follows the basic food safety rules, like she cleans her shop, working
surfaces, and all the utensils (such as; cooking pots, chopping board, knives, and
blender jugs), thoroughly in the morning before starting her working day and in the
evening after closing her shop. She washes all the washable ingredients such as fruits
before using them in product manufacturing, keeps them covered, and stores at cold
temperature. She has separate duster cloth pieces for drying the crockery items and
furniture for the customers in the shop. The table sheets and other covering material
are washed regularly and dried under sun to kill the heat sensitive microbes. Separate
garbage bins are used for wet food wastes and other related wastes with coverings to
keep the bins’ openings closed. Moreover, the water used in food products such as
making juice and coffee is sure to be treated for pathogen eradication. She considers
the expiry time of the ingredients and products’ shelf life to be of vital importance;
therefore, she buys only 1–2 kg of the coffee every month to avoid change in taste
and aroma over time. Apart from cleanliness of the material and place, she also takes
care of personal hygiene by washing her hands with soap before and after preparing5 Sustainability in Food Supply Chains: Case of Southeast Asia 63
the items, after touching surfaces, using toilet, and wears specific clothes and apron
which are washed regularly, and keeps her hair covered while handling food material
to avoid any physical contaminant find its way into the food.
Concerning the shelf life and product storage, Ms. Thuenprom does not make
products in bulk as she uses estimated amount by her experience of approximate
number of customer each day since last seven years. Therefore, all the products get
sold out on the same day, but if seldom products are unsold, they are distributed in
her neighbors or kids rather than store for the next day.
By following above basic practices, she claims that no mishaps have occurred in
her business, and no customer has complained till the date about getting sick after
consuming her products.
5.3.4 Technology and Logistics at the Bakery
The coffee shop does not use much-advanced technology. The shop has webpage
on social media applications such as Facebook Fanpage (Fig. 5.2), where the daily
activities and products are advertised. The page also includes the map to find the
Coffee Moona shop, along with mobile number. The fan page and the mobile number
can be used to place online orders. Moreover, she uses some basic technological
tools such as oven, coffee maker, blender, and grinder, which are normally required
in bakery.
Although she takes online orders less frequently, if ordered by close friends and
relatives (because she cannot bear the expenses of logistics), Ms. Thuenprom uses
her family car to deliver the order. She also uses her car to buy the raw material if
Fig. 5.2 Reference to the webpage of the Coffee Moona in Facebook. Source Authors64 Modisa and T. Jaikaew
required in bulk, but if she faces a shortage of one or two raw materials, she travels
through public transport such as local buses.
5.3.5 Adopted Ways of Marketing and Promotions
Having lesser profit from the business, not many marketing and promotional strate￾gies are used so far, but having more concern about the environmental sustainability
issues, Coffee Moona has provided the offer of 5 ฿ discount on bringing personal
containers for the beverages and coffee. Earlier, she was providing the customers
with the stamp collection cards (also called as reward card), through which a person
would get his card stamped every time a beverage is bought, and after collecting nine
stamps, the person would get a drink for free. But now she has stopped providing the
stamp cards. Moreover, her daughter who studies in Asian Institute of Technology
visits her home on every weekend and advertises her mother’s products through her
personal Facebook page. If any of her friends orders the products, she delivers the
products for free on coming back to institute on weekdays.
Ms. Thuenprom plans to give more promotions in the future depending on the
budget and income from the business.
5.3.6 Problems Faced in Business
One of the major issues that Ms. Thuenprom faces is the location of the coffee shop.
She has built her shop in her home’s vicinity which is a residential area due to which
the shop is not on the main road or commercial area; therefore, very less people
pass by and know about it to stop by and get a drink. Secondly, the area has many
shopping superstores such as Big C, Tops, Seven eleven, and there is another coffee
shop just across Coffee Moona. All these increase the competition for the customer
availability. She also mentioned that she has to look after her home, children, and
her mother who is sick; therefore, she cannot focus on her business fully and cannot
afford any employee to give her hand in doing the home chores or the work at shop.
This year, the government has made new rules. Those who have their business
in their homes (residence) are also needed to pay tax for the place and business,
which also increases her worries for the maintenance of the business and expenses.
Moreover, if any machine stops working, she has to wait for a long time to get it
corrected from the repairing shop as she cannot afford new machines to replace the
older impaired ones.5 Sustainability in Food Supply Chains: Case of Southeast Asia 65
5.3.7 Planning for the Future
Keeping in account her schedule, she is thinking about increasing online order and
delivery business as more deliveries at the same time will reduce the expenses of
logistics. Her most common business targets will be the government organizations
and educational institutes where various events are conducted, such as seminars, and
workshops. She can deliver full snack boxes containing bakery items and beverages.
Moreover, she is planning to register in various online food delivery applications
such as GrabFood and Foodpanda, so that thousands would see her products of people
which will increase her chances of getting more online orders from the customers.
Looking at all the problems she is facing currently, we suggested her a few possible
solutions such as;
The new tax-paying rule for those working in their own residential areas can
increase financial burdens; therefore, they can make a petition requesting the govern￾ment to withdraw this new rule and get signed by as many as possible business people
who work in their vicinities.
Secondly, customers check the ingredients and the product’s safety value. The
better proof would be the certification from any international or national food safety
regulatory authority whose logo on the package acts as evidence for the consumer
and environmentally friendly product.
To let people know about her business, she can collaborate with local YouTubers
to advertise her shop and products in their videos, highlighting the food safety rules
that are followed and the certificate acquired for the practices. Furthermore, as per
today’s demand, people now believe in what they see for themselves; therefore,
selecting random customers to visit the shop’s kitchen regarding cleanliness and
product quality will help gain customer’s trust. Free tasters for the old and new
products will allow the customers to find the right taste and by this strategy customers
will feel valued and decide to buy any of the products. Similarly, promotions based on
various occasions and special days throughout the year will also increase customer’s
interest in products.
5.4 Sustainability in Food Supply Chain
According to estimations, the world’s population will be 34% higher (9.1 billions)
than the present population by 2050. With this increase, increase in food production
will be needed by 70% of the present day food production. It is also thought that the
urbanization will also increase which will reduce the land for the food production.
Additionally, water and energy being in limited quantity will be in scarce. Therefore,
a sustainable food production system is of vital importance.
Sustainable food production can be defined as the method of production with
processing and systems which do not cause any pollution or reduce the amount
of pollutants released in the environment, conserve the nonrenewable energy and66 Modisa and T. Jaikaew
natural resources as much as possible, having economic efficiency, safer for the
workers, consumers, and communities, and do not consume the resources of which
the future generations are the rightful owners (users).
In other words, sustainability is the use of resources in amounts that do not surpass
earth’s capacity of replacing them. In food, food supply security, health, safety,
cost-effectiveness, quality, better job and growth opportunities, and simultaneously,
environmental sustainability in subject to climate change, biodiversity, soil, and water
quality.
The food industry has a greater impact on the environment, as it contributes to
climate change, scarcity of water (70% freshwater resources are used by crop and
livestock systems with 60% of land), degradation of soil, and biodiversity loss. There￾fore, world food production methods should be changed to reduce harsh impacts on
the environment and the sufficient production of food to meet the increased popula￾tion’s demands in the future. It is said that crops and animal production and forestry
release about 25% of total greenhouse gases emitted globally directly or indirectly
[10].
According to European Commission, in this century, fossil fuel use has increased
by 12 factors which require extracting 34 times more from natural resources. Among
food materials, each person consumes 16 tons every year, out of which 6 tons are
wasted and half of this wasted food goes to landfills, due to which sources of minerals,
metals, energy, fish, timber, water, fertile soils, clean air, biomass, and biodiversity
are under stress. By 2050, demands for food will increase by 70%, 60% of world’s
ecosystem would already be degraded. If the same way of usage of resources was
carried on, we will require resources equal to more than two planets to sustain the
living [20].
5.4.1 Highlighted Areas
Sustainable food system can be made possible by modern technologies and
knowledge. The actions in this regard include;
• Reduced use of fossil fuels and regulated use of water in production systems.
• Adjusted use of land and avoiding conversion of more land into agriculture.
• Water and energy-efficient food production sites should be designed.
• Monitored use of pesticides and fertilizers to reduce soil and water pollution.
• Reverse the soil erosion and restoration of organic material in the soil.
• Reduction in greenhouse gases emissions.
• Increased biodiversity by adopting farming practices suitable for protection of
land, water, and energy sources along with the forests and wetland.
• In case of marine resources, implementation of sustainable fishing practices to
restore fish quantity.
• Reduction of pollution due to fertilizers and garbage at coastal areas [1].5 Sustainability in Food Supply Chains: Case of Southeast Asia 67
5.4.2 Food Waste
Food waste has become a serious sustainability global issue. Food waste is defined as
the waste or food losses that occur during the food supply chain which include main
step as agricultural production, postharvest handling and storage, processing and
packaging, distribution, consumption. In annually, food produced around 1.3 billion
tons is lost or wasted, one-third of total food produced for human consumption.
Food waste can occur at every step of the food supply chain. The waste food of
all commodity groups (e.g., fruits and vegetables, fish and seafood, cereal products,
meat and dairy, oilseeds and pulses) along the food supply chain is approximately
20–50% [9].
Therefore, people should be concerned about some causes of food waste and know
how to solve sustainability issues.
5.5 Solutions
This section presents a few solutions cum strategy for attaining sustainability in food
supply chains.
The prevention of food waste is mentioned at all international, national, regional,
and local levels. In the international level, the United Nations frameworks a specific
aim within the Sustainable Development Goals to reduce food waste volumes reach
one-half by 2030. While regional and local levels, the prevention of food waste is
gaining interest in food systems sustainability [8]. Most solutions to food waste are
important for sustainability in the food supply chain. However, the government and
people should collaborate to prevent or reduce food waste in the food supply chain.
5.5.1 Vertical Farming Toward Managing Energy Waste
Vertical farming also linked to “indoor farming, urban agriculture, and controlled￾environment agriculture” but remains unique. This type of farming can be beneficial
for the fresh fruits and vegetables’ supply chain, as the production of the commodities
can be accomplished in a small area, making it less costly and safer and contributing to
the sustainability of the environment. In this type of farming, plants are grown indoors
in vertically stacked layers with an artificial environment where temperature, lighting,
nutrients, irrigation, and air circulation are controlled and constantly adjusted. The
most common type is hydroponics, where the plants are grown in tubes connected
to liquid supplies of required nutrients and hormones in fixed proportions mixed
with water. Vertical farming is used as a term for a solution to feed the world and
repair damaged ecosystems. There are no seasons indoors, making it stress-free due
to changing weather conditions and other natural elements that can negatively affect68 Modisa and T. Jaikaew
the crops. Depending on the plant species, the efficiency of each floor of plants can
be equal to 10–20 traditional soil-based areas. This technology also provides various
environmental benefits such as eliminating the need to use fossil fuels as fertilizers
and various pesticides, herbicides, weedicides for plowing, seeding, weeding, and
harvesting. Urban areas can also be used to produce the crops by taking advantage
of vertical farming without needing large lands in traditional farming.
Hence, this technology contributes to sustainable crop production by reducing
water and land use, decreased waste, and carbon dioxide emission. The controlled
nature reduces agricultural runoff which in traditional farming happens by water
carrying byproducts and contaminants to fresh water or oceans. Vertical farming in
urban areas can reduce energy usage and fuel emissions due to the transportation of
crops from rural areas to urban areas and the reduction of food spoilage. Moreover, in
urban areas, the abandoned or unused properties can be used rather than overworked
land in rural areas. As by 2030, estimated 60% people will be living in cities where
urban agriculture systems can be attractive and beneficial way of feeding growing
population [4].
5.5.2 Sprinkle Spray Irrigation Toward Energy Waste
Management
Spray irrigations are used in large farms for the production of raw material for food
supply chains. It has long fixed tubes at one end with water source, from which water
flows and is shot out by the spray guns system. Here, the technology also plays its
role; for example, Verizon is doing tests where the sprinkler systems are installed in
vineyards and the telemetry in the ground to measure moisture content which then
turns on the sprinkler system only if there is a need for water. Telemetry is a great
example of the internet of things to save wastage of large quantities of water.
Apart from these, soil erosion is one of the problems: the loss of top soil and soil
nutrients. This can be due to natural effects of wind and water activity but also human
activities such as deforestation and poor land management. The possible solution can
be avoiding monoculture practices, i.e., planting different types of crops in the same
field, increasing the nutrients in soil, and causing the reduction of pest and crop
diseases [4].
5.5.3 Marine Sources of Food for Energy Waste Management
Seafood consumption has increased overtime which accompanies the overfishing
of specific species of fish and other marine life. Due to the seafood’s numerous
advantages and nutrients, 29% of marine fish stocks are overfished and 61% are fished
at full capacity. Due to overfishing, many fish species are endangered. Therefore, a5 Sustainability in Food Supply Chains: Case of Southeast Asia 69
solution can be fish farming which is also called aquaculture. Farmed fish proves
to be a great solution for the seafood supply chains, both fresh seafood and its
products as farmed fish is a safe, sustainable, and nutritious source of seafood. It
can reduce the burden on overfished marine sources, and it also meets the changing
demands of consumers concerning animal welfare and safety of the products. Farmed
fish is fresher at the time of purchase as it can be cultivated at any place globally,
even in the countries that do not have coastal area and sea as a source of seafood.
Secondly, nutrient composition of fish is effected by various factors such as season,
diet, location, age, and species. Therefore, nutrient levels differ in marine fish while
the feed can influence that of farmed fish. The fish feed can be enhanced by adding
microalgae and plant-based nutrients, which results in increased fats in the farmed
fish than the wild fish. The fish fats have greater advantages for health and can be used
to make various fish oil products. Moreover, human activities and industrialization
have caused ocean bodies to be polluted, influencing wild fish and shellfish. The
level of contamination depends on the diet of the animal; for example, carnivores
such as salmon and tuna might have higher level of contamination. While the diet of
seafood animals cannot be controlled which also effects the degree of contamination,
the farm fish’s diet can be closely monitored and controlled with additional safety
provided by the vaccination programs to reduce disease outbreak [13].
5.5.4 Livestock as a Solution Toward Energy Waste
Management
Animal products are major source of proteins which contains all essential amino
acids but it could be partly replaced by more sustainable sources such as soy and
legumes which are protein-rich sources from crops. One such example is the meat
analogue produced by vegetarian butchers, in which plant-based meat is prepared
with almost similar taste and texture. And such meat replacers are getting consumer’s
attention gradually.
Moreover, substitutes for animal proteins can also include algae, edible insects,
and duckweed. Insects tend to be consumed as a rich source of protein with lesser
greenhouse gas emissions. Many insect species are consumed around the globe, with
lesser evidence of hazardous effects on health. The level of contamination depends
on the methods of production, harvesting, and processing techniques. Insect meals
can prove even more environment-friendly by feeding insects on food waste.
Algae (microalgae, macroalgae) have a higher content of proteins, fast-growing,
and highly productive than conventional crops. Seaweeds (marine algae) are staple
food in Korea and Japan. Furthermore, duckweeds are small marine plants used as
feed for domestic animals and mixed in soups salads, etc., in some parts of Asia, a
high-quality protein source.
Finally with advanced technology, the meat is produced at the laboratory by
culturing stem cells from the animals, which does not require growing a whole70 Modisa and T. Jaikaew
animal with expenses of feed for the animals, space, and compromised environmental
sustainability. This meat requires lesser space and time, with controlled and known
amount of each constituent in the meat. But this technology is still used for research
and on laboratory scale, and further advancements and agreement of the consumers
are required for it to grow to an industrial scale.
5.5.5 Improvements in Storage Warehouses
5.5.5.1 LED Lighting
An enormous amount of cool temperature and light is required for the storage of
products and raw material. LED lighting can be used in cold storage, which is energy
efficient and generates less heat.
The Yusen logistics in New Jersey has shifted to LED, which has reduced their
electricity use and expenses by 60%, accounting for 1 million kilowatt-hours (kWh)
per year. Another company, Atlanta-based Americold logistics, which is temperature￾controlled warehousing and Transportation Company for perishable goods, has
installed motion-sensing LEDs with fast-closing doors. The LED lighting system
activates as needed by this system and switches off automatically when the personnel
leaves. That saves 14 million kWh per year [1].
5.5.5.2 Solar Power and Turbine Generators
The Americold Company uses solar power generation atMassachusetts facility which
generates 500,000 kWh of clean energy and turbine generators at Salina, California,
that generates up to 600,000 kWh of energy per year. And according to the company,
they have saved 320 million kWh since 2010, which means 264 million pounds of
CO2 was not released into the atmosphere [13].
5.6 Conclusion
The supply chain connects the members working together and bringing a product
to the customer. The food supply chain is the network for a food product from its
producer to supplier and distributor till it reaches its consumer. The food industry
has a major influence on most of the Southeast Asian countries’ economies. Being
ranked as one of the top exporters of one or more food products, the ASEAN is trying
to improve their food supply chains at each step by using better technology, food
safety systems, packaging, etc. Although some of the member countries still have
traditional supply chain systems, the Association of Southeast Asian Nations’ newer
rules and regulations are helping these countries adopt modern and better supply5 Sustainability in Food Supply Chains: Case of Southeast Asia 71
chain practices. Moreover, as the resources are limited for the growing population,
adaptation to more sustainable supply chain systems is important. And sustainability
in the food supply chain is the requirement of the Southeast Asian food industry and
every country around the world. The major issues include energy waste, food waste,
and pollution of the environment and its components. In this scenario, wiser ways
of resource utilization are required. In this context, many innovative solutions are
brought in and some need testing for their feasibility. Newer rules and regulations
are set, but for implementing the solutions and laws, each country’s government and
the public need to collaborate and work together.
References
1. Beddington JR (2011) The future of food and farming: challenges and choices for global
sustainability [final project report of the UK government foresight global food and farming
futures]. Government Office for Science
2. Bukeviciute L, Dierx A, Ilzkovitz F (2009) The functioning of the food supply chain and its
effect on food prices in the European Union. European Commission Directorate-General for
Economic and Financial Affairs Publications, Brussels, pp 4–5
3. Buurma J, Saranark J (2006) Supply-chain development for fresh fruits and vegetables in
Thailand. In: Agro-food chains and networks for development. Kluwer/Springer, Dordrecht,
The Netherlands, pp 119–127
4. Chabada L, Dreyer HC, Romsdal A, Powell DJ (2013) Sustainable food supply chains: towards
a framework for waste identification. In: IFIP advances in information and communication
technology. http://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-40352-1_27
5. Chakraborty A, Mandal P (2014) Understanding challenges of supply chain sustainability in
Asia. Int J Process Manag Benchmarking 4(1):51–68
6. Chonhenchob V, Singh SP (2005) Packaging performance comparison for distribution and
export of papaya fruit. Packag Technol Sci Int J 18(3):125–131
7. Dani S (2015) Food supply chain management and logistics: from farm to fork. Kogan Page
Limited, UK, pp 1–15
8. Diaz-Ruiz R, Costa-Font M, López-i-Gelats F, Gil JM (2019) Food waste prevention along
the food supply chain: a multi-actor approach to identify effective solutions. Resour Conserv
Recycl 149:249–260
9. Gustavsson J, Cederberg C, Sonesson U, Emanuelsson A (2013) The methodology of the FAO
study: “global food losses and food waste—extent, causes and prevention”. In: FAO, 2011.
SIK—The Swedish Institute for Food and Biotechnology, Lund, pp 8–13
10. Hochfelder B (2017) Sustainability in the food supply chain. Food Logistics
11. Hu FB (2002) Dietary pattern analysis: a new direction in nutritional epidemiology. Curr Opin
Lipidol 13(1):3–9
12. Hugos M (2011) Essentials of supply chain management, 3rd edn. Wiley, Hoboken, pp 1–38
13. Li D, Wang X, Manzini R (2014) Sustainable food supply chain management. Int J Prod Econ
152:1–6
14. Lu D (2011) Fundamentals of food supply chain management. Dawei Lu & Ventus Publishing
ApS, pp 8–27
15. Noomhorm A, Ahmad I (2008) Food supply chain management and food safety: South &
East-Asia scenario. Agric Inf Res 17(4):131–136
16. Othman NM (2007) Food safety in Southeast Asia: challenges facing the region. Asian J Agric
Dev 4(1362-2016-107682):83–9272 Modisa and T. Jaikaew
17. Otto B, Sentana M (2013) Indonesian capital’s infrastructure strained by flooding. Wall Street
J. Jan 20 [Online]. http://online.wsj.com/article/SB1000142412788732462440457825338060
4853110.html
18. Pingali P (2007) Westernization of Asian diets and the transformation of food systems:
implications for research and policy. Food Policy 32(3):281–298
19. Rao P, Holt D (2005) Do green supply chains lead to competitiveness and economic
performance? Int J Oper Prod Manag 25(9):898–916
20. Roadmap to a Resource Efficient Europe (2011) Communication from the Commission to the
European Parliament, the Council, the European Economic and Social Committee, and the
Committee of the Regions. Roadmap to a Resource Efficient Europe, Brussels, p 20
21. Rolle RS (2011) Packaging in fresh produce supply chains in Southeast Asia. FAO Regional
Office for Asia and the Pacific, Bangkok. ISBN 978-92-5-106998-1
22. Scott W, Oldfield C (2004) The nine basic rules of a successful supply chain. Waer Systems,
Ltd., UK
23. Seo K, Lee C (2007, May) Development and prospecting of agricultural traceability system in
Korea. In: International symposium on traceability for food safety. RDA, Korea, p 154
24. Teng P, Escaler M (2010) The case for urban food security: a Singapore perspective. Centre
for Non-Traditional Security Studies, S. Rajaratnam School of International Studies
25. Wong LC (2007) The role of supply chains and international networks in enhancing the agri￾cultural sector’s competitiveness in Cambodia, Laos, Myanmar, and Vietnam (CLMV). Asian
J Agric Dev 4(1362-2016-107657):1–10Chapter 6
Traceability and Transportation Issues
in the Food Supply Chain
Akshay Patidar, Monica Sharma, Rajeev Agrawal,
and Kuldip Singh Sangwan
Abstract The food supply chain (FSC) is complex, immense and crucial to human
beings. Disruptions, fragmentation, poor product traceability, improper product
flows, food contamination, food recall, etc., are some of the prevailing issues in
the food supply chain. Many cases of E. Coli, hog contamination and halal meat
contamination are also evident. This creates a strong need to identify, understand
and resolve the issues, leading to an efficient and responsive food supply chain. This
study identifies the various issues in the food supply chain and thereafter focuses
on traceability and transportation-related issues. The authors have tried to conduct a
review of the issues in the food supply chain, especially traceability, transportation
and solutions under the purview of supply chain drivers. The study can help future
researchers identify and understand an issue and develop a feasible solution for it.
Keywords Traceability · Transportation · Food supply chain
6.1 Introduction
The prime objective of a business is to fulfil a customer’s need. To do so, an organi￾sation has to procure raw materials, process them, produce products and ultimately,
market the product, ensuring its availability. Here exists the concept of supply chain:
A. Patidar (B) · M. Sharma
Department of Management Studies, Malaviya National Institute of Technology, Jaipur, India
M. Sharma
e-mail: msharma.dms@mnit.ac.in
M. Sharma · R. Agrawal
Department of Mechanical Engineering, Malaviya National Institute of Technology, Jaipur, India
e-mail: ragrawal.mech@mnit.ac.in
K. S. Sangwan
Department of Mechanical Engineering, Birla Institute of Technology and Science, Pilani, India
e-mail: kss@pilani.bits-pilani.ac.in
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2022
R. S Mor et al. (eds.), Operations and Supply Chain Management in the Food Industry,
Lecture Notes in Management and Industrial Engineering,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-16-5555-5_6
7374 A. Patidar et al.
Product Flows Financial Flows 
Farmers Processor Distributor Retailer Consumer 
Fig. 6.1 Typical food supply chain. Source Author
a customer demands something; on his demand, a manufacturer procures raw mate￾rial and manufactures the product as per the customer’s specifications and sells it to
them. A network of all these integrated operations is called a supply chain. Typically,
when all the stakeholders come together with a shared objective or goal, it becomes
a supply chain. Keith Oliver in 1982 coined the term “Supply Chain Management”,
where there is a strong requirement for managing and ensuring the smooth flow of
goods, information and finance [47]. Based on the nature of the product, the exis￾tence of the supply chain is defined. A typical food supply chain is shown in Fig. 6.1,
where the flow of products and money can be seen along with the stakeholders of
the supply chain. Information flow is not shown in the figure and is bidirectional.
These flows of a supply chain are facilitated by several pulls and pushes. In a
food supply chain, farmers or processors, after processing food, push the food to
consumers, who, using their demand, pull the product from the processor or the
producer. This push and pull facilitates the supply chain, but when managed improp￾erly creates some issues like the bullwhip effect. To overcome this problem, one has to
manage the information flow effectively. It is important because it creates efficiency
throughout the supply chain and should be bidirectional in the case of a food supply
chain. The information flow facilitates decision-making by sharing information with
all the stakeholders across the supply chain.
Supply chain in advanced or developed countries is categorised into various
sectors such as agriculture, horticulture, fisheries and aquaculture. These fall in the
category of primary producers, whereas manufacturers who process the food (and
make it ready to cook or eat) and the various packaging organisations are intermedi￾aries. Wholesalers, retailers and caterers are the final part of the food supply chain
[61].
Across the entire supply chain, value is added with the change in ownership. Food
items can reach consumers from any of these stages, i.e. fresh produce from farmers,
caterers and manufacturers. This movement is supported by the logistics service
provider, who can be in-house or a 3PL service provider. Much fragmentation or
primitiveness can be seen in developing countries like India.
Professor N. Viswanadham, in his special feature, discussed Indian leadership
in the food supply chain. He said that to become a leader in food supply chain,
India needs to focus on introducing supply chain expertise by embracing efficient
customer response (ECR), which was introduced by the USA in the early nineties
and is now globally accepted in grocery supply chain [67]. This is a strategy that
leads all companies to work together to serve the customer better and at a lower
cost. Also, it emphasises collaborative planning, anticipation and replenishment. The
customer gets availability and choice as benefits from the distributors and retailers.6 Traceability and Transportation Issues in the Food Supply Chain 75
Professor Viswanadham discussed the need for standards in food supply chain: like
food standards that are related to content and processing, or related to logistics
and IT systems that will enhance the compatibility, interoperability and ultimately,
productivity. Further, he discussed multiple business models, where a customer is
served in many online and offline ways by the food processing industry. International
customers must be served through food malls, and for effective decision-making,
their lead time, service time and demand forecasting need to be focused on. He
further discussed streamlining processes and several prevailing regulatory measures
of the state and central governments. Streamlining these would be highly productive.
Further, he proposed that research needs to be initiated for developing indigenous
packaging, machining and laboratories for food processing and storing. Training is an
important part and needs to be focused on to make India a leader in the food supply
chain. For this, all the stakeholders of the food supply chain have to be coached,
counselled and mentored. Apart from these generalised issues and their remedies,
several other issues need to be focused on.
This study is an effort to review the prevailing issues in the food supply chain, espe￾cially traceability and transportation issues. Section 2 discusses the issues. Section 3
focuses on the traceability issues, while Sect. 4 discusses transportation issues. A
few solutions are discussed in Sect. 5, and conclusions are listed in Sect. 6.
6.2 Issues in the Food Supply Chain
The food supply chain is facing many roadblocks. It is important to make it resilient
to these roadblocks. Whether climate change happens, or a disaster or epidemic
occurs, it leads to disruption and directly affects the food supply chain. Apart from
these, many other issues like creating provenances (which is seeing high demand
from consumers these days), traceability and transportation issues are also seen in
the food supply chain. These need to be addressed. For this, understanding, the issues
is of prime importance.
6.2.1 Climate Change
Author Steve Banker, in his articles published in Forbes, identified the complexity of
the food supply chain and addressed the impact of climate change on it [60]. Further,
he discussed the report by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC)
and found that major climate change affects food supply. Researchers estimated
that, for every 1 degree increase of temperature on the planet, crop yield decreases
by 10%. The latest estimates say that reliance on fossil fuels needs to be reduced,
thereby reducing emissions. This will halt or reduce the increase in temperature.
Hence, the author suggested that emissions be curbed, thereby reducing the climate76 A. Patidar et al.
change effect so that the food supply chain faces fewer disruptions and can provide
an uninterrupted supply.
6.2.2 Natural Disasters
Extreme weather events are common these days. During the aftermath of a disaster,
or the response or recovery phase of disaster management, we see the importance of
providing aid to the affected area. Many of us have seen people trying to stock up
supplies before a storm hits them. To maintain these supplies without interruption,
farmers need to conduct proper evacuation of their animals. In North Carolina, hog
farming is a major industry worth $2 billion. Hurricane Florence hit this region and
directly affected hog farming at Sampson and Duplin. Overall, more than 6000 hogs
perished in the storm, leading to a higher price of pork due to limited supply [33]. To
deal with such risks, control towers are being developed, these are commonly known
as holistic control towers.
6.2.3 Epidemics
Pathogens, especially airborne pathogens, are a common threat to the food supply
chain. Back in 2017, a chicken farm associated with Tyson Foods found that a flock
of chicken having 73,500 birds had been contaminated. The flock was being used
for breeding purposes. As a result, the entire flock had to be destroyed and farms
within six miles of the contamination were quarantined [65]. The implications of the
recent COVID-19 pandemic are widely known. The effect of the pandemic on the
food supply chain and the related disruptions are also well known. Social distancing
norms and lockdowns interrupted the food supply chain, leading to wastage of food
supply. Increased demand from consumers, along with increased prices, shocked the
entire chain. For food-related organisations, this resulted in an increased struggle
to meet consumer demand, which led to increased allocation. But, despite such
allocation, supply chain disruption leads to a risk of losing market share.
6.2.4 Creating Provenance
Increased awareness among consumers led food companies to create provenance of
their supply of food ingredients. This made large organisations like Unilever, Nestle,
etc., modify their procurement practices. The consumer wants to know not only
the ingredients but also the impact of the sourcing decision on the environment. For
example, with the increased usage of palm oil, sourcing of palm oil is a major concern
due to the deforestation of tropical trees. Many large organisations like Mondelez6 Traceability and Transportation Issues in the Food Supply Chain 77
publish online data that consumers can use to get details of the farm or plantation.
Consumers can go online and view details regarding where cocoa is procured from
and grown. Therefore, stakeholders in the food supply chain are focusing on creating
provenance and enhancing supply chain visibility.
6.2.5 Traceability Issues
Tracking and tracing are major concerns of food supply chain managers these days.
Because of the increased demand for creating provenance across the supply chain,
stakeholders are also demanding that track-and-trace issues be addressed. Creating
a sound traceability system is the need of the hour. Food companies are focusing on
developing a tracking and tracing system to provide insight to consumers regarding
the product’s movement through the supply chain. Major traceability issues include
food crisis management like food recalls, food quality and food safety, food fraud
prevention and most importantly creating traceability of bulk products like grains,
cereals, etc. [3]. Food identity preservation and counterfeit products are other issues
related to traceability, where the major focus is on food preservation. In the case
of identity preservation, a commodity must not lose its identity. Also, counterfeit
products should be identified while tracing the product during movement.
6.2.6 Transportation Issues
Transportation is an integral part of any supply chain. It smoothens the most important
flow, i.e. the flow of goods. Maintaining these flows caters to many related issues,
such as lesser than truckload (LTL) shipping, refrigeration or cold chain facilities for
perishable products, on-time deliveries to reduce the chargebacks in case of promised
delivery, and handling issues that can lead to contamination of the food products [34].
Refrigerated chain or cold chain is one of the important issues that not only affects the
food supply chain but also plays a major role in the healthcare supply chain. Increased
cost of equipment and less developed infrastructure are the prime factors because of
which the cold chain remains less developed. But once it is developed, it will lead to
the resolution of major issues in the food supply chain and healthcare supply chain
[45]. These issues need to be addressed to create an efficient and responsive FSC that
can contribute to increased customer satisfaction and a less fragmented food supply
chain.78 A. Patidar et al.
6.3 Traceability Issues in FSC
The definition of traceability and traceability system found in the literature seems to
be very broad [48], but the common thing in it is oriented towards the capability to
guarantee the tracking and tracing ability of a food supply chain (FSC), in relation
to its products. As per European Commission (EC) Regulation No. 178/2002, trace￾ability implies “the ability to trace and follow a food, feed, food-producing animal or
substance intended to be, or expected to be, incorporated into a food or feed, through
all stages of production, processing, and distribution” [30]. The Codex Alimentarius
Commission (2206) describes traceability as “the ability to follow the movement of
a food through specified stages of production, processing, and distribution” [11].
According to the author [18], tracking can be defined as the ability to follow the
path of a product along the supply chain, whereas tracing refers to identifying the
product’s origin and its characteristics by referring to records in the supply chain.
Due to reasons like mandatory regulations, international standards and certification
requirements, development of marketing strategies, creating provenance for product
origin, maintaining quality standards and safeguarding from sanitary outbreaks,
tracing the history of a food product related to its displacement is essential for modern
companies.
For an individual firm, the traceability value is related to its differentiating ability
and selling the product when a competitor has provided an unsafe product to the
market [55]. For an industry, it is important to safeguard its reputation and market
share by differentiating the product from the problem. And for a consumer, it is about
removing contamination before fulfilling family needs. On a major scale, consumer
interest is related to human health.
As per ISO 2005 and 2007, traceability system (TS) is the integration of data
and operations, maintaining the desired information pertaining to a product and its
components through the entire value chain. TS maintains records and follows the trail
of a product or material: it enters the supply chain through suppliers, is processed
and is distributed as an end-product.
A basic system has these characteristics:
• Batch or unit identification.
• Information storing with the movement of batches/units.
• A system linking the identification and product movement with relevant trace￾ability information as the product moves to the next stage.
Among the different kinds of food traceability based on how traceability is being
created and what is it all about, the following are mainly discussed [36]:
• Conventional traceability: the traditional way of creating traceability using a
labelling system, and its management for processed foods, but in batches.
• Genetic traceability: creating traceability where a product’s genetic composition
is determined to detect fraud and valorise production.
• Geographical traceability: tracing the point of origin and creating provenance in
the system.6 Traceability and Transportation Issues in the Food Supply Chain 79
Creating a sound traceability system is becoming the need of the hour. But it has
several problems. Disease outbreaks, poor supply chain visibility, complex global
supply chains, etc., are factors that affect the creation of a traceability system in the
food supply chain. Further, this section focuses on the various issues with respect to
traceability systems that can have a significant impact on the food supply chain and
its performance.
6.3.1 Food Crisis Management and Food Recalls
The mechanism of food recalls and crisis management is a significantly underdevel￾oped field [12]. Recall may be defined as an action to call back such food products
from the food chain as may pose a threat to public health or violate the country’s law,
including a product that is in the customer’s possession. For an efficient recall, the
architecture of food safety systems needs to be developed, as it affects the organisa￾tion’s ability to recall. Recall is done in public interest [10]. Besides product recall,
product withdrawal is also done in some cases where there may be public health and
safety issues, or product issues. It can be done in two ways:
• When the product has quality defects or labelling irregularities.
• As a precautionary measure, pending further investigation, and where a threat to
public health and safety is established.
Food recall can be done due to many reasons [1]. One such reason is incorrect food
packaging. This may include incorrect packaging, undisclosed allergens, misleading
claims and incorrect ingredient labels. Another reason for recall is that the food
item contains biological, physical or chemical hazards. For example, a high level
of clostridium botulinum bacteria, which causes botulism, can lead to the recall of
canned goods. Similarly, metal shavings from machines getting into a product can
lead to a physical hazard. And so, the food is discarded.
Another example of food recall is farm produce that has been cross-contaminated
from animal manure and runoff. This can lead toE. Colispreading to fruits and vegeta￾bles, as happened in the romaine lettuce outbreak in Arizona. Pathogen-contaminated
products are highly damaging because they affect all consumers. According to
USDA’s report, Listeria, E. Coli and Salmonella led to 17 food recalls in 2015.
6.3.2 Traceability of Bulk Products
Many industries use bulk ingredients in the form of liquid, powders, crystals or grains
stored in huge silos that rarely get emptied. Hence, several lots are kept in the same
silos, and continuous consumption takes place. Traceability becomes very difficult in
the common case where bulk products are used because of a lack of knowledge about
the lot’s composition [14]. Similarly, fruits, vegetables or grains in the food supply80 A. Patidar et al.
chain are some of the bulk commodities, and tracing them is a big challenge if they
get piled from different sources of different kinds and at different periods. Many
authors have developed models to create a traceability system for such problems.
The author [59] discussed operational techniques for implementing traceability in
bulk product supply chains, and a system approach was used to develop a framework
where a relational database model was developed to facilitate internal traceability.
It was suggested that this technique could mitigate bulk grain handling. Similarly,
authors Li [39], Liang et al. [40, 41] proposed a set of solutions, like inserting
pill-sized food-grade tracer particles during harvest. These tracers can provide infor￾mation related to the point of origin of the product and are edible, such as sugar
and cellulose. Specialised food-grade ink is used in printers to print barcodes. The
authors used dynamic simulation to model the changeovers of liquid in a pipe for bulk
liquid products [54]. The author proposed a traceability model for the raw Brazilian
sugar supply chain using RFID and WSN [29]. Apart from this, a lot of research
is being done to develop a traceability system for products like soybean, corn, etc.
A study was conducted and a traceability system developed using item-level radio
frequency identification. This was applied in the dairy industry to trace milk as a
product [6]. Another interesting study discussed the breadth, depth and precision of
a traceability system [32]. The author also discussed the benefit of implementing
a traceability system in private organisations. Further, they stressed upon UPC that
most of the products have a barcode that is used to determine consumption pattern
and sales pattern, and now, these barcodes can be used to track numerous product
attributes. Another study discussed employing various chromatographic techniques
such as gas–liquid chromatography, high-performance liquid chromatography and
electrophoretic methods for authenticity tests and traceability of vegetable oils and
dairy products [16].
Similarly, another study focused on the labelling and traceability of genetically
modified organisms and discussed DNA-based detection methods and protein-based
methods. Finally, the author discussed that the feasibility of traceability systems
depends on several factors, including identifiers for GM products, detection methods,
level of contamination and financial costs [46]. Another Indian study discusses the
Indian perspective on food traceability and the initiatives taken by APEDA and
its association with GS1 India in the form of Anarnet, Peanut.net, Meat.net and
Grapenet and several ICT initiatives working in many states of India [19]. Also, the
author discussed several factors affecting the traceability system, such as restrictive
government, marketing standardisation, insecure policies and unstable actions for
food safety, unorganised infrastructure, the absence of cold chain facilities and small
local stores and inadequate agricultural practices, with a large number of small and
medium industries and farmers.6 Traceability and Transportation Issues in the Food Supply Chain 81
6.3.3 Quality and Identity Preservation Concerns
The development of technologies like RFID tags has provided new and interesting
opportunities to FSC managers. This technology has inbuilt sensors for temperature,
humidity, etc., and can transmit the collected data along with the item’s identity.
Using this, a traceability system develops the ability to capture information about
the item’s identity and its attributes or properties like humidity or temperature history,
thus providing a complete description and status of the FSC to the manager. This
widens the scope of dynamic optimal planning, like route planning for perishable
goods according to their state of perishability. Some authors have proposed a method
to improve the ability to define an optimal target temperature for multi-commodity
refrigerated storage [4]. Further, the author conducted a simulation-based experi￾ment with a wireless sensor network (WSN) and found that sensor-based methods
for real-time quality monitoring and assessment are better than traditional visual
assessment methods. Research in 2014 developed a model to analyse quality control
in food supply chain management, performed case studies and found that the tier in a
food supply chain is directly proportional to distortion in the supply chain [13]. Food
quality distortion can be removed through effective and efficient pricing and regula￾tory approaches. The authors in 2014 conducted a case study in the red wine industry
about logistics data to assure the quality in a sustainable food supply chain [62].
Another author developed an improved traceability system model for food quality
assurance and evaluation based on fuzzy classification and neural networks that not
only provides efficient traceability but also helps in the evaluation of traceability
system as a basis for visualising the quality management process [69].
Adding to it, due to the increased need for product differentiation, the need
for identity preservation arises significantly because it adds economic value to the
product. Bennet, in 2009, defined identity preservation as the ability to maintain
particular traits or attributes [7]. Among these, country of origin, safety-related traits,
GMO, halal, allergen contamination, animal welfare, low carbon footprints, etc., can
be listed. These attributes are not directly related to quality characteristics, but affect
the product value-addition recognised by consumers. However, consumers cannot
identify these directly, and so, they need a guarantee through certifications. A well￾known study in 2016 identified identity preservation in international feed supply
chains and focused on non-genetically modified crops [66]. The author identified
three steps, i.e. product management at the origin, product transportation and product
processing, and suggested that agricultural products should maintain their identity
at all these three levels of an FSC.
A recent study discussed food traceability from a consumer’s perspective and
answered a research question as to whether the variables characterising Poland’s food
product consumers—like gender, age, education and financial status—affect food
traceability aspects such as identification of the producer, food features’ importance,
the importance of the information given on food product packaging, and the influence
of the shopping place and frequency on tracing the food origin. By conducting empir￾ical research on 500 respondents of Poland, the author found that creating provenance82 A. Patidar et al.
(i.e. point of origin) mattered to consumers, irrespective of the conditions that were
analysed [68]. Food origin gained the maximum attention of consumers, and the
availability of information about producers was considered necessary.
Identity protection is also used to separate lots based on their specificity of traits
and to understand if a particular known composition is being used to enhance the
resulting composition blend [42], for example availability of protein in flour and
of ethanol in wine. In cases like fortified food, diet food, baby food and industrial
products, some components have to be present more than in traditional products.
6.3.4 Fraud Prevention and Anti-counterfeit Concerns
Frauds and fakes are increasing with the increased complication of the FSC and
need to be addressed. Mainly, these instances are evident in high-end products like
wine, cheese and caviar and result in economic and reputation losses. Implementing
traceability will be useful for developing an effective tracking- and tracing-based
system that can store the history of product movement along with the point of origin
and processing history [50]. With the help of overt and covert technologies, this
problem can be resolved. The most promising technology for this kind of system is
RFID because of its wide usage [17].
But the problem lies in the management of this technology. The data stored in
the central database and the cost of managing that database are comparatively high.
Besides this, other technologies like blockchain and cryptography can be useful for
the system because of their immutability feature. Data can be stored, but it is very
hard to manipulate the information. Also, it is easy to track the information back,
as it is shown in the form of transaction history and is decentralised, even though
centralisation makes the system more transparent. Many studies have been carried
out on creating traceability systems to address the fraud prevention and counterfeit
concerns.
The authors in 2015 developed and published a rapid quantitative detection method
for onsite food fraud analysis and focused on spectrometry- and spectroscopy-based
approaches. They used predictive computing, along with sensor and Internet of
Things technology, after the commendable development in computational and infor￾mation sciences [22]. Some other researchers discussed mitigation measures using
traceability systems and data analysis to focus on fraud prevention rather than on
fraud detection [44]. The authors in 2014 focused on halal FSC and its integrity, as
the halal concept is an object of concern these days [73]. The halal status of a food
product needs to be proved to consumers because of their awareness of this concept.
Hence, the author focused on halal certifications, halal standards, halal traceability
and trust across the FSC members and developed a conceptual framework for inves￾tigating halal integrity with the food supply chain. Further, in 2016, a PPP model was
stressed upon for food fraud inhibition. Steps necessary to implement country-wide6 Traceability and Transportation Issues in the Food Supply Chain 83
or industry-wide vulnerability assessment were discussed, and a food fraud preven￾tion strategy that is focused on vulnerability assessment and initial screening was
proposed [56].
If an active consumer can reach a database using handheld devices like mobile
phones, the effectiveness of the traceability system and the trust in the food supply
chain will be enhanced. Most of the traceability and anti-counterfeit systems are
based on information collected at various levels of the food supply chain. And, as
the traceability costs are already included in other purposes of the supply chain,
track-and-trace anti-counterfeit systems can reduce the price while protecting food
from frauds and fakes, without losing competitiveness [57].
6.4 Transportation Issues in FSC
Transportation plays a vital role in the supply chain. The supply chain focuses on and
maintains product flows, information flows and financial flows, and transportation
or logistics provides an integral solution for facilitating these flows.
The transportation system contributes to maintaining the flow of goods from
farmer to processor and then, to the distributor and retailer in case of agri-food
supply chain (AFSC) [63]. Another mode of product flows can be from the farmer to
the wholesaler and then to the retailer and consumer in the food grain supply chain
(FGSC). In some cases, the cold chain also plays a vital role and needs a temperature￾controlled supply chain for perishable products. Refrigerated transportation is needed
in the fruits and vegetables supply chain (F&V SC).
Every industry has its own logistics and transportation issues. These can arise from
a multitude of sources, such as product type, model, receiver and market conditions.
Professionals at Zipline Logistics discuss the unique issues of food and beverage
supply chain transportation [24]. These issues need to be managed for effective and
efficient food supply chain management.
6.4.1 On-time Delivery (OTD) and Retailer Chargebacks
On-time delivery (OTD) is a challenge in food transportation, as most of the manu￾facturers or retailers specify a date for delivery—commonly known as “must arrive
by dates” (MABD). If these dates are missed by a transport service provider, it leads
to a penalty. In an example cited by the professionals of Zipline Logistics [24], Roger
charges a flat $500 for late orders and Wal-Mart takes 3% of the purchase price on
late cases under its “on-time in full” (OTIF) program. If the manufacturers are unable
to meet the timelines as specified by customers, a brand can lose a huge amount of
money in a quarter and can even lose a buyer relationship.
To maintain the relationship with customers, many of the retailers are setting
strict parameters about their order management. Many retail stores are working on84 A. Patidar et al.
pallet configuration, appointment scheduling and confirmation processes, operating
hours and their preferred carriers. Researchers in 2011 conducted a study on cluster￾building and logistics network integration of local FSCs to enhance the efficiency of
logistics across the potential markets, along with reduced environmental impact. They
developed a coordinated distribution system for local food producers and enhanced
traceability for consumers [8].
6.4.2 Refrigerated Shipping
Many industries dealing with goods of a perishable nature prefer refrigerated ship￾ping. Refrigerated shipping is nothing but temperature-controlled shipping. It consti￾tutes a major part of the cold chain. Generally, temperature varies from 0 to 4 °C.
Initially, the cold chain was used only for vaccines or medicines, but nowadays, it is
being used for almost every product that is perishable. Demand for such temperature￾controlling equipment rose significantly due to consumers’ preference for fresh and
less-processed products.
Two reasons the supply chain is seeing little improvement are the higher cost
of ownership and a challenging regulatory environment [72]. It directly shows the
tighter capacity and increased prices when compared with traditional truckloads.
Availability of these refrigerated vehicles is a challenge, also because of the season￾ality. They are much-required during prime production season, but are less available
on the spot. But during the off-season, the availability of these vehicles is high. This
affects not only their capacity utilisation, i.e. operational capability, but also their
operating cost i.e. financial capability. Another author in Chap. 16 of Post-harvest
Handling discussed the fresh produce value chain from field to home, along with
refrigeration and other supporting technologies and focussed on increased shelf life
and the extension of perishable produce storage [21].
Researchers discussed the possibility of global trading of perishable goods using
the creation of environmental control and refrigeration during maritime transporta￾tion [23]. Further, the author focused on the mean rate of energy consumption of the
systems and discussed greenhouse gases and carbon footprints during the transporta￾tion of apples from New Zealand to the UK and their long-term storage. Researchers
also compared a refrigerated container versus bulk in the banana cold chain [2].
They conducted a two-fold analysis where, initially, they described the demand and
supply of refrigerated products and reefer capacity, respectively, utilising contain￾ership fleet and by conventional reefer fleet. Secondly, a trade case of banana was
evaluated and a cost analysis carried out for each stakeholder across the banana cold
chain. Other authors, in Chap. 18 of Delivering Performance in Food Supply Chains,
discussed the significance of keeping a controlled temperature during transportation,
for the safety of microbes and the improved quality of food [35]. Further, the authors
discussed the levels of the cold chain, i.e. chilling, freezing, storage, transporta￾tion and the shop-floor level. Energy reduction and environmental issues were also6 Traceability and Transportation Issues in the Food Supply Chain 85
discussed, and finally, some factors that producers should consider while specifying
refrigeration systems for the FSC were mentioned.
6.4.3 Handling and Contamination
Handling and contamination are directly connected to food safety and food quality.
To maintain safety and quality, several measures have to be considered by the logistics
partner. Cleaning the loading space is one of the important dimensions described by
the Zipline professionals. Improper cleaning leads to infusion into the food packages
that are being shipped, which can contaminate them. Trailers often get rejected for
the same reason, and this leads to a delayed timeline, affecting the efficiency and
responsiveness of the entire supply chain. Another issue related to food safety and
food quality is the over-handling of freight [51]. This problem is evident in snacks￾based products and bulk ingredients, where bags and totes are fragile and can get
ripped during movement. Chances of breakage are high during loading and unloading.
Damaged packaging or holes in the package leads to a ruined product. This shows
a very low product safety. Hence, it was proposed by industry professionals that
the modes of transportation be chosen with very few transfer points to maintain
product safety during handling. Further, many studies have been conducted on the
above-mentioned problem, focusing on the risks of halal food product contami￾nation during transportation [70]. Further, the authors discussed the food hygiene
regulation 2009, ISO 9001, Malaysia Standard of MSI500:2009 and MS2400:2010
that cover food production, transportation, warehousing and retailing in Malaysia.
Another study characterises risks and controls for food transportation safety, focusing
on various types of contamination, like biological and physical, during storing and
transporting [52]. Further, the authors elaborated on five food safety hazards that
carry the greatest concern, i.e. lack of security, improper handling practices, inade￾quate loading and unloading practices, contamination across stock and less control of
temperature [37]. The analysis also suggests that organisational risk factors and tran￾siting factors explain the relationship among food safety-related hazards. The author’s
analysis further suggested some measures to mitigate the risk of food damages. These
include creating awareness among and training employees, frequent review of records
by management and effective communication among stakeholders of the entire food
supply chain.
6.4.4 Less Than Truck Load (LTL) Shipping
Less than truckload shipping is beneficial to those who are not able to fill a full truck,
since they do not have enough freight. The traditional LTL model requires pricing up
of freight and unloading at a central facility and then, reloading for delivery, which
leads to distortion due to extra transfer of product. A factor that can resolve the LTL86 A. Patidar et al.
shipping issue but create another issue is the loading of a large mix of products. But
then, a threat of contamination is created, thereby making LTL a difficult mode for
consumer brands. Many authors, through their research, have discussed this issue,
along with load securement techniques and packaging methods as a mitigation tool
for reducing the risk of damage and injury during shipment by a truck or container.
Also, they have discussed proper loading methods, along with food pallets and
unitisation methods to reduce subsequent injury during loading and overcoming
penalties and other related matters. Further, the authors have discussed requirements
to meet Federal Motor Carrier Safety Regulations (FMCSR) [53]. Another study,
conducted for a scheduling problem for cross-docking with loading and unloading
constraints based on an improved particle swarm optimisation algorithm, compared
the improved particle swarm optimisation with PSO and GLNPSO and found that
improved PSO outperforms all the algorithms, particularly when there are more
products, docks and trucks [71]. The author performed statistical tests to find out the
statistical significance of the difference in performance. Another author discussed
the same scheduling problem in “less than truckload” industries [43].
6.5 Resolving the Issues of the FSC
The FSC is growing rapidly and so are stakeholders’ expectations. For instance,
consumers want fresh and exotic food on their plates throughout the year. This expec￾tation has led supply chain managers to extend their verticals across geographies and
to more stakeholders, leading to a longer and complicated supply chain.
We frequently come across several issues in the food supply chain. Here are some
suggestions to resolve them.
6.5.1 Lack of Traceability
Lack of traceability and transparency develops a huge grey area in the supply chain,
which can expose the entire supply chain to several kinds of risks. This lack (of
tracking and tracing issues) in the FSC arises mainly because of the use of outdated
or traditional systems [9]. This introduces errors and delays in information sharing
and lowers the supply chain visibility.
A technological solution to these issues can be blockchain technology. Many
researchers and authors have described this technology as an important one for
creating tracking, tracing and transparency in the FSC [31, 49].
Blockchain technology is a distributed-ledger technology, where data are stored
in a distributed manner and the information is shared across the network, leading
to better supply chain visibility. As a benefit, users can view the information on
a real-time basis without having the right to alter information. Another advantage
of this technology is that once the information is circulated through the network,6 Traceability and Transportation Issues in the Food Supply Chain 87
no one can alter the information: hacking, cracking, manipulating and corrupting
information are a time-consuming and costly affair. The essence of this technology
is creating transparency, traceability and trust using the power of decentralisation and
a consensus mechanism that not only empowers the stakeholders but also uses the
consensus to store the information. The information is fetched from a decentralised
database that stores information after obtaining the consensus of the key persons
having the right authority [5].
Many researchers are developing a farm-to-fork model that can trace even a single
bit of information across the FSC.
Technology has the power to deliver transparency, traceability and trust that have
been the requirements of the food industry for a long time. Because of this unal￾terable data, a system developed can share information pertaining to the point of
origin, ingredients and current state of the product with all the producers, suppliers,
distributors, retailers and consumers [58].
6.5.2 Product Safety and Quality
Manufacturers these days face pressure to deliver safe and high-quality products.
Commonly identified causes for these issues are storage and warehousing prac￾tices, transportation delays, improper weather conditions and industrial sabotage
[25]. These safety and quality issues sometimes lead to product recalls, which result
in huge costs and can result in damage to the brand equity also.
For manufacturers who want to create product safety and product quality, this
entire process starts with the selection of raw materials and the implementation of
appropriate production methods as per the standards, along with testing them and
creating provenance [27]. Testing entails the selection of an accredited laboratory that
practises recent and advanced collection and analysis techniques to ensure accurate
results and reliability of quality assurance. Besides this, a trustworthy logistics partner
needs to be identified. They must be experienced in handling food products and must
have a good track record and reputation.
People from academia and industry are continuously trying to improve industry
standards with the help of research and development. Many authors have published
their research in reputed journals directly related to food safety and food security.
Researchers are also developing models as per international standards to create inter￾national acceptance of the food product. This will not only contribute to the improve￾ment of the industry but will also lead to the creation of global recognition of the
food products. Another aspect researchers are focusing on is of achieving fewer food
recalls by enhancing the quality and safety of a product. This can be done by identi￾fying its point of origin and identifying the quality of the material or the conversion
of the material throughout the supply chain.88 A. Patidar et al.
6.5.3 Lack of Communication
A major issue found in the food supply chain is fragmented information and lack of
communication. Most of the stakeholders in the food supply chain have little or no
information about other stakeholders’ whereabouts [28]. This affects efficiency and
waste generation, which can contribute to the creation of distrust among stakeholders.
If the supply chain is operating globally, this problem can be increased manifold.
Technology these days provides a solution for the lack of communication. It has
made it easier and faster to get an insight into the entire FSC. Live chat, microblogging
and cloud-based networks are the solutions that can provide quick onboarding and an
improved view of the entire supply chain, leading to ease of communication among
suppliers, manufactures, distributors, retailers and the logistics partner. This, in turn,
will enable smooth flow in the entire supply chain [15].
Since maintaining food quality is of utmost importance and starts with the selec￾tion of the right supplier supplying the right material, the supplier’s role is very
important. Food quality is closely related to the quality of agri-produce or that of
the ingredients being used in food processing [20]. Therefore, to enhance quality
assurance, one must get fresh ingredients of better quality from ethical suppliers.
This will not only specify and maintain the quality of the raw material but will also
contribute to reducing supply shortages.
6.5.4 Increase in Supply Chain Costs
There are many types of costs associated with the food supply chain: those pertaining
to power, transportation, freight, human resources and adoption of the latest tech￾nology [64]. These costs affect the profitability of the supply chain, and so, keeping
them under check is crucial.
When it comes to controlling costs, knowing the costs is the first step. Once the
supply chain manager can identify the costs, managing them gets easier. Spread￾sheets may be used for collecting information and managing the SC costs, but only
if and when supply chains are simpler and lesser complex. As the complexity of
the supply chain increases, the manager needs a technological solution. Complex
supply chains are provided with a network solution that can be integrated with the
supply chain. A study conducted by Chainlink Research in 2019 proposed a supply
chain network termed as the network enterprise. This is a new business model that
relies on the supply chain trading partner operating model, which is compatible
with interoperability and visibility with reduced complexity [64]. Further, the author
says that “a supply chain network needs the integration/visibility capabilities and
multi-enterprise supply chain applications on one process-wide platform, a supply
chain application network”. The author has discussed integrator networks (IN) and
“real-time single versions of the truth” networks (RSN).6 Traceability and Transportation Issues in the Food Supply Chain 89
Technology adoption is related to value-cost calculation. Saving too much cost
can affect efficiency and growth. Adopting a technology can be an expensive affair,
but it can also save costs in the long run. Also, it can modernise the business and
create vulnerability to competitive forces. But, instead of focusing on cost alone, a
value-cost calculation is always better for the long run.
6.5.5 Inventory Control
Inventory control is a crucial area of FSC. The leading reason that explains its impor￾tance is the perishable nature of some of the food products. Inventory needs to be
managed carefully, as the supply chain manager needs to focus on controlling costs,
maintaining quality and satisfying customer demands [38]. Excess inventory, beyond
customer demand, leads to food spoilage and ultimately, increases food wastage.
Reducing inventory beyond a certain level creates customer dissatisfaction if the
customer’s demands remain unfulfilled. FSC managers have a critical responsibility
to manage and create a balance among customer satisfaction, inventory levels and
reduction of wastage.
Ideally, to maintain and manage inventory levels in the food supply chain, there
should be a system that enables and empowers supply chain visibility to the inven￾tory through the entire supply chain using technologies like RFID, Internet of Things
(IoT) and related tracking and tracing technologies that can help in maintaining and
creating data accuracy. For a food supply chain manager, a challenge exists with
respect to food quality and food safety for all the finished products, whether the
operations are at the global level or a local level. To create effective communication
throughout the supply chain, one needs to develop supply chain visibility, which will
ultimately help in managing the supply chain. Creating and maintaining supplier
relationships, identifying and appointing reputable and experienced logistics part￾ners and appropriate technology adoption can lead to an efficient supply chain with
improved food quality products and increased customer satisfaction. Also, it can
deliver better results [26].
6.6 Conclusion
Due to basic characteristics like perishability, increased customer expectations
and awareness and knowledge, the food supply chain is becoming very complex.
Managing it is a challenge for supply chain managers and officials. Some of the
crucial concerns are supply chain visibility, inventory control, full truckload ship￾ping, tracking and tracing as part of traceability, lack of trust, increased interme￾diation, product origin provenance, food recall, food quality and food safety, all of
which can increase the complexity of the SC. These complexities can be addressed
and simplified with the help of technology solutions like big data, blockchain, IoT,90 A. Patidar et al.
RFID, sensor technology, etc., apart from a few abstract solutions. Managers need to
focus on technology and their relationships with customers, suppliers and logistics
partners in order to enhance the efficiency, quality and safety of the food supply
chain.
References
1. Ahsan K, Gunawan I (2014) Analysis of product recalls: identification of recall initiators and
causes of recall. Oper Supply Chain Manag Int J 97–106. http://doi.org/10.31387/oscm0180115
2. Arduino G, Carrillo Murillo D, Parola F (2015) Refrigerated container versus bulk: evidence
from the banana cold chain. Marit Policy Manag 42(3):228–245. https://doi.org/10.1080/030
88839.2013.851421
3. Aung MM, Chang YS (2014) Traceability in a food supply chain: safety and quality
perspectives. Food Control 39(1):172–184. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodcont.2013.11.007
4. Aung MM, Chang YS (2014) Temperature management for the quality assurance of a perish￾able food supply chain. Food Control 40(1):198–207. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodcont.2013.
11.016
5. Badia-Melis R, Mishra P, Ruiz-García L (2015) Food traceability: new trends and recent
advances. A review. Food Control 57:393–401. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodcont.2015.05.005
6. Barge P, Gay P, Merlino V, Tortia C (2014) Item-level radio-frequency identification for the
traceability of food products: application on a dairy product. J Food Eng 125(1):119–130.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfoodeng.2013.10.019
7. Bennet G (2009) Food identity preservation and traceability: safer grains. https://books.goo
gle.co.in/books?hl=en&lr=&id=wREGddur_8IC&oi=fnd&pg=PP1&dq=%5B35%5D%09B
ennet,+G.+S.+(2009).+Food+identity+preservation+and+traceability:+Safer+grains.+CRC+
Press.&ots=FZKBcWTCLb&sig=J8syEY6zX4yUMYYaquYctkgMQ68
8. Bosona TG, Gebresenbet G (2011) Cluster building and logistics network integration of local
food supply chain. Biosys Eng 108(4):293–302. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biosystemseng.2011.
01.001
9. Bosona T, Gebresenbet G (2013) Food traceability as an integral part of logistics management
in food and agricultural supply chain. Food Control 33(1):32–48. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.foo
dcont.2013.02.004
10. Carlson CC, Peake WO (2012) Rethinking food recall communications for consumers.
Iridescent 2(3):11–23. https://doi.org/10.1080/19235003.2012.11428511
11. Chammem N, Issaoui M, De Almeida AID, Delgado AM (2018) Food crises and food safety
incidents in European Union, United States, and Maghreb area: current risk communication
strategies and new approaches. J AOAC Int 101(4):923–938. https://doi.org/10.5740/jaoacint.
17-0446
12. Charlebois S (2011) Food recalls, systemic causal factors and managerial implications: the
case of premiere quality foods. Br Food J 113(5):625–636. https://doi.org/10.1108/000707011
11131737
13. Chen C, Zhang J, Delaurentis T (2014) Quality control in food supply chain management: an
analytical model and case study of the adulterated milk incident in China. Int J Prod Econ
152:188–199. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2013.12.016
14. Comba L, Belforte G, Dabbene F, Gay P (2013) Methods for traceability in food production
processes involving bulk products. Biosys Eng 116(1):51–63. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biosys
temseng.2013.06.006
15. Complexities of supply chain in India and its impact on food services industry | Elior India (n.d.).
Retrieved Feb 26, 2021, from https://www.elior.in/press/challenges-indian-supply-chain-and￾its-impact-food-services-industry-elior-india6 Traceability and Transportation Issues in the Food Supply Chain 91
16. Cserháti T, Forgács E, Deyl Z, Miksik I (2005) Chromatography in authenticity and traceability
tests of vegetable oils and dairy products: a review. Biomed Chromatogr 19(3):183–190. https://
doi.org/10.1002/bmc.486
17. Curtin J, Kauffman RJ, Riggins FJ (2007) Making the “MOST” out of RFID technology: a
research agenda for the study of the adoption, usage and impact of RFID. Inf Technol Manage
8(2):87–110. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10799-007-0010-1
18. Dabbene F, Gay P, Tortia C (2014) Traceability issues in food supply chain management: a
review. Biosyst Eng 120:65–80. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.biosystemseng.2013.09.006
19. Dandage K, Badia-Melis R, Ruiz-García L (2017) Indian perspective in food traceability: a
review. Food Control 71:217–227. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodcont.2016.07.005
20. Dharni K, Sharma RK (2015) Supply chain management in food processing sector: experience
from India. Int J Logistics Syst Manag 21(1):115–132. https://doi.org/10.1504/IJLSM.2015.
069080
21. Dodd MC, Bouwer JJ (2014) The supply value chain of fresh produce from field to home.
Refrigeration and other supporting technologies. In: Postharvest handling: a systems approach.
Elsevier Inc., pp 449–483. http://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-408137-6.00016-8
22. Ellis DI, Muhamadali H, Haughey SA, Elliott CT, Goodacre R (2015) Point-and-shoot: rapid
quantitative detection methods for on-site food fraud analysis-moving out of the laboratory
and into the food supply chain. Anal Methods 7(22):9401–9414. http://doi.org/10.1039/c5a
y02048d
23. Fitzgerald WB, Howitt OJA, Smith IJ, Hume A (2011) Energy use of integral refrigerated
containers in maritime transportation. Energy Policy 39(4):1885–1896. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.enpol.2010.12.015
24. Five challenges in food and beverage supply chains (n.d.). Redwood Logistics. Retrieved Feb
26, 2021, from https://www.redwoodlogistics.com/five-challenges-in-food-and-beverage-sup
ply-chains/
25. Fixing the 5 big problems in the food supply chain (n.d.). Retrieved Feb 26, 2021, from https://
supplychainbeyond.com/5-big-problems-in-the-food-supply-chain/
26. Folkerts H, Koehorst H (1997) Challenges in international food supply chains: vertical co￾ordination in the European agribusiness and food industries. Supply Chain Manag 2(1):11–14.
https://doi.org/10.1108/13598549710156312
27. Food supply chain—optimizing a important supply chain (n.d.). Retrieved Feb 26, 2021, from
https://www.thebalancesmb.com/food-supply-chain-2221100
28. Food supply chain disruption: challenges and learning for the F&B sector (n.d.). Retrieved Feb
26, 2021, from https://www.entrepreneur.com/article/349140
29. Fray Da Silva R, Praça I, Tsugonobu H, Yoshizaki Y, Cugnasca CE (2015) Proposal of a trace￾ability model for the raw Brazilian sugar supply chain using RFID and WSN. In: Production
and Operations Management Society, POMS 26th annual conference, Washington DC, USA
30. Frohberg K, Grote U, Winter E (2006) EU food safety standards, traceability and other regula￾tions: a growing trade barrier to developing countries’ exports? https://ageconsearch.umn.edu/
record/25668/files/ip06fr01.pdf
31. Galimberti A, De Mattia F, Losa A, Bruni I, Federici S, Casiraghi M, Martellos S, Labra M
(2013) DNA barcoding as a new tool for food traceability. Food Res Int 50(1):55–63. http://
doi.org/10.1016/j.foodres.2012.09.036
32. Golan E, Krissoff B, Kuchler F, Nelson K, Price G, Calvin L (2003) Traceability in the US
food supply: dead end or superhighway. Choices 18(2):17–20
33. Harmin C, Allen T (2015) Flood vulnerability of hog farms in Eastern North Carolina:
an inconvenient poop. East Carolina University. https://thescholarship.ecu.edu/handle/10342/
5143
34. James SJ, James C (2010) The food cold-chain and climate change. Food Res Int 43:1944–1956.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodres.2010.02.001
35. James SJ, James C (2010) Advances in the cold chain to improve food safety, food quality
and the food supply chain. In: Delivering performance in food supply chains. Elsevier Ltd., pp
366–386. http://doi.org/10.1533/9781845697778.5.36692 A. Patidar et al.
36. Kok E, Van Der Spiegel M, Prins T, Manti V, Groot M, Bremer M, Van Raamsdonk L, Van
Der Fels I, Van Ruth S (2012) Traceability. In: Chemical analysis of food: techniques and
applications. Elsevier Inc., pp 465–498. http://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-384862-8.00014-5
37. Kozak GK, Crichton J, Farber J (2014) Control of pathogens at retail. In: Retail food safety.
Springer, New York, pp 3–15. http://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4939-1550-7_2
38. Lee HL, Billington C (1992) Managing supply chain inventory: pitfalls and opportunities.
http://allman.rhon.itam.mx/~gigola/Curso_pron_inv/Pitfulls.pdf
39. Li L (2013) Technology designed to combat fakes in the global supply chain. Bus Horiz
56(2):167–177. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bushor.2012.11.010
40. Liang K, Thomasson JA, Shen MX, Armstrong PR, Ge Y, Lee KM, Herrman TJ (2013) Rugged￾ness of 2D code printed on grain tracers for implementing a prospective grain traceability system
to the bulk grain delivery system. Food Control 33(2):359–365. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foo
dcont.2013.03.029
41. Liang K, Thomasson JA, Lee KM, Shen M, Ge Y, Herrman TJ (2012) Printing data matrix
code on food-grade tracers for grain traceability. Biosys Eng 113(4):395–401. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.biosystemseng.2012.09.012
42. Lindner B, Burton M, James S, Pluske J (2001) Welfare effects of identity preservation and
labelling of genetically modified food. In: 45th annual AARES conference. http://doi.org/10.
22004/AG.ECON.125745
43. Maknoon MY, Soumis F, Baptiste P (2017) An integer programming approach to scheduling
the transshipment of products at cross-docks in less-than-truckload industries. Comput Oper
Res 82:167–179. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cor.2017.01.018
44. Manning L (2017) Guest editorial. Br Food J 119(1):2–6. http://doi.org/10.1108/BFJ-09-2016-
0446
45. Manzini R, Accorsi R (2013) The new conceptual framework for food supply chain assessment.
J Food Eng 115(2):251–263. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfoodeng.2012.10.026
46. Miraglia M, Berdal KG, Brera C, Corbisier P, Holst-Jensen A, Kok EJ, Marvin HJP, Schimmel
H, Rentsch J, Van Rie JPPF, Zagon J (2004) Detection and traceability of genetically modified
organisms in the food production chain. Food Chem Toxicol 42(7):1157–1180. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.fct.2004.02.018
47. Oliver RK, Webber MD (1982) Supply-chain management: logistics catches up with strategy.
In: The roots of logistics. Springer, Berlin, pp 183–194. http://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-
27922-5_15
48. Olsen P, Borit M (2013) How to define traceability. Trends Food Sci Technol 29(2):142–150.
http://doi.org/10.1016/j.tifs.2012.10.003
49. Opara LU,Mazaud F (2001) Food traceability from field to plate. Outlook Agric 30(4):239–247.
https://doi.org/10.5367/000000001101293724
50. Regattieri A, Gamberi M, Manzini R (2007) Traceability of food products: general framework
and experimental evidence. J Food Eng 81(2):347–356. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfoodeng.
2006.10.032
51. Savov AV, Kouzmanov GB (2009) Food quality and safety standards at a glance. Biotechnol
Biotechnol Equip 23(4):1462–1468. http://doi.org/10.2478/V10133-009-0012-8
52. Sertkaya A (2010) Food transportation safety: characterizing risks and controls by use of expert
opinion. https://www.researchgate.net/publication/268179950
53. Singh P, Singh J, Antle J, Topper E, Grewal G (2014) Load securement and packaging methods
to reduce risk of damage and personal injury for cargo freight in truck, container and intermodal
shipments. J Appl Packag Res 6(1):47–62. http://doi.org/10.14448/japr.01.0005
54. Skoglund T, Dejmek P (2007) Fuzzy traceability: a process simulation derived extension of the
traceability concept in continuous food processing. Food Bioprod Process 85(4 C):354–359.
http://doi.org/10.1205/fbp07044
55. Smyth SJ, Phillips PWB (2002) Product differentiation alternatives: identity preservation,
segregation, and traceability. http://www.agbioforum.missouri.edu/v5n2/v5n2a01-smyth.htm.
AgBioForum. https://mospace.umsystem.edu/xmlui/handle/10355/3066 Traceability and Transportation Issues in the Food Supply Chain 93
56. Spink J, Moyer DC, Whelan P (2016) The role of the public private partnership in food fraud
prevention—includes implementing the strategy. Curr Opin Food Sci 10:68–75. http://doi.org/
10.1016/j.cofs.2016.10.002
57. Sun C, Li W, Zhou C, Li M, Yang X (2013) Anti-counterfeit system for agricultural product
origin labeling based on GPS data and encrypted Chinese-sensible code. Comput Electron
Agric 92:82–91. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compag.2012.12.014
58. Supply chain management & logistics 2.0 | (2008)
59. Thakur M, Wang L, Hurburgh CR (2010) A multi-objective optimization approach to balancing
cost and traceability in bulk grain handling. J Food Eng 101(2):193–200. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.jfoodeng.2010.07.001
60. The global food supply chain faces daunting challenges in the coming decades (n.d.). Retrieved
Feb 26, 2021, from https://www.forbes.com/sites/stevebanker/2019/10/10/the-global-food-sup
ply-chain-faces-daunting-challenges-in-the-coming-decades/?sh=cdbec855acf9
61. Tilman D, Cassman KG, Matson PA, Naylor R, Polasky S (2002) Agricultural sustainability
and intensive production practices. Nature 418(6898):671–677. http://doi.org/10.1038/nature
01014
62. Ting SL, Tse YK, Ho GTS, Chung SH, Pang G (2014) Mining logistics data to assure the
quality in a sustainable food supply chain: a case in the red wine industry. Int J Prod Econ
152:200–209. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2013.12.010
63. Tsolakis NK, Keramydas CA, Toka AK, Aidonis DA, Iakovou ET (2014) Agrifood supply
chain management: a comprehensive hierarchical decision-making framework and a critical
taxonomy. Biosyst Eng 120:47–64. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.biosystemseng.2013.10.014
64. Understanding supply chain network technology—the network effect (n.d.). Retrieved Feb 26,
2021, from https://supplychainbeyond.com/understanding-supply-chain-network-technology/
65. USDA kills 73,500 Tyson-bound chickens because of bird flu | Food Safety News (n.d.).
Retrieved Feb 26, 2021, from https://www.foodsafetynews.com/2017/03/usda-kills-73500-
tyson-bound-chickens-because-of-bird-flu/
66. Varacca A, Soregaroli C (2016) Identity preservation in international feed supply chains.
EuroChoices 15(1):38–43. https://doi.org/10.1111/1746-692X.12118
67. Viswanadham N (2006) Ed, Achieving rural and global supply chain excellence: the Indian
way, Indian school of Business, December 5, 2006 (released by the Prime Minister of India).
https://www.csa.iisc.ac.in/~nv/Mypublications/Books/GLAMSBook.pdf
68. Walaszczyk A, Gali ´nska B (2020) Food origin traceability from a consumer’s perspective.
Sustainability 12(5):1872. https://doi.org/10.3390/su12051872
69. Wang J, Yue H, Zhou Z (2017) An improved traceability system for food quality assurance
and evaluation based on fuzzy classification and neural network. Food Control 79:363–370.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodcont.2017.04.013
70. Yaacob TZ, Suzana Jaafar H, Rahman FA (2016) An overview of halal food product
contamination risks during transportation. Sci Int (Lahore) 28(3):3183–3190
71. Ye Y, Li J, Li K, Fu H (2018) Cross-docking truck scheduling with product unloading/loading
constraints based on an improved particle swarm optimisation algorithm. Int J Prod Res
56(16):5365–5385. https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2018.1464678
72. Zhou GH, Xu XL, Liu Y (2010) Preservation technologies for fresh meat—a review. Meat Sci
86(1):119–128. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.meatsci.2010.04.033
73. Zulfakar MH, Anuar MM, Talib MSA (2014) Conceptual framework on halal food supply
chain integrity enhancement. Procedia Soc Behav Sci 121:58–67. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sbs
pro.2014.01.1108Chapter 7
A Framework for Blockchain Technology
Adoption in Food Supply Chain
Ashish Dwivedi, Ajay Jha, Vikas Yadav, Manisha Bansal,
and Harsh Srivastava
Abstract With its several unique and useful applications, blockchain has proven
to be a positively disruptive technology in various sectors. Blockchain applications
for the food sector had been successfully developed and practised numerous times.
The stakeholders of the food supply chain (FSC) are actively exploring the diffusion
strategy for the blockchain. The present chapter identifies and analyses the Critical
Success Factors (CSFs) that can facilitate the successful adoption of Block Chain
Technology (BCT) in FSC. The results of the study highlight that the “Technological
maturity (CSF3)” and “Resiliency (CSF5)” are the potential driving CSFs while
“Information security and reliability (CSF1)” and “Trust and collaboration (CSF9)”
are the most dependent CSFs for BCT adoption in FSC. The analysis from the study
draw the contextual and hierarchical relationships among the identified CSFs of
BCT adoption in FSC. The outcomes can assist the policymakers in the successful
dissemination of BCT and enhancing the performance of FSC.
Keywords Food supply chain · Blockchain · Interpretive structural modelling · Information system · Drivers · Theory building
A. Dwivedi (B)
Jindal Global Business School, O. P. Jindal Global University, Sonipat, India
A. Jha
Operations Management, Jaipuria Institute of Management, Lucknow, India
V. Yadav
Indian Railway, New Delhi, India
M. Bansal
Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, New Delhi, India
e-mail: manisha.bansal@alumni.iitd.ac.in
H. Srivastava
Organization Design, GMR Group, New Delhi, India
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2022
R. S Mor et al. (eds.), Operations and Supply Chain Management in the Food Industry,
Lecture Notes in Management and Industrial Engineering,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-16-5555-5_7
9596 A. Dwivedi et al.
7.1 Introduction
In the present scenario, food supply chain (FSC) industry merely utilizes advances
in Information and Communication Technology (ICT) to hoard and track the order
deliveries. Despite having abundant technology to support productive features such as
tracking, provenance, automatic audit, automatic transaction, quality monitoring and
smart contract execution, FSCs are yet to facilitate these features for its stakeholders
[10]. These features are supported by combinations of blockchain technology (BCT)
with the Internet of Things (IoT) and artificial intelligence (AI). The application of
BCT and AI can substantially improve the performance of FSC [1]. Several authors
anticipated the increase in demand for applications based on BCT and AI technologies
[23, 49, 53]. Therefore, researchers around the globe have extended their attention
towards the development of innovative applications, best practices and procedures,
theoretical foundations, practical considerations and others aspects for successful
deployment of these technologies [4, 22, 41, 48].
BCT is anticipated to bring substantial improvement in terms of accountability,
transparency, trust and resiliency of FSC. Further, BCT can bring the information
power symmetry along the supply chain irrespective of the size and scope of the
stakeholders [8, 9, 23]. The researchers have explored the BCT application in food
quality monitoring, land and use record, provenance tracking, financial transactions,
pesticide and farm use control, farm to fork tracking, etc. [10, 32]. In recent years,
the previous literature has worked on the prospects, benefits and complexities of the
BCT deployment [3, 37, 50]. However, the theoretical foundation for the successful
dissemination of BCT along the FSC remains an overlooked aspect. There are limited
studies that had addressed the enablers, CSFs and decision-making frameworks for
the adoption of BCT [23]. Therefore, it is essential to have an understanding of the
CSFs for resolving the issues in context of FSC. Further, understanding the dynamics
among the CSFs of BCT adoption, their interrelationships, scope and influences, can
assist the BCT developers in convincing the FSC stakeholders to implement the BCT.
Therefore, the present chapter aims to attempt the following objectives:
1. What are the Critical Success Factors (CSFs) of BCT implementation in FSC?
2. How useful are these CSF and their interactions for the practitioners and
decisionmakers?
7.2 Literature Review
The previous literature observes significant contributions related to blockchain adop￾tion in different domains. The researchers have worked on the application develop￾ment, theoretical discussions, pilot studies, blueprints, simulation and modelling
approaches [29–31, 41]. There are several studies evident in literature in context of
food and agriculture sector. However, there is a dearth of literature assessing the CSFs
affecting blockchain adoption in the context of FSC. Kamble et al. [23] modelled7 A Framework for Blockchain Technology Adoption in Food … 97
Table 7.1 CSFs of BCT adoption in FSC
S. No. Critical Success Factors (CSFs) References
1 Information security and reliability (CSF1) [17]
2 Faster transaction processing system (CSF2) [18, 47]
3 Technological maturity (CSF3) [11, 48, 56]
4 Provenance recording and tracking (CSF4) [17, 21, 39]
5 Resiliency (CSF5) [28, 38]
6 Quality and safety management (CSF6) [20, 48, 55]
7 Interoperability (CSF7) [2, 26]
8 Smart contract (CSF8) [19, 27]
9 Trust and collaboration (CSF9) [6, 7, 13]
10 Ease of documentation (CSF10) [51]
11 Immutability (CSF11) [10, 28]
12 Intermediary reduction (CSF12) [27, 44, 50]
Source Author
the enablers of BCT in the context of agriculture supply chain. However, there is a
limited scope to BCT-enabled traceability for attaining sustainability in the supply
chain. A comprehensive study accessing the attributes and interrelationship among
the CSFs affecting the BCT adoption is still lacking.
7.2.1 Critical Success Factors for BCT Adoption
A detailed literature survey was conducted for the identification of CSFs for BCT
adoption in FSC. The list of CSFs identified from the literature review is presented
in Table 7.1. The identified CSFs drive the adoption of BCT by the organizations
engaged in the FSC.
A detailed discussion on the scope and characteristics of the identified CSFs for
BCT adoption in FSC is presented below:
7.2.1.1 Information Security and Reliability (CSF1)
The adulteration of food and fraud along the supply chain has become a major cause
of concern for the FSC stakeholders [16, 17]. BCT key features to provide information
in a secure, transparent and reliable manner that can positively affect the functioning
of the FSC. Therefore, it can be included as a potential CSF for BCT adoption.98 A. Dwivedi et al.
7.2.1.2 Faster Transaction Processing System (CSF2)
FSC has become more complex on account of diversified food demand around the
globe. The global flow of food has generated the requirement to have tight control
over the maintenance of food quality, transparency and faster transaction speed [47].
Therefore, BCT can serve as a critical determinant of operational performance by
easing the custom process and removing the international transaction complexities
[18].
7.2.1.3 Technological Maturity (CSF3)
BCT observes several constraints that can be attributed to the nascent stage of tech￾nological development. Few critical issues that limit the deployments are power
hungry nature of technology, intensive computing power requirement and infrastruc￾ture requirements [11, 48, 56]. Also, the wide power gap among the FSC stakeholders
and derived control over the network can cause several issues with BCT.
7.2.1.4 Provenance Recording and Tracking (CSF4)
Increased awareness regarding the ethical attributes of food and concerns related to
hygiene and food adulteration can be resolved by the deployment of BCT [23, 54].
In recent years, several pilot studies are successfully conducted to facilitate food
provenance and tracking [17, 21, 39]. Therefore, provenance recording and tracking
qualify as a CSF for BCT adoption in FSC.
7.2.1.5 Resiliency (CSF5)
BCT offers higher resiliency than the legacy system currently installed in FSC [28].
Improved resiliency of transaction settlement enables better control over the quality
of food and satisfaction of customers, thus facilitating performance improvement of
FSC and better response to uncertainty and disruptions [38].
7.2.1.6 Quality and Safety Management (CSF6)
Food quality, cleanliness and authenticity are a competitive advantage in the global
FSC [20]. Several technological solutions contribute to the safety and quality manage￾ment of food. Radio Frequency Information Device (RFID), bar code, IoT and
others serve to collect the real-time data and other tracing and tractability systems.
Blockchain holds the potential to empower these systems with more transparency,
security and authenticity of data, thus enabling an improved quality and safety
management system [48, 55].7 A Framework for Blockchain Technology Adoption in Food … 99
7.2.1.7 Interoperability (CSF7)
The globalization of FSC has created information asymmetry between producer,
service provider and consumer [26]. The FSC needs to coordinate asymmetric stake￾holders, transporters, government and regulatory body and diversified consumer.
Thus, there is a requirement for interoperability standards to expedite business-to￾business and business-to-consumer integration in FSC. BCT might enable the FSC
stakeholders to evolve with the ever-changing FSC. BCT application can serve as a
transparent, robust and efficient information system [2].
7.2.1.8 Smart Contract (CSF8)
BCT increases the value of certification and transaction settlement times through
smart contracts [19]. Smart contract feature facilitates the automatic business process.
Also, smart contract feature can report mitigating the food fraud and unethical busi￾ness process [27]. The developers are performing experiments by supporting the
small-scale farmers with financial grant and later integrating them in a productive
and economically beneficial ecosystem. Therefore, it is apparent that smart contract
feature can transform the FSC and benefit several stakeholders [27].
7.2.1.9 Trust and Collaboration (CSF9)
The majority of legacy systems adopted in FSC heavily rely on the centralized infor￾mation system that suffers from lack of trust, security threats, confidentiality and
auditability [10]. BCT intrinsic capability to increase trust and collaboration among
supply chain partners presents an unavoidable scenario for their adoption in the
supply chain [6, 7, 13].
7.2.1.10 Ease of Documentation (CSF10)
The supply chain gains efficiency by digitalizing documents transfers and acceler￾ating data in a globally complex supply chain [51]. The reduction of trade documents
and processing cost eliminates the delays associated with paper movement in inter￾national transactions, thus enabling better visibility and transparency. This results in
ease of documentation as a potential CSF for FSC.
7.2.1.11 Immutability (CSF11)
BCT by design is immutable and supports easy auditability. This transparent source
of information resolves the issues of power and information asymmetry along the100 A. Dwivedi et al.
Table 7.2 Details of experts
and their designation S. No. Designation Work experience (Years)
1 Government Mandi officer 12
2 Transporter 20
3 Blockchain developer 5
4 Research scholar 3
5 Traders 8
Source Author
FSC stakeholders [10], thus facilitates the better coordination, reliability and trust in
the network [28].
7.2.1.12 Intermediary Reduction (CSF12)
In a few instances, intermediary reported to follow the unethical business process and
generated inefficiencies along the supply chain [51]. The power and money acqui￾sition by intermediary sometimes results in exploitation of low and small producers
[44]. Also, these intermediaries cause a loss in quality of food. Also, the reduction of
intermediary by adopting BCT can improve the performance and benefits of several
stakeholders of FSC [27].
7.3 Data Collection and Sampling Design
The data for the present study is gathered by arranging scheduled interviews with
closed-ended questionnaires. A closed-ended questionnaire was developed to ascer￾tain the effect of all CSFs concerning each other, which are said to be pairwise
comparisons. In total, five experts are selected for further analysis. The details of the
experts’ are presented in Table 7.2.
The experts were selected based on their extensive experience in FSC. Blockchain
developer and research scholar made the expert panel multidimensional. They
provided several insights on the BCT application and how BCT adoption affects
the FSC. Approximately 45–70 min were spent for each expert. A total of 300 min
were spent on interviewing the experts.
7.4 Methodology
This section briefly explains the methodology adopted in this chapter. The targeted
objectives of this chapter are achieved by employing a modified version of Inter￾pretive Structure Modelling (ISM). ISM is a widely used method to construct the7 A Framework for Blockchain Technology Adoption in Food … 101
hierarchical framework among factors/drivers/barriers. ISM method also produces
the interrelationship among the factors. ISM is a constructive approach when dealing
with convoluted problems but inefficient in constructing a theory to answer why.
Consequently, it is necessary to abstractly represent the links to define the appropriate
interactions among the elements as suggested by the experts [45].
In order to overcome the shortcomings of ISM technique an extended form “Total
Interpretive Structural Modelling (TISM)” is introduced. In the TISM technique,
the ISM limitation is focused by using the “Interpretive Matrix” tool where causal
thinking is confined at the time of data collection by experts and made explicit
in the matrix [45]. Some recent publications adopted the TISM methodology for
solving complicated problems. Chaple et al. [12] modelled the lean barriers for
successful lean implementation. Bag [5] obtained the interactions among the green
procurement drivers using the TISM methodology. Workforce agility IoT project
enablers were modelled adopting TISM method [35]. A sustainable manufacturing
evaluation model was obtained for leather industries adopting TISM technique [14,
15]. Interactions among the antecedents of green human resource management were
established employing the TISM technique [33].
Further, Sushil [46] modified TISM and added simultaneous transitive check.
This modified version reduced the need of pairwise comparison. This reduction in
pairwise comparisons results in the reduction of errors with human judgement, thus
making the analysis more efficient and transparent. Several authors have recently
adopted mTISM methodology. For more details on mTISM, readers are advised to
refer [36, 42].
Next, we describe stepwise result of mTISM exercise implemented in this chapter.
Step I: Identify and define CSF
The first step of mTISM is to identify and define the key factors of the objectives. A
total of twelve CSFs are identified from the study related to blockchain adoption in
FSC from personal interviews, and literature review as shown in Table 7.1.
Step II: Pairwise comparison
A relationship among each pair of CSFs reflecting an existence or deficiency of rela￾tionship is performed. This step involves the simultaneous transitive check. In this
modified form, there is reduction of pairwise comparison of the pairs that have tran￾sitive links. This assists in construction of reachability matrix. The final reachability
matrix obtained for this study is shown in Table 7.3.
Step III: Partitioning the reachability matrix
This step consists of making reachability set, antecedent set and intersection set. The
reachability matrix constructed in the previous step is partitioned into different levels
using number of iterations based on the following principle. Table 7.4 represents the
levels of CSF obtained during this exercise.102 A. Dwivedi et al. Table 7.3 Final reachability matrix for CSFs Information security and reliability (CSF1) Faster transaction processing system (CSF2) Technological maturity (CSF3) Provenance recording and tracking (CSF4) Resiliency (CSF5) Quality and safety management (CSF6) Interoperability (CSF7) Smart contract (CSF8) Trust and collaboration (CSF9) Ease of documentation (CSF10) Immutability (CSF11) Intermediary reduction (CSF12) Information security and reliability (CSF1)
1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1* 0 0 0
Faster
transaction
processing
system (CSF2)
1 1 0 1 1* 1* 0 1* 1* 1* 0 1*
Technological
maturity
(CSF3)
1* 1 1 1 1* 1 1 1* 1* 1* 0 0
Provenance
recording and
tracking
(CSF4)
1* 1 0 1 1 1 0 1 1* 1* 0 1
Resiliency
(CSF5)
1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0
Quality and
safety
management
(CSF6)
1* 0 0 0 1 1 0 0 1 0 0 0
Interoperability
(CSF7)
1 1 0 1 0 0 1 1 1* 1* 0 1
Smart contract
(CSF8)
1* 0 0 0 1 1 0 1 1 1 0 0
(continued)7 A Framework for Blockchain Technology Adoption in Food … 103 Table 7.3 (continued) Information security and reliability (CSF1) Faster transaction processing system (CSF2) Technological maturity (CSF3) Provenance recording and tracking (CSF4) Resiliency (CSF5) Quality and safety management (CSF6) Interoperability (CSF7) Smart contract (CSF8) Trust and collaboration (CSF9) Ease of documentation (CSF10) Immutability (CSF11) Intermediary reduction (CSF12) Trust and collaboration (CSF9) 1* 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 Ease of documentation (CSF10) 1* 0 0 0 1* 1* 0 1 1 1 0 0 Immutability (CSF11) 1* 1* 0 1 1* 1* 0 1* 1* 1 1 1 Intermediary reduction (CSF12) 1* 0 0 0 1* 1* 0 1* 1* 1 0 1 Source Author 1 represents a direct link among factors, 0 represents no link among the factors, and 1* represents a transitive link104 A. Dwivedi et al.
Table 7.4 Iteration (1–6) for the CSFs
CSF Reachability set Antecedent set Intersection set Level
CSF1 1, 5, 9 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11,
12
1, 5, 9 L1
CSF2 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10, 12 2, 3, 4, 7, 11 2, 4 L4
CSF3 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 3 3 L7
CSF4 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10, 12 2, 3, 4, 7, 11 2, 4 L5
CSF5 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12 1, 5, 9 1, 5, 9 L7
CSF6 1, 5, 6, 9 2, 3, 4, 6, 8, 10, 11, 12 6 L2
CSF7 1, 2, 4, 7, 8, 9, 10, 12 3, 7 7 L6
CSF8 1, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10 2, 3, 4, 7, 8, 10, 11, 12 8, 10 L3
CSF9 1, 5, 9 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11,
12
1, 5, 9 L1
CSF10 1, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10 2, 3, 4, 7, 8, 10, 11, 12 8, 10 L3
CSF11 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12 11 11 L6
CSF12 1, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10, 12 2, 4, 7, 11, 12 12 L4
Source Author
Step IV: Development of Interpretive Structure Model
In last step, an ISM model is constructed using the relationships obtained in the
last steps. This model depicts the various direct and transitive relationship among
the CSFs. Figure 7.1 represents the ISM model of the CSFs for successful BCT
adoption in FSC.
Table 7.5 explains the key insights obtained during the interview with experts.
The experts suggested their opinion regarding the basis of relationship among the
CSFs. Further, several insights were matched and tabulated for easy understanding
of reader in Table 7.5. The first row and first column contain the CSFs analysed in the
chapter. The corresponding block to each row and column explains the mechanism
or nature of relationships.
7.5 Results and Discussion
BCT is at a nascent stage in the FSC and counters several challenges that are required
for efficient implementation. Several researchers and experts have highlighted the
benefits of BCT surpass the challenges and complexities of their adoption in FSC
[40]. With appropriate policies and strategic support, FSC stakeholders can leverage
the BCT potential to full extent. To meet that end, this chapter provides a model
of CSFs that requires consideration. This chapter provides a theoretical foundation
to counter the practical problems that may occur in BCT adoption. In this section,
outcomes from the study, results and discussion and the insights are discussed.7 A Framework for Blockchain Technology Adoption in Food … 105
Technological maturity (CSF3) Resiliency (CSF5)
Interoperability (CSF7) Immutability(CSF11)
 Faster Transaction processing 
system (CSF2)
Intermediary Reduction (CSF12)
Provenance Recording and 
Tracking (CSF4)
Smart Contract (CSF8) Ease of Documentation (CSF10)
Quality and Safety Management (CSF6)
Trust and Collaboration (CSF9) Information Security and Reliability 
(CSF1)
Fig. 7.1 ISM model reflecting relationships among the CSFs. Source Author
In this chapter, to analyse the interrelationships among different CSFs of BCT
in FSC, a mTISM model has been developed. Based on the mTISM results, CSFs
are arranged as follows. CSF1 > CSF9 > CSF6 > CSF8 > CSF10 > CSF12 > CSF2
> CSF4 > CSF7 > CSF11 > CSF3 > CSF5. The mTISM model can be studied in
seven different levels. Information security and reliability (CSF 1) and Trust and
collaboration (CSF 9) are at the first level. Its position on the topmost level signifies
that this CSF is affected by rest of the CSFs studied in this chapter. This result is in106 A. Dwivedi et al.
Table 7.5 Explanation of interrelationship among the CSFs
Information
security and
reliability
(CSF1)
Faster
transaction
processing
system (CSF2)
Technological
maturity
(CSF3)
Provenance
recording and
tracking
(CSF4)
Resiliency
(CSF5)
Information
security and
reliability
(CSF1)
1 0 0 0 Data reliability
enhances the
organization
capabilities
against
malicious
attacks and
disruption
Faster
transaction
processing
system (CSF2)
Faster
processing
reduce the
risk of
tempering
and
unauthorized
access
1 0 Improved
speed of
information
and transaction
flow ease the
tacking process
Transitive
Technological
maturity
(CSF3)
Transitive Innovation and
increased
attention from
researchers will
reduce the
transaction time.
Further
facilitating
faster payments
to parties
1 Mature
technology
improves the
facilitations of
tracking and
tracking
capabilities
Transitive
Provenance
recording and
tracking
(CSF4)
Transitive Capabilities
assist the
stakeholders in
decision-making
regarding the
financial
transaction
0 1 Improved
tracking
capabilities
improves the
organizational
readiness for
future
disruptions,
uncertainty
and fluctuation
Resiliency
(CSF5)
Resilient
supply chain
increases the
customers’
perceptions
and in turn
makes
system more
reliable
0 0 0 1
(continued)7 A Framework for Blockchain Technology Adoption in Food … 107
Table 7.5 (continued)
Information
security and
reliability
(CSF1)
Faster
transaction
processing
system (CSF2)
Technological
maturity
(CSF3)
Provenance
recording and
tracking
(CSF4)
Resiliency
(CSF5)
Quality and
safety
management
(CSF6)
Transitive 0 0 0 Better control
over quality of
the products
and safety of
products
increases the
chances of
responding to
uncertainty
appropriately
Interoperability
(CSF7)
BCT
capability to
keep record
immutable
improves the
system
reliability
Interoperability
assist in
transaction
speed
0 Interoperability
among
different
systems and
devices is must
for tracking
across wide
range of users
0
Smart contract
(CSF8)
Transitive 0 0 0 Removes the
risk of
fraudulent
activities thus
improving
system
responsiveness
Trust and
collaboration
(CSF9)
Transitive 0 0 0 Collaboration
among
stakeholders
helps in
countering
disruptions
Ease of
documentation
(CSF10)
Transitive 0 0 0 Transitive
Immutability
(CSF11)
Transitive Transitive 0 Enhances the
reliability of
tracking
facilities
Transitive
intermediary
reduction
(CSF12)
Transitive 0 0 0 Transitive
(continued)108 A. Dwivedi et al.
Table 7.5 (continued)
Quality and safety
management
(CSF6)
Interoperability
(CSF7)
Smart contract
(CSF8)
Trust and
collaboration
(CSF9)
Information
security and
reliability (CSF1)
0 0 0 Transitive
Faster transaction
processing system
(CSF2)
Transitive 0 Transitive Transitive
Technological
maturity (CSF3)
Maturity in
technology
enhances the
quality control
practices
Technological
innovations with
time enhance the
applications
integration thus
improving the
supply chain and
adoption of BCT
Transitive Transitive
Provenance
recording and
tracking (CSF4)
Improved tracking
capabilities
enhances the
quality control
practices and
ensures the
customer
satisfaction
regarding food
quality
0 Tracking
capabilities
support the smart
contracting
activities
Transitive
Resiliency (CSF5) 0 0 0 Resiliency in
system enhances
the swift trust
Quality and safety
management
(CSF6)
1 0 0 Better control on
quality generated
the swift trust
among
stakeholders
Interoperability
(CSF7)
0 1 To facilitate the
smart contracting.
Lack of
interoperability
reduces the utility
of smart
contracting feature
Transitive
(continued)7 A Framework for Blockchain Technology Adoption in Food … 109
Table 7.5 (continued)
Quality and safety
management
(CSF6)
Interoperability
(CSF7)
Smart contract
(CSF8)
Trust and
collaboration
(CSF9)
Smart contract
(CSF8)
Reduces the risk of
tempering and
unauthorized
transactions and
unauthorized
tempering with
products and the
delay associated
with quality check
and transaction
0 1 Contracting
feature enhances
the trust among
stakeholders and
improves the
operations
performance of
SC
Trust and
collaboration
(CSF9)
0 0 0 1
Ease of
documentation
(CSF10)
Transitive 0 Improve the
responsiveness of
smart contracting
features
Paperwork
reduction,
transparency and
rapid flow of
information
enhances the
collaboration
among
stakeholders
Immutability
(CSF11)
Transitive 0 Transitive Transitive
Intermediary
reduction (CSF12)
Transitive 0 Transitive Transitive
Ease of documentation
(CSF10)
Immutability (CSF11) Intermediary reduction
(CSF12)
Information
security and
reliability (CSF1)
0 0 0
Faster transaction
processing system
(CSF2)
Transitive 0 Transitive
Technological
maturity (CSF3)
Transitive 0 0
Provenance
recording and
tracking (CSF4)
Transitive 0 Removes the assistance
of any third party for
tracking activities
Resiliency (CSF5) 0 0 0
Quality and safety
management
(CSF6)
0 0 0
(continued)110 A. Dwivedi et al.
Table 7.5 (continued)
Ease of documentation
(CSF10)
Immutability (CSF11) Intermediary reduction
(CSF12)
Interoperability
(CSF7)
Transitive 0 Integrations among key
stakeholders removes
the nonessential
intermediary
Smart contract
(CSF8)
Reduces the need of
documentation
0 0
Trust and
collaboration
(CSF9)
0 0 0
Ease of
documentation
(CSF10)
1 0 0
Immutability
(CSF11)
Reduces the resources
enjoyment in inspection
and monitoring activities
1 Removes the needs of
any regulatory and
controlling authority.
Thus improving the
operational
performance
Intermediary
reduction (CSF12)
Limited stakeholders
improve the
documentation
0 1
Source Author
line with the study conducted by Shoaib et al. [43]. Further, it defines that this CSF
has least influence on other CSFs. Quality and safety management (CSF 6) is at the
second level. Smart contract (CSF 8) and Ease of documentation (CSF 10) are at the
third level. Intermediary reduction (CSF 12) is at the fourth level. Faster transaction
processing system (CSF 2) and Provenance recording, and tracking (CSF 4) are at
the fifth level. Interoperability (CSF 7) and Immutability (CSF 11) are at the sixth
level. Technological maturity (CSF 3) and Resiliency (CSF 5) are at the seventh and
the bottom level in the mTISM structure.
The results from the study highlight that the reliability and security of the infor￾mation is the most crucial feature of the BCT that will attract the FSC stakeholders.
Also, this outcome has been supported by Kamble et al. [24], Nakasumi [34], Weber
et al. [52]. In literature, previous studies had raised several concerns while main￾taining the food quality in transit. This becomes more difficult in the global and
disconnect supply chain [25]. Thus, safety and quality of food can be a differen￾tiating factor for organizations. mTISM analysis exposes this significance of BCT
enhanced food quality which has been largely overlooked in the previous literature.
The findings suggest that BCT developers are required to pay more attention to the
BCT feature that enhances the food quality and safety [17]. Further, reduction of
documents and execution of rapid transactions will also become a potential feature7 A Framework for Blockchain Technology Adoption in Food … 111
that will be sought by various stakeholders. For the FSC stakeholders and BCT devel￾opers, several insights emerged during the semi-structured interview process. One
respondent suggested that the sensitization of regulatory and intermediary body is
essential to meet the desired expectations from the BCT. Other supporting infras￾tructure needs to be built around the whole supply chain network. This requires the
development of robust IT network and innovations in IoT devices considering the
FSC requirements. Government also needs to be proactive for its policies, regulations
and infrastructure development support. Also, the regulations need to be modified that
prevent or limit the BCT-based transaction. The same has been suggested by Rugevi￾ciute andMehrpouya [37]. Another suggestion for the blockchain developers emerges
regarding considerations of small producers. BCT developers need to incorporate the
features that can easily integrate small prouder and secure their economic well-being.
FSC struggles with the domination of few influencing stakeholders who sometimes
engage in unethical practices. With BCT deployment, influencing stakeholders can
derive enormous power and might end up causing more complications.
7.6 Conclusion, Limitations and Future Research
Directions
The food supply chain is critical due to involvement of public health and safety.
Thus, it requires special attention for flawless operations of supply chain system.
To operationalize fluently, various emerging technologies have been implemented
within the system. Among them, BCT is promising to cater issues related to FSC.
This chapter aims to explore, understand and model the CSFs of BCT adoption in
FSC. In this chapter, a literature review was performed to identify the CSFs of BCT
in FSC. Interrelationships among the CSFs are presented using the final reachability
matrix (Table 7.3). Finally, mTISM model reflecting interactions among the CSF
appropriate to FSC is obtained (Fig. 7.1). The chapter is unique in terms of its focus
towards FSC. The provided insights will help the FSC stakeholders in the BCT
adoption process.
The BCT would be helpful in various aspects to the existing supply chain. It can
be used for financial services such as credit transfer using smart contract system.
This will not only reduce the intermediaries but also provide secure transactions
between the parties. The technology can also be used to reduce the paperwork and
documentation process. This will lead to reduction in overall lead time as well as
ensure the quality. Addition to this, several other technologies can also be clubbed
with BCT to provide ease of use and transparency. For an instance, IoT can be used
along with BCT to capture data at each stage and share it with required stakeholders.
This will prevent the loss of data with secure record keeping as a transaction in
blockchain system. This chapter highlights the various uses of BCT considering
different factors which can make its implementation successful.112 A. Dwivedi et al.
The key limitation of this study is the respondent geographical diversity. However,
it helped in generating insights for a very complex FSC in India. In India, FSC is
characterized with large number of small-scale producers and corrupt intermediary.
These insights serve well for the scope of the study. However, future researchers are
recommended to explore the CSFs from different geographical perspectives.
References
1. Ahumada O, Villalobos JR (2009) Application of planning models in the agri-food supply
chain: a review. Eur J Oper Res 196(1):1–20. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2008.02.014
2. Ande R et al (2020) Internet of things: evolution and technologies from a security perspective.
Sustain Cities Soc 54:101728. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.scs.2019.101728
3. Angelis J, Ribeiro da Silva E (2018) Blockchain adoption: a value driver perspective. Bus Horiz
62(3):307–314. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.bushor.2018.12.001
4. Antonucci F et al (2019) A review on blockchain applications in the agri-food sector. J Sci
Food Agric 99(14):6129–6138. https://doi.org/10.1002/jsfa.9912
5. Bag S (2019) Identification of green procurement drivers and their interrelationship using fuzzy
TISM and MICMAC analysis. In: Advanced methodologies and technologies in engineering
and environmental science. IGI Global, pp 167–186
6. Baharmand H, Comes T (2019) Leveraging partnerships with logistics service providers
in humanitarian supply chains by blockchain-based smart contracts. IFAC-PapersOnLine
52(13):12–17. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ifacol.2019.11.084
7. Biggs J et al (2017) Blockchain: revolutionizing the global supply chain by building trust and
transparency, pp 1–26
8. Bronson K, Knezevic I (2016) Big data in food and agriculture, pp 1–5. http://doi.org/10.1177/
2053951716648174
9. Carbonell IM (2016) The ethics of big data in big agriculture. Internet Policy Rev 5(1):1–13.
https://doi.org/10.14763/2016.1.405
10. Caro MP et al (2018) Blockchain-based traceability in agri-food supply chain management: a
practical implementation. IEEE, pp 2018–2021
11. Chamberlain SL (2019) Assessing the merits of blockchain technology for global sustainable
development initiatives. Harvard Extension School. Available at: http://nrs.harvard.edu/urn-3:
HUL.InstRepos:42004229%0A
12. Chaple AP et al (2018) Interpretive framework for analyzing lean implementation using ISM
and IRP modeling. Benchmarking 25(9):3406–3442. https://doi.org/10.1108/BIJ-07-2017-
0177
13. Dubey R et al (2020) Blockchain technology for enhancing swift-trust, collaboration and
resilience within a humanitarian supply chain setting. Int J Prod Res. http://doi.org/10.1080/
00207543.2020.1722860
14. Dwivedi A, Agrawal D, Madaan J (2019) Sustainable manufacturing evaluation model focusing
leather industries in India: a TISM approach. J Sci Technol Policy Manag 10(2):319–359.
https://doi.org/10.1108/JSTPM-06-2018-0054
15. Dwivedi A, Madaan J (2020) A hybrid approach for modeling the key performance indicators
of information facilitated product recovery system. J Model Manag 15(3):933–965. https://doi.
org/10.1108/JM2-01-2019-0003
16. Dwivedi A, Jha A, Prajapati D, Sreenu N, Pratap S (2020) Meta-heuristic algorithms for solving
the sustainable agro-food grain supply chain network design problem. Mod Supply Chain Res
Appl 2(3):161–177. https://doi.org/10.1108/MSCRA-04-2020-0007
17. Galvez JF, Mejuto JC, Simal-Gandara J (2018) Future challenges on the use of blockchain
for food traceability analysis. TrAC Trends Anal Chem 107:222–232. http://doi.org/10.1016/
j.trac.2018.08.0117 A Framework for Blockchain Technology Adoption in Food … 113
18. Ganne E (2018) Can blockchain revolutionize trade? Available at: http://blogs.worldbank.org/
trade/can-blockchain-revolutionize-trade
19. Ge L et al (2017) Blockchain for agriculture and food: findings from the pilot study.Wageningen
Economic Research. Available at: www.wur.eu/economic-research
20. George RV et al (2019) Food quality traceability prototype for restaurants using blockchain
and food quality data index. J Cleaner Prod 240:118021. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2019.
118021
21. Kamath R (2018) Food traceability on blockchain: Walmart’s pork and mango pilots with IBM.
J Br Blockchain Assoc 1(1):1–12. https://doi.org/10.31585/jbba-1-1-(10)2018
22. Kamble SS, Gunasekaran A, Gawankar SA (2020) Achieving sustainable performance in a
data-driven agriculture supply chain: a review for research and applications. Int J Prod Econ
219(July 2018):179–194. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2019.05.022
23. Kamble SS, Gunasekaran A, Sharma R (2019) Modeling the blockchain enabled traceability
in agriculture supply chain. Int J Inf Manag 52(June 2019):101967. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.iji
nfomgt.2019.05.023
24. Kamble SS, Gunasekaran A, Sharma R (2020) Modeling the blockchain enabled traceability
in agriculture supply chain. Int J Inf Manag 52(May 2019):101967. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.iji
nfomgt.2019.05.023
25. Kayikci Y et al (2020) Food supply chain in the era of Industry 4.0: blockchain technology
implementation opportunities and impediments from the perspective of people, process, perfor￾mance, and technology. Prod Plan Control 1–21. http://doi.org/10.1080/09537287.2020.181
0757
26. Keogh JG et al (2020) Data and food supply chain: blockchain and GS1 standards in the food
chain: a review of the possibilities and challenges. Build Future Food Saf Technol 145–178.
http://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-818956-6.00007-5
27. Kim HM, Laskowski M (2018) Agriculture on the blockchain: sustainable solutions for food,
farmers, and financing. Supply Chain Revolution, Barrow Books
28. Kumar A (2019) Is blockchain a silver bullet for supply chain management? Technical
challenges and research opportunities. Decis Sci 1–30. http://doi.org/10.1111/deci.12396
29. Kuo T, Kim H, Ohno-machado L (2017) Blockchain distributed ledger technologies for biomed￾ical and health care applications. J Am Med Inform Assoc 24(6):1211–1220. https://doi.org/
10.1093/jamia/ocx068
30. Longo F et al (2019) Blockchain-enabled supply chain: an experimental study. Comput Ind
Eng 136(July):57–69. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cie.2019.07.026
31. L’Hermitte C, Nair N-KC (2020) A blockchain-enabled framework for sharing logistics
resources in emergency operations. Disasters 1–31. http://doi.org/10.1111/disa.12436
32. Maru A et al (2018) Digital and data-driven agriculture: harnessing the power of data
for smallholders. F1000Research 7(525):38. Available at: https://cgspace.cgiar.org/bitstream/
handle/10568/92477/GFAR-GODAN-CTA-white-paper-final.pdf%0A https://f1000research.
com/documents/7-525
33. Moktadir MA et al (2019) Antecedents for greening the workforce: implications for green
human resource management. Int J Manpow. https://doi.org/10.1108/IJM-07-2019-0354
34. Nakasumi M (2017) Information sharing for supply chain management based on block chain
technology. In: Proceedings—2017 IEEE 19th conference on business informatics, CBI 2017,
vol 1, pp 140–149. http://doi.org/10.1109/CBI.2017.56
35. Patil M, Suresh M (2019) Modelling the enablers of workforce agility in IoT projects: a TISM
approach. Glob J Flex Syst Manag 20(2):157–175. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40171-019-002
08-7
36. Patil A, Shardeo V, Madaan J (2020) Modelling performance measurement barriers of human￾itarian supply chain. Int J Prod Performance Manag. Vol. ahead-of-print No. ahead-of-print.
http://doi.org/10.1108/IJPPM-01-2020-0031
37. Rugeviciute A, Mehrpouya A (2019) Blockchain, a panacea for development accountability? A
study of the barriers and enablers for blockchain’s adoption by development aid organizations.
Front Blockchain 2(October):1–17. https://doi.org/10.3389/fbloc.2019.00015114 A. Dwivedi et al.
38. Saberi S et al (2019) Blockchain technology and its relationships to sustainable supply chain
management. Int J Prod Res 57(7):2117–2135. https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2018.153
3261
39. Sander F, Semeijn J, Mahr D (2018) The acceptance of blockchain technology in meat trace￾ability and transparency. Br Food J 120(9):2066–2079. https://doi.org/10.1108/BFJ-07-2017-
0365
40. Schulz KA, Gstrein OJ, Zwitter AJ (2020) Exploring the governance and implementation of
sustainable development initiatives through blockchain technology. Futures 122(July):102611.
http://doi.org/10.1016/j.futures.2020.102611
41. Shahid A et al (2020) Blockchain-based agri-food supply chain: a complete solution. IEEE
Access 8:69230–69243. https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2020.2986257
42. Shardeo V, Patil A, Madaan J (2020) Critical success factors for blockchain technology adoption
in freight transportation using fuzzy ANP—modified TISM approach. Int J Inf Technol Decis
Making. https://doi.org/10.1142/S0219622020500376
43. Shoaib M, Lim MK, Wang C (2020) An integrated framework to prioritize blockchain-based
supply chain success factors. Ind Manag Data Syst 120(11):2103–2131. https://doi.org/10.
1108/IMDS-04-2020-0194
44. Skidmore M et al (2017) The effect of intermediary market power on grain prices in India. In:
2017 agricultural and applied economics association annual meeting, Chicago, Illinois
45. Sushil (2012) Interpreting the interpretive structural model. Glob J Flex Syst Manag 13(2):87–
106. http://doi.org/10.1007/S40171-012-0008-3
46. Sushil (2017) Modified ISM/TISM process with simultaneous transitivity checks for reducing
direct pair comparisons. Glob J Flexible Syst Manag 18(4):331–351. http://doi.org/10.1007/
s40171-017-0167-3
47. Trienekens JH et al (2012) Advanced engineering informatics transparency in complex dynamic
food supply chains. Adv Eng Informatics 26(1):55–65. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aei.2011.
07.007
48. Tse D et al (2017) Blockchain application in food supply information security. In: 2017 IEEE
international conference on industrial engineering and engineering management (IEEM), pp
1357–1361. http://doi.org/10.1109/IEEM.2017.8290114
49. Verdouw CN et al (2013) In: Kreowski H-J, Scholz-Reiter B, Thoben K-D (eds) Smart agri￾food logistics: requirements for the future internet BT—dynamics in logistics. Springer, Berlin,
pp 247–257
50. Wang Y, Han JH, Beynon-Davies P (2019) Understanding blockchain technology for future
supply chains: a systematic literature review and research agenda. Supply Chain Manag
24(1):62–84. https://doi.org/10.1108/SCM-03-2018-0148
51. Wang Y et al (2019) Making sense of blockchain technology: how will it transform supply
chains? Int J Prod Econ 211(April 2018): 221–236. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2019.02.002
52. Weber I et al (2016) In: La Rosa M, Loos P, Pastor O (eds) Untrusted business process
monitoring and execution using blockchain BT—business process management. Springer
International Publishing, Cham, pp 329–347
53. Yawar SA, Kauppi K (2018) Understanding the adoption of socially responsible supplier devel￾opment practices using institutional theory: dairy supply chains in India. J Purchasing Supply
Manag 24(2):164–176. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pursup.2018.02.001
54. Zander K, Hamm U (2010) Consumer preferences for additional ethical attributes of organic
food. Food Qual Prefer 21(5):495–503. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodqual.2010.01.006
55. Zhao G et al (2019) Blockchain technology in agri-food value chain management: a synthesis
of applications, challenges and future research directions. Comput Ind 109:83–99. http://doi.
org/10.1016/j.compind.2019.04.002
56. Zheng W et al (2019) NutBaaS: a blockchain-as-a-service platform, p 7Chapter 8
Blockchain Technology for Enhancing
Sustainability in Agricultural Supply
Chains
Rohit Sharma, Anjali Shishodia, and Sachin S. Kamble
Abstract Nowadays, information and communication technology (ICT) plays a
vital role in enhancing the sustainability performance in an organization. Techno￾logical disruptions such as the Industry 4.0 technologies have had significant posi￾tive impacts across various sectors, and agricultural sector is no exception. The
current study highlights the impact of blockchain technology (BCT) as a sustain￾ability enabler in the agricultural supply chains (ASCs). The study begins by iden￾tifying the BCT enablers from the literature that will lead to potential sustainability
outcomes in the ASCs. These sustainability outcomes are then mapped with the
United Nation’s Sustainable Development Goals (UNSDGs). We therefore contend
that BCT may hold the key in driving the ASCs toward sustainability. Finally, the
possible implications from the study are suggested.
Keywords Blockchain · Sustainability · Agricultural supply chain
8.1 Introduction
Ever since blockchain technology (BCT) made its debut as a peer-to-peer transac￾tion platform through the work of Nakamoto [29], it has revolutionized almost all
the sectors wherever it has been deployed (see fintech, aerospace, manufacturing,
tourism, supply chain management, and agriculture to name a few) [43]. Recent
reports by PwC highlight that BCT through its potential use cases will add USD
1.76 trillion to the global gross domestic product (GDP) over the next decade [31].
Globally, BCT has garnered the attention of academia and practitioners through
R. Sharma (B)
Jaipuria Institute of Management, Noida, India
e-mail: rohit.sharma.2017@nitie.ac.in
A. Shishodia
LMTSM, Thapar University, Patiala, India
S. S. Kamble
EDHEC Business School, Roubaix, France
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2022
R. S Mor et al. (eds.), Operations and Supply Chain Management in the Food Industry,
Lecture Notes in Management and Industrial Engineering,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-16-5555-5_8
115116 R. Sharma et al.
its fascinating use cases. BCT is a decentralized data management and transaction
technology that eliminates the need of an intermediary. It is a platform that allows
for the integration of other Industry 4.0 technologies such as digital twins (DT),
cyber-physical systems (CPS), big data analytics (BDA), artificial intelligence (AI),
augmented reality (AR), Internet of things (IoT), and Internet of services (IoS).
In the context of agribusiness, adoption of ICTs has tremendously helped increase
the farm productivity and yield, and in mitigating the greenhouse emissions [4]. In
addition, rapid globalization of the agri-food supply chains and the ever-growing
world population have had an adverse impact on the sustainability of food supply
chains [26]. Majority of the food production systems in the world are now competing
for resources in order to ensure the food security for the masses. It is also estimated
that majority of the food wastage and losses occur in the developing economies due
to poor management of supply chain and technology integration issues [5]. The other
challenges associated with the agricultural supply chains are seasonality, supply and
demand spikes, long supply lead times, and perishability of agricultural produce [7].
Therefore, robustness and resilience are the major driving forces to manage agricul￾tural supply chain risks. The research study carried out by Kamble et al. [18, 19]
also highlighted critical issues in an agri-food supply chains such as lack of indus￾trialization in the production processes, inadequacy of the top management, and
information inaccuracy which render ASCs ineffective. The other issues threatening
the agricultural supply chains are climate change risks, and development of sustain￾able agricultural supply chains is therefore one of the global challenges that needs
to be overcome with the use of modern information and communication technology
tools. Development of sustainable agricultural supply chains is therefore a global
challenge that needs to be overcome. This involves identifying critical supply chain
issues starting from the farm-level goals to global sustainability agenda. There has
been increasing use of emerging technologies in the ASCs. Industry 4.0 technolo￾gies, IoT, BCT, and big data technologies are found to be the potential enablers for
enhancing sustainability in the ASCs. These technologies are driving ASCs toward a
digital supply chain environment which in turn would help in achieving sustainable
supply chain objectives (social, environment, and economic).
In the present study, key BCT enablers and sustainable dimensions in ASCs
have been identified from the literature which were then mapped to UNSDGs for
examining their contribution in achieving the UNSDGs.
8.2 Literature Review
A literature review of the pertinent literature was carried out for identifying the BCT
enablers in the ASCs. Only peer-reviewed articles published in Scopus were included
in the review. Keywords for search included: blockchain, agricultural food chain,
agricultural supply chain, and agri-food. These keywords were used independently
and in combination with each other.8 Blockchain Technology for Enhancing Sustainability … 117
The literature review for the current study is divided into three subsections, viz.
BCT and its enablers, ASCs and their sustainability dimensions, and UNSDGs.
8.2.1 BCT and BCT Enablers
Blockchains are digital ledgers that are tamper evident and tamper resistant and
store information in a distributed, decentralized manner without the need of a central
repository and a central authority [40]. Basically, BCT enables the stakeholders in a
community to record the transactions on a shared ledger such that in case of normal
operations, no transaction can be altered if once published [42]. BCT can be termed
as a digital ledger, wherein all the transactions are stored in a list of blocks and new
blocks are added as the information is appended on a continuous basis [44]. The BCT
uses a decentralized database system, wherein the data is distributed simultaneously
on different computers, and not stored on a single computer, that are known as nodes
[15]. This unique characteristic of the BCT allows the stakeholders in a BCT network
to access information on a real-time basis [25]. As BCT uses a cryptographic private
key, data anonymity and data privacy of the network stakeholders/participants are
thoroughly maintained, thereby making BCT safe and secure [24]. Some of the
other prominent features of BCT are depicted in Table 8.1. BCT, therefore, holds
immense potential in transforming traditional industries with its unique features such
as decentralization, traceability, auditability, and transparency [18, 19].
8.2.2 Sustainability Dimensions in ASCs
Over the last few decades, the concept of sustainability in the agricultural supply
chains has garnered a lot of interest from industry and the academia. As per the
definition suggested by the World Commission on Environment and Development
[38], sustainability is defined as “the activities carried out in meeting the needs of
the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own
needs.” From the triple bottom line perspective [13], sustainability in the ASCs can
be defined by the overlap of social, economic, and environmental dimensions.
The social sustainability dimensions in ASCs pertain to the development of short
food supply chains promoting local products with an overall goal of inclusion of
small landholders [17, 32]. The economic sustainability dimensions in the ASCs
pertain to reducing the number of intermediaries in the ASC processes, reducing
food frauds, and focusing on revenue sharing contracts between farmers and buyers
for developing economically sustainable ASCs [17, 41]. The environmental sustain￾ability dimensions of the ASCs pertain to activities that lead to food waste reduction,
processes, and activities that increase food safety, security, and quality [33]. As there
exists an overlap between the social, economic, and environmental dimensions, a118 R. Sharma et al.
Table 8.1 Features of BCT
BCT enabler Definition Reference(s)
Real-time information flow The presence of a
decentralized and a distributed
database system allows the
stakeholders in a BCT
network to access information
on a real-time basis
Liu et al. [25], Mudliar et al. [28]
Decentralized database
system
The data is distributed
simultaneously on different
computers known as nodes
Glaser et al. [15], Kouhizadeh
and Sarkis [22]
Cybersecurity BCT uses a cryptographic
private key, and data privacy
of the network participants is
thoroughly maintained
Kshetri [24]
Traceability Data can be traced back to
each block via the time stamp
Kamble et al. [18, 19], Behnke
and Janssen [6]
Transparency The technology provides new
frontiers in redesigning the
reputation system and is
helpful in preventing
fraudulent activities
Chod et al. [12], Venkatesh et al.
[37]
Immutability The decentralized database
technology allows the
transactions to be stored in
different nodes, thereby
making it difficult to tamper
with the data in the BCT
network
Ateniese et al. [2], Zheng et al.
[44]
Fast transaction settlement
time
Decentralized and distributed
database allows for faster
transaction settlement times
Chiu and Koeppl [11], Peters and
Panayi [30]
Reduced transaction time BCT can unlock the sharing
economy by making it cheaper
to create and own an online
platform. Transactions could
be performed at lower costs
Min [27], Kamble et al. [18, 19]
Smart contracts In a smart contract, the
underlying asset is transferred
into a program. This program
then runs the code
Kosba et al. [21], Watanabe et al.
[39]
Risk management Deploying BCT ensures
improved traceability of the
underlying assets and adds to
the provenance
Boussard et al. [8], Fu and Zhu
[14]8 Blockchain Technology for Enhancing Sustainability … 119
balanced approach is required to be followed in order to implement BCT in the
ASCs for achieving sustainable ASC operations.
The next subsection highlights the UNSDGs and how BCT supports in achieving
them.
8.2.3 UNSDGs
The UNSDGs date back to 1992 Earth Summit, wherein more than one hundred
seventy-eight countries adopted the Agenda 21 which was a detailed plan of action for
building a global partnership for sustainable development aimed at improving human
lives and protecting the environment. Following this, the member states adopted the
2030 agenda for sustainable development and provided a charter for inculcating
peace and prosperity for the people and the planet. At the very crux of this charter
are the seventeen Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), which depict an urgent
call for action by all member states both developed and developing to commit in
a global partnership. These seventeen SDGs are aimed at ending poverty and other
deprivations, developing strategies for improving health care and education, reducing
inequalities, and enhancing economic growth [36]. In the case of ASCs, BCT is
expected to bring in benefits supporting the UNSDGs. The targeted UNSDGs include
UNSDG12 which is responsible production and consumption, UNSDG2 which is
zero hunger, UNSDG3 which is good health and well-being, and UNSDG13 which
is climate action.
The next section highlights the research framework adopted in this research.
8.3 Research Framework
Figure 8.1 depicts the research framework adopted for this research. The research
consisted of four phases. In phase one of the research, the literature survey was
executed for identifying the BCT enablers in the ASCs. In phase two of the research,
the identified enablers were validated by the experts. Following the expert validation
of the BCT enablers, these were then mapped with the sustainability outcomes, viz.
social, economic, and environmental aspects of the ASCs in phase three. In the final
phase, the sustainability outcomes of the ASCs were mapped with the UNSDGs
based on the expert panel inputs.
The next section highlights the mapping of the sustainability outcomes of BCT
with the SDGs. This mapping would help the academia and practitioners in designing
sustainable ASCs using BCT.120 R. Sharma et al.
Fig. 8.1 Literature review process and research framework. Source Author
8.4 Mapping of Sustainability Outcomes with SDGs
For mapping the sustainability outcomes of ASCs enabled by BCT with the SDGs,
opinion from an expert panel was sought. The expert panel comprised fifteen profes￾sionals (two blockchain experts; two environmental engineers; four senior-level
practitioners from agribusiness organizations; four professors from academia having
expertise in supply chain management, agricultural sciences, computer science, and
information technology; two bank managers; and one system integrator with exper￾tise in blockchain). Expert opinion reveals that BCT enablers can lead to potential
sustainability outcomes in the ASCs. Figure 8.2 depicts the BCT sustainability frame￾work, and it comprises three main components, viz. BCT enablers, ASC sustainability
dimensions, and UNSDGs.
The first component of the BCT sustainability framework highlights the BCT
enablers that have been found through extensive literature search. It is anticipated
that the BCT enablers will have a profound impact in creating sustainable ASCs.
The enablers impact all three sustainability dimensions, viz. social, economic, and
environmental, thereby helping in creating sustainable ASCs globally. The second
component of the BCT sustainability framework highlights the ASC sustainability
dimensions. It can be highlighted that BCT will play a crucial role in efficient resource
allocation for ensuring transparency and visibility in the ASCs [3]. BCT will further
enable strategic information sharing and offers a promising future for achieving
ASC sustainability [37]. The third component of the BCT sustainability framework
highlights how the sustainability dimensions in the ASC can lead to the achievement8 Blockchain Technology for Enhancing Sustainability … 121
Fig. 8.2 BCT-sustainability framework. Source Author
of the UNSDGs. BCT will enable digitally enabled ASCs, thereby enhancing the
transparency and visibility in the ASCs [35]. The BCT sustainability framework
suggests that the BCT enablers and ASC sustainability dimensions have a feedback
loop which focuses on developing the ICT capabilities for ensuring sustainable ASC
operations through check and recheck mechanisms.
8.5 Discussion
BCT holds immense potential in transforming the traditional ASCs such as over￾coming food fraud vulnerabilities and other counterfeiting issues [23]. It is therefore
expected that incorporating BCT will enhance food safety and transparency through
effective data capture, management, and control [9]. In line with the findings from
the study carried out by Hughes et al. [16] relating BCT and the UNSDGs, the present
study has mapped the BCT enablers with the sustainability outcomes of the ASCs
for achieving the UNSDGs. Particularly, BCT helps in determining the ecological
footprint by eliminating probable food frauds, promoting food safety, and reducing
food waste across the ASCs. Overall, BCT will increase the environmental impact
visibility in case of ASCs [1]. As reported by Chapron [10], BCT will enhance
integrity of data through effective data management and control, thereby increasing
the trust among ASC stakeholders. Overall, BCTs primary aim in ASC operations is
to enhance the visibility and transparency through creation of digital ASCs, thereby122 R. Sharma et al.
promoting sustainable ASC operations which can help in achieving the targeted
UNSDGs.
8.5.1 Implications
The agribusiness organizations should invest in developing sustainability orientation
in the ASCs. The top management should ensure that adequate funds and resources
are allocated for adoption of modern ICTs as these will enhance ASC sustainability.
Moreover, agribusiness organizations should invest more in research and develop￾ment for promoting innovation and sustainability. Usage of more sensors and devices
along the ASCs will help in digitizing the ASCs and thereby enhance total quality
management leading to sustainable ASCs [35]. The adoption of BCT in the ASCs will
ensure effective and timely information sharing among the ASC stakeholders, thereby
enhancing food traceability, food safety, and quality [34]. Top management should
conduct training and development sessions (on modern ICTs and sustainability) for
enhancing the knowledge and skillset of workers and other ASC stakeholders as it
will change their outlook toward ASC sustainability [26]. With the adoption of BCTs
in the ASCs, the practitioners will have a good food traceability system and they will
be in complete control for managing food quality and safety [18, 19]. BCT adoption
in the ASCs will enhance food provenance and will increase the ASC transparency,
visibility, and traceability and thereby enhance the ASC sustainability.
As far as the policymakers are concerned, adoption and implementation of BCT
will lead to effective regulatory and certification norms in the ASCs. This will further
lead to reduction of fraudulent activities along the ASCs [20]. Further, BCT will
help in facilitating the international trade by meeting all the sanitary and phytosani￾tary standards and requisite trade certifications/documentation. BCT will help in the
financial inclusion of the farmers as the transaction settlement times will be reduced.
Therefore, implementation of BCT in the ASCs will lead to social and economic
sustainability of farmers and small landholders. Further, BCTs can lead to the elim￾ination of middlemen and ensure direct credit facilitation for the farmers. Features
of BCT such as auditability and immutability will help in maintaining an efficient
audit trail. BCT will effectively help in mitigating the risks in the ASCs (pertaining to
food safety, quality, transaction settlement, credit facilitation, and insurance services)
and help in enhancing the resilience capabilities in the ASCs leading to creation of
sustainable ASCs [18, 19].
8.5.2 Limitations and Future Research Directions
The present study identified ten BCT enablers for enhancing the sustainability in the
ASCs. These enablers were identified from the pertinent literature and were vali￾dated by experts from various fields such as agribusiness, supply chain management,8 Blockchain Technology for Enhancing Sustainability … 123
computers, and information technology. BCT in particular has certain limitations
that need to be overcome so as to reap the benefits of this technology. A few notable
shortcomings of BCT are its high implementation cost, scalability issues, the need to
skill the current workers with BCT, and interoperability issues. As the study pertained
to a developing economy context, enablers might have been different in developed
economies. Therefore, it is recommended to carry out similar studies in the context
of developed economies as their ASCs are comparatively advanced and the results
may then be compared for further refinement of the interdependencies. BCTs are
still being tested on experimental basis; therefore, case studies can be carried out
for highlighting the significant work the agribusiness organizations have been doing
to enhance sustainability in the ASCs using BCT. Future studies can be carried out
based on finding the cause and effect relationships between the BCT enablers using
structural equation modeling and other modeling techniques.
References
1. Ahmed S, ten Broek N (2017) Blockchain could boost food security. Nature 550(7674):43–43
2. Ateniese G, Magri B, Venturi D, Andrade E (2017) Redactable blockchain-or-rewriting history
in bitcoin and friends. In: 2017 IEEE European symposium on security and privacy (EuroS&P).
IEEE, pp 111–126
3. Bai C, Sarkis J (2020) A supply chain transparency and sustainability technology appraisal
model for blockchain technology. Int J Prod Res 58(7):2142–2162
4. Balafoutis A, Beck B, Fountas S, Vangeyte J, Wal TVD, Soto I, Gómez-Barbero M, Barnes A,
Eory V (2017) Precision agriculture technologies positively contributing to GHG emissions
mitigation, farm productivity and economics. Sustainability 9(8):1339
5. Balaji M, Arshinder K (2016) Modeling the causes of food wastage in Indian perishable food
supply chain. Resour Conserv Recyc 114:153–167
6. Behnke K, Janssen MFWHA (2020) Boundary conditions for traceability in food supply chains
using blockchain technology. Int J Inf Manage 52:101969
7. Behzadi G, O’Sullivan MJ, Olsen TL, Zhang A (2018) Agribusiness supply chain risk
management: a review of quantitative decision models. Omega 79:21–42
8. Boussard M, Papillon S, Peloso P, Signorini M, Waisbard E (2019) STewARD: SDN and
blockchain-based trust evaluation for automated risk management on IoT devices. In: IEEE
INFOCOM 2019-IEEE conference on computer communications workshops (INFOCOM
WKSHPS). IEEE, pp 841–846
9. Bumblauskas D, Mann A, Dugan B, Rittmer J (2020) A blockchain use case in food distribution:
do you know where your food has been? Int J Inf Manag 52:102008
10. Chapron G (2017) The environment needs cryptogovernance. Nature 545(7655):403–405
11. Chiu J, Koeppl TV (2019) Blockchain-based settlement for asset trading. Rev Fin Stud
32(5):1716–1753
12. Chod J, Trichakis N, Tsoukalas G, Aspegren H, Weber M (2019) On the financing benefits of
supply chain transparency and blockchain adoption. Manag Sci 66(10):4378–4396
13. Elkington J (1998) Partnerships from cannibals with forks: the triple bottom line of 21st-century
business. Environ Qual Manage 8(1):37–51
14. Fu Y, Zhu J (2019) Big production enterprise supply chain endogenous risk management based
on blockchain. IEEE Access 7:15310–15319
15. Glaser F, Hawlitschek F, Notheisen B (2019) Blockchain as a platform. In: Business
transformation through blockchain. Palgrave Macmillan, Cham, pp 121–143124 R. Sharma et al.
16. Hughes L, Dwivedi YK,Misra SK, Rana NP, Raghavan V, Akella V (2019) Blockchain research,
practice and policy: applications, benefits, limitations, emerging research themes and research
agenda. Int J Inf Manage 49:114–129
17. Jelsma I, Schoneveld GC, Zoomers A, van Westen AC (2017) Unpacking Indonesia’s indepen￾dent oil palm smallholders: an actor-disaggregated approach to identifying environmental and
social performance challenges. Land Use Policy 69:281–297
18. Kamble SS, Gunasekaran A, Gawankar SA (2020) Achieving sustainable performance in a
data-driven agriculture supply chain: a review for research and applications. Int J Prod Econ
219:179–194
19. Kamble SS, Gunasekaran A, Sharma R (2020) Modeling the blockchain enabled traceability
in agriculture supply chain. Int J Inf Manag 52:101967
20. Kamilaris A, Fonts A, Prenafeta-Bold´ FX (2019) The rise of blockchain technology in
agriculture and food supply chains. Trends Food Sci Technol 91:640–652
21. Kosba A, Miller A, Shi E, Wen Z, Papamanthou C (2016) Hawk: the blockchain model of
cryptography and privacy-preserving smart contracts. In: 2016 IEEE symposium on security
and privacy (SP). IEEE, pp 839–858
22. Kouhizadeh M, Sarkis J (2018) Blockchain practices, potentials, and perspectives in greening
supply chains. Sustainability 10(10):3652
23. Kshetri N (2018) 1 Blockchain’s roles in meeting key supply chain management objectives.
Int J Inf Manage 39:80–89
24. Kshetri N (2017) Can blockchain strengthen the internet of things?. IT Prof 19(4):68–72
25. Liu H, Zhang Y, Yang T (2018) Blockchain-enabled security in electric vehicles cloud and
edge computing. IEEE Netw 32(3):78–83
26. Mangla SK, Luthra S, Rich N, Kumar D, Rana NP, Dwivedi YK (2018) Enablers to implement
sustainable initiatives in agri-food supply chains. Int J Prod Econ 203:379–393
27. Min H (2019) Blockchain technology for enhancing supply chain resilience. Bus Horiz
62(1):35–45
28. Mudliar K, Parekh H, Bhavathankar P (2018) A comprehensive integration of national identity
with blockchain technology. In: 2018 international conference on communication information
and computing technology (ICCICT). IEEE, pp 1–6
29. Nakamoto S (2009) Bitcoin: a peer-to-peer electronic cash system. Bitcoin. org. Disponible en
https://bitcoin.org/en/bitcoin-paper
30. Peters GW, Panayi E (2016) Understanding modern banking ledgers through blockchain tech￾nologies: future of transaction processing and smart contracts on the internet of money. In:
Banking beyond banks and money. Springer, Cham, pp 239–278
31. PwC (2020) https://www.pwc.com/gx/en/news-room/press-releases/2020/blockchain-boost￾global-economy-track-trace-trust.html. Last accessed 2020/11/10
32. Schmitt E, Galli F, Menozzi D, Maye D, Touzard JM, Marescotti A, Six J, Brunori G (2017)
Comparing the sustainability of local and global food products in Europe. J Clean Prod 165:346–
359
33. Sgarbossa F, Russo I (2017) A proactive model in sustainable food supply chain: insight from
a case study. Int J Prod Econ 183:596–606
34. Tian F (2016) An agri-food supply chain traceability system for China based on RFID &
blockchain technology. In: 2016 13th international conference on service systems and service
management (ICSSSM). IEEE, pp 1–6
35. Tsolakis N, Niedenzu D, Simonetto M, Dora M, Kumar M (2021) Supply network design
to address United Nations sustainable development goals: a case study of blockchain
implementation in Thai fish industry. J Bus Res 131:495–519
36. UNDESA (2020) United Nation’s Department of Economic and Social Affairs sustainable
development. https://sdgs.un.org/goals
37. Venkatesh VG, Kang K, Wang B, Zhong RY, Zhang A (2020) System architecture for
blockchain based transparency of supply chain social sustainability. Robot Comput Integr
Manuf 63:1018968 Blockchain Technology for Enhancing Sustainability … 125
38. WCED (1987) Our common future, vol 17. World Commission on Environment and
Development, pp 1–91
39. Watanabe H, Fujimura S, Nakadaira A, Miyazaki Y, Akutsu A, Kishigami JJ (2015) Blockchain
contract: a complete consensus using blockchain. In: 2015 IEEE 4th global conference on
consumer electronics (GCCE). IEEE, pp 577–578
40. Yaga D, Mell P, Roby N, Scarfone K (2019) Blockchain technology overview. arXiv preprint
https://arxiv.org/abs/1906.11078. https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/ir/2018/NIST.IR.8202.pdf
41. Yan B, Shi S, Ye B, Zhou X, Shi P (2015) Sustainable development of the fresh agricul￾tural products supply chain through the application of RFID technology. Inf Technol Manage
16(1):67–78
42. Yli-Huumo J, Ko D, Choi S, Park S, Smolander K (2016) Where is current research on
blockchain technology?—a systematic review. PloS one 11(10):e0163477
43. Zhang P, Schmidt DC, White J, Lenz G (2018) Blockchain technology use cases in healthcare.
Adv Comput 111:1–41
44. Zheng Z, Xie S, Dai H, Chen X, Wang H (2017) An overview of blockchain technology:
architecture, consensus, and future trends. In: 2017 IEEE international congress on big data
(BigData congress). IEEE, pp 557–564Chapter 9
Cloud Computing: Technological
Innovations in the Food Industry
Kumar Rahul, Rohitash Kumar Banyal, Vijay Kumar, and Darshana Hooda
Abstract Cloud computing is an emerging area of computer sciences, and much
research is in progress in different aspects since the beginning. Cloud computing
creates security, cost, and governance concerns in other prospects in use and a
network system of food industries. Food industries are the fastest growing industries
in India and abroad. Simultaneously, cloud computing plays an essential role in data
and application migration to the cloud for better and effective services. Enterprises
get multiple benefits in terms of hardware and software through cloud computing
technologies. This book chapter describes various aspects of cloud computing imple￾mentation challenges and issues among distributed systems that are well connected
geographically. This chapter also provides multiple levels of challenges during the
implementation of cloud services in the food industries at the server-side and client￾side. This chapter describes a systematic literature review of benefits, technologies,
challenges, and issues encountered during cloud computing services offered to food
industries.
Keywords Cloud computing · Scalability · Security · Food industries · Services
BDA Big data analysis
CDC Cloud data center
DAAS Desktop as a service
ERP Enterprise resource planning
GUI Graphical user interface
(continued)
K. Rahul (B) · V. Kumar
Department of Basic and Applied Science, National Institute of Food Technology
Entrepreneurship and Management, Kundli (Sonepat) 131028, India
R. K. Banyal
Department of Computer Sciene and Technology, Rajasthan Technical University, Kota 321040,
India
D. Hooda
University Computer Center, Deenbandhu Chhotu Ram University of Science and Technology,
Murthal 131039, India
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2022
R. S Mor et al. (eds.), Operations and Supply Chain Management in the Food Industry,
Lecture Notes in Management and Industrial Engineering,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-16-5555-5_10
127128 K. Rahul et al.
(continued)
IAAS Infrastructure as a service
IoT Internet of things
NAAS Network as a service
PAAS Platform as a service
SAAS Software as a service
SBMC Subscription basis model charges
TMS Transaction management system
9.1 Introduction
Cloud computing is a technology, mechanism, or approach that provides different
services regarding hardware and software to the various clients geographically
located with a limited computing power capacity at their end. Cloud computing offer
services like manipulation, configuration, and accessing application online. Cloud
computing provides services like data storage facilities, infrastructure setup facilities,
and application access online. Various cloud computing applications exist, including
higher education, health, banking, retail, manufacturing, transport, pharmacy, and
service sector. These sectors are well equipped with automation and systematic
execution of their operations with the IT facilities. Cloud computing consists of
various attributes such as multi-tenancy, elasticity, network access, pay as you go, and
on-demand resources [1]. Industrial data are essential data for their daily operations
and maintenance; their application and usability are different regarding profitability.
Food industries’ IT support cannot be changed again and again in a shorter time￾line. Thus, a facility called cloud computing helps to “pay for the services they have
used.” Cloud computing provides services at the level of hardware through Software
as a Service (SAAS), Platform as a Service (PAAS), and Infrastructure as a Service
(IAAS) accordingly. Nowadays, approximately 90% of global industries use cloud
computing as a service and make business more profitable. A significant feature of
cloud computing is multiple tenant-oriented services, meaning different service users
can run other platforms or software concurrently on the same infrastructure.
Maximum utilization of cloud resources is the primary concern of the client system
or industries always provide a better outcome, and cloud resource is an essential
requirement for successful implementation at the operational and execution level
[2]. Observations have been made for cloud adoption in industries, which leads to
the study of different sectors. The level of service access has been different from GUI￾based software to the infrastructure levels. If we talk about the banking sector located
at other places and remote locations, service providing facilities has always been
challenging in less time and money. We all know these sectors are well connected to
e-com industries, where transaction failure affects industry outcomes [3]. However,9 Cloud Computing: Technological Innovations in the Food Industry 129
cloud in the manufacturing industry, only 7% believe that cloud services are appli￾cable effectively [3]. Recently, mobile cloud computing has emerged in this area and
shown how mobile cloud computing is used. Mobile cloud computing offers benefits
such as scalability, reliability, battery life, etc. but still has lots of challenges such
as privacy, trust, energy efficiency, security, bandwidth, data management, synchro￾nization [4]. Cloud computing characteristics include on-demand self-service, broad
network access, rapid elasticity, measured service, resource pooling, etc. [5].
Food and beverage industries can use cloud computing technologies such as
PAAS, NAAS, IAAS, SAAS, and so on a different scale. Food industries require
delivery of the product on time through supply chain management technologies,
enabling cloud services such as “SAAS” effectively. Supply chain management soft￾ware can be helpful through SAAS. Cloud supply chain (SAAS, IAAS, PAAS)
integrated with suppliers, distributors, manufacturers, wholesalers, retailers [5]. The
“on-time food delivery system” challenge can be solved with the cloud computing
technological implementation concept in food industries. By doing so, food indus￾tries would be in a position to have higher benefits. Cloud computing services enable
food industries to accelerate the operations and functionalities along with supply
chain objectivities.
The different tasks such as traceability, cost-effectiveness, streaming complexity,
and data sharing among various end-users of food industries can be achieved through
cloud computing services [5]. 74% of food and beverage industries have adopted
cloud computing as per Harvard business review claimed in Operators [6]. The
food and beverage sector would benefit from adopting cloud computing services in
different ways, including data security, reduction of time and cost, decision support
system improves, control staff and inventory cost, consistency through centraliza￾tion, and compliance with regulations [6]. This book chapter is divided into different
sections. Section 9.2 describes cloud computing in terms of industrial applications,
which defines the basic understanding and requirement of the cloud for industries and
how much (%) different industries are using cloud technologies in today’s scenario.
Cloud computing is suitable for the food industries for various reasons including
greater speed and agilities, updating system within food industries, expanding loca￾tions with lower cost, executing new ideas, interaction with customers through the
latest communications mode, revenue potential increase, decision-making system
with big data technologies and so on [6].
In Indian food industries, cloud computing technologies have been implemented
and executed by a few legendary industries such as Nestle, Haldiram’s, etc. It is esti￾mated that by 2022, more computation services provided by PAAS and IAAS [7].
Cloud computing services help in storage, processing, and networking through arti￾ficial intelligence and machine learning techniques [7]. The next industrial growth
would be affected by cloud computing technologies. Around 60% of the enterprises
(including food industries) would be in a position to use cloud services at the end
of 2020 [7]. Indian cloud computing services report 2020–2027 indicates the imple￾mentation of cloud services requirements in small- and medium-scale industries [8].
Cloud services providers are Amazon web services, Azure, Google cloud, Alibaba
cloud, IBM cloud, Tencent cloud, Oracle, etc. Amazon leads to $100 Billion cloud
market as per records given in synergy research group [9].130 K. Rahul et al.
The worldwide public cloud services market has grown up to $257.9 billion as per
Gartner, Inc. [10]. DAAS is suitable for remotely located employees of an organiza￾tion. It has significant growth from 95.4% to $1.2 billion and is expected worldwide
public cloud services for different services IAAS, SAAS, and PAAS [10]. Cloud
migration services is expected to be $448.34 Billion (USD) by 2025. It has been
increasing from smaller to large-scale organization for scalability, effectiveness and
disaster recovery, etc. In the recent pandemic of COVID-19, most industries have
moved to cloud services with a witness of 775% cloud services claimed by Microsoft
Inc. [11]. The cloud migration market growth rate by region (2020–2025) shows
North America is the leading one, where 95% of organizations have moved toward
cloud services, a survey claimed by IBM [11]. Cloud computing adoption maturity
of the UK has given in Opara-Martins et al. [12]. In the survey paper, it is mentioned,
46.2% of industries preferred to migrate and use public cloud, whereas 36.8% indus￾tries used hybrid cloud, followed by 26.4% industries in private cloud and merely
10.4% industries only for community cloud [12].
Section 9.2 explains cloud computing: an overview in terms of food industries
applications. Section 9.3 describes the benefits of cloud computing for food industry
solutions. Section 9.4 presents cloud computing implementation and challenges for
food industries. Section 9.5 focused on the outcome for food industries after cloud
concept (services) implementation. Section 9.6 elaborates on various issues and the
future of cloud computing in food industries for better and effective utilization in
industries.
9.2 Cloud Computing: An Overview in Terms of Food
Industries Applications
There is an increasing demand for cloud computing usability in many industries
[13]. Cloud computing provides services through various network mode. Cloud
computing structure presented in scalable infrastructure supports different appli￾cations, accessing files, or data storage globally. With these technologies, multiple
costs such as computational, data storage, website hostage, application hosting, and
service delivery reduce. Cloud computing is based on providing service of reusability
and effective utilization of IT services [14]. Different industries, distinct in nature
and production, use cloud computing for business continuity plan (BCP) and disaster
recovery purposes. Nowadays, industrial services are cloud-based/IT-based, which is
not always possible to be available effectively in industries. They (industries) benefit
from SAAS, and for all such facilities, industries pay to the cloud service providers.
A well-deployed cloud computing service provides many advantages to sectors
regarding easy access to resources and applications, including data [15]. It offered
cost-effectiveness and built up to standard services among various cloud service
providers. Cloud computing adoption in industries reduces capital and operational
expenditure [15].9 Cloud Computing: Technological Innovations in the Food Industry 131
Food industries tend to understand that scalability and availability are possible to
achieve [15]. The authors showed scheduling in the cloud and scheduler organization
for a distributed system where the scheduler input and output data, scheduler runs,
frequency, application model, and objectives [7]. Here, the authors show the client
(as industries) and provider (cloud service) perspective in cloud computing [16].
The author shows interrelated issues, emerging trends, and challenges near IoT, big
data, and cloud computing in all respect [17]. The author said IoT and big data more
influence cloud computing technologies future growth [17]. The author shows the
adoption of cloud computing in e-government and discussed the cloud computing
role advanced from the traditional government system concerning the feature of avail￾ability, accessibility, performance, data scalability, and disaster recovery industries
[18]. Cloud computing characteristics include on-demand self-service, multi-tenancy
and resource pooling, rapid elasticity, scalability, resource optimization, etc. [19].
9.2.1 Cloud Computing Technologies of Food Industries
Cloud computing reduces cost, reduces management responsibilities, increases busi￾ness agility, and meets enterprises flexible environment [19]. It is suitable for the
whole logistics platform, as mentioned in Daniluk and Holtkamp [20]. It supports
logistics processes and value-added services to the logistics sector to boost up produc￾tivity. The cloud computing market value has increased from $25.5 billion to $159.3
billion in 2020 [20]. The authors have designed a logistics process designer (LDP),
a central tool for the logistics mall [20]. Cloud computing is also called utility
computing for industries. Cloud technologies are used to provide services of different
categories of services to various industries for IT solutions, including banking, retail,
manufacturing, etc. Cloud technologies include:
i. Commodities of Hardware
ii. Virtualization of Computational Processing, Storage and Communication
iii. Distributed System Services.
Industries have started using cloud computing, easily understood from the diagram
(Fig. 9.1). Various sectors such as insurance, oil, gas and electric, school and educa￾tion, food retail and healthcare, financial sector, manufacturing, telecommunication,
business management services, specialized services, freight services, energy manage￾ment, membership organization, media, and military use cloud computing services.
Effective utilization of cloud computing in various sectors can be understood as given
below.
Different industries (given below in Fig. 9.2) use cloud computing technologies
for other purposes. The cloud delivers SAAS, PAAS, and IAAS, and so on to many
clients as and when required. It is an on-demand service system. It includes the
latest technologies such as virtualization, live migration (LM), offline access, online
storage, third-party integration, online collaboration, etc. It offers applications of
variance in nature with high computing parameters. These services shifted to the132 K. Rahul et al.
Fig. 9.1 Cloud computing applications. Source Author
outsourced concept under industries for recommendations, including the cost of hard￾ware/software setup and IT administration. The industrial security level consists of
various clusters of different natures where groups provide application-based software
and other essential applications for industries at different levels.
Figure 9.1 shows Cluster A offers services for online shopping related web appli￾cation, which also includes Customer Relationship Management (CRM) module for
maintaining the relationship with the customer to promote other product promo￾tions through the web portal. Cluster B maintains the dataset of various TMS users,
which keeps the record of, “How many transactions occurred during a particular
date and time?” Cluster C keeps records of “Requirement of applications software
for industries based on demand.” Cloud computing service provider industries such
as Amazon, IBM Cloud, Oracle Cloud, SAP, Red Hat, Verizon Cloud, etc., provide
these services to various industries.
9.2.2 Cloud Computing in Different Industries
Various industries are using big data and cloud computing technologies for the last
few years. Day by day, their industrial growth is increasing, and at the same time, it
becomes essential for them to maintain quality services and produce the right product
on time. Figure 9.2 shows cloud usages in various industries. It represents how much
% of different industries are using cloud services. It offers financial sector 12%,
manufacturing 10%, telecommunication 9%, business management 10%, specialized
service 5%, energy, membership organization 6%, media and military 6%, chemical
and pharmacy 3%, commercial physical research 1%, government 7%, insurance9 Cloud Computing: Technological Innovations in the Food Industry 133
Fig. 9.2 Cloud usages of various industries [21]
6%, oil gas and electric 5%, school and education 4%, food retail and healthcare
12%, and another sector 4%. In food retail and healthcare, the food habit is affected
by a celebrity chef in different ways at a different level with the support of media
technologies [21].
9.3 Benefits of Cloud Computing for Food Industries
Solutions
There are many benefits to using cloud computing in industries. Industries have
been using to solve operational problems and to reduce cost optimization. Cloud
computing benefits can be understood in terms of easily upgraded software, data
storage, reduce IT cost, business continuity, productivity anywhere, efficiency, scal￾ability, flexible cost, always-on availability, improved mobility, and improved collab￾oration. Another advantage of cloud computing is the minimum cost of globalization
of the workforce. Industries (other than IT) do not require to spend more on IT infras￾tructure, including software upgradation and software and network licensing. With
the help of a login/password or accessibility feature, industrial data can be access
across the globe.
Other benefits of these technologies are providing project monitoring and control￾ling systems that work effectively, rapid development, high productivity, less deploy￾ment time, easy to manage, high availability, and shared resources. Cloud computing134 K. Rahul et al.
services and IoT are available to support cultivation, agri-logistics, food processing,
distributor, food retail, food services, etc. [22]. In cold chain logistics, cloud
computing and BDA work to estimate the predictions and real-time traffic congestion
and transportation through unified device [23].
Through data-center consolidation of cloud services, it is easier for food industries
to achieve lower cost for computer resources utilization, reduced time to market, etc. It
supports multi-tenancy for the different food businesses (such as ERP, food informa￾tion system, traceability system, production system) where various operations will be
useful and maintained separately in form of privacy isolation, performance isolation,
failure isolation [24]. Cloud computing services also support statistical multiplexing,
horizontal scalability, variable pricing, price setting, efficiency, incentive compati￾bility, etc. [24]. However, these three are significant benefits of implementing cloud
computing in food industries as follows.
9.3.1 Reduce IT cost
However, cloud computing provides IT services based on demand anywhere. Hence,
no need to maintain and expense more on IT establishment and infrastructure much
in industries other than IT, only up to a certain level, enterprises need to purchase an
established IT infrastructure, flexibility offers in IT cases, where software or platform
is used directly from the cloud. There is no need to pay wages to external experts.
Since industries have limited IT resources, current IT infrastructure forces them to
focus more on data storage, security, retrieval issues, etc. Cloud computing services
provider industries offer more IT-enabled services.
9.3.2 Business Continuity
Business continuity is an essential feature of cloud computing in industrial aspects. It
is basically a “plan of execution” in case of business failure. The BCP objective (busi￾ness continuity plan) is “Business should not stop, in any case”. So, the data, process,
engineering methodology, production steps, quality parameter, cost evaluation, etc.,
everything stored on the cloud for fast transfer in case of emergency. Business-related
data stored on a cloud storage system, so data security is an essential aspect for cloud
computing service provider companies. Cloud service provider company provides
you data as and when required to loss of productivity and back-end support.9 Cloud Computing: Technological Innovations in the Food Industry 135
9.3.3 Software Integration
Cloud computing is nicely used through different ERP systems. ERP software is
implemented in almost all types of industries.
The majority of the ERP is integrated with other marketing, production, supply
chain, advertisement, human resource, customer relationship management, etc.
SAAS services are readily available with cloud technology, and with the help of
SAAS, the software is integrated and upgraded on time. More enterprises are giving
first preference to cloud services in 2018 as per the report of RightScale [25].
9.4 Cloud Computing Implementations Challenges
and Opportunities for Food Industries
Cloud computing challenges are categorized in different ways, which is given in this
section. However, it includes a lack of resources and expertise, security, managing
cloud, compliance, government, etc. Cloud computing challenges can be understood
from the diagram mentioned below [25].
Various implementation challenges need to be resolved before implementation
and access resources of cloud services.
i. Identifying the suitable cloud setup: Suitable Cloud setup is an essential step
for any business or industry to meet their requirements. Cloud setup ordinarily
available in different forms such as private cloud, community cloud, and hybrid
cloud. All these clouds are other in size, but functionalities are the same for
execution and services. Every industry has its own set up for IT needs. All
efforts made to meet their specific requirements to run a business such as beverage
Fig. 9.3 Cloud computing challenges in the previous year of 2017 and 2016 [25]136 K. Rahul et al.
Fig. 9.4 Cloud computing
and its type. Source Author
industries will focus more on beverage product making process, leveling, quality
evaluation, packaging, and marketing rather than IT services. However, there
would be a need to utilize the right cloud services in the automation system to
achieve the success rate without establishing more IT facilities in industries [26].
ii. Unauthorized service provider: Unauthorized service provider is the second
important security and services of cloud computing. Industries have ICT facil￾ities to cope up with the requirement and economic growth of enterprises.
Figure 9.1 shows different cloud computing concept and their types of imple￾mentations, so industries can adopt anyone to provide IT facilities in various
forms with secured and authorized services. The majority of the sectors (except
IT) does not put much effort into ICT facilities instead, and they focus on core
areas to gain maximum profit. Thus, it becomes essential to understand the
authorized service provider from the cloud side.
iii. Data security: Data security is an important parameter, and it is one of the
biggest challenges for industries in different forms to provide quality services.
Industrial data are sharable among various units in an organization where
data access permits any other industries to use at a certain level, which must
be protected and secure during transmission. There have been many mali￾cious attacks in the past, including virus attacks, threats, hacking at micro and
significant access levels in industries that force us to think about data security
in sectors. That is why entrepreneurs feel about security issues while imple￾menting cloud services and accessing cloud services in industries [26]. Indus￾trial policies, processing strategy, product making process, etc., are essential
aspects of industrial data, so organizations don’t share without permission and
provide access. So, cloud computing service provider companies’ responsibil￾ities are to ensure that their “data will be secure” and not shared among third
parties.
iv. Consumptions basis charges: This is also called consumption-based model
charges (CBMCs), which charge as per consumptions and services. Cloud￾provided services as on-demand, so sometimes it quite happens that price goes
up and down as per availability of resources. It is not possible to stick always9 Cloud Computing: Technological Innovations in the Food Industry 137
to a particular amount. Because of this reason, it is difficult to implement
cloud services in industries. Since this is a pricing model, there is a subscrip￾tion model available at the counter that provides web services up to a certain
level, whether daily, monthly, yearly, etc. Nowadays, such a subscription is
easily available in different sectors, such as the telecom sector (BSNL, MTNL,
RELIANCE, etc.). This approach is called subscription basis model charges
(SBMCs), where customers need to pay as per time frame and subscription
limit.
v. Migration: Industry’s high authority cultural difference is one of the issues to
shift from one platform to other platforms such as access services on payment
based on cloud computing technologies. Industries high authorities gener￾ally do not share essential data details to third party or through technologies
intermediate devices.
Higher authorities are having misconceptions about cloud computing
(except IT industries) because it is hard for them to accept technological
advancement in most industries [26].
vi. Reliability on Cloud Computing Services: Not all industries believe in cloud
computing facilities and services easily available on-demand where no-cost
implementation exists for hardware and software respect. In fact, with the
various feature, work becomes easy and reduce overhead cost. Industrial data
transformation from living to a cloud system is difficult because of the lack of
reliability on technologies [27].
With the feature advancement of cloud computing services, the CDC
increases their size and volume, where resource failure occurs. Thus, indus￾tries have less confidence in the reliability of services provided by the cloud
[27].
vii. Transforming data to virtual setup: Transforming data and business from one
part to another virtual form is difficult for any industry, where some portion
of enterprises is carried out at one place, and another amount of work will
execute at virtual design.
9.5 The Outcome for Food Industries After Cloud Services
Implementation
Cloud computing-based applications in industries do not pay for different hardware
and software facilities to avail. However, SAAS, PAAS, and IAAS of cloud tech￾nology provide all services related to software, platform, and infrastructure. Food
and beverage industries IT cost reduced after implementation of cloud services. Food
industries and IT infrastructure reduced. Services are being upgraded automatically
when it is being used through cloud activities. It is also upgraded periodically when
interacted with cloud services or technology hired by the cloud. Cloud adoption
leads to less deployment time and effective utilization of resources at an industrial138 K. Rahul et al.
Fig. 9.5 Impact of cloud computing in food industries [28]
site. Instead, cloud adoption supports adopting more projects and work related to IT
services and free from purchase in industries (Fig. 9.5).
The above figure shows the cloud impact on business [28]. Industries that are
equipped with cloud services experienced 20.66% average improvement in time
to market, 18.80% recorded as moderate growth in process efficiency within an
organization, and a 15.07% reduction in IT spending of industries. All together,
these sources led to a 19.63% increase in industrial growth. In the case of public
cloud services adoption among sectors, the following observations were found as
per the report given [25].
Fig. 9.6 ERP public cloud adoption [25]9 Cloud Computing: Technological Innovations in the Food Industry 139
9.6 Issues and Future of Cloud Computing in Food
Industries
Some challenges faced by Indian food industries such as poor knowledge of weather
forecasting, pest and diseases, poor ICT infrastructure, insufficient power supply in
rural areas where small- and medium-scale industries installed and function [29].
So, these challenges can be solved through cloud computing services with a minimal
rental cost. Industries would be able to get on-demand, less expensive, measured
services, etc. Cloud-based services provides databases for crop related information,
market information, agricultural tools and production information [29]. Some other
challenges include IoT under development, capital cost, skilled workforce, farm
monitoring devices, advanced farm equipment, alternate farming techniques, within
food industries.
Although there are various issues and challenges exist during the cloud computing
adoption in industries such as security (lack of control over the location of data,
lack of filtered data, increased vulnerabilities from shared infrastructure, privileged
use abuse at the cloud provider), reliability, stability, access, interorganizational
connectivity, and application software availability [30]. Apart from these chal￾lenges, industries face several other challenges during cloud computing technology
implementation in enterprises.
These challenges are integration with existing systems, modifying workflow,
changes to IT policy, learning curve, higher cost than expectation, lower perfor￾mance than expected, lower availability than expected, and so on [31]. The future
of cloud computing affected food industries in terms of enhancing storage services
and the Internet, ERP development preferred in modular form, IoT emerged with
cloud services, the predictive mechanism through big data, update cloud services,
etc. Food industries also face several other issues, including data security risks, over
dependencies on a single cloud, legal and regulatory compliances, data access, lack
of integration between modules and network, data protection and security, transition
cost are high, loss of control, incapable of moving data from vendor to cloud, etc.
[12].
9.7 Conclusions
This book chapter explains the various aspects of cloud computing services in the
food industries. Cloud computing provides multiple service access to food industries
despite several limitations for which food industries pay for the services it accesses.
Services such as web-related infrastructure and services and different applications
software support to food industries. It provides data virtualization of resources, data140 K. Rahul et al.
sharing, and data filtering through other systems implemented in the food indus￾tries. Cloud computing introductions ensure low hardware and software require￾ments, minimum maintenance cost, easy accessibility, and flexibility are signifi￾cant benefits in food industries. Food industries can improve the services offered
through cloud computing technologies. Although new technologies help in different
ways, it also includes some challenges such as lack of resources, security, managing
cloud spend, compliance, governance, managing multiple cloud services, unplanned
outages, performance, etc. This chapter introduced the impact of cloud computing
implementations in food and allied industries where the cost can be minimized and
improved the service’s qualities.
References
1. Habib M, Hauke S, Ries S, Uhlhäuser MM (2012) Review open access trust as a facilitator in
cloud computing: a survey. J Cloud Comput Adv Syst Appl 1:19. Retrieved from http://www.
journalofcloudcomputing.com/content/
2. Wang P, Gao RX, Fan Z (2015) Cloud computing for cloud manufacturing: benefits and
limitations. J Manuf Sci Eng 137(4):044002. https://doi.org/10.1115/1.4030209
3. Intelligence Unit from The Economist (2016) Ascending cloud the adoption of cloud computing
in five industries. The Econ 16. Retrieved from https://www.eiuperspectives.economist.com/
sites/default/files/EIU_AscendingcloudMBP_PDF_1.pdf
4. Noor TH, Zeadally S, Alfazi A, Sheng QZ (2018) Mobile cloud computing: challenges and
future research directions. J Netw Comput Appl 115(May):70–85. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jnca.2018.04.018
5. Cloud computing in Food Sector (n.d.)
6. Operators B (n.d.) What every F & B executive needs to know the power of cloud for
7. Cloud Computing Market Size, Share_Industry Report, 2020–2027 (n.d.)
8. Cloud Infrastructure as a Service, Worldwide.pdf (n.d.)
9. Felix Richter (2020) Chart: Amazon leads $100 Billion cloud market|Statista. Retrieved
from https://www.statista.com/chart/18819/worldwide-market-share-of-leading-cloud-infras
tructure-service-providers/
10. Costello K, Rimol M (2019) Gartner forecasts worldwide public cloud revenue to grow 17%
in 2020. Gartner Press Release. Retrieved from https://www.gartner.com/en/newsroom/press￾releases/2019-11-13-gartner-forecasts-worldwide-public-cloud-revenue-to-grow-17-percent￾in-2020
11. Cloud Migration Market_Growth, Trends, Forecasts (2020–2025) (n.d.)
12. Opara-Martins J, Sahandi R, Tian F (2016) Critical analysis of vendor lock-in and its impact
on cloud computing migration: a business perspective. J Cloud Comput 5(1). https://doi.org/
10.1186/s13677-016-0054-z
13. Pardeshi VH (2014) Cloud computing for higher education institutes: architecture, strategy
and recommendations for effective adaptation. Procedia Econ Fin 11(14):589–599. https://doi.
org/10.1016/S2212-5671(14)00224-X
14. Wu D, Hugenholtz P, Mavromatis K, Pukall R, Dalin E, Ivanova NN et al (2009) Cloud
computing—an overview an overview. White Paper 462(7276):1–5. https://doi.org/10.1038/
nature08656
15. Ferraz F, Ribeiro F, Lima W, Sampaio C (2018) A disturbing question: what is the econom￾ical impact of cloud computing? A systematic mapping. In: 2018 IEEE 11th international
conference on cloud computing (CLOUD), pp 853–856. https://doi.org/10.1109/CLOUD.
2018.001209 Cloud Computing: Technological Innovations in the Food Industry 141
16. Bittencourt LF, Goldman A, Madeira ERM, Nelson LS, Sakellariou R (2018) Scheduling in
distributed systems: a cloud computing perspective. Comput Sci Rev 30:31–54. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.cosrev.2018.08.002
17. Kobusi ´nska A, Leung C, Hsu C, Raghavendra S, Chang V (2018) Emerging trends, issues
and challenges in internet of things, big data and cloud computing. Futur Gener Comput Syst
87:416–419. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.future.2018.05.021
18. Ali KE, Mazen SA, Hassanein EE (2018) SC. Future Comput Inf J. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
fcij.2018.09.001
19. Mahmood Z (2011) Cloud computing for enterprise architectures 3–19. https://doi.org/10.
1007/978-1-4471-2236-4
20. Daniluk D, Holtkamp B (2015) Logistics mall—a cloud platform for logistics, pp 13–27. https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-13404-8_2
21. Phillipov M (2017) Media and food industries: the new politics of food. Media Food Ind New
Polit Food 1–259. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-64101-0
22. Deloitte, FICCI (2018) Industry 4.0 in Food Industry India Food Report (January), pp 1–19
23. Chen YH (2020) Intelligent algorithms for cold chain logistics distribution optimization based
on big data cloud computing analysis. J Cloud Comput 9(1). https://doi.org/10.1186/s13677-
020-00174-x
24. Sandholm T, Lee D (2014) Notes on cloud computing principles. J Cloud Comput 3(1):1–10.
https://doi.org/10.1186/s13677-014-0021-5
25. RightScale (2018) RightScale 2018 state of the cloud ReportTM, pp 46. https://doi.org/10.1016/
J.EXGER.2014.04.005
26. Top 20 Cloud Computing Issues & Challenges (Latest) (n.d.)
27. Singh Gill S (2018) Failure management for reliable cloud computing: a taxonomy, model and
future directions 9615(c):1–10. https://doi.org/10.1109/MCSE.2018.2873866
28. Advantages of Cloud Computing in 2019|McAfee MVISION Cloud (n.d.) Retrieved
from https://www.skyhighnetworks.com/cloud-security-blog/11-advantages-of-cloud-comput
ing-and-how-your-business-can-benefit-from-them/
29. Application of cloud computing to learning (2010) Afr J Bus Manag 4:3217–3225
30. Cegielski CG, Allison Jones-Farmer L, Wu Y, Hazen BT (2012) Adoption of cloud computing
technologies in supply chains: an organizational information processing theory approach. Int
J Logist Manag 23(2):184–211. https://doi.org/10.1108/09574091211265350
31. CompTIA|2018 Trends in Cloud Computing (n.d.) Retrieved from https://www.comptia.org/
content/research/2018-trends-in-cloud-computingChapter 10
Green Technological Approaches
for Food Quality and Safety in Food
Supply Chain
Owais Yousuf and Anupama Singh
Abstract In a food supply chain, food quality and safety are of paramount impor￾tance as there is a drastic change in consumers’ food habits, behaviour and markets.
Consumer expectations for food quality and safety during the current pandemic situa￾tion are the main driving forces behind this change. Food safety has become essential,
and in order to have a safe food and to get a sustainable system of food in a food
supply chain, emerging green technologies are of immense importance. In a food
supply chain, having good-quality food is necessary, which is safe for consumption
and free of contamination. Considering these objectives, acquiring the food safety
and quality is of immense prominence and responsibility of all the stakeholders in
food supply chain. Alongside this journey of food products from the field to fork,
there are several risks linked to food contamination which may occur in the whole
supply chain. With an aim of achieving the safety and quality in the food supply
chain, stakeholders, besides following the legislations and standards have also to
include the effective green technological approaches in the supply chain. Evidently,
several green technological approaches have emerged which can be adapted with an
intention of confirming the food quality and safety in the overall food supply chain.
The aim of this chapter is to provide a concise description of the green technologies
and to discuss them from the view point of food quality and safety.
Keywords Food supply chain · Food quality · Food safety · Green technological
approaches
O. Yousuf (B)
Department of Bioengineering, Integral University, Lucknow 226026, India
A. Singh
Department of Food Engineering, National Institute of Food Technology Entrepreneurship and
Management, Kundli (Sonepat) 131028, India
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2022
R. S Mor et al. (eds.), Operations and Supply Chain Management in the Food Industry,
Lecture Notes in Management and Industrial Engineering,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-16-5555-5_11
143144 O. Yousuf and A. Singh
10.1 Introduction
In a food chain, quality together with safety of the food products is of prime impor￾tance. For this quality assurance, green technologies need to be identified from the
view point of food safety. The quality and safety starts with the production and
storage of food products and continues with processing, packaging, distribution
before reaching to the table of the consumers [1]. In general, food supply chain,
consists of various players connected together through the farm to the fork, with
an objective of producing the consumer-oriented products and an augmented travel
of the food products throughout the supply chain [2]. With an increased consumer
perception for the food, supply chain has turned out more complex. The consumer’s
criteria for food selection is ever more dependent on the food characteristics of
quality, safety, taste, shelf life and added health welfares [3]. Consumers are not only
becoming more conscious about these factors, but are even more aware of the factors
associated with food supply chain which include practices for food production and
also the side effect of the food processing on environment and human health [4].
With the intention of safeguarding the food supply chain, ample safety needs are to
be investigated and monitored at various levels from the producers to the consumers.
This is a vital obligation not only to protect the food from triggering different health
hazards but also to minimize the post-harvest losses, which is equally significant in
those circumstances where food security is susceptible [2].
With due course of time, the approaches for the food quality and safety in the
food supply chain have intensified. Worldwide, many countries have resorted to the
food quality and safety awareness by evolving key approaches encompassing the
whole supply chain [5]. Presently, food quality and safety verification in food supply
chain comprise of varied approaches which include, Hazard Analysis and Critical
Control Point (HACCP), Good Hygiene Practices (GHPs) and Good Manufacturing
Practices (GMPs). In addition to these safety systems, food standard for quality and
safety is also certified through legislations and permissible criteria for the upper safe
limits of microbial contamination or the lower limits of various food components in
a commodity at various levels. These methods are in use in the food supply chain
but with the increased demand of safer and quality food, need is to enhance these
techniques and incorporate newer methods with their relevance to the food supply
chain [2].
These apprehensions led to the evolution of different approaches of green tech￾niques, the application of which will lead to the decreased use of energy, decline in
the food contamination and waste generation throughout the food supply chain [3].
These green technological approaches can be incorporated with an intent of settling
the safety and quality of the food in the overall food supply chain, leading to more
nutrition, new flavours, texture, taste and an extended shelf life [6]. It is obvious that
these approaches will enhance the competition among the players of supply chain to
be more inventive, economical and bringing in ecological reforms which may fit in10 Green Technological Approaches for Food Quality and Safety … 145
with the criteria of green concepts of sustainability [7]. Furthermore, new progres￾sions, equipment, safety systems, packaging materials and testing procedures will
bring out the advances in overall quality and safety in the food supply chain. [8].
10.2 Importance of Food Supply Chain
Food is very sensitive entity in the whole market and is always linked to various
hazards and risks like temperature levels, relative humidity, inadequate storage, light,
poor air quality, inappropriate post-harvest technologies and other such factors which
surely influence its quality and safety. The food products passes through the supply
chain, comprising of several operations which influence the raw materials procure￾ment, processing of the material till conversion into the processed product, followed
by its packaging and finally, marketing. These activities implicate all the stakeholders
of the chain from the farmers to the consumers with varied interests and scopes,
hence making it a gripping and challenging work [9]. However, these players are the
major participants of this chain, they are, therefore, responsible for conditioning and
upholding the quality and safety of the food products. Every activity in the supply
chain is very important, and if somehow an error occurs at a point, the entire supply
chain gets affected. Usually, the whole track of the supply chain is occupied with
the challenges for all its stakeholders especially those confirming to the regulations
to assure food product quality and safety and at the same time generate the trust of
consumers. To avoid the chain to fall apart, it is very crucial that the participants
value various factors of the food supply chain seriously. Moreover, considering the
fact that food being a delicate market component, and to ensure its standard features,
an effective management system is compulsory. To ensure this obligation, a well￾organized food supply chain is necessity in the present-day complex and critical
situation of food all over the world [10].
10.3 Importance of Food Quality and Safety
Food quality and safety is an indispensable notion in food supply chain. In the present
times, consumers are more alarmed about the quality and safety of their food as they
are more educated and informed about food-related issues or food scandals that have
happened in the recent times. It is also observed that with the change in the life style,
the consumers’ demands associated to the food have also changed [11]. The necessity
for the ready to eat, ready to serve and minimally processed foods has increased.
This is because the customers have developed a consciousness towards their health
shifting for better quality and safer food. There has been a standard transference in
the approach of the consumers from quantity to the standard of the food products
[12]. With these changes, now more concern remains with the quality and safety of
food products. In this context, governments and the other stakeholders related to the146 O. Yousuf and A. Singh
food industry are developing and enforcing fresh legislations and other such possible
schemes to upgrade the product quality in an effort not only to guarantee the safety
of the products, but also to raise the consumer’s awareness of their efforts [13]. It is
noteworthy that these regulations and criterions are not enforced at the government
level only, but the other components of the food supply chain are also responsible
for the same [14]. It is indeed very important for the food industry to improve their
overall logistic performance in the supply chain with the latest developments which
will surely make the food supply chain highly efficient capable in ensuring the total
food quality and safety.
10.4 Food Quality and Safety Challenges
Food sector, in the whole world, is facing challenges in terms of quality and safety
of food products. Nowadays, food supply track has grown very complex with the
upsurge in the number of producers, suppliers, processes, products and much more.
The longer the food supply chain, the more chances for things to go wrong which
results in adverse health consequences for consumers. Proliferation of food supply
chain pooled with the change climate has led to larger incidences of food-borne illness
which has caused compulsion of identifying the evolving food quality and safety
concerns [2]. It has also been witnessed that plenty of gaps persist in the application
of already existing laws and regulations which also adds to the pile of food quality and
safety concerns in the whole food supply chain. New food production and resource
approaches offer the possibility of outbreak and a change in the epidemiology for
large widespread food-borne disease in food safety systems [6]. Therefore, the crucial
feature to protect the food at all the crossroads of the food supply chain is through
the approaches ensuring an improved quality and safety of food. This integrated
approach in the food supply chain should be utilized to prevent risk and encourage
and implement orders so as to achieve the overall quality and safety of food products
in the whole chain.
10.5 Need for Technological Approach
Technological approaches are different for nearly every food product in the complete
supply chain. Official support is often required for the consumer’s concerns regarding
food safety and solving the issues of food quality. With rapid distribution methods
in the global delivery of food, serious public health risks and food hazards in some
parts of the world can be shifted to other parts of the world in a very small time [11].
Customers assume the government agencies to make sure that safe food is produced
and threats to human health are minimized. But many a times, due to the lack of
latest knowledge, information and resources, or other such factors, government fails
in providing financial and technical support for ensuring the quality and safety of10 Green Technological Approaches for Food Quality and Safety … 147
food [2]. Thus, there is an increased need for enhanced regulatory food examination
and processing facilities for food control execution programmes. In general, technical
interventions should be initiated in the whole supply chain for promising the security
in food supply chain which in turn will safeguard the quality and safety of the food.
10.6 Green Technological Approaches in Food Supply
Chain
Green technological approaches in food supply chain will lead to the pursuit of overall
development and economic growth, while averting ecological deprivation, loss of
biodiversity and unsanctionable use of natural resources [15]. Incorporation of the
green technological approaches will address the issues pertaining to the overall food
supply chain, improved food production practices, viable food processing method￾ologies, evolving analytical techniques, societal issues influencing consumer percep￾tions about techniques and significance of food supply chain in sustaining the overall
attributes of food products. In the food supply chain, foods are often processed for
increase in shelf life, ensuring safety, quality and nutritive properties while making
them more suitable to the market [16].
In order to ensure this obligation of quality and safety in food processing sector,
several primary, secondary and tertiary processing ways are being used for the
processing of products and converting the whole product into highly processed food
products. Furthermore, various physical, chemical and biochemical processes such as
thermal treatment, minimal processing, aseptic processing, chilling, drying, fermen￾tation and preservers have been conventionally used to boost safety and quality [11].
Generally, these processes consume a lot of energy, alternate processes consuming
lesser energy and having environmentally friendly impacts must be well thought off.
There is thus a mounting necessity for the new technologies to work out for these
evolving issues. This is of extreme importance as these green technologies are requi￾site to look into the issues allied with the entire supply chain. Successful adoption
and dispersal of these sustainable technologies will definitely add on their economic
viability as well [17]. Ultimately, food processing at various stages is much desir￾able in attaining improved quality and enhanced safety of the food in the food supply
chain.
10.7 Green Technologies for Assuring Food Quality
and Safety
Assuring the food quality and safety of the food stuffs is an extremely important target
in the food supply chain. At present, various techniques are in use for achieving these
targets, but there is an immense need for the incorporation of newer and novel green148 O. Yousuf and A. Singh
techniques. Taking in to cognizance these presumptions, there are various innovative
green techniques which may be used to accomplish the product quality and safety
with an aim to preserve the nutrients, improve the sensory properties and augment
the product’s shelf life [18]. Some of the best known green techniques to assist in
these intents are ozone treatment, microwave technology, ultrasound technology,
pulsed electric field, ohmic heating, high-pressure processing, irradiation, pulsed
light technology, and active and smart packaging [19]. With an aim of sinking the
risk of contamination and ensuring an overall quality and safety of food products in
the whole chain, selected best possible techniques are discussed in this section.
10.7.1 Ozone Treatment
Ozone is an active sporicidal agent and an able sanitizer with a proficient antimicro￾bial properties. Ozone is considered as effectual sanitizers, capable of inactivating
yeasts, bacterial spores, moulds, protozoan cysts and viruses and leads to an impul￾sive decomposition to a non-toxic product [20]. Ozone has been found effective in
almost all classes of food products during processing and storage and to bring in the
safety and shelf life extension of these products. In prolonging the fruits and vegeta￾bles shelf life, ozonized water works as an efficient sanitizer. Besides inactivation of
microorganisms, ozone also reduces the level of pesticides on fresh produce. Ozone
treatment is very effective in decreasing the Biological oxygen demand (BOD) and
chemical oxygen demand (COD) of water used in washing and processing [21].
Furthermore, ozone acts as a promising environment friendly sanitizer by rapidly
decomposing to oxygen and also decreases the inorganic waste accumulation in
the environment [22]. To ensure effective sanitization of the commodities, different
ozone dosage is required. For example, fresh meat with high fat contents, requires
more ozone than fruits and vegetables, which contain high carbohydrates and low
fat content [23].
The nature of the surface of food contributes considerably to the effectiveness
of ozone treatment. It is observed that the microorganisms attached intensely to the
surface and those attached to areas that are not easily accessible to ozone, cannot be
removed by simple rinsing in ozonized water. For that reason, when ozone is applied
in food processing, it should be made sure that a good interaction between the target
microorganisms and the sanitizer on the treated food takes place [24]. As per US
FDA, ozone comes under the category of GRAS antimicrobial agent in dealing with
raw and fresh vegetables and fruits produce. This is the simplest techniques which
can be utilized so as to render food safe. Thus, application of ozone throughout the
supply chain will render the products free from any contaminations which may occur
during its journey through the food supply chain.10 Green Technological Approaches for Food Quality and Safety … 149
10.7.2 Microwave Technology
The Microwave technique, at present times, is deliberated as an emerging and effi￾cient technique in the food processing which is capable of various unit operations
in the food processing industry [25]. In comparison to the conventional approaches,
microwave possesses the ability to save energy, hold higher rates of heating, partake
very low maintenance, take less processing temperature and time, and in most of the
cases is very safe and easy in handling [8]. In microwave heating, heat is produced
through electromagnetic waves of certain frequencies. Most commonly operated
microwave frequencies for the food products are 2450 and 915 MHz. Despite the
concern of non-uniform heating which is noteworthy a technical hurdle, the process
shows significant potential when combined with other techniques for improved
quality and safer foods [26]. Foodstuff such as precooked foods, bread and animal
feed has been treated by means of microwaves for pasteurization or sterilization.
Some of the other processes which can be done using microwave are pasteurization,
concentration, curing, drying, baking, freeze drying, sterilizing, tempering, cooking,
thawing and drying [27]. Due to its dynamic characteristics, microwave technology
can be used in various ways in the food supply chain for attaining the prospects of
quality and safety of the food products.
10.7.3 Pulsed Electric Field
Pulsed electric filed (PEF) technology is an efficient food processing technique in
which short electricity pulses are used for the inactivation of microbial population
present in the foods while at the same time imposing minimal injurious influence
on food quality [28]. To evade damage and avert off-flavour to the food commodity
from heat, treatment temperature is retained as low as possible. This technology is
recognized to offer enhanced food quality as it being a green technological approach
which reduces the unfavourable changes in quality food and nutrition, enhances the
safety and keeps the overall features of the food undamaged [29]. PEF technology’s
application varies widely in almost all the types of food of solid, liquid and semi-solid
state. It also includes application of high-voltage pulses intended for the inactivation
of microbes in dairy, poultry and other liquid foodstuffs. This technique is also appli￾cable in baking applications, processing of juices and soups which is very effective
in attaining prime quality and extended shelf life [30]. PEF like other green tech￾nologies is also accomplished for its energy and economic efficiency approaches.
It is therefore an effective substitute to the conventional processing techniques in
food supply chain. It is worthy to mention that PEF, being a non-thermal technique,
may not be restricted to the inactivation of microbes only but can also be used in
the delay of decay bringing chemical and biochemical reactions and simultaneously
withholding the valuable food components while processing in the food supply chain
[31].150 O. Yousuf and A. Singh
10.7.4 High-Pressure Processing
High-pressure processing (HPP) technology is an exceptional non-thermal tech￾nology for the processing of food and for confirming overall food quality and safety,
by the elimination of microorganisms [32]. HPP technology is effective in improving
the taste and texture of food, enhancing the nutritional and sensorial characteristic
of food besides causing an ample decline in microbial load [33]. In HPP, the food
commodity is exposed to the maximum pressures of 1400 MPa, although the working
pressures in the food processing ranges between 300 and 600 MPa, [34]. In the recent
years, the industries using the HPP for food processing has grown up broadly as this
approach is found suitable for fresh products. It is observed that the blend of mild
heat and high pressure causes inactivation of more fragile bacteria [35]. Sterilization
of heat subtle components like shellfish, flavourings and vitamins, while pasteur￾ization of fruit products, vegetables, meat, pickles, sauces, yoghurt, can be done
using the above technique. This technique is observed to leave no traces of toxicity,
rather reduces the processing time, maintains freshness, nutrients, flavour and colour
and destroys the vegetative bacteria and spores. This technique produces the unifor￾mity of treatment throughout the food product [36]. This green technology is thus a
good substitute to conventional processing methods and is very effective in shelf life
extension and improve the food quality and safety in the food supply chain.
10.7.5 Pulsed Light Technology
Pulsed light technology is one of the finest commercialized replacements to the
orthodox cleansing processes and own an extensive range of applications in food
processing technology. The prime significance of this technology is the decontam￾ination of food or packaging material, and alongside this, it also maintains texture,
nutrients and quality of the product as well [37]. This technique provides a germi￾cidal effect which is based on the principal of photochemical and photo thermal effect
and involves high-voltage electric pulses discharge of up to 70 kV/cm into the food
commodity located in in the middle of electrodes for a few seconds [38]. Pulsed light
is an evolving decontamination technique and a replacement of traditional pasteur￾ization and works effectively in decreasing the pests, pathogens and microorganisms
from food for attaining the safety and quality. Besides inactivation of food surface
microorganisms, this approach is also used for sterilization of packaging material
and the equipment as well. Sterilization on food surface is done using high intense
white light which is pulsed between 10–8 and 10–1 cycles per second [39]. It is a
non-thermal treatment with higher levels of energy, treated to inactivate bacterial
spores in addition to vegetative cells. It also minimizes the damaging consequence
of the thermal processing and chemical action on quality attributes. Application of
this method used in food processing emits one to 20 flashes per second of electromag￾netic energy which is utilized in sterilization of dairy products, water, vegetables,10 Green Technological Approaches for Food Quality and Safety … 151
equipment surface and cleanliness of packaging materials [40]. Pulsed light tech￾nique is projected for the future surface treatment of food products and packaging
material, guaranteeing the safer food products in the whole supply chain.
10.7.6 Ohmic Heating
Ohmic heating is a green technological approach wherein the thermal energy is
produced inside the food products during the processing. Contrasting to the conven￾tional food processing technique, ohmic heating is effectual in processing food with
large solid particulates. In this approach, food is located in between the equipment
electrodes and an electric current is passed through it. The food product, solid or
liquid, acts as an electrical resistance and gets heated up [41]. Heat is produced when
electric current is conducted through the food, transforming the electrical energy
into heat and destroying the microbes [42]. Application of this method in food prod￾ucts depends evidently on their electrical conductivity. This technique is pertinent
in various unit operations like dehydration, blanching, evaporation, value addition
and extraction [43]. It is presumed that with the help of ohmic heating, the expressed
foods could be preserved by heating the suspended solids and liquids at diverse
process streams and united later. One more property associated with this technique
is that the food product swiftly attains the higher temperature after this treatment
and cool off quickly as well, thus inhibiting the vitamin and nutrients loss while at
the same time destruction of microorganisms is evident [44]. This green technique
can be very effectively used in various processes of the food supply chain espe￾cially in baking, cooking, thawing, blanching, enhanced diffusion, electroporation,
sterilization of juice, and milk [45].
10.7.7 Ultrasound Technology
Ultrasound (US) is an effective green technology applied widely in food processing
operations. It is also called as supersonic technology for having the frequency greater
than 20 kHz. In food processing, the ultrasound of low-frequency is engaged in the
intensification of processes, while ultrasound with high frequency is utilized as an
analytical technique effective for the process monitoring, quality control and safety
considerations [46]. The feasibility of US technology has been extensively considered
and is found to possess the abilities of enhanced competence of processes, reduced
energy intake and to harvest better quality and safer food commodities [47]. Ultra￾sound when combined with reasonable heat aids in inactivation of microorganism. It
has an immense application in drying, usually done at low temperature reducing the
possibilities of degradation or oxidation in contrast to conventional methodology.
Ultrasound has probable use for emulsified foods, particularly where a product’s
rheological assets can be enhanced by ultrasound treatment. Heat transfer between152 O. Yousuf and A. Singh
the solid heated exterior and liquid is enhanced by roughly 30–60% by engaging
ultrasound technique [48]. Ultrasound is being used extensively in decontamina￾tion, emulsification, extraction, crystallization, inactivation of enzymes, viscosity
variation, coating, spraying, anti-fouling and de-foaming processes [49]. This is an
evolving technique which can display a praiseworthy role in the overall food quality
and safety features of the food products in the food supply chain.
10.7.8 Irradiation
Persistent increase in food loss due to manifestation, contamination and spoilage, and
rising distresses over food-borne diseases gave rise to emergence of the irradiation
technique. This process not only assists as a conservation technique for post-harvest
damages, owing to insect manifestation and premature germination, but also supports
in reducing the dependency on chemical pesticides [50]. For roots and tubers, germi￾nation is the chief reason of damages. Radiation processing proposes a substitute
to fumigation and certain additional treatments which is helpful in decreasing the
bacteria population [51]. The irradiation effect penetrates the product and eliminates
microorganisms that are found in the food products. Microbial and pathogen counts
can be greatly wilted by low-dose irradiation, deprived of disturbing the sensory
attributes [52]. Irradiation of vegetables and fruits is approved by US-FDA to a limit
of 1 kGy for disinfection. It is considered as an efficient, well-established and a
harmless processing technique [53]. Applications of this technique are very much
varied and usually include decontamination of dry vegetables, spices, grains, meat,
seafood, fruits, inhibition of root crop sprouts and bulbs, and sterilization of food￾stuffs like functional foods, honey and mushroom. It is a favourable technique that
can be utilized to boost the safety of food commodity [54]. Irradiation lengthens the
shelf life of several products by the annihilation of microorganisms, and therefore,
is an imperative approach in the food quality and safety of the food supply chain.
10.7.9 Active and Smart Packaging
Food packaging technology is an essential feature of the food processing sector. Food
quality and safety often gets compromised due to the microbial contamination and
other factors in the food supply chain. In order to avert these challenges and to impart
better food safety features in the food supply chain, newer food packaging approaches
play an active role. Over the time, several changes have taken place in the food
packaging system which has evolved from the customary containers to the present day
active and intelligent packaging systems [55]. Presently, active and smart packaging
techniques are in focus of food industry which can be efficiently used for imparting
quality and safety of the food products. An active packaging system not only contains
the product but also acts as an active hurdle in protecting the food product from the10 Green Technological Approaches for Food Quality and Safety … 153
external environmental issues. The active packaging system maintains the quality and
safety of the food product, hinders adversarial effects of environment, enhances shelf
life and in some cases improves the sensory characteristics of the food products [56].
Active packaging is an outstanding green technique in which the food, surroundings
and packaging interrelate together to augment the quality, safety and shelf life of the
food product.
In addition to active packaging, smart packaging is also an innovative technology
which not only enhances the quality and the safety of food products but also keeps
consumers updated about the packed food product [57]. Active and smart packaging
technique is customary with the combination of various active components in the
packaging material which are able to absorb or release the constituents in or out
of the food product or the adjacent space. Packaging system comprises of active
compounds which include absorbers of oxygen, water, ethylene, carbon dioxide and
other several compounds [58]. Active packaging contains numerous gas absorbents
and emitters and is considered as the significant packaging means for food products.
The application of an active system having an engineered package to scavenge the
molecules as O2, CO2 and ethylene finds use in the fruit and vegetable segment as
well as the other food products throughout the supply chain [59].
10.7.10 Food Traceability
Traceability is the techniques of getting to know about the whereabouts of food
product in the food supply chain. In other words traceability gives the exact docu￾mented transparency of the commodity in the food supply chain [60]. As per Codex
Alimantarius Commission (CAC), “Traceability is the ability to follow the move￾ment of the food product though the specified stages of production, processing and
distribution” [61]. On the other hand, ISO standard 22005:2007 defines food trace￾ability as a technical tool to determine the history or location of the product or its
relevant components. Traceability is used to determine both forward as well as the
backward linkages of food supply chain in terms of tracing and tracking [62]. Tracing
determines backward process which deals with the information and record related
to the origin of the product while tracking determines the forward process which
deals with the identification of consumers or the end users of the product [63]. In
both the cases of tracing and tracking, vital supervisory assessments are to be made
in the whole supply chain for not only maintaining the quality and safety of the food
products but also for the overall improvement of the supply chain [64].
Traceability is very effective in regulating and checking out the behaviour and
condition of the product in the chain and will thus be very helpful in attaining the
quality and safety of food products. Besides this, traceability will surely help in
maintaining the transparency, reduces the risk related to food safety, food fraud
identification, decreased food waste and can also manage the human errors in food
supply chain [65]. In the supply chain contemporary technologies like information
and communication technology, location mapping technology, sensor technology,154 O. Yousuf and A. Singh
wireless technology, and internet technology can be used by the stakeholders of the
chain for accessing the food traceability. This will not only serve for achieving the
quality and safety of the products but will also act as the preventive management
system at times of risks and hazards which in turn will help for timely recall if needed
[66]. Bar codes, sensors, QR codes and radio frequency tags are now more often used
for the identification of the products, need is for the inaction of such techniques in
whole chain for achieving the objectives of traceability in the food supply chain [67].
10.8 Future Outlook
In the recent years, the application of micro and nanotechnology is on an increasing
trend in the food processing sector. It is therefore expected that they will play an
imperative role in the whole food supply chain in the near future. Besides this,
encouraging results and applications are also reported in the field of food packaging.
Keeping this thing in mind, incorporation of micro and nanotechnology with the
amalgamation of encapsulation technology in the food packaging sector will be of
immense importance in the overall food supply chain. Another vital aspect which
needs to be considered in the food supply chain is the waste management at all the
points of the chain. Usually, reuse, recycle and recover are the common terms used in
this context, but it is very essential to develop a suitable waste management system
integrated with technological approaches for an overall sustainable development. In
the supply chain, continuous valuation of the food product is very necessary. This
makes traceability an important technique which is not only used for the constant
check of product but will surely help in the management of the chain as well. Need
is for the augmentation of traceability technique with the merger of newer systems
of block chain, Internet of Things and information and communication technology.
Furthermore, the regulation of these technological approaches for different food
products in various supply chains will play a considerable role in standardizing
the protocols for the food quality and safety in food supply chains. It is thus quiet
obvious that for the overall development of an effective and efficient food supply
chain, highly collaborative effort between the stakeholders of the chain in terms of
product design, sourcing, logistics, storage and waste management is must. It will
surely help in achieving the objective of quality and safety of the food products in the
food supply chain as these approaches are often found faster, selective and sustainable
then conventional ones. Application of the innovative and upcoming technological
approaches in the food supply chain will not only improve the quality and safety
of the food products but will surely provide better opportunities for stakeholders in
achieving the better prospects in terms of economics and at the same time developing
a feasible equilibrium of environment, market and the food supply chain.10 Green Technological Approaches for Food Quality and Safety … 155
10.9 Conclusion
Attainment of the feasible stability in the food supply chain along with the improved
quality and safety of the food products is a tedious task. To address these apprehen￾sions, we look towards the incorporation of the green technological approaches to
swap the traditional processing techniques in the food supply chain. It is very obvious
that while keeping the knowledge about the quality and safety of the food products
in the food supply chain, integration of the newer green technological approaches
should be appropriate with an added acquaintance of food research, regional study,
traditional practices, environmental issues and the regulations linked with the supply
chain. The main motive for implementing these green technological approaches is
not only to guarantee the microbial decline on the commodity at various stages of
supply chain but also the superior and safer standard of the food produced. Incorpo￾rating novel techniques at various stages of the food supply chain, integrated with the
improved food inspection approaches, upgraded laboratory services and better food
control implementation programmes will definitely lead to the guarantee of safety
and quality in the complete food supply chain. It is conclusive to report that a sustain￾able food supply chain with the better quality and safety of the food products can be
achieved with the incorporation of innovative green technological approaches in an
integrated and collaborative food supply chain. With the advent of these advance￾ments, there will be a significant improvement in the effectiveness of the food supply
chain. It is also clear that the application of these green technological approaches will
surely reduce the operational costs and proliferate the food supply chain flexibility.
It is thus evident that the incorporation of green technological approaches combined
with the standard food laws and regulations along with the emerging techniques of
traceability and block chain are going to make an impact on an overall working of
the food supply chain.
References
1. Kehoe B (2006) Integrating the supply chain. Mater Manag Health Care 15(8):26–29
2. Yousuf O, Titikshya S, Singh A (2018) Technological aspects for assuring food safety in food
production chain 36:953–958
3. Boye JI, Arcand Y (2013) Current trends in green technologies in food production and
processing. Food Eng Rev 5(1):1–17. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12393-012-9062-z
4. López-Pedrouso M, Díaz-Reinoso B, Lorenzo JM, Cravotto G, Barba FJ, Moure A, Domínguez
H, Franco D (2019) Green technologies for food processing: principal considerations. In:
Innovative thermal and non-thermal processing, bioaccessibility and bioavailability of nutrients
and bioactive compounds. Elsevier Inc. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-814174-8.00003-2
5. Grunert KG (2005) Food quality and safety: consumer perception and demand. Eur Rev Agric
Econ 32(3):369–391. https://doi.org/10.1093/eurrag/jbi011
6. Trienekens J, Zuurbier P (2008) Quality and safety standards in the food industry, developments
and challenges. Int J Prod Econ 113(1):107–122. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2007.02.050
7. Pingali PL (2012) Green revolution: impacts, limits, and the path ahead. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 109(31):12302–12308. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0912953109156 O. Yousuf and A. Singh
8. Chemat F, Rombaut N, Meullemiestre A, Turk M, Perino S, Fabiano-Tixier AS, Abert-Vian
M (2017) Review of green food processing techniques. Preservation, transformation, and
extraction. Innov Food Sci Emerg Technol 41:357–377. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ifset.2017.
04.016
9. Turi A, Goncalves G, Mocan M (2014) Challenges and competitiveness indicators for the
sustainable development of the supply chain in food industry. Procedia Soc Behav Sci 124:133–
141. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sbspro.2014.02.469
10. Bendekovi´c J, Naletina D, Nola I (2015) Food safety and food quality in the supply chain.
https://bib.irb.hr/datoteka/786708.TP_Bendekovic_Naletina_Nola.pdf
11. Yousuf O, Titikshya S, Singh A (2018) Fresh-cut fruits and vegetables: scope in developing
countries and approaches to improve quality and safety 6(3):2226–2229. https://www.resear
chgate.net/publication/326092027
12. Suslow TV, Oria MP, Beuchat LR, Garrett EH, Parish ME, Harris LJ, Farber JN, Busta FF
(2003) Production practices as risk factors in microbial food safety of fresh and fresh-cut
produce. Compre Rev Food Sci Food Saf 2(1 SUPPL.):38–77. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1541-
4337.2003.tb00030.x
13. Manning L (2007) Food safety and brand equity. British Food J 109(7):496–510. https://doi.
org/10.1108/00070700710761491
14. Clarke T, Boersma M (2017) The governance of global value chains: unresolved human rights,
environmental and ethical dilemmas in the apple supply chain. J Bus Ethics 143(1):111–131.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10551-015-2781-3
15. Blandford D, Burrell A, Hall A, Stevens C (2011) Foreword-3 a green growth strategy for food
and agriculture: preliminary report© Oecd 2011. www.oecd.org/agriculture/greengrowth
16. Boye JI, Arcand Y (2012) Erratum: green technologies in food production and processing (green
technologies in food production and processing). Food Eng Ser. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-
1-4614-1587-9
17. Ho JC, Shalishali MK, Tseng TL, Ang D (2009) Opportunities in green supply chain
management. Coast Bus J 8(1):18–31
18. Hobbs RJ, Arico S, Aronson J, Baron JS, Bridgewater P, Cramer VA, Epstein PR, Ewel JJ,
Klink CA, Lugo AE, Norton D, Ojima D, Richardson DM, Sanderson EW, Valladares F, Vilà
M, Zamora R, Zobel M (2006) Novel ecosystems: theoretical and management aspects of the
new ecological world order. Glob Ecol Biogeogr 15(1):1–7. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1466-
822X.2006.00212.x
19. Jiménez-Sánchez C, Lozano-Sánchez J, Segura-Carretero A, Fernández-Gutiérrez A (2017)
Alternatives to conventional thermal treatments in fruit-juice processing. Part 1: techniques
and applications. Crit Rev Food Sci Nutrit 57(3):501–523. https://doi.org/10.1080/10408398.
2013.867828
20. Korich DG, Mead JR, Madore MS, Sinclair NA, Sterling CR (1990) Effects of ozone, chlorine
dioxide, chlorine, and monochloramine on Cryptosporidium parvum oocyst viability. Appl
Environ Microbiol 56(5):1423–1428. https://doi.org/10.1128/aem.56.5.1423-1428.1990
21. Sheldon BW, Brown AL (1986) Efficacy of ozone as a disinfectant for poultry carcasses and
chill water. J Food Sci 51(2):305–309. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2621.1986.tb11116.x
22. Oyama ST (2000) Chemical and catalytic properties of ozone. Catal Rev Sci Eng 42(3):279–
322. https://doi.org/10.1081/CR-100100263
23. Karaca H (2010) Use of ozone in the citrus industry. Ozone Sci Eng 32(2):122–129. https://
doi.org/10.1080/01919510903520605
24. Naito S (1991) Studies on utilization of ozone in food preservation. Nippon Shokuhin Kogyo
Gakkaishi 38(4):360–367. https://doi.org/10.3136/nskkk1962.38.360
25. ¸Stef˘anoiu G-A, T˘anase EE, Mitelu¸t AC, Popa ME (2016) Unconventional treatments of food:
microwave vs radiofrequency. Agric Agric Sci Procedia 10:503–510. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.aaspro.2016.09.024
26. Alonso AA, Banga JR (1998) Optimal control of microwave H eating using
27. Barba FJ, Roselló-Soto E, Marszałek K, Bursa´c Kovaˇcevi´c D, Režek Jambrak A, Lorenzo JM,
Chemat F, Putnik P (2019) Green food processing: concepts, strategies, and tools. Green Food
Process Tech 1–21. https://doi.org/10.1016/b978-0-12-815353-6.00001-x10 Green Technological Approaches for Food Quality and Safety … 157
28. Pal M (2017) Pulsed electric field processing: an emerging technology for food preservation.
J Exp Food Chem 03(02):10–12. https://doi.org/10.4172/2472-0542.1000126
29. Yogesh K (2016) Pulsed electric field processing of egg products: a review. J Food Sci Technol
53(2):934–945. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13197-015-2061-3
30. Toepfl S, Heinz V, Knorr D (2006) Application of pulsed electric fields in liquid processing
31. Abbas Syed Q (2017) Pulsed electric field technology in food preservation: a review. J Nutr
Health Food Eng 6(6):168–172. https://doi.org/10.15406/jnhfe.2017.06.00219
32. Amaro-Blanco G, Delgado-Adámez J, Martín MJ, Ramírez R (2018) Active packaging using
an olive leaf extract and high pressure processing for the preservation of sliced dry-cured
shoulders from Iberian pigs. Innov Food Sci Emerg Technol 45:1–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ifset.2017.09.017
33. Balasubramaniam VM, Barbosa-Cánovas GV, Lelieveld HLM (2016) High-pressure
processing equipment for the food industry. Food Eng Series 39–65. https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-1-4939-3234-4_3
34. Barba FJ, Esteve MJ, Frígola A (2012) High pressure treatment effect on physicochemical and
nutritional properties of fluid foods during storage: a review. Compre Rev Food Sci Food Saf
11(3):307–322. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1541-4337.2012.00185.x
35. Lou F, Neetoo H, Chen H, Li J (2015) High hydrostatic pressure processing: a promising
nonthermal technology to inactivate viruses in high-risk foods. Annu Rev Food Sci Technol
6:389–409. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-food-072514-104609
36. Considine KM, Kelly AL, Fitzgerald GF, Hill C, Sleator RD (2008) High-pressure processing—
effects on microbial food safety and food quality. FEMS Microbiol Lett 281(1):1–9. https://
doi.org/10.1111/j.1574-6968.2008.01084.x
37. Mandal R, Mohammadi X, Wiktor A, Singh A, Singh AP (2020) Applications of pulsed light
decontamination technology in food processing: an overview. Appl Sci (Switzerland) 10(10).
https://doi.org/10.3390/app10103606
38. Angersbach A, Heinz V, Knorr D (2000) Effects of pulsed electric fields on cell membranes
in real food systems. Innov Food Sci Emerg Technol 1(2):135–149. https://doi.org/10.1016/
S1466-8564(00)00010-2
39. Knorr D, Angersbach A, Eshtiaghi MN, Heinz V, Lee DU (2001) Processing concepts based
on high intensity electric field pulses. Trends Food Sci Technol 12(3–4):129–135. https://doi.
org/10.1016/S0924-2244(01)00069-3
40. Abida J, Rayees B, Masoodi FA (2014) Pulsed light technology: a novel method for food
preservation. Int Food Res J 21(3):839–848
41. Varghese KS, Pandey MC, Radhakrishna K, Bawa AS (2014) Technology, applications and
modelling of ohmic heating: a review. J Food Sci Technol 51(10):2304–2317. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s13197-012-0710-3
42. Cappato LP, Ferreira MVS, Guimaraes JT, Portela JB, Costa ALR, Freitas MQ, Cunha RL,
Oliveira CAF, Mercali GD, Marzack LDF, Cruz AG (2017) Ohmic heating in dairy processing:
relevant aspects for safety and quality. Trends Food Sci Technol 62:104–112. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.tifs.2017.01.010
43. Kim SS, Kang DH (2015) Effect of milk fat content on the performance of ohmic heating
for inactivation of Escherichia coli O157:H7, Salmonella enterica Serovar Typhimurium and
Listeria monocytogenes. J Appl Microbiol 119(2):475–486. https://doi.org/10.1111/jam.12867
44. Roohinejad S, Koubaa M, Greiner R, Mallikarjunan K (2019) Effect of emerging processing
methods on the food quality. In: Effect of emerging processing methods on the food quality.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-18191-8
45. Lee SY, Sagong HG, Ryu S, Kang DH (2012) Effect of continuous ohmic heating to inactivate
Escherichia coli O157: H7, Salmonella typhimurium and Listeria monocytogenes in orange
juice and tomato juice. J Appl Microbiol 112(4):723–731. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2672.
2012.05247.x
46. Chemat F, Zill-E-Huma, Khan MK (2011) Applications of ultrasound in food technology:
processing, preservation and extraction. Ultrasonics Sonochem 18(4):813–835. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.ultsonch.2010.11.023158 O. Yousuf and A. Singh
47. Kentish S, Feng H (2014) Applications of power ultrasound in food processing. Annu Rev
Food Sci Technol 5(1):263–284. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-food-030212-182537
48. Khan MK, Chemat F (2011) Application of low and high power ultrasound in food analysis.
Anal Chem Lett 1(1):103–114. https://doi.org/10.1080/22297928.2011.10648208
49. Majid I, Nayik GA, Nanda V (2015) Ultrasonication and food technology: a review. Cogent
Food Agric 1(1). https://doi.org/10.1080/23311932.2015.1071022
50. Mari M, Neri F, Bertolini P (2008) Novel approaches to prevent and control postharvest diseases
of fruits. Stewart Postharvest Rev 3(6):1–7. https://doi.org/10.2212/spr.2007.6.4
51. Del Mastro NL (2011) Role of irradiation treatment in the food industry. Int J Nuclear Gov
Econ Ecol 3(3):266. https://doi.org/10.1504/ijngee.2011.042213
52. Oms-Oliu G, Martín-Belloso O, Soliva-Fortuny R (2010) Pulsed light treatments for food
preservation: a review. Food Bioprocess Technol 3(1):13–23. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11947-
008-0147-x
53. Kume T, Furuta M, Todoriki S, Uenoyama N, Kobayashi Y (2009) Status of food irradiation
in the world. Radiat Phys Chem 78(3):222–226. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.radphyschem.2008.
09.009
54. Guerrero-Beltrán JA, Barbosa-Cánovas GV (2004) Review: advantages and limitations on
processing foods by UV light. Food Sci Technol Int 10(3):137–147. https://doi.org/10.1177/
1082013204044359
55. Müller P, Schmid M (2019) Intelligent packaging in the food sector: a brief overview. Foods
8(1). https://doi.org/10.3390/foods8010016
56. Hosseinnejad M (2014) Active packaging for food applications—a review 2(4):1174–1180
57. O’Grady MN, Kerry JP (2008) Smart packaging technologies and their application in conven￾tional meat packaging systems. Meat Biotech 425–451. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-0-387-
79382-5_19
58. Camo J, Beltrán JA, Roncalés P (2008) Extension of the display life of lamb with an antioxidant
active packaging. Meat Sci 80(4):1086–1091. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.meatsci.2008.04.031
59. Ghoshal G (2018) Recent trends in active, smart, and intelligent packaging for food products.
In: Food packaging and preservation. Elsevier Inc. https://doi.org/10.1016/b978-0-12-811516-
9.00010-5
60. Opara LU,Mazaud F (2001) Food traceability from field to plate. Outlook Agric 30(4):239–247.
https://doi.org/10.5367/000000001101293724
61. FAO (2018) Codex alimentarius, principles for traceability/product tracing as a tool within
a food inspection and certification system. Cac/Gl 1(1):1–423. http://scholar.google.com/
scholar?hl=en&btnG=Search&q=intitle:PRINCIPLES+FOR+TRACEABILITY+/+PRO
DUCT+TRACING+AS+A+TOOL+WITHIN+A+FOOD+INSPECTION+AND+CERTIF
ICATION+SYSTEM#0
62. Petersen A, Green D (2007) Seafood traceability: a practical guide for the U.S. industry. http://
seafood.oregonstate.edu/.pdfLinks/SeafoodTraceability-APracticalGuide.pdf
63. Bechini A, Cimino MGCA, Marcelloni F, Tomasi A (2008) Patterns and technologies
for enabling supply chain traceability through collaborative e-business. Inf Softw Technol
50(4):342–359. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.infsof.2007.02.017
64. Rábade LA, Alfaro JA (2006) Buyer-supplier relationship’s influence on traceability imple￾mentation in the vegetable industry. J Purch Supply Manag 12(1):39–50. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.pursup.2006.02.003
65. Aung MM, Chang YS (2014) Traceability in a food supply chain: safety and quality
perspectives. Food Control 39(1):172–184. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodcont.2013.11.007
66. Bhat R, Jõudu I (2019) Emerging issues and challenges in agri-food supply chain. Sustain Food
Supply Chains Plan Des Control Interdisc Methodol 23–37. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-
12-813411-5.00002-8
67. Feng H, Wang X, Duan Y, Zhang J, Zhang X (2020) Applying blockchain technology to
improve agri-food traceability: a review of development methods, benefits and challenges. J
Clean Prod 260. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2020.121031Chapter 11
Communicative Packaging Systems
for Safety of Food Products
Pushpendra Kumar, Anand Kishore, Khushbu Kumari, and Rahul S Mor
Abstract The packaging system protects the food content from moisture, oxida￾tion, biological deterioration, and physical damage and facilitates product distribu￾tion throughout the supply chain. It is of the utmost importance to select the suit￾able packaging material, right packaging technique, and distribution system to meet
the consumer demand. The traditional packaging system facilitates the distribution
system by performing the basic function of containment, protection, preservation,
and communication. Nowadays, food industry and consumers are more concerned
about the product’s freshness and safety apart from containment and protection. This
chapter entails that a communication-based packaging system is an important tech￾nique that improves or indicates product safety in the supply chain using smart devices
in the packaging system. It monitors the changes in the environments and communi￾cates the condition of food products throughout the supply chain. Smart devices may
include various indicators, sensors, radio frequency identification tags, bar codes,
and other techniques that improve food safety and quality. These devices establish a
chain of responsibility throughout the food supply chain and build a more transparent
distribution system and transmit information, rectifying the existing challenges and
improving food safety.
Keywords Communicative packaging · Smart packaging indicator · Food safety · Sensors · RFID
P. Kumar · A. Kishore (B) · R. S Mor
Department of Food Engineering, National Institute of Food Technology Entrepreneurship and
Management, Kundli (Sonepat) 131028, India
K. Kumari
National Dairy Research Institute, Karnal, India
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2022
R. S Mor et al. (eds.), Operations and Supply Chain Management in the Food Industry,
Lecture Notes in Management and Industrial Engineering,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-16-5555-5_12
159160 P. Kumar et al.
11.1 Introduction
There are four primary functions of a packaging system involving containment,
protection, convenience, and communication. Protection of the food materials is
one of the primary functions of packaging materials. In general, all the packaging
materials protect the food material from the external environment to ensure that the
food product is safe and fit for consumption and is not contaminated by external
materials [1]. Moreover, these functions are connected; the food packaging industry
has sought additional functions to raise the regulatory body’s concern and meet
the consumer demands for food safety in the supply chain and storage. Food busi￾ness operators implement GAP and HACCP to ensure that these hazards do not
occur in any processing stages [2]. Once the product leaves the processing site,
there are possibilities that these hazards will occur in food from the environment,
but most of the time, these are not monitored as the facility lacks to check them.
The possible safety concerns may be contamination with physical hazards, chemical
changes in food, migration from the packaging materials, and the rise of micro￾bial load. A communicative-based packaging system can play an important role
in achieving a safe food supply chain. A communicative-based packaging system
monitors the condition of packaged food, carries basic information during distribu￾tion, and can convey information about its quality. It has functions like sensing,
recording, detecting, tracking, and communicating to facilitate decision making
to extend shelf life and warn about possible problems [3]. This chapter entails
various communicative-based smart packaging systems, smart packaging devices,
data layers, data processing, and wireless communication network, highlighting
the research involved in food product safety. These smart package devices may be
attached to primary packaging or secondary packaging to communicate throughout
the supply chain.
11.2 Packaging System for Microorganisms and Toxins
Detector
Foodborne diseases generally occur due to contamination of food with microorgan￾isms and are a major threat to consumers. These microorganisms produce toxins or
ill effects if ingested by consumers. It requires strict monitoring of food products in
the supply chain and storage. Therefore, many modifications in the packaging have
taken place to identify the growth of microorganisms. The potential target molecules
for microorganisms and toxins covers organic acids (lactic and acetic acids), glucose,
ethanol, volatile nitrogen compounds (ammonia, dimethylamine, trimethylamine),
biogenic compounds (histamine, carbon dioxide, ATP-degradation products), and
sulfuric compounds, etc [4]. The decrease or increase of the target compounds is
used as an indication of the quality of food. Most of the spoilage indicators are11 Communicative Packaging Systems for Safety of Food Products 161
based on color changes due to microbial metabolites produced from spoilage. Pack￾aging systems that indicate a clear visible readout can be employed in such cased
for warning the consumer about safety. The pH dyes-based indicators are frequently
used in the food packaging industry to detect spoilage of food products. A typical
example is a colorimetric mixed-pH dye-based indicator developed by Rukchon et al.
[5] to monitor skinless chicken breast spoilage on the package. The amount of CO2
and total color difference of the indicators correlate with the spoilage of chicken.
The pH dye reagents include bromothymol blue, methyl red, bromocresol green,
xylenol blue, bromocresol purple, cresol red, phenol red, and alizarin which are
generally used for indicators. Gas sensors may also be used for the indication of the
quality of food products. The various indicators are studied for gases, but gas sensors
employ changes in the sensor’s electrical properties for changes in food to correlate
the decay process better. A paper-based electrical gas sensor (PEGS) was developed
in a study by Barandun et al. [6] for sensing water-soluble gases using cellulose
paper and carbon ink. The maximum sensitivity of PEGS was for NH3 followed by
trimethylamine and CO2, while CO and H2S were least detectable. There was an
increase in the conductance of PEGS when the concentration of NH3 was increased.
The sensor’s sensitivity was affected by environmental RH. The sensor’s increased
conductance is attributed to an increase in the concentration of NH3, trimethylamine,
and dimethylamine, which correlated with the microbial load of the meat. The elec￾tronic nose and biosensor also can communicate the quality of food products during
the supply chain.
11.3 Packaging System for Tampering
Tampering can be defined as the change in the package condition from external
forces, which may be intentional or unintentional. In general, it is the question of
integrity and safety of the package. Food products are carefully sealed in packaging
material before dispatching them from the company. During transit, the package
may get damaged from a pointed object, or a person opens it and closes it back.
If a person intentionally opens a package, it would help to acknowledge that it has
tampered and might not be safe. Due to these reasons, there is a need for a packaging
system to detect tampering. It will ensure that the food is safe and has not been
contaminated intentionally or unintentionally from the external environment. It has
a wide application for MAP and other packaged food.
For advanced packaging systems, there is continuous development in this cate￾gory of packaging. Gas indicators are used to detect package leaks, sealing integrity
and quality of food products. Most of the gas indicators are based on color change,
transparency, and pH change. The most widely used oxygen indicator is composed
of redox dyes and strong reducing agents—the conventional oxygen indicator films
based on synthetic and artificial components. A two-compartment arrangement was
used by Won et al. [7] for developing a tampering indicator using natural compounds
(laccase, guaiacol, and cysteine). Laccase in one compartment and guaiacol and162 P. Kumar et al.
cysteine were kept in wells of the indicator. The indicator containing laccase (1
U/mL), guaiacol (5 mM), and cysteine (5 mM) was evaluated at different concentra￾tions of oxygen (1, 10, and 21), which showed a maximum color difference at 21%
oxygen after 2 h of tampering. The rate of color change increased with increasing
oxygen concentration. Vu and Won [8] made a colorimetric oxygen indicator film
with carrageenan and redox dyes to reduce dye leakage with water. Carrageenan was
employed at 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, and 0.5% in the films using dip coating. Three different
redox dyes, methylene blue (MB), azure A (AA), and thionine (Th), were used for
indicator films. Leaching studies of the film indicate that the dye leaching from the
carrageenan films was very low compared to zein-based reference films subjected to
electrostatic bonding between carrageenan (anionic) and dye (cationic). Upon UV
irradiation, MB/TiO2/glycerol/carrageenan-based films were completely bleached in
4 min with a decreased rate for films with higher concentration. The film with 0.2%
carrageenan recovered in 8 h in the presence of the oxygen at ambient condition.
These carrageenan-based colorimetric oxygen indicator films can be utilized in the
MAP products to maintain low oxygen levels, indicating the package’s poor seal
or tampering. Furthermore, the kinetic indicator study is needed to understand the
effect of oxygen level on the indicator recovery.
CO2 concentration also gives an idea about the tampering or package leak. Choi
and Han [9] developed a CO2 indicator utilizing sodium caseinate and pectin solu￾tion for real-time monitoring of food quality based on transparency and pH. Sodium
caseinate tends to agglomerate at lower pH, which changes its transparency. Pectin
further lowers the agglomeration point as their zeta-potential and isoelectric point is
changed. In the presence of CO2, there is a reduction in the solution’s pH, which can
be inferred from the solution transparency. As most of the deterioration process is
assisted by microbial growth in the substrate, which increases the CO2 concentration,
this solution can potentially detect the CO2. The indicator was used to determine the
quality of the kimchi at room temperature for five days. As there was the growth
of Lactic acid bacteria during storage, the pH changed and subsequently, the trans￾parency altered due to a rise in CO2 concentration. In many cases, CO2 rise also
occurs due to overripe products or fermentation. A similar principle for developing
CO2 indicator was utilized by Lee and Ko [10] with whey protein isolate. Whey
protein isolate solution tends to alter its turbidity due to aggregation upon a change
in pH below 6.0 due to transition at isoelectric point. A lower concentration of the
whey protein isolates favored a steep decrease in the pH and turbidity in a 100%
CO2 environment. A 0.3% whey protein isolate solution used in the sachet showed
a pH transition from 7.05 to 5.50 and transparency from 71.1 to 12.6% in 100 min
under a 100% CO2 environment. Jung et al. [11] indicated that the pH decreased due
to reaction with the CO2 into the headspace for the solution transparency. Chitosan￾based CO2 indicator includes, which is turbid at pH 7.0 and changes to transparent
at low pH due to chitosan dissolution. 2-amino 2-methyl 1-propanol (AMP) was
incorporated in an indicator to control the rate of transition of chitosan dissolution.
The indicator behaves significantly different at different temperatures. At 10 °C,
lactic acid bacteria’s growth during storage was delayed, which took 9 days to reach
pH 4.0 compared to 10 °C storage. Optimum ripening of kimchi (pH 4.0–4.2 and11 Communicative Packaging Systems for Safety of Food Products 163
titrable acidity 0.4–0.8%) was achieved in 1 day and 5 days at 20 and 10 °C, which
directly correlated with the transparency of the indicator solution. These indicators
are not exhaustively studied, but their study for different temperatures and CO2 levels
improves these indicators’ functionality. Furthermore, these have a great potential to
be used as an indicator to communicate about the package tempering.
11.3.1 Time–Temperature Indicator-Based Packaging System
The temperature has a significant effect on the quality and shelf life of the food
product. A time–temperature indicator (TTI) is a device that is intended to record
the temperature history of the product after production [12]. TTI devices are small
adhesive labels integrated onto food containers or individual packages to monitor
food product quality during distribution and storage. The most common TTI is based
on deformation, color movement, or color development with temperature change
in the supply chain. TTI generally reflects partial or complete temperature history,
which can also reflect on food product safety. An elevation in the temperature during
transportation accelerates the growth of microorganisms in the food product. These
microorganisms pose a threat to human safety as many of them are responsible
for foodborne illnesses. TTI can be classified into six categories based on their
mechanism [13]:
1. Diffusion-based TTI
2. Microbial TTI
3. Enzymatic TTI
4. Polymer-based TTI
5. Photochemical TTI
6. Electronic TTI.
TTI is dependent on temperature, and its indication changes upon temperature
change. Hence, it becomes an important aspect to calculate the activation energy of
these TTI to implement with the type of food that matches TTI. Furthermore, there
should be alignment in the endpoint of TTI with the end of food product shelf life
[14].
Diffusion-based TTI incorporates material that flows depending on the temper￾ature of the storage. During distribution and storage of perishable food products,
diffusion-based TTI systems can be an important tool for monitoring microbial
quality and temperature abuse. A diffusion-based TTI with isopropyl palmitate (IPP)
was studied by Kim et al. [15] for the microbiological quality of non-pasteurized
angelica juice during storage. The diffusion of IPP in mm was studied and modeled
isothermally over a range on temperature (15, 20, 25, 30, 35 °C) and verified at 13,
23, and 33 °C. This TTI was used at non-pasteurized angelica juice at 5, 15, and
25 °C for 48 h. Microbial growth was not favored at 5 °C. 6 log cgu/mL was taken
as critical and for 15 °C, 9.7 mm was covered in 36.6 h and for 25 °C, 7.2 mm
was covered in 12.5 h by TTI to reach critical growth. Dynamic temperature storage164 P. Kumar et al.
study showed a distance of 7.6 mm in 27.4 h. Hence, IPP diffusion of 7 mm is set for
the threshold for microbial spoilage. Isopropyl palmitate diffusion showed similar
increases in microbial growth after 12 h.
Microbial-based TTI prevails over other TTI as these give more accurate results.
Kim et al. [16] optimized pH-indicator to be used with lactic acid bacteria-based
TTI. Out of 5 pH indicators, bromocresol green was the best based on maximum
color change, E and response function F(x) when tested at 37 °C followed by
bromocresol purple, bromophenol blue, chlorophenol red and congo red. The TTI
exhibited activation energy for 4 microbial strains of lactobacillus between 103.88
and 116.35 kJ/mol indicated that it could be used for various foods depending on
their spoilage characteristics.
Enzymatic TTI utilizes enzymes that react with a substrate at a temperature￾dependent rate. An enzymatic TTI was developed by Brizio and Prentice [17] based
on the activity of α-amylase. Starch and iodine form a dark blue color complex. This
was utilized to verify that the ham was properly pasteurized or not. When starch is
heated, it is converted into maltose by the activity of α-amylase and as the concen￾tration of the starch depletes, the dark blue complex turns whitish-yellow. Hence,
heating the ham for the desired time was analogous to the complex color degrada￾tion, a suitable enzymatic TTI to ensure ham’s pasteurization. A concentration of
6.5% of α-amylase was optimum for use as it coincides with the ham pasteurization
and even after 4 months, this TTI works fine if stored in refrigerated condition. In a
recent study, Wu et al. [18] developed a TTI in which urease reacts with carbamide
to produce carbamic acid and ammonia. This results in increased solution pH and
phenol red, a pH-dependent dye, and its color changes from yellow to red. TTI
has activation energy (Ea) of 23.05 ± 1.15 kJ/mol for a temperature range (5, 10,
15, 20, 25, and 30 °C), which can be used with foods that exhibit similar spoilage
characteristics.
A polymer-based TTI employs a polymer matrix for making TTI. Lee and Shin
[19] studied the polymer-based TTI to determine activation energy. The TTI was
prepared from 4,4
-bis(2-benzoxazolyl) stilbene (BBS) chromophores and commer￾cial polymer TOPAS 5013, a copolymer of ethylene and norbornene. Beyond the
polymer’s glass transition temperature, irreversible phase separation occurs, which
aggregates the dye resulting in the change in color of TTI. 1 and 2% BBS exhib￾ited noticeable color change above the 140 °C. Kinetic modeling of the TTI gave
activation energy of 185.67 and 179.29 kJ/mol. The TTI is suitable to use for retort
processing, baking, and confectionery processing purposes.
An electrical-based TTI measures electric properties such as conductivity, resis￾tance, etc. of substances that vary with time and temperature. Wan and Knoll [20]
fabricated and investigated an electrochemical TTI. This contains a conductive acti￾vation layer and hydrophilic migration layer. TTI can be activated with the help of
0.5 M NaOH filled in the temperature-sensitive film that migrates from the doping
front of TTI. The length of migration fits with the conductance, which depends on the
storage temperature. This can avoid the food from temperature abuses by indicating
the end of shelf life upon storage.11 Communicative Packaging Systems for Safety of Food Products 165
11.3.2 Bar Codes for Packaging System
Bar codes are intended to deliver the information when scanned. Novel barcodes
are introduced in the food packaging to promote the quality of food. It incorporates
using chemical or enzymes which react and change its appearance concerning the
reference barcode. The code change is always subject to chemical or microbiological
alterations in the food. This is emerging as a promising visual indicator that can be
utilized to indicate the food safety. A US patent provides innovation that a dual
barcode was made to detect toxic contamination [21]. The bar code is prepared with
labeled antibodies and printed on the substrate formed with antigens. As the toxins
are produced upon the product storage, the toxin binds with the substrate antigens.
This leads to changes in the binding with the antibodies and the barcode changes,
indicating toxins or contamination that occurs upon scan. Different antigens can be
employed depending on the toxin or contaminant that is to be identified. A barcode
for sensing the volatile organic compounds (VOCs) in the food sample was also
developed recently. A filter paper-based colorimetric sensor array was developed by
Chen et al. [22], which use a mobile phone to diagnose chicken samples’ freshness
and safety at different temperature ranges. Barcode sensor fabricated in square shape
contains Nile red (rectangle), zinc-tetraphenylporphyrin (triangle), and methyl red
(circle). These three dyes change optical readout concerning emanating VOCs and pH
change for the chicken meat upon storage. The picture was taken from the phone and
processed in MATLAB for R, G, and B values. The intensity of the R was analyzed in
the principal component analysis because of its maximum sensitivity. A significant
daily and hourly change in the PCA was observed, which was distinguishable, and
it can be used to predict the freshness and aging at different temperatures. This
barcode sensor can be a very promising alternative for consumers as it does not
require expertise to evaluate the parameters. Further development for this sensor can
be employed by developing mobile software with the database in cloud storage for
different temperatures for different products. The development of novel barcodes
(such as toxins and metabolites-based) can further strengthen the application of
intelligent food packaging. Though there is continuous development for food product
safety, more novel barcodes with a wide application should be developed. Their easy
interface would help consumers read out the status of safety.
11.3.3 Radio Frequency Identification-Based Packaging
System
Radio frequency identification (RFID) deals with many existing food industry prob￾lems such as waste in the supply chain, empty shelves at retail outlets, temperature,
theft, and recall of dangerous products subjected to foodborne illnesses [23]. Every
food business operator should adopt product recall to ensure that safe food is deliv￾ering to consumers. In case of emergencies, these affected foods can be recalled166 P. Kumar et al.
and outbreaks can be stopped. The tags implemented may be active, semi-passive,
or passive. These devices operate in low frequency (125–134 kHz), high frequency
(13.56 MHz), ultrahigh frequency (860–960 MHz) and super high frequency (2.45–
5.8 GHz), but most of the time, high and ultrahigh frequencies are employed [24].
An active RFID continuously sends the information rather than the passive. RFID
employing temperature is useful in conforming to HACCP requirements [25].
RFID is meant to deliver the information from a distance irrespective of the
barcodes, giving information upon scanning. In development by Nambi et al. [26],
an RFID named Auburn University Detection and Food Safety (AUDFS) was made
using a biosensor interface operating at 13.56 MHz. This biosensor interface was
capable of identifying pathogens like Salmonella and Escherichia coli in the food.
This can be used widely in the food chains to minimize foodborne illness risk due
to pathogens. Hence, it may serve to deliver safe food to the consumers. RFID tech￾nology is widely used in integration with the TTI, humidity sensors, etc., directly
telling about the food package’s current situation. It will reduce the consumption
of spoiled food and waste and better control the supply chain by monitoring and
rectifying the existing challenges toward food safety and security. Huang et al. [27]
conceptualized using mobile diagnosis on RFID for food product safety. RFID oper￾ating at 13.56 MHz was employed with PDA in the mobile server with remote moni￾toring and diagnosis server. The remote diagnosis sensor records the food product
storage temperature changes using an X-chart and statistical process control. The
abnormality in the temperature was communicated and classified for its severity by
transmitting data between RFID and PDA attached to the phone. Various data can be
fused at a time to provide the severity of the abuse. The emergence of this concept in
RFID can help the various parties in the food supply chain monitor the food status
with temperature abuse.
In a recent development of critical temperature indicators (CTI), integrated RFID
tag microfluidics technology was used [28]. The indicator functionality depends
upon a solvent melting point. Dimethyl sulfoxide with erythrosine B is employed for
horizontal and vertical CTI to understand the working of solvent-based indicators.
Microfluidic technology-based CTI, when integrated with passive RFID tag operating
at 13.56 MHz with a reading range of 10 cm, using hexadecane as solvent (critical
temperature 19 °C), sends a signal to the attached PC/tablet interface as the critical
temperature is reached with the help of the reader. The RFID signal is based on
the change in the system’s resistance from 1 to 8 k as hexadecane melts. This
microfluidic CTI integrated RFID can be utilized for the supply chains with different
critical temperatures using different solvents. Another temperature and humidity
measurement-based passive RFID was developed by Le et al. [29] for analyzing the
freshness of the packaged vegetables. The reader can read the tag from a distance of
30 cm for temperature and humidity values. This can help determine the freshness
of the packaged vegetables. RFID employed in the food system can be very helpful
in continuously providing information at the interface. This can be used to assess
the food products’ quality and safety in the food supply chain. Moreover, various
losses concerning quality and microbial growth can be controlled with conveyed
information.11 Communicative Packaging Systems for Safety of Food Products 167
11.4 Conclusion
The food industry, consumers, and regulatory bodies are concerned about the safe
food and transparent supply chain system for food products. In this sense, a new
packaging system based on smart devices will continue to evolve to improve product
traceability and reduce food waste. The communicative-based packaging system has
evolved to provide better information at an optimized cost in the food supply chain and
storage. In this packaging system, inexpensive labels or tags of smart devices should
be attached to the package to monitor changes in food packages and communicate
the food product conditions throughout the supply chain. It is concluded that smart
devices-based food packaging is gaining importance for consumers, industry, and
researchers due to its potential to provide information to achieve the desired benefit
in food quality and safety enhancement. Various indicators, sensors, tags, and bar
codes are developing in recent years, which are being integrated into the packaging
systems to improve the food supply chain management. This type of packaging could
add several benefits to the system by enabling real-time monitoring, integrity, and
traceability of the products while moving along the supply chain. Future research
should direct on the manufacturing and deployment of smart devices in packaging
systems to enable a wider application to improve the food supply chain.
References
1. Robertson GL (2016) Food packaging: principles and practice. CRC Press
2. Kleter GA, Marvin HJP (2009) Indicators of emerging hazards and risks to food safety. Food
Chem Toxicol 47:1022–1039
3. Lee DS, Yam KL, Vanni LP (2017) Food packaging science and technology. CRC Press,
London
4. Han JH (2005) innovations in food packaging. Elsevier Academic Press
5. Rukchon C, Nopwinyuwong A, Trevanich S, Jinkarn T, Suppakul P (2014) Development of a
food spoilage indicator for monitoring freshness of skinless chicken breast. Talanta 130:547–
554
6. Barandun G, Soprani M, Naficy S, Grell M, Kasimatis M, Chiu LC, Ponzoni A, Guder F
(2019) Cellulose Fibers Enable Near-Zero-Cost Electrical Sensing of Water- Soluble Gases.
ACS Sensors 4:1662−1669
7. Won K, Jang NY, Jeon J (2016) A natural component-based oxygen indicator with in-pack
activation for intelligent food packaging. J Agric Food Chem 64(51):9675–9679
8. Vu CHT, Won K (2014) Leaching-resistant carrageenan-based colorimetric oxygen indicator
films for intelligent food packaging. J Agric Food Chem 62(23):7263–7267
9. Choi I, Han J (2018) Development of a novel on-off type carbon dioxide indicator based on
interaction between sodium caseinate and pectin. Food Hydrocolloids 80:15–23
10. Lee K, Ko S (2014) Proof-of-concept study of a whey protein isolate based carbon dioxide
indicator to measure the shelf-life of packaged foods. Food Sci Biotechnol 23(1):115–120
11. Jung J, Lee K, Puligundla P, Ko S (2013) Chitosan-based carbon dioxide indicator to
communicate the onset of kimchi ripening. LWT-Food Sci Technol 54:101–106
12. Giannakourou MC, Koutsoumanis K, Nychas GJE, Taoukis PS (2005) Field evaluation of the
application of time temperature integrators for monitoring fish quality in the chill chain. Int J
Food Microbiol 102(3):323–336. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2004.11.037168 P. Kumar et al.
13. Dan W, Juzhong P, Jianchu C, Xingqian Y, Donghong L (2014) Dynamic research of time￾temperature indicating system based on alkaline lipase. Appl Mech Mater 469:422–427
14. Wanihsuksombat C, Hongtrakul V, Suppakul P (2010) Development and characterization of a
prototype of a lactic acid-based time-temperature indicator for monitoring food product quality.
J Food Eng 100:427–434
15. Kim JU, Ghafoor K, Ahn J, Shin S, Lee SH, Shahbaz HM, Shin H-H, Kim S, Park J (2016)
Kinetic modeling and characterization of a diffusion-based time-temperature indicator (TTI)
for monitoring microbial quality of non-pasteurized angelica juice. LWT Food Sci Technol
67:143–150
16. KimMJ, Jung SW, Park HR, Lee SJ (2012) Selection of an optimum pH-indicator for developing
lactic acid bacteria-based time-temperature integrators (TTI). J Food Eng 113:471–478
17. Brizio APDR, Prentice C (2015) Development of aa new time temperature indicator for
enzymatic validation of pasteurization of meat products. J Food Sci 80(6):M1271–M1276
18. Wu D, Wang Y, Chen J, Ye X, Wu Q, Liu D, Ding T (2013) Preliminary study on time￾temperature indicator (TTI) system based on urease. Food Control 34:230–234
19. Lee BS, Shin HS (2012) Polymer-based time-temperature indicator for high temperature
processed food products. Food Sci Biotechnol 21(5):1483–1487
20. Wan X, Knoll M (2016) A new type of TTI based on electrochemical pseudo transistor. J Food
Eng 168:79–83
21. Goldsmith RM, Goldsmith CH, Woodaman JG (2002) Duel bar code for food contamination
detection. United States Patent, US 6,479,016 B1
22. Chen Y, Fu G, Zilberman Y, Ruan W, Ameri SK, Zhang YS, Miller E, Sonkusale SR (2017)
Low cost smart phone diagnostics for food using paper-based colorimetric sensor arrays. Food
Control 82:227–232
23. Harrop P (2012) Radio-frequency identifiction (RFID) for food and beverage packaging
applications. In: Emerging food packaging technologies. Woodhead Publishing, pp 153–174
24. Bibi F, Guillaume C, Gontard N, Sorli B (2017) A review: RFID technology having sensing
aptitudes for food industry and their contribution to tracking and monitoring of food products.
Trends Food Sci Technol 62:91–103
25. Kumar P, Reinitz HW, Simunovic J, Sandeep KP, Franzon PD (2009) Overview of RFID
technology and its applications in the food industry. J Food Sci 74(8):R101–R106
26. Nambi S, Nyalamadugu S, Wentworth SM, Chin BA (2003) Radio frequency identification
sensors. In: Proceedings of the 7th world multi-conference on systemics, cybernetics and
informatics, pp 386–390
27. Huang H-P, Chen C-S, Chen T-Y (2006) Mobile diagnosis based on RFID for food safety. In:
2006 IEEE international conference on automation science and engineering, pp 357–362
28. Lorite GS, Selkälä T, Sipola T, Palenzuela J, Jubete E, Viñuales A, Cabañero G, Grande HJ,
Tuominen J, Uusitalo S, Hakalahti L (2017) Novel, smart and RFID assisted critical temperature
indicator for supply chain monitoring. J Food Eng 193:20–28
29. Le GT, Tran TV, Lee H-S, Chung W-Y (2016) Long-range batteryless RF sensor for monitoring
the freshness of packaged vegetables. Sens Actuators, A 237:20–28Chapter 12
Entrepreneurial Opportunities
in Agri-Food Supply Chains
Anupama Panghal, Tribhuvan Nath, and Priyanka Vern
Abstract Agri-food supply chains are a dynamic system of networks and interme￾diaries that coordinate at required locations to make food available. The twenty-first
century agri-food supply chains are advancing and becoming more efficient with
the technological developments and acceleration of globalization. The increasing
complexity and uncertainty associated with agri-food markets and agri-food supply
chains offer entrepreneurial opportunities to potential entrepreneurs to exploit it.
The various entrepreneurship models are evolving in agri-supply chains, owing
to an entrepreneur’s imaginative and inventive explorations to tap new opportuni￾ties. This chapter discusses the entrepreneurial opportunities in the agri-food supply
chain, highlighting the entrepreneurial challenges and innovative business models.
It also provides an entrepreneurial policy framework and guidelines for developing
agri-food entrepreneurship. Some relevant case studies of successful entrepreneurs
associated with agri-food supply chains were also included.
Keywords Agri-food supply chain · Entrepreneurial opportunities · Agri-food
entrepreneurship · Policy framework
12.1 Introduction
Agri-food supply chains consist of a sequence of processes and a set of actors
providing the commodity or financial or legal inputs toward making the product
available to the consumer from its point of production [1]. Agri-food supply chains
play a crucial role in agricultural economies in providing producers access to markets
that integrate with the forward flow of products through the processes of value
addition, processing, distribution, and retail sale to the ultimate consumers. An
A. Panghal · P. Vern (B)
Department of Food Business Management and Entrepreneurship Development, National Institute
of Food Technology Entrepreneurship and Management (NIFTEM), Sonipat, Haryana, India
T. Nath
Institute of Management Studies, RGSC, Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh, India
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2022
R. S Mor et al. (eds.), Operations and Supply Chain Management in the Food Industry,
Lecture Notes in Management and Industrial Engineering,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-16-5555-5_13
169170 A. Panghal et al.
efficient food supply chain is crucial for minimizing food wastages, addressing
food safety and quality, achieving food security, and the success in agri-food busi￾nesses [2]. Agri-food supply chains in many developing countries have faced several
changes and challenges in recent years in terms of globalization, commodification for
being cost-effective, and consolidation across all supply chain levels [3]. Agri-food
entrepreneurs can come up with innovative strategies for providing solutions and
strengthening agri-food supply chains. However, entrepreneurship in the agri-food
sector was not strongly promoted in developing countries including India. Consid￾ering the importance of entrepreneurship as vital to job creation, rural economic
growth, and ensuring the progress of thriving agri-food SMEs, the promotion of
agri-food entrepreneurship is crucial. The entrepreneurship development can also
help to identify practical agribusiness strategies to strengthen agri-food supply and
tackle many social and economic problems of rural areas, including sustainability
and climate change. However, there are many challenges for entrepreneurship devel￾opment in the agri-food sector. Therefore, a strong need was felt for developing
an actionable policy framework for promoting agri-food entrepreneurship along the
food supply chain. This study discusses the entrepreneurial opportunities along the
agri-food supply chain, highlighting the entrepreneurial challenges, and provides a
summary of some innovative business models. It also develops an entrepreneurial
policy framework and guidelines for developing agri-food entrepreneurship.
12.2 Challenges for Entrepreneurs in Agri-Food Supply
Chains
The agri-food supply chains in many developing countries continue to be plagued
with multiple problems at every stage of the chain (Fig. 12.1). At the input supply
stage, the prominent problems as highlighted in many researches were poor seed
replacement rate (SRR), poor adoption of improved variety of crops, low seed germi￾nation rate, and shortage of quality inputs in the market during crop season [4]. In the
production stage, the limited awareness and technical knowledge among producers
about modern agriculture practices (such as organic farming, poly house horticulture,
and medicinal plants), poor access and adoption to farm technology, crop disease,
and poor adoption of technology in dairy, fisheries, poultry causing significant losses
in quality and production volume in agriculture [5, 6]. At the food processing stage,
the major problems were low food processing level, lack of sorting/grading of farm
produce, high post-harvest losses, poor-quality control practices, and limited/poor
packaging/labeling/branding of food products [7, 8]. Lastly, at the logistics and
distribution stages, the prominent problems were inaccessibility of market, limited
bargaining power of poor farmers, less share of farmers in consumer rupees, poor
transportation facility, limited cold storages and warehouse, inefficient distribution
channels, and less food export [4, 9].12 Entrepreneurial Opportunities in Agri-Food Supply Chains 171
Fig. 12.1 Problems at different stages of the Agri-food supply chain. Source Author
The above problems are more prominent in South Asia and Sub-Saharan Africa
where the awareness, availability, and adoption of promising high yielding tech￾nology (high yielding variety seed, chemical fertilizer, irrigation system) have been
far from the many producers particularly smallholders due to ineffective input supply
system and inadequate extension services [10, 11]. Also, the provision of technolo￾gies of high-tech production including poly house horticulture, organic farming,
medicinal plants, fisheries, poultry farming is still limited to the big farmers [12, 13].
Transformation of farm produce through value addition, and food processing is
also very minimal, hindering their export performance. For example, India despite
being one of the primary food-producing countries with lead producers in rice, wheat,
fruits, vegetable, and milk; the share in processed food in the world had just about
2% of the aggregate global exports [14]. Most of the agri-food supply chains in India
are unorganized [15]. The unorganized agri-food supply chains fail to transport,
store, and distribute food produces effectively. Also, limited cold chain facilities,
poor warehouse conditions, traffic delays, and less organized marketing channels are
common problems causing huge wastages of food products.
As various problems mentioned in Fig. 12.1, the new thinking and unique ideas can
lead to innovative solutions to resolve the problems. Entrepreneurs are widely known
for their ability to conceive innovative ideas to develop unique and viable solutions to
satisfy customer needs that lead to growth, profitability, and business sustainability
[16]. However, entrepreneurship comes with a host of challenges. A large number
of startups are founded every year, but only a handful of them get converted into
successful business entities. According to the study done by the IBM Institute for
Business Value (IBV), 90% of startups in India fail within five years. The agri-food
entrepreneurs and startups mainly struggle due to limited access to information,
complicated licensing procedures, difficulty in access to finance, poor technical and172 A. Panghal et al.
managerial skills, lack of incubation facility and mentorships, including unrealistic
expectations. According to a report on “Entrepreneurship in India” conducted by
the National Knowledge Commission (NKC) through interview of entrepreneurs
in Indian cities, about half (50%) of the entrepreneurs reported difficulties while
seeking statutory clearances and licenses; more than 66% faced problems in filing
taxes and 60% claimed to have encountered corruption. In addition to this, other
problems reported were difficulty in accessing reliable information on registration
procedures, finance, including other schemes. Some 56% of entrepreneurs reported
for infrastructural issues—especially transport, power, and telecommunications—
was a critical barrier. The above challenges are more prominent and involved in the
agri-food sector and tough to overcome. Some significant challenges being faced
by agri-food startups apart from the above are high cost of production, high post￾harvest losses, seasonality of crops, low quality of products, lack of processable
varieties of crops, lack of technical know-how, lack of technology, power interruption,
supply chain infrastructure gaps, over-regulation of the agriculture sector, lack of
skilled human resources, lack of training, limited cold storage, and marketing and
export [17–20]. Addressing these challenges is a prerequisite for a favorable business
environment in developing countries for startups in the agri-food sector and its supply
chains.
12.3 Potential Business Opportunities along Agri-food
Supply Chain
With changing times, the structure of supply chains is also changing. With the trans￾formation of agriculture into technology and the market-oriented agribusiness sector,
there are enormous entrepreneurial opportunities that have evolved along the agri￾food value chain (Fig. 12.2). With increasing complexity and uncertainty in consumer
demand and behavior has triggered changes in the food agri value chain which is
leading to more value creation and differentiation in the food industry [21]. The
entrepreneurs can look for their business interest for input supply, high-value crops,
organic farming, high-tech farming, sorting and grading, dairy farming, fisheries,
poultry, transport, distribution, e-food retailing, and food export are some potential
enterprises.
Entrepreneurs can play a crucial role by bringing innovation in products,
processes, technology, business model, and practices of agri-food supply chain
management [22]. Also, the entrepreneurs can reallocate resources from the non￾agriculture sector to the agriculture and food processing sector, including food distri￾bution and logistics through knowledge, skills, and abilities. Provided with the right
entrepreneurial policy framework and an ecosystem, the entrepreneurs can signifi￾cantly contribute to rural prosperity, employment generation, productivity growth,
and transforming rural communities by connecting the farm sector to the consumers
in an efficient manner [2, 23]. The enterprises working in food supply chains need to12 Entrepreneurial Opportunities in Agri-Food Supply Chains 173
Fig. 12.2 Entrepreneurial opportunities along the agri-food supply chain. Source Author
face several challenges like global competition; consumer awareness and concern for
food quality and safety. The enterprises need to adapt to changing business models
to remain competitive [24, 25]. Organizational learning, communication, technolog￾ical capabilities, and knowledge sharing must be enhanced to explore entrepreneurial
opportunities in the food agribusiness [26]. The weak links in the functioning of agri￾food supply chains many times offer opportunities for entrepreneurs. The supply
chain participants now look for more vertical integration. Direct procurement from
producers/farmers by the retailers is becoming a practice. In the past few years,
various alternative models of conventional supply chains have emerged like: “direct
farm selling, pick your own or u-pick; box schemes; farmers’ markets; collec￾tive farmer shops, community-supported agriculture, solidarity purchasing groups,
collective buying groups” [27]. All such direct marketing models integrate producers
with consumers and develop close linkages between producer and consumer, which
enable value sharing in the supply chains. Emergent agri-food supply chains based
on the principles of lean practices and resource efficiency, with an enhanced focus
on supporting the local producers [28] may be an area of interest for emerging
entrepreneurs, which is profitable for them as well as beneficial for the society.
Dung et al. [29] say entrepreneurial orientation benefits farmers and expands their
knowledge toward agricultural entrepreneurship. Their study shows entrepreneurial
orientation has a positive relationship between collaborative performance and knowl￾edge acquisition in agri-food value chains in emerging markets. Knowledge acqui￾sition acts as an intermediary between entrepreneurial orientation and collaborative174 A. Panghal et al.
performance. Kuckertz et al. [30] constructed an entrepreneurial opportunity space
in the food value chain by mapping different sources of entrepreneurial opportunities
which are change in demand, change in supply, information asymmetries, and exoge￾nous shocks. Investors’ perspective, converting and packaging, agriculture, shipping,
and selling are the stages in the food value chain which provides the maximum
financing. Kruja [31] discussed that collaboration between research institutions,
government institutions, and the industry itself results in better entrepreneurial oppor￾tunities and act as performance enhancement in agribusiness. There are business
models, emerging with new concepts like the application of blockchain technology
in agri-food supply chains; artificial intelligence (A.I.)-based food business models.
Entrepreneurs are also coming up with business models that support the develop￾ment and promotion of local food supply chains. However, the traditional businesses
of logistic providers and other 3PL services providers are also equally explored
by entrepreneurs in the agri-food sector. This section will discuss a few emerging
business models adopted successfully by agri-food entrepreneurs.
12.4 Policy Framework for Entrepreneurship in Agri-Food
Supply Chains
Across the world, the government interest in entrepreneurship development has
increased as potential solutions to boost economic growth, job creation, innova￾tion, productivity enhancement, and the vibrant industry sector. The driving force
behind this interest is the ground-level success stories and research which establish
the relationship between entrepreneurship and economic upliftment [32]. The studies
have revealed that government policy has a substantial influence on entrepreneur￾ship and affects entrepreneurial activities directly or indirectly [33]. However, stim￾ulating entrepreneurial activity requires an actionable policy framework to create
an entrepreneurial ecosystem for supporting and facilitating the emergence of new
entrepreneurs and their business startups. A firm entrepreneurship policy facilitates
creating awareness, education, motivation, skills, finance, incubation, and mentorship
of individuals willing to become entrepreneurs. The different organizations, policy￾makers, and researchers have suggested a different framework for entrepreneurship
[34]. Food agri-supply chains are embedded with various consumer-oriented poli￾cies and producer-oriented policies. Implementation of these policies affects the
behavior of various actors in an environment [35]. UNCTAD [36] has suggested a
policy framework, as a collection of policies, which comprised of six areas: (i) general
entrepreneurship policy, (ii) awareness and networks building, (iii) access to finance,
(iv) entrepreneurship education and skills, (v) R&D and technology transfer, and (vi)
regulatory environment. Lundström and Stevenson [37] have indicated six policy
priorities for entrepreneurship: (i) entrepreneurship promotion, (ii) entrepreneurship
education, (iii) the environment for startups, (iv) startup and seed capital financing,
(v) business support measures for startups, and (vi) target group strategies.12 Entrepreneurial Opportunities in Agri-Food Supply Chains 175
However, an entrepreneurship policy for the agri-food sector, particularly in devel￾oping countries, needs a slightly different and a mix of above-stated policies’ prior￾ities, considering the involvement of a large number of farmers, sensitive product in
terms of food quality and safety, high regulation sector and infrastructural issues.
Therefore, while designing an entrepreneurial policy framework, it is essential to have
a holistic view of the agri-food value chain. Authors have suggested entrepreneur￾ship policy interventions in five areas (Table 12.1) to address all the possible aspects
of agri-food entrepreneurship along the supply chain in terms of entrepreneurship
promotion, awareness, motivation, education, skill development, seed financing for
startups, business support, mentoring, incubation, performance measurement, and
business sustainability. This policy framework is modified from Lundström and
Stevenson [37] to the context of the agri-food sector.
Entrepreneurs are essential for the economy’s growth. The reforms and industrial
policies of the 1990s and 2000s have led to the development of the new entrepreneur￾ship and startup landscape and the current structure. Governments, through their
entrepreneurial policies, plan to overcome four policy challenges: (1) fostering
the benefits of entrepreneurship as a community and employment opportunities;
(2) supporting and training entrepreneurs on the skills and know-how required
to thrive as an entrepreneur, along with eliminating job impediments; (3) helping
young entrepreneurs; reducing obstacles and promoting access to various opportu￾nities; (4) helping entrepreneurs through initial years of the journey by providing
the necessary support, technology, elimination of information prejudice, enabling
funding [38]. In 1990, industrial policy was introduced, which focused on the promo￾tion of entrepreneurship through the campaign in rural areas. The entrepreneurship
development program was conducted to train women and youths. Importance to
women entrepreneurs was given. The Small Industries Development Bank of India
(SIDBI) was founded on April 2, 1990, by the Indian Parliament, which currently
acts as a key financial institution for the promotion, financing, and growth of the
Micro, Small, and Medium Enterprises (MSME) sector. In 2000, a detailed policy
package was introduced for small-scale enterprises. In 2006, the MSME Develop￾ment Act came into the light which conceptualized the notion behind enterprises.
Both service and manufacturing enterprises were recognized. This act has facili￾tated the growth of entrepreneurship in both old and young minds. The government
has set in place a range of schemes to encourage and enable access to finance for
aspiring entrepreneurs. To help entrepreneurs, obtain quick access to capital, the
Indian government-initiated Pradhan Mantri Mudra Yojana (PMMY). This scheme
was launched in 2015 to offer loans of up to 10 lakhs to non-corporate, non-farm
small/micro-enterprises. In the financial year 2019–2020, around 62,237,981 PMMY
loans have been sanctioned. Funds worth Rs. 337,465.13 crore have been approved
for which Rs. 329,684.63 crore has been disbursed/paid to run the company (https://
www.mudra.org.in/) [39].
Over the years, the Indian entrepreneurship policy framework and the startup
system have emerged with the potential to improve the new venture ecosystem.
Present scenario and updated regulatory framework are accommodating to
entrepreneurs and open to small business ventures. But there is a holistic approach176 A. Panghal et al. Table 12.1 Policy framework and guidelines for entrepreneurship in agri-food supply chain Steps in the entrepreneurial policy framework Description: suggestive framework and guidelines I. Entrepreneurship promotion and development of an ecosystem for entrepreneurship in the agri-food sector • The promotion of entrepreneurship intends to create awareness among youth and other individuals about the benefits of entrepreneurship and motivate them to take up entrepreneurship as a career option. Special attention and entrepreneurial motivation should be given to farmers and rural youth toward agribusiness and food processing entrepreneurship • Entrepreneurship should be a mandatory part of the academic curriculum right from the high school level to orient the students toward entrepreneurship. The case studies of successful entrepreneurs should be included in the syllabus • The government should take strong measures for ease of doing business to create a favorable entrepreneurial climate and culture by eliminating obstacles to agri-food startups, ease the barriers to entry and exit, easy access to finance, technology transfer, IPR, incubation facility and mentorship, concession in tax in initial business years, tax reform, and infrastructure development • The different government departments/organizations (such as KVIC, DIC) involved in the promotion and development of entrepreneurship should regularly conduct entrepreneurship awareness programs in urban and rural areas. The aim is to identify potential entrepreneurs and facilitate their entrepreneurial journey. The successful entrepreneurs can be presented as a role model to motivate youth (continued)12 Entrepreneurial Opportunities in Agri-Food Supply Chains 177 Table 12.1 (continued) Steps in the entrepreneurial policy framework Description: suggestive framework and guidelines II. Entrepreneurial education and consortium for entrepreneurship along agri-food supply chain • Universities, institutions, and industries specialized in agriculture, food processing, operations, and supply chain should form an entrepreneurial consortium for entrepreneurial promotion, training, and incubation of potential entrepreneurs • The higher academic institutions should mandatory open specialized centers for entrepreneurship development in their academic area, which acts as a single window for all entrepreneurial needs of potential entrepreneurs • These institutions should regularly conduct capacity building and skill development and skill upgradation for entrepreneurs. The focus should be on imparting technical and managerial skills • They should adopt some potential entrepreneurs (based on their strength) and assign academic and industry mentors and continue with them till establishment and sustainable functioning • All the government departments involved in entrepreneurship development should be linked with universities/institutions for all training and skill upgradation needs of potential entrepreneurs III. Seed financing for agri-food startups and startup credit for agri-food entrepreneurs • Finance is the lifeblood of business. However, for agri-food startups, seed capital is critical in the early stages as it helps get things started before the business earns any revenue. It also boosts the confidence of the entrepreneur to prove the merit of his/her idea • The government should take the step in assisting entrepreneurs in the agri-food business for seed funding to address the initial capital requirements for a startup. The online/offline platform should be created where potential entrepreneurs and investors can meet • The mentor organizations/academic institutions (who trained the entrepreneur) may be empowered for the recommendation of entrepreneurs for agri-food startup credit/micro-loan from the bank (continued)178 A. Panghal et al. Table 12.1 (continued) Steps in the entrepreneurial policy framework Description: suggestive framework and guidelines IV. Business support for agri-food startups—handholding, incubation, and facilitation in the establishment of agri-food enterprises • Supporting new agri-food businesses is crucial for turning potential entrepreneurs’ breakthrough ideas into successful enterprises. Importantly, startups are providing missing links in the agri-food value chain, which in turn helping the agriculture sector and farm community in realizing a higher return • However, entrepreneurs in the agri-food sector need strong support and an advisory system to not only survive but thrive. The entrepreneurial policy should extend the facilitation for access to information, technical know-how, expert advice, mentoring, and incubation support to turn their agri-food startup ideas into valuable businesses • Opening a single-window platform as a startup support center by Govt. in online mode through web-portal and the offline mode will help the entrepreneurs in establishing and sustaining their nascent agri-food enterprises V. Measuring entrepreneurial performance and business sustainability • Measuring the entrepreneurial performance of agro-food startup is vital to ensure the success of ventures. The performance of startups is primarily measured in terms of the degree of success in achieving the goal to generate growth and profits. The entrepreneur, including the government, should continuously watch the performance of agri-food enterprises. In case of any deviation, effort shall be made to bring it on track to avoid business failures • Sustainability is key to business success in the current business environment. Therefore, after the immediate success of agri-food startups, the business should set sustainability goals to create positive environmental and social impact apart from profits Source Author12 Entrepreneurial Opportunities in Agri-Food Supply Chains 179
to creating structures like incubators, which is optimistic. Incubators support startup
businesses by providing support, access to industry mentors, engaging with other
founders, and most notably supplying startups with the fund to get through the
survival stage. Nonetheless, a lot of changes are required at the ground level. The
value of the newly built startup ecosystems does not appear to be fully percolating
to entrepreneurs. Enterprises have arisen through the MUDRA scheme, and other
related schemes require business support services, mentoring and constant guidance,
etc. However, the ability to scale up requires qualified support, which is sometimes
lacking. Some of these companies find it tough to recruit experts, and the assis￾tance and aid they receive from government authorities are frequently inadequately
trained, not well versed with recent problems, technologies, and abilities, are not
per existing industry and consumer requirements. There is another scheme that has
a vital role in maintaining the efficiency of the agri and food supply chain called e￾NAM; the National Agricultural Market is a pan-India e-commerce portal supported
by the central government and introduced by a Small Farmer Agribusiness Consor￾tium (SFAC). These portals act as networking portals between the existing Agri￾culture Produce Marketing Committee (APMC), submarket yards, private markets,
and other unregulated markets to bring all the agricultural markets together as one
and to create an online platform. This platform recently launched two new features,
i.e., FPO trading module and negotiable warehouse receipt module, to e-NAM to
strengthen agricultural marketing by farmers (https://www.enam.gov.in/web/) [40].
12.5 Agri-Food Supply Chain and Innovative Business
Models
Supply chain innovations are crucial to any business for their survival and sustain￾ability. This section discusses a few business models which are marking their
significance in the agri-food sector (Fig. 12.3).
12.5.1 Agri-Food Traceability Models
With rising concerns about food safety and security, the traceability of food products
has become an essential parameter for the success of the supply chain model of any
business. Technologies like radio frequency identification (RFID) and blockchain are
being used these days for product traceability [41]. RFID is used in agri-food supply
chains for more than 20 years back and is an automatic identification technology
based on radio frequency signals [41]. Blockchain technology is an innovation in
the agri-food sector [24]. This technology is based on a distributed ledger database
system, where different supply chain partners are connected through nodes on an
online platform. It helps in bringing transparency in the supply chain by providing180 A. Panghal et al.
Fig. 12.3 Innovative business models for agri-food entrepreneurs. Source Author
complete traceability for the products [24]. The traditional agri-food supply chains
have various channels and a large number of intermediaries, which complicate the
logistics and distribution functions. Blockchain technology, with the help of smart
contracts, helps in removing the intermediaries and expedites the logistics functions
[42]. Presently, the adoption rate for blockchain technology is not much appreci￾ated due to reasons like high costs, less knowledge, immature systems, management
reluctance, etc. Still, soon with the entry of more players in this domain, blockchain
technology will fetch its acceptance in agri-food systems. Galvez et al. [43] high￾lighted few application cases of blockchain in the agri-food supply chains like for
fish (improved transaction systems); wine (complete chain management); agri-food
(quality and digital identity); fruits (fairness of records); pork (reduced risk and12 Entrepreneurial Opportunities in Agri-Food Supply Chains 181
brand protection); large food enterprises (traceability); fresh food (product infor￾mation from farm to fork). Blockchain technology adoption provides 360-degree
monitoring from lower management to upper management in a supply chain. It
is a platform that provides easy and secure traceability, information tracking, and
backtracking (Antonucci 2019).
12.5.2 Local Food Supply Chain-Based Models
The risks and the possibility of crisis at various levels in the conventional agri-food
supply chains are leading to “relocalization” of supply chains in rural areas. The
local food supply chains (FSC), which focus on locally grown commodities and
involve fewer channels, prove to be shorter and closed-loop [27]. Along with the
same lines, a term emerging and impressed upon in literature [27, 44] is “Foodhub”.
The “food hubs” are considered as innovative business models, where small- and
medium-sized producers can collaborate for getting market access to their locally
produced food. Rural women can play a significant role in promoting local food-based
entrepreneurship. There are a variety of food products produced by rural women in
India either at the home level or small-scale level, mostly based on traditional recipes
and indigenous ingredients. Such products and business ideas have a lot of potential
in urban markets. Previous studies have also highlighted the importance of local
food entrepreneurship in various ways. Mars and Schau [45] have classified local
food entrepreneurs into four actor types, viz. producer, organizer, purveyors, and
narrators, where producer (e.g., processor and farmer) harvest and prepare product,
purveyors (e.g., market vendors, restaurant owners, and retailers) and help in selling
and distribution of the product. Organizers are working to enhance resources and
market spaces for promotion and distribution. At last, narrators help in shaping the
public image of local food within a particular region (e.g., local food journalist).
Policy integration determines the success to build a framework for developing the
food value chain in a rural environment [46]. The elements such as accessibility to
the point of sale, sustainability in terms of economic and environmental perspective,
and quality in forming a space in which coordination between actors can emerge
are required in investigating alternative food networks required to collaborate to
enhance each other’s strengths, where local actors of territory play a strategic role in
the development of food politics and consumer acceptance [47]. A strong community
desired to link resources of the homeland to the consumers of the same, indifferent
from their stays will always reconnect to the supply source that will also enhance
consumer participation in the food value chain [48].182 A. Panghal et al.
12.5.3 ICT-Based Models
The use of information and communication technology in agri-food supply chains
is leveraged by entrepreneurs for exploiting the niche opportunities of this domain.
The technologies in use range from smartphones to drones [24]. There is an emer￾gence of electronic platforms for trading in agri-food supply chains. The concept of
B2B (business to business) is also emerging in agri-food supply chains, where the
entrepreneurs are providing a platform to connect producers directly to consumers
and other service providers, through mobile or Internet-based platforms. Another
model is by providing an online retailing platform to producers, where producers
can sell their produce directly to consumers at the best possible prices. Fritz and
Hausen [25] identified four electronic platform models operating in the domain of
agri-food supply chains (although the efficiency is low), viz. Neural verticals, where
transactions are performed along the complete supply chain, as per spot market
environments; downstream intermediaries, where existing business relationships are
supported at some specific later stages of the chain; Ag output subsectors where the
focus is on agriculture-related stages of the supply chain; and Large consortia where
adaptation is made as per the requirement of agri-food players and other participants.
12.5.4 Comprehensive One-Stop Solution-Based Models
Providing a comprehensive one-stop solution through a business model can also
be an opportunity for entrepreneurs in agri-food supply chains. Some compa￾nies are providing integrated solutions under one roof like warehousing, insurance
support, bulk procurement, rural retailing, etc. Similarly, companies provide logistics
along with on-farm consultancy and contract farming. Producers and other supply
chain partners suffer due to the unavailability of correct and updated information;
entrepreneurs can fill this gap by offering producers on-call advisory services [49].
12.6 Selected Case Studies of Emerging Agri-Food
Entrepreneurs
Following are the case studies of successful entrepreneurs associated with agri-food
supply chains.12 Entrepreneurial Opportunities in Agri-Food Supply Chains 183
12.6.1 UrbanKisaan
It is an ongoing success story of a vision that started in the mind of a young
entrepreneur which has now turned into the aspirations of many millennial farmers of
his kind. UrbanKisaan [50] was created in 2017 by Mr. Vihari Kanukollu, Dr. Sairam
Reddy, and Mr. Srinivas Chaganti. The young entrepreneur Vihari was particularly
fascinated by the possibility of growing your food in a relatively little area with
minimal natural resources than traditional farming practices. Mr. Vihari Kanukollu
made the list of Forbes 30 under 30 Asia 2020 at the age of 26. The goal was to build
a better vision for farming and feed the world in a manner that is beneficial for both
the people and the earth.
UrbanKisaan’s first 2500 ft2 urban rooftop farm was built to create a hyper-local
food source with a fully transparent supply chain with a minimal carbon footprint.
Growing a variety of lettuces, herbs, and Indian staple leafy veggies, this farm today
uses 95% less water. It produces 30 times more yields compared to traditional farms in
the same area without any pesticides. The startup produces pesticide-free ingredients
in a vertical hydroponic system. Hydroponics is a way to grow soil-free terrestrial
plants using water-based mineral fertilizer solutions. Although farms grow plants
in the soil, they use 95% less energy. UrbanKisaan manages everything from seeds
to its patented, farm-controlled software framework and even empowers people to
develop their own healthy, fresh, and high-quality food. This was the first time in
India when someone could walk into a farm and buy the products which they can get
right off the stem on their own.
UrbanKisaan in 2019 was selected to become a part of the prestigious American
startup school Y-Combinator, raising its first round of seed funding at the accelerator
along with other investors. There was no looking back from that eponymous moment.
UrbanKisaan is currently opening its tenth retail location in Hyderabad contributing
to the over 50 acres of production capacity compared to conventional farms. The
smallest ideas can have the most significant impact. (Source Telephonic interview of
the entrepreneur with the authors).
12.6.2 Ninjacart
It is India’s largest fresh-produce supply chain business, a network that solves one of
the world’s toughest challenges through technology. They connect food producers
directly to supermarkets, restaurants, and service providers using in-house applica￾tions that drive end-to-end operations. At present, their supply chain is designed
to transfer 1400 tons of fresh perishables from farm to market every day in less
than 12 h. The made-for-India technology and India-centric solutions have changed
the way fruit and vegetables are brought to people’s plates, from farms, changing
the lives of farmers, companies, and customers in a significant way. Ninjacart was
among the 42 most innovative startups in India in November 2018. This platform is184 A. Panghal et al.
addressing problems faced by farmers like experiencing price risk, information asym￾metry about the market and consumer demands, inefficient distribution system, delay
in payments. Retailers face problems such as low quality, unhygienic procurement,
high market volatility. The Indian supply chain is hugely unorganized, resulting in a
high incidence of food waste. Ninjacart offers solutions by removing intermediaries
and gaining charge of the supply chain via automation and delivering technology￾based solutions. Ninjacart provides farmers 20% more profit than the current market,
one-stop selling for all goods, precise weighing and pricing, payment within 24 h,
saves time. Consumers get hygienically handled products, 100% traceable to farms￾improve food health, higher quality. Ninjacart is operational in seven cities presently.
(Source Ninjacart website [51]).
12.6.3 Subzeelogic
The startup was initiated in the year 2020 by Mr. Abhishek Biswas and a team
of six National Institute of Food Technology Entrepreneurship and Management
(NIFTEM) students. Mr. Biswas is a business enthusiast with experience working in
a variety of Asian countries such as Thailand, India, Korea, and China. He served as
a trade representative and P.R. representative in the Indian Chamber of Commerce
with the Thai government. He has also launched the world’s first vegetarian food
certification program “Sattvik Council of India”.
The core idea revolves around having 99.9% non-bacterial exotic vegetables,
freshly procured and packaged for sale, free of the uncertainties and difficulties
of manual washing of vegetables. It all began while focusing on the challenges
people face as a result of the Covid-19 pandemic and food safety and security
issues. They came up with a solution to give value to both consumers and farmers
by washing exotic vegetables using proprietary sanitizing technologies and making
them 99.9% bacteria-free, and then packaging them in such a way as to extend
product shelf life. This makes easy use of vegetables, nutritious and healthy meals,
and assured consumers. Following are the steps that are included in the process of
making the vegetable bacteria-free are procurement of exotic vegetables, cleaning
involves the removal of dirt and soil, disinfecting using the patented technology,
drying of vegetables to the optimum moisture level, packaging to increase shelf life,
and testing to ensure quality and dispatch. The startup also provides guaranteed profits
to linked farmers by receiving a pre-order amount of product at a fixed price. Subzee￾logic [52] aims to improve the income and quality of living of farmers by providing
them with improved infrastructure, support facilities, and an urban marketplace by
linking Indian farmers directly to customers. There are several initiatives taken by
Subzeelogic. The project began with the intention of allowing optimum use of water
for washing vegetables instead of using detergents and chemicals. Many problems
are faced by the Indian farmers, i.e., lack of technology and lack of knowledge
about marketing opportunities. At Subzeelogic, it has been a mission and an impor￾tant goal to help farmers increase their income and aims to connect at least 120012 Entrepreneurial Opportunities in Agri-Food Supply Chains 185
farmers in phase 1 by motivating them with Subzeelogic’s value-added technology
and enabling them to market their goods at higher margins with the best branding
and certifications. They concentrate on generating opportunities, promising growth,
having a positive impact on farmers’ businesses by providing enhanced technology,
supporting services, and an urban marketplace through/connecting Indian farmers
directly to consumers. (Source Interview of the entrepreneur with the authors).
12.6.4 AgroBlock
It is a safe, clean, and sustainable agri-tech traceability platform powered by
blockchain and IoT automation. It solves the issue of the traceability of the supply
chain for agricultural goods that come at a premium or which are perishable since
most of the supply chain companies and their suppliers face this challenge daily
where the consignments are either not well protected in transit or lost. This has a
considerable effect on their margins which contributes to constant follow-up, recon￾ciliation, and additional manual inspection. The operational efficiency of the entire
network will be enhanced by the implementation of a traceability scheme that gives
end-to-end accountability for the supply chain and all functional activities, both in
terms of saving time and reducing management and reconciliation costs. AgroBlock’s
ultimate goal is to play a role in encouraging the different players of agri to improve
their economic partnership, by assisting agricultural companies to use the new tech￾nologies surrounding blockchain, AI, and IoT. AgroBlock [53] aims to close the
gap between reliability, knowledge, and trust between the different institutions in
the agricultural supply chain. These are the three cornerstones of this approach,
intending to create a circular economy that will support both farmers and customers,
as well as the framework intermediaries. There are various pillars of blockchain
which are traceability and trust, authenticity and quality protection, real-time trace￾ability and data reconciliation process, brand enhancement, revenue growth (increase
in value), cost savings (savings in operation cost), and innovative drive. The unique
selling propositions of AgroBlock are end-to-end evidential traceability, Dapp for
supply chain/logistics process, supervisory input through a smart contract, IoT inte￾gration and artificial intelligence, circular approach technology, IoT automation and
bio-innovation. AgroBlock is built on three pillars of the multi-party supply chain
process:
Traceability It is essential to ensure that customers can always follow the trail of the
supply chain in both directions, upstream and downstream, as it ensures proof that
the brand procures from the sources from where it claims and the same goes for the
retailers.
Visibility This is important to keep track of logistical operations as it ensures that the
supply chain has not encountered any bottlenecks which are beyond the mutually
accepted agreements as well as it also helps in ensuring no unsavory event has taken
place during the transit.186 A. Panghal et al.
Accountability It ensures the end product’s quality. It covers to most vital aspects
that the delivered product is not faked during transit and the product is viable at
consumption at the end.
12.6.5 ThinkAg
It is India’s first Ag-Tech platform to put together innovators, business companies,
and investors to boost results in Indian food and agriculture, where fresh opportunities
are increasingly opening up with increasing and evolving trends of consumption. This
platform is co-founded by Mr. Ankur Capital, in collaboration with Mr. Ram Kaun￾dinya, Mr. Raman Ahuja, and Mr. Hemendra Mathur in the year 2018. It is essential to
harness these resources in the face of climate change, low productivity, supply chain
inefficiencies and pollution, large-scale investment in agri-infrastructure, and tech￾nological advancement. While many entrepreneurs and innovators are using cutting￾edge technologies and modern business models to address these challenges, existing
players are also looking to adopt smart approaches to old businesses.Winning partner￾ships between stakeholders (existing entities, new entrants, innovators, and investors)
to accelerate these innovations through rapid prototyping can transform the Ag-Tech
landscape in India. It encourages investment in food and agriculture by enabling
market validation of promising innovations. It provides AgLab, a market-linked inno￾vation program for rapid scaling up as progressive corporates and mentors engage
with budding entrepreneurs; AgInvest, a pool of industry-leading investment-ready
technologies, access to experts in the industry; and AgConnect to drive innova￾tion. ThinkAg [54] focuses on developing solutions for supply chain optimization,
food waste reduction, the future generation, risk mitigation, and smart production.
BigBasket, Grofers, and Ninjacart are the top three companies that raised the highest
capital from the year 2014–2019 [55].
12.7 Conclusion and Policy Implications
Entrepreneurship is the primary driver of the economy across the developed and
developing nations. The countries that give close attention to the promotion of
entrepreneurship stand better chances of an improved economy, employment gener￾ation, innovation, industrialization, and national competitiveness. Agriculture is a
dynamic and most important sector in many agricultural economies which provides
a multitude of entrepreneurial opportunities along the agri-food value chain such as
input supply, organic farming, high-tech farming, dairy farming, fisheries, poultry,
sorting and grading, value addition and food processing, transport, distribution, e￾food retailing, and food export. Most importantly, the entrepreneurs can bring inno￾vation in products, processes, technology, and business model for economic trans￾formation and prosperity in the agri-food sector. However, the entrepreneurs and12 Entrepreneurial Opportunities in Agri-Food Supply Chains 187
agri-food startups face many challenges such as limited access to reliable informa￾tion, complicated licensing procedure, access to finance, lack of technical skills, lack
of technology, power interruption, supply chain infrastructure gaps, lack of incuba￾tion facility and mentorships apart from agriculture- and crop production-related
issues. Provided with the right entrepreneurial policy framework and ecosystem, the
entrepreneurs can significantly contribute to rural prosperity, employment gener￾ation, productivity growth, and transforming rural communities in developing
economies. The study has suggested a robust entrepreneurial policy framework
for entrepreneurship promotion, awareness, motivation, education, skill develop￾ment, seed financing for startups, business support, mentoring, incubation, enterprise
performance measurement, and business sustainability for creating entrepreneurial
opportunities in agri-food supply chains. The study has policy implications for
exploiting the entrepreneurial opportunity along the agri-food supply chain through
adopting the entrepreneurial policy framework.
References
1. Cagliano R,Worley CG, Caniato FF (2016) The challenge of sustainable innovation in agri-food
supply chains. Organ Sustain Effect 5:1–30
2. Knudson W, Wysocki A, Champagne J, Peterson H (2004) Entrepreneurship and innovation in
the agri-food system. Am J Agr Econ 86:1330–1336
3. Mattevi M, Jones JA (2016) Traceability in the food supply chain: awareness and attitudes of
UK small and medium-sized enterprises. Food Control 64:120–127
4. Ali J, Kapoor S (2009) Farmers’ perception on risks in fruits and vegetables production: an
empirical study of Uttar Pradesh. Agric Econ Res Rev 21:317–326
5. Raju SS, Chand R (2008) Agricultural insurance in India problems and prospects. NCAP
Working Paper No. 8
6. Rao KCP (2008) Changes in dry land agriculture in the semi-arid tropics of India,1975–2004.
Eur J Dev Res 20(4):562–578
7. Kumar S, Bourai VA, Kumar H (2011) Post harvest losses in pulses of Uttarakhand (a specific
study of sample villages of Assan valley). Econ Aff 56(2):243–247
8. Raghavan V (2002) Preserving India’s food, vol 34, no 09. McGill Reporter, McGill University
9. Rajagopal (2002) Post harvest management of mangoes with special reference to Kesar Variety
in Junagadh District of Gujarat. Research Papers 1997–98, G B Pant University of Agriculture
and Technology, Pantnagar, Uttaranchal
10. Kumar R, Kumar V, Jom I (2019) Study on growth and opportunity of agropreneurship in India.
IUJ J Manag 7(2):117–128
11. Sandeep S (2012) Problems faced by agri entrepreneurs and remedies to solve it. J Bus Manag
3(1):23–29
12. McElwee G (2006) Farmers as entrepreneurs: developing competitive skills. J Dev Entrep
11(03):187–206
13. Pertin T (1997) Entrepreneurship as an economic force in rural development. In: Rural devel￾opment through entrepreneurship, compiled and edited by Tea, REU Technical Series 41. FAO
Regional Office for Europe, FAO of the United Nations, Rome
14. EXIM Bank Working Paper No. 61 (2017) International trade in processed foods: an Indian
perspective
15. Samuel MV, Shah M, Sahay BS (2012) An insight into agri-food supply chains: a review. Int
J Value Chain Manag 6(2):115–143188 A. Panghal et al.
16. Suryvanci S (2012) Opportunities for agri. Entrepreneurship. ISAP
17. Awasthi D (2011) Approaches to entrepreneurship development: the Indian experience. J Glob
Entrep Res 1(1):107–124
18. Bansal S, Garg D, Saini SK (2012) Agri-business practices and rural development in India—
issues and challenges. Int J Appl Eng Res 7(11):1573–1577
19. Negi S (2013) Food processing entrepreneurship for rural development: drivers and challenges.
In: IIM, SUSCON III third international conference on sustainability: ecology, economy and
ethics. Tata McGraw Hill Education, New Delhi, pp 186–197
20. Raj SJ (2016) Problems faced by entrepreneurs: a special reference to micro and small
entrepreneurs in Mumbai and Pune. Int J Bus Manag Res 6(3):57–62
21. Cucagna ME, Goldsmith PD (2018) Value adding in the agri-food value chain: research article.
Int Food Agribus Manag Rev 21(3):293–316. https://doi.org/10.22434/IFAMR2017.0051
22. Berglund H (2005) Toward a theory of entrepreneurial action: exploring risk, opportu￾nity and self in technology entrepreneurship. In: Book Doktorsavhandlingar vid Chalmers
TehniskaHogskola
23. VanPraag CM, Versloot PH (2007) What is the value of entrepreneurship? A review of recent
research. Small Bus Econ 29:351–382
24. Bhat R, Jõudu I (2019) Emerging issues and challenges in agri-food supply chain. In:
Sustainable food supply chains. Academic Press, pp 23–37
25. Fritz M, Hausen T (2008) Electronic trade platforms in food networks: an analysis of emerging
platform models and strategies. J Inf Technol Agric 3(1):26–36
26. Sachitra KMV (2019) Entrepreneurial opportunities and role of capability approach in agribusi￾ness: evidence from Sri Lanka. Asian Res J Agric 11(1):1–11. https://doi.org/10.9734/arja/
2019/v11i130051
27. Berti G, Mulligan C (2016) Competitiveness of small farms and innovative food supply chains:
the role of food hubs in creating sustainable regional and local food systems. Sustainability
8(7):616
28. Anastasiadis F, Poole N (2015) Emergent supply chains in the agri-food sector: insights from
a whole chain approach. Supply Chain Manag Int J
29. Dung TQ, Bonney LB, Adhikari RP, Miles MP (2020) Entrepreneurial orientation, knowl￾edge acquisition and collaborative performance in agri-food value-chains in emerging markets.
Supply Chain Manag 25(5):521–533. https://doi.org/10.1108/SCM-09-2019-0327
30. Kuckertz A, Hinderer S, Röhm P (2019) Entrepreneurship and entrepreneurial opportunities
in the food value chain. Npj Sci Food 3(1):1–5. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41538-019-0039-7
31. Kruja A (2020) Entrepreneurial orientation, synergy and firm performance in the agribusiness
context: an emerging market economy perspective. Central Eur Bus Rev 9(1):56–75. https://
doi.org/10.18267/J.CEBR.229
32. Mandysová I (2012) Creating a context as the base for entrepreneurial support policy. Scientific
Papers of the University of Pardubice, Series D, Faculty of Economics and Administration,
Issue 24 (2/2012).
33. Akinyemi FO, Adejumo OO (2018) Government policies and entrepreneurship phases in
emerging economies: Nigeria and South Africa. J Glob Entrep Res 8(35):1–18
34. Cassim S, Soni P, Karodia A (2014) Entrepreneurship policy in South Africa. Oman Chap Arab
J Bus Manag Rev 3:29–43
35. Borsellino V, Schimmenti E, El Bilali H (2020) Agri-food markets towards sustainable patterns.
Sustainability 12(6):2193. https://doi.org/10.3390/su12062193
36. UNCTAD (2009) Key components of entrepreneurship and innovation policy frameworks.
Trade and Development Board. https://unctad.org/en/Docs/ciimem1d6_en.pdf
37. Lundstrom A, Stevenson L (2005) Entrepreneurial policy—theory and practice. Springer,
Boston, MA
38. Shankar R, Nithyananda K (2017) Developing entrepreneurship policy in India—looking
for order in chaos. In: Conference: twelfth biennial conference on entrepreneurship, vol 1.
Entrepreneurship Development Institute of India Ahmedabad
39. MUDRA. https://www.mudra.org.in/. Accessed on 16.08.2012 Entrepreneurial Opportunities in Agri-Food Supply Chains 189
40. e-NAM. https://www.enam.gov.in/web/. Accessed on 15.08.20
41. Tian F (2016) An agri-food supply chain traceability system for China based on RFID and
blockchain technology. In: 2016 13th international conference on service systems and service
management (ICSSSM). IEEE, pp 1–6
42. Mezquita Y, Casado-Vara R, GonzÁlez Briones A, Prieto J, Corchado JM (2020) Blockchain￾based architecture for the control of logistics activities: pharmaceutical utilities case study. Log
J IGPL. jzaa039. https://doi.org/10.1093/jigpal/jzaa039
43. Galvez JF, Mejuto JC, Simal-Gandara J (2018) Future challenges on the use of blockchain for
food traceability analysis. TrAC, Trends Anal Chem 107:222–232
44. Koch K, Hamm MW (2015) The role of values in food hub sourcing and distributing practices.
J Hunger Environ Nutr 10:483–495
45. Mars MM, Schau HJ (2018) What is local food entrepreneurship? Variations in the commer￾cially and socially oriented features of entrepreneurship in the Southeastern Arizona local food
system. Rural Sociol 83(3):568–597
46. Graef F, Sieber S, Mutabazi K, Asch F, Biesalski HK, Bitegeko J, Bokelmann W et al (2014)
Framework for participatory food security research in rural food value chains. Glob Food Sec
3(1):8–15
47. Barbera F, Dagnes J (2016) Building alternatives from the bottom-up: the case of alternative
food networks. Agric Agric Sci Procedia 8:324–331
48. Kawharu M (2019) Reinterpreting the value chain in an indigenous community enterprise
context. J Enterprising Commun 13(3):242–262
49. Verma I (2013) Agri-logistic in india: Challenges and Emerging Solutions. Yourstory. https://
yourstory.com/2013/05/agri-logistics-in-india-challenges-and-emerging-solutions?utm_pag
eloadtype=scroll. Accessed on 26.8.2020
50. UrbanKisaan. https://www.urbankisaan.com/. Accessed on 20.08.20
51. Ninjacart. https://ninjacart.in/. Accessed on 26.8.20
52. Subzeelogic. http://subzeelogic.com/. Accessed on 29.8.20
53. AgroBlock. https://agroblock.io/. Accessed on 06.09.20
54. ThinkAg. https://www.thinkag.in/. Accessed on 01.08.20
55. ThinkAg (2020) Ag-Tech in India, Investment Landscape Report. Available at: https://a0e
20efd-4fe9-4537-80f50bc1b751db89.usrfiles.com/ugd/a0e20e_da949f63da464c90a0ab4d25
c4b280d5.pdfIndex
A
Agile supply chains, 2, 4, 7–9, 11
Agribusiness, 42, 54, 55, 116, 120, 122,
123, 170, 172–174, 176, 179
Agriculture supply chain, 2–4, 8–11, 97,
116
Agri-food, 1, 3–5, 8, 9, 55, 83, 116,
169–182, 186, 187
Agri-food entrepreneurship, 169, 170, 175
Artificial Intelligence (AI), 11, 22, 23, 96,
116, 129, 174, 185
B
Blockchain technology, 86, 96, 115, 174,
179–181
C
Cloud computing, 11, 127–140
Communicative packaging, 159, 160
D
Digital technology, 5
Drivers, 73, 101, 186
E
Entrepreneurial opportunities, 169, 170,
172–174, 186, 187
Exponential, 14, 21, 24, 26, 28–33
F
Farm to fork, 1, 2, 96, 181
Food industry, 5, 14, 21, 23, 24, 33, 66, 70,
71, 87, 130, 146, 152, 159, 165, 167,
172
Food packaging, 79, 152, 154, 160, 161,
165, 167
Food preferences, 1–4, 6, 10
Food processing, 21, 33, 75, 88, 134, 144,
147–152, 154, 170–172, 176, 177,
186
Food products, 2, 3, 9, 15, 21, 23, 24,
27–29, 32, 33, 35, 53, 55, 58, 59, 62,
70, 77–79, 81, 82, 85, 87, 89,
143–155, 159–161, 163, 165–167,
170, 171, 179, 181
Food quality and safety, 110, 122, 143–147,
150, 152, 154, 167, 173, 175
Food supply chain, 21, 53–55, 59–61, 65,
67–71, 73–86, 88–90, 95, 96, 111,
116, 117, 143–155, 159, 160, 166,
167, 169–172, 174, 179–182
Food wastage, 89, 116, 170
Forecasting, 21–26, 28–33, 75, 139
G
Green approaches, 143
Grounded theory, 1, 3, 4, 11
I
Industrial engineering, 129
Information and communication
technology, 96, 115, 116, 153, 154,
182
Information systems, 99, 134
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s), under exclusive license
to Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2022
R. S Mor et al. (eds.), Operations and Supply Chain Management in the Food Industry,
Lecture Notes in Management and Industrial Engineering,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-16-5555-5
191192 Index
Interpretive structural modelling, 16, 19,
100, 101, 104
M
Manufacturing systems, 62
Modelling, 15, 25, 26, 28, 32, 96
Moving averages, 21, 24, 26, 28–30, 32, 33
P
Perishability, 81, 89, 116
Policy framework, 169, 170, 172, 174–178,
187
Procurement, 22, 39–51, 76, 101, 145, 173,
182, 184
Production technology, 22
R
Radio Frequency Information Device
(RFID), 56, 80–82, 89, 90, 98, 165,
166, 179
S
Sensors, 5, 6, 15, 81, 82, 90, 122, 153, 154,
159, 161, 165–167
Smart packaging indicator, 148
Smoothening, 21, 33
Supply chain analytics, 22
Supply chain risk, 116
Sustainability, 53, 54, 57, 58, 64–67, 70,
71, 97, 115–117, 119–123, 145, 170,
171, 175, 178, 179, 181, 187
T
Technological innovations, 22, 108
Traceability, 97, 117, 118, 122, 129, 134,
153–155, 167, 179–181, 185
Transportation, 9, 13–16, 19, 54, 58, 68, 70,
73, 75, 77, 81, 83–85, 87, 88, 134,
163, 170
V
Value chain, 6, 39, 41, 42, 48, 78, 84,
172–175, 178, 181, 186
W
Wholesaler, 50, 62, 74, 83, 129
