PRAISE FOR OPERATIONAL 
RISK MANAGEMENT IN 
FINANCIAL SERVICES
‘Written by a renowned educator, this book is an invaluable resource for both 
experienced and early-career professionals seeking to enhance their skills and 
practices to foster value added operational risk management. With a simple and 
engaging approach, Operational Risk Management in Financial Services aptly 
recognizes the growing complexity of operational risk activities, offering 
essential tools and practical examples for navigating this evolving landscape.’
Josephine Degaita, Head of Group Operational Risk, National Bank of 
Greece
‘If you are looking for an all-round guide to operational risk management, 
whether you are an expert who wants to be challenged or just starting out in 
this field, this book is a must-have! Elena Pykhova seamlessly guides you 
through all you need to know about operational risk while making it simple to 
understand. I encourage everyone to read this book to learn from a top expert in 
this field.’
Inna Schwartz, Chief Risk Officer, Sygnum Bank
‘If you can only purchase one book on operational risk management, then I 
strongly recommend this one. Elena Pykhova’s insightful approach makes this 
book the best choice for those seeking practical, business-oriented solutions.’
Manoj Kulwal, Chief Risk and AI Officer, RiskSpotlight
‘Elena Pykhova teaches and writes in simple, clear and engaging language. This 
book is a brilliant resource for risk professionals, covering all foundational 
concepts in a practical and easy to follow manner.’
Daniela Biagi, Head of Academy, Euronext Group
‘An essential read for all risk professionals and CEOs. This book is the definitive 
guide to operational risk management in financial services.’
Richard Doe, former CEO, Harpenden Building Society
i‘Operational risk is a topic that is large and complex in both breadth and depth, 
making it a particularly challenging area for risk managers to get hold of. Elena 
Pykhova does a masterful job in bringing all the various strands together in a 
practically valuable yet accessible way. Very highly recommended!’
Moorad Choudhry, Author of The Principles of Banking
‘Simply, the most practical and educational guide on operational risk 
management written by an expert. A refreshingly lively read, with useful 
examples, valuable industry insights, challenges and good practices. 
A must-have book for anyone in the industry.’
Susana Gomez Smith, Non-Executive Director, Novo Banco and Leonteq AG
‘This is an excellent book. Elena Pykhova writes with passion and clarity, 
providing the reader with a simple-to-follow, guided journey through all the 
components of the operational risk framework. This is a great read for 
experienced risk professionals and non-professionals alike.’
Ellen Brataas, CEO, IIA Norway
‘A must for risk management professionals. The book has clear and direct 
language, very good examples and recommendations to better cope with the 
heavy burden and great responsibility that comes with operational risk 
management in the financial world. Very notable are its recommendations at the 
beginning of each chapter, together with challenges and good practices, which 
are valuable for those who work to make things happen in operational risk 
management.’
Esteban Olivares Arellano, Partner, Next Consultores, Adjunct Professor 
Faculty of Economics and Business, University of Chile and Regional 
Director, PRMIA
‘This book is an essential guide for professionals seeking to understand and 
manage the complexities of operational risk in today's financial services 
landscape. Crucially, this second edition provides valuable insights into the 
future of operational risk management and guides professionals into 
incorporating ESG into day-to-day strategies. A must-read for anyone in the 
industry.’
Nigel Boothroyd, Non-Executive Director, British Arab Commercial Bank
iiOperational Risk 
Management in 
Financial Services
A practical guide to establishing 
effective solutions
Elena Pykhova
Second Edition
iiiFirst published in Great Britain and the United States in 2021 by Kogan Page Limited
Second edition published in 2024
Apart from any fair dealing for the purposes of research or private study, or criticism or review, 
as permitted under the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988, this publication may only be 
reproduced, stored or transmitted, in any form or by any means, with the prior permission in 
writing of the publishers, or in the case of reprographic reproduction in accordance with the 
terms and licences issued by the CLA. Enquiries concerning reproduction outside these terms 
should be sent to the publishers at the undermentioned addresses:
Publisher’s note
Every possible effort has been made to ensure that the information contained in this book is 
accurate at the time of going to press, and the publishers and author cannot accept respon￾sibility for any errors or omissions, however caused. No responsibility for loss or damage 
occasioned to any person acting, or refraining from action, as a result of the material in this 
publication can be accepted by the editor, the publisher or the author.
2nd Floor, 45 Gee Street
London
EC1V 3RS
United Kingdom
www.koganpage.com
8 W 38th Street, Suite 902
New York, NY 10018
USA
Kogan Page books are printed on paper from sustainable forests.
© Elena Pykhova 2021, 2024
The rights of Elena Pykhova to be identified as the author of this work has been asserted by her in 
accordance with the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
ISBNs
Hardback 978 1 3986 1719 3
Paperback 978 1 3986 1714 8
Ebook 978 1 3986 1718 6
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A CIP record for this book is available from the British Library.
Library of Congress Control Number 
2024941651
Typeset by Integra Software Services, Pondicherry
Print production managed by Jellyfish
Printed and bound by CPI Group (UK) Ltd, Croydon, CR0 4YY
ivCONTENTS
List of figures x
About the author xiv
Preface xv
01 Operational risk: Definition and taxonomy 1
Introduction: value-added risk management 1
Helping employees to think about risk 2
Defining operational risk 5
Operational risk taxonomy and its evolution 9
Cause, event and impact: use of the bow-tie 14
Role of taxonomy in risk management by risk category 18
Common challenges and good practices 22
Industry benchmark 24
Practical workplace exercise 26
Notes 27
02 Operational risk framework and its implementation 29
Introducing the framework and its components 30
Three essential steps for implementing operational risk 
management practices 33
Common challenges and good practices 40
Industry benchmark 43
Practical workplace exercise 45
Notes 47
03 The Three Lines model: Its application to operational 
risk management 48
Overview: Three Lines model, its benefits and challenges 50
First line operational risk: problem solvers, postmen and 
champions 53
Second line operational risk: drifters, diminishers and 
multipliers 57
Recipe for success: when multipliers work with champions 62
Common challenges and good practices 63
vvi Contents
Industry benchmark 66
Practical workplace exercise 68
Notes 69
04 Operational risk events 71
Overview: importance of operational risk events 71
Defining scope and thresholds 73
ORE life cycle: from identification to root cause analysis 80
Addressing the human element 88
Treatment of technology-related events, data breaches and 
conduct failures 89
Roles and responsibilities 91
Common challenges and good practices 92
Industry benchmark 96
Practical workplace exercise 98
Notes 99
05 Risk and control self-assessments 100
Rethinking the approach: essential ingredients of the perfect 
recipe 102
Heightened focus on proactive risk identification 102
Top-down and bottom-up assessments and their features 103
Risk identification and assessment 109
More on risks: velocity, killer risks, risk acceptance 115
Control identification, categorization and assessment 118
RCSA life cycle and measures of success 123
Roles and responsibilities 127
Common challenges and good practices 128
Industry benchmark 131
Practical workplace exercise 133
Notes 134
06 Operational risk assessment of change initiatives 136
Trilogy: Scope–Methodology–Integration 138
Identifying risky change activities 139
Methodology: risks and opportunities assessment 142
Change activities and their features 147
Change assessment life cycle 153Contents vii
Roles and responsibilities 156
Common challenges and good practices 157
Industry benchmark 160
Practical workplace exercise 163
Notes 164
07 Key Risk Indicators 165
Definition, examples and key attributes 165
Defining thresholds and mastering aggregation 172
KRI life cycle and checklist: useful or useless? 177
Roles and responsibilities 181
Common challenges and good practices 182
Industry benchmark 185
Practical workplace exercise 187
Notes 188
08 Scenario analysis 189
Definition and purpose: for risk management and 
measurement 189
Scenario selection process 194
Scenarios in practice: three case studies 195
Life cycle: from pre-reading packs to mitigating bias 201
Emerging risks 208
Roles and responsibilities 211
Common challenges and good practices 212
Industry benchmark 215
Practical workplace exercise 217
Notes 218
09 Operational risk appetite 220
Risk reward equation and its application to operational risk 220
Three steps for developing an effective appetite statement 224
Monitoring risk profile and taking action 238
Common challenges and good practices 240
Industry benchmark 243
Practical workplace exercise 245
Notes 246viii Contents
10 Operational risk reporting 248
Reporting: its role and its challenges 248
Three steps for effective report writing 252
Helpful format and templates 257
Common challenges and good practices 261
Industry benchmark 265
Practical workplace exercise 268
Notes 269
11 Operational risk training and education 270
Advocating for continuous risk education 271
Building blocks for upskilling risk professionals 273
Cultivating first line risk coordinators 280
The educational journey: three steps towards memorable risk 
training 281
Common challenges and good practices 286
Industry benchmark 289
Practical workplace exercise 291
Notes 292
12 Risk culture 294
Understanding and measuring risk culture 294
The five-aspects risk culture assessment model 297
Metrics: culture and conduct dashboard 300
Practical steps towards embedding risk culture 301
Role of risk conversations 305
Impact of the identity of operational risk practitioners 306
Common challenges and good practices 309
Industry benchmark 312
Practical workplace exercise 314
Notes 315
13 Embedding and maturity assessment 317
The journey to maturity: three-step maturity ladder 319
Three pillars of success: financial performance, use test, risk 
culture 321
Business units’ self-assessment of embeddedness 325
Importance of retaining evidence 327Contents ix
Common challenges and good practices 329
Industry benchmark 331
Practical workplace exercise 334
Notes 335
14 Incorporating ESG into operational risk framework 337
Decomposing ESG into its elements: E, S and G 338
E, S and G: understanding risk management 342
The E in ESG 349
The S and the G in ESG 362
Common challenges and good practices 371
Industry benchmark 373
Practical workplace exercise 375
Notes 376
15 Operational resilience 380
Operational resilience: a step up from its predecessor 381
Integrating operational risk and resilience 383
Continued regulatory focus on operational resilience 391
Industry benchmark 393
Notes 396
16 Reflections on the future of the operational risk 
discipline 398
Think sharper, act smarter 399
Third-party and cyber: establishing the optimum second line 
role 400
Is operational risk disintegrating? 408
AI 410
Call for action to call for action 416
Notes 418
Appendix 1: Operational Risk Champion: role description 421
Appendix 2: Example operational risk event reporting 
template 423
Appendix 3: ORA template 425
Appendix 4: Table of 50 Key Risk Indicators 426
Index 434LIST OF FIGURES
Figures
Figure 1.1 Operational risk in a picture 5
Figure 1.2 Seven operational risk categories, Basel Committee 11
Figure 1.3 Sixteen operational risk categories, ORX 12
Figure 1.4 Cause-Event-Impact bow-tie 15
Figure 1.5 Governance forums aligned to risk categories 21
Figure 1.6 Industry poll: operational risk taxonomy 25
Figure 1.7 Industry poll: satisfaction with the taxonomy 26
Figure 2.1 Holistic operational risk management framework 31
Figure 2.2 Three steps for implementing an operational risk 
framework 34
Figure 2.3 Example extract from benchmarking study 38
Figure 2.4 Swimlane plan: operational risk implementation 39
Figure 2.5 Industry benchmark: operational risk plan of work 42
Figure 2.6 Industry poll: progress in operational risk management 43
Figure 2.7 Industry poll: operational risk framework effectiveness 44
Figure 2.8 Industry poll: operational risk and fintech 45
Figure 3.1 Focus of Chapter 3: responsibilities across the Three 
Lines 49
Figure 3.2 Three Lines in financial services 51
Figure 3.3 Operational risk personnel in first and second lines 53
Figure 3.4 First line operational risk role types 54
Figure 3.5 Second line operational risk role types 57
Figure 3.6 Industry poll: % of first line risk champions to total staff 67
Figure 4.1 Focus of Chapter 4: operational risk events 72
Figure 4.2 Unified impact rating grid 79
Figure 4.3 Industry poll: first line attitude to reporting OREs 96
Figure 4.4 Celebrating success using OREs 97
Figure 5.1 Focus of Chapter 5: risk assessments 101
Figure 5.2 Process risk self-assessment 105
Figure 5.3 Strategic risk assessment 107
Figure 5.4 Three questions for risk assessments 110
xList of figures xi
Figure 5.5 Use of the bow-tie model in RCSA process: risks 111
Figure 5.6 Risk grading matrix 114
Figure 5.7 Risk grading matrix: extending top risks 116
Figure 5.8 Control categorization 119
Figure 5.9 Use of the bow-tie in RCSA process: controls 120
Figure 5.10 Residual risk dependency on controls 121
Figure 5.11 Industry poll: RCSA effectiveness 131
Figure 5.12 Industry poll: first line perception of RCSAs 132
Figure 5.13 Industry poll: maturity of control testing and assurance 133
Figure 6.1 Focus of Chapter 6: risk assessments 137
Figure 6.2 Trilogy: Scope-Methodology-Integration 139
Figure 6.3 Risks and opportunities matrix 144
Figure 6.4 Industry poll: maturity of operational risk approach to 
change 161
Figure 6.5 Industry poll: operational risk involvement in change 
projects 162
Figure 6.6 Industry poll: tools used to measure change risk 162
Figure 7.1 Focus of Chapter 7: Key Risk Indicators 166
Figure 7.2 Example Key Risk Indicators dashboard 176
Figure 7.3 Industry poll: next steps for Key Risk Indicators 186
Figure 7.4 Industry poll: usefulness of Key Risk Indicators 186
Figure 8.1 Focus of Chapter 8: scenario analysis 190
Figure 8.2 Loss distribution curve 192
Figure 8.3 OREs, RCSAs and scenario analysis horizon 192
Figure 8.4 Scenario analysis spectrum 195
Figure 8.5 Cause-Event-Impact approach to scenario analysis 199
Figure 8.6 Emerging risk management cycle 210
Figure 8.7 Emerging risk horizon scanning maturity 210
Figure 8.8 Industry poll: scenario analysis value-add 216
Figure 8.9 Industry poll: number of scenarios considered 217
Figure 9.1 Focus of Chapter 9: operational risk appetite 221
Figure 9.2 Risk-reward relationship 222
Figure 9.3 Three steps for developing an operational risk appetite 225
Figure 9.4 Risk appetite: absolute scale example 226
Figure 9.5 Positioning principal enterprise risks on the scale 227
Figure 9.6 Positioning principal operational risks on the scale 229
Figure 9.7 Aligning appetite scale with the unified impact rating 
grid 229
Figure 9.8 Appetite maturity ladder 238xii List of figures
Figure 9.9 Monitoring risk profile against the appetite 239
Figure 9.10 Industry poll: approach to operational risk 244
Figure 9.11 Industry poll: expression of appetite (qualitative vs 
quantitative) 244
Figure 9.12 Industry poll: operational risk appetite features 245
Figure 10.1 Focus of Chapter 10: operational risk reporting 249
Figure 10.2 Three steps for report writing 252
Figure 10.3 Example of executive summary 258
Figure 10.4 Example operational risk report format 260
Figure 10.5 Industry poll: length of operational risk report 266
Figure 10.6 Operational risk report maturity 267
Figure 10.7 Industry poll: operational risk reporting challenges 267
Figure 11.1 Focus of Chapter 11: training and education 272
Figure 11.2 Three educational building blocks for the second line 
teams 273
Figure 11.3 Three steps for developing all-staff education 282
Figure 11.4 Industry poll: investment in education of operational risk 
professionals 290
Figure 11.5 Industry poll: operational risk soft skills development 290
Figure 12.1 Focus of Chapter 12: risk culture 295
Figure 12.2 Risk culture aspects model 298
Figure 12.3 Risk culture assessment case study analysis 299
Figure 12.4 Example of conduct and culture dashboard 302
Figure 12.5 Risk conversations 306
Figure 12.6 Industry poll: leading risk culture efforts 312
Figure 12.7 Industry poll: risk culture 313
Figure 12.8 Industry poll: improving risk culture 314
Figure 13.1 Focus of Chapter 13: embedding and maturity 
assessment 318
Figure 13.2 Operational risk maturity ladder 320
Figure 13.3 Three pillars of embedded operational risk 
management 321
Figure 13.4 Operational risk balanced scorecard 325
Figure 13.5 Defining point of arrival 332
Figure 13.6 Industry poll: operational risk maturity assessment 333
Figure 13.7 Operational risk embeddedness: measures of success 334
Figure 14.1 Focus of Chapter 14: interaction of E, S and G with 
operational risk framework 339
Figure 14.2 The Triangle: firm’s motivation in addressing E, S 
and G 344List of figures xiii
Figure 14.3 Mapping of E to operational risk taxonomy 352
Figure 14.4 Example results of climate-related risk assessment 356
Figure 14.5 Example climate risks and opportunities assessment 358
Figure 14.6 Climate-related scenario example 360
Figure 14.7 Mapping of S to operational risk taxonomy 365
Figure 14.8 Mapping of G to operational risk taxonomy 369
Figure 14.9 Industry poll: challenges of ESG integration 374
Figure 15.1 Operational resilience lifecycle 384
Figure 15.2 Critical operation dependencies 385
Figure 15.3 Operational risk and resilience scenarios 388
Figure 15.4 Operational resilience reporting dashboard 389
Figure 15.5 Industry poll: top operational risks 2024 393
Figure 15.6 Industry poll: employee familiarity with BCP 394
Figure 16.1 Industry poll: role of second line risk in cyber, third-party 
and resilience 400
Figure 16.2 Industry poll: understanding the third-party risk 
landscape 403
Figure 16.3 Industry poll: board-approved appetite for TPRM 403
Figure 16.4 Industry poll: is cyber a people risk? 407
Figure 16.5 Industry poll: integrating Generative AI into operational 
risk management 414
Figure 16.6 Industry poll: overall stance on Generative AI 414
Figure 16.7 Industry poll: knowledge of risk teams on AI 415
Figure 16.8 Industry poll: top operational risk priorities 2024 417ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Elena Pykhova is an award-winning risk ex￾pert, author, international trainer and educator. 
Based in London, she is the founder of a bou￾tique risk management consultancy, The 
OpRisk Company, www.theopriskcompany.
com, specializing in risk transformation, and in 
board/executive level advice on effective opera￾tional and enterprise risk management strat￾egy, design and implementation. Elena is a renowned educator, who for 
many years has run public and in-house training courses in the UK and in￾ternationally for world-leading organizations including the London Stock 
Exchange Academy, Euronext, Risk.net, the Møller Centre, Cambridge 
University and the Institute of Internal Auditors. Elena is also a thought 
leader, influencer and founder of a prominent industry think tank, the Best 
Practice Operational Risk Forum. She is a former Director for Education at 
the Institute of Operational Risk, and chair of the Expert Panel for the 
Association of Foreign Banks. Passionate about the operational risk disci￾pline, she founded her training and consulting practice after 20 years of 
experience in senior roles at Fortune 500 companies. She is a regular speaker 
at conferences and writes articles for Thomson Reuters, Advantage Talent 
Inc., Operational Risk & Regulation and other publications.
xivPREFACE
Operational Risk Management in Financial Services: A practical guide to 
establishing effective solutions reflects my passion for the operational risk 
discipline and the value it delivers to the enterprise. No other domain in fi￾nancial services is so extensive and all-encompassing, yet at the same time 
relatively young and still evolving as a discipline. These factors together 
mean that operational risk is perhaps the most exciting and interesting field 
to explore in the whole financial services sector. I am delighted to be sharing 
my passion for this fascinating and important topic, and invite the reader to 
embark on a journey distinguished by three main features: a practical ap￾proach, simplicity and engaging insights.
A practical approach
I came into operational risk from executive leadership roles in operations: 
running round-the-clock global foreign exchange and money market settle￾ments, processing billions of dollars a day, at American Express; managing 
busy retail branches with customers queuing at tellers’ tills in Citibank 
Tunisia; and starting up an internal control unit at Citibank Russia, where a 
dozen initial recruits helped to shape the bank from its inception. My per￾sonal experience in these roles taught me to apply a pragmatic approach to 
operational risk management. When designing and implementing frame￾works and tools, I always question whether these tools would have enabled 
me to do my job better. Operational risk management is about the value 
proposition of risk: finding practical ways of embedding risk management 
into the organization to add value. This has been my personal mantra in 
group head roles across American Express, Standard Chartered, VTB Capital 
and Deutsche Bank as well as many executive assignments with a broad 
range of clients in my consultancy practice.
Simplicity
Simplicity is another essential element. As Albert Einstein is alleged to have 
said, ‘If you can’t explain it simply, you don’t understand it well enough.’ 
xvxvi Preface
From an early age I was accustomed to dealing with complexity and trans￾lating it into simplicity: my parents are nuclear physicists, my brother stud￾ied and worked in the field of laser physics, and for my own degree I chose 
applied mathematics, admiring the beauty of logic and order. When teaching 
operational risk classes, I always aim to find ways of relaying complex infor￾mation in a simple manner, and to communicate in language that is engag￾ing and easily understood. Many of my courses, for example in mainland 
China, are run with a consequential translator. This construct demands an 
extra degree of clarity and simplicity when formulating and expressing 
thoughts. Research demonstrates that our brains can process three chunks 
of information comfortably. So, throughout the book you will find uncom￾plicated three-step approaches that help explain the different concepts being 
outlined: three steps for implementing operational risk practices, three ques￾tions for risk identification, the ‘Scope–Methodology–Integration’ trilogy… 
and many more besides.
Engaging insights
Another feature of the operational risk journey that is apparent to me is the 
vital importance of open debate and the sharing of experiences among op￾erational risk practitioners – especially at times when the discipline is ac￾tively evolving. To this end, I have been leading industry work in operational 
risk for over two decades, first as chair of the operational risk expert panel 
at the Association of Foreign Banks in London, managing round-table dis￾cussions and overseeing working groups and papers on good practices. 
Subsequently I spearheaded the creation of the Best Practice Operational 
Risk Forum, comprising senior risk practitioners from over 50 diverse and 
geographically spread financial services firms. One positive development 
that has emerged from the Covid-19 pandemic is that the Best Practice 
Forum has expanded even further, as our meetings have moved online. I 
have been delighted to welcome many new international participants who 
are now joining the Forum’s monthly calls from locations all over the globe. 
On these calls we share valuable insights – under Chatham House rules to 
preserve confidentiality – and conduct frequent live polls which enable rapid 
snapshots of current practices in every single area of operational risk. The 
Forum’s work is reflected in the book, where every chapter contains industry 
benchmark sections, providing a reader with a perspective of where the in￾dustry stands on each particular topic. I also make a point of posting regular Preface xvii
insights, reports and briefings on my website www.theopriskcompany.com
and on LinkedIn. If these are of interest, you can continue reading them by 
following my consultancy practice, The Op Risk Company Ltd.
Many friendships emanated from these years of industry work, and I am 
grateful to every one of my colleagues who has shared my passion for op￾erational risk management over the years.
About the 2nd Edition
What is new in the 2nd edition? There is, of course, an added chapter (14) 
addressing the integration of environmental, social and governance (ESG) 
aspects into the Operational risk framework. Without doubt, ESG factors 
are becoming increasingly important for organizations and their teams. The 
reader will note my view that the acronym needs to be decomposed into its 
separate elements: E, S and G, enabling effective assimilation into existing 
tools and processes.
The operational resilience chapter (15) has been re-written as a number 
of new publications came out since the first edition, and industry practices 
have somewhat matured.
There is a new chapter (16) which reflects on the current state and the 
future of operational risk management. It discusses topical subjects such as 
Third-party, Cyber risk, and GenAI, and proposes a recipe for risk profes￾sionals to remain current and successful to withstand future challenges. This 
is even more important in the current testing environment, when demands 
are continuing to increase while budgets and resources (at best) remain at 
the same level. There is less room for risk administration and more impetus 
for value-added risk management. Operational risk professionals must 
think sharper and act smarter.
Lastly, industry benchmarks at the end of every chapter have been up￾dated to provide the latest snapshots of current practices. Readers will note 
that industry polls demonstrate gradual and steady progress is many, despite 
not all, areas, as operational risk discipline continues to mature. One area 
where deterioration was noted is the Risk and Control Self-Assessments 
(RCSAs). It appears that the more organizations persist in making the pro￾cess rigid and complex, with pre-defined and pre-formulated risk and con￾trol libraries, the less room is left for free-flowing conversations on what 
truly keeps the stakeholders awake at night. Thus, a point of reflection: do 
not overcomplicate the RCSAs: re-inject the energy with expert facilitation, 
re-engage the stakeholders in meaningful discussions around three simple xviii Preface
questions as noted in Chapter 5, and derive value by making the results ac￾tionable.
Finally, I wholeheartedly thank all those who made the 2nd edition pos￾sible: Charlie Lynn from Kogan Page who worked with me tirelessly, 
Howard Walwyn from Prism-Clarity who aided in achieving clarity, many 
inspirational risk experts who took their time to read and comment on the 
draft chapters, and my family who, second time round, already knew what 
book writing entails, and were duly patient and supportive. I am hugely 
grateful to my clients, industry partners and Best Practice Forum members 
who continue to place trust in me and with whom I am fortunate to work, 
continuously enhancing operational risk management practices. It’s thanks 
to all of you that this second edition became possible.
I hope that readers will appreciate practical solutions, tips and hints and 
relate to the challenges highlighted in the chapters. I also trust that the 
book will help to dispel the myth that operational risk is a boring discipline 
and inspire more practitioners to apply for roles in the Operational Risk 
department.Operational risk 01
Definition and taxonomy
What this chapter covers: This introductory chapter starts with reflections 
on what risk is, and how to encourage employees to think about risk with￾out viewing it as an alien subject. The chapter provides a definition of 
Operational Risk and examines its evolution. It then presents the Risk 
Taxonomy as the essential glue that binds the framework together, laying 
the foundation for effective operational risk management. It proceeds to 
emphasize the importance of an appropriate classification system. Finally, 
the chapter contains an industry study and the results of live polls with in￾dustry practitioners.
FURTHER READING
● Operational Riskdata eXchange Association (2019) ORX Reference 
Taxonomy
Why recommended: The ORX reference taxonomy is the latest positive 
industry development, presenting a coherent and up-to-date 
classification system.
● Daniel Kahneman (2012) Thinking, Fast and Slow, Penguin Books
Why recommended: After all, risk management is about decision-making. 
This international bestseller by Nobel Laureate Daniel Kahneman 
explores how our minds work and provides practical techniques to help 
us make better decisions.
Introduction: value-added risk management
Organizations – some more than others, admittedly – take a natural inter￾est in managing their people, systems and processes, and the threats posed 
by the external environment. Business units and support functions were 
12 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
handling these things well before operational risk was defined in the Basel 
Accord; and they would continue to do so, even if operational risk practi￾tioners were not part of the equation.
The key question, therefore, is about the value proposition of the risk 
function. Are operational risk professionals providing end-users with the 
tools that enable them to do their job better? Or do risk frameworks merely 
add an administrative burden, and hinder employees’ experience, rather 
than enhancing it?
This book is about the value proposition of risk: simple, practical ways of 
embedding operational risk management into your organization to add 
value.
Helping employees to think about risk
What is risk and how do we think about it? Without oversimplifying, risk is 
an intuitive concept: perhaps without always realizing it, we are managing 
risk and taking risk-based decisions every day. As individuals, we have an 
internal compass that guides our risk perception. The tuning of the compass 
is highly personalized; something perceived as alarming by some may be 
normal for others, and so our reactions vary. Risk takers may welcome 
thrilling situations, while other more conservative individuals may prefer to 
stay as far away as possible from anything remotely threatening.
For over two decades I have been running training courses on operational 
risk, and I usually start these sessions with a simple exercise: asking partici￾pants to exchange stories about something risky they have done and getting 
each group to decide who is the riskiest person in their team. This always 
sets the room in motion: no formal definitions or lengthy explanations are 
required about what risk is. Invariably fascinating stories are told by attend￾ees representing different cultures, nationalities and geographic locations. I 
consider myself very fortunate to have heard so many of them.
This exercise is particularly helpful because it enables attendees to con￾sider some important concepts as well as draw parallels with the world of 
operational risk management.
Risk taking for reward
The anecdotes that feature most frequently in these stories are related to 
extreme sports such as bungee jumping, mountain biking and skydiving. It ­Operational ris 3
never fails to fascinate me how many financial services professionals engage 
fearlessly in activities which are essentially quite dangerous. They illustrate 
risk taking – actively seeking risk for reward – doing exciting things while at 
the same time recognizing that they contain threats.
Risk assessment
It is worth exploring how participants assessed the risk and what precau￾tions they took before deciding to (for instance) jump out of a plane with a 
parachute. These might include:
● researching the service provider to ensure it was a reputable establishment;
● asking to be accompanied by a master instructor on the dive;
● taking out insurance.
These kinds of precautions immediately highlight some important concepts. 
First, the notion of inherent risk – risk without any associated controls. 
Second, the idea of risk reduction via the application of controls. Third, the 
related notion of residual risk – the level of risk remaining after the applica￾tion of controls – which the individual has accepted before choosing to pro￾ceed. This example also introduces the concept of a risk assessment, which 
will be outlined in Chapter 5.
Risk mitigation
Many of the courses I run are in countries with different cultures and lan￾guages, sometimes alongside a translator. In some languages the word risk
has a negative connotation and is associated with danger or individual par￾ticipants may attribute this meaning. For them hearing the word risk con￾jures up threats and hazards in their minds. Consequently, their stories 
sometimes involve snowstorms, floods or explosions. These examples, in 
turn, illustrate that risk is not always intentionally sought; there is no re￾ward to be gained and therefore the level must be mitigated downwards, by 
any means possible. This summarizes the key dilemma around the nature of 
operational risk, discussed in Chapter 9, which invites readers to form a 
view on whether operational risk is taken for return or, akin to a snow￾storm, imposed from the outside and not intentionally sought – with reduc￾tion or mitigation being left as the only option.4 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
Impact and likelihood
Sometimes, the accounts contain examples of materialized risk; perhaps a 
skiing accident which (thankfully) resulted in only a minor injury. When risk 
materializes it turns into a risk event, as presented in Chapter 4. This illus￾trates that risk is something that has not happened yet and may (or may not) 
happen in the future; introducing the uncertainty of outcome and the twin 
dimensions of likelihood and impact. In the skiing accident example the 
impact was described as minor; but before the trip took place its outcome 
was unknown.
Risk appetite
I asked a group of international participants at a course I delivered at 
Cambridge University to identify the riskiest person in their group. They all 
pointed immediately to the head of the delegation. This was because, on ar￾rival, they had rented a bicycle and gone out exploring the picturesque town 
on their own. The group perceived this decision as ‘very adventurous’ due to 
a lack of familiarity with the layout of the town, not to mention the lan￾guage barrier, which it was felt would diminish their opportunity to ask for 
help if needed. The head of the delegation, by contrast, argued that they 
were well-travelled and used to exploring unknown places, and would con￾tinue to do so throughout the stay.
This discussion articulates the fact that people have different individual 
risk appetites, ranging from conservative to expansionary. Similarly, finan￾cial services firms have distinct risk appetites to suit their size, nature and 
business model. The example also highlights the importance of risk conver￾sations, encouraging people to talk openly about risk, and to compare notes 
on the magnitude of risk being taken and the quality of controls in place.
Every key concept in operational risk management can be explained via 
real-life stories of this kind; the list of examples and respective parallels that 
can be drawn is endless. The main objective of the introductory exercise to 
the training course is to encourage participants to embrace risk and actively 
converse on the topic. Bringing in examples from personal experience dem￾onstrates that we are already continually reflecting on risk-related matters; 
and it should be no different when it comes to running a financial services 
business.
Within a corporate environment, it is essential to find ways of inspiring 
employees to think and talk about risk, in as many ways as possible.­Operational ris 5
Defining operational risk
Definition and its evolution
The well-known definition of operational risk presented by the Basel 
Framework is ‘the risk of loss resulting from inadequate or failed internal 
processes, people and systems or from external events’.1
 Put simply, the reg￾ulators concluded that financial services firms could sustain major damage 
due to risks other than credit and market risks. Consequently, a broad range 
of threats was grouped under the umbrella of operational risk, as depicted 
in Figure 1.1; and firms were requested, for the first time, to put capital aside 
to guard against such losses.
Needless to say, the spectrum of the operational risk discipline based on 
this definition is very wide-ranging, covering deliberate or accidental actions 
of employees, malfunctions of technological systems and broken processes. 
The categories of risk covered by this definition are distinct, not homogene￾ous and require specialist knowledge. This is an interesting phenomenon 
which has always prompted questions about the identity of operational risk 
practitioners and the expectation that they need to be masters of all trades. 
That very breadth of the scope should, however, be viewed as the greatest 
advantage of the operational risk discipline: no other domain in financial 
services is so extensive or all-encompassing in scope. Coupled with the fact 
that it is still a relatively young and evolving discipline, operational risk is 
perhaps the most exciting and interesting financial services field in which to 
explore and build a career.
LOSS
Processes
People
External
events
Systems
Figure 1.1 Operational risk in a picture6 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
Operational risk, not operations risk
Arguably, the name operational risk does not do the discipline justice; 
whether in English or other languages, it is often mistakenly associated with 
the Operations Department and the potential errors and failures that ema￾nate from operational processing. When my training slides are translated 
into various languages, I always double-check the definition and frequently 
have to correct the fact that the word has been translated as operations.
What was confusing a decade ago is still so nowadays. So it is important to 
emphasize:
Operational Risk ≠ Operations Risk
The educational journey is far from complete, within both financial services 
firms and the regulatory authorities themselves. In 2017, the European 
Securities and Markets Authority (ESMA) issued a pioneering document on 
the application of distributed ledger technology to the securities market.2
Under the ‘Key Risk’ section, however, operational risk still called out only 
errors and glitches; while other sub-components such as cyber, fraud and 
money laundering – which should have been mentioned under the same 
heading – appeared under separate and distinct titles.
In recent years, potential fragmentation was somewhat exacerbated by 
conduct risk being unhelpfully introduced and treated by many firms as a 
risk distinct from operational risk. To reiterate, in this book operational risk 
is viewed in its broadest, all-encompassing context. In some organizations, 
it has even been renamed to non-financial risk to emphasize the breadth and 
remove the confusion with operations.
Just loss no longer works
The roots of the operational risk discipline lay in the Basel Capital
Accord; the word capital relaying the primary focus of prudential regulatory 
directives on risk measurement and the adequacy of internal financial re￾sources. The Basel Committee disclosed, in a study of 30 major banks, that 
the value of losses crystallizing from operational risk failures between 1998 
and 2000 amounted to €2.6 billion;3
 as a result, it became a significant 
enough concern to warrant an introduction of a capital charge.
In reality there are other important impacts of operational risk failure, 
in addition to financial losses incurred by the firm itself. These include 
customer detriment, reputational damage and market instability. Following ­Operational ris 7
high-profile mis-selling scandals and significant technology failures, both 
firms and regulators nowadays are paying close attention to conduct and 
operational resilience. While the Basel Framework itself is primarily in￾wardly focused on the firm’s financial resources, supervisors around the 
world would argue that organizations also need to have an outward view: 
considering the harm that their wrongdoing may be causing to clients and 
markets. This friction creates an interesting divergence: a growing number 
of organizations are coming to the view that the definition which cites only 
loss is no longer fully reflective of today’s environment. The universe of 
operational risk is thus expanded, by amending the first part of the stand￾ard Basel definition to:
● the risk of direct or indirect loss resulting from...;
● the risk of actual or potential financial loss or client harm resulting 
from...; or even more broadly...
● the risk of not achieving strategic objectives due to inadequate or failed 
internal processes, people and systems or from external events.
Link to strategy and value proposition
As a business value proposition, operational risk management has a clear 
purpose. Its primary goal is to provide tools to business units on the ground 
to enable them to make well-informed and risk-aware decisions. Even 
though the Basel description specifically excludes strategic risk from its 
scope, expanding the definition of operational risk to be more of an enter￾prise-wide discipline – and specifically linking it to business objectives – 
makes a lot of sense and immediately bears fruit. Having a conversation 
with a chief executive and senior managers on what keeps them awake at 
night inevitably brings more strategic aspects into the discussion. A nar￾rowly defined scope, on the other hand, creates barriers to a free-flowing 
conversation. It means business-related concerns are expressly carved out 
and demonstrates clearly that the focus of operational risk should be limited 
to ‘operational’ concerns, such as fraud and the like.
The traditional definition of risk cited by the International Organization 
for Standardization (ISO) is ‘the effect of uncertainty on objectives’.4
 This 
definition purposely focuses on objectives; not the whole realm of uncertain￾ties, but rather their specific impact on what needs to be achieved. Similarly, 
the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission 
(COSO) stresses the position of risk in relation to mission and strategy.58 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
This may be the missing link in how operational risk is distinguished from 
other disciplines. At times there is a tendency within the operational risk 
domain to go its own way, creating lists of all the things that can possibly go 
wrong due to processes, people or systems, but not always seeing the vital 
connection to what matters most: the firm’s business goals. Expanding the 
definition to include an explicit link to business objectives elevates the brand 
and straightaway brings risk practitioners to the strategy table.
In 2018, I conducted a study to understand industry practices around 
these definition questions, the results of which are presented in Table 1.1. 
They demonstrate that, while the majority of practitioners are still using 
the original Basel definition, we are also seeing a positive shift in the indus￾try, re-positioning operational risk where it can help derive the maximum 
possible business benefit.
As part of the same study, operational risk professionals voted on their 
presence at the strategy table. The outcome in Table 1.2 reflects a common 
complaint among practitioners that the operational risk function is not rou￾tinely called upon when major discussions and decisions are taking place. 
This result provides yet more impetus to expand the definition and promote 
the standing of the discipline.
Table 1.1 Industry study: definition of operational risk
Operational risk definition % firms
Using Basel definition 56
Expanded to broader than loss 13
Expanded to include strategy or link to objectives 23
Other expanded 8
Operational risk function at the strategy table % firms
Yes 25
Occasionally involved in some strategic decisions 49
Not involved in making strategic decisions 26
Table 1.2 Industry study: operational risk function at the strategy table­Operational ris 9
To this end, an impressive example of a Governance, Risk and Compliance 
(GRC) software solution is Corporater (corporater.com), which has adopted 
a GPRC (Governance, Performance, Risk and Compliance) approach. It in￾corporated Performance as a module, enabling alignment of risk manage￾ment with business performance and strategy execution.
Operational risk taxonomy and its evolution
At the heart of operational risk management is the Risk Taxonomy, which 
provides further explanation and definition of the scope of what is included 
in the discipline.
OPERATIONAL RISK TAXONOMY
The taxonomy is a risk classification system which defines and 
distinguishes different categories of operational risk, enabling it to capture 
the complete risk universe.
What is the main purpose of this taxonomy? In practice it serves several dif￾ferent uses, as highlighted below.
Common language and areas of focus
Classification introduces a common language of risk, enabling the organization 
to use consistent terminology. It also allows firms to bring certain themes into 
the spotlight, by specifically calling them out in separate categories, which helps 
to focus attention on them during risk identification exercises. There is an 
additional benefit from the regulatory requirement to map internal taxonomy 
to standard Basel Committee categories which are described further in the chap￾ter. It means that not only do firms have a common language but there is also 
an industry common language that can be used for benchmarking purposes.
Risk measurement
In the early days, the primary use of the taxonomy tended to be for risk 
measurement. It enables firms to allocate losses – which we can think of as 
crystallized operational risks, as discussed in Chapter 4 – to a specific named 10 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
category. This helps firms analyse their loss profile, understand the distribu￾tion of loss amounts across the spectrum of possibilities and evaluate the 
adequacy of their capital.
Risk identification
As the operational risk discipline has matured, the use of categorization for 
risk management purposes has gradually been increasing. For example, dur￾ing the risk assessment process outlined in Chapters 5 and 6, risk categories 
provide a helpful reminder that a whole range of themes need to be ad￾dressed, from fraud to system failures, ensuring that no material risks are 
omitted from the review.
Back-testing
The taxonomy is the essential glue that links the framework elements to￾gether. If the tools introduced in subsequent chapters all apply the same 
classification, it is possible to compare and contrast their outputs against 
each other, which helps to tell a coherent story.
Aggregation and reporting
Following on from this, categorization allows a structure to be imposed on 
large quantities of operational risk data, allowing the aggregation, analysis 
and reporting of themes in a meaningful way, and enabling areas of concern 
to be highlighted.
Introduction of operational risk taxonomy
The Basel taxonomy consists of seven categories, or types, described in 
Figure 1.2. (Note: the terms ‘category’ and ‘type’ will be used interchange￾ably throughout the rest of this chapter.)
Basel classification has been used by many organizations since the very 
early days of the operational risk discipline, and is now deeply embedded in 
the core tools of the framework which capture, process and analyse relevant 
data.
A further nomenclature exists for each of the main (or level 1) categories. 
We can think of these as level 2 sub-categories (or sub-types) of risk. The 
Basel Framework, for instance, splits internal fraud into more detailed sub￾categories, such as unauthorized activity and theft and fraud (see Table 1.3).­Operational ris 11
Internal fraud
External fraud
Employment practices
and workplace safety
Clients, products and
business practices
Damage to physical
assets
Business disruption and
system failures
Execution, delivery and
process management
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Figure 1.2 Seven operational risk categories, Basel Committee
Table 1.3 Taxonomy sub-categories
Level 1 category Level 2 sub-category
1. Internal fraud 1.1 Unauthorized activity
1.2 Theft and fraud
Typically, firms define a hierarchy with two to three levels, though some 
organizations go up to five levels, creating a comprehensive catalogue of 
detailed individual risks. A taxonomy with more than three levels may, how￾ever, become too granular and burdensome to use.
Evolution of operational risk taxonomy
While some firms continue to apply the original Basel classification, it is 
recognized across the industry that it is becoming dated. Increasingly, or￾ganizations are taking the opportunity to design a bespoke, fit-for-purpose 
listing tailored to their own needs. The publication of an updated reference 
taxonomy by the ORX, summarized in Figure 1.3, has enabled some firms 
to accelerate progress in adopting a more current categorization system.612 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
Simplifying the language
The Basel Committee naming conventions are not entirely obvious or intui￾tive to employees on the ground who may be less familiar with operational 
risk as a discipline. While the term execution, delivery and process manage￾ment is easily recognized by most risk practitioners, it is less meaningful to 
other departments. To help improve embeddedness, a better value proposition 
People
External fraud
Internal fraud
Physical security and 
safety
Business continuity
Transaction processing
and execution
Technology
Conduct
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Legal
Financial crime
Regulatory compliance
Third party
Information security 
(including cyber)
Statutory reporting and 
tax
Data management
Model
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
8 16
Figure 1.3 Sixteen operational risk categories, ORX
To create a fit-for-purpose taxonomy, organizations should aim to:
● use simple language which is understood at all levels of the 
organization;
● shape the categories to reflect the most significant risks in their 
business;
● create the best possible value for risk identification and management 
purposes.­Operational ris 13
is to deliver the risk framework in the language that people in the business 
actually use. For example, as seen in Figure 1.3, employment practices and 
workplace safety has been effectively renamed by ORX as merely people – a 
more sensible and intuitive expression of that risk type.
Reflecting the current landscape
Over the years the operational risk landscape has evolved markedly, provid￾ing yet another reason for a refresh of the Basel taxonomy. For example:
● Outsourcing and Supplier (or Third-party risk) – given firms’ increasing 
reliance on third (fourth and n-th) parties and in view of requirements 
such as the European Banking Authority’s guidelines,7
 this needs to be 
promoted into its own level 1 category rather than displayed as part of 
execution, delivery and process management.
● Cyber – for which the Financial Stability Board has developed a whole 
lexicon of its own – needs to be reflected with adequate language.8
● Clients, products and business practices is too wide-ranging and includes 
several distinct topics, including legal and financial crime. If a firm is 
assessing its exposure to and appetite for, say, legal risk – which is 
specifically called out by the Basel Framework as part of operational 
risk – it would be beneficial to have that risk as a distinct category.
● On the other hand, examples such as cheque kiting – a form of 
unauthorized chequing account activity which Basel lists as level 3 under 
execution, delivery and process management – are becoming less pertinent 
in the digital age.
Considering best value for risk management purposes
As discussed earlier in the chapter, taxonomy allows firms and practitioners 
to consciously focus attention on specific themes; it is therefore a powerful 
risk management tool. For example, where the firm is reliant on a significant 
number of complex spreadsheets and end-user computing applications 
(EUCs), it may introduce model risk as a level 1 category. This will empha￾size the importance of the topic and encourage end-users to identify and 
assess model risk, defined as the risk of incorrect model design or poor im￾plementation. Areas such as trading, finance and market risk commonly use 
elaborate models, sometimes in the form of spreadsheets, which take as￾sumptions, perform computations and produce critical outputs that are 
used for decision-making. There are plenty of industry examples of model 14 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
errors that have caused significant losses and reputational damage to the 
enterprise, signifying the importance of model risk management.
Similarly, if the organization is actively launching new products and value 
propositions, it may feel appropriate to distinguish a level 1 product risk
category, as described in Table 1.4.
Product does not appear as a level 1 category in either the Basel or ORX 
taxonomies; while model is present in the ORX but not the Basel level 1 
categorization. This discrepancy illustrates that it is useful to refer to indus￾try sources as a guide rather than a rule, and to develop a customized clas￾sification scheme. The challenge, of course, is that businesses evolve over 
time and the scheme has to be meaningful at the moment of creation and yet 
have the flexibility to evolve in line with business needs.
Cause, event and impact: use of the bow-tie
Generally, the purpose of the operational risk taxonomy is to classify events. 
It is worth discussing this in more detail, highlighting a perpetual opera￾tional risk management challenge around cause, event and impact.
● cause leads to an event;
● event is a specific occurrence, or something that goes wrong;
● impact is the consequence of an event.
Staff fatigue may be a cause of, for instance, a transactional error or failure 
to process a payment (an event), leading to financial loss, client detriment 
and other consequences (impacts), as outlined in Figure 1.4.
Level 1 
category
Subject 
matter expert Definition
Level 2 
sub-categories
1. Product Head of Product 
Development
The risk of product 
flaws or defects, 
failure to adhere to 
specification.
1.1 Product defects
1.2 Failure to adhere to 
product specification
1.3 Inadequate new/
change product approval 
process
Table 1.4 Taxonomy example: product category­Operational ris 15
This well-known model, named after its resemblance to a bow-tie, is helpful 
in differentiating between causes, events and impacts, leading to a neater 
taxonomy containing events (and excluding causes and impacts). The bow￾tie model will be further referred to in subsequent chapters of the book. In 
the earlier example, the event falls under the category transaction processing 
and execution; while staff fatigue, being a cause, does not belong in the 
event taxonomy.
That said, it has to be acknowledged that there are endless cause–event–
impact chains in operational risk management due to the sheer breadth of 
the discipline and interconnectedness of various elements. One event can 
become the cause of another; for instance, miscommunication (cause) can 
result in an erroneous transaction (event); in turn, an erroneous transaction 
(cause) may corrupt a system, leading to system failure (event).
Event
Staff fatigue Transactional
error
Financial loss
Client detriment
Regulatory fine
Reputational
damage
Cause
Mitigating
controls 
Mitigating
controls 
Impact
Figure 1.4 Cause–Event–Impact bow-tie
PRACTICAL TIP: ‘PIN THE BOW-TIE’
To untangle the cause–event–impact chain, practitioners may adopt an 
approach of ‘pinning the bow-tie’, whereby the cause is ascertained first to 
distinguish the event. Alternatively, employees may choose to ‘pin’ the 
impact (for example, on the end-customer), working backwards to the 
event. The latter approach is easier and more readily understood by the 
business units and support functions.16 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
A note on exclusivity, which is a useful design concept when setting the tax￾onomy. It is important to provide clear guidance to avoid the overlap where 
a risk or event can easily be placed into two or more taxonomy categories. 
For example, the Outsourcing and Supplier (or Third-Party) category may 
be designed to capture all events caused by service providers. In this case, 
information security type dealing with data loss, theft or non-deliberate 
data breaches should clearly denote the exclusion of third-party data-related 
events, pointing to their coverage under the respective category.
To summarize, when designing the taxonomy, adopt a pragmatic ap￾proach, and configure to the extent possible ‘clean’ event-type categories 
which are:
● exhaustive;
● mutually exclusive;
● resonant with end-users; and
● aiding the most in risk management.
Importantly, be prepared to invest in the analysis of captured data – and 
recategorization of it where necessary – accepting that perfection is not fea￾sible in this space. Additionally, maintain mappings to the original Basel 
categories for industry benchmarking purposes.
Most debated taxonomy categories
There are areas of taxonomy that are actively debated and deserve atten￾tion, outlined below.
People
The first one is the people category, where both the Basel and ORX taxono￾mies only count occurrences such as employment lawsuits (events). The 
firms, however, frequently wish to encourage the identification and monitor￾ing of risks related to employees being overstretched, or not having the right 
skillset. If business functions are urged to record threats to capacity or capa￾bility, that might enable the firm to receive signals and proactively act before 
the problem becomes serious. In this case, the overall employee life cycle 
from on-boarding to off-boarding – including well-being, which became a 
particular focal point during and post the Covid-19 pandemic – is included 
in the event-type taxonomy to capture the entire range of people-related 
matters.­Operational ris 17
Change
Another topic which justifies review, as it often leads to arguments, is the 
topic of change. Inadequate change management is usually a cause of events 
such as errors or failed regulatory reporting obligations. Therefore, it has no 
place in the original Basel or ORX event-type taxonomies. However, due to 
the increasing change agenda within all organizations, change is often now 
built into the classification system in its own right; to prompt staff to reflect 
on the magnitude of corporate transformation and address the pressures of 
too much change before things go wrong.
Conduct
While conduct is sometimes presented in its own right (including by ORX), it 
is best to treat it as an overarching term to identify the multitude of risks that 
may result in poor customer outcomes (also see Chapter 12 for further defini￾tions). Arguably, many risks residing in the categories such as people, financial 
crime, information security may have conduct implications. They may, how￾ever, also apply to the technology category, where for example, underinvest￾ment in systems leading to technology failure is a behavioural matter, as it 
reflects a lack of customer care: the customer not being at the heart of strate￾gic decisions, prioritization and allocation of budget. Consequently, a conduct 
lens can be applied to almost any risk or event to reflect the fact that it has 
specific (customer or market) consequences, leading to reporting on conduct 
risk via consolidation of one or more taxonomy categories.
Operational resilience
Operational resilience according to the Basel Committee is an ‘outcome that 
benefits from the effective management of operational risk’.9
 Similarly to 
conduct, it is best not to shoehorn it into a separate category due to the 
potential for duplication with other risk types (see Chapter  15 for more 
details).
ESG
This topical subject has a dedicated chapter describing how E, S and G can 
be incorporated into the taxonomy. Essentially, E can be treated as a cause, 
while S (as well as G) as a lens through which traditional operational risks 
are viewed (see Chapter 14 for more details).
Geopolitical
Geopolitical risk frequently appears as a top operational risk in various in￾dustry surveys. As it reflects an external threat landscape, it in fact represents 18 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
a driver of multiple operational risks materializing. Therefore, it is best to 
view it as a cause; this approach is supported by ORX, where geopolitical/
economic/social instability appears in the causal taxonomy among other ex￾ternal causes.10
In 2020, I led a comparative analysis of operational risk taxonomies 
across the financial services sector. Presented in Table 1.5 are examples from 
six firms, anonymized and slightly modified to preserve confidentiality.
The study demonstrates the expected degree of divergence, and proves that 
there is no ‘right’ solution to the taxonomy question. Companies are actively 
tailoring the nomenclature to suit their needs, splitting or collapsing categories 
and introducing their own terminology. And while there are some common 
groupings such as fraud and information technology, unique types – for 
example transparency or customer and employee communication – also appear.
Role of taxonomy in risk management 
by risk category
A well-defined taxonomy sets the foundation for effective management of 
operational risk not only at the overall level, but also by risk category; this 
is where the naming conventions and appropriateness of the categorization 
scheme become even more apparent. It is likely that all the risk types de￾cided on are already being managed by the enterprise, and that experts are 
in place to provide specialist advice. The critical role of the operational risk 
function, therefore, is to orchestrate, connect and coordinate the various 
activities, bringing together a wealth of existing expertise while avoiding 
unnecessary duplication.
A subject matter expert (SME) for a given taxonomy category can be 
defined as a knowledgeable senior individual who is able to provide 
expertise and advice on that category, including:
● contributing to its definition and level 2 composition;
● providing expert opinion on operational risk data recorded under the 
category;
● defining operating policies and standards; and
● contributing to operational risk appetite statement and measures 
(discussed in Chapter 9).Table 1.5 Industry study: operational risk taxonomies
Firm 1 Firm 2 Firm 3 Firm 4 Firm 5 Firm 6
Internal fraud Economic crime Financial 
crime
Fraud Third party liability Fraud
External fraud Rogue trading and market 
abuse
Financial crime
Unauthorized 
activity
Employment 
practices
Employment practices People Staff Health and safety Health, safety and 
security
Personal and 
physical security
Health, safety and 
environment
Health and 
safety
Health and 
safety
Buildings and premises
Facilities management
Compliance risk Product flaws Model Valuation Transparency risk Model governance
Regulatory compliance Conduct Compliance Communications
Legal compliance Legal
Customer and employee 
communication
Tax
Information 
Technology risk
Information Technology 
management
Technology 
and cyber 
security
Systems Information technology Technology
(continued)
19Firm 1 Firm 2 Firm 3 Firm 4 Firm 5 Firm 6
Continuity risk Operational 
resilience
Data Cyber Business resilience
Data security Business continuity
Data quality and integrity
Processing risk Payments transactions Execution, 
delivery and 
process 
management
Booking and 
processing
Estate management Business process
Control risk Member service Change 
management
Accounting Reporting Change management
Financial, regulatory and 
critical monitoring and 
reporting
Supplier Collateral Third party risk Supplier management
Insurance
Project
Outsourcing
Table 1.5 (Continued)
20­Operational ris 21
Organizational structures often naturally lend themselves to the SME con￾cept, with the head of Human Resources, for example, being the natural SME 
for the people risk category, the Chief Technology Officer for technology, the 
head of the Legal department for legal, and so on. Some organizations utilize 
the term risk owner instead of an SME, which implies more responsibility. 
Whichever term is used, it must fit well with the accountability regime applied 
by the organization.
Partnership with SMEs enables operational risk teams to agree each tax￾onomy category and set the foundation for continuous collaboration in risk 
management. Operational risk teams must not apply an overly rigid ap￾proach, instead consulting with SMEs and incorporating their views. It is 
better to find the right middle ground to arrive at a sensible and meaningful 
classification, rather than aiming for a perfect categorization that does not 
achieve organizational buy-in.
Where a partnership with SMEs is not achieved, operational risk practi￾tioners face a challenge of a high degree of fragmentation – and lack of co￾ordination – of their activities. They will be managing operational risk at an 
aggregate level, whereas their respective SMEs are dealing with each cate￾gory individually on the ground. Bringing the framework together and inte￾grating the activities helps greatly in ensuring effective and value-added risk 
management. That is where governance forums aligned to material risk cat￾egories, as described in Figure 1.5, are most effective.
These kinds of forums allow firms to dedicate sufficient attention and 
perform a deep dive into material risk categories. They also bring together 
the operational risk function, SMEs, and business units and support func￾tions, enabling much needed coordination. Not all categories are equal; some 
will require a forum with more frequent meetings, while other less material 
ones could benefit from either an annual review or coverage as an agenda 
item at the overall operational risk committee. The benefit of establishing 
Operational
risk
committee
Third-party
risk forum
Legal risk
forum
People risk
forum …
Figure 1.5 Governance forums aligned to risk categories22 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
dedicated forums has to be weighed against the cost of running additional 
meetings. Some forums may govern multiple risk sub-types, such as an op￾erational resilience forum providing oversight of technology/cyber and third￾party risks; or a conduct (or compliance) forum dealing with categories such 
as conduct, financial crime and regulatory.
While roles may vary from firm to firm, an example of responsibilities is 
presented in the box below.
The operational risk function is responsible for:
● leading the design and development of the operational risk taxonomy in 
consultation with SMEs;
● working closely with each respective SME to define each level 1 
category and its level 2 components;
● establishing and coordinating governance forums aligned to the 
taxonomy categories, to provide appropriate depth and quality of risk 
management discussions for each risk type (Note: the forums may be 
chaired by the SME or the operational risk function, depending on the 
firm’s approach and governance arrangements);
● analysing operational risk data, validating and reclassifying it as needed;
● leading the definition of the appetite, overall and by risk category;
● reporting on the aggregate level of operational risk and by risk category;
● providing oversight and challenge to first line areas.
First line business units and support functions will, in turn:
● apply taxonomy to identify material risks that may prevent achievement 
of their objectives;
● involve SMEs as needed in risk and control identification and 
management;
● participate in governance forums; and
● correctly report and categorize operational risk data.
Common challenges and good practices
Common challenges and good practices when developing an operational 
risk taxonomy are described below.­Operational ris 23
Common challenges
No elegance in the solution
I had a discussion with a senior practitioner searching for an elegant opera￾tional risk taxonomy, with no cross-overs between causes, events and im￾pacts, and with data falling neatly into allocated places. It is hardly feasible 
to strive for perfection. But nor is it advisable to have ‘dirty data’, a term 
that often applies when events, causes and control failures all end up in the 
categorization system, creating an entangled and unreconcilable array of 
data. It is best to apply a practical solution, such as a bow-tie structure, to 
arrive at a sensible classification that is meaningful to the firm; while accept￾ing that this will inevitably mean some detailed data analysis is required.
Data clean-up and recategorization
Continuing from the first challenge, the importance of continuous clean-up 
and recategorization of operational risk data is sometimes underestimated. 
For example, when logging events, employees may erroneously classify pay￾ment errors under people, reasoning that it is a human error. These opera￾tional risk events (OREs) need to be moved to the correct category, such as 
transaction processing and execution. This kind of clean-up is an ongoing 
activity which has to be factored into the day-to-day responsibilities of risk 
practitioners (whether first or second line), because invariably they are the 
firm’s main experts in taxonomy. This kind of challenge can be also miti￾gated, however, by more training of the end-users.
Laborious process of introducing changes
Once classification is embedded into the operational risk software, it takes 
a substantial effort to introduce any changes. This is because previous data – 
related to past operational risk events, risks and controls – will need to be 
re-mapped to the new classification. In large international organizations it 
may take years to move to a new classification scheme. It is best, therefore, 
to invest effort up-front into developing a system and classification that is 
well thought through from the start.
Good practices
Developing expertise
There will be instances where an unusual event may arise which raises ques￾tions on how it should be incorporated into the existing scheme. It is crucial 24 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
to develop expertise on these cases within the Operational Risk depart￾ment – perhaps even to appoint a taxonomy ‘guru’ who can interpret arbi￾trary cases and provide effective guidance.
Creating supplementary classification systems
Some firms use the term ‘taxonomy’ more widely and create other data cat￾egorization structures in addition to event-type classification. Most common 
are classifications for causes and impacts (being the left- and right-hand 
bows of the bow-tie). For example, a rudimentary causal taxonomy can be 
based on the definition of operational risk, and include:
● people;
● systems;
● processes; and
● external events.
More developed causal types are expansive, incorporating considerations 
around lack of staff training; miscommunication; process design failure; sys￾tem misconfiguration. Reference taxonomies for cause and impact issued by 
ORX provide a good starting point for organizations.11
There may also be a separate classification scheme for control types; for 
example, by using Preventative–Detective–Directive–Corrective categories, 
as explored in Chapter 5.
Consistent use of taxonomy by other functions
It is good practice to strive for consistent use of taxonomy by other func￾tions; for example compliance and internal audit, as well as specialist areas 
such as IT and facilities management, who may have separate systems for 
recording technology incidents or health and safety breaches. Failure to 
align may result in duplication of effort, varying criteria, confusion for end￾users and fragmentation of valuable risk data. In contrast, a unified catego￾rization system utilized by all functions enables data to be compared and 
contrasted effectively, increasing the quality and depth of analysis.
Industry benchmark
The operational risk taxonomy is the essential glue that binds together all 
the elements of the framework. Over the years, the Best Practice Operational 
Risk Forum has kept a constant watch over the state of maturity of this tool, ­Operational ris 25
and variations in the way it is applied, recognizing the vital importance of 
taxonomy and its place in the framework.
As presented in Figure  1.6, organizations are moving away from the 
original Basel classification, which has become outdated. Only a minority 
(21 per cent) of respondents are still applying it, which represents a further 
reduction from the 30 per cent observed in a similar poll in 2020 (see the 
first edition of the book). Following the publication of the reference tax￾onomy by ORX,12 a significant proportion of firms (46 per cent of respond￾ents) have adopted that taxonomy instead. It is clearly a useful guide for 
those firms considering making changes to this part of their framework. 
The remaining organizations opted to work with a specific taxonomy tai￾lored to their own needs. This is the optimal solution, because it involves 
using risk categories that are well understood across the firm, which results 
in significantly more meaningful risk identification, management and re￾porting.
Overall, Best Practice Forum members felt more confident with their op￾erational risk classification system in 2022 compared to previous years, with 
only 17 per cent perceiving that a complete overhaul was needed (see 
Figure 1.7). The response ‘Could be improved’ selected by most respondents 
(70 per cent) implied a lesser degree of required technical re-classification, 
but actually touched on a more fundamental question; namely, how opera￾tional risk could be described in a way that creates a true connection with 
33%
46%
21%
ORX
Basel
Own
What taxonomy are you using?
Figure 1.6 Industry poll: operational risk taxonomy
Best Practice Operational Risk Forum, 202226 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
employees. Since the inception of the discipline, the language of operational 
risk has been somewhat dictated by the Basel Committee, both in the defini￾tion of the discipline and in the naming conventions used for taxonomy 
categories. But organizations are already adjusting and amending that 
language to suit their own needs. As part of the aim of connecting with em￾ployees and the things that really matter to them, could the taxonomy cat￾egories be re-worded around what people care about, rather than – as at 
present – being expressed in somewhat technical, regulatory-driven risk lan￾guage? This remains an area for consideration.
Another area of continuing challenge is the lack of alignment with areas 
such as Compliance, Internal Audit and others who tend to employ different 
categorisation systems. Only a minority of respondent firms achieved full 
alignment, while others were dedicating resources to improve collaboration 
in this area.
Practical workplace exercise
Reflecting on the content of this chapter, review the definition of operational 
risk and the existing classification system used in your firm, considering:
1 Is the definition fit for purpose? Does it position the discipline relative to 
the firm’s business objectives?
70%
17% 13%
Could be improved
Spot on Rework needed
How satisfied are you with taxonomy?
Figure 1.7 Industry poll: satisfaction with the taxonomy
Best Practice Operational Risk Forum, 2022­Operational ris 27
2 Is the taxonomy easy to understand, up to date and effective?
3 Are the taxonomy categories exhaustive and mutually exclusive to the 
extent possible?
4 What works well and should be retained?
5 What can be improved? Note down potential improvements.
MAKE A DIFFERENCE (MAD) ACTION
Note down one action you will take after reading this chapter that will make 
a positive difference to how the operational risk taxonomy is defined and 
treated in your firm.
In summary, this chapter introduced operational risk and discussed the im￾portance of the risk taxonomy, as well as challenges related to its develop￾ment and implementation.
Moving on, the next chapter outlines the framework, and the key tools used 
to identify, manage and mitigate operational risk.
Notes
1 Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, Basel Framework, www.bis.org/
basel_framework/ (archived at https://perma.cc/96FE-VF9B)28 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
2 European Securities and Markets Authority (2017) The Distributed Ledger 
Technology Applied to Securities Markets, www.esma.europa.eu/system/files_
force/library/dlt_report_-_esma50-1121423017-285.pdf?download=1 (archived 
at https://perma.cc/88XL-E6FK)
3 Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2002) The Quantitative Impact 
Study for Operational Risk: Overview of individual loss data and lessons 
learned, www.bis.org/bcbs/qis/qisopriskresponse.pdf (archived at https://
perma.cc/CZ7Z-7TV6)
4 International Organization for Standardization (2009) ISO 31000:2009, www.
iso.org/standard/43170.html (archived at https://perma.cc/QC2G-Z8WR)
5 Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission 
(COSO) (2017) 2017 Enterprise Risk Management: Integrated framework, 
www.coso.org/Pages/erm.aspx (archived at https://perma.cc/RKP9-BZ4Z)
6 Operational Riskdata eXchange Association (ORX) (2019) ORX Reference 
Taxonomy, managingrisktogether.orx.org/operational-risk-taxonomy (ar￾chived at https://perma.cc/Z9QC-WC6L)
7 European Banking Authority (2019) EBA Guidelines on Outsourcing 
Arrangements, www.eba.europa.eu/regulation-and-policy/internal-governance/
guidelines-on-outsourcing-arrangements (archived at https://perma.cc/4X3C￾LZ6Z)
8 Financial Stability Board (2018) Cyber Lexicon, www.fsb.org/2018/11/
cyber-lexicon/ (archived at https://perma.cc/CWD6-EGUD)
9 Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2021) Principles for Operational 
Resilience, www.bis.org/bcbs/publ/d516.pdf (archived at https://perma.cc/
EA35-62G3)
10 Operational Riskdata eXchange Association (ORX) (2020) ORX Cause and 
Impact Operational Risk Reference Taxonomy, managingrisktogether.orx.org/
operational-risk-reference-taxonomy/orx-cause-impact-reference-taxonomy
(archived at https://perma.cc/A35M-BNU4)
11 Operational Riskdata eXchange Association (ORX) (2020) ORX Cause and 
Impact Operational Risk Reference Taxonomy, managingrisktogether.orx.org/
operational-risk-reference-taxonomy/orx-cause-impact-reference-taxonomy
(archived at https://perma.cc/DN4Q-CZN2)
12 Operational Riskdata eXchange Association (ORX) (2019) ORX Reference 
Taxonomy, managingrisktogether.orx.org/operational-risk-taxonomy
(archived at https://perma.cc/88N6-8PYP)Operational 02
risk framework 
and its 
implementation
What this chapter covers: This chapter builds a foundation which is then 
used throughout the book, introducing the Operational Risk Framework 
and explaining its key components. Each subsequent chapter will commence 
with a visual diagram of the framework, clearly denoting the element it ad￾dresses, and providing a coherent link between all the chapters. The chapter 
also outlines a structured three-step approach for implementing and embed￾ding operational risk management, presenting a range of practical tools 
which can help in the deployment process.
FURTHER READING
● Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2021) Revisions to the 
Principles for the Sound Management of Operational Risk
Why recommended: Since the early days, the Basel Principles have been 
the key document to study for operational risk practitioners, and the 
latest 2021 update forms a solid base for a benchmarking exercise.
● Gerd Gigerenzer (2015) Risk Savvy: How to make good decisions, 
Penguin Books
Why recommended: An operational risk framework needs to be built out 
with a simple and pragmatic approach in mind, one that will resonate 
with the end-users. This mode of thinking aligns with this excellent 
suggested book, whose author believes that the best decisions are 
arrived at using common sense and listening to your gut.
2930 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
Introducing the framework 
and its components
Every firm embarking on an operational risk journey requires a framework 
that provides a structure for implementing operational risk management 
throughout the entire organization. It needs to present a simple yet coherent 
picture of the essential pieces of the puzzle, and to outline how they join 
together. The framework should be easy to understand, as it will be com￾municated to senior management as well as employees at the coal face, serv￾ing as an anchor and a key reference point for a whole range of discussions 
related to operational risk management.
While there is no one-size-fits-all approach, an example of the framework 
is described in Figure 2.1, and serves as a base for the rest of the chapters in 
the book. Let’s examine these framework components in more detail.
To begin with, each practitioner needs to answer a single question: what 
tools do I need in my operational risk toolbox? Four core elements are po￾sitioned in the middle section of the diagram. They work together in an in￾tegrated fashion to ensure the company identifies, assesses and manages the 
operational risks that it faces. The life cycle of each core element is described 
in subsequent chapters of the book.
Core tools
Operational risk events
Operational risk events (OREs) are the oldest and the most common of the 
four core elements. They enable an organization to act promptly following 
an incident, to minimize the impact from the incident escalating and to de￾rive valuable lessons learnt. Even more, they allow the firm to achieve a clear 
understanding of its loss profile and evaluate the adequacy of its capital re￾sources.
Risk assessments
Risk assessments are a key forward-looking framework component. They 
supplement the backward-looking OREs while still taking them into consid￾eration, permitting management to identify and mitigate risks before they 
crystallize into events. They enable the organization to bring focus to gaps 
and weaknesses, providing management with a powerful tool for strength￾ening the control environment.Figure 2.1 Holistic operational risk management framework
Governance, roles and responsibilities
Establish governance and clear roles across the Three Lines for managing operational risk.
Risk assessments
Assess risk exposure in 
process, business or 
function via RCSAs.
Supplement by evaluating
risks emanating from
change activities via 
ORAs. 
Identify exposure from
extreme but plausible 
events. Mitigate through
risk transfer to insurance.
Scenario analysis
Monitor risk and control
performance through 
predictive indicators.
Act if indicators breach 
established appetite 
threshold. 
Key Risk Indicators
Reporting and decision-making
Review actual risk prole against set appetite, apply active risk management to enable achievement of strategic objectives.
Operational risk 
events
Record and report risk 
events, act to minimize 
future exposure.
Monitor trends against
RCSAs and KRIs.
Risk appetite and risk capacity
Dene nature and types of risk accepted in pursuit of strategic objectives. Evaluate adequacy of capital resources.
Operational risk taxonomy
Embedding and maturity assessment
Training and education
Risk culture
3132 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
Scenario analysis
Scenario analysis is an instrument that utilizes proactive risk assessment 
thinking and applies it to extreme but plausible circumstances. It augments 
the ORE dataset by adding considered scenarios which – even if they are 
synthetic – build on the knowledge derived from the other core tools. It is 
just as valuable for risk management as for measurement purposes.
Key Risk Indicators
Key Risk Indicators (KRIs) are used to monitor the risk and control environ￾ment of the organization. KRI information, assimilated and presented in the 
form of a dashboard, is indispensable for observing the behaviour of the 
most significant risks identified during forward-looking exercises.
Practitioners can of course change the composition of this toolbox, filling 
it with the right components to suit the needs of their own organization. For 
example, they may decide to:
● segregate external loss data into a distinct framework element (in this 
book, it forms part of OREs); or
● add control assurance or process mapping as separate components (here, 
both are addressed as part of risk assessments); or
● remove KRIs – not all firms adopt this element, although in this book 
KRIs are viewed as an extremely useful mechanism.
It is up to the second line operational risk team to find the best fit, and the 
tools most suitable to the nature, size and business model of the firm.
Linking components
Once the core tools have been agreed upon, it is time to link them via gov￾ernance arrangements, risk appetite and risk reporting, as displayed in 
Figure 2.1, stretching above and below the main toolset.
Governance, roles and responsibilities
Clear responsibilities are particularly important to operational risk manage￾ment, where similar roles may be being performed by first line operational 
risk coordinators as well as by independent second line risk teams. Equally 
important are the roles of subject matter experts, risk and control owners, 
and members of the board, senior management and governance committees, 
all working collaboratively to multiply the power of risk management.Operational risk framework and its implementation 33
Risk appetite and risk capacity
Operational risk appetite is the most nascent of the framework components. 
Once it is well developed, however, it converges the core elements and be￾comes an irreplaceable mechanism for decision-making.
Reporting and decision-making
Reporting is the window through which operational risk teams communi￾cate with management across the organization, the board and senior com￾mittees. This is where the results from all the toolbox instruments are 
consolidated in a meaningful way, answering the vitally important so what?
question, and supporting a wide range of tactical and strategic decisions.
Supporting elements
Finally, the framework relies on other supporting elements, highlighted in 
Figure 2.1 on the perimeter around the main components. They include:
● Risk culture, given that operational risk is closely linked to and largely 
dependent on the culture of the organization.
● Training and education, without which it would be impossible to embed 
solid practices firm-wide.
● Maturity assessment, which a firm may want to carry out once it has 
embarked on its risk management implementation journey, to evaluate 
where it has got to relative to the desired state, and set improvement 
strategies.
● Taxonomy, used for setting the foundation for operational risk 
management by risk category (covered in Chapter 1).
Three essential steps for implementing 
operational risk management practices
Where do we start with implementing operational risk management prac￾tices in our organization? This question, which was topical at the inception 
of the operational risk discipline, remains relevant now. There are still plenty 
of firms starting from scratch for a whole range of valid reasons, perhaps 
opening a new branch or applying for a new banking licence. But even for a 
well-established firm, it is equally important to benchmark the framework 34 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
that is already in place, to set your direction of travel and define sensible 
next steps. Whether your firm is in the first category or the second, there are 
a number of crucial steps to follow, some of which are more challenging 
while others are easier to accomplish (Figure 2.2).
Step 1: External and internal requirements
Understanding rules and regulations
The first step always consists of identifying the minimum requirements set 
by relevant regulators, assembling the list of applicable documents and un￾derstanding both the letter and the spirit of the rules. It is worth installing 
yourself in a comfortable chair and putting on your reading glasses. This 
stage is key. It builds a solid foundation by forcing firms to actively inter￾pret their fundamental obligations, as well as more nuanced elements, for 
example:
● Subtle differences in the position of the second line operational risk 
function, which is expected to provide assertive challenge in some 
jurisdictions but to exhibit helpful support in others. These kinds of 
expectations influence the second line approaches, for instance, scenario 
analysis and KRIs; whether it oversees the process or assists first line 
units in completing the tasks.
● Requirements related to control testing if, for example, the firm is subject 
to Sarbanes–Oxley regulation;1
 these rules have a meaningful impact on 
the risk and control self-assessment (RCSA) methodology, and require a 
defined approach to testing rather than a purely judgemental assessment 
of controls.
● The obligation under certain jurisdictions to have a mandatory internal 
control function, which influences the entire set-up and operation of the 
Risk department.
Figure 2.2 Three steps for implementing an operational risk framework
External and
internal
requirements
Benchmarking Planning
implementationOperational risk framework and its implementation 35
For international firms, the most rigorous expectations will usually prevail and be 
applied across the entire organization. Branches and subsidiaries of international 
institutions, especially those situated in locations subject to stricter rules, are fre￾quently driving the operational risk value proposition for the whole firm – often 
including the head office. This can create friction between the head office and the 
affiliate, whose voice is not always taken into due consideration. In these cases, the 
local entity needs to take a firm lead in creating any necessary addendums to the 
group’s policies and practices, and in ensuring that it continues to maintain those 
higher standards locally, withstanding the rigours of regulatory scrutiny.
Developing an internal value proposition
Particularly important at the outset, and at the same time as understanding 
the external rules, internal requirements also need to be assimilated. 
Essentially, this process involves analysing the firm’s strengths and weak￾nesses, to determine the key selling points of operational risk management. 
While undeniably there are many generic advantages of prudent risk man￾agement, what specific benefits will resonate the most? Those particular 
benefits should be the ones most emphasized during discussions with the 
chief executive and the business units; they represent cards that will be put 
squarely on the table in subsequent conversations. Examples of the benefits 
that operational risk management brings – and the corresponding frame￾work tools that enable their realization – are presented in Table 2.1.
KEEPING UP TO DATE WITH REGULATORY 
REQUIREMENTS
Understanding regulatory requirements for operational risk management is 
not a one-off exercise. It is critical to achieve clarity as to who is 
responsible for horizon scanning and picking up changes as they come 
along. This helps to avoid gaps and grey areas which often exist between 
compliance and operational risk teams. Sometimes it is assumed that 
Compliance is performing holistic horizon scanning, and full reliance is 
placed on their process. In practice, though, the compliance function may 
be excluding certain topics from its scanning process; for instance, some 
aspects of prudential regulation, ‘best practice’ industry guidance, or even 
selected geographies. Operational risk teams need to ensure agreement on 
the scope of such processes, and maybe even perform their own reviews of 
what is a continuously changing regulatory agenda.36 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
Table 2.1 Benefits and corresponding framework tools
Benefits of operational 
risk management
Corresponding framework tools to help realize 
the benefits
Well-developed strategy, 
risks to strategic 
objectives are well 
understood and 
weighed up
Top-down strategic risk assessment with chief 
executive and senior management team
Scenario analysis to explore the impact of extreme 
events
Enhancement of internal 
control environment, 
revenue protection
Bottom-up risk identification process, prioritizing the 
controls that need to be strengthened and potentially 
tested
Lessons learnt from OREs, leading to error reduction
Improved decision￾making
Risks and opportunities assessment, as described in 
Chapter 6, enabling the firm to take balanced 
decisions by weighing up its risks and opportunities
Applying risk appetite and Key Risk Indicators to guide 
mitigation and, at the same time, enable agreement 
on when to accept the risk and do nothing
Process optimization, 
efficiency and increased 
operational resilience
Bottom-up process risk assessment; identifying risks 
and controls while creating end-to-end process 
maps, which allow the firm to streamline the entire 
set of activities and achieve a view based on 
business processes or services
Strong risk culture All framework tools; with emphasis on increased 
transparency, no blame, accountability, risk￾awareness and risk reward
Regulatory compliance All framework tools; regulatory conformance is 
hugely important yet – rightly – the last element on 
the list. The organization needs to find the benefits of 
risk management which lead to compliance, but not 
the other way around
A word of caution: operational risk loss reduction is frequently seen as a 
tempting reason for establishing a framework. But this may be a hard sell 
for a small to medium-sized firm that does not have much history of losses 
(see Chapter 13 for further details).Operational risk framework and its implementation 37
Step 2: Conducting benchmarking
Regulatory directives are commonly principle-based and do not prescribe 
rigidly how to implement the framework or operate the tools. That is where, 
historically, the Basel Committee Principles for the sound management of 
operational risk have provided exceptionally useful directional guidance.2
The Basel Principles, revised several times over the years, with the latest 
update issued in 2021, succinctly articulate fundamental requirements and 
remain the primary source for comparative analysis against existing prac￾tices. Despite being targeted at banks, they can be applied broadly to insur￾ance, asset management or any other financial services activity, especially in 
sectors where fewer sources of literature are available compared to banking.
Second line operational risk teams, in conjunction with relevant subject 
matter experts, must conduct benchmarking analysis against these require￾ments – at a minimum performing a line-by-line comparison of the Basel 
Committee’s 12 principles and 60+ detailed supporting statements vs the 
firm’s current practices.
The Basel Principles can be supplemented by industry best practice; de￾rived, for instance, from prior experience, from interactions with fellow 
practitioners, and from specialist industry guidance, such as papers issued 
by the Institute of Operational Risk.3
 Throughout the book, additional rec￾ommended reading of this kind is included at the start of each chapter.
KEEPING UP TO DATE WITH INDUSTRY 
BEST PRACTICE
Best practices evolve. One of the most important things to do when 
embarking on an operational risk implementation journey is to create strong 
links with other practitioners in the industry. There are plenty of forums, 
discussion groups and professional organizations across the financial 
services industry, examples of which are outlined in Chapter 11. These 
kinds of interactions are instrumental for keeping up with peers and closely 
following good industry practices as they develop.
Part of the purpose of the benchmarking analysis is to judgementally evaluate 
to what extent the Basel Principles (at a minimum) are already being applied, 
and to identify gaps and improvement areas. Conclusions can either be pre￾sented for each principle individually; or, with a bit more work, structured 38 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
into themes which correspond to the individual components of the opera￾tional risk framework, as depicted in Figure 2.1. Results can be documented 
with the help of round ideograms, often used in qualitative comparative anal￾ysis for presenting the degree to which an item meets a particular criterion. An 
example extract of this kind of analysis is provided in Figure 2.3.
The benchmarking study extract in Figure 2.3 demonstrates that the or￾ganization perceives that – relative to other framework elements – it is risk 
assessments and reporting that are least embedded and most in need of en￾hancement. Training and education, on the other hand, has been evaluated 
as well embedded and requires less focus.
Step 3: Planning implementation
The benchmarking exercise outlines the ‘as-is’ state of operational risk man￾agement, effectively defining the point of departure. It constitutes a starting 
point, enabling the firm to plan its next steps.
Figure 2.3 Example extract from benchmarking study
1. Risk assessments 2. Reporting
• RCSAs are used as a ‘tick-box’
exercise with no resulting actions.They
require methodological revision and
expert facilitation in order to increase
the value-add. 
• Operational risk reporting is not 
comprehensive. The tools are not
integrated, making the reports less
actionable. 
3. Operational Risk Events (OREs) 4. Risk appetite
• OREs are recorded and lessons
learnt conducted for material events.
Data quality is sub-optimal and will benefit
from review, and reconciliation with
general ledger. 
• The basic appetite statement
expressed via annual operational risk
loss threshold is in place. It requires more
comprehensive and meaningful
statements and measures.
5. Taxonomy
• The firm utilizes Basel Committee
taxonomy.
Taxonomy will benefit from refresh and
redesign. 
6. Training and education
• Operational risk training is rolled out
for new starters and first line
operational risk coordinators.
Additional education is recommended to
increase risk awareness.
Priority 1: least embedded,
in need of enhancement
Priority 2: partially embedded,
will benefit from improvement
Priority 3: embedded,
consider enhancingFigure 2.4 Swimlane plan: operational risk implementation
1. Risk 
assessments
3. OREs
2. Reporting
4. Risk appetite
5. Taxonomy
6. Training and 
education
Complete pilot RCSA
Perform data quality 
assessment
Update completed
Devise plan in conjunction with
enterprise risk management
Propose updated
categories
Consult with subject 
matter experts
Agree reconciliation 
process and approach
Develop enhanced 
training plan Executive briefings
Develop methodological 
enhancements
Perform assessment of
current reporting
50% RCSAs completed
Agree template
and approach
Data quality enhanced
All staff education New starter training
New taxonomy 
agreed
Quarter 1 Quarter 2 Quarter 3 Quarter 4
100% RCSAs completed
Consult with subject 
matter experts
Implement 
enhancements
Train report 
writers
3940 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
Subsequently, the benchmark can be translated into a practical implementa￾tion plan, with specific milestones and their timelines agreed and endorsed 
by senior management. This plan needs to consider the resource requirements 
to complete each task, and to set a realistic time frame within which it can 
be accomplished.
An example of a resulting ‘swimlane’ plan, with the key themes high￾lighted in Figure 2.3 now split into implementation milestones, is presented 
in Figure 2.4.
In conclusion, it may be a daunting prospect to start up a new function – 
and to spearhead the development of operational risk practices within the 
organization – completely from scratch. If you have landed in such a situa￾tion, bear in mind that it will be a very exciting and enriching journey. All 
operational risk professionals had to start somewhere, and most, myself in￾cluded, have since grown very fond of what is an outstandingly interesting 
discipline.
Common challenges and good practices
Common challenges
Insufficient thought given to value proposition
Operational risk implementation can sometimes be triggered by an unsatis￾factory audit report or regulatory criticism; regulatory compliance then be￾comes the primary impetus for developmental activities. A lack of 
consideration of the internal value proposition – and an absence of explicit 
articulation or marketing of it – results in operational risk management 
being perceived as an administrative burden, with unclear value emanating 
from the function. This leads to first line business units pushing back, and 
refusing to use the tools or embed the practices. Even when pressed for time, 
it is crucial for the operational risk practitioner to invest strong effort in 
developing and articulating their value proposition: with a view to attract￾ing interest and agreement across the board and achieving true engagement 
from first line units.
Three-step process not followed
In my consulting practice, I occasionally receive questions from practition￾ers which reflect the fact that Step 1 – namely understanding external and 
internal requirements – has not been completed properly. For example, a Operational risk framework and its implementation 41
request to determine whether an organization really needs to conduct con￾trol testing or can instead adopt a judgemental evaluation of control effec￾tiveness? The short answer to these questions is: it depends. As articulated in 
the three-step approach, there may (or may not) be a regulatory requirement 
for control testing, depending on the jurisdictions the firm operates in. Or 
the firm may actively aspire to perform testing if that will enhance the inter￾nal value proposition. Applying a structured three-step approach enables 
the firm to conduct thorough research and find answers to these kinds of 
questions before starting its implementation.
Absent or overly complicated framework diagram
Some organizations have developed their operational risk policies and pro￾cedures yet have failed to create a single pictorial diagram describing the 
framework and its key elements. This is challenging for visual learners, who 
absorb information through pictures. It may also mean that operational risk 
teams themselves are somewhat unclear how in reality the different pieces 
join together. At the other extreme, I have seen diagrams that require larger 
(e.g. A3-size) paper because they are so complicated that they do not fit onto 
an ordinary (e.g. A4-size) page. An easy-to-understand visual framework is 
a necessity. As per the classic quote attributed to Albert Einstein, ‘If you can’t 
explain it simply, you don’t understand it well enough.’
Good practices
Creating a plan
It is good practice in all cases to have an annual plan; whether the frame￾work needs to be designed from scratch or is only undergoing enhancements 
(in more mature practices). Operational risk is still very much a developing 
discipline. New guidelines keep emerging, such as the Basel Committee 
Principles, which were updated yet again in 2021. Board and senior man￾agement priorities, new topics such as ESG, Generative AI or Operational 
resilience, will inevitably require to be considered as part of annual plan￾ning. This is an area where simple organization, discipline and rigour will 
make a difference. Yet, what transpires from my discussions with operational 
risk professionals is that the plan is rarely well developed. For example, the 
majority of participants (63 per cent) that attended advanced operational 
risk management workshops only had some targets in place while the re￾maining 37 per cent did not have a plan in place (Figure 2.5).42 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
Prioritizing tasks for implementation
Where there are plans in place for implementation, they at times contain 
unachievable targets, with multiple milestones all falling due at the same 
time, rather than being spread throughout the year in a more manageable 
fashion. It is good practice to involve the operational risk team – or even 
broader business teams – in a ranking exercise, asking them to vote on their 
top three priority enhancements. Team members can be supplied with pre￾tend tokens and requested to ‘put their money’ on the three tasks that they 
believe will generate most value. The votes are then summed and the im￾provements receiving most support can be scheduled for speedier delivery.
Achieving a balanced plan focussed on value-add
More and more unregulated firms are aspiring to implement solid opera￾tional risk management practices. Kudos to these organizations. They ap￾proach the implementation straight from an internal value proposition 
perspective, coupled with industry best practice. This can only make the 
value-add stronger. However, even with regulatory-driven priorities, the 
overall plan must be balanced. It should combine key regulatory delivera￾bles with targets that the firm aspires to achieve for itself. From this point of 
view, it is important to have a constructive dialogue with the supervisors, 
pushing back on the deadlines and milestones to achieve the right plan, one 
that first and foremost makes sense to the firm as well as to the supervisor.
Figure 2.5 Industry benchmark: operational risk plan of work
Advanced Operational Risk Management Workshop, 2023
37%
63%
Yes, well
developed
Yes, some
targets set
Needs
development
There is an annual Op Risk plan of workOperational risk framework and its implementation 43
Industry benchmark
Amid a continuously evolving operational risk landscape, Best Practice 
Operational Risk Forum members contemplated whether the current frame￾work and its tools remained fit for purpose. Overall, practitioners agreed that 
operational risk as a discipline was moving in the right direction, steadily 
progressing and maturing, though perhaps more slowly than expected. Using 
the analogy that financial sector organizations are akin to large, powerful 
cruise ships, getting the cruise ship to change course – that is, to buy in and 
then fully embrace a wide range of operational risk practices – requires time, 
plenty of effort and cultural change. A curious finding in this area was a per￾ception that operational risk management has progressed further in the indus￾try overall than in the respondents’ firms individually (as seen in Figure 2.6).
Furthermore, while the overall risk toolkit was seen as effective, a major￾ity of participants (60 per cent, as shown in Figure 2.7) felt that the way it 
operated required some enhancement. The key words were agility, speed
and integrity, with the discussion focusing particularly on technology, data 
and the need for further speedy progress in a digital world that is relying 
increasingly and significantly on technology:
● A constantly evolving risk landscape calls for instant access to the firm’s 
current risk profile. In particular, the fast-moving topic of cyber risk
required interactive dashboards and imminent indicators on the spot, and 
third-party risk necessitated not only internal data but also input from 
service providers.
Best Practice Operational Risk Forum, 2024
Figure 2.6 Industry poll: progress in operational risk management
In operational risk discipline in general
In operational risk management in my rm
1=strongly disagree, 5=strongly agree,
3.5
Strongly disagree
3.4
Strongly agree
There has been significant progress
=average rating44 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
● Practitioners were concerned with some delays in reporting important 
information. Summary RCSA results were commonly presented with a 
one to two month time lag, by which time they had often become stale. 
Members discussed the laborious process required to extract and 
aggregate the data, and agreed there is a need for investment into 
operational risk systems, which were not yet generally seen as a top 
priority investment for firms.
Technological angles (whether related to the use of operational risk systems 
or the use of technology more broadly within the firm) have been repeatedly 
explored by the Best Practice Operational Risk Forum over the years. In 
2018, against a background of ongoing evolution in the fintech sector, the 
Basel Committee issued its paper ‘Implications of Fintech Developments for 
Banks and Bank Supervisors’.4
 This is a paper that remains valid to this day, 
notably in the way it urges organizations to actively extend their risk frame￾works to adequately cover technology-related risks. Following the publica￾tion of the paper, in 2020 the Operational Risk Best Practice Forum 
questioned whether the framework and toolset enabled firms to effectively 
identify, assess, manage and report on fintech-driven operational risks. The 
results are presented in Figure 2.8.
It is apparent from Figure 2.8 that – at that time – organizations were 
generally in the early or middle stages of their fintech journey, rather than 
Best Practice Operational Risk Forum, 2024
Figure 2.7 Industry poll: operational risk framework effectiveness
20% 20%
60%
Remain t for
purpose
Some
enhancement
is needed
Rethink is
needed
Operational risk framework and toolsOperational risk framework and its implementation 45
towards the end. In particular, the use of innovative technologies such as 
artificial intelligence (AI) for operational risk purposes was still very much 
at its inception, receiving the lowest score.
The results of this 2020 poll remain just as valid in 2024, in the sense that 
organizations are still in the middle – rather than towards the end – of their 
journey towards technological maturity. What this means is that constant 
careful consideration needs to be applied to all aspects of risk management 
that involve technology.
Yet to end on a positive note, once a large, powerful cruise ship really gets 
moving, it is hard to stop. Despite the challenges outlined in this chapter, the 
overall positive momentum of operational risk management as a discipline 
is being maintained. And it will continue further as the discipline matures 
and its practices become ever more effective and embedded.
Practical workplace exercise
Consider key points and ideas presented in this chapter. Obtain and review 
the operational risk framework used in your firm, questioning:
1 Is there a clear picture of how the framework elements operate together, 
in an integrated fashion?
Figure 2.8 Industry poll: operational risk and fintech
Best Practice Operational Risk Forum, 2020
Op Risk staff are skilled and tech savvy
Op Risk and fintech space
3
2.5
2.8
2.4
1.8
Strongly disagree
Strongly agree
Fintech risks are well understood
Op Risk tools suitable for fintech
Op Risk embedded in agile projects
AI used in Op Risk
1 = strongly disagree, 5 = strongly agree, = average rating46 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
2 Has the firm conducted a benchmark against the Basel Committee 
Principles and other industry documents?
3 Is there a clear implementation plan outlining priorities for the current 
year?
4 What works well and should be retained?
5 What can be improved? Note down potential improvements.
MAKE A DIFFERENCE (MAD) ACTION
Note down one action you will take after reading this chapter that will make 
a positive difference to how the firm’s operational risk framework is defined 
and implemented.
In summary, this chapter introduced the operational risk framework and 
discussed some possible approaches to its implementation.
Moving on, the next chapter starts a deep dive into each of the framework 
components, commencing with the role of the Three Lines (formerly of de￾fence) in operational risk management.Operational risk framework and its implementation 47
Notes
1 The Sarbanes–Oxley Act of 2002, www.sec.gov/about/laws/soa2002.pdf
(archived at https://perma.cc/9H8R-WXX3)
2 Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2021) Revisions to the Principles for 
the Sound Management of Operational Risk, www.bis.org/bcbs/publ/d515.pdf
(archived at https://perma.cc/TF5P-MAZT)
3 Institute of Operational Risk (2021) Sound Practice Guidance, www.ior-institute.
org/sound-practice-guidance (archived at https://perma.cc/L7VE-FNFD)
4 Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2018) Implications of FinTech
Developments for Banks and Bank Supervisors, www.bis.org/bcbs/publ/d431.
pdf (archived at https://perma.cc/5VQA-88RN)The Three Lines 03
model
Its application to operational 
risk management
What this chapter covers: The chapter examines how the concept of the 
Three Lines (formerly of defence) is applied to operational risk management 
and implemented in practice by individuals that embody the different lines 
(Figure 3.1). It analyses the role of the first line operational risk coordina￾tors and introduces Problem Solvers, Postmen and Champions. The chapter 
then concentrates on the second line operational risk function and presents 
Drifters, Diminishers and Multipliers. The role of internal audit is briefly 
discussed, recognizing that there is commonly less confusion around the 
tasks carried out by the third line. The chapter highlights common chal￾lenges and good practices and includes an industry benchmark.
FURTHER READING
● Institute of Internal Auditors (2013) IIA Position paper, The Three Lines of 
Defence in Effective Risk Management and Control
● Institute of Internal Auditors (2020) The IIA’s Three Lines Model
Why recommended: The first paper is an essential read on the fundamental 
nature of the original Three Lines of Defence from the Institute of Internal 
Auditors, for those willing to learn from the source. It is supplemented by 
the second document issued in 2020, which provides an updated and 
current position of the Institute, with the word defence dropped.
● Dr Simon Ashby, Dr Cormac Bryce and Dr Patrick Ring (2019) Risk and 
Performance: Embedding risk management, ACCA
Why recommended: A must-read research paper from three acclaimed 
professors, providing an insight on some of the practical aspects of 
embedding risk management.
48Figure 3.1 Focus of Chapter 3: responsibilities across the Three Lines
Governance, roles and responsibilities
Establish governance and clear roles across the Three Lines for managing operational risk.
Risk assessments
Assess risk exposure in 
process, business or
function via RCSAs.
Supplement by evaluating 
risks emanating from
change activities via
ORAs. 
Identify exposure from
extreme but plausible 
events. Mitigate through
risk transfer to insurance.
Scenario analysis
Monitor risk and control 
performance through
predictive indicators.
Act if indicators breach 
established appetite 
threshold. 
Key Risk Indicators
Reporting and decision-making
Review actual risk prole against set appetite, apply active risk management to enable achievement of strategic objectives.
Operational risk
events
Record and report risk 
events, act to minimize 
future exposure.
Monitor trends against 
RCSAs and KRIs.
Risk appetite and risk capacity
Dene nature and types of risk accepted in pursuit of strategic objectives. Evaluate adequacy of capital resources.
Operational risk taxonomy
Embedding and maturity assessment
Training and education
Risk culture
4950 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
Overview: Three Lines model, its benefits 
and challenges
The somewhat controversial Three Lines model (formerly known as the 
Three Lines of Defence model), which had its origins in military planning 
and sports management, is now firmly engrained into the DNA of financial 
services firms. It is widely viewed as an important factor in the successful 
embedding of enterprise risk management, while at the same time attracting 
a fair share of criticism due to its inefficiencies and challenges. In simple 
terms, the success or failure of the model depends on how the concept is 
implemented in practice. And this is particularly relevant to operational risk 
management, where, as articulated in Chapter 2, fairly similar roles may be 
performed by the first line operational risk coordinators as well as by inde￾pendent second line risk teams. An opportunity to work collaboratively? Or 
to generate conflicts, trip over each other and duplicate tasks?
The original Three Lines of Defence (frequently abbreviated to 3LOD) 
concept, which is described in the position paper written by the Institute of 
Internal Auditors (IIA), distinguished between the three groups (or lines) 
involved in effective risk management:1
● functions that own and manage risks;
● functions that oversee risks;
● functions that provide independent assurance.
IIA argued that ‘risk management normally is strongest when there are three 
separate and clearly defined lines of defence’.2
A subsequent update issued in 2020 retains the core concepts and the 
language of ‘first line’, ‘second line’ and ‘third line’, however it advocates for 
a more collaborative approach de-emphasizing segregation and therefore 
removing the word ‘defence’. Throughout this chapter and the rest of the 
book, we will therefore refer to the updated ‘Three Lines’ model.
A typical application of the Three Lines model in financial services is 
presented in Figure 3.2.
As outlined in the schematic:
● First line business units and support functions are risk owners – a term also 
used by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) – who have 
the authority to manage risk and are accountable for doing so.3
 They have 
primary responsibility for establishing a robust control environment, complying 
with policies and executing day-to-day risk and control management.The three lines model 51
● The second line provides expertise, support, monitoring and constructive 
challenge, flagging to the board and senior committees if the level of risk 
is not commensurate with the risk appetite set by the board. Generally, 
functions such as risk management and compliance are within the second 
line, although interpretation varies across firms.
● The third line, internal audit, is independent of both business units and 
supports functions and second line departments. It is responsible for 
providing assurance about the design and operation of the internal risk 
and control framework via a programme of risk-based reviews.
The concept of the Three Lines can be illustrated with a picture. France, 
1895, the Montparnasse train station in Paris: an iconic photograph of a 
Granville–Paris train, trying to make up for lost time, entering the station at 
too high a speed, crushing through the wall of the station and tumbling onto 
the street. Miraculously, none of the passengers died.4
You can imagine a control room engineer sending warning signals to the 
driver: ‘Attention, attention, you are running too fast, please slow down.’ 
The driver increases his speed, ignoring the message from the control room.
The first line, train drivers, own the risks and make choices over whether 
to control them effectively or not. Front-office staff who sell products to 
clients, employees processing payments and information technology person￾nel maintaining systems all belong to the first line.
Figure 3.2 Three Lines in financial services
Business
Finance
Information
technology
Design framework
Provide expertise,
support and training
Oversee and challenge
Develop and execute 
on risk-based plan
Internal audit
Provide external 
External audit and supervisors validation
Risk and compliance
2nd line expertise, support and challenge
3rd line independent assurance
External validation
Human 
resources
Operations
Identify, assess, 
manage and report 
on risk
Maintain adequate 
internal control 
environment52 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
Table 3.1 Benefits and challenges of the Three Lines model
Benefits Challenges
The structure of defined lines provides a 
level of confidence to the firm’s board 
of directors and senior management.
The model can result in duplication of 
activities. Who, for example, is 
performing control testing?
It describes and allocates clear roles to 
first, second and third lines.
It is debatable what functions form 
the second line; application across 
the industry varies.
The model aims to embed enterprise 
risk management at all levels across the 
firm and enhance risk communication.
The concept can cause confusion 
within the organization; do employees 
know what line they represent?
It serves as a protection mechanism. 
Functions work effectively together 
within their line to prevent and/or 
mitigate significant failures.
One of the key challenges of the 
model is trust. If lines are fully 
segregated (especially where the 
outdated concept of ‘defence’ is 
emphasized) trust between them may 
be low.
Regulators and many professional 
bodies, including the Institute of Internal 
Auditors and Institute of Directors, 
endorse the concept.
The use of the model alone should 
not be regarded as a guarantee of 
success.
The second line, control room operators, communicate warning signals, 
pointing out when the level of risk is too high. Not being in the front line, 
however, they cannot always stop the train from crashing.
The third line inspect both the train tracks and the set-up of the control 
room, ensuring that the whole enterprise, comprised of first and second 
lines, is positioned effectively for delivering on its objectives.
Some of the benefits and challenges of the Three Lines are outlined in 
Table 3.1.
The Three Lines concept has particular significance to operational risk. 
To embed good practices, processes and behaviours, first line business units 
and support functions commonly appoint operational risk coordinators. 
This practice helps immensely with spreading operational risk knowledge; 
however, it can also confuse the Three Lines structure.The three lines model 53
In theory, placing operational risk experts in the first line should double the 
benefits. It is the same discipline, after all, so operational risk practitioners 
in both the first and second lines must work together, completely in sync, 
towards a common goal of augmenting the value of risk management within 
the organization. In practice, however, models are implemented by people; 
consequently, a great deal depends on the personalities of the individuals 
and the way they embody the different lines. The relationship and dynamics 
between coordinators and the risk department may result in productive out￾comes, but they can also lead to unpleasant and avoidable experiences.
It is therefore important to examine operational risk manager roles in 
more detail, focusing on finding practical solutions to making the spider’s 
web of operational risk professionals across the two lines, depicted in 
Figure 3.3, work effectively and efficiently. Note that the role of the third 
line, internal audit, is usually clearly defined and well established, so rarely 
generates many questions or challenges.
First line operational risk: problem 
solvers, postmen and champions
An organization’s policy will often require all heads of business units and 
support functions to nominate an operational risk lead: a named individual 
who serves as both a subject matter expert (SME) on operational risk mat￾ters and a key liaison point between the business and the second line Risk 
department.
Figure 3.3 Operational risk personnel in first and second lines
Business
Finance
Information
technology
Human 
resources
Operations
Op risk champion Op risk champion
2nd line operational risk
Op risk champion Op risk champion54 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
The theory is well known and understood. Where it becomes interesting is 
when it comes down to practical implementation. In reality, who are the 
operational risk coordinators and what is it that they do? Let’s review three 
types of coordinator roles, depicted in Figure 3.4.
The problem solver
Problem solvers, sometimes also called ‘risk hunters’, are tasked with identi￾fying risks and ‘fixing’ them, by coming up with action plans, enhancing 
controls or delivering process improvements. In this model the duty of pro￾viding operational risk management for the whole business unit falls on one 
individual, while the rest of the staff contentedly abdicate their responsibili￾ties. ‘How do we manage operational risk? We are very good at it. Please see 
our colleague around the corner: it is their role and they will tell you all 
about it.’
Problem solvers also carry the burden of remediation and mitigation activi￾ties for the risks that they themselves have identified. They are expected to add 
value by repairing broken processes and plastering over the cracks of poor 
controls. The more risks they discover, the more issues they have to solve.
Organizations with less mature risk cultures use problem solvers as a way 
of ticking the operational risk box, and demonstrating externally that some￾one is in place performing all the required activities. The problem solvers’ 
approach indicates that the respective heads of business units or support 
functions are not accepting the accountability they have been allocated for 
the management of operational risk.
The postman
Postmen see their role as receiving a message from the centre and delivering it to 
the business unit or function. In many organizations, the first line operational risk 
Figure 3.4 First line operational risk role types
The problem 
solver The postman The championThe three lines model 55
coordinator is a part-time role. Coordinators are busy people; throughout the day 
they are occupied with important tasks within their direct area of responsibility. 
On top of their regular duties, they will engage with the Operational Risk depart￾ment as and when the second line calls a meeting, receive the transmitted informa￾tion, and pass it on to their colleagues and department head. For example:
● ‘Operational Risk is implementing a new policy: please find this attached.’
● ‘Operational Risk is initiating a firm-wide RCSA refresh: please complete 
per the stipulated deadline.’
● ‘The template for loss reporting has changed: please familiarize yourselves 
with the new form.’
The second line usually trains coordinators on key tools and processes. 
Occasionally, therefore, messages will also be relayed in the other direction, 
from business unit to the second line Operational Risk department. For exam￾ple, when an event or loss is identified, the postmen will know where to locate 
the relevant form, and how to fill it in and communicate with the second line.
Given limited time on their hands, postmen are mainly focused on the 
administrative side of operational risk processes, rather than the actual 
quality of risk management, which requires more time and thought. They 
frequently complain that the additional duties of being a coordinator, on top 
of their daily tasks, are burdensome. I have had many interactions with co￾ordinators via public and in-house training courses that I deliver specifically 
for first line personnel. Having surveyed over 200 coordinators over the last 
15 years, a fair share of them operate as postmen. Generally they spend 
around 2–15 per cent of their time on operational risk.
The champion
Champions are engaged and passionate operational risk specialists embed￾ded in the first line. They focus on the essence of risk management, ensuring 
that material risks are identified and mitigated. They take the initiative and 
spearhead enhancements, with business unit employees giving them proper 
support while also understanding that risk management is everyone’s re￾sponsibility.
For example, champions will not only contribute to the Risk and Control 
Self-Assessment (RCSA) process, but will also consider:
● how to meaningfully engage all employees in risk identification, to ensure 
their voice is heard – perhaps suggesting a discussion or live poll that can 
be conducted at the next departmental meeting;56 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
● how to best share the results, so that all employees can consistently 
articulate the top operational risks of the unit;
● the status and behaviour of material risks, whether actions are being 
taken to remediate them, and how business units can work collectively 
with other functions;
● whether RCSA results are used in other initiatives, for example, when 
developing new products or engaging in regulatory programmes;
● what learnings, whether successes or failures, can be shared with other 
business units or support functions (also see Chapter 5, Risk and control 
self-assessments).
(Note: subsequent chapters of the book contain a checklist with proposed 
champion responsibilities for each of the core operational risk tools – events, 
RCSAs, ORAs, KRIs and scenario analysis.)
How do organizations step up from using problem solvers and postmen 
and instead develop an effective and engaged group of operational risk 
champions? The answer is a combination of contributory factors, which 
range from very complex (for example, getting the culture right) to very 
simple (such as having a clear profile of the coordinator role):
● Tone from the top: both across the firm overall and within respective 
business units or support functions, recognizing the value of operational 
risk management.
● Understanding the why of risk management, integrating risk into decision￾making, aligning the effort to better customer experiences and shareholder 
outcomes.
● Full ownership: it is the role of the first line to manage risks and maintain 
a sound control environment, and it is a team effort where everyone is 
accountable for sound risk management.
● Acknowledgement of additional responsibilities allocated to the 
champion, allowing sufficient time for them to be undertaken effectively.
● Incentives: these can be financial, via increased pay or a reward for 
significant achievements. They can also be developmental: for example, 
studying or obtaining a professional qualification in operational risk 
management; participating in cross-functional initiatives to increase 
exposure to other departments and disciplines; or joining relevant 
external forums and committees as a member. This latter incentive is not 
sufficiently used. Having chaired various operational risk industry forums 
over the last 20 years, my observation is that typically less than 10 per 
cent of attendees are from the first line.The three lines model 57
● Praise and recognition of good work: this sounds obvious but does not 
always happen.
● A clear job description: again this sounds basic, but many champions are 
operating without a clear role profile.
● An appropriate framework and set of tools developed by the second line, 
which enable and do not hinder the risk management process.
● And another key factor: ample direction, guidance, training and 
engagement from multipliers in the second line (see below).
Second line operational risk: drifters, 
diminishers and multipliers
Second line operational risk plays a crucial role in determining the success or 
failure of risk management. Not only via the design of an appropriate frame￾work and tools, but via the attitude and value proposition represented by the 
second line, which ultimately matter just as much and have a significant in￾fluence on risk outcomes. Different role types are presented in Figure 3.5.
The drifter
Despite working in the second line operational risk function, drifters seem 
unsure of their role and the definitive risk product that they are expected to 
be producing. The Operations department is processing payments. 
Information Technology is maintaining systems. Human Resources is ad￾ministering payroll. Their output is clear and well understood. Aside from 
periodic reports to the governance committees, however, drifters are often 
found deliberating about potential outputs. They understand the objective 
of providing independent oversight and challenge, but they cannot quite see 
Figure 3.5 Second line operational risk role types
The drifter The diminisher The multiplier58 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
how to implement this in practice. Their CV may contain tasks with unclear 
value, for example:
● attended business unit’s meetings;
● requested regular updates;
● collated information from business unit and repackaged for risk reporting;
● communicated RCSA deadlines and monitored completion within 
schedule.
They drift from meeting to meeting, but rarely contribute, present or pro￾vide insights. They are more focused on the administrative side of risk man￾agement (‘RCSAs completed within the timeline?’, ‘Operational risk events 
reported via the right template?’) than on the actual management of risks 
that are important to the business. Over the years, I have conducted job in￾terviews for over 100 second line candidates; and while some came across 
brilliantly, others struggled to articulate the ways in which they added value 
to the organization. Which risks have diminished as a result of their role? 
Which controls have improved? What was their contribution to the firm’s 
ability to achieve its strategy and business objectives?
The diminisher
In her inspirational book about leadership, Multipliers: How the best lead￾ers make everyone smarter, Liz Wiseman introduces the concept of dimin￾ishers and multipliers. Diminishers, according to Wiseman, ‘stifled others 
and diluted the organization’s crucial intelligence and capability’, while mul￾tipliers ‘brought out the intelligence in others and created collective, viral 
intelligence’.5
 That concept, applied to leadership, can be extrapolated to 
describe two more types of second line operational risk functions.
Diminishers tend to place emphasis on the role of independent challenge
entrusted to them by the board and senior committees. They see themselves 
as advisors to the firm’s executives, accentuating the need for the separation 
between business units and the Operational Risk department. This may in￾clude physical segregation, with diminishers located on a different floor or 
isolated area, which has the effect of widening the gap between first and 
second lines. They are formal, unapproachable and do not tend to socialize. 
Diminishers believe that they:
● are entitled to attend first line business unit or support function meetings;
● are not here to be liked;The three lines model 59
● are independent and therefore cannot discuss, advise or facilitate work￾shops;
● should be provided with information (for example, RCSAs, KRIs, sce￾narios) which they will then autonomously challenge.
Under this model the first line, lacking sufficient explanation, education and 
advice about the context lying behind these processes, ends up producing 
sub-optimal results and then facing criticism and adverse commentary. This 
not only strains the relationship but also results in reduced motivation on 
the part of the first line to manage its own operational risks. Diminishers 
diminish the work of first line business units and support functions, ulti￾mately creating a negative risk management brand.
It is important to note that the role of diminisher is outdated. It emanates 
from the original ‘Three Lines of Defence’ concept which emphasises segrega￾tion. The diminisher approach creates blockages and siloed mentality, result￾ing in bureaucratic and costly processes. Now that the word defence has been 
dropped, the role must change accordingly, embracing the multiplier concept.
The multiplier
In contrast, multipliers work in collaboration with the first line, actively 
positioning them for success. They are informal, approachable, likeable and 
do not hesitate to work closely with business units and support functions. 
They also have a clear value proposition and focus on risk management, not 
risk administration.
In research published by ACCA, the authors emphasized the importance of 
informal risk management mechanisms, in addition to formal policies and 
governance structures, and stressed that the people skills of the risk team 
are key.6
 They argued that a less formal, integrated accountability approach 
recognizes distinct roles within the Three Lines, yet still ‘allows greater 
levels of collaboration and cooperation between the individuals responsible 
for conducting these roles’.
It is of significance that this softer and more integrated approach is also 
adopted in the revised Three Lines model, where the IIA states that first and 
second line roles may be ‘blended or separated’ and emphasizes that the 60 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
second line provides ‘assistance with managing risk’.7
 The IIA paper came 
out amid the Covid-19 pandemic, and arguably was not given full attention 
due to other urgent priorities. Four years after the publication, I still see the 
original 3LOD model, with defence prominently embedded in letter and in 
spirit, in organizational policies and practices. This signifies that more work 
is needed to change attitudes and behaviours.
A good way of thinking about second line operational risk responsibili￾ties is by outlining a spectrum of roles and assigning them a RAG (red, 
amber, green) rating:
● core second line operational risk roles (green zone);
● legitimate second line roles with safeguards (amber zone);
● roles that second line should not undertake (red zone).
Outlining the zones will guide the multipliers to find the right balance, being 
supportive and, at the same time firm, providing ample assistance yet not 
doing the job on behalf of the first line.
Green zone
Core second line operational risk multiplier roles:
● Mastermind the framework and design the tools that suit the size, nature 
and culture of the organization; continuously evolve them based on 
feedback.
● Analyse information, having the privilege of seeing the overall picture 
and risk profile of the firm; report to management committees but also 
circle back to the business units and support functions.
● As a trusted advisor, contribute to the firm’s strategy and business plan, 
scrutinize and influence risk decisions, and provide early warnings.
● Educate, educate, educate. Create engaging, fun and light-hearted training 
programmes (see Chapter 11, Operational risk training and education).
● Collaborate with business units and support functions to achieve quality 
outcomes. Workshop facilitation deserves a special mention in this con￾text. Expert facilitation adds great value and does not contradict the 
Three Lines model. Necessary challenge can be performed during the 
workshop and subsequently minuted for evidence. Note that it is just as 
acceptable for first line champions to lead the workshops, as long as they 
have been fully trained and possess the right skills and expertise to per￾form this role. On the other hand it is detrimental to ask the first line to The three lines model 61
undertake this kind of facilitation if they are not ready or do not have the 
necessary skills; or to require two separate operational risk discussions 
with the business, one with the first line and a subsequent additional 
meeting for second line to challenge.
● Invest in developing an engaged network of champions, helping to multi￾ply their capabilities and potential; hold periodic meetings to share suc￾cesses and challenges.
● Act as a centre of excellence on operational risk; participate in external 
industry forums and professional bodies, actively seeking to develop 
more professional knowledge and benchmark one’s own practices.
● Be accessible and available for informal advice when needed.
Amber zone
Legitimate operational risk responsibilities, to be performed as long as they 
do not replace the accountability of the first line for risk management (to be 
adopted with caution):
● Conduct thematic reviews, based on identified trends and themes.
● Perform assurance, carry out periodic or ad hoc spot checks and control 
tests.
● Provide one-off help to business units or support functions when, for 
example, assisting with the roll-out of RCSAs; an operational risk expert 
can be temporarily seconded to the first line in exceptional circumstances.
● Champion the establishment of a risk culture, in close collaboration with 
senior management.
Red zone
What second line teams should not do:
● Manage operational risks on behalf of the first line; this debate was 
topical a decade ago, and the industry has moved on since to recognizing 
the right roles and responsibilities.
● Complete RCSAs (or manage other tools) on behalf of business units or 
support functions.
● Assume accountability for implementing control improvements and deal 
with actions instead of first line responsible functions.
● Take decisions on behalf of the business whether to accept or remediate 
risk.62 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
● Serve as administrative assistants or note takers rather than risk managers.
● Always agree. It is valuable to have an honest second line opinion, 
regardless of its position; whether it agrees with the first line view or not.
A note about the third line: the Chartered Institute of Internal Auditors has 
developed a similar spectrum of audit responsibilities with assigned RAG 
ratings to clearly distinguish and delineate the role of the audit function; a 
very useful and practical document well worth a read.8
 As it relates to op￾erational risk management, there is rarely confusion around the tasks of 
internal audit colleagues who execute independent reviews. One area of fre￾quent disputes though relates to the ownership of audit findings. At times, 
all findings related to operational risk management are erroneously attrib￾uted to the second line operational risk function, even when the weaknesses 
arise from the first line business units. It is important to acknowledge the 
accountability of the first line in the risk management process, and allocate 
the findings accordingly.
Recipe for success: when multipliers 
work with champions
The power of risk management is increased when multipliers in the second 
line work with champions in the first line.
To begin with, it is essential for the second line Operational Risk depart￾ment to deliberate, decide and agree on the what and the how of second line 
risk management. Often this will be done most effectively using a vehicle 
such as a strategy day or awayday, to enable a full debate free of distractions.
SECOND LINE OPERATIONAL RISK ESSENTIAL 
QUESTIONS
● What are the products that the second line is producing, apart from 
policies and periodic reports to the governance committees? Will 
business units and support functions benefit from these products?
● How will the second line work with first line businesses and embedded 
champions, via what formal and informal interactions? Per ACCA, is the 
balance of formal and informal mechanisms appropriate?9
 If not, what 
needs to be done differently and how will second line achieve it?The three lines model 63
A similar process, again perhaps via a strategy day, then needs to take place 
between the second and first line operational risk personnel, who must come 
to an agreement on the joint plan for success. Some questions to consider in 
this process may include the following.
JOINT FIRST AND SECOND LINE OPERATIONAL 
RISK ESSENTIAL QUESTIONS
● Are roles clearly articulated and is there a good understanding of each 
other’s responsibilities, to avoid gaps and duplication? For example, how will 
the first line operational risk coordinator engage with business units on new 
products and change initiatives, and what exactly will the second line do?
● Are second line interactions with business units effective? For example, 
if both groups need to review certain outputs – be it a strategy, business 
plan or RCSA – is it feasible for all concerned to do that at the same 
meeting rather than conducting separate sessions?
● How is the output of the second line different to what the first line 
produces? For example, if the first line creates reports to governance 
committees, the second line may be able to append their clearly 
articulated opinion to the report. In this case, governance committees 
will have the benefit of both views. And finally:
● What does success mean? How will it be measured and what needs to 
be done to achieve it?
It is also good practice to have periodic catch-ups with other second line 
functions, for example Compliance, as well as with Internal Audit, to in￾crease collaboration and eliminate inefficiencies to the extent possible.
To summarize, when multipliers work with champions, the collaboration 
creates great chemistry, leading not only to thoughtful and productive risk 
management, but also to enjoyable days at the workplace.
Common challenges and good practices
Challenges
Challenges that firms may encounter when implementing operational risk 
roles and responsibilities across the Three Lines include the following.64 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
Information not shared
The concept of the Lines is also used in sport. In football, players pass the 
ball to each other to help the team to score a goal. In financial services, em￾ployees operating within different lines do not always pass the ball. 
Information is not always willingly shared by internal audit or risk depart￾ments, and business units may be reluctant to provide full disclosure to the 
second and third lines. Developing the culture of openness and investing in 
relationship building is essential for the groups to work effectively together.
Operational risk superhero character
In the early years of the millennium another archetypal second line opera￾tional risk practitioner – Superman/Superwoman – was responsible for actu￾ally managing operational risk on behalf of the organization, stepping way 
out of their mandate to oversee and challenge the first line. This archetype is 
now rarely seen, as operational risk practices have matured and roles and 
responsibilities have matured with them.
Lack of support for champions
Insufficient support is provided to the first line coordinators, who end up 
doing extra work on top of their daily tasks, without incentivization or rec￾ognition. This is a cultural issue and, unfortunately, it sometimes takes a 
major loss, unsatisfactory audit or regulatory censure to prompt the organi￾zation to focus on how they perform risk management.
Duplication of activities
Unnecessary duplication of activities may arise if groups act in an uncoordi￾nated manner. For example, business units developing a new product will 
often have a risk identification session with the first line coordinator. 
Subsequently, the second line Operational Risk department will request a 
separate meeting to provide independent challenge. This kind of duplication 
only causes confusion (‘Another meeting with Operational Risk?’). Joint 
strategy days, and obtaining agreement on how the lines actually work to￾gether, help to minimize this kind of inefficiency.
Confusion over legal department
Questions frequently arise whether the Legal department belongs to the first or 
second line. The jury is out on this across the industry, and opinion is split. 
Around half of the firms I have interacted with over the years consider Legal to 
be within the first line; the other half disagrees and has Legal in the second line.The three lines model 65
Criticism of the Three Lines
The Three Lines model is at times criticized for potentially creating slower 
decision-making, due to the need for sign-offs from first and second lines, 
which is particularly challenging in an age of technological advancement 
and revolution. It may be perceived as promoting wrong behaviours, includ￾ing encouraging employees to rely on someone else to oversee their work 
(‘Two more lines behind me will surely check what I am doing’), rather than 
accepting accountability themselves.
Good practices
Work in collaboration
There is great power in the model of multipliers working closely and coop￾eratively with champions. Two lines acting in collaboration go a long way 
towards shaping good practices and behaviours. Invest in creating a solid 
champion network and cherish the relationship. It will pay back.
Share experience
Other peer risk disciplines – namely credit, market and liquidity risk – do 
not have the same issues with the Three Lines model, as there is no need for 
a credit risk coordinator within, for example, a Human Resources depart￾ment. Consequently, it is good practice for Operational Risk to regularly 
confer and share experiences with other functions that use a distributed 
model, such as business continuity and information security.
Evaluation
First line champions usually have a direct reporting line to the business or 
function they support. When managers are conducting performance ap￾praisals of first line champions, it is good practice to also solicit feedback 
from members of the second line Operational Risk department, who can 
opine on how well the champion performed relative to the first line group.
Discussions with risk takers
Even with first line coordinators in place, it is essential for the second line to 
have a dialogue with risk takers and decision-makers in business units and 
support functions. First line coordinators, especially in full-time roles, can 
sometimes block the second line’s access to the business unit. Avoiding block￾ages like this ensures that communication does not become partial – with risk 66 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
practitioners talking among themselves – and prevents the decline in the ef￾fectiveness of conversations.
Make ownership tangible
A reader of one of my LinkedIn articles commented on the term ownership, 
noting that in their view it is a care factor. Aligning risk management efforts 
to tangible things that employees care about, for example, enhanced cus￾tomer experiences or more resilient processes, helps to present the case and 
explain why risk management is so important.
Second line in advisory capacity
Once the framework is embedded and the first line becomes more mature, 
the second line can take a step back and act in more of an advisory capacity. 
A measure of success is the number of times the second line is approached 
for advice; if business units and support functions regularly call on 
Operational Risk, that demonstrates trust and recognition of value.
Virtual multipliers
In hybrid and working from home environments, risk teams must practice 
the art of being virtual multipliers. Undeniably, being engaging, transmit￾ting good energy levels and multiplying virtually is more challenging than 
in person. When hosting an online meeting, it is useful to utilize check-in 
routines or warm up activities, tracking what can be seen (body language, 
facial expressions) and heard (the actual words and the silence), using in￾the-moment feedback. If working from home during extended periods of 
time, it is essential to recognize that an important informal communication 
line with the business is strained – no chats at the watercooler or quick cof￾fee breaks. In this case, it is recommended to double the efforts to proac￾tively reach out to stakeholders with a virtual coffee value proposition, to 
maintain close contact.
Industry benchmark
Is there a ‘right’ number of first line risk champions (RCs) in the organization? 
Over the years firms have tended to increase the number of their RCs, with the 
aim of increasing first line risk ownership and accountability. Conversely 
there has been a reverse trend to reduce embedded risk resources – with a 
view to centralizing, achieving cost savings or building up second line capa￾bilities.The three lines model 67
The results of the live poll from the industry Best Practice Operational Risk 
Forum highlighted that a range of approaches are still being adopted, as 
displayed in Figure 3.6:
● Almost one-third of respondents (29%) have extensive first line risk and 
control departments, representing between 5–10% of total staff, with 
roles covering a wide range of governance, risk and compliance (GRC) 
related tasks;
● 18% of respondents opt for a pragmatic approach, with risk champions 
representing 1–5% of total staff, a combination of full-time RCs in larger 
businesses and support units and part-time resources in smaller areas;
● A further 29% adopted a minimalist stance, with predominantly part￾time RCs operating in a liaison role and as point persons between the 
second line Operational Risk department and business units;
● Lastly, 24% of voting organizations did not employ RCs at all, deeming 
it more effective for the Operational Risk department to communicate 
directly with the business.
It is clear that designing a successful risk champion structure may not be a 
straightforward process, and may require a number of iterations to get right. 
Indeed, a majority of forum participants (64 per cent) noted that regardless 
of the number of RCs in place, further evolution was needed to increase the 
overall effectiveness of this operating model.
One key area for enhancement was the need to maintain continued engage￾ment, and to provide better support for both full- and part-time champions, 
Figure 3.6 Industry poll: % of first line risk champions to total staff
No RCs
in place
less
than 1%
1–5% 5–10% Over
10%
24%
29% 29%
18%
% of 1st line risk champions to total staff
Best Practice Operational Risk Forum, 202268 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
to ensure that risk management remains their priority. Operational risk is an 
exciting discipline, and practitioners need to continue to invest in enhancing 
its brand and reputation, making the first line champion role a highly desira￾ble and sought-after position. The eventual goal is for champions to really feel 
that they are enjoying the role and have ‘time flies when you are having fun’ 
mentality.
Practical workplace exercise
Reflect on the ideas discussed in this chapter. Obtain role profiles of the 
second line operational risk function and, if available, first line champions. 
Review the descriptions, considering:
1 Are the roles sufficiently clear? Do they articulate how the functions will 
collaborate and avoid gaps and duplication?
2 Are there measures of success for both first and second line operational 
risk personnel?
3 What good practices exist to support collaboration between first and 
second line operational risk practitioners; for example, joint strategy 
days, relationship-building measures, education or similar activities?
4 What can be improved? Note down potential improvements.
A suggested role description for a risk champion is provided in Appendix 1.
MAKE A DIFFERENCE (MAD) ACTION
Please outline the key learnings and note down one specific action you will 
take after reading this chapter, to enhance your existing practices relating 
to the Three Lines and its application to operational risk management.The three lines model 69
In summary, this chapter discussed the concept of the Three Lines and pro￾posed ways of increasing the power of risk management via effective col￾laboration of the first and second line functions.
Moving on, the next chapter starts with a deep dive into the first core tool 
of the framework, operational risk events.
Notes
1 Institute of Internal Auditors (2013) Position paper, The Three Lines of Defence 
in Effective Risk Management and Control, na.theiia.org/standards-guidance/
Public%20Documents/PP%20The%20Three%20Lines%20of%20Defense%20
in%20Effective%20Risk%20Management%20and%20Control.pdf (archived 
at https://perma.cc/4AM3-2SEM)
2 Institute of Internal Auditors (2013) Position paper, The Three Lines of Defence 
in Effective Risk Management and Control, na.theiia.org/standards-guidance/
Public%20Documents/PP%20The%20Three%20Lines%20of%20Defense%20
in%20Effective%20Risk%20Management%20and%20Control.pdf (archived 
at https://perma.cc/D5HG-PT4G)70 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
3 International Organization for Standardization (ISO) (2018) ISO 31000:2018, 
Risk Management – Guidelines, www.iso.org/standard/65694.html (archived at 
https://perma.cc/K98D-KUHW)
4 History Daily (2019) Montparnasse Derailment: When a train went through a 
station walls, historydaily.org/montparnasse-derailment-when-a-train-went￾through-a-stations-walls (archived at https://perma.cc/JD72-65B5)
5 Liz Wiseman (2015) Multipliers: How the best leaders make everyone smarter, 
HarperBusiness
6 Ashby, A, Bryce, C and Ring, P (2019) Risk and Performance: Embedding risk 
management, www.accaglobal.com/gb/en/professional-insights/risk/risk-and￾performance.html (archived at https://perma.cc/U5QE-V3AU)
7 Institute of Internal Auditors (2020) The IIA’s Three Lines Model, na.theiia.org/
about-ia/PublicDocuments/Three-Lines-Model-Updated.pdf (archived at https://
perma.cc/879L-ZZA7)
8 Chartered Institute of Internal Auditors (2017) Position paper, Risk 
Management and Internal Audit, www.iia.org.uk/resources/risk-management/
position-paper-risk-management-and-internal-audit (archived at https://perma.
cc/U8HK-3KQA)
9 Ashby, A, Bryce, C and Ring, P (2019) Risk and Performance: Embedding risk 
management, www.accaglobal.com/gb/en/professional-insights/risk/risk-and￾performance.html (archived at https://perma.cc/VT5A-SEAA)Operational risk 04
events
What this chapter covers: The chapter incorporates multiple industry 
benchmarks and includes a sample template for operational risk event 
reporting. Operational Risk Events (including losses) are the oldest and 
the most common operational risk component, and are now imple￾mented by firms in many countries worldwide (Figure 4.1). The chapter 
commences with revisiting the basics, including definitions and exam￾ples, and then delves into practical matters: examining how to establish 
an effective collection process, considering the human element of re￾porting, and ensuring data completeness and accuracy. It addresses the 
evolution of the tool in the rise of technology incidents, regulatory non￾compliance and data breaches; and advocates for broadening the scope 
of the tool from losses only to operational risk events, moving away 
from focussing on solely risk measurement and capital calculation to 
active risk management.
FURTHER READING
● European Banking Authority (2008) Compendium of Supplementary 
Guidelines on Implementation Issues of Operational Risk (CP21)
Why recommended: Although this document is slightly dated, it is one of 
the best explanatory guides for those looking for practical examples of 
losses, boundary events and other concepts.
Overview: importance of operational 
risk events
Emanating from its original definition, operational risk is the risk of loss
resulting from inadequate or failed internal processes, people and systems or 
71Governance, roles and responsibilities
Establish governance and clear roles across the Three Lines for managing Operational risk.
Risk assessments
Assess risk exposure in 
process, business or
function via RCSAs.
Supplement by evaluating 
risks emanating from
change activities via 
ORAs. 
Identify exposure from
extreme but plausible 
events. Mitigate through
risk transfer to insurance.
Scenario analysis
Monitor risk and control
performance through 
predictive indicators.
Act if indicators breach 
established appetite 
threshold. 
Key Risk Indicators
Reporting and decision-making
Review actual risk prole against set appetite, apply active risk management to enable achievement of strategic objectives.
Operational risk
events
Record and report risk 
events, act to minimize 
future exposure.
Monitor trends against 
RCSAs and KRIs.
Risk appetite and risk capacity
Dene nature and types of risk accepted in pursuit of strategic objectives. Evaluate adequacy of capital resources.
Operational risk taxonomy
Embedding and maturity assessment
Training and education
Risk culture
Figure 4.1 Focus of Chapter 4: operational risk events
72Operational risk events 73
from external events. If the firm does not have a clear understanding of its 
loss profile and has no preview into the common causes of failures, it will be 
significantly less equipped for managing forward-looking risks effectively.
Historically, losses were the first operational risk component deployed by 
organizations, while appetite, for example, was introduced at a much later 
stage. For banks, loss data collection was the earliest Basel Committee re￾quirement, primarily as a prerequisite to the development of a credible risk 
measurement system, enabling evaluation of how much capital is needed for 
operational risk. Early on, banks set up collection processes, striving to ac￾cumulate several years’ worth of accurate and comprehensive event data. 
Hence the relative embeddedness of the tool which, according to the Basel 
Committee, is now reasonably well established and more fully implemented 
than other operational risk framework components.1
The journey, however, is far from complete. The results of multiple indus￾try polls presented in this chapter demonstrate that financial services firms 
need to persevere in enhancing this seemingly basic instrument. They need 
to step away from mere regulatory compliance, working in collaboration 
with other departments to avoid multiple parallel reporting processes. And 
they need to continue contributing positively to the development of a no 
blame culture that is conducive to staff speaking up and raising incident 
reports.
Defining scope and thresholds
Operational risk losses occur when operational risk materializes. Examples 
of operational risk losses include:
● a cashier steals $1,000 from the till;
● a payment of $200,000 is sent to the wrong customer and not returned;
● a bank’s ATM is vandalized, and has to be repaired at a cost of $7,000;
● an employee files a lawsuit against the firm, resulting in a court settlement 
of $70,000;
● late filing of regulatory reports leads to a fine of $10,000.
Further examples illustrate various types of potential outcomes:
● a foreign exchange deal is booked with an erroneous amount; correcting 
the error leads to a gain of $37,000 due to a favourable market move (i.e. 
a fortuitous gain instead of a loss);74 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
● technology disruption occurs just outside of trading hours (a near miss);
● a duplicate payment of $50,000 is sent by error, and returned within five 
days (also a near miss, sometimes also termed a rapidly recovered loss);
● a payments system outage results in multiple delayed payments to 
customers (an event which has an impact on clients as well as potential 
future monetary loss to the firm).
These cases demonstrate the complexity of operational risk, which can crys￾tallize into a variety of financial as well as non-financial (client, reputational, 
regulatory) outcomes.
The scope of loss data collection depends on the business model of the 
organization as well as local regulatory guidance and priorities. Some firms 
concentrate on negative and quantifiable impacts on the profit and loss of 
the organization – actual operational risk losses. There is, however, a 
marked drive in the industry towards more active management of opera￾tional risk, which places increasing emphasis on non-financial outcomes. 
Adopting this kind of more inclusive approach is beneficial; therefore, the 
more encompassing term risk event (or incident) is adopted – a broader 
term than loss.
Operational Risk Events (OREs) are transactions/events that arise due to failed 
processes, people or systems or from the external environment, resulting in 
actual or potential financial exposure and/or client harm, reputational damage 
or regulatory censure.
For explanation purposes, it can be stated that an ORE is an event which 
leads the actual outcome of a business process to differ from its expected 
outcome; this emphasizes the erroneous or undesirable nature of the inci￾dent.
Recognizing the need for clarity, various regulatory publications have 
considered different elements as constituting an operational risk loss. They 
directed institutions towards focussing on the actual losses;
2
 while acknowl￾edging that recording the other types of incident represents good practice, 
whether or not their impact is quantifiable.Operational risk events 75
Table 4.1 Industry study: scope of loss data collection
Element % of firms collecting
Direct charges 100
External costs incurred as a 
consequence of the event
80
Provisions 40
Pending losses 40
Near misses 60
Profits/gains 70
Opportunity costs/lost revenue 20
Timing impacts 20
In 2012, in my role as Chair of the Operational Risk Expert Panel of the 
Association of Foreign Banks in the UK, I led a group study with branches 
and subsidiaries of foreign banks to understand what elements were in fact 
collected by different institutions. The results, presented in Table 4.1, dem￾onstrate the divergence in firms’ approaches.
Direct charges and external costs are easily recognizable and are captured by 
most firms, while gains and near misses are in scope of only some organizations. 
A minority account for opportunity costs, due to the difficulty of estimating the 
DEFINING THE SCOPE OF OPERATIONAL RISK LOSS
1 Actual losses (including direct charges to P&L, external costs, 
provisions and pending losses).
2 Near misses.
3 Operational risk profits/gains.
4 Opportunity costs/lost revenues.
5 Timing impacts (financial mis-statements, i.e. negative economic 
impacts booked in a given fiscal period due to operational risk events, 
but impacting the cash flows of previous periods).76 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
Note the following two alternative definitions used in the industry:
1 An event that could have happened but did not, due to a secondary or 
supplementary control preventing it from taking place – for example, a 
transaction input error was corrected by an authorizer. This interpretation 
can be administratively burdensome and is not recommended (and, in the 
end, this is the reason that firms have such controls in place anyway).
2 A possible nuance, to replace supplementary with non-routine or out of 
the firm’s control – for example, a transaction input error was also missed 
by the authorizer, but was discovered by chance due to a batch failure 
and the subsequent need to manually re-input all transactions. It is best 
not to over-complicate. Applied in practice, the definition highlighted in 
the box is better and easier for end-users to comprehend.
Boundary events touch on our neighbouring disciplines of credit and market 
risk, with examples below:
● A loan is made to a client based on a fraudulent application via electronic 
identity fraud (phishing), leading to a loss of $15,000. This is a boundary
event relating to both operational and credit risks, where both risks have 
materialized. Another way to describe it is as a lending loss that would 
not have otherwise occurred, resulting from an internal failure of people, 
processes and systems.
amount; however, there is an increasing desire to capture lost opportunities, 
especially those incurred by technology downtime. The Basel Committee also 
acknowledges this variance, concluding that ‘only a few banks collect and ana￾lyse information relating to all internal operational risk events, including losses, 
near misses and profitable events’.3
Further definitions of frequently encountered event types are presented 
below.
A near miss, or a nil loss, is an operational risk event that has occurred but 
did not ultimately result in a loss. Effectively, in this instance, the firm was 
lucky. However, as its controls have failed, the next time this event 
happened it could just as easily lead to a monetary loss or other significant 
non-financial consequences.Operational risk events 77
Table 4.2 Industry study: loss data collection threshold
Threshold % of firms applying
0 50
£500 10
£1,000 20
£1,250 10
£5,000 10
To develop a fit-for-purpose threshold, consider the following factors:
✓ Size of the organization: a lower amount is suitable for smaller-sized firms 
which generally have fewer OREs, and typically lower impact values.
✓ History of past events: a lower limit is beneficial for start-ups or 
organizations that do not have a sufficient history of past data. This 
allows the firm to gather more events, thus learning from its own 
experiences of failure and enhancing the internal control environment as 
it does so.
● A trader position taken in excess of prescribed limits, supplemented by an 
unfavourable market move, causes a loss of $200,000. This is also a 
boundary event, covering operational and market risk respectively.
Threshold setting
Thresholds for loss data gathering contribute to the deliberations on what 
should be in scope. Based on the Basel Committee study of 119 banks, 10 
respondents applied a zero threshold, another 10 set €10,000 while most 
chose an amount somewhere in between.4
In 2012 I led a similar survey of smaller-sized banks in the UK. This study 
concluded that all participants applied a limit below or equal to £5,000, 
with 50 per cent setting a zero threshold, effectively capturing all OREs re￾gardless of the amount. This result seems to support the view that a low 
limit is beneficial for smaller-sized organizations.78 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
Unified impact rating grid
Essentially, regulatory compliance aside, the firm needs to capture incidents 
that it deems important, without establishing a cottage industry of collect￾ing every minor error and issue. This requires understanding of what, in 
fact, is meant by important. Without written and agreed guidelines this in￾terpretation will inevitably vary from person to person.
To this end, the operational risk function should take the lead in coordi￾nating an aligned Organizational Impact Rating Grid, applicable for assess￾ing OREs as well as evaluating the impact of the risks discussed in Chapters 5 
and 6. This kind of grid can also be adopted by compliance and internal 
audit for rating their issues and findings, and by information technology 
colleagues for assessing technology incidents. An example of a harmonized 
grid is presented in Figure 4.2. It guides the end-user to consider a range of 
consequences, being financial, client, reputational and regulatory. The cate￾gory with the highest impact determines the overall rating.
A harmonized grid has substantial benefits, including:
● the introduction of a common language and universal meaning of Low vs 
Very High across the organization, enabling comparability of events, 
issues or findings of the same rating;
● help for end-users in prioritizing their focus and actions;
● aid in determining escalation depending on materiality;
● management of risks, events and issues within a set appetite.
✓ Capital calculation: losses below the threshold should be immaterial for 
capital calculation purposes; this may be supported by statistical evidence.
✓ Cost of collection: the ORE collection process is costly, and for larger 
companies this has to be balanced against the benefits. In these cases 
usually a higher limit is appropriate. Considerations need to include 
employees’ time, and whether any system or software will be used, as 
opposed to a manual spreadsheet-based method.
✓ Risk management: active risk management provides impetus for including 
in scope any material events that have a non-financial impact.
✓ Tone from the top: the set threshold gives an indication of management’s 
expectations of the quality of the ORE process.Operational risk events 79
Each impact category needs to be agreed and correctly calibrated, with input 
from compliance, finance, internal audit and other relevant subject matter ex￾perts, and approved by the governance committee. To establish what constitutes 
a material financial consequence, it is helpful to consider the firm’s risk appetite 
(see Chapter 9) and conduct an analysis of internal and external loss data.
In this way, using a unified grid, operational risk can define the scope 
and threshold for ORE collection of, for example Moderate and above. The 
advantage of this approach is that other impacts, in addition to financial, 
are accounted for; while minor issues can still be carved out to avoid clut￾tering the dataset and overwhelming employees with unnecessary adminis￾tration.
In conclusion, the first rudimentary step of agreeing the scope of ORE in 
practice requires active thought and strategizing. Some firms continue to 
struggle to define the scope that is fit for purpose, and end up either collect￾ing minor events or missing out on lessons learnt from important incidents 
by setting the thresholds too high.
Impact Description
Very high
High
Moderate
Low
Financial: Actual/potential loss greater than $xxx
Client: Serious client detriment/large proportion impacted
Reputation: Deep damage to the brand and market
value, sustained media coverage
Regulatory: Formal investigation up to suspension of licence
Financial: Actual/potential loss between $xx and $xxx
Client: High level of detriment
Reputation: Market commentary, serious damage to the
reputation, brand and value
Regulatory: May prompt investigation or regulatory action
Financial: Actual/potential loss between $x and $xx
Client: Moderate impact/small proportion or segment
Reputation: One-off media coverage, minor damage to
reputation, brand and value
Regulatory: Potential enquiry or one-off fine
Financial: Actual/potential loss below $x
Client: Minor impact or complaints
Reputation: Inconsequential
Regulatory: Unlikely to result in any regulatory action
Figure 4.2 Unified impact rating grid80 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
ORE life cycle: from identification 
to root cause analysis
The life cycle of an operational risk event is described below:
● Identify and notify: employee identifies and raises potential event.
● Escalate: material events are escalated to senior management.
● Report: operational risk event report is completed within set time frame.
● Resolve and close: action plan is created; actions tracked until resolution; 
root cause analysis is performed for more significant events.
● Analyse: analysis, trend examination, aggregation and reporting are 
carried out.
● Validate: reconciliation is performed against books and records and other 
sources to ensure completeness and accuracy.
Identify and notify
Due to the breadth of the operational risk discipline, and the endless 
possibilities of an event occurring, OREs cannot easily be located in (and 
extracted from) the organization’s books and records. Against this back￾ground, other discovery channels can be helpful, including: a) results of day￾to-day control and reconciliation checks; b) source documents for passing 
accounting entries related to fines, penalties, compensations and write-offs; 
c) customer complaints; d) technology incident reports; and e) the results of 
quality assurance and inventory reviews.
However, the primary mechanism for capturing OREs when things go 
wrong is to rely on employees. Business units and support functions operat￾ing at the coal face need to be able to:
● understand what an ORE is, visualize examples and recognize an event 
when it occurs;
● know how to report it once discovered and have the means to do so;
● know who to ask in case of doubt.
The completeness of event reporting remains a challenge for many firms, for 
multiple reasons:
● employees not wanting to draw attention to their own failure;Operational risk events 81
● arguments as to who owns the ORE;
● the consequence of having to manage the follow-up root cause analysis 
and remediation efforts; and
● a lack of understanding, with an unclear ORE definition possibly leaving 
too much to judgement.
To address the latter point, it is useful to compile a list of possible ORE ex￾amples, to provide clarity and assist employees in recognizing an incident.
Potential events for a Human Resources department may include:
● payroll calculated incorrectly; employee underpaid;
● delivery of payslips to the wrong address by an outsourced provider;
● spreadsheet containing employee personal data placed on a public drive 
and accessed by unauthorized personnel;
● disgruntled member of staff threatens a lawsuit, resulting in an out-of￾court settlement (Note: it is important to remember that out-of-court 
settlements count as operational risk events);
● failure of payroll system results in delayed salary disbursement.
The list of possible incidents for a trading business may comprise:
● wrong trade amount (fat-finger error);
● an error in model design, leading to incorrect valuation of the deal;
● erroneous valuation of a position due to a failure in updating prices;
● trading system upgrade, causing errors in transaction reports made to the 
regulatory authorities;
● client order taken on an unrecorded mobile phone; client subsequently 
claims not to recognize the order; trade reversed at a loss.
Similar lists can be prepared and discussed with each business unit and sup￾port function. Continuous, tailor-made employee training and education is 
essential to keep up a solid level of understanding.
In 2023, Best Practice Operational risk Forum participants discussed 
their level of confidence that events were indeed being reported by staff as 
required. Six per cent of respondents exhibited high confidence that over 
90 per cent of incidents were identified and escalated; while 67 per cent 
believed that over 70 per cent were collected, as illustrated in Table 4.3. This 
is an improvement from a similar poll in 2020 (see first edition of this book), 
reflecting increased employee familiarity with the event logging process 
which is becoming ‘the norm’ within financial services firms.82 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
Table 4.3 Industry study: confidence in completeness of ORE reporting
Confidence level % Firms
High: 90% and above 6
Medium high: over 70% 67
Medium low: over 50% 17
Low: less than 50% 10
DEFINITIONS OF MATERIAL
Example 1
Material OREs are events where actual or potential loss ≥ $500,000. These 
events need to be immediately notified to the head of Finance, head of Risk, 
chief operations officer and the head of respective business or function.
When you add in client harm, reputational damage and regulatory 
censure, significance can be expressed via a combination of financial and 
non-financial impacts.
Escalate
Material events need to be escalated promptly. Escalation is becoming more 
important over time, involving rapid alert to senior management at the very 
early stages of an incident, to enable customer and stakeholder communication 
and speedy resolution. Especially with technology downtime, impacted clients 
may turn to social media to flag service unavailability; the very last resort in 
finding out about your own event should be from the customer themselves. 
Major incidents may necessitate swift assembly of the crisis management team, 
who will take the lead in coordinating follow-up action.
Some OREs also have to be notified to the regulators, depending on local 
supervisory guidelines, which vary by jurisdiction. Supervisors frequently 
set an amount above which they have to be informed of a loss within a given 
period of time; or outline types of impacts, for example, involving customer 
harm, which require to be promptly escalated.
The definition of what is material is also changing. A decade ago, materi￾ality was mostly expressed in financial terms.Operational risk events 83
Example 2
Material OREs are events with High or Very High impacts in any of the 
categories (financial, client, reputational or regulatory) defined in the unified 
rating grid. They need to be immediately notified to the Operational Risk 
department, which will, in turn, inform relevant stakeholders and escalate to 
the chief operating officer, chief risk officer, head of Compliance and the 
head of respective business or function. The chief operating officer may 
initiate a crisis management process and will ascertain the need for client 
and regulatory communication.
Depending on the nature of the event, there may be other participants in the 
chain. Cases of fraud or financial crime will be routed to Human Resources, 
Fraud Prevention, Legal or some combination of the above. There are advantages 
in directing all events via the operational risk function, which can serve as a cen￾tral point to determine subsequent escalation.
Report
The Operational Risk department usually develops a reporting template. 
A standard form is useful to stipulate minimum requirements, including 
important dates – the dates of occurrence, discovery and accounting – and 
an example template has been provided in Appendix 2. Reporting needs to 
be completed within a set timeline, which can vary significantly from firm 
to firm, from 24 hours up to 90 days. Rapid recording is encouraged, to 
relay the essence of the issue, rather than waiting for all facts to come to 
light. It is best to just get the record in, and if necessary add to it as new 
details emerge.
In many instances, the area that discovers the event is not the one that 
caused it; for example, the Finance department identifies an incorrect 
booking made by Operations. Who is responsible for filing the ORE? To 
avoid a heated debate, it is good practice for the identifying business unit 
or support function to report the incident, regardless of whether or not 
they are at fault. This helps speed up the process and prompts depart￾ments to work in collaboration. The operational risk function can assist 
in moderating complex cross-functional events where multiple areas are 
involved.84 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
A reporting process can be established in one of two ways:
● Reporting is made available to all employees, for example, via a chat line, 
a link to a form on the firm’s intranet site, or a paper template. Any 
member of staff can then complete a report and submit it directly to 
required recipients, ensuring swift notification. Investing in automation 
and streamlining the process via built-in menus and predefined distribution 
lists enhances the end-user experience and makes the tool straightforward 
and easy to use. All-staff reporting of this kind requires a higher level of 
maturity of the organization, where employees have reasonable 
knowledge and understanding of OREs. The approach works best in 
firms where the culture is conducive to accepting bad news and reacting 
constructively, focusing on resolution rather than pointing fingers.
● Reporting is accessible only to a smaller group of nominated first line 
operational risk champions within each business unit and support 
function. These risk champions are usually trained on various aspects of 
OREs and other operational risk tools, which enables a significant 
increase in the quality of the reports, and a weeding down of false alerts. 
This approach may, however, slow down the reporting process because 
the risk champion becomes a key dependency.
It is possible to combine both options in a two-step process, allowing all 
employees to flag an event which is then routed to the champion for subse￾quent review.
An industry study conducted in 2020 revealed a definitive move towards 
simplifying the reporting process. As many as 50 per cent of respondents 
had a short and simple online incident reporting form available to all staff, 
either via the firm’s intranet portal or as part of the operational risk system. 
Another 25 per cent used paper templates and the remaining 25 per cent 
limited access to first line champions, in order to increase the quality of 
submissions (see Table 4.4).
Table 4.4 Industry study: operational risk event reporting process
ORE reporting % firms
Paper template available to all employees 25
System or online intranet module available to all employees 50
Reporting by champions only 25Operational risk events 85
Where a deeper analysis of root causes and failed controls is not 
completed, the firm will end up merely counting the loss occurrences, their 
volume and value; without understanding why they happened and how to 
prevent the next event from materializing.
Resolve and close
Until now, we have been discussing the event identification and reporting 
process. One of the fundamental challenges faced by operational risk pro￾fessionals is ensuring that OREs are not merely seen as a reporting exercise. 
Even the name given in the Basel Accord, internal loss data, invites the use 
of the word collection next to it. A lot of focus is placed on the gathering 
aspect – scope, template, timeline – to the extent that sometimes the most 
important element, active risk management, is underemphasized.
Essential learnings can be derived from OREs when thought, time and 
effort are invested in understanding what controls have failed and why. 
Material OREs necessitate an exhaustive root cause analysis, sometimes 
called a deep dive or lessons learnt. The operational risk function can facili￾tate this process, lend guidance and expertise, and provide a standard tem￾plate to ensure consistency in the approach. Analysis can be completed via a 
workshop with subject matter experts (SMEs), and with the right stakehold￾ers in the room a discussion will usually suffice. The firm may also apply 
techniques such as 5 Whys or fishbone (Ishikawa) diagrams, which are 
widely employed in the Six Sigma process improvement methodology:5
● 5 Whys prompt continual asking of the why question, to drill down into 
the problem and get to its true origin;
● a fishbone diagram is useful in exploring distinct groups of causes; for 
example, what are the people-, system- or process-related causes of the 
incident.
Following the in-depth study, action plans must be created, with owners and 
target dates, to prevent future reoccurrence. The second line Operational 
Risk department usually monitors the progress of these plans and escalates 
to the relevant governance committees any OREs which have not closed by 
the target resolution date. Operational Risk can also take a more active role 
and sign off on the actions, to confirm that the intended control enhance￾ments actually address the risk.86 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
Lastly, OREs can serve as a trigger to consider revision of other tools, 
such as RCSAs, KRIs and scenarios.
Analyse
Analysis, trend examination, aggregation and reporting are crucial activities 
which bring value to the organization. Correct event classification using the 
risk taxonomy category, and tagging it against the primary responsible busi￾ness unit and legal entity, help build a solid foundation for the analysis.
The second line Operational Risk department has a view of the entirety 
of the firm’s ORE data and is best placed to conduct the analysis. The ques￾tions to consider include:
● What is the overall story – has there been an increase/decrease in the 
number or value of OREs? It is helpful to analyse incidents relative to 
transaction volume: if a business unit doubles its transaction processing 
but OREs go up by only 10%, that could be interpreted as positive news.
● What can be said about the firm’s risk profile? Are there certain risks that 
are continuously materializing?
● Are OREs occurring in different areas but with the same root cause? 
Another useful tool borrowed from Six Sigma, Pareto analysis, can be 
applied to the ORE data, with a view to finding a few key drivers which 
contribute to the majority of failures.6
● Is there a particular day of the month when events take place (e.g. month￾end)?
● What are the weak spots, where controls appear to fail repeatedly? This 
is particularly a concern if prevention measures have already been 
implemented.
● What is the rate of near misses to actual monetary losses? This reflects the 
strength of preventative controls.
● What is the length of time between the date of event occurrence and the 
date of discovery? This provides insight on the performance of detective 
controls.
● Is there a cluster of events that occurred during a short period of time, 
which may be connected?
● Are OREs being reported within the timeline set by the policy? This 
provides a good reflection of the firm’s culture.Operational risk events 87
● Integration with other tools – are the reported OREs consistent with the 
outputs of other tools, such as RCSAs (see Chapter  5) and KRIs 
(Chapter 7)?
In short, a meaningful story around the OREs needs to be relayed to senior 
management and appropriate governance committees (see Chapter  10, 
Operational risk reporting).
Another powerful technique is to present trends and findings back to first 
line business units and support functions, who can sometimes feel that their 
reported OREs seem to disappear into a black hole without any follow-up 
feedback. This kind of reporting back can be done, for example, in a quar￾terly review session with each business unit, where the department’s own 
events are discussed and additional firm-wide analysis is shared by the sec￾ond line operational risk team.
Validate
The validation stage focuses on data accuracy and completeness. Sound 
data collection, and the quality and integrity of the collected data, are cru￾cial – for risk management purposes as well as measurement – to generate 
capital outcomes that are aligned with the firm’s operational loss exposure. 
The Basel Framework requires banks to ‘have processes to independently 
review the comprehensiveness and accuracy of loss data’.7
Validation steps may include regular reconciliation of OREs recorded in 
the operational risk system or spreadsheet to the firm’s accounting records. 
This ensures that losses are correctly reflected in the general ledger; and in 
the opposite direction, checks that the respective general ledger entries cor￾respond to what is captured in the system.
An additional certification mechanism can be used, where business units 
are asked to attest to the completeness and accuracy of OREs in the report￾ing period. To facilitate this process, it is good practice to provide depart￾ments with the OREs they have submitted, and to seek written confirmation 
from the department head that no other incidents have taken place.
Firms may find it useful to open a separate general ledger account for 
recording OREs, ensuring transparency and ease of reconciliation. As an 
example, in a trading business all gains and losses commonly end up in the 
same profit and loss account. This makes it very difficult to extract entries 
related to operational risk events from the normal day’s P&L; a dedicated 
account helps in this process.88 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
External loss data
External events provide excellent case studies and enable a firm to proac￾tively consider the question could this happen to us?. Data can be obtained 
from various sources, including newspaper articles or a paid subscription to 
external loss data consortia. It is the role of the operational risk function, 
both second line personnel and first line champions, to institute a disciplined 
approach for examining external events, selecting those cases that are most 
relevant, and following up by facilitating workshops on the events with 
subject matter experts.
Addressing the human element
Another key ORE challenge is linked to the culture of the organization: ensur￾ing that employees feel comfortable and empowered to speak up when things 
go wrong. Fostering a no blame environment and emphasizing the value of 
lessons learnt will encourage staff to raise issues. The operational risk func￾tion is often a catalyst of positive change in this direction; providing training 
to employees on the value of OREs, as well as requesting senior management 
to avoid reacting to events with negative comments or an immediate demand 
for the responsible employee’s name. The operational risk function can also be 
a mediator, especially when transmitting bad news up the chain of the or￾ganization, focusing constructively on addressing the cause rather than nam￾ing and shaming members of staff. Needless to say, the second line operational 
risk should not have a role in any post-event disciplinary proceedings.
Operational risk helps transition from a who did this?-style comeback 
from management to a how do we solve this?-type reaction. Alas, this is a 
broader cultural challenge that cannot be solved by operational risk alone, 
even if mammoth efforts are made. In some organizations, the fear of re￾prisal significantly impedes the firm’s ability to make effective reports and 
hence to derive true value from the lessons learnt.
Unfortunately, OREs are always ‘bad news’; with the rare exception 
when an incidental gain is incurred instead of a loss. Over time, this can cre￾ate a negative brand to the process, and if not managed, can spread to affect 
the reputation of the whole operational risk discipline. Positive energy needs 
to be consciously injected by:
● focusing on lessons learnt;
● presenting the results of deep dives which demonstrate process 
enhancements implemented as a result of the incident;Operational risk events 89
● sharing details of events between departments, to promote common 
learning and help avoid similar problems in other areas;
● celebrating success, highlighting any positive employee or customer 
feedback that relates to improved processes.
Treatment of technology-related events, 
data breaches and conduct failures
As discussed in the first chapter, the operational risk discipline is moving 
away from solely focusing on regulatory capital calculations, and the defi￾nition of operational risk as the risk of just loss is no longer truly reflective 
of today’s environment. Following cyber-attacks, significant technology 
incidents and failures of third-party service providers, firms’ operational 
resilience is being brought into the spotlight, as highlighted in Chapter 15. 
Supervisors are constantly asking organizations to assess how their fail￾ures are impacting their clients and the markets they operate in. This con￾flict between the letter of the earliest Basel Committee requirement and the 
evolution of the financial services environment has created a divergence; 
either firms need to expand their treatment of operational risk losses to 
incorporate other non-financial impacts, or they need to create alternative 
parallel processes which capture events with client, reputational and regu￾latory outcomes.
Specifically, there are three areas of challenge: technology-related events, 
data breaches and conduct failures.
Technology-related events
These are subject to continual debate between operational risk, information 
technology and now additionally operational resilience colleagues, due to 
the lack of integration between the ORE process and IT helpdesk incident 
management. Major (not all) technology incidents usually turn into opera￾tional risk events, and a mechanism needs to be in place to guide decision￾making: at what point does system failure or an attack become an ORE? As 
one example, the criteria can be agreed by instituting a unified rating grid as 
discussed earlier in the chapter. But end-users also need to be educated as to 
what notification route they should follow, be it via the IT helpdesk or an 
operational risk material event escalation channel. Equally, incidents may 
emanate from a failure on the part of a third-party provider of outsourced 90 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
IT services. Those kinds of failures should be logged as OREs, and the firm 
must both oversee resolution of the incident and ensure that the supplier 
introduces measures to prevent reoccurrence.
Technology-related events may not immediately translate into a clear fi￾nancial loss to the firm. However, with increased reliance on technological 
solutions they are becoming more and more impactful to clients. As dis￾cussed in Chapter 15, the resilience dialogue evolves primarily around tech￾nology, and hence operational resilience colleagues are now firmly involved 
in these kind of events. The speed of escalation, customer and regulatory 
communication and event resolution is vital, especially where enhanced in￾cident management requirements are introduced by regulation such as the 
Digital Operational Resilience Act (DORA). Who steps up to the challenge 
and assumes the role of incident coordinator? This varies between opera￾tional risk, IT and operational resilience teams, and at times all of the above 
aim to hold a central position and orchestrate the activities, including any 
necessary liaison with required stakeholders from various disciplines. The 
need for integration, collaboration and clarity when it comes to roles and 
responsibilities is also discussed in Chapter 15.
Data breaches
The EU Global Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) introduced a dramatic 
increase in penalties for poor data management. Prompt identification and 
reporting of actual and potential violations is now part of every firm’s pri￾orities. Good practice is to use an existing operational risk event reporting 
channel for data-related issues. This requires an update to the ORE policy 
to clarify the scope. But it also relies on an increase in the speed of ORE 
submission, to comply with GDPR timelines, as well as good coordination 
between operational risk and data protection officers, to ensure prompt cir￾culation and actioning of the report. In a similar way to a technology failure, 
a data breach may not generate an immediate and obvious loss, but does 
have an impact on the customer (or employee if it is an employee-related 
event). It can also emanate from a third-party failure.
The alternative to using one incident reporting process is to create a sep￾arate data breach reporting one, with a different (yet another) template for 
the end-user, a separate policy, training and education. Unfortunately, many 
organizations choose this route; but it is confusing for the employees at the 
coal face, who already have multiple templates to complete for different 
purposes.Operational risk events 91
Conduct-related events
This is another field where the ORE process can be a conduit for captur￾ing and escalating material breaches, rather than creating an equivalent 
compliance reporting mechanism. For example, an incident where a new 
product is traded with a client prior to formal sign-off from the new 
product approval committee. Although it has zero financial impact, this 
represents a severe misconduct and internal policy breach. Similarly, an 
account opened for a client prior to customer due diligence (CDD) veri￾fication, where the CDD is completed 10 days later with no exceptions, 
epitomizes a lucky escape. There could have been significant conse￾quences for the firm if the new client was subject to sanctions, or was 
operating outside the firm’s target market and ended up not being ap￾proved. Even if a financial penalty was avoided, from a risk management 
perspective it is beneficial to examine the causes of this event and derive 
lessons learnt.
The operational risk function needs to work closely with compliance to 
agree on a joined-up approach. End-users will always favour having a single 
channel for raising all types of exceptions, which are then routed to respec￾tive SMEs, whether compliance, operational risk, IT or data protection.
In terms of reflecting events that have conduct implications, an ORE tem￾plate can include a flag or a field which addresses behavioural elements. This 
enables any conduct-related events to be easily extracted from the overall 
database and subjected to subsequent analysis.
Roles and responsibilities
It is the responsibility of first line business units and support functions to 
identify, escalate and report OREs in compliance with the requirements 
stipulated by the policy. Business units agree on and fund control improve￾ments to prevent incidents reoccurring, and track the enhancements until 
they have been fully implemented. They also need to use OREs as a trigger 
to consider any necessary updates to other operational risk tools – risk and 
control self-assessments and Key Risk Indicators.
First line operational risk champions, embedded in the business, play a 
crucial role as risk coordinators, ensuring that OREs are used effectively to 
improve risk management.
An ORE checklist for first line risk coordinators is presented below.92 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
FIRST LINE RISK COORDINATOR CHECKLIST: ORES
✓ All staff in the department are trained on operational risk events.
✓ Employees understand the importance of learning from incidents and are 
encouraged to raise them.
✓ Root cause and trend analysis are performed, actions are taken to 
improve control environment.
✓ Completeness of events is ensured through validation or attestation.
✓ Risk coordinators share lessons learnt from OREs.
✓ Relevant external events are examined: can they happen to us?
The second line Operational Risk department is responsible for establishing 
policy requirements, providing training and education to end-users, con￾ducting overall trend analysis and providing insights to help derive the 
maximum value out of past events. The second line back-tests OREs against 
other tools in the framework, to ensure consistency, and derives key views 
on risk measurement and capital adequacy.
Operational risk specialists are often catalysts of cultural change, espe￾cially in firms where speaking up and raising incidents may be challenging. 
The function works in close partnership with first line business units, pro￾moting and facilitating cross-functional learning.
Common challenges and good practices
Common challenges
Potential challenges related to operational risk events can include the fol￾lowing.
Reluctance to raise OREs
This is a very real hurdle especially in organizations characterized by a 
blame culture, where the first question is usually who did it?. The opera￾tional risk function plays a key role in positively influencing the culture and 
encouraging transparency and no blame; but there are limits to what a Operational risk events 93
single department can accomplish. Using data analytics and artificial intel￾ligence can help to surface incidents automatically, placing less reliance on 
personnel and removing the emotion from the process. This is an embry￾onic area but one definitely worth exploring further.
Lack of action following the event
The necessary improvements are identified but are not completed on time 
due to other priorities, insufficient budget, apathy or for other reasons. In 
these cases, actions turn overdue and target dates are extended multiple 
times. To avoid this scenario a pragmatic approach needs to be adopted, 
differentiating between minor and material matters. For insignificant 
events, improvements may be too costly and risk acceptance is the opti￾mum solution. If the event and corresponding actions are material, how￾ever, they need to be treated with the same rigour as internal audit action 
plans.
Lack of ownership of cross-functional incidents
Where multiple areas are involved in an event, none of the business areas are 
willing to step up and lead remediation, passing the accountability around: 
this is not my event. In such instances the Operational Risk department can 
moderate the resolution, facilitating conversations and agreeing the right 
steps forward.
Over-engineered ORE framework and template
Simply put, business units hesitate to use the ORE mechanism. If the form 
is too complicated and appears to provide no value then the reporting hur￾dle may not even be attempted. Simplifying the process ensures that, from 
an end-user perspective, it adds value compared to the time and effort in￾vested.
Administration instead of risk management
There is some risk that the whole ORE exercise can become solely about 
form completion; especially if thresholds are inappropriately low, combined 
with over-zealous employees in the Operational Risk department who duly 
chase each event, action and target date regardless of materiality. While it is 
important to have a disciplined approach to logging and analysing events, it 
is equally essential to apply a risk-based perspective and common sense 
when it comes to minor issues.94 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
Unbalanced operational risk engagement
Criticism is sometimes directed towards the Operational Risk department to 
the effect that it is only visible when there has been an operational risk 
event. And while the business unit is determinedly focusing on investigating 
and resolving the incident, operational risk is unhelpfully following up every 
hour demanding submission of the ORE report. It is true that the second 
line needs to be actively involved at all stages of the event management pro￾cess; but this should not be the only time it ever engages with end-users. 
Relationship building, understanding each other’s roles and working in 
partnership throughout the whole risk management life cycle are key to ef￾fective risk management.
Good practices
Training and education
Engaging and interactive training sessions, which are tailored to reflect ex￾amples relevant to business units and support functions, increase under￾standing about OREs and make the process more accessible. Educational 
programmes need to be continuous, to account for new joiners.
Trend analysis
It is good practice to invest time in conducting trend analysis at firm-wide 
level, to really understand the story that OREs present. To some extent, the 
loss profile reveals a firm’s strengths and weaknesses, and this valuable 
knowledge should guide the organization when taking key decisions – for 
example when it is considering major business changes, expansion or invest￾ment in new product lines.
Examination of decline in OREs
While any increase in the value and number of events is concerning and 
should be investigated, a sharp drop is equally worrying. This can occur due 
to process improvements that the firm has implemented; but it can also 
occur as a result of a new leader stepping in and propagating no errors/no 
losses type objectives, instilling fear in any employees who deliver unpopu￾lar messages. Consequently, the absence of OREs may not necessarily be 
good news, and the operational risk function needs to keep its ears to the 
ground, evaluating the situation and understanding what has caused it.Operational risk events 95
Sharing learning
The second line Operational Risk department can lead a forum with first 
line champions to share relevant events, learnings and success stories. This 
process encourages debate and prompts champions to develop their own 
network, enhancing their ability to reach out to each other and compare 
notes. Is it worth mentioning that event sharing is particularly valuable in 
large organizations with the same activity being undertaken in various geo￾graphical locations. Fraudsters may identify a weakness in a firm’s system 
and undertake the same fraud in different jurisdictions and locations. 
Sharing of incidents can prevent this from happening.
Data confidentiality
Organizations need to ensure that customer or employee names and per￾sonal details are removed from the text of all event reports. Litigation, fraud 
and financial crime events contain sensitive details, so it is important that 
only a respective loss amount is recorded in the ORE report, supplemented 
by a reference number for the respective file which contains full details and 
is retained in the Human Resources or Legal department. This is particularly 
important when capturing sensitive data like pay-offs to staff.
In jurisdictions where firms are subject to bank secrecy or data privacy 
laws, client and transaction information should be relayed outside the juris￾diction only to the degree permitted by local privacy laws.
Celebrating success
This is particularly important given that OREs intrinsically have a negative 
connotation embedded in their name (incidents, losses). Operational risk 
needs to emphasize improvements, focusing on lessons learnt, and to en￾courage first line business units and support functions to adopt the same 
attitude. Recognition of timely and disciplined reporting, reward for process 
enhancements and, especially if available, client feedback related to per￾fected processes turn the focus from what went wrong to what works well 
and has been improved. This tool is not used nearly enough in most firms.
Knowledge of the second line operational risk function
Due to their direct use in risk measurement, OREs require in-depth knowl￾edge and proficiency with definitions and attributes. To name a few, these 
attributes include gross and net amounts, reference dates and timing impacts 
(which, for example, should be captured when they span more than one fi￾nancial accounting period and give rise to legal risk).8
 As described in 96 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
Chapter 11, which covers training and education, operational risk policy 
setters must be able to not only articulate how the ORE process works but 
also explain: why a particular approach and scope was selected; what con￾siderations went into the decision; which home and host supervisory guide￾lines have been examined; what cost/benefit analysis has been conducted; 
and whether cultural aspects have been considered.
Industry benchmark
The Best Practice Operational Risk Forum, which comprises practitioners 
from a wide range of financial services firms, conducted a deep dive into the 
topic of operational risk events.
Addressing the cultural aspect: a marginal 
improvement
As described in Figure 4.3, the majority of respondents (58 per cent) per￾ceived that their firms contained different pockets of culture, which was 
largely due to different managers encouraging right – or wrong – behaviours 
and attitudes in their respective areas. This tendency generated a mixed re￾Reluctant but
accepting
Defensive Mixed;
depends on
the area
Constructive;
drives
lessons
learnt
18%
6%
58%
18%
1st line attitude to risk event reporting
Figure 4.3 Industry poll: first line attitude to reporting OREs
Best Practice Operational Risk Forum, 2023Operational risk events 97
sponse to the topic of OREs; some areas were supportive of the ORE con￾struct, and happy to focus on lessons learnt, while others’ attitudes were de￾fensive or even blame-orientated. On a positive note, there was an 
improvement in the number of respondents pointing to a consistently con￾structive approach, from 8 per cent in 2020 to 18 per cent in 2023 (see first 
edition of the book for details of 2020 poll results); in these cases leaders 
across the whole organization were prepared to accept that mistakes happen, 
and to devote their energy to finding solutions. This is a promising result, 
which is a tribute to firms’ leadership setting the right tone, as well as the 
event logging process becoming more of a norm across the industry.
Celebrating success
It is crucial to consciously inject positive energy into OREs, not only to 
avoid the negative brand of this important tool but to create an environment 
of psychological safety. The premise of ‘there is no improvement without 
openness about mistakes and failures’ was discussed, with focus on 
encouraging constructive reaction to bad news, and a thorough lessons 
learnt process. Members noted that while, previously, psychological safety 
was an HR-led area, the Operational Risk department is increasingly step￾ping in to lead or co-lead the efforts.
Nevertheless, practitioners acknowledged that, in general, positive re￾ward and recognition mechanisms were not being applied sufficiently. The 
majority of respondents (61 per cent) felt that they had limited time on their 
hands, and that just as one ORE was investigated and closed, another one 
came in and the busy cycle continued, leaving not enough time to celebrate 
Not enough
– could be
improved
Yes, Somewhat
practiced
39%
61%
Celebrating success using OREs
Figure 4.4 Celebrating success using OREs
Best Practice Operational Risk Forum, 202398 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
the benefits and positive ramifications of the event. However, in those cases 
where rewards were given, forum members shared how much the positive 
affirmation truly mattered to recipients. It seems that much more emphasis 
on the constructive aspects of OREs – such as transparency, learning and 
meaningful enhancements – is both desirable and needed. In short, practi￾tioners need to take stock and dedicate time to congratulating and encour￾aging employees and teams that exhibit the right attitudes and behaviours.
Practical workplace exercise
Reflecting on the content of this chapter, examine a sample of operational 
risk events recorded within your organization over the last year, and con￾sider the following questions:
1 Have a scope and thresholds been set for OREs and are they fit for purpose?
2 What analysis has been undertaken to support the scope and thresholds?
3 Is there evidence of active risk management of events, with analysis of the 
root cause and actions to prevent reoccurrence?
4 Is the culture of the firm conducive to employees speaking up and logging 
incidents without fear of reprisal?
5 What are the strengths of the process?
6 What can be improved? Note down possible enhancements.
MAKE A DIFFERENCE (MAD) ACTION
Please outline the learnings and note down one action that you will take 
after reading this chapter to enhance your existing practices related to 
operational risk events.Operational risk events 99
In summary, this chapter addressed operational risk events, historically 
the first tool deployed by organizations, where many challenges still re￾main; from complex ones such as getting the culture right, to more sim￾ple ones such as setting the correct threshold.
Moving on, the next chapter will focus on forward-looking risk identification.
Notes
1 Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2014) Review of the Principles for 
the Sound Management of Operational Risk, www.bis.org/publ/bcbs292.pdf
(archived at https://perma.cc/X9UQ-5ZAB)
2 European Banking Authority (2008) Compendium of Supplementary Guidelines 
on Implementation Issues of Operational Risk (CP21), www.eba.europa.eu/
sites/default/documents/files/documents/10180/37070/8bfec18c-2de6-4436-
ae28-2f1b044bd385/CEBS%202008%20230%20Final.pdf? (archived at 
https://perma.cc/F2V4-B35T)
3 Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2014) Review of the Principles for 
the Sound Management of Operational Risk, www.bis.org/publ/bcbs292.pdf
(archived at https://perma.cc/XBW2-27EM)
4 Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2009) Results from the 2008 Loss 
Data Collection Exercise for Operational Risk, www.bis.org/publ/bcbs160.pdf
(archived at https://perma.cc/24GS-MXYN)
5 George, ML, Maxey, J, Rowlands, D and Price, M (2004) The Lean Six Sigma 
Pocket Toolbook: A quick reference guide to 100 tools for improving quality 
and speed, McGraw-Hill
6 George, ML, Maxey, J, Rowlands, D and Price, M (2004) The Lean Six Sigma 
Pocket Toolbook: A quick reference guide to 100 tools for improving quality 
and speed, McGraw-Hill
7 Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, Basel Framework, www.bis.org/
basel_framework/ (archived at https://perma.cc/3JNV-5BB8)
8 Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, Basel Framework, www.bis.org/ 
basel_framework/ (archived at https://perma.cc/3JNV-5BB8)Risk and control 05
self-assessments
What this chapter covers: Risk and Control Self-Assessments (RCSAs) are 
used by many organizations, yet the instrument attracts its fair share of 
criticism. This chapter draws attention to methodologies that have proven 
effective over time; suggests an approach to risk identification based on 
three simple questions; and emphasizes the importance of engaging with 
stakeholders via personable and meaningful conversations (Figure 5.1). 
While covering the main fundamental concepts, it also focuses on overcom￾ing pitfalls and proposing measures of success that help evaluate whether 
the RCSA has delivered desired outcomes. The chapter contains case studies, 
examples and an industry benchmark.
FURTHER READING
● Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission 
(2017) Enterprise Risk Management: Integrating with strategy and 
performance
Why recommended: One of the many strengths of the COSO approach is 
its emphasis on the value of enterprise risk management in relation to 
the setting and carrying out of strategy, positioning it in the context of the 
firm’s performance rather than as an isolated exercise. This useful guide 
aids in building a business case when considering RCSA roll-out.
● Theodore Zeldin (1998) Conversation: How talk can change your life, The 
Harvill Press
Why recommended: Perhaps a rather unusual choice for the chapter, 
this book brings out the art of conversations. The aim of including it is to 
stress the fact that RCSA is not a checklist or a mechanical task, but a 
meaningful – and potentially even enjoyable – interaction of minds.
100Figure 5.1 Focus of Chapter 5: risk assessments
Governance, roles and responsibilities
Establish governance and clear roles across the Three Lines for managing operational risk.
Risk assessments
Assess risk exposure in 
process, business or
function via RCSAs.
Supplement by evaluating
risks emanating from 
change activities via
ORAs. 
Identify exposure from 
extreme but plausible 
events. Mitigate through
risk transfer to insurance.
Scenario analysis
Monitor risk and control 
performance through
predictive indicators.
Act if indicators breach 
established appetite 
threshold. 
Key Risk Indicators
Reporting and decision-making
Review actual risk prole against set appetite, apply active risk management to enable achievement of strategic objectives.
Operational risk
events
Record and report risk 
events, act to minimize 
future exposure.
Monitor trends against 
RCSAs and KRIs.
Risk appetite and risk capacity
Dene nature and types of risk accepted in pursuit of strategic objectives. Evaluate adequacy of capital resources.
Operational risk taxonomy
Embedding and maturity assessment
Training and education
Risk culture
101102 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
Rethinking the approach: essential 
ingredients of the perfect recipe
Risk and Control Self-Assessments (RCSAs) are a key forward-looking 
component of the operational risk framework, and one of the most interac￾tive and engaging tools available to risk practitioners. While widely used by 
many firms in financial services, RCSAs typically generate a mixed response, 
not only from business stakeholders but also from practitioners themselves. 
Sceptics question whether they bring any benefits; critics suggest that they 
are a waste of time. A study of industry practices published by the 
Operational Riskdata eXchange Association (ORX) in 2020 even reflected 
the view that RCSAs were seen as simply not delivering enough value, and 
were perceived as a tick-box exercise rather than truly influencing business 
decisions.1
By this stage of evolution of the RCSA tool, firms are likely to have devel￾oped detailed procedures, predefined templates for what needs to be captured 
in a software or spreadsheet solution, and a library of commonly phrased 
risks and controls. Could it be that the methodology has become too prescrip￾tive and that the process has trumped the business value-add? Whether start￾ing from scratch or rethinking an existing approach, it is important to bear in 
mind that the essential ingredients of the perfect RCSA recipe are quite basic: 
the right stakeholders participating in the process, personal and meaningful 
engagement, a high degree of preparedness and an expert facilitator.
Heightened focus on proactive 
risk identification
Firms are subject to growing interest in their operational risk profile. 
Nowadays, boards, internal and external auditors, as well as regulators, 
frequently focus discussions towards the most material operational risks the 
firms face. And this is not surprising, as over the past decade operational 
risks have arguably surpassed financial risks in order of magnitude. This is 
demonstrated by the shift in the risk profile of the annual Global Risks 
Report published by the World Economic Forum. In 2024, it is the opera￾tional risks – AI-generated misinformation and disinformation, extreme 
weather events and cyber – that topped the risk chart,2
 with increasing in￾terconnectedness among the risks themselves.Risk and control self-assessments 103
The growing ask for clear articulation of top operational risks, in addi￾tion to well-established routine loss reporting, demonstrates very effectively 
the shift of focus in the industry: from being merely an operational risk 
regulatory capital calculation towards more active risk management. To this 
end, RCSA is a core tool that encourages proactive thinking, provides boards 
and management with a detailed view of the firm’s risk and control environ￾ment, and leads to prudent decision-making. Coupled with the big drive 
towards increased personal accountability, RCSAs are instrumental in help￾ing senior management to demonstrate and evidence that they have taken 
reasonable steps in understanding and managing their risk and control envi￾ronment. There are plenty of reasons to make the most of the exercise.
Top-down and bottom-up assessments 
and their features
Defining RCSAs
In Chapter 4 we discussed OREs, the events of the past. RCSAs, in contrast, 
encourage firms to consider the areas where they are exposed and where 
things could potentially go wrong for them in the future; thereby enabling 
them to invest in preventative as well as detective measures.
Terminology varies widely between firms. The risk assessments may also 
be called Risk and Control Assessments (RACAs), Control Self-Assessments 
(CSAs) or Own Risk Self-Assessments (ORSAs). Going forward, throughout 
this chapter and the rest of the book, we will refer to these assessments col￾lectively as Risk and Control Self-Assessments, or RCSAs.
RCSA is a process of the identification and assessment of risks faced by the 
firm and review of the control environment, in order to highlight areas 
where controls are ineffective or insufficient to mitigate the risk and take 
appropriate action.
Despite the RCSA concept being rather straightforward and necessarily sim￾plistic, it generates multiple questions that all require answers. As with any 
process, one of the fundamental steps in carrying out a successful RCSA is 
deciding on the right way of doing it. With no standard industry design, it is 104 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
imperative that each firm selects an appropriate methodology and approach, 
process and level of granularity that is suitable given its own circumstances.
Methodological questions that need to be considered include:
● How to structure a bottom-up approach, gathering intelligence from the 
employees at the coal face as well as how to obtain a top-down view from 
the senior stakeholders; both sets of discussions are needed;
● What assessment scales should be adopted;
● Whether controls will undergo judgemental evaluation or need to be 
actively tested;
● How to add value and measure the success – or failure – of the exercise.
Presented below are examples of selected RCSA approaches, their key fea￾tures, advantages and weaknesses.
Granular assessments
Detailed bottom-up assessments help a firm to achieve greater understand￾ing of its risk and control profile. One methodology in this category is pro￾cess risk self-assessment (PRSA) which aims to map a particular process 
end-to-end, and to identify the key risks and controls within it. Activities are 
selected based on certain criteria. For example, if the driver is Sarbanes–
Oxley (SoX), a regulation which historically gave rise to many internal con￾trol evaluation programmes, the focus would be on the processes that impact 
the company’s most significant general ledger accounts.3
Where the driver is operational resilience – as has been the case more 
recently – the organization identifies the critical operations which are most 
important for its clients or the financial markets it operates in.
Organizations that have historically applied a PRSA methodology driven 
by SoX are also better positioned when it comes to satisfying operational 
resilience demands. This is because the fundamental yet very time-consum￾ing task of mapping the process, and understanding its interdependencies, 
would have already been accomplished in the first stage of analysis. (See also 
Chapter 15, Operational resilience.)
A PRSA schematic is described in Figure 5.2.
Examples of processes or services that may be selected for PRSA include:
● Client deposits: these are mapped end-to-end, from the point of 
establishing a client relationship and performing due diligence checks, 
through to the client depositing the money which results in accounting 
entries on the balance sheet.Risk and control self-assessments 105
● Foreign exchange: similarly this process is mapped from the point of a 
new corporate/institutional client being set up, to agreeing the deal with 
the trader, confirmation, settlement and general ledger accounting entries.
PRSA is a bottom-up assessment, resulting in relatively granular risk identi￾fication, for example:
● risk of money laundering resulting from missed or poorly executed client 
due diligence at the account opening stage;
● risk of incorrect foreign exchange transactions due to trader ‘fat finger’ 
error.
The key features of this approach are outlined below.
● Advantages:
❍ Process mapping is a robust technique which in itself generates 
immediate benefits, including process optimization, as redundant steps 
are identified and eliminated.
❍ A cross-functional methodology brings together participants from the 
front office, operations, finance, technology and other functions, 
encouraging fruitful dialogue and increasing overall understanding of 
the risk and control environment; and improving collaboration 
between business units and support functions.
❍ Due to end-to-end mapping, the impact of failure on the external 
customer becomes transparent and measurable. This is essential 
learning for non-client facing departments and a key differentiator of 
the approach.
Figure 5.2 Process risk self-assessment
Significant 
risks
Key
controls
Control 
testing
Significant 
accounts 
from 
financial 
statements
Main client￾facing 
services
Underlying
business
processes106 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
❍ Often process controls are actively tested (rather than judgementally 
evaluated), making the assessment more factual and objective.
● Challenges:
❍ It takes a lot of thought, and sometimes some trial and error, to set the 
right boundaries around the process; and to obtain agreement on 
where it starts and ends and what is (and is not) included. It may be 
equally challenging to find an owner for a particular process, due to its 
cross-functional nature. Organizations are rarely structured by process, 
but usually rather by department.
❍ The approach is labour intensive and requires rigorous work creating 
maps and keeping them up to date; it is most likely to succeed where 
a firm is already in the habit of process mapping as part of its culture.
❍ The approach requires consideration of how the broader risks of, for 
example, poor governance or conduct can be addressed; as well as 
how the granular results are aggregated and presented to the board 
and senior management at the top of the house.
An alternative detailed form of assessment is the departmental RCSA, focus￾ing on the risk and control environment of a particular department, business 
or function. This approach fits well with firms’ organizational structure, 
with clear units of measure – departments – already established and operat￾ing, and an obvious RCSA owner, the respective unit head. It also aligns 
closely to senior management accountability and therefore can be used in 
personal attestations to satisfy certification and accountability regimes 
where they exist. The approach is, however, siloed by nature as each busi￾ness unit is evaluating its own setting without considering interdependencies 
and reflecting on the overall impact of the risk or control on the client or the 
balance sheet. Overall, therefore, PRSA is a stronger and more rewarding 
approach. But if you are conducting the assessments at departmental level, 
aim to maximize the exploration of linkages and interdependencies.
High-level assessments
Top-down assessments are essential for engaging with senior management 
and arriving at an enterprise-wide view. Strategic risk assessment (SRA) fo￾cuses on the identification of risks which may prevent the firm from achiev￾ing its strategic objectives, and the formulation of controls to mitigate those 
risks. The starting point is the high-level business plan, which usually trans￾lates into the goals of business heads. This gives rise to an immediate value Risk and control self-assessments 107
proposition: the conversation starts with an offer from the risk practitioner 
to help the business identify and mitigate the risks that could impede the 
successful realization of their own objectives and business plan. It sounds so 
much better than a bald statement of the type ‘You need to complete your 
RCSA’.
Operational risk practitioners often complain that they are not invited to 
the strategy table. In this context the SRA is a sound tool which not only 
generates value but also elevates the brand and profile of risk professionals. 
The assessment is best conducted at the start of the year, to coincide with 
strategy setting, arriving at robust objectives given risks that have been well 
understood and evaluated. This timing is important to ensure that the SRA 
does not represent an isolated exercise but is linked to the need to make a 
decision – namely to discuss and adopt the strategy given the risks to it. As 
noted by COSO, enterprise risk management and these kinds of exercises 
enrich the ‘dialogue by adding perspective to the strengths and weaknesses 
of a strategy’ and allow management ‘to feel more confident that they’ve 
examined alternative strategies’.4
 This is described in schematic form in 
Figure 5.3.
SRA is a top-down assessment resulting in the identification of high-level 
risks which stretch beyond purely operational, actually entering into enter￾prise risk territory.
Figure 5.3 Strategic risk assessment
Inherent
risks
Key
controls
Residual
risks
Firm’s
strategic
objectives
CASE STUDY 5.1
An investment bank sets one of its objectives as being ‘to create an extensive 
range of competitive products that meet client requirements’, with a plan to 108 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
Arguably, reasoning such as this (‘new product approval process too slow’) 
does not belong in the operational risk domain. In the above example, how￾ever, this is clearly a very important risk for the business; and the methodology 
needs to be flexible enough to accommodate what truly matters to stakehold￾ers, rather than what can be neatly fitted into the standard taxonomy.
The key features of the SRA approach are presented below.
● Advantages:
❍ SRA is a vital tool for understanding the most significant risks that 
underlie the business. This is an essential step for subsequently setting 
the firm’s risk appetite (see Chapter 9, Operational risk appetite).
❍ The exercise is directly relevant to business heads as it is closely linked 
to their goals and strategic objectives. This kind of value proposition 
helps to build a convincing case for participants.
❍ SRA promotes risk conversations at the senior management level, 
increases awareness, elevates the value of the risk assessment process 
and drives the need and appreciation for resulting management 
information and reporting.
❍ By its nature, SRA is broader than operational risk and evaluates the 
risk and control environment on a holistic basis, considering both gaps 
and areas that might be overcontrolled.
● Challenges:
❍ By design, the SRA does not delve deep into the details of individual 
controls.
significantly increase its client value proposition during the coming year. During 
the SRA, in discussing what issues might prevent the business heads from 
executing on this objective, three risks are identified:
● inadequate product design leading to poor customer outcomes;
● inability to identify and implement new regulatory requirements on a timely 
basis;
● new product approval process too slow.
The last risk is considered a real blocker to delivering on the strategy. A 
multimillion improvement programme is launched, to recruit additional resources 
in support functions and invest in a parallel system testing environment. Metrics 
are agreed as to what constitutes an acceptable new product review and 
approval time frame, and each new product is measured against the timeline.Risk and control self-assessments 109
❍ It is not easy to organize and requires robust planning given the busy 
diaries and preoccupations of the participants.
❍ Controls are evaluated judgementally, not tested, making the 
assessment less factual.
The organization needs to conduct assessments that are both granular and 
high level. They complement each other, enabling a deep dive as well as 
considering the firm-wide profile, which cannot be arrived at via mere ag￾gregation. The risks are key at the level where they are raised; so a PRSA will 
capture process-related risks, but is not expected to reflect executive com￾mittee concerns (for example, around failed governance arrangements or 
strategic business risks).
Whichever approach is applied, an RCSA has a number of distinct steps 
that need to be followed.
Risk identification and assessment
Identifying risks
Risk identification aims to highlight material risks for the area covered by 
the RCSA, potential failures that may impact key business activities and 
prevent respective business unit or support functions from meeting their 
objectives.
To achieve a robust outcome, it is essential to involve the right stakehold￾ers – usually the heads of the respective departments, their direct reports and 
selected subject matter experts (SMEs) – and for strategic risk assessment, 
the chief executive and their management team.
While there is no agreed universal approach, risk identification lends it￾self well to individual interviews with the appropriate participants, facili￾tated by an experienced operational risk practitioner. This can be followed 
by a follow-up workshop, discussed later in the chapter. One-to-one discus￾sions allow inputs to be gathered effectively and efficiently. A good start can 
be achieved via a conversation centred around three basic questions, de￾scribed in Figure 5.4.
The open question
Open questions explore participants’ concerns about the area in scope, 
to obtain an understanding of what keeps them awake at night. The 110 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
question is broad and posed in the language of the participant (rather 
than risk-type language such as ‘what are your inherent risks?’). 
Stakeholders understand their business; the answer should provide a 
good feel for their key areas of focus.
Various elements may arise from this process which are not necessarily 
risks; the aim is to listen, probe and turn the information into desired output. 
Many accomplished operational risk managers see themselves as transla￾tors, interpreting regulation into day-to-day practices, converting stakehold￾ers’ input into risk language and complexity into simplicity.
Slightly digressing from the discipline of operational risk into the art of 
leading a conversation: to quote Theodore Zeldin, ‘Real conversation 
catches fire. It involves more than sending and receiving information.’5
 A 
risk practitioner is not an administrative note-taker, but a knowledgeable 
and equal partner in the dialogue, orchestrating the conversation. A rela￾tionship of mutual trust helps bring about a good debate.
Back to risk identification, an alternative open question might explore 
what could go wrong, or what might prevent stakeholders from achieving 
their annual objectives?. Linking every risk assessment to objectives brings 
much needed connection to the business plan and what needs to be achieved. 
Or, if they were building this process from scratch, what would they be con￾cerned about?.
The intention is to talk about risk in language the stakeholder can easily 
understand, even better without using the actual word risk itself.
Figure 5.4 Three questions for risk assessments
The open
question
The leading
question
The
prioritization
question
Failure of a control is not a risk.
Potential hurdles to watch out for include participants raising, for example, 
failure of account reconciliation as one of their concerns. Account reconcili￾ation is a control that detects occurrences of multiple risks, including the 
risk of transactional error or internal fraud, as highlighted in Figure 5.5. In Risk and control self-assessments 111
this case the facilitator needs to bring the focus back to the risk: one way of 
achieving this is via the use of the bow-tie model outlined in Chapter 1. This 
model, yet again, helps us to visually differentiate between materialized risks 
(events) and their causes and impacts, as well as the controls discussed later 
in this chapter. Skilled operational risk practitioners operate the bow-tie 
model subconsciously, automatically converting inputs into the right formu￾lation of risks.
Often the answers to the open question will cover most of the necessary 
ground, but a few remaining risks will emerge from the second question.
The leading question
The second, follow-on question is about completeness. Simply put, it comes 
down to what else should be keeping the stakeholder awake at night. This is 
where the risk taxonomy – whether the Basel version, ORX or internally 
developed – is particularly handy, helping the discussion to become leading, 
or ‘menu-based’. The risk practitioner encourages the stakeholder to con￾sider relevant topics not brought up previously; for example, considering 
the possibility of future technology failures and their impact on the business; 
probing whether their exposure to money laundering is increasing; or 
whether internal fraud is more or less likely to happen than previously.
Facilitating free-flowing stakeholder conversations does not mean arriv￾ing at the meeting unprepared. On the contrary, the more skilled and 
equipped with information the risk expert is, the more confidently they will 
hold their ground at the session.
Figure 5.5 Use of the bow-tie model in RCSA process: risks
Event
Transactional error
Internal fraud
Account 
reconciliation
Cause
Mitigating
controls
Mitigating
controls
Impact112 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
Before the meeting, the risk professional must have formed their own 
view on what risks they expect to come up, based on their understanding of 
the business and its environment. A pre-reading pack with supplementary 
information is an essential aid for the assessment. Pack materials might in￾clude:
● strategy and business plan, financials, minutes of governance committee 
meetings, planned material change programmes;
● operational risk data, including a history of operational risk events, Key 
Risk Indicators, and outputs from previous RCSAs if they exist (Note: 
these are certainly useful, but it is important not to allow them to limit 
the scope of the current assessment);
● output from other control disciplines, for example, compliance 
assessments and internal audit reports;
● data from external sources, including external loss data for peer firms, 
information on the regulatory landscape and priority areas for home and 
host state regulators.
Detailed preparatory work, including close examination of the pack, ena￾bles the risk practitioner to be an equal partner in the discussion, effectively 
providing oversight and challenge.
The prioritization question
The third part of the conversation needs to concentrate on how much the 
raised concern is keeping the stakeholder awake at night. In practical terms, 
what monetary loss do they expect to sustain next year as a result of the 
concern? What level of customer harm, reputational damage or regulatory 
censure is anticipated? This line of questioning helps to evaluate the risks 
relative to each other; some being more significant than others in terms of 
impact. Which brings us neatly to risk assessment.
Assessing risks
Risk assessment needs to be carried out on both an inherent and a residual 
basis.
Residual risk
Residual risk is the risk remaining after the application of controls, and is 
quite intuitive. Stakeholders are asked to articulate – even given the current Risk and control self-assessments 113
control environment – what still keeps them awake at night. This kind of 
questioning reflects the existing state of the environment, ‘as is’, and partici￾pants are usually easily able to perform the assessment.
Inherent risk
Inherent risk is the risk before the effect of the existing controls. It is a less 
intuitive concept, as it can be very challenging for business units to try to 
imagine their environment without controls. It is also a very specific form of 
risk jargon, whether expressed in English or other languages. Depending on 
the maturity and level of risk knowledge of the audience, at times it may be 
best, therefore, to start the risk assessment by evaluating the level of residual 
risk first, followed by inherent risk; perhaps using the more intuitive word￾ing how much worse could it be if the primary controls failed?.
Risks are commonly assessed in two dimensions: the likelihood of their 
occurrence and their impact.
Likelihood means the possibility of the risk materializing in the future, 
expressed using a range of values. While the methods used by organizations 
to articulate likelihood vary considerably – with time horizons that may 
stretch from 12 months out to 100 years – RCSAs are typically confined to 
the current business cycle and thus focus primarily on the near term (one–
five years). The tool is not intended to analyse worst-case or catastrophic 
events – for example, a 1-in-100-year flood. Those are generally addressed 
through a separate scenario analysis, as discussed in Chapter 8. Some firms 
do, however, find it useful to highlight extreme risks as part of the RCSA 
exercise; noting them down as potential candidates for scenario analysis and 
developing them further at a later stage.
The second dimension, risk impact, evaluates the consequences, both fi￾nancial and non-financial, of risk materializing. The unified impact rating 
grid has already been introduced in Chapter 4, in Figure 4.2.
While the most common non-financial impacts consist of client, regula￾tory and reputational consequences, firms may also add other categories; for 
example people impact – perhaps evaluating the scope for physical and psy￾chological injury to staff; resilience impact, which is particularly relevant for 
payment service providers, central banks and other organizations where sta￾bility of service delivery is crucial to the operation of the firm, its customers, 
or even the economy more widely.
These two dimensions, impact and likelihood, when combined, reflect the 
overall exposure of the firm to the identified risk. This finds its place on a 
heat map, an example of which is presented in Figure 5.6.Figure 5.6 Risk grading matrix
Immaterial
risk
Risk grading matrix
Moderate risk
Significant risk
Top risk
Low Medium Hig
h
Unlikely Possible Likely
Very high
Risk is unlikely to occur 
in the foreseeable future
(over 5 years)
Risk may occur 
in the next 1– 5 
years
Risk is almost certain
to materialize in the
next 12 months
Financial: Actual/potential loss greater than $xxx
Client: Serious client detriment/large proportion impacted 
Reputation: Deep damage to the brand and market value, 
sustained media coverage 
Regulatory: Formal investigation up to suspension of licence
Financial: Actual/potential loss between $xx and $xxx 
Client: High level of detriment
Reputation: Market commentary, serious damage to the 
reputation, brand and value
Regulatory: May prompt investigation or regulatory action
Financial: Actual/potential loss between $x and $xx
Client: Moderate impact/small proportion or segment
Reputation: One-off media coverage, minor damage to 
reputation, brand and value
Regulatory: Potential enquiry and/or fine
Financial: Actual/potential loss below $x
Client: Minor impact or complaints
Reputation: Inconsequential
Regulatory: Unlikely to result in any regulatory action
Impact
Likelihood
114Risk and control self-assessments 115
Heat maps attract criticism due to their imprecision and the high level of 
human judgement involved in the assessment process. And it is important to 
recognize these limitations. The value of the exercise is more to compare 
risks relative to each other, to understand which ones are more material and 
need to be prioritized for remediation. The aim is not to find a perfect risk 
position on the grid. Understanding these constraints helps the tool to be 
used appropriately as a visual aid supporting the exercise.
Assessment scales often start out as compact 3×3 dimensional matrices, 
with some more extensive versions being as large as 20×20. A more sensibly 
sized matrix of 4×4 is usually sufficient, preferably with an even (rather than 
odd) number of cells, to discourage any tendency for participants to aim for 
a mid-point and ‘sit on the fence’.
Potential methodological enhancements for the risk grading tool are de￾scribed below.
More on risks: velocity, killer risks, 
risk acceptance
Risk velocity
An additional third dimension, risk velocity, is useful to understand how 
quickly a given risk is expected to change its position on the matrix. Some 
risks may develop rapidly and start posing a threat which was not evident 
before, and therefore require more focus at an earlier stage. Where velocity 
is not used, risk direction (e.g. increasing, decreasing) can be outlined.
Killer risks
One of the key learnings that came out of the Covid-19 pandemic is the 
danger of deprioritizing material risks which are deemed unlikely to happen. 
The threat of infectious diseases was in fact identified in the January edition 
of the 2020 global risk report by the World Economic Forum, rated as sig￾nificant but with relatively low likelihood.6
 This was an interesting finding 
which has been extensively discussed by the risk community, including ques￾tions as to what the risk profession could have done better to ensure pan￾demic preparedness. One possibility, therefore, for enhancing the risk matrix 
is to take the probability out of the equation for risks with a very high im￾pact. As a result, the entire row of very high risks can be viewed as top or 116 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
killer risks as described in Figure 5.7; prompting to concentrate on their 
mitigation regardless of the likelihood score. In fact, this approach has been 
adopted by multiple regulatory bodies in terms of operational resilience, 
where it is assumed that disruptions will occur. Therefore, the firms are re￾quested to focus on mitigating the impact only, building strength, and main￾taining continuity.
Escalation, appetite, acceptance
Heat maps are very useful in helping to guide end-users on subsequent ac￾tion. For example, the level of escalation required for residual risks, depend￾ing on their magnitude, can be articulated with the help of the heat map, 
with more material risks needing to be brought to the attention of the board 
and senior committees. Similarly, the heat map can be used to define which 
risks lie outside the firm’s appetite, will not be tolerated and require mitiga￾tion. Rules can also be set around risk acceptance, determining what author￾ity is required to accept each risk level. For example, moderate risks can be 
accepted by the head of the business or support function if mitigation is not 
cost-effective; significant risks require appropriate committee sign-off, while 
top risks will be considered in exceptional circumstances only, and with the 
Figure 5.7 Risk grading matrix: extending top risks
Immaterial
risk
Risk grading matrix
Low Medium High
Unlikely Possible Likely
Very high
Extending top risks Risk and control self-assessments 117
approval of the board. It is useful to instil a structured process, whereby risk 
acceptances for significant and above risks are logged and reviewed at least 
annually. This is important in ensuring that decisions remain valid with the 
change in strategy and business environment.
Documenting risks
What is the right way to document risks, and how prescriptive should the 
format be? The documentation methodology will vary depending on the 
type of the exercise:
● Allow stakeholders, aided by risk practitioners, to phrase their risks in 
their own language (free style). This approach is suitable for strategic risk 
assessments with a senior audience.
● Provide guidance language, based on the premise that risk is a negative 
statement. This approach will typically make use of words such as 
inability, inadequate and failure of. For example: Inability to identify and 
implement new regulatory requirements on a timely basis, resulting in 
fines, regulatory censure and reputational damage. This approach is not 
overly prescriptive hence appropriate for most assessments.
● Establish a format along the lines there is a risk of… due to… resulting 
in… . For example: There is a risk of data breaches due to inappropriate 
data usage by staff, leading to fines, client harm and reputational damage.
This is a sensible structure but should be used with caution. The due to
element can inadvertently lead to a proliferation of identified risks, by 
exploring multiple causes which all lead to the same risk materializing.
● Develop a library of risks, where the stakeholders can select pre-populated 
risks that specifically relate to them.
The more prescriptive the approach, the more consistent the documenta￾tion of the risks. However, some of the nuances and real concerns may be 
lost, and the value of the exercise diminished accordingly. After all, when 
elaborating the firm’s strategy, the chief executive and their team do not 
select strategic objectives from a predefined list of objectives. It is better for 
the risk practitioner to help the stakeholders articulate their risks in the 
required format while capturing as closely as possible the true meaning of 
what was said.
Identified risks need to be mapped to the firm’s taxonomy, which allows 
for cross-comparison with other framework elements. Usually, RCSAs in the 
operational risk space lead to the identification of risks aligned to the Basel 118 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
or ORX categorizations or the firm’s internal classification. However, high￾level strategic RCSAs – dealing with the risks that may prevent the firm from 
achieving its objectives – will usually highlight a broader spectrum of risks, 
including strategic and business risks.
Control identification, categorization 
and assessment
A control is an activity or process established to mitigate the risk and, as 
noted by COSO, is ‘designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the 
achievement of objectives’.7
Every risk is typically mitigated by a multitude of controls. For RCSA 
purposes we are looking for key controls, or the controls which mitigate the 
risk the most effectively – and thus cannot be left out of the assessment. In 
arriving at the determination of whether or not a control is key, it is useful 
to consider what the impact would be if the control was removed.
There is no prescribed number of controls to mitigate each risk. But the 
suggestion is to identify at least one primary control, and no more than 
three to five in total.
Control identification
In a similar way to risk identification, controls can be defined during one-to￾one interviews with SMEs.
As with risks, approaches vary when it comes to documenting controls 
and deciding on how rigid the format should be:
● Provide minimum guidance to ensure the process referred to is known 
and understood, for example, account reconciliation, client due diligence, 
employee recruitment; this approach should certainly be used in high￾level assessments.
● Prescribe the format, requesting a description of both the process and its 
results, and noting, at minimum, what, who and when. [what?] Pre￾employment screening is conducted for all staff [by whom?] by HR Risk and control self-assessments 119
[when?] prior to employment. This is a useful format which results in 
controls being described quite specifically, with allocated accountability 
for control performance and a defined control owner.
● Develop a library of controls, where participants can select existing 
controls that mitigate their risk.
A helpful way of thinking about controls is by categorizing them into 
Preventative, Directive, Detective and Corrective types, as described in 
Figure 5.8.
Preventative and Directive controls reduce the likelihood of risk materi￾alizing, by establishing processes which preclude the threat from happening, 
and clearly instructing employees to do the right things.
Detective and Corrective controls decrease the impact, via prompt iden￾tification of deficiencies and speedy remediation, not allowing the impact to 
spread.
The distinction described above is reflected pictorially in Figure 5.9.
There is a clear relationship between the inherent and residual risk levels, 
which is directly dependent on the controls in place. If an inherent risk (say 
Risk 1, as depicted in Figure 5.10) is mitigated only by preventative or direc￾tive controls, that will reduce the likelihood of its occurrence, i.e. move the 
risk horizontally (left) along the heat map to assume residual position 1.1. 
Conversely, controls which are solely detective or corrective will only allow 
the risk to move vertically (downwards), decreasing its impact to a residual 
level of 1.2.
Figure 5.8 Control categorization
DETECTIVE
Help to identify if risk has
materialized
Examples:
Reconciliation
Control testing and assurance
Reviews
DIRECTIVE CORRECTIVE
PREVENTATIVE
Prevent risk from happening
Examples:
Segregation of duties
User access rights
Client due diligence
Provide guidance and direction on
tasks and duties 
Examples:
Policies and procedures
Training
Ensure continuous improvement
Examples:
Implementation of internal audit 
recommendations
Actions from OREs
Reduce likelihood
Reduce impact120 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
In order for the risk to move diagonally (to position 1.3), both types of con￾trols have to be present and effective.
This point is important as sometimes inherent and residual risk levels are 
assessed independently and placed on the heat map in almost random posi￾tions; not substantiated by mitigating controls.
RCSA encourages users to directly evaluate the controls that they oper￾ate. If one of the key controls is owned by another function, it can still be 
included and relied on (with the agreement of the respective function). This 
is a good practice which prompts employees to collaborate and explore risk 
and control interconnectedness. For example, a business may own the risk 
of inability to identify and implement new regulatory requirements on a 
timely basis; and include its own controls as well as an additional regulatory 
horizon scanning control owned by the compliance function.
Control assessment
Assessment of controls establishes how effectively they are being imple￾mented in practice, and therefore to what extent they reduce the level of 
inherent risk. There are two main methodologies for this form of assess￾ment: either judgemental evaluation or factual testing.
Judgemental evaluation
Evaluation involves SMEs opining on control effectiveness based on their 
knowledge and experience. The rating can be one-dimensional, for example 
Figure 5.9 Use of the bow-tie in RCSA process: controls
Event
Detective
Corrective
Cause
Mitigating
controls 
Mitigating
controls 
Impact
Preventative
DirectiveRisk and control self-assessments 121
‘effective’, ‘somewhat effective’ or ‘ineffective’. Or it can be carried out on a 
two-dimensional scale:
● Control design: this considers how well the control has been built to mitigate 
the risk; is it automated or manual, and does it mitigate the risk fully?
● Control performance: this considers how the control operates in practice, 
including the human element; whether employees are appropriately 
skilled and execute the task correctly, on the required frequency and to 
the expected quality standard.
Following evaluation of each control individually, it is beneficial to assess 
the overall suite of controls, considering whether in aggregate they pro￾vide a sufficient level of risk reduction. An ineffective overall control suite 
may reveal a missing control which needs to be considered in addition.
Testing
Testing is a process which involves selecting a representative sample of con￾trol performances to establish how effectively the control is operating.
Figure 5.10 Residual risk dependency on controls
Risk 1.2
Risk grading matrix
Risk 1.3
Risk 1.1 Risk 1
Low Medium High
Unlikely Possible Likely
Very high122 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
CASE STUDY 5.2
A private bank develops a control testing programme to periodically check the key 
controls that mitigate its most significant inherent risks. An example test programme 
plan is created, describing the risk, the control, the test plan and its frequency.
Risk to appropriateness and suitability
Selling products that do not fit clients’ risk appetite or investment profile, 
resulting in sales-related complaints.
Control
Prior to conducting any trading or investments on a client's behalf, an investment 
risk profile is established, reflecting the client’s investment objectives and risk 
appetite. This is agreed with the client and updated with the frequency required 
by policy.
Test plan
Select a sample of 25 accounts opened during the last quarter, and ascertain the 
date of the first investment transaction from the system:
● review whether or not the investment risk profile is present in the client file 
and has been approved by the appropriate investment specialist;
● check that investment specialist’s sign-off precedes the date of the first 
transaction, as identified above;
● select a sample of 15 existing customer account relationships and confirm 
that their investment profiles have been updated according to the frequency 
established by policy.
Test frequency: quarterly
The testing programme is approved and operated effectively by the institution. 
Use of test scripts with clear control objectives and defined sample sizes allow 
staff with no audit or risk background to perform effective testing in line with 
internal audit practices.
In 2023, I ran a LinkedIn poll for my network of risk professionals to ascer￾tain their view on control evaluation vs testing. The results are presented in 
Table 5.1 and demonstrate that almost all respondents employed at least 
some testing activity.Risk and control self-assessments 123
RCSA workshops
RCSAs lend themselves well to workshops, which provide an opportunity to 
build on collective intelligence, debate ideas and challenge assessments. 
Workshops are usually arranged as a follow-up to individual interviews, 
where participants have already considered their risks and controls, thus 
laying a foundation for the joint meeting. They are, however, an expensive 
tool as they collect multiple senior people in the room for a period of time. 
Consequently, they require maximum preparedness, with clear messages on 
what is expected to be achieved, how the meeting will be run and how long 
it will take. Good workshop organization includes inviting the respective 
risk owners for the whole duration of the meeting, while allocating specific 
time slots to discuss particular controls. Using this approach, control own￾ers or SMEs – such as Human Resources for people-related controls or 
Technology for information technology-related matters – need only join for 
their allocated time slot. This saves SMEs time, makes the meeting more 
focused and moves it along. Facilitation is a key skill which needs to be 
mastered by the workshop leader; this is discussed further in Chapter 11. 
Short, targeted meetings facilitated by expert operational risk teams are 
typically well received by attendees and this helps to achieve the desired 
outcomes.
RCSA life cycle and measures of success
The RCSA life cycle is presented below: the first two components, identifica￾tion and assessment, have already been covered in this chapter:
● Identify: significant risks which may prevent the achievement of objectives 
are identified, together with the controls that mitigate them.
Table 5.1 Industry poll: should firms move away from judgmental 
evaluation of control effectiveness to conduct more testing?
Response % of responses
Yes, more testing is needed 46
No, evaluation is sufficient 1
A good balance is best 53124 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
● Assess: risks and controls are evaluated using a defined methodology.
● Conclude and act: results are presented to achieve formal sign-off and 
agreement of action plans for any areas where controls are ineffective or 
insufficient to mitigate the risks.
● Refresh: RCSA is updated periodically or based on particular trigger 
events.
Conclude and act
To finalize the exercise, the executive owner is required to sign off that the 
RCSA is a true and fair reflection of the risk and control profile of their re￾spective area; and most importantly, to consider the ‘so what?’ question, 
confirming actions and next steps. Presenting the results in a clear manner, 
with key messages and actions outlined, supports the conclusion. A mean￾ingful three-page report will contain:
● Page 1: an executive summary explaining the overall risk profile, whether 
it is elevated, has decreased or remained stable and articulating key 
changes since the last assessment. This summary needs to be supported 
by key facts, such as OREs, issues, audit and compliance findings, which 
should correlate to key messages in the summary.
● Page 2: visual aids that support the narrative: for example, a heat map 
drawing attention to the most significant risks, or a radar chart which is 
effective in pointing out risk and control relationships, highlighting risks 
as well as areas that may be overcontrolled.
● Page 3: a list of actions and/or risk acceptances, with target dates and 
owners, for the approval of the executive owner.
The executive owner signing the report must be the direct report of the 
Chief Executive Officer, possessing the required authority, budget and re￾sources to act on the results. One of the reasons RCSAs are perceived as not 
truly influencing business decisions is the fact that the results are not pre￾sented to individuals with decision-making powers.
Refresh
RCSA is a living document which needs to be kept current. This has histori￾cally been a challenge, and remains so. As noted by the ORX industry study, 
‘RCSAs are often out of date’.8
 Usually a periodic – e.g. semi-annual – refresh Risk and control self-assessments 125
is combined with trigger-based updates. The trigger can be a material change 
to the business model, product set or organizational structure; anything that 
creates impetus to revisit an area’s capability to continue delivering on its 
objectives given the change. A significant ORE that raises a question on con￾trol effectiveness, an external event or a major regulatory change can also 
serve as triggers. In the periodic refresh, it is worth following the same struc￾ture adopted in the main RCSA process: three questions, starting with seek￾ing an understanding of what keeps the stakeholder awake at night at any 
given moment; aiming to elicit material changes since the last update.
The usual risk management life cycle is comprised of the components 
identify–assess–manage–report. So the valid question may arise: what about 
reporting? Monitoring and reporting of top risks is undertaken via Key Risk 
Indicators (KRIs), which are a suitable way to address these key compo￾nents of the overall life cycle. This is discussed further in Chapter 7.
Marketing the benefits and measuring success
RCSA is a significant value-added activity, and known benefits of a well￾executed RCSA programme include the following:
● process optimization, enhanced operational resilience and a well￾developed customer-centric mentality (where the PRSA methodology is 
used);
● sound strategy setting with a good understanding of risks (where SRA is 
used);
● prioritization for budget and resource spend;
● evidenced support for senior management certifications and attestations;
● an improved control environment, through the identification of 
weaknesses and implementation of adequate corrective actions;
● documented agreement where risk is accepted and no further action is 
needed;
● positive cultural impacts: risk conversations encouraging risk thinking 
and elevating risk and control consciousness at all levels of the firm.
However, RCSA marketing is rarely consciously undertaken, and all the 
positive points described above are rarely publicized and drawn attention 
to. The commencement of the programme is commonly announced via an 
email stating that departments are required to complete an annual RCSA 
refresh by a certain date. This creates a sense of a task added to the to-do list 126 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
rather than something that business units want to do due to its benefits. 
Therefore, investing efforts into marketing the tool, finding all the salient 
points and positioning them upfront is essential.
To support the value proposition of RCSA, it is also a good practice to 
develop specific measures of success. These can include:
● RCSA as a driver of change: any actions emanating from the RCSA – 
ideally with the monetary value of any improvement projects initiated as 
a result of the programme – are good measures of how useful the exercise 
has been.
● RCSA as a driver of transparency around the risk and control environment. 
RCSA should minimize surprises in subsequent internal or external audit 
reviews, as material risks are already known and addressed. In view of 
this, the number of new or unknown significant risks identified by internal 
audit (perhaps as a percentage of the total number of risks), can be used 
as a tangible measure of RCSA effectiveness. Some firms use a Management 
Awareness Rating System (MARS), where internal audit provides two 
ratings, one on the audit result and a separate one on the effectiveness of 
self-identification of risks and issues.
● RCSA as a robust risk management tool: surveys can be used to gauge 
stakeholders’ feedback, especially after the RCSA is introduced for the first 
time or following a change in approach. The questions can be centred around 
the value RCSA delivered, asking for an outline of the most significant benefit. 
They can also enquire about the overall stakeholder experience, as well as 
collect views on what has worked and what can be improved.
An industry study I conducted in 2018 demonstrated that very few organiza￾tions explicitly measure the success of their RCSAs, as outlined in Table 5.2.
Table 5.2 Industry study: measuring success of RCSAs
RCSA measures of success % firms
No formal measures of success 72
Actionability (number of emanating actions) 10
Risk awareness (no surprises in audits) 22
Other measures 5
Institute of Operational Risk (IOR), 2018, webinarRisk and control self-assessments 127
Roles and responsibilities
The role of the second line Operational Risk department is key to the suc￾cess of the RCSA programme. The department is responsible for develop￾ing the approach and methodology; educating stakeholders on the process 
and expected benefits; completing pre-work and being fully conversant 
with the area’s environment; mastering facilitation skills; as well as pro￾viding the usual oversight and challenge on whether the outcome reflects 
and correctly represents the environment. Ultimately, the operational risk 
team is largely responsible for the success (or failure) of the initiative.
As risk and control owners, first line business units and support func￾tions are accountable for the robust identification and management of risk. 
It is to their benefit to ensure that the exercise is taken seriously, that the 
right stakeholders are at the table and that the RCSA generates meaningful 
results. First line functions must develop action plans to address weak con￾trols, and track them through to resolution. Where business units have em￾bedded operational risk coordinators, they can take on the role of risk 
experts, interviewers and workshop facilitators – leading the whole RCSA 
exercise – as long as the right level of knowledge and skills have been trans￾ferred to them by the second line team.
Below is a risk coordinator checklist.
FIRST LINE RISK COORDINATOR CHECKLIST: RCSAS
✓ Management and staff can consistently articulate top risks of their area.
✓ OREs and other relevant data are used to inform RCSA.
✓ Action is taken to manage the risks and improve poor controls.
✓ There is process and governance around decision-making. (What level 
of risk can be accepted? By whom?)
✓ RCSA is a living document and is refreshed with frequency set per policy 
and upon major change.
✓ RCSA results are used in decision-making.128 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
Common challenges and good practices
Common challenges
Challenges that may be encountered when designing and deploying RCSAs 
are outlined below.
Stakeholders not engaged
RCSA is an up-front investment in understanding and improving the con￾trol environment to prevent potential risks materializing in the future. It is 
not always obvious to stakeholders why they should spend time now when 
nothing bad has happened (and may never happen). It is somewhat easier 
to spearhead the remediation of operational risk events, where the firm has 
already experienced unpleasant consequences; but more challenging to 
achieve the same level of engagement and interest in risk assessments. It is 
essential to have senior management, who are personally accountable for 
failures, fully involved in the process and fully conversant with the value 
proposition and the time commitment required. They should also ensure 
the scope of the exercise is explicitly agreed at the appropriate governance 
committee.
Underinvestment in risk expertise
As can be seen from this chapter, it is the author’s opinion that risk teams 
play a crucial role in the whole RCSA process. Although RCSA has the word 
self in its name, business units rarely, if at all, have the maturity and under￾standing to conduct self-assessments on their own, without expert support. 
They need guidance on the level of granularity to adopt; the correct formu￾lation of what is a risk (and what is not a risk); assistance on how to ap￾proach impact-likelihood assessment; and a general understanding of what 
good looks like. Forms, questionnaires and requests to complete Excel 
spreadsheets are not effective: RCSA needs to be facilitated by a knowledge￾able individual. Perhaps the tool needs to be renamed to RCFA, risk and 
control facilitated assessment.
To provide the required level of support, risk teams, both second and first 
line, should have extensive experience not only in the risk discipline itself 
but also in the softer skill of facilitation. Underinvestment in this skillset will 
lead to a situation where neither the leaders nor the followers really know 
what they are doing. The whole enterprise will undergo an expensive exer￾cise that only results in sub-optimal outcomes.Risk and control self-assessments 129
Disproportionate effort
If the approach is too granular (which is the case in many organizations), 
RCSAs may end up with hundreds and sometimes thousands of entries – 
emphasizing quantity over quality and quickly leading to organizational 
fatigue. After all, no firm will be actively managing 500+ risks. While there 
is no accepted standard number of risks, a departmental RCSA will proba￾bly generate a range of 10 to 15 risks, with three to five key controls per risk. 
Not all risks need to be recorded; the focus should be on material items, as 
smaller risks are less damaging. It is good practice to work this guidance 
into the assessment, for example, recommending the capture of only top and 
significant inherent risks (see Figure 5.6) and carving out less important 
entries.
RCSA not actionable
The RCSA is completed and filed, but no action emanates from the exer￾cise due to an inability to draw conclusions, apathy, poor communication 
of the results or pitching to the wrong audience of non-decision-makers. 
A study of industry practices conducted by ORX concluded that RCSA is 
‘not sufficiently influencing business decisions’ and ‘not enabling institu￾tions to be as proactive on risk management as intended’.9
 A lack of tan￾gible outcomes leads to questions about the value of the programme, and 
major effort should be put in to deriving clear, well-worded actions and 
next steps.
Good practices
Correct approach
RCSAs are typically applied across the whole organization and remain the 
most demanding, laborious and time-consuming of all the tools in the op￾erational risk framework. Therefore, it is worth investing time and thought 
up-front into developing the right approach. It is recommended that the 
exercise only commences after a detailed research review of relevant litera￾ture; benchmarking against the industry and discussion with fellow practi￾tioners to draw out good practices; and conversations with senior 
management on the desired outcomes. Allocating enough budget to obtain 
external consultancy advice and provide the necessary training for facilita￾tors helps considerably in achieving the right outcomes.130 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
Identification of overcontrolled areas
As part of the RCSA exercise, it is good practice to focus on any areas that 
might be overcontrolled, in addition to searching for gaps and weaknesses. 
This not only provides a more balanced view on the control environment 
but also results in potential cost savings where unnecessary controls can be 
reduced or eliminated. This is a valuable activity that is not undertaken 
enough in the industry; control reduction may be an uncomfortable subject 
for both senior executives as well as for some risk practitioners.
Reflection of outsourced activities
In cases where the organization outsources activities to a third party or an￾other group entity, the risk is still owned by the entity and this should be 
fully recognized in the RCSA. For example, if the process of developing and 
maintaining credit models is performed by a third-party provider, the or￾ganization will need to reflect outsourcing risk (including third-party failure 
and inadequate oversight) as well as model risk (inaccurate design or imple￾mentation of models).
Aggregation
One of the common questions around RCSAs relates to aggregation. As ar￾ticulated in this chapter, both bottom-up and high-level assessments are 
needed. High-level assessments are, effectively, judgemental summaries of 
more detailed results, using the collective intelligence of senior leaders across 
the organization. Executives arriving at the top-down workshops may take 
their existing granular RCSAs into consideration, enabling them to arrive at 
the entity- or firm-wide view, which will inevitably be more elevated and 
thematic. If the firm is not in the habit of conducting high-level assessments, 
the second line Operational Risk department can take on the role of aggre￾gating RCSA outcomes itself. This process also needs to be judgemental, 
with due consideration of key themes and using the firm’s taxonomy to re￾port on the results.
Embedding risk thinking
To ensure that risk assessments are properly embedded, business units and 
support functions can be encouraged to add a quick ‘top of mind’ risk iden￾tification exercise as part of their periodic departmental meetings. This can 
be accomplished by splitting employees into groups, with each group being 
asked to use a heat map to discuss what keeps them awake at night and Risk and control self-assessments 131
comparing notes afterwards. Not only does this highlight true concerns, it 
also generates good risk conversations and exchanges of knowledge be￾tween employees. Similarly, an important activity that I lead every year via 
the Best Practice Operational Risk Forum is to benchmark top and emerging 
operational risks across the financial services industry. Practitioners from 
various firms are split into groups and use a simple heat map which invari￾ably generates a lively debate and important outcomes.
Industry benchmark
The perpetual topic of RCSAs always causes a debate on the ways to in￾crease their value. In 2023, half of Best Practice Operational Risk Forum 
members believed that RCSA effectiveness could be improved (50 per cent, 
Figure 5.11), although some were in a better place, with 22 per cent evaluat￾ing the tool as ‘effective’. The poll reflects a challenge the firms are continu￾ously facing in keeping the high level of business engagement and generating 
outputs that are used by senior management in decision-making.
RCSAs were primarily seen as a time-consuming exercise (53 per cent, 
Figure 5.12). The overall perception of business units has deteriorated as 
compared to previous years, as the results of a similar poll taken in 2019 
reflected that employees seemed to have embraced RCSAs and accepted that 
Best Practice Operational Risk Forum, 2023
Figure 5.11 Industry poll: RCSA effectiveness
Very effective Effective Somewhat
effective
Improvement
needed
0%
22%
28%
50%
How effective are current RCSAs?132 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
they were a necessity, with 22 per cent noting that the process was adding 
value. In contrast, in 2023 no respondents chose value-added option (see 
first edition of this book for further details of 2019 poll results).
What are the reasons for this deterioration? While operational risk man￾agement is still a developing discipline and a gradual evolution is expected 
year-on-year, the progress to maturity is not linear, but rather goes through 
peaks and troughs. The decline is attributed to multiple factors, including:
● Challenging macroeconomic and geopolitical environment, recession and 
rising interest rates, pushing firms to revisit the resilience of their business 
models and thus impacting people, their workload and priorities. In 
stressed environments, first line business units concentrate on pressing 
matters with less time left for quality RCSAs discussions.
● Operational risk digitalization not keeping up with the pace of automation 
within the firm. While many first line units benefit from instant access to 
information and use of AI and data science for decision-making, operational 
risk RCSA are at times stored in multiple spreadsheets, or if systems are in 
place, they are cumbersome to use, making RCSA a rather laborious process.
● Chosen methodology: it appears that the more organizations persist in 
making their RCSA process rigid and complex, with predefined and pre￾formulated risk and control libraries, the less room is available for free￾flowing conversations on what actually keeps stakeholders awake at night.
● Cultural aspects, significant change in personnel – both within Risk 
departments as well as first line business units – have also influenced the 
scores.
Figure 5.12 Industry poll: first line perception of RCSAs
Best Practice Operational Risk Forum, 2023
Needs to
be done
Value-add Time
consuming
Time
wasted
10%
53%
37%
0%
1st line perceives RCSAs asRisk and control self-assessments 133
Even so, risk professionals were confident that RCSA as a tool will continue 
to generate benefits. Targeted control testing programmes supplemented the 
value proposition, and were utilized by the majority of firms, with 13 per 
cent rating their assurance process as ‘mature’ and the rest at various stages 
of development (Figure 5.13), with a combination of testing carried out by 
first and second line units.
In conclusion, while there is no simple recipe, more positive outcomes 
can be delivered by applying situational awareness, which at times means 
reducing the scope of RCSA exercises to focus on material risks only (rather 
than performing a complete refresh); or re-balancing the use of core tools 
with more emphasis on scenario analysis. Replacing templates with mean￾ingful facilitated discussions, applying risk acceptance and focusing more 
clearly on actionability will also bear fruit.
Practical workplace exercise
Consider key concepts and ideas examined in this chapter. Obtain an exam￾ple of the firm’s RCSA, and review it, considering:
1 Is the organization conducting both top-down strategic and more 
granular assessments?
Best Practice Operational Risk Forum, 2023
Figure 5.13 Industry poll: maturity of control testing and assurance
Testing not
used
Improvement
needed
Mature Developing
13% 13%
24%
50%
Maturity of control testing and assurance134 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
2 Considering the most significant operational risk events of the past year, 
were the risks that the event may occur identified before the event?
3 If risks were identified, were they documented in the RCSA?
4 How is the exercise perceived by stakeholders and are there formal 
measures of success in place for the RCSA exercise?
5 Make notes of RCSA features that you particularly like.
6 What can be improved? Note down potential enhancements.
MAKE A DIFFERENCE (MAD) ACTION
Please outline key learnings and note down one specific action you will 
take after reading this chapter, to enhance risk and control self￾assessments within your organization.
In summary, this chapter introduced RCSAs, a forward-looking tool for 
identifying and assessing risks that may prevent threats to the achievement 
of the firm’s objectives.
The next chapter will focus on a supplementary assessment methodology 
for change initiatives.
Notes
1 Operational Riskdata eXchange Association (ORX) (2020) Optimizing Risk 
and Control Self-Assessment, orx.org/resource/rcsa-practice-benchmark
(archived at https://perma.cc/GK3T-7AL7)Risk and control self-assessments 135
2 World Economic Forum (2024) The Global Risks Report 2024, 
www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_The_Global_Risks_Report_2024.pdf (archived 
at https://perma.cc/ART5-T3RN)
3 The Sarbanes–Oxley Act of 2002, www.sec.gov/about/laws/soa2002.pdf
(archived at https://perma.cc/CK4A-P6K3)
4 Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (2017) 
Enterprise Risk Management: Integrating with strategy and performance, 
www.coso.org/enterprise-risk-management (archived at https://perma.cc/
UC2D-TCLA)
5 Zeldin, T (1998) Conversation: How talk can change your life, The Harvill 
Press
6 World Economic Forum (2020) The Global Risk Report 2020, www.weforum.
org/reports/the-global-risks-report-2020 (archived at https://perma.cc/7JAY￾YYWB)
7 Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (2013) 
Internal Control: Integrated framework, www.coso.org/guidance-on-ic (archived 
at https://perma.cc/3P9A-Q6XZ)
8 Operational Riskdata eXchange Association (ORX) (2020) Optimizing Risk 
and Control Self-Assessment, orx.org/resource/rcsa-practice-benchmark 
(archived at https://perma.cc/J7T3-6EHG)
9 Operational Riskdata eXchange Association (ORX) (2020) Optimizing Risk 
and Control Self-Assessment, orx.org/resource/rcsa-practice-benchmark 
(archived at https://perma.cc/J7T3-6EHG)Operational risk 06
assessment 
of change 
initiatives
What this chapter covers: This chapter continues discussion on the topic of 
risk assessments, outlining an approach to evaluating the risks associated 
with change initiatives (Figure 6.1). It is centred on the Scope–Methodology–
Integration trilogy: defining the range of activities that benefit from further 
scrutiny; presenting techniques for conducting a risks and opportunities as￾sessment; and considering how to effectively transition residual risks to a 
‘business-as-usual’ (BAU) environment. The chapter analyses specific fea￾tures of new product and system launches, projects and regulatory pro￾grammes; and highlights the value of post-implementation reviews. It 
includes examples, case studies and an industry benchmark.
FURTHER READING
● Helen Winter (2019) The Business Analysis Handbook: Techniques and 
questions to deliver better business outcomes, Kogan Page
Why recommended: This book is valuable for learning about project 
management, including tools and techniques such as RAIDs (risks, 
assumptions, issues, dependencies) and process mapping, as well as waterfall/
agile methodologies, in language that is engaging and easy to understand.
● Dr Spencer Johnson (1999) Who Moved My Cheese? An amazing way to 
deal with change in your work and in your life, Ebury Publishing
Why recommended: An old-time favourite, this entertaining book on the 
crux of change management is a must-read for every risk practitioner. It 
is still widely read, by both individuals and teams, and especially during 
major corporate transformations.
136Figure 6.1 Focus of Chapter 6: risk assessments
Governance, roles and responsibilities
Establish governance and clear roles across the Three Lines for managing operational risk.
Risk assessments
Assess risk exposure in 
process, business or 
function via RCSAs.
Supplement by evaluating
risks emanating from
change activities via
ORAs. 
Identify exposure from
extreme but plausible
events. Mitigate through
risk transfer to insurance.
Scenario analysis
Monitor risk and control
performance through 
predictive indicators.
Act if indicators breach 
established appetite 
threshold. 
Key Risk Indicators
Reporting and decision-making
Review actual risk prole against set appetite, apply active risk management to enable achievement of strategic objectives.
Operational risk 
events
Record and report risk 
events, act to minimize 
future exposure.
Monitor trends against
RCSAs and KRIs.
Risk appetite and risk capacity
Dene nature and types of risk accepted in pursuit of strategic objectives. Evaluate adequacy of capital resources.
Operational risk taxonomy
Embedding and maturity assessment
Training and education
Risk culture
137138 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
Trilogy: Scope–Methodology–Integration
‘Nothing is permanent except change.’ This quote is attributed to Heraclitus, 
a Greek philosopher famous for proclaiming that change is the essence of 
the universe, and author of a well-known saying about not stepping into the 
same river twice. Financial services as an industry is characterized by an 
enormous amount of transformation, driven by technological advancements 
and new regulation. In this dynamic environment, are the risks inherent in 
change activities identified and managed consistently and effectively?
One of the Basel Principles for the sound management of operational risk 
evolves around assessments of operational risks for all ‘material new prod￾ucts, activities, processes and systems’.1
 According to the Basel Committee’s 
survey, only two-thirds of respondents conducted such assessments; a rather 
meagre uptake given the importance of this principle.2
Indeed, the sheer breadth of firms’ change agenda often hinders the im￾plementation of a uniform approach. The most common challenges include:
● a struggle to come up with a holistic definition of change, which results 
in the governance framework not covering all types of initiatives;
● decentralized management of change activities, resulting in inconsistent 
treatment across initiatives;
● sub-optimal transition to a business-as-usual state, with a lack of 
monitoring of risks emanating from the initiatives and an absence of 
formal post-implementation reviews.
Recognizing these potential weaknesses, Basel Committee purposefully 
strengthened the requirements in its latest 2021 update, demanding that 
senior management ensures that ‘change management process is compre￾hensive, appropriately resourced and adequately articulated between the 
relevant lines’ [of defence].3
Whether challenging or not, conducting operational risk assessment of 
change initiatives is simply and intuitively the right thing to do. Drawing 
parallels with credit risk, a firm is unlikely to lend money to a client without 
evaluating their creditworthiness: any governance committee would look in 
disbelief if such a proposal were presented. Similarly, major change to a 
process, system or product is prone to a wide spectrum of operational risks, 
and simply must not be implemented without the full understanding of the 
underlying risks it may pose.Operational risk assessment of change initiatives 139
The role of the Operational Risk department in this area is instrumental. 
The function must take the lead in enabling the firm to apply a risk lens to 
change programmes, raising questions centred around three main topics, 
presented in Figure 6.2.
Figure 6.2 Trilogy: Scope–Methodology–Integration
Scope Methodology Integration
OPERATIONAL RISK FOCUS ON CHANGE 
INITIATIVES INCLUDES:
● scope: how to identify those activities that require an operational risk 
assessment (ORA);
● methodology: what tools are best suited to assess the risks emanating 
from the initiative; and
● integration: how to transition risks and their ownership into a business￾as-usual environment on completion of the programme.
Identifying risky change activities
Change activities consist of a vast variety of events, including, for example:
● new product launches;
● system upgrades;
● relocation to a new building;
● payments process optimization;
● reorganization leading to offshoring of tasks to another location;
● implementation of a new regulatory requirement.140 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
Every business/function within an organization will inevitably be managing 
a pipeline of projects. Among this sea of initiatives there could be a handful 
of potentially riskier programmes which could have significant impact out￾side the firm’s appetite, and therefore would really benefit from increased 
scrutiny.
The role of the operational risk team is to develop criteria that enable a 
wide net to be cast to capture those activities that are more material and 
potentially more risky, ensuring that they undergo an ORA. This process is 
more powerful if done in close collaboration with project management 
functions (where they exist), to jointly agree on the most suitable approach.
Criteria for material and therefore riskier change initiatives can be 
expressed via a set of parameters that are centred around:
● criticality of business processes impacted by the change (see Chapter 
15, Operational resilience);
● novelty, e.g. whether the activity is business-as-usual or a new market 
or product; the less familiar the territory, the higher the risk;
● scale/magnitude, e.g. duration, resources, spend, number of impacted 
areas;
● urgency, considering whether implementation is being rushed through 
and therefore poses higher risk; and
● complexity of requirements, e.g. a new regulatory directive.
As an alternative, the determination can be also made using a more guided 
scorecard approach. This consists of developing a set of questions with pre￾defined responses that have a score assigned to them. The overall sum of 
individual scores serves as a guide to suggest what category the change falls 
under – whether minor or material – thereby providing a triage mechanism. 
Examples of questions that can appear in the scorecard are presented in 
Table 6.1.
In any approach, it is not possible to cover all the idiosyncrasies of every 
change. Business units and support functions need to apply common sense 
to identify activities that may have material impact on the risk profile of the 
organization.Operational risk assessment of change initiatives 141
Table 6.1 Scorecard approach for assessing materiality of change initiative
Theme Criteria Score
Operational 
Resilience
Will the change pose a 
threat to operational 
resilience?
Score 1: No new system 
development; a minor process or 
people change in a non-critical 
business process
Score 3: Limited system 
development, use of spreadsheets or 
other user-developed applications 
(also called end-user computing
(EUC) applications); moderate 
process or organizational change in a 
non-critical business process
Score 5: Significant system 
development, reorganization or 
process transformation; any change 
activity impacting a critical business 
process; or one requiring new or 
amended business continuity 
arrangements in a non-critical 
business
Outsourcing Does the change involve 
outsourcing of all or part 
of the activities?
Score 1: No outsourcing
Score 3: Limited change to the scope 
of existing outsourcing arrangement
Score 5: Material new third-party or 
inter-group relationship
Data Does the change involve 
processing of personal 
or sensitive information?
Score 1: No change to data 
processing
Score 3: Moderate impact to a 
limited scope of internal use data 
only
Score 5: A change to processing 
personal and/or sensitive information
Regulatory 
Compliance
Is there a risk of 
regulatory non￾compliance?
Score 1: No regulatory impact
Score 3: Potential limited fines for 
non-conformance
Score 5: Regulatory-driven initiative 
with substantial fines or other 
penalties for non-compliance142 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
Methodology: risks and opportunities 
assessment
ORA DEFINITION
The operational risk assessment (ORA) of change activity evaluates the 
risks emanating from the activity; which enables the relevant governance 
committee to take an informed Go/No-Go decision on its implementation.
Unlike RCSAs, as discussed in Chapter 5, ORAs are temporary and valid 
only for the duration of the initiative, leading to its implementation. After 
this they cease to exist, with any remaining risks being transitioned to busi￾ness-as-usual. They are also linked directly to a specific decision requiring 
action. Therefore, while ORAs have some similarities with RCSAs, they also 
possess distinct features, as discussed in this chapter.
ORA IS A SHORTENED FORM OF RCSA:
● inherent risks are identified and evaluated in a similar manner;
● no control assessment takes place due to the activity being in a 
transitional/project mode; instead, actions to reduce the level of inherent 
risk throughout the duration of the programme are noted; and
● residual risk levels, anticipated after the completion of intended actions, 
are recorded.
Analogously to the RCSA, the ORA is ideally conducted via a cross-func￾tional workshop with subject matter experts, facilitated by a skilled opera￾tional risk professional. The facilitator leads the discussion, drawing out the 
significant risks of the change activity. To ensure a consistent approach 
across the organization, the same risk grading matrix introduced for RCSAs 
(see Chapter 5, Figure 5.6) should also be applied for ORAs. This familiar 
matrix prompts consideration of impact and likelihood, providing uniform￾ity not only to the approach, but also to the meaning of the risk levels, from 
low to high.Operational risk assessment of change initiatives 143
Two potential methodological enhancements are described below:
1 First, some initiatives, for example new products, are prone to credit, 
market, strategic, business and other risks. The coverage of the assessment 
can be expanded to a broader universe of threats, beyond operational, 
providing a rounded, all-encompassing view. This provides a perfect 
opportunity for operational risk professionals to exhibit their facilitation 
skills and, at the same time, increase their exposure to a wider universe of 
risks.
2 Second, the evaluation can be enriched by supplementing the ‘risks’ view 
with the mirror view of ‘opportunities’.
Risks and Opportunities assessment aims to create a balanced view of 
threats and benefits, emphasizing the positive aspects of risk management.
EXAMPLE ORA
The firm is evaluating a new proposition which includes the use of narrow 
artificial intelligence (AI) for providing personalized insights to clients based 
on their transactional history.
Identified risks include:
● AI displacing workforce;
● software failure or glitches impacting performance;
● risk of poor machine conduct, resulting in inadequate or discriminatory 
advice;
● inappropriate use of data leading to potential privacy breaches;
● cyber risk: the probability of cyber incidents occurring and their impact.
Opportunities include:
● speed and efficiency;
● availability of advice 24/7;
● enhanced quality of insight based on data analysis;
● cost reduction.Figure 6.3 Risks and opportunities matrix
Likelihood
Risks
Unlikely Possible Likely
Opportunities
Low Medium High
Likely Possible Unlikely
Very high
Low Medium High Very high Software failure Cyber risk Poor machine conduct AI displacing workforce Inappropriate use of data Cost reduction Speed and efficiency Enhanced quality Availability 24/7
Likelihood
Impact
Impact
144Operational risk assessment of change initiatives 145
The opportunity assessment can be undertaken when evaluating business 
prospects, products, ventures and processes. In fact, it is suitable for a bal￾anced appraisal of any change activity. It reinforces positive risk manage￾ment, an enabler not a show stopper, assisting business units to arrive at an 
honest picture of threats and benefits in order to weigh them up and take a 
prudent, risk-aware decision. In reality, the view that recognizes both risks 
and opportunities is not given enough airtime. The Risk department, like a 
gloomy critic, is often in the habit of highlighting the negatives and missing 
the positives. In a live poll conducted by the Best Practice Operational Risk 
Forum in 2020, less than half of respondents admitted to having a struc￾tured approach to identifying and evaluating the upside of risk.
When is the best time to perform an ORA? Ideally, at the inception of the 
product/process development, enabling valuable conversations around risks 
and opportunities to take place in a structured manner. This remains an in￾dustry challenge. On occasions, business units work on a new proposition 
for months before reaching a decision, with the operational risk function 
neither aware of the proposal nor present at the table. The risk assessment 
is then hastily completed at the end, to satisfy governance requirements, 
which devalues the process.
What steps should be followed to enact the ORA more meaningfully, 
ensuring that it takes place at the right time and in a disciplined manner?:
● Start with senior management education: outline the value of a clear 
articulation of risks and opportunities to help them reach a Go/No-Go 
decision.
● Provide broader education for relevant staff and first line champions: to 
help embed the use of the ORA tool, list examples and illustrate successful 
programmes where evaluation helped to identify significant risks.
Risks and opportunities are plotted on a double-sided heat map (see 
Figure 6.3) for an assessment of the threats and opportunities landscape 
and to help prioritize areas of focus. Can opportunities be maximized? Risks 
reduced? The purpose of the workshop with subject matter experts is to 
establish a consistent approach to the risk assessment and build on 
combined knowledge.
Following the exercise, detailed focus groups are established to further 
explore material risks, as well as opportunities.146 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
● Where change activity is overseen by a central governance committee, 
work in close partnership with the secretariat responsible for assembling 
committee papers; this will ensure that requests submitted without a 
completed ORA are caught on a timely basis and returned to the respective 
business/function.
● For decentralized activities – for example, process changes and reorgani￾zations – collaborate with first line champions to facilitate implementa￾tion within their respective areas.
It is also useful to understand the overall landscape of change activities 
within the organization. The result can be documented in an inventory, an 
example of which is presented in Table 6.2.
This inventory will demonstrate that some initiatives, for example, new 
products, may already have set criteria to define new or materially different
products, and are executed in a structured manner, with a dedicated policy 
and a governance committee. Others, for example, process changes, do not 
apply any notion of materiality, and are completely decentralized and imple￾mented by each department in its own way.
To further illustrate the point, various types of change activities and their 
specific features are analysed below. (Note, the final part of the trilogy 
Scope–Methodology–Integration is covered later in the chapter as part of 
the change life cycle.)
Table 6.2 Example change landscape
No
Type of 
change 
activity
Materiality 
threshold?
Governance 
committee?
Committee 
name
Policy 
in 
place?
Policy
name
1 New 
Products
Yes Yes NPA 
Committee
Yes NPA Policy
2 System 
Changes
Yes Yes IT Change Yes IT Change 
Management
3 Projects No No – Yes Project 
Management
4 Regulatory 
Programmes
No Yes Regulatory 
Programmes 
Oversight 
Committee
No –
5 Process 
Changes
No No – No –Operational risk assessment of change initiatives 147
Change activities and their features
New products
New Product Approval (NPA) is a process through which an organization 
channels new products or customer propositions, ensuring that rigorous re￾view and sign-off take place prior to the product launch. In many organiza￾tions this process is relatively well-established and contains the following 
features:
● Clear scope: a definition of what constitutes a new and/or significantly 
modified product, thus capturing all initiatives that fall under the policy 
and providing a perfect trigger for an operational risk assessment. Where 
this is the case, no additional criteria or scoring are needed.
● Central governance committee that ultimately makes a Go/No-Go 
decision.
● Defined roles of product sponsor and cross-functional reviewers from 
operations, technology, finance, compliance and other functions, enabling 
a comprehensive and multifaceted product evaluation.
Compared to other change activities, NPA usually works like a well-oiled 
machine, with propositions going through defined steps, one of which is an 
ORA. Stakeholders are bound and energized by the same goal of getting the 
product launched. They have interest in achieving success, and a risk assess￾ment to help the team identify and mitigate the risks of their own initiative 
is usually well received. A real measure of success is to have product owners 
want their projects to be evaluated, demonstrating their understanding of 
the value and benefits of prudent risk management.
System changes
System enhancements deserve special attention because of the fact that 
change management is cited as the number one root cause of technology out￾ages and a threat to operational resilience.4
 To strengthen industry practices, 
as an example, the European Banking Authority specifically articulated ICT 
(information and communication technology) projects and change 
management principles, noting that ‘financial institutions should appropri￾ately monitor and mitigate risks deriving from their portfolio of ICT 
projects’.5148 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
Information technology (IT) departments commonly have their own 
change management processes and categorizations of activities. The chal￾lenge is one of alignment. It is imperative for operational risk experts to 
work closely with IT colleagues to agree on what constitutes a material 
change. The criteria should not be skewed towards purely system consid￾erations but should also extend to financial, client, regulatory and reputa￾tional impacts.
In contrast to new products, system enhancements employ a fair amount 
of technical jargon; this can result in stakeholders who are less IT-savvy 
becoming disengaged and the change being typically assessed and imple￾mented by the Technology department itself. In contrast to NPA govern￾ance, this means that at times there is either no or minimal cross-functional 
review and sign-off of IT changes, despite the undoubted value in involving 
business units and support functions – the actual users of the technological 
solutions. Successful IT functions present their initiatives in simple language, 
explaining potential implications, encouraging dialogue and maximizing 
input from other departments.
CASE STUDY 6.1
In close collaboration with a business unit, the IT department is planning a 
system upgrade which will result in superior product features to the benefit of 
the clients. The change is regarded as material and triggers an ORA.
The operational risk team is facilitating a cross-functional workshop, and in 
addition to more common risks of significant system failure and inadequate 
business continuity arrangements, the risk of unfair customer treatment is 
raised. This emanates from an exception included in the small print of the 
product documentation. A particular customer segment has been excluded from 
the proposition, and the group questions whether as a result these customers 
may unfairly lose out on the service. This scenario has simply not been 
considered: the main reason provided is the clients’ accounts of the excluded 
segment reside on a different, older platform which is becoming obsolete and 
therefore any upgrades are out of scope.
As a result of the discussion, the programme objective is amended to find 
appropriate solutions and make the offer available to all client groups.Operational risk assessment of change initiatives 149
This case study demonstrates the value of proper cross-functional risk con￾versations. Accomplished operational risk practitioners thrive on facilitating 
workshops with varied audiences, thinking out of the box and pulling out 
key risks, including the less obvious risks as well as the more common ones. 
Workshop facilitation is also addressed in Chapter 11, Operational risk 
training and education.
Additional challenges with system changes are related to the firm’s cul￾ture, especially in matrix organizations where the IT department is set goals 
on a different basis than the rest of the organization. In an agile environ￾ment, this translates into IT work prioritization being at variance with the 
project manager’s needs and expectations. Operational Risk has a role to 
play in ensuring that the ordering principles applied in the technology pipe￾line are appropriate; and that there is adequate governance in prioritizing, 
for example, regulatory requirements and business growth initiatives. 
Where the ranking of IT change activity conflicts with project require￾ments, it is important that the organization has effective conflict resolution 
mechanisms, with quick escalation so that decisions can be made by senior 
management.
Emergency upgrades deserve a special mention. In these cases, urgency 
is already embedded in the name, and consequently these implementations 
are risky by nature. There may not be time for a fully documented ORA, 
but a formal recognition of material risks, followed by a post-upgrade re￾view, is essential for emergency upgrades. This ensures that the Technology 
department will not flick the switch without citing approvals from the key 
stakeholders.
Projects
Project managers may argue that they are already managing risks by using 
the RAIDs (risks, assumptions, issues and dependencies) concept which is a 
core part of project management methodology. However, operational risk 
management can still bring distinct value to this domain. The two disci￾plines are complementary. Experts running change initiatives are, naturally, 
mostly focused on the risks to the programme itself: the risks of not being 
on time or within budget, or of not delivering to the required specification. 
This is consistent with the definition of project risk used by the Project 
Management Institute: ‘An uncertain event or condition that, if it occurs, has 
a positive or negative effect on one or more project objectives such as scope, 
schedule, cost and quality.’6150 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
ORA will supplement this by bringing out the operational risks inherent 
in the programmes.
CASE STUDY 6.2
Due to a change in its business model, a corporate bank is planning to transition 
multiple customer accounts from one entity to another. A multi-year project is 
initiated, led by the central Programme Office.
Throughout the duration of the project, the risks of not delivering on time, on 
budget or failing to execute client transition seamlessly are rigorously identified 
and tracked via a central RAID log. Due to the magnitude of the programme, an 
ORA is also carried out and facilitated by the Operational Risk department. The 
assessment examines a range of risks and highlights an increased risk of 
external as well as internal fraud. Clients may be targeted by fraudsters during a 
mass change in account numbers; while employees may find the environment 
prime for unauthorized activity.
The ORA triggers further examination of these risks and a review of the 
overall internal control environment.
This case study reflects the complementary nature of the ORA and project 
RAIDs. And yet again, it highlights the significance of risk conversations 
facilitated by expert facilitators.
The traditional project methodology, also sometimes known as a water￾fall approach, involves a sequential process of ‘defining requirements before 
design starts, then design being completed before development starts’.7
 From 
a risk management perspective, these projects are easier to manage due to 
the fact that they involve robust governance, impact assessment and sign￾offs at each stage prior to proceeding to the next stage.
More and more organizations are, however, moving to an agile environ￾ment. Agile projects apply an iterative approach, with teams working in 
parallel, delivering in increments and collaborating to evolve the design over 
time. This flexible methodology is based on self-organized teams, motivated 
individuals and face-to-face conversations, welcoming ‘changing require￾ments, even late in development’.8
 From an operational risk perspective, 
agile projects pose more challenges compared to waterfall projects, simply 
due to their fluidity.Operational risk assessment of change initiatives 151
This does, however, place a high demand on risk resource, be it first or sec￾ond line.
Agile environments also embrace the concept of a minimum viable prod￾uct (MVP), a product which meets the basic design features and require￾ments but does not have all the bells and whistles that may be developed 
subsequently. By definition, an MVP may have limitations which create 
risks. It is essential that these risks are appropriately assessed to determine 
whether the limitation is acceptable against the overall risk appetite. For 
example, perhaps an MVP does not have a reporting capability which limits 
the performance management of a product; or regulatory reporting must be 
completed manually, leading to impacts (including errors and penalties) 
which are potentially outside the firm’s appetite.
Regulatory programmes
JWG, a pioneering market intelligence company, performed the interesting 
exercise of counting the total number of pages of new regulation and esti￾mating the height of the pile if they were stacked on top of each other. They 
noted that ‘since the financial crisis, we have been gifted over two Eiffel 
Towers high worth of complex and costly financial regulation, ever increas￾ing in quantity and intricacy’.9
 Needless to say, then, a large proportion of 
transformation is driven by regulation.
These regulatory change programmes are inherently risky. Countless ex￾amples of substantial supervisory fines demonstrate how easy it is to end up 
with inadequate implementation.
The key challenge of regulatory programmes evolves around the interpre￾tation of voluminous technical texts, spanning hundreds of pages, into prac￾tical implementation. Among other things this interpretation process needs 
to point out which specific field in the system needs to be amended and how. 
Is the organization crystal clear on who is taking this decision? It may be 
assumed that this is the role of the compliance function. Compliance, how￾ever, will argue that they can recite the letter and the spirit of the regulation, 
but that it is up to business users, with their in-depth knowledge of the busi￾ness process, to take the right decision. Assumptions will be made, and the 
Embedding operational risk specialists into agile teams is the ideal way of 
ensuring that risk conversations take place throughout an agile programme.152 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
best judgement of project participants will be accepted as the way forward. 
In these situations, ORAs are needed more than ever, to articulate the risks, 
including any uncertainty around the correctness of the application together 
with an assessment of the magnitude of its impact. However, this requires a 
level of maturity where all employees are sufficiently conversant with risk 
management concepts and tools to pause the discussion at the right point, in 
order to recognize and document the risks. Rarely is an organization this 
advanced. The path to success is in firm-wide education; and in the mean￾time, yet again, in embedding operational risk practitioners into major regu￾latory programmes, to facilitate risk conversations. Even this is often 
challenging, due to the scarcity of resource.
As an example, the Markets in Financial Instruments Directive (MiFID 
II), a complex piece of legislation, led to big changes in the structure and 
operating model for trading, treasury and support functions, and involved 
significant decisions being taken by project teams. In 2017, prior to the di￾rective going live, I led an industry study to understand the extent to which 
operational risk professionals were party to the programme. This study re￾vealed that in the majority of firms the project was run by compliance; and 
over half of operational risk practitioners admitted to having little or no 
involvement. A third of the group were members of the relevant governance 
committees, providing oversight at a high level; but only a minority were 
actively engaged facilitating ORAs. As part of the study, the group con￾cluded that it was key for operational risk staff to get more involved in 
major initiatives of this kind; however, this inevitably clashed with other 
priorities.
For complex regulatory directives, multiple ORAs may be executed for 
logical sub-parts of the programme. As an example, MiFID II and the Global 
Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) generated a range of 10 to 20 separate 
ORAs, allowing the assessments to cover a wide range of the programme. In 
complex cases the process is iterative for each ORA, with an assessment 
conducted at inception and subsequently amended in the event of significant 
change to any of the parameters.
Process changes
This is the least homogeneous of all the change areas, and the one where 
clear criteria on what constitutes a material change is most needed. One way 
of handling process transformations is by extending existing governance – 
for example, NPA – to accommodate a broader set of initiatives, thereby Operational risk assessment of change initiatives 153
ensuring the same rigour is applied to process changes, organizational 
changes, restructuring and others. In this way the NPA committee upgrades 
itself to NPCA – the New Product and Change Approval committee. In 
other cases, organizations create a separate material change committee. 
Most firms, however, do not apply consistent governance in this area. The 
lead from the Operational Risk department is absolutely essential, initiating 
the development of a set of parameters and embedding the discipline of risk 
assessing process changes.
Change assessment life cycle
The change risk assessment process life cycle is described below:
● Scope: a clear set of parameters is agreed in order to capture activities 
that require an operational risk assessment.
● Assess: a practice of risk assessing material change initiatives is adopted 
firm-wide.
● Integrate: a hand-over process is set up to transition residual risks into 
the BAU environment.
● Check: post-implementation reviews are conducted to evaluate success 
and derive lessons learnt.
● Aggregate and Monitor: the overall impact of multiple transformations 
on the risk profile of the firm is assessed and monitored via Key Risk 
Indicators.
The first stage (scope), describing the parameters which differentiate signifi￾cant initiatives, was covered at the beginning of this chapter.
Assess
As outlined earlier, ORA is a simple yet effective way of evaluating the risks 
of change initiatives, using the already-familiar risk grading matrix. Are 
there alternatives to ORAs, and what other approaches exist for dealing 
with change risks?
● Where ORA is not used, the change may serve as a trigger to revisit an 
existing risk and control self-assessment. While this approach is plausible, 
it does not lend itself well to the transient nature of the change.154 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
● Scenario analysis can be conducted to examine extreme outcomes. This 
tool is supplementary rather than primary as it does not deal with 
volume – it is neither feasible nor necessary to run scenarios for each 
material change.
● There may be no specific assessment, but instead stepped governance, 
implemented based on the scale of the activity. This increases the level of 
scrutiny, but does not provide a structured approach to identifying and 
assessing risks.
Integrate
Integration is another key step in the Scope–Methodology–Integration trilogy. 
While change programmes are live, they attract attention, energy and rigour. 
We have all witnessed the decline that is triggered when project teams are 
disbanded, people leave and in-depth knowledge departs with them. It is vital 
to ensure transition not only of the relevant expertise, but also of any residual 
risks that have been flagged and not closed during the risk assessment stage.
Material residual risks not mitigated during the change programme must 
be formally handed over to the new business-as-usual owner, with the trans￾fer being cemented by a sign-off from the recipient. The change activity can￾not be considered complete without this sign-off.
The hand-over of risks is executed via transitioning a completed ORA to 
the now-accountable head of the business unit or support function. 
Challenges may arise at this stage if, during the programme, identified risks 
were assigned to a project resource – potentially not the owner who is best 
placed to understand, mitigate and treat them holistically. It is always advis￾able to involve BAU teams in the change activity from the beginning. 
Engagement and regular updates will ensure full proficiency in and agree￾ment with the amended processes and controls; as well as the risks that the 
BAU team may need to manage in the future.
One possible solution is for the BAU risk owner to formally accept the re￾sidual risks of the initiative prior to going live, thereby acknowledging that these 
risks will now be managed as part of the business’s overall portfolio of risks.
Check
Post-implementation reviews (PIRs) have multiple aims. Firstly, a PIR evalu￾ates how effectively the project, programme or activity was run and what 
lessons can be derived for the future. Secondly, it determines whether initial Operational risk assessment of change initiatives 155
objectives were met; for example, for new products, it allows comparison of 
actual volumes to forecasts, and an assessment of profitability and customer 
feedback. And finally, PIRs provide a great opportunity to do a deep dive
into the control environment. If significant risks were identified during the 
initial risk assessment, the reviewer can cast a critical eye over the perfor￾mance and quality of the controls that mitigate these risks. The latter ele￾ment is rarely in scope and not considered nearly enough; yet, for regulatory 
programmes, for example, it provides an opportunity to ensure that controls 
are still operating as originally intended and that the operating environment 
has not deteriorated subsequently.
Post-implementation reviews are commonly conducted within three to 
nine months of the change. Sometimes they can be followed by an addi￾tional long-term review, within two years of completion of the change. PIRs 
can also be triggered by an increased incidence of operational risk events, 
signalling that transition to a BAU state has not been smooth.
Not all activities require a PIR. New products, system changes and regu￾latory programmes, however, are among those that most benefit from the 
look-back and re-evaluation that a PIR provides. It is also worth testing a 
sample of change initiatives that were not in scope of the initial risk assess￾ment, to determine whether they actually should have been included. This 
acts as a deterrent against change owners understating the scale of the 
change to avoid review.
Aggregate and monitor
The aggregation step aims to assess the overall impact of multiple simulta￾neous initiatives and to evaluate whether the firm’s change risk is elevated 
beyond its appetite. Various approaches are possible to achieve this:
● The most common consolidation is based on an inventory of initiatives in 
flight, prepared by a central change management function (if such a 
function exists within the organization). An appropriate governance 
committee reviews the list noting pressure points, including dependencies 
on key personnel, to weigh up whether the firm can cope effectively with 
the change portfolio. This results in a judgemental assessment of whether 
the overall impact of multiple transformations is tolerable.
● Another option is to add a change risk category into the operational risk 
taxonomy. As discussed in Chapter 1, the question of whether change risk
is a distinct risk type or a cause of other risks crystallizing is an active 156 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
debate, which has split opinion in the industry. If a separate category is 
used, functions can highlight the raised risk levels in their respective 
RCSAs, which can then be aggregated later.
● A final option is to perform a trigger-based review, via analysis of 
operational risk events and their root causes. An increase in the number 
and/or value of risk events with the same root cause (i.e. an excessive 
change agenda) will signal that immediate focus is required. While this 
kind of review is somewhat beneficial, it is a rather reactive approach.
Presented below are examples of Key Risk Indicators that can be useful for 
evaluating various aspects of change:
KRI1: Change risk – the percentage of overdue and at-risk projects within 
the active project portfolio. The KRI reflects on the overall health of the 
portfolio, monitoring the ratio of struggling programmes vs those that 
are on track.
KRI2: Transition to business-as-usual – the number of change activities 
where post-implementation reviews highlighted material issues. PIRs are 
used to measure the success of project discipline and the metric tracks 
unsuccessful and poorly implemented projects.
KRI3: Risk assessments – the number of material change activities in scope 
without a completed ORA. This metric is related to cultural aspects of 
the firm, and monitors compliance with the set process to ensure that 
change projects undergo a risk assessment.
Further KRI examples are discussed in Chapter 7, Key Risk Indicators.
Roles and responsibilities
Second line Operational Risk departments are the masterminds behind the 
change risk assessment methodology, working closely with relevant stake￾holders – be they project, product or other teams – to ensure that ORA is 
integrated into business practices. Effective collaboration enables a firm to 
find the right solutions that are appropriate to the size, nature and culture of 
the organization. The Operational Risk department provides training and 
education for first line business units and support functions, and facilitates 
workshops. It is also the role of the department to oversee and challenge 
material initiatives, ensuring that the level of risk is commensurate with the Operational risk assessment of change initiatives 157
activity, and reporting on the aggregate level of change risk to the relevant 
governance committees.
First line business units and support functions own the risks and are ulti￾mately accountable for the success or failure of their initiatives. They are 
responsible for identifying material projects and programmes that fall within 
the set criteria, and for conducting ORAs as required. Where there are em￾bedded first line operational risk champions, they help considerably in 
spreading knowledge and can serve as advisors and facilitators when it 
comes to ORAs.
A first line risk coordinator checklist can be found in the following box.
FIRST LINE RISK COORDINATOR CHECKLIST: ORAS
✓ Staff are aware of policy and governance for change activities.
✓ Change initiatives are evaluated according to the set criteria to define 
their materiality.
✓ ORA is completed for material change initiatives.
✓ Risks and opportunities are considered to arrive at a balanced view.
✓ Upon completion, remaining residual risks are transitioned to business￾as-usual state in a disciplined manner.
✓ Post-implementation reviews are conducted.
Common challenges and good practices
Common challenges
Potential hurdles when dealing with change risk assessments are presented 
below.
Unbalanced goals and objectives
Cultural challenges may arise when business goals are weighted so heavily 
towards growth and efficiency that product and change owners are not in￾centivized to ensure that the control environment is appropriate to the risk 
that is being taken on. They may not necessarily see the review process as 
beneficial, rather as a necessary stage or even a hindrance to their project, 
and may refuse to jump through the approval hoops. The right tone at the 158 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
top and balanced business goals that reflect the risk appetite of the organiza￾tion help to address this challenge.
Lack of transparency from change sponsor
By the same token, if a risk-based approach is adopted for conducting ORAs 
for riskier initiatives, it is important to ensure that the sponsor provides a 
full perspective on the proposition so that it is not understated and as a re￾sult falls below the review threshold. This is a concern particularly if the 
owner does not see the review as beneficial or adding value.
Reluctance to complete the ORA
Business units and support functions may be reluctant to complete an ORA, 
reasoning that they do not have capacity and in any case that the review is 
a bureaucratic step which will not highlight anything new. The best way to 
convert the sceptics is to identify true risks that were missed or not thought 
of. Presenting past success stories, demonstrating that the Operational Risk 
department can skilfully lead discussions, facilitating workshops and lend￾ing your own expertise also help to change sceptical attitudes.
Incorrect roles and responsibilities
It is widely deemed to be the role of the operational risk team to complete 
the ORA. The Basel Committee noted this paradox in its survey,10 emphasiz￾ing that actually first line business units and support functions are responsi￾ble for identifying and managing their own risks. Operational risk is a 
powerful facilitation partner but is not the owner (see also Chapter 3 high￾lighting roles and responsibilities of the Three Lines).
Criteria not fit for purpose
When the criteria for what constitutes a material change initiative are set 
too low, the exercise becomes a formality, a tick-box template. This can 
cause the business, as well as the Operational Risk department, to be over￾whelmed by numerous unnecessary assessments. Using sound judgement 
helps to correctly calibrate the parameters and align the ORAs with the risk 
appetite of the organization.
Sub-optimal transition to business-as-usual
Sometimes, transition from the programme to a BAU state is sub-optimal; 
the project is closed without formally transferring the remaining risks, or Operational risk assessment of change initiatives 159
the newly identified owner is not willing to accept accountability. Involving 
the right stakeholders and teams from the start – and ensuring they are part 
of the risk conversation – helps avoid failures down the line.
Lack of operational risk involvement
There are instances of major change activities with no participation or in￾volvement from either first or second line operational risk employees. This 
creates a gap in understanding of the overall risk profile of the change; as 
well as missed opportunities for operational risk professionals to be at the 
decision table and help implement a structured approach to evaluating risks 
and opportunities. It is recommended that first and second line operational 
risk functions hold periodic catch-ups to ensure adequate coverage and 
awareness of the most material change activities.
Good practices
Embedded use of ORAs
Organizations with a well-embedded risk culture recognize the value of risk 
assessments. Executive committees and boards rely on ORAs accompanying 
material change initiatives, because a clear picture of risks and opportunities 
is simply indispensable for decision-making. They will reject a new business 
proposition without an ORA; this is a sign of maturity and sends a powerful 
message in support of robust risk management practices.
Risks and opportunities assessment
Use of a risks and opportunities matrix brings a positive sentiment to risk 
management and enhances the brand of the operational risk function. In 
developing approaches and leading conversations, it is important to balance 
out the words that have a negative connotation – losses, threats, risks – with 
more optimistic and upbeat terminology – opportunities, benefits, lessons 
learnt.
Finding the right approach
If a template is used for conducting ORAs, it is good practice to have the 
operational risk taxonomy built into the template, as a reminder of areas 
that need to be covered. The sponsor can then select relevant risks from the 
menu and add commentary, evaluate estimated inherent and residual risk 
levels, and outline known mitigating actions at an early stage of the 160 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
programme. However, to the points raised in Chapter 5 on RCSAs, while 
templates do provide a framework to encourage consideration of a full 
range of risk pillars, they can also limit the risk identification mindset. In 
this case the template becomes a tick-box exercise. Often assembling a meet￾ing with the right stakeholders and starting with a blank page asking what 
are the risks here? can draw out top-of-mind themes more effectively. The 
template can then be used as a basis for documenting the discussion in a 
disciplined way.
Using system or software
Unlike RCSAs, risk assessments of change initiatives are short-lived (and 
even, for longer regulatory programmes or projects, have an end of life). 
They are usually documented via manual Word or Excel documents. If op￾erational risk software has a change module, it enables the loading, tracking 
and storage of ORAs in one place. Evaluating how many live ORAs exist at 
any point in time, and what their risk level is, helps operational risk to over￾see the overall transformation landscape and increases transparency. As 
highlighted in the industry benchmark further on, this technique is rarely 
used, and only by a minority of organizations.
Celebrating success
The Operational Risk department commonly has a preview of all ORAs, 
given their role in facilitation, review and challenge. Consequently, opera￾tional risk staff gain an enormous amount of experience and insight, and 
can use that knowledge to draw out relevant lessons learnt and share them 
with business units and support functions. Celebrating success is once again 
an important topic. Discussions that focus on cases where assessments were 
particularly impactful really reinforce the value of risk management.
Retaining evidence
In the age of evidence, it is important to retain solid documentation of 
ORAs, demonstrating how risk decisions were taken. Assessments can be 
referred to in the future, especially in cases where personnel have moved 
roles or left the organization.
Industry benchmark
Change risk is on the increase, and since 2022 has appeared as one of the 
top three operational risks across the financial services sector, as assessed by Operational risk assessment of change initiatives 161
the Best Practice Operational Risk Forum. Practitioners evaluated the matu￾rity of the operational risk approach to change initiatives, with 69 per cent 
of respondents considering that their firm’s practices were still evolving and 
ad hoc, while the remaining 31 per cent noted that improvement was needed 
(see Figure 6.4). No respondents at all considered that the approach to 
change in their firms was already fully embedded.
By contrast, in a similar poll carried out four years earlier (2018), 40 per 
cent of professionals had been confident that significant or riskier activities 
were consistently identified and risk assessed in their firms, demonstrating 
a pattern of good embeddedness (also see first edition of the book for fur￾ther details). Overall, then, this rating deteriorated from 2018 to 2022, and 
the pace of progress in implementing robust change management practices 
now appears slower than expected. This setback is largely attributed to an 
understandable focus on other urgent priorities during the pandemic years 
and the subsequent challenging economic environment. These factors have 
often resulted in change programmes being underfunded and lacking suf￾ficient attention from boards and senior management. An increase in or￾ganizational fragmentation, greater reliance on third parties and a siloed 
operating environment may have also contributed to these challenges.
On a positive note, however, a majority (76 per cent) of risk professionals 
are involved in change projects, with 46 per cent being engaged throughout 
the duration of the initiative, as reflected in Figure 6.5.
Best Practice Operational Risk Forum, 2022
Figure 6.4 Industry poll: maturity of operational risk approach to change
Maturity of Op Risk approach to change
Fully
embedded
Evolving and
ad-hoc
Minimal/
could be
improved
31%
69%162 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
Best Practice Operational Risk Forum, 2022
Figure 6.5 Industry poll: operational risk involvement in change projects
46%
12%
Throughout
the life
cycle
When is Op Risk involved in change projects?
At the
outset and
at go live
At the
outset
only
At go
live only
Not involved
12%
6%
24%
Figure 6.6 Industry poll: tools used to measure change risk
47%
18% 18% 18%
RCSA Change risk
assessments
What tools are used to measure change risk?
Scenario
analysis
A
combination
Not using
tools
Best Practice Operational Risk Forum, 2022
Change risk assessment was considered as a core mechanism to measure and 
manage change risk, enabling increased levels of scrutiny and sign-off where 
needed. RCSAs and other tools, in combination, were also used for this pur￾pose (see Figure 6.6). Change assessments continued to be recorded largely 
manually, with only a few firms developing and using a change risk assess￾ment module within their operational risk systems.Operational risk assessment of change initiatives 163
Overall, Best Practice Forum members yet again concluded that change 
management remains a focus area. Operational risk professionals could 
serve as effective connectors, reaching across the silos, and teaming up with 
colleagues from various areas to jointly produce better outcomes. The rea￾son for this is the ongoing intensity of change agenda and its impact on 
business models. In turn, this is inspiring operational risk professionals to 
remain at the heart of the process, continually embedding robust risk man￾agement practices with energy and enthusiasm.
Practical workplace exercise
Obtain a sample of various change initiatives completed within the last year, 
and consider the following questions:
1 Are there set criteria for defining material change activities that would 
benefit from an ORA?
2 Is there an ORA process; or if not, how are the risks emanating from 
change initiatives identified, assessed and managed?
3 What is the role of the Operational Risk department in the change 
process?
4 What is working well?
5 What can be improved? Note down possible enhancements.
A template for the ORA process has been provided in Appendix 3.
MAKE A DIFFERENCE (MAD) ACTION
Please outline key learnings and note down one specific action you will 
take after reading this chapter, to enhance your existing practices relating 
to the risk assessment of change initiatives in your organization.164 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
In summary, this chapter discussed the approach to identifying and assessing 
risks in change initiatives, supplementing Chapter 5, RCSAs.
Now that risk identification is complete, the next topic is dedicated to risk 
monitoring via Key Risk Indicators.
Notes
1 Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2021) Revisions to the Principles 
for the Sound Management of Operational Risk, www.bis.org/bcbs/publ/d515.
pdf (archived at https://perma.cc/3AW7-3S2D)
2 Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2014) Review of the Principles for 
the Sound Management of Operational Risk, www.bis.org/publ/bcbs292.pdf
(archived at https://perma.cc/3V88-VK6R)
3 Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2021) Revisions to the Principles 
for the Sound Management of Operational Risk, www.bis.org/bcbs/publ/d515.
pdf (archived at https://perma.cc/FX66-VY83)
4 Financial Conduct Authority (2018) Cyber and Technology Resilience: Themes 
from cross-sector survey 2017–18, www.fca.org.uk/publication/research/
technology-cyber-resilience-questionnaire-cross-sector-report.pdf (archived at 
https://perma.cc/LUV7-G6FZ)
5 European Banking Authority (EBA) (2019) EBA Guidelines on ICT and security 
risk management, www.eba.europa.eu/sites/default/files/document_library/
Publications/Guidelines/2020/GLs%20on%20ICT%20and%20security%20
risk%20management/872936/Final%20draft%20Guidelines%20on%20ICT%20
and%20security%20risk%20management.pdf (archived at https://perma.
cc/46HX-HYW8)
6 Project Management Institute (2013) A Guide to the Project Management 
Body of Knowledge, 5th edn, Project Management Institute (PMI)
7 Winter, H (2019) The Business Analysis Handbook: Techniques and questions 
to deliver better business outcomes, Kogan Page
8 Manifesto for Agile Software Development, agilemanifesto.org/principles.html
(archived at https://perma.cc/9LYB-K57R)
9 JWG (2017) Preparing for the regulatory flood: standards getting us to high 
ground!, jwg-it.eu/article/preparing-for-the-regulatory-flood-standards-getting￾us-to-high-ground/ (archived at https://perma.cc/8UUS-XAHV)
10 Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2014) Review of the Principles for 
the Sound Management of Operational Risk, www.bis.org/publ/bcbs292.pdf
(archived at https://perma.cc/N6YE-95JV)Key Risk 07
Indicators
What this chapter covers: Key Risk Indicators (KRIs) score the lowest rating 
in operational risk implementation surveys, and remain a challenge for 
practitioners. This chapter examines KRIs from a practical perspective, fo￾cusing on their purpose, design and benefit to the business (Figure 7.1). It 
discusses what is really important when implementing KRIs; provides a 
framework for assessing whether a metric is useful or useless; and reviews 
examples of effective (and not so effective) indicators. It also includes an 
industry benchmark and a list of 50 suggested KRIs (see Appendix 4).
FURTHER READING
● Institute of Operational Risk (2021) Operational Key Risk Indicators
Why recommended: A short supplementary read, containing several 
examples of Key Risk Indicators.
● Michael George, John Maxey, David Rowlands and Mark Price (2004) 
The Lean Six Sigma Pocket Toolbook: A quick reference guide to 100 
tools for improving quality and speed, McGraw-Hill
Why recommended: This excellent handbook is one of many on Six 
Sigma methodology and is useful for those wishing to obtain a broader 
perspective on the importance of measurement and how it fits into the 
overall process improvement cycle.
Definition, examples and key attributes
A primary monitoring mechanism, usually referred to as Key Risk Indicators 
(KRIs), is a core component of the operational risk framework and a power￾ful risk management tool.
165Governance, roles and responsibilities
Establish governance and clear roles across the Three Lines for managing operational risk.
Risk assessments
Assess risk exposure in 
process, business or 
function via RCSAs.
Supplement by evaluating
risks emanating from
change activities via 
ORAs. 
Identify exposure from
extreme but plausible 
events. Mitigate through
risk transfer to insurance.
Scenario analysis
Monitor risk and control
performance through 
predictive indicators.
Act if indicators breach 
established appetite 
threshold. 
Key Risk Indicators
Reporting and decision-making
Review actual risk prole against set appetite, apply active risk management to enable achievement of strategic objectives.
Operational risk 
events
Record and report risk 
events, act to minimize 
future exposure.
Monitor trends against
RCSAs and KRIs.
Risk appetite and risk capacity
Dene nature and types of risk accepted in pursuit of strategic objectives. Evaluate adequacy of capital resources.
Operational risk taxonomy
Embedding and maturity assessment
Training and education
Risk culture
Figure 7.1 Focus of Chapter 7: Key Risk Indicators
166Key Risk Indicators 167
The secret of success with KRIs is in channelling energy and thought into 
designing the right, targeted metrics and setting suitable thresholds, without 
overburdening the business or support functions with terminology and defi￾nitions. In terms of practical application, the usefulness test matters most: 
have the KRIs resulted in better business decisions?
In 2014, in a survey of regulated banks, Basel Committee found that 
KRIs scored the lowest implementation rating out of all operational risk 
framework tools.1
 Either they were not used as part of the framework at all; 
or, in most banks surveyed, they were still under development and not yet 
fully implemented. In 2019, Best Practice Operational Risk Forum was en￾couraged to see some progress, whereby KRIs, despite not yet scoring full 
marks for their usefulness, were being deemed a helpful tool in decision￾making. Fast forward five years, in 2024 the topic of KRIs remains very 
pertinent. In my extensive experience of running public and in-house train￾ing courses, it is often the KRI module that still attracts ample discussion 
and debate – and sometimes even light-bulb moments. Furthermore, at the 
end of each course when I ask participants to call out the most useful takea￾ways, many mention points related to KRIs.
It would be fair to note that there remains some divergence and confu￾sion with the definition. As the Basel Committee noted, some banks consid￾ered Key Risk Indicators and Key Performance Indicators to be the same set 
of metrics; while others differentiated between Key Risk Indicators (metrics 
designed to measure inherent risk) and Key Performance Indicators (focus￾ing on the adequacy of underlying processes and controls). Other firms use 
Key Control Indicators for controls and Key Performance Indicators to 
measure business performance. It is not surprising, then, that, for simplicity, 
some firms find it easier to replace the term KRI altogether, with the label 
monitoring metrics.
The challenge goes deeper than definition, however. It extends to the role 
of the KRIs and their place in the broader operational risk framework.
Let’s start by defining KRIs and discussing their role and place in the 
broader operational risk framework.
KRI DEFINITION
● A Key Risk Indicator (KRI) is a metric or measure used to monitor the 
state of a key risk, indicating whether it is increasing or reducing.
● The KRI can be linked to the risk itself or to a key control that mitigates the risk.
● The KRI should be a well-chosen, targeted metric that helps the firm to 
take decisions (usefulness test).168 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
In Chapter 5, we covered Risk and Control Self-Assessments (RCSAs). An 
RCSA is effectively a snapshot, at a point in time, of the firm’s risk and con￾trol environment. The assessment is true and valid on the day it takes place; 
but what can happen tomorrow, next month or next quarter? The control 
environment may deteriorate due to, for example, experienced members of 
staff, with knowledge of information technology systems, leaving the firm. 
Inherent risk may increase due to the firm starting to trade new products. 
While it is important to periodically refresh RCSAs, it is not cost-effective to 
do this on a continuous basis.
That is where KRIs come in.
Once the most important (top or key) risks have been identified, the pur￾pose of KRIs is to monitor them. As part of the RCSA process, business units 
or support functions have already agreed that the key risks are more signifi￾cant than other risks; and therefore, they are now selected for special treat￾ment. They are worthy of the time and effort involved in monitoring them 
and KRIs are defined for each key risk, to allow us to keep an eye on its 
behaviour.
The word key in ‘Key Risk Indicators’ relates to the risk and signifies the risk
being key, not the indicator.
When KRIs are selected to monitor key risks, the advantages include:
● clarity on why the metric is being collected – it monitors the behaviour of 
a risk which is known to be significant to the firm;
● reduced number of indicators – it enables a small sub-set of key risks to 
be monitored, which is more efficient and ensures focus on what is 
important.
CASE STUDY 7.1
A medium-sized firm acquired by a larger organization identifies one of its key 
risks as Loss of staff, causing inability to meet business requirements. During the 
12 months of integration after the acquisition, senior management has to ensure 
continuity of high-value, high-volume transaction services, while recognizing 
that inevitably, there will be attrition. Management decides that in this situation it Key Risk Indicators 169
is crucial to monitor the risk via a KRI, Predicted attrition – defined as the number 
of employees expected to leave in the next month, as a percentage of the total 
number of staff. Each leader is requested to maintain an honest dialogue with 
their staff discussing future plans, and report the Predicted attrition KRI on a 
monthly basis.
While accepted to be not very scientific, this KRI, based on the leader’s 
knowledge and informal estimates, proves very useful. It provides a basis for 
management to act, proactively recruiting temporary workers and a consultancy 
firm to fill identified potential gaps, and the integration is successfully completed.
Attributes of the Predicted Attrition KRI:
● It is directly relevant to the risk Loss of staff causing inability to meet 
business requirements.
● It measures the level of risk, indicating whether that is increasing or 
reducing, and is helpful in decision-making.
● Although not precise, it is at least measurable: to quote the British 
philosopher and logician Carveth Read, ‘It’s better to be approximately 
right than exactly wrong.’
In normal circumstances, though, the practice of asking employees whether 
they are planning to resign in the near future is neither feasible nor recom￾mended. So, what are the alternatives?
Risk: loss of staff causing inability to meet business 
requirements
KRI1: Absenteeism – this can be narrowed down by cause, e.g. stress-related 
absenteeism; an increase may be a sign of poor staff health, leading to 
future attrition. The opposite – Presenteeism – equally became a concern 
during and post the Covid-19 pandemic, where working hours have 
stretched with employees spending extended time behind the screen, 
potentially leading to fatigue and burnout.
KRI2: Use of employee helpline – if this kind of facility is available, spikes 
in usage may signal a broader issue and require investigation.170 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
KRI3: Employee satisfaction survey rate – decreased staff satisfaction with 
the role, manager or the company may lead to resignations.
KRI4: Exit interview analysis: number of identified concerns – if the Human 
Resources department interviews leavers and analyses trends (a very 
valuable activity), they will be able to flag if there is a recurring theme or 
concern.
KRI5: Salary benchmark, showing the number or percentage of positions 
not benchmarked or below the industry benchmark – uncompetitive pay 
may prompt employees to look elsewhere.
KRI6: Key staff without succession plan – this will not prevent employees 
from leaving, but will reflect how well the impact can be mitigated if 
they do.
Depending on particular aspects of risk that are of concern to the firm, ad￾ditional indicators can be designed, for example, ones that help understand 
who is leaving:
KRI7: High performance (regretted) turnover – highly rated leavers as a 
percentage of total number of leavers.
Or how quickly people are leaving:
KRI8: Permanent staff leavers – left within six months of joining.
CASE STUDY 7.2
In a highly dynamic start-up firm, indicator Permanent staff leavers, left within six 
months of joining was instrumental in helping management to monitor a pattern 
whereby employees either stayed for a long time, or joined and left very quickly. 
Following further investigation, it was revealed that the vibrant and 
entrepreneurial environment was either loved or hated by the members of staff. 
As a consequence, Human Resources enhanced the employee on-boarding 
process to explain the culture to prospective new joiners at the interview stage, 
allowing them to decide up-front whether it suited them, and reducing the 
number of speedy departures.
What attributes are we looking for when selecting KRIs?Key Risk Indicators 171
Some organizations use the KRI Staff attrition rate. While factual, this KRI 
is backward-looking (i.e. employees have already left); and it provides no 
insight into why the departures happened or whether people are more or 
less likely to leave in the future. It is difficult for management to act on the 
information and therefore, from a risk management perspective, the KRI is 
not very helpful. The recommendation is to select more predictive and tar￾geted metrics that can provide an early warning when the level of risk is 
increasing.
Another example of risk worth reviewing is the Unauthorized/rogue trad￾ing, which is a key risk for firms with markets or trading business. Direct 
measures of the risk (in this case, the number of employees expected to turn 
rogue in the next month) rarely exist, if at all. If there are no risk indicators 
as such, KRIs can be set to monitor the control environment in order to alert 
management to any deterioration, thus allowing them to promptly imple￾ment corrective measures.
ATTRIBUTES OF GOOD KRIs
✓ relevant, targeted – specific to the risk or control;
✓ predictive, forward-looking – provide an early warning;
✓ useful – help the firm to take decisions;
✓ available for collection;
✓ measurable.
Indicators can be established for a risk as well as for a control that 
mitigates the risk.
Risk: Unauthorized/rogue trading
Example of a KRI dashboard for the risk of Unauthorized/rogue trading, 
containing control indicators.
KRI1: Unconfirmed deals over 20 days – highlighting aged trades that have 
not been agreed to by the trade counterparty for a long time (e.g. over 
20 days), flagging a potentially erroneous or fraudulent deal.172 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
KRI2: Trades executed at off-market rates – identifying ‘unusual’ trades that 
require further explanation.
KRI3: Late deals – counting exceptions where trades have been concluded 
after the close of the business day.
KRI4: Unresolved profit and loss (P&L) differences as of month-end over 
the threshold – monitoring discrepancies between a trader’s position and 
the books and records of the firm.
KRI5: Cancel & amends – showing the number of deals that were cancelled 
and/or amended after being agreed with the counterparty, potentially 
requiring further investigation.
KRI6: Trader mandate breaches – monitoring instances where trades were 
executed outside of the prescribed mandate, either due to an error or 
deliberate non-compliance.
Risk: Money laundering/financial crime
Finally, examining the risk of Money laundering/financial crime, which can 
be measured using a combination of risk and control indicators:
KRI1: Percentage of high risk accounts vs overall accounts – a risk indicator 
which provides a view of the overall portfolio.
KRI2: Client due diligence (CDD) reviews past due over 30 days – highlights 
delay and/or non-completion of CDD refresh, a control indicator.
KRI3: Open activity monitoring alerts not properly actioned – monitors 
investigation and resolution of alerts of suspicious activity, a control indicator.
Market abuse and financial crime are growing concerns in the financial ser￾vices industry, with some firms moving to automated real-time trader surveil￾lance to detect manipulation, and use of artificial intelligence to identify 
suspicious patterns. This is an area of continuing enhancements and a great 
opportunity for operational risk practitioners to lead the way in transforming 
manual KRI monitoring into state-of-the art real-time indicator dashboards.
Defining thresholds and mastering 
aggregation
Once KRIs have been identified, thresholds (or tolerance levels) need to be 
established for each indicator. The levels define tolerance for error or failure Key Risk Indicators 173
with respect to the specific risk or control that the KRI is intended to moni￾tor, effectively outlining what is acceptable and what will not be tolerated.
SETTING RAG THRESHOLDS
✓ Establish data collection process.
✓ Observe values internally.
✓ Benchmark with industry (if available).
✓ Present a proposal to the governance committee.
RAG status may also be defined in more detail. For example, red metrics 
may require escalation to an appropriate governance or a board-level com￾mittee.
The following steps are recommended when setting the thresholds.
Thresholds are essential for escalation and action, and are commonly set 
on a Red/Amber/Green (RAG) basis:
Red: Unacceptable: immediate action needed
Amber: Tolerable: attention, explanation, monitoring and/or plan to 
bring to green
Green: Acceptable: no action needed
Thresholds outline what the firm considers acceptable, effectively establish￾ing the firm’s operational risk appetite (see Chapter 9, Operational risk ap￾petite). They need to be approached with a high level of rigour, including 
review and approval by the relevant governance committee(s). Group-wide 
or top of the house indicators and their thresholds are usually approved by 
the board.
Collecting the data and observing current values helps greatly in under￾standing the existing risk and control environment, although should not be 
used for guidance in setting the thresholds. External benchmarks are rarely 
available in financial services, but are worth checking if a relevant study has 
been published.174 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
EXAMPLE 2
Risk: Incorrect financial/regulatory reporting, resulting in penalties and 
regulatory censure.
KRI: Number of high-risk spreadsheets or end-user computing (EUC) 
applications with policy exceptions – a control indicator, already narrowed 
down to critical spreadsheets/EUC applications where the firm has no 
tolerance for exceptions to policy requirements (protecting the content, 
restricting access, performing back-ups and validating the formulas).
Thresholds:
Green: zero
Red: >= 1
Some indicators can be binary, turning from acceptable directly to unaccep￾table, i.e. by-passing the tolerable level.
EXAMPLE 1
Risk: Payment errors/poor transaction execution, leading to customer 
detriment, financial loss and reputational damage.
KRI: Number of aged reconciliation breaks – a control indicator, monitoring 
volume of discrepancies and speed of resolution.
Thresholds:
Green: Less than 20 breaks outstanding >30 days at month-end AND zero 
breaks outstanding >60 days
Amber: Less than 50 breaks outstanding >30 days at month-end AND zero 
breaks outstanding >60 days
Red: Over 50 breaks outstanding >30 days at month-end OR any breaks 
outstanding >60 days
The same KRI can be turned into a composite measure, combining both 
volume and the monetary value of reconciliation breaks,
KRI: Strength of reconciliation process – combining volume and value.
Green: Less than 20 breaks outstanding >30 days at month-end AND zero 
breaks outstanding >60 days AND overall value of unresolved 
discrepancies <$50,000Key Risk Indicators 175
Aggregation
At both group-wide and business unit level, there are usually multiple KRIs, 
each reported with its own RAG rating. Hence the need arises for aggrega￾tion of the measures, to enable an understanding of whether the risk overall 
is within or outside the firm’s risk appetite.
Aggregation can be rule- or judgement-based. In rule-based aggregation:
● Conservative/cautious: the overall rating is based on the worst value KRI, 
i.e. if at least one indicator is at an unacceptable level, the overall RAG 
rating becomes unacceptable.
● Moderate/modest: the result is unacceptable if a set percentage of KRIs is 
flagging red (e.g. over 20 per cent).
In judgement-based aggregation, the KRI owner – namely the responsible 
first line head of business unit or support function who owns the KRI – de￾cides on the overall rating using their expert knowledge. To ensure the pro￾cess is robust and avoids gaming, the reasons for the rating need to be 
articulated in writing, which enables the second line operational risk func￾tion and respective governance committees to provide effective challenge.
CASE STUDY 7.3
A global financial markets business unit, trading out of multiple locations, is 
monitoring the risk of Unauthorized/rogue trading. One KRI (Unconfirmed deals 
>20 days) is flagging Red in one location (Figure 7.2). When presenting the 
dashboard to the risk committee, the head of financial markets confirms that an 
investigation into the Red KRI has commenced and argues that, overall, the risk 
is within the elevated but tolerable Amber level. This is due to the good 
performance of mitigating controls in place (namely other KRIs flagging Green), 
which were recently reviewed and tested by the Quality Assurance function.
The committee accepts this argument but requests to see the results of the 
investigation. On further analysis, it transpires that all unconfirmed trades are with 
the same small-size corporate client, with a single authorized signatory whose 
frequent business travels result in a significant backlog of unsigned confirmations.
Given the increased risk of fraudulent and erroneous trades that this 
represents, the firm decides it has no appetite to continue dealing with the client 
unless they appoint an additional signatory and regularize the backlog. The client 
complies and the KRI returns to Green within two months.Operational risk dashboard WHEM
KEY RISK INDICATORS NY Miami UK Sing HK
Global
GFM*
RISK of ROGUE TRADING
B-1: Unconrmed deals >20 Days
B-2: Trades executed at ‘Off-Market’ rates
B-3: ‘Late deals’
B-4: Unresolved P&L differences as of month-end >threshold
B-5: Cancel and amends
B-6: Mandate breaches
EMEA APAC
= Red = Amber = Green
Figure 7.2 Example Key Risk Indicators dashboard
176Key Risk Indicators 177
In the above example, judgement-based aggregation was used. If a rule￾based conservative/cautious approach was applied, the overall RAG rating 
would have turned Red, flagging that the overall risk of Unauthorized/rogue 
trading for the global financial markets business is outside the firm’s risk 
appetite.
KRI life cycle and checklist: useful 
or useless?
The KRI process cycle is described below:
● Select: A key risk that requires monitoring is selected (from RCSA);
● Design: A workshop is run with subject matter experts to define KRIs;
● Collect: A data collection process is established;
● Propose thresholds: Subject matter experts conduct the study to propose 
thresholds;
● Approve thresholds: KRI and thresholds are presented to the relevant 
governance committee for approval;
● Monitor: KRI is monitored with agreed frequency; actions are taken if 
the level becomes ‘unacceptable’;
● Validate: Data accuracy is periodically reviewed (e.g. by Internal Audit).
Selection
KRIs are commonly established at multiple levels throughout the organiza￾tion, including at group-wide and individual business or support function 
level. Respectively, the starting points are key risks at the top of the house 
which are most significant to the firm; and more granular individual busi￾ness- or function-level risks. The selection process involves deciding on what 
constitutes key risks that require monitoring. These can be, for example, 
inherent risks with the highest impact and likelihood rating; or residual risks 
that are outside the firm’s risk appetite; or a combination of both. Less is 
more – narrowing down is important to ensure that reviewing the KRI dash￾board is manageable.178 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
Design
This stage is best achieved via a workshop with respective subject matter 
experts from the business or support functions, led by operational risk. 
Design is a creative, stimulating and enjoyable process, where participants 
collectively define the best metrics that possess the right attributes – relevant, 
targeted, predictive, useful, measurable and available for collection – for each 
of the key risks. Business units and support functions are already engaged as 
the value proposition is clear – let’s find ways to monitor those significant 
risks that may prevent the business from achieving its own objectives.
In preparation for the workshop it is worth examining existing metrics, 
as some may already be collected. If this stage proves difficult, and the team 
is running out of ideas, external help is also available. Some organizations 
provide a library of Key Risk Indicators (via a paid subscription service), as 
well as guidance on where and how each indicator can be used.2
 A collabo￾rative approach of second line operational risk professionals, who have a 
solid understanding of the framework and desired outcomes, working to￾gether with business units and support functions, ensures that identified 
metrics will provide an insight into the level of risk and present a true and 
fair reflection of the risk profile of each unit or function.
Data collection
This stage is usually manual, because KRIs are the most manually intensive 
of all operational risk tools. Data accuracy is key, and KRI owners need to 
establish verification procedures to ensure the correctness of information 
which is used for decision-making. This may involve review and sign-off by 
department heads.
Thresholds
These were discussed in the previous section.
Monitoring and mitigation using KRIs
Breaches of KRI thresholds need to be explained, acted upon and notified to 
the appropriate governance committees. Especially the unacceptable Red level 
which, if correctly calibrated, cannot be ignored. The firm has already agreed 
what outcomes would not be tolerated and needs to follow through with Key Risk Indicators 179
investigation, resolution and if needed, monetary investment. Clear account￾ability helps to achieve desired results, so it is good practice to have an owner 
for every KRI. This may be the respective risk or control owner, who takes the 
lead in resolving the breach and bringing the metric back to acceptable level.
Validation
As highlighted in the data collection step, beware errors in the dataset. Many 
organizations end up having to go back to the risk committee and/or the board 
explaining why the KRI was mis-reported for the previous month(s). Maintain 
data quality with spot checks, period assurance and internal audit reviews.
Periodic updates
KRIs should be subject to periodic review following the RCSA refresh, trig￾gered by a major change or significant operational risk event, or at least 
annually. During the review, it is recommended to consider the usefulness 
test (see box below).
KRI USEFUL
✓ clearly linked to a key risk;
✓ targeted, relevant metric;
✓ demonstrable decisions;
✓ drives improvement, replaced with a better KRI.
In many instances, once KRIs become visible and continuously monitored, 
they lead to enhancements. To quote H James Harrington, the US perfor￾mance and quality guru, ‘Measurement is the first step that leads to control 
and eventually to improvement.’
Six Sigma, an effective problem-solving methodology for improving busi￾ness performance, is centred on the DMAIC concept: Define, Measure, 
Analyse, Improve and Control.3
 In my career I have been fortunate to man￾age Six Sigma green and black belts, working with the methodology and 
seeing first-hand evidence of the value that the projects delivered. Robust Key 
Risk Indicators fit into this overall improvement cycle; and if used correctly 
can take a firm a long way towards advancing its processes and performance.180 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
KRI NOT USEFUL
✓ not linked to a key risk;
✓ difficult to explain why collected;
✓ no decisions taken;
✓ constant Green;
✓ if it turns Red, it is argued that it is not a real Red: no action needed.
CASE STUDY 7.4
A firm experiences a failure of a third-party technology service provider, where it 
transpires that the supplier had facilities in a flood prone area, with sub-optimal 
disaster recovery and business continuity capabilities. In addition to remediation 
activities, a programme of work commences to carry out a review of all critical 
third-party suppliers to ensure robust climate risk assessment (the E component 
of ESG) has been completed, and BCP/DR plans and test results are available 
and fit-for-purpose.
Management selects an interim measure to monitor the risk of critical 
third-party failure: The number of Critical third parties with missing climate risk 
assessment or BCP arrangements. The KRI reflects the progress of the 
programme; and measures the population of critical suppliers where robust 
information has not yet been obtained or is not available (for example, in cases 
where service providers have not evaluated their own exposure to climate￾related risk drivers), hence flagging an unknown potential areas of exposure.
The firm sets a zero tolerance for the KRI as it has already been narrowed 
down to critical suppliers, resulting in unacceptable Red RAG rating for the 
duration of the project. Stringent governance is thus required, with updates from 
the chief operating officer, responsible for coordinating the Supplier 
management programme, to the governance committees and the board.
Following project completion, as the required information has been collected, 
the KRI becomes redundant and is replaced by a better indicator – Critical 
suppliers with inadequate climate risk exposure or BCP arrangements, for 
continuous monitoring of any negative (or positive) changes to the risk profile.Key Risk Indicators 181
In some firms, KRIs are not linked to any particular risk. A dashboard is 
created from scratch (perhaps based on the question what shall we moni￾tor?) or assembled using data that is already being gathered. KRIs are sub￾sequently monitored in case they collectively flag a developing risk. While 
this approach is feasible, it is also laborious and ineffective, as the firm ends 
up collecting more indicators than it needs (not all related to key risks), and 
struggles to justify why a particular metric is being monitored. When work￾ing with clients, I always recommend identifying the key risks first, and se￾lecting the KRIs subsequently.
In terms of decision-making, examples of less useful KRIs include those 
backward-looking, or lagging, indicators that reflect risk having already ma￾terialized. Among them is the earlier-mentioned Staff attrition rate (employees 
have already left) as well as Number of system failures, Number of cases of 
internal fraud, and Number of reported operational risk losses. In short, it is 
good practice to select predictive, rather than backward-looking metrics, 
where possible.
KRIs – and their thresholds – may also need to be examined in case they 
persistently report Green for a prolonged period of time (e.g. over a year), 
including in periods of stress. This pattern may signify that the department is 
overstaffed or has extra capacity, or that the threshold has been set incorrectly.
Even worse is when KRI turns Red and the importance of the event is 
downplayed. For example, an explanation is provided that it is not a true 
exception and that there is no reason to be concerned. This situation war￾rants a review. The threshold may have been incorrectly set, or, more likely, 
it is recognized that investment is required to resolve the issue, but there is 
neither budget nor appetite among management to progress this further.
Appendix 4 provides some example KRIs.
Roles and responsibilities
First line business units or support functions are responsible for most of the 
KRI cycle: developing indicators which monitor their risk and control envi￾ronment; proposing the thresholds; establishing a data collection process; 
monitoring and providing commentary; and then acting when indicators 
breach the threshold. This is common sense risk management, and if indica￾tors are correctly selected to monitor significant risks that may prevent the 
business or support function from achieving their own objectives, there 
should be no pushback.182 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
An Operational Risk department works in partnership with first line 
functions, facilitating KRI workshops and adding its expertise and knowl￾edge of the KRI tool and the desired outcomes. Oversight and constructive 
challenge are provided as part of the discussion at the KRI workshop. The 
second line usually has the right to add or alter indicators or thresholds. If 
the firm has first line coordinators embedded into its business units or sup￾port functions, those individuals will play a crucial role in achieving the 
right outcomes.
Below is an example checklist for a first line risk coordinator.
FIRST LINE RISK COORDINATOR CHECKLIST: KRIs
✓ KRIs are set to monitor key (top) operational risks.
✓ Collected data is accurate and reliable; data quality is validated.
✓ KRI thresholds are defined and approved by the relevant governance 
committee.
✓ Dashboard is used in decision-making – if KRI breaches the threshold, 
action is taken.
✓ KRI outputs are compared and contrasted against other core operational 
risk tools.
Common challenges and good practices
The following challenges may be encountered when designing and deploy￾ing Key Risk Indicators.
Common challenges
Business units disengaged
At times, employees may perceive KRIs as a pointless exercise and refuse 
to engage in their design. It is crucial to build a value proposition and 
make a case for monitoring what is important to the business, namely 
those significant risks that may prevent the business from achieving their 
own objectives.Key Risk Indicators 183
Threshold manipulation
Business units or support functions may attempt to game the threshold, 
proposing ranges that will always exhibit a Green KRI (in particular in firms 
which are characterized by a blame culture, i.e. to avoid the consequences of 
being Red); or, on the contrary, purposely setting a threshold to display Red 
in order to substantiate a request for more people or better systems. 
Independent second line operational risk opinions (referred to earlier as 
challenge) can be helpful in resolving these tendencies.
Lack of action
A dashboard with Red flashing indicators is presented month-on-month but 
with no action taken to resolve the matter and bring the metric within the 
tolerable level. This pattern should be avoided at all costs, as it simply deval￾ues the whole process.
Manual data collection
KRIs are the most manual tool in the operational risk framework. When 
starting the project, allow sufficient time and resource not only for the de￾sign phase but for the future manual and possibly labour-intensive collec￾tion process. Consider automation where possible – firms investing in 
technological solutions are ahead of the game, using the best practice of in￾viting IT and data specialists to the initial KRI workshop and thus ensuring 
that potential automation is considered from the outset.
Too many KRIs
It can be challenging to identify the correct number of KRIs for a given firm: 
usually there are too many (the challenge is rarely in the opposite direction, 
namely too few). Some organizations monitor hundreds (or even thousands) 
of indicators. I am frequently asked what is the right number. While there is 
no absolute correct answer, a range of around 30 good KRIs at the top of 
the house is appropriate.
Good practices
Review what already exists
While it is unrealistic to rapidly turn existing departmental metrics straight 
into a KRI dashboard, it is valuable to review what is already being collected. 184 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
Frequently, current indicators serve as a base for the conversation. Business 
units and support functions naturally manage their people, systems and pro￾cesses and will often have a good set of measures that help them take deci￾sions. This can be supplemented by blue-sky thinking, to consider what 
KRIs should ideally be used, and if felt important, time and technical capa￾bilities invested to put them in place. If risks are the starting point, that nar￾rows down the scope and creates a much better case for agreeing what is 
essential to monitor.
Define a healthy portfolio
Evaluate the proportion of predictive metrics vs backward-looking meas￾ures in the overall KRI set. A healthy set of indicators will contain 
predominantly predictive measures that aid in decision-making. In 2024, I 
ran a LinkedIn poll for my network of risk professionals to ascertain their 
view on what constitutes a healthy portfolio, and was pleased that almost 
half of respondents favoured forward-looking KRIs, while the other half 
opted for a balance of predictive and lagging indicators (see Table 7.1). This 
is a positive sign, as organizations should be moving away from dashboards 
merely filled with historic data.
Translate KRIs into a story
Ensure KRIs tell a story to the governance committees and especially when 
presented at board level. The context helps in escalating Red KRIs and en￾suring they are acted upon. Measure and highlight the length of persistency 
of Red KRIs, which demonstrates apathy and unwillingness to deal with 
issues.
Apply the usefulness test
Apply the usefulness test and revisit KRIs after major changes, aiming to 
continuously evolve them. Review KRIs in search of better, more targeted 
Table 7.1 A healthy portfolio of KRIs contains
Response % of responses
Mostly forward-looking KRIs 43
Mostly backward-looking KRIs 3
An equal proportion of each 54Key Risk Indicators 185
metrics, avoiding stale indicators. Additionally, review the thresholds peri￾odically to make sure that they are still appropriate and fit for purpose.
Share learnings and celebrate success
Share good examples of KRIs between first line risk coordinators. It is good 
practice to run periodic workshops where coordinators present their best 
indicator of the year, substantiated with reasons why. Group discussions and 
the exchange of practical hints and tips injects positive energy into risk man￾agement. Report on cases where KRI monitoring has resulted in 
improvements, emphasizing the value of risk management. This practice is 
not done nearly enough.
Appreciate the bigger picture
The operational risk team needs to be involved and fully on-board with the 
firm’s strategy and business objectives, to ensure that the data collected and 
monitored aligns with the bigger picture and is truly important to the firm.
Industry benchmark
In 2024, the view on KRIs remains consistent with previous years: firms are 
constantly searching for targeted, predictive and useful indicators. Some 73 
per cent of risk professionals taking part in an Advanced Operational Risk 
workshop were aiming to enhance their KRI set, as presented in Figure 7.3. 
Around 8 per cent were working to decrease their number of KRIs (espe￾cially if the number ran to hundreds), while others intended to start or in￾crease KRI reporting if the tool was somewhat new.
Risk professionals mentioned that KRI dashboards still contained many 
backward-looking indicators such as staff attrition, transaction errors, com￾pliance breaches and system failures. While they were factual and available 
for collection, they did not provide a perspective on the future areas of risk 
or shed a light into underperforming controls. Therefore, the overall satis￾faction with the KRI portfolio remained rather low (see Figure 7.4).
Despite not yet at the point of arrival, KRIs were actively used in measur￾ing the level of operational risk against risk appetite, thus aiding in decision￾making. To advance the use of this excellent tool, operational risk 
professionals were planning to invest time into facilitating workshops with 
the first line units, to identify more targeted, relevant and predictive metrics. 186 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
Truly help in decision-making
1 = strongly disagree, 5 = strongly agree,
Are regularly updated
Strongly disagree
Satised with current KRI set
Strongly agree
2.5
2.7
3.1
Key Risk Indicators
= average rating
Figure 7.4 Industry poll: usefulness of Key Risk Indicators
Advanced operational risk management workshop, 2024
Increase the
number
Start using Decrease
the number
Select
better
indicators
Discontinue
14%
8%
5%
73%
What are your plans/next steps for KRIs?
Figure 7.3 Industry poll: next steps for Key Risk Indicators
Advanced operational risk management workshop, 2024
This will, in turn, enhance important board and senior management conver￾sations centred around risk appetite, leading to better decisions.Key Risk Indicators 187
Practical workplace exercise
Reflect on the content of this chapter. Obtain a copy of the RCSA or a list of 
your firm’s top/key risks. Select three risks and practise creating three or 
four Key Risk Indicators for each risk, taking into account the attributes of 
good KRIs.
Obtain a copy of your firm’s KRI dashboard. Review it, considering the 
following questions:
1 Are the KRIs clearly linked to a key risk? Are they reported together with 
the risk?
2 Do they have the right attributes?
3 Are decisions taken when the KRI breaches the threshold?
4 Which KRIs are most useful? Make notes of the features that you 
particularly like.
5 Which ones are less useful and can be replaced? Note down potential 
‘better’ KRIs.
MAKE A DIFFERENCE (MAD) ACTION
Please outline the key learnings and note down one specific action you will 
take after reading this chapter, to enhance your existing practices relating 
to Key Risk Indicators.188 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
In summary, this chapter discussed the ultimate monitoring tool, KRIs, used 
for observing the behaviour of key risks and aiding in decision-making.
The next topic is dedicated to the final core tool of the operational risk tool￾box – scenario analysis.
Notes
1 Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2014) Review of the Principles for 
the Sound Management of Operational Risk, www.bis.org/publ/bcbs292.pdf
(archived at https://perma.cc/ECZ3-KB9N)
2 RiskSpotlight, www.riskspotlight.com (archived at https://perma.cc/7YCJ￾5NPH)
3 George, M L, Maxey, J, Rowlands, D and Price, M (2004) The Lean Six Sigma 
Pocket Toolbook: A quick reference guide to 100 tools for improving quality 
and speed, McGraw-HillScenario 08
analysis
What this chapter covers: This chapter explores Scenario Analysis, a tool 
that historically was used solely for risk measurement purposes; and advo￾cates for the strengthening of its use, given its benefits for risk management 
(Figure 8.1). The chapter provides an overview of the process by exploring 
three different scenario workshop case studies. The chapter outlines exam￾ples of good practices, lists common pitfalls and provides suggestions on 
how to avoid them. It also includes an industry benchmark containing the 
results of a live poll with industry practitioners.
FURTHER READING
● Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2009) Observed Range of 
Practice in Key Elements of Advanced Measurement Approaches
Why recommended: The document contains a valuable benchmark on 
the various aspects of scenario analysis, for those interested in exploring 
a wide range of practices.
● Nassim Nicholas Taleb (2008) The Black Swan: The impact of the highly 
improbable, Penguin Books
Why recommended: Simply the best book on the subject of the 
unpredictable.
Definition and purpose: for risk 
management and measurement
As mentioned in the Preface to this book, in my role as chair of various in￾dustry bodies I regularly lead operational risk meetings with practitioners. 
189Figure 8.1 Focus of Chapter 8: scenario analysis
Governance, roles and responsibilities
Establish governance and clear roles across the Three Lines for managing operational risk.
Risk assessments
Assess risk exposure in 
process, business or
function via RCSAs.
Supplement by evaluating 
risks emanating from
change activities via
ORAs. 
Identify exposure from 
extreme but plausible 
events. Mitigate through
risk transfer to insurance.
Scenario analysis
Monitor risk and control 
performance through
predictive indicators.
Act if indicators breach 
established appetite
threshold. 
Key Risk Indicators
Review actual risk prole against set appetite, apply active risk management to enable achievement of strategic objectives.
Operational risk
events
Record and report risk 
events, act to minimize 
future exposure.
Monitor trends against 
RCSAs and KRIs.
Risk appetite and risk capacity
Dene nature and types of risk accepted in pursuit of strategic objectives. Evaluate adequacy of capital resources.
Operational risk taxonomy
Embedding and maturity assessment
Training and education
Risk culture
Reporting and decision-making
190Scenario analysis 191
For these meetings, we typically select a topic and conduct a study of how it 
is being addressed by member firms. Risk and Control Self-Assessments 
(RCSAs) and Key Risk Indicators (KRIs) are among the most popular sub￾jects, and usually manage to create engagement with all participants.
In contrast, whenever scenario analysis (SA) comes up as the study topic, 
a third of the audience will invariably skip the meeting. The reasons given 
often include the fact that the tool is too quantitative, and that many opera￾tional risk practitioners – especially if working in a foreign branch of an 
international organization – are not closely involved in the process. The tool 
is usually administered by a select group of experts in the organization’s 
head office, where scenarios are run for capital calculation purposes; or by 
insurance industry practitioners who generally favour quantitative ap￾proaches.
In a similar way to operational risk losses, scenarios were historically 
required and used primarily for risk measurement purposes.
The tool was utilized with a single intent – to come up with numbers 
which could be put into a statistical model in order to produce a capital 
charge. The overall dataset for the model was reasonably solid. Many firms 
made significant progress in collecting internal loss events (usual, or ex￾pected losses), and additionally many subscribed to external loss data con￾sortia to supplement their internal data. However, at the end (or tail) of the 
impact scale – covering rare, severe or unexpected losses – the loss data was 
sparse, as over time the industry simply had not experienced that many ex￾treme operational events, as described in Figure 8.2.
That was where scenario analysis came in: a tool for generating synthetic 
data not yet observed, by imagining hypothetical events and estimating their 
corresponding impact.
Putting aside the need to satisfy a regulatory objective – deriving numbers 
for capital calculation purposes – the design and examination of scenarios is 
actually one of the most interesting, interactive and intellectually challeng￾ing activities in the operational risk toolset. It is also great fun. Scenario 
analysis is as useful for risk management as it is for risk measurement; it can 
be used for both, or for risk management only (also see Chapter 15 for ar￾ticulation of operational resilience scenarios).
The chapter aims to illustrate practical ways in which a firm can establish 
and maintain scenario analysis as part of its overall operational risk frame￾work.192 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
Figure 8.2 Loss distribution curve
Loss amount (severity)
Frequency of loss
Expected loss
Unexpected loss
Less severe
events, sufficient
historic data
Rare events with major
financial impact, with a lack
of historic data
Aim of scenario analysis
Scenario analysis is the continuation of risk assessment, as pointed out in 
Figure 8.3, with a specific focus on events at the more extreme end of the 
spectrum. Each scenario is also a deep dive into a particular theme, allowing 
focus on a detailed story line.
The two main differences between scenario analysis and RCSAs, de￾scribed in Chapter 5, are the time horizon and the magnitude of considered 
events. While RCSAs concentrate on the business cycle and business-as￾usual risks (high frequency, low severity), scenarios focus on rare but major 
occurrences (low frequency, high severity). The two tools are complemen￾tary in helping to build the overall risk profile of the firm. Some organiza￾tions have separate RCSA and SA processes; while others combine them by 
stretching the time horizon of the risk assessment matrix (discussed in 
Chapter 5) to a lengthy period, for example up to 100 years. The firm can 
adopt either approach, as long as they are fully integrated into the risk man￾agement framework and serve to enable the best decision-making.
Figure 8.3 OREs, RCSAs and scenario analysis horizon
Risk events 
(past)
Risk 
assessments 
(present,
near future)
Scenario
analysis
(remote
future)Scenario analysis 193
A note on terminology. In previous chapters, we discussed impact and 
likelihood:
● When working with scenarios, the terms impact and severity are often 
used interchangeably. The term severity has been historically applied by 
quants to model severity distribution – a statistical distribution of the 
amount of loss incurred in each risk event. But the word also handily 
emphasizes the extreme nature of scenarios and their position on the 
impact scale.
● Frequency reflects how often the event occurs – as opposed to how large 
it is – and is used when talking about modelling frequency distribution – 
a statistical distribution that displays how often (i.e. frequently) various 
outcomes occur.
Terms such as severity, frequency and probability are mathematical concepts 
that are common in scenario analysis; where often we are asked to estimate 
a 1 in X year event – an event which has both a defined impact (i.e. ‘sever￾ity’) and a ‘frequency’ that it will only occur once in every X years. But for 
most audiences it is advisable to use the softer, more intuitive terms and 
language, as described in the good practices section, and a simplified way of 
approaching these mathematical concepts.
The main aims of scenario analysis are to:
● consider the worst outcomes of risks materializing and evaluate their 
impact on the organization;
● examine the control environment and the firm’s preparedness for extreme 
events;
● create a consolidated, forward-looking view of the firm’s most material 
exposures by examining a portfolio of scenarios;
● enable the firm to develop a horizon-scanning capability for emerging 
risks, based on an understanding of the drivers of potential extreme, low￾probability events;
● raise awareness among senior management of the severe, but plausible 
types of events they could experience;
● use the outcome for operational risk management and reduction;
● review the adequacy of the firm’s insurance coverage and identify whether 
any specific form of insurance is needed; and
● calculate regulatory and economic capital, and support the internal 
capital adequacy assessment process.194 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
Scenario selection process
Examples of scenarios are significant events such as major cyber attacks or 
rogue trading, extreme weather leading to a flood in the data centre, sus￾tained regulatory non-compliance resulting in a supervisory intervention 
and fine, an employment discrimination lawsuit or a pandemic. While these 
are relatively common story lines, the exact scenarios depend on the nature 
of the firm, its business model and risk profile.
The strategic RCSA (at the top of the house, reflecting risks for the 
whole entity or a business line) is a good starting point for thinking about 
scenarios, as the firm has already used this tool to consider its key, strate￾gic level risks. Story lines can then be developed for each of the most sig￾nificant inherent risks, pushed to their extreme. Or several risks can be 
assumed to have simultaneously materialized. The firm’s taxonomy cate￾gories provide a helpful reminder of the whole range of themes to be ad￾dressed via scenarios.
External newspaper articles describing significant operational risk 
events – along with industry top operational risks surveys – can also be used 
to generate ideas. External events are incredibly powerful to counteract the 
inevitable challenge from participants that this could never happen to us 
and this could never cost that much. Keeping in touch with the industry and 
leveraging incidents also reflects very well on the organization.
Alternatively, it is possible to start from a blank page and just think the 
unthinkable, contemplating for example, a complete destruction of the data 
centre. The firm’s operational risk taxonomy provides a useful checkpoint of 
the completeness of coverage, ensuring that scenarios have been considered 
for the key categories of the taxonomy.
For the scenario to materialize, controls – sometimes several of them – 
are assumed to have failed. This is a challenging aspect for those partici￾pants who operate the daily controls and may have high confidence (and a 
vested interest) in their performance. But in extreme scenarios, business-as￾usual controls may turn out to be less effective simply because the environ￾ment prevents one or more component, such as people or systems, from 
functioning properly.
As described in Figure 8.4, scenarios usually bounce between business-as￾usual known experiences and lights-out, end-of-the-world thinking. The 
hard part is developing and cultivating an extreme but plausible mindset 
that the firm can actually work with as a basis for credible testing.Scenario analysis 195
Scenarios in practice: three case studies
Let’s review three case study examples of different scenario approaches, to 
articulate the range of practices used in the financial services industry, and 
highlight their strong points and areas for improvement.
Figure 8.4 Scenario analysis spectrum
Examples: Major data
breach or failure of the
critical provider of
outsourced services
Examples: Meteorite
falling on the data
centre; nuclear war
Examples: Payments 
transaction error;
late product 
launch
Extreme but plausible
Right mindset for 
scenarios
‘Lights out’
Too extreme 
Business-as-usual
Benign, not severe 
enough
CASE STUDY 8.1
A newly established financial markets equities and fixed income business 
examines a Rogue Trader scenario, which it sees as its most significant potential 
risk. This is done via a workshop with the following participants:
● head of Operational Risk (workshop facilitator);
● head of Trading (scenario owner), joined by a trader;
● chief risk officer;
● head of Market Risk;
● head of Operations;
● head of Finance;
● representatives from Compliance and middle office/product control.
The head of Operational Risk sets the scene and introduces the purpose of the 
workshop. Given the business line is newly established, the specific aim is to 
deliberate exactly how a dishonest trader might approach unauthorized trading 
and what strategies they may adopt. It is also to evaluate the firm’s control 
environment, and to test its resilience and ability to withstand a worst-case 
event. The outcomes will also feed into the firm’s capital adequacy process, 
though this objective is secondary.196 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
The trader describes three potential rogue trading strategies, which are 
reviewed in detail by the participants:
● deliberate skimming, including collusion between the trader and their 
counterparty (to share the profits);
● excessive intra-day position taking, a foolish bet whereby the trader believes 
they can make major profits during the day and establishes large positions 
which they subsequently liquidate by the end of the day; and
● concealing positions, whereby large positions are created by over-the￾counter (OTC) deals being intentionally not entered into the trading system.
The group scrutinizes key preventative and detective controls:
1 Trader supervision, relying on the head of Trading to be constantly aware of 
all traders’ dealing activities. It is assumed that this control fails and 
fraudulent activity is overlooked.
2 The confirmations process, administered independently by Operations. This is 
a primary detective control ensuring that each deal is matched with a 
corresponding counterparty’s trade. Upon close examination, a gap is 
identified. It transpires that the process involves several counterparties 
signing a short form confirmation which is received by the trader rather than 
an independent operations unit. An action to remediate the deficiency is taken 
jointly by the head of Trading and head of Operations; this should include 
re-evaluation of the relevant risks and controls set out in the RCSA.
During the workshop, the overall maximum amount of loss for each of the three 
scenarios is estimated by reviewing trading volumes, considering the nature and 
number of counterparties, and external limitations set by exchanges and 
correspondent banks.
Following the meeting, the head of Operations and head of Finance state that 
they found the study very useful, and ask Operational Risk to facilitate similar 
workshops within their respective areas. Their request is to replicate the thought 
process of the rogue trading workshop, examining possible ways in which 
unauthorized or fraudulent payments can be executed, and trying to find 
potential loopholes. These workshops are subsequently run for risk management
purposes only – it is known a priori that the financial outcomes will be lower than 
rogue trading and therefore are unlikely to be used for capital assessment 
purposes.Scenario analysis 197
What are the positive features of this process?
● An approach with a strong sense of purpose, which engages the 
participants and establishes scenario analysis as a valuable risk 
management tool that subsequently becomes in demand.
● An explicitly defined executive level scenario owner (the head of Trading).
● A value-added control review leading to remedial actions.
What can be improved?
● The estimation of the amount at risk, considering different elements 
that might contribute to a loss; including, for example, regulatory fines 
and remediation costs.
CASE STUDY 8.2
A medium-sized regulated subsidiary is subjected to a review of its internal 
capital adequacy assessment process (ICAAP), with unsatisfactory results. One 
of the regulator’s criticisms is around scenarios, which are deemed too benign 
and not sufficiently extreme. As part of the remediation, senior management 
agrees to start running multifactor scenario analysis. Despite the process being 
regulatory driven, the head of Operational Risk is aiming to derive maximum 
value out of the exercise.
The 10 most significant (top) inherent risks are extracted from the subsidiary’s 
risk and control self-assessment and noted down on Post-it Notes, one risk on 
each note. Five members of the senior executive team consisting of the CEO, 
head of Corporate Banking, head of Risk, chief operations officer and head of 
Finance are asked to each pick two Post-it Notes at random and to come up with 
a scenario where their two chosen risks materialize at the same time. This 
approach is useful because in real life an extreme unexpected loss often arises 
from a combination of unrelated events which, when combined, place intolerable 
stress on the control environment.
The head of Finance selects Poor change management process and 
Significant data breach and develops a plausible story line combining two 
failures:
● the subsidiary is planning to migrate customer accounts to a new system;
● the deadline is fast approaching and corners are cut in the testing phase;
● once the transition goes live, a major issue is highlighted, and migration has 
to be stopped and rolled back to the pre-transition stage;198 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
● an employee participating in the project, who has worked significant overtime 
over several months, is frustrated with this result and uses the opportunity to 
print out and anonymously leak confidential details of multiple client accounts;
● the leak is not discovered until later due to key personnel being occupied with 
the roll-back.
Other participants introduce their respective scenarios before the two-hour 
workshop concludes. The workshop generates lively debate among senior 
management participants, resulting in agreement about several areas that need 
further exploration and possible enhancement of processes and controls. 
Proposed story lines are subsequently supplemented by a study of relevant 
internal and external loss data, and a financial value for each scenario is 
estimated at follow-up meetings with a broader audience of subject matter 
experts (SMEs).
What are the positive features of this process?
● Multifactor scenarios, assuming that multiple risks crystallize at once.
● Senior stakeholder engagement.
● Several improvement projects emanating from the workshop.
What can be improved?
● A disciplined approach to the creation of a preparatory pack; this 
should contain supporting materials with internal and external loss data 
and other information to facilitate the assessment of scenario amounts.
CASE STUDY 8.3
An institution using a statistical model to calculate its operational risk capital is 
running a scenario analysis workshop. (Note: the firms in the earlier case studies 
were not using statistical models.) The workshop is led by the first line 
operational risk coordinator, with middle management from relevant business 
lines in attendance. The operational risk coordinator explains that scenarios 
need to be created due to key gaps in the relevant loss data. In the future, these 
scenarios could be decommissioned if they are replaced by real events, either 
internally or externally sourced.Scenario analysis 199
As preparatory work, operational risk has distributed a reading pack containing 
internal loss data, external loss data and an analysis of the risk and control 
environment relevant to the story line. A training session has also been offered 
to participants prior to the workshop, which some of the attendees have opted 
to take.
The scenario story line is a major regulatory breach. The group discuss the 
cause, the event itself and its consequences, using the already familiar bow-tie 
approach, as per Figure 8.5.
Causal factors include prior regulatory criticism of the lack of first line 
ownership, poor change management and rushed implementation of a new 
regulatory initiative. Assumptions are documented around a generally 
deteriorating business environment and a series of minor reportable breaches 
which preceded the main event. This combination of factors then culminates in a 
major regulatory non-compliance incident, whereby the firm fails to identify, 
understand and implement an important new regulatory directive before its 
effective date.
The consequences of the event include a fine and investigation, disciplinary 
actions against the firm and its managers, and a loss of client business due to 
damaged brand and reputation.
To assist scenario quantification, participants use the checklist in Table 8.1 
which contains different categories of possible impacts.
The overall loss amount is estimated as a sum of applicable sub-components. 
Participants are asked to consider three scenario frequencies – a 1 in 10-year 
event, 1 in 25 and 1 in 40 – and to come up with an estimated loss number in each 
category, giving rise to three points to model as the basis of a loss curve.
Figure 8.5 Cause–Event–Impact approach to scenario analysis
Cause Event Mitigating controls 
Mitigating
controls 
Impact
Assumption: 
multiple control 
failures
Scenario
story line
Assumption: 
multiple control 
failures200 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
Table 8.1 Scenario quantification
Loss 
category Description
Applicable? 
Yes/No Amount
Direct loss Impact of the loss on the P&L 
account
Fines and 
penalties
Regulatory, compliance, taxation or 
other penalties as a result of non￾compliance
Expenses Consultancy costs or other 
unbudgeted expenses
Legal liability Legal fees, legal judgement and/or 
settlement
Indirect costs Overtime paid to staff due to extra 
hours worked in resolving the loss, 
short-term rental of additional 
premises, travel and other indirect 
expenses
Risk of life Danger or loss of life of an employee
Reputational 
impact
Reduced sales and lost revenue due 
to brand damage
The workshop lasts for one and a half hours and concludes with no further 
actions.
What are the positive features of the workshop?
● Structured approach to generating pre-reading materials and providing 
training.
● Consistent format for estimating the amount, resulting in well-reasoned 
evaluations.
● First line operational risk in the lead.
What can be improved?
● The value proposition, use of a workshop for risk management purposes, 
ownership and agreement of actions, senior stakeholder engagement.Scenario analysis 201
Life cycle: from pre-reading 
packs to mitigating bias
The scenario process life cycle is described as:
● Define: A theme or topic for a scenario and a detailed story line are 
developed.
● Prepare: Relevant data is researched and assembled into a pre-reading 
pack.
● Explore and Assess: A workshop is run with SMEs to discuss the scenario 
and arrive at the estimated numbers.
● Extract Learnings and Actions: Identified control gaps and actions are 
noted down, with owners and target dates.
● Validate: Scenario outcomes are scrutinized by relevant SMEs and 
governance committees.
Define
As mentioned above, the most significant inherent risks from RCSAs can be 
a good starting point to generate scenario ideas. It is good practice to exam￾ine simultaneous multiple failures, for example, by combining two to three 
top risks from the RCSAs, for example Significant system failure and Internal 
fraud. In the event that the firm is anticipating an acquisition or expansion 
into a new market, this kind of strategic initiative also needs to be taken into 
consideration.
When defining story lines, it is important to ensure that scenarios are 
forward looking and correspond to the organization’s strategy. Scenarios 
can examine plausible events that may crystallize as a result of a chosen 
strategic direction, thus aiding good decision-making.
Scenarios can be established at multiple levels of the organization, including 
at group-wide and individual business or entity level. The selection process 
involves deciding on what constitutes a key risk which would benefit from 
further exploration. There may be a need to run the same scenario – for 202 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
example Internal fraud – several times to ensure all business units are in￾cluded. Systemic risks impacting any number of control processes operating 
in business units also need to be considered.
It is good practice to agree an executive sponsor at the outset, a senior 
executive who owns and is accountable for the content and the story 
line. The owner plays a key role in the whole life cycle, from defining the 
story line to providing sign-off as part of the later validation stage, and 
finally ensuring any follow-up actions are actually completed.
Prepare
Pre-reading packs help to structure the workshops. Typically, the opera￾tional risk team researches, prepares and analyses relevant materials. 
These will often include internal losses, a selection of pertinent external 
events experienced by peer firms, and RCSA data reflecting the firm’s risk 
and control environment, as well as the results of compliance monitoring 
and internal audit reviews. Applicable operational and financial data, con￾taining transaction volumes, values and profitability, help to make the dis￾cussion more factual and to arrive at accurate loss estimates. It is useful to 
outline the inherent risk exposure from the RCSAs up-front; as well as 
noting if the scenario involves breaches of the firm’s appetite. A consistent 
and uniform approach to the preparatory packs helps to achieve reliable 
outcomes.
Generally, the more time spent in preparation, the shorter the required 
length of the workshop. Foundational activity may involve working with 
the scenario owner and relevant business experts to define a story line. The 
workshop can then be used, in effect, as a validation activity.
Alternatively, a shorter preparation time can result in a longer work￾shop where the story line itself is debated and developed in detail. This 
can be done using, for example, a technique such as a Bayesian tree sce￾nario, commonly used in the insurance industry. In simple terms, this ap￾proach allows a mapping of the scenario journey by workshop participants 
all working together. This might involve a starting point: for example, the 
new normal of working from home which has emanated from the Covid￾19 pandemic. The story line is then progressively developed, exploring 
potential for a data loss, cyber attack and internal fraud. The strength of 
this approach is its ability to explore the interconnectivity between vari￾ous different causes.Scenario analysis 203
Explore and assess
The Basel Committee notes four possible approaches to scenario analysis, 
namely workshops, individual interviews, questionnaires and voting.1
 In 
the 2020 poll I ran with industry experts, 100 per cent of respondents 
were using workshops: no other mechanism was deemed nearly as effec￾tive, though the duration of workshops differed sharply, as illustrated in 
Table 8.2.
As part of the workshop, an estimation should be made as to the fre￾quency and severity of the losses occurring in different timelines; usually 
in normal situations as well as worst or stressed cases. The quantification 
is then completed by business experts based on their subjective judge￾ment. This process involves a risk of partiality or unfairness (bias) in the 
assessment; driven by common bias factors such as overconfidence, moti￾vational bias, availability or anchoring. Consequently the firm needs to 
have measures in place to address those biases, for example as described 
in Table 8.3.
Based on the 2020 industry study mentioned earlier, only 50 per cent of 
respondents explicitly addressed biases in their scenario analysis process.
Extract learnings and actions
This is a critical part of SA, which in practice is underemphasized or entirely 
overlooked. The workshops need to answer both questions: how much?
(capital calculation, or a risk measurement question) and so what? (a risk 
Table 8.2 Industry study: scenario workshop duration
Workshop duration % respondents
1 hour 30
1.5–2 hours 20
3–4 hours 30
Half-day or longer 20204 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
Table 8.3 Mitigating bias
Bias Explanation Mitigation
Overconfidence Attendees overestimate 
the robustness of 
controls
Pre-reading pack containing factual 
data on past internal events
Stress testing controls: exploring 
what will make them fail
Motivational Participant is conflicted/
interested in influencing 
the outcome of the 
workshop (to, for 
example, reduce the 
estimated loss amount)
Consistent and robust facilitation 
to manage conflicting interests
Use of anonymous voting polls or 
obtaining estimated numbers 
beforehand
Challenge and validation by SMEs
Availability Increased focus on 
recent events as they 
can be easily recalled
Pre-reading pack containing factual 
external event data
Encouragement to think about 
possible events that have not yet 
occurred
Anchoring Different starting points 
(anchors) will yield 
different results
Use of neutral open questions
Avoidance of leading questions 
containing a number (anchor)
Training for participants to explain 
different terms; and what should 
or should not be included into 
estimates
Request to submit quantifications 
ahead of the workshop
Use of ranges instead of specific 
values
management question). A key aim of scenario analysis is to use the outcomes 
for risk reduction. Risk mitigating measures need to be considered when:
● a specific control weakness is identified as a result of the exercise; or
● assessment reveals that insurance cover is insufficient or inadequate; or
● the measurement results of the analysis exceed a certain threshold level, 
bringing it outside the firm’s appetite (also see Chapter 9, Operational 
risk appetite). This may happen when a specific scenario highlights 
significant risk exposure and consequences that are deemed unacceptable 
for the organization.Scenario analysis 205
The actions need to contain a target date and an owner, and the Operational 
Risk department usually monitors progress until they have been fully imple￾mented.
At times, the purchase of insurance is a standalone activity which is not 
coordinated with the firm’s risk management efforts. Evaluating the degree 
and scope of insurance coverage is a great opportunity for operational risk 
to work closely with the department responsible for procuring the firm’s 
insurance: for example, assessing proposals obtained in the market, consid￾ering the types of cover offered and analysing whether they are appropriate. 
This is the opportunity to consider gaps in cover as well as any ambiguity 
on whether a particular loss is or is not included in the policy. Insurance 
needs to be both commensurate with identified exposure and in sync with 
the story lines examined in the workshops. Furthermore, given the nature of 
the insurance market, both corporate insurance buying functions and exter￾nal brokers can be good sources of credible but extreme scenario suggestions.
Finally, the scenario workshop can also trigger a revision of RCSAs, to 
sense check the inherent risk assessment; as well as amendments to/intro￾ductions of new Key Risk Indicators, discussed in Chapter 7.
Validate
Based on the Basel Committee study, four challenge functions are used to 
maintain the integrity of scenario analysis: review by a risk control function 
(93 per cent); review by internal/external audit (83 per cent); comparisons 
by experienced or expert staff (76 per cent); and comparisons with other 
data elements (62 per cent).2
The second line Operational Risk department is usually the first point of 
validation. To enable this to occur, it is critical that the team does not con￾tribute to the quantification, to avoid marking its own homework.
Scenarios can be assessed for consistency of outcomes, ensuring that:
● the scenario is correctly classified using the firm’s usual operational risk 
taxonomy;
● financial impact is not lower than that experienced from internal loss 
events;
● if different frequencies are used, the financial impact with the lower 
frequency is smaller than the higher-frequency event;
● story lines and related assumptions are comparable with related external 
events;206 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
● there is consistency in the documentation and rationale around the 
outcomes, to ensure ‘a clearly defined and repeatable process’.3
Further evaluation is usually undertaken by a wider group of stakeholders, 
either at the risk committee or the capital and stress testing committee; or by 
the appropriate governance committee responsible for the operational risk 
capital calculation.
How are the reviewers determining whether the story lines are extreme 
enough and the amounts plausible?
The construct and extremity of scenarios is in part a cultural matter, re￾flecting how cautious and well capitalized the firm aspires to be. The ap￾proach is often tested in practice at times of crisis, resulting in some 
conservative firms having sufficient reserves while others find themselves 
operating to the wire and perhaps in need of external help. During the early 
stages of the Covid-19 pandemic, Nassim Taleb relayed thoughts on this 
topic when discussing the concept of bail-out, stipulating that bail-out (of 
banks in particular) is encouraging the wrong behaviour, favouring those 
firms that do not have an adequate buffer, and pointing out that ‘not having 
a buffer is irresponsible’.4
Therefore, in practice, scenario validation can be a tenuous activity. By 
definition, scenarios are made-up events with imaginary story lines that 
have been allocated a potential loss amount by workshop participants. The 
cultural element in firms often manifests itself in haggling over the numbers. 
One of three things can happen: reduce the estimate, increase the estimate 
or enhance controls.
Call to reduce the estimate
Reviewers will state that estimated amount is abnormally high, resulting 
in a greater than expected capital requirement; workshop participants 
must go back and re-evaluate the amount, ideally bringing it lower. This 
eventuality can be due to incorrect workshop attendees, poor methodol￾ogy or excessive confidence in the ability of the control regime to respond 
to the event. However in many cases there is an additional cultural aspect: 
a refusal to tolerate any buffer that increases the cost of running the busi￾ness (this links back to motivational bias). This attitude also creates a 
danger of losing the operational value of the risk management points 
raised by the scenario, simply due to over-consideration of the costs of the 
final number.Scenario analysis 207
Call to increase the estimate
The estimated amount can also be perceived as too low, with a similar re￾quest to re-work it. This, again, can occur because of procedural elements, 
but in most senses is a positive sign: the firm would rather be too cautious 
than overly optimistic. This happens far more rarely and is a credit to any 
firm whose leaders raise this kind of challenge.
Call to enhance controls
The scenario amount is assessed as unacceptably high; however, rather than 
changing the number, there is a request to improve the control environment, 
so that if the scenario materializes, the impact is reduced. Participants walk 
away from the process committing to develop, agree and implement mitigat￾ing actions. This is the preferred outcome, which not only demonstrates the 
use test but also does not devalue the efforts of workshop participants and 
does not over-ride their judgement. A sign of risk maturity is to learn from 
the expertise in the room but as a consequence of the scenario analysis to 
seek to reduce its impact or likelihood.
Periodic updates
Many organizations factor trigger-based scenario updates into their policies. 
In practice, however, where scenarios are run mainly for risk measurement 
purposes, they are more usually updated annually, to coincide with the up￾date of the ICAAP. Ideally, scenarios are management’s first choice when it 
comes to exploring or anticipating the impact of major changes or disrup￾tions to the firm’s business. These can include:
● changes in business model, including a new line of business, service or 
geography, acquisition, or divestiture;
● material changes in the external environment, be it new regulations, a 
material external loss event, or wider social or political behaviour;
● a large unexpected internal loss or significant deterioration in the internal 
control environment.
The outbreaks of avian flu in 2003 and Covid-19 during 2020 prompted 
many organizations to run a pandemic scenario, exploring the readiness of the 
firm and considering actions (risk management) as well as evaluating their 
potential impact on the capital position (risk measurement). Similarly, large 208 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
industry rogue trading events served as a trigger for scenario revision. If a 
scenario owner is engaged and has enjoyed a good experience with the work￾shop, they will be more inclined to rely on the tool as a first point of call in the 
event of a major shift in the day-to-day environment – as a way to explore the 
consequences of the event. This can be one of the clearest measures of the suc￾cess of the tool: to have the owners want to use the SA process.
Other softer factors are also recognized as a foundation for good deci￾sion-making; including situational awareness, which refers to perceptions 
about the wider environment and a good comprehension of the meaning 
and projection of the future state. Indeed, what transpired during Covid-19 
is that while most firms had the scenario analysis tool at their disposal, it 
was those firms with a situational awareness mindset who promptly applied 
it in practice and showed maximum responsiveness.
Emerging risks
Scenario analysis plays a key role in the management of emerging risks. The 
insurance industry is more advanced in this area compared to banking and 
asset management, as insurers typically seek to understand as much as pos￾sible about the emerging risks potentially impacting their portfolios. These 
emerging risks have the characteristic of being less familiar than the exist￾ing risk portfolio. They are not fully understood but still perceived to be 
potentially significant. As an example, the International Risk Governance 
Council (IRGC) defines an emerging risk as ‘a risk that is new, or a familiar 
risk in a new or unfamiliar context or under new context conditions (re￾emerging)’.5
In the operational risk context, emerging risk can be defined as a new or 
increasing operational risk which has the potential to become a top risk.
In turn, top risks are those inherent risks which, if not well controlled, 
will result in the most significant impact to the firm.
This is an interesting subject in its own right, and not just for insurers. 
Public sector bodies have a considerable interest in emerging risks, while a 
number of think tanks and academics have produced research and guidance Scenario analysis 209
on the topic. For the financial services sector, regulators have continually 
urged organizations to adopt a forward-looking approach. The BIS’s 
Corporate Governance Principles for Banks emphasize the need for ongoing 
‘identification of new or emerging risks’;6
 while the Principles for the Sound 
Management of Operational Risk insist that Operational risk reporting 
should include ‘a discussion and assessment of key and emerging risks’;7
 and 
the Risk Data Aggregation Principles underscore the focus on ‘risk expo￾sures, concentrations and emerging risks’.8
Against this background, it is important that organizations have a mean￾ingful process in place from horizon scanning for emerging themes to risk 
quantification via the use of scenario analysis. The operational Risk depart￾ment can implement a structured approach of monitoring internal and ex￾ternal sources in order to develop a watchlist of emerging risks. This can be 
further discussed at the Operational Risk or other relevant governance 
committee, and candidate risks can subsequently be selected for further 
scenario analysis. Depending on the outcomes of examination and quanti￾fication via scenario workshops, significant candidate risks could be pro￾moted to top risks, with subsequent actions, a statement of appetite, and 
enhanced monitoring. An example of this kind of process is presented in 
Figure 8.6.
To expand on the process of monitoring internal and external sources, in 
other words risk horizon scanning. This is different to compliance horizon 
scanning which usually focuses on the presentation of a regulatory radar of 
new and forthcoming directives applicable to the firm. Instead, risk horizon 
scanning involves:
● A scan of major external operational risk losses or regulatory fines 
incurred by peers;
● A review of external sources that publish top and emerging risks;
● A scan of characteristics and changes in the firm’s external operating 
environment;
● An examination of the firm’s internal environment, to identify potential 
emerging risks emanating from within the firm, such as change fatigue;
● Employee surveys to gather internal intelligence on emerging risks, 
considering questions along the lines of, perhaps, ‘risks you are aware of 
that are not being actively mitigated’.
Emerging risk horizon scanning maturity varies significantly among organi￾zations, as presented in Figure 8.7. Some firms are inwardly focused and do 210 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
not dedicate risk resources to reviewing the environment for emerging risks. 
Others perform ad hoc analysis, as and when a prominent industry event 
materializes. In turn, the mature stage of this practice involves continual 
scanning of external and internal sources, followed by further examination 
and quantification of identified risks via scenario analysis. In my consul￾tancy experience, most firms lack a robust forward-looking process in this 
area, and would benefit significantly from putting more emphasis on emerg￾ing risks. In addition, this process provides an excellent opportunity to be￾come a trusted board advisor.
Figure 8.6 Emerging risk management cycle
Risk
‘watchlist’
Scan of external sources
Risk
committee
Scan of internal sources
Scenario
analysis Top risk
EXTERNAL SOURCES INTERNAL SOURCES
Figure 8.7 Emerging risk horizon scanning maturity
NON-EXISTENT
• No horizon scanning for 
 emerging risks
MATURE
• Resource(s) allocated to 
 horizon scanning
• Continuous process
• Tangible action – scenario 
 analysis is used for 
 quantication of select 
 emerging risk 
EARLY STAGES
• Ad hoc analysis of industry
 events
• Notication of new 
 events/threats for
 information purposes, not 
 followed by tangible actionScenario analysis 211
Roles and responsibilities
The second line operational risk team sets the tone and determines whether 
the SA exercise will be used for measurement and regulatory compliance 
purposes only, or whether it will have a true value proposition. It goes with￾out saying that key building blocks need to be in place. These include robust 
policy and guidance for participants; close oversight, ensuring that story 
lines are clearly defined with sufficient level of detail; the right stakeholders 
being involved; a strong validation and challenge process; and, last but not 
least, a trigger-based refresh process. It is far more difficult, and yet at the 
same time essential, to invest time and effort in turning the scenario exercise 
into a tool that stakeholders are truly keen to use; because of its clear ben￾efits to them. The actions and behaviours of the second line, whether con￾sciously or subconsciously, define the brand and reputation of scenario 
analysis. How will it be seen? Is it ‘this needs to be done for capital purposes; 
but apart from that it’s not very useful’? Or is it ‘a valuable exploratory 
exercise; our first point of call when considering significant internal and 
external changes which also, by the way, generates inputs into the capital 
calculation’?
First line business units and support functions own and operate the con￾trols and therefore, the scenario process examines their exposure to extreme 
risks. They are responsible for owning the story lines, evaluating the envi￾ronment, identifying and agreeing actions and following them up until reso￾lution.
Below is an example checklist for a first line risk coordinator.
FIRST LINE RISK COORDINATOR CHECKLIST: 
SCENARIO ANALYSIS
✓ Staff are aware of the SA tool and its benefits.
✓ There is a nominated senior executive, the scenario owner, for each 
scenario owned by the department.
✓ Material change in the environment triggers a consideration of scenario 
refresh or a need for a new one.
✓ Actions emanating from the SA are followed up until resolution.
✓ Post-SA, other core tools, including RCSAs, KRIs, OREs and where 
separately used, emerging risks, are considered for revision.212 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
Common challenges and good practices
Common challenges
The following challenges may be encountered when dealing with scenario 
analysis.
Challenges of the operational risk discipline
Within the operational risk discipline, historically there existed a disconnect 
between the quantitative community of modellers who designed statistical 
models for the capital calculation, and generalists who focused more on the 
qualitative aspects of embeddedness, helping to implement good practices 
within, for example, the Human Resources or IT departments. Modellers 
and generalists not working together often led to risk measurement and 
management not being in sync. This is a very specific challenge to opera￾tional risk. In contrast, credit and market risk disciplines are more homoge￾neously quantitative – they do not have to work hand-in-hand with, say, 
Human Resources. On the other side, the compliance function – which is 
perhaps akin to operational risk in that it works with all the different units 
across the firm – does not typically design or run its own statistical models. 
It is crucial for both communities to work together. The generalists who 
have a natural curiosity about the quantitative aspects and take the time to 
understand the model assumptions and limitations often play a key role in 
bridging the gap between the quants and the business.
Participants dismissive of the story line
Workshop participants are dismissive of the scenario, taking the viewpoint 
that this can never happen to us. This is a common challenge from attendees 
who operate controls and understandably take pride in their robustness. 
Participants need to be pushed to think outside their comfort zone, by being 
educated and informed about the purpose of the SA process. It should be 
emphasized that it is not a test of the BAU control environment but a 
stressed, extreme environment enabling the firm to build shock-proof con￾trols; and bringing to the fore relevant case studies of external events which 
prompted failures.
Terms hard to understand
Attendees struggle to understand the notion of frequency, questioning what 
exactly do the statements 1 in 40 years or 1 in 100 years actually mean. Scenario analysis 213
Operational risk teams need to provide an explanation, comparing it more 
intuitively to, for example, a once in a career event or a once in a lifetime 
event. Some practitioners run workshops using softer terminology, keeping 
the probability numbers and concept in the background. One approach that 
should definitely be avoided is to invite attendees to assess the 95th percen￾tile loss amount, or other similar statistical measures; as these are mathe￾matical concepts which may take considerable time to explain. (Note: 
another common misunderstanding is that a 1 in 40 year event will not 
occur with the prescribed impact for the next 40 years; while it could hap￾pen tomorrow!)
Difficulty in arriving at a number
From a measurement viewpoint, scenario analysis relies heavily on expert 
judgement to produce a rather extreme number. It is important to recognize 
that participants from business and support functions, as knowledgeable as 
they are in their areas, are not really experts in predicting the future, and 
consequently may be only partially effective in providing loss estimates. It 
often helps to allow people to express ranges, even for a single event or 
component of it.
Lack of action
A rather bureaucratic exercise is run and quickly forgotten. After the num￾bers are obtained, no actions emanate from the workshop and its value 
rapidly diminishes. It is essential to acknowledge the value of SME inputs; 
to share outcomes with senior management; to keep participants informed 
on uses of the output, and to highlight real-life internal and external events 
when they happen (helping to demonstrate the reality of the scenarios); as 
well as to ensure that the SA exercise includes a thorough control examina￾tion. All these features should be a mandatory part of the process.
Overall number of scenarios
The number of scenarios varies significantly from firm to firm. Similar to 
KRIs, some organizations design and run way too many scenarios, running 
to hundreds, purely for risk measurement purposes. While there is no right 
target number and it is often determined by the firm’s risk taxonomy and 
footprint, a range of around 15–30 scenarios with solid risk management
outcomes is appropriate. This comes with a caveat, however, of what is 
meant by scenario and what value is derived from the process. For 214 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
management purposes, cyber war games, crisis management and incident 
response table-top exercises are also labelled as scenarios by some organiza￾tions, even though they do not generate a capital number. Some firms dif￾ferentiate ‘big S’ Scenarios used for capital calculation purposes and ‘small 
s’ scenarios run to identify and remedy control weaknesses.
Models drive the exercise
Sometimes organizations applying less quantitative, formula-based approaches 
to capital calculation are not driven and constrained by the statistical model 
and consequently do better with scenario analysis from the value proposition 
point of view. This, however, does not have to be the case; business benefits 
need to come first regardless of the approach, with regulatory compliance a 
secondary, not primary outcome.
Good practices
Ensuring value proposition
The secret of success with scenario analysis is in ensuring it has a clear value 
proposition for the attendees and does not become an operational risk num￾ber-generating exercise. When running workshops, it is important to con￾sider what benefits participants will derive from the meeting. A clear purpose 
ensures that the scenario process is integrated with business decisions. The 
purpose can be, for example, to examine preparedness for a particular event 
that is relevant to the business owner and keeps them awake at night; to as￾sess the impact of a major change, including a new product, service or geog￾raphy, or wider social and political shifts. Scenarios are there to help first 
line business units and support functions to examine their own exposure to 
extreme risks, and to mitigate them so eventually they are able to meet their 
own objectives.
Workshop facilitation
Good workshop facilitation, discussed in Chapter 5, is even more critical for 
scenarios. The Basel Committee notes the need for ‘qualified and experi￾enced facilitators with consistency in the facilitation process’.9
 This is im￾portant for the brand and value proposition of the exercise as well as for 
achieving reliable outcomes. Facilitation can include the use of aids such as 
live polls which can help mitigate, for example, motivational bias by Scenario analysis 215
requesting participants to anonymously vote on a scenario estimate. Expert 
guest speakers, YouTube clips and functional presentations also make the 
workshop more engaging for the attendees.
Stress testing controls
It is good practice to challenge each control in turn, finding ever more ex￾treme situations in which a control may fail. This can be thought of as stress 
testing each control. In real-life situations one or more controls fail to oper￾ate due to what are often unforeseen circumstances, thus proving that the 
improbable is actually more probable in practice than in theory.
Rigour and documentation
Regulatory focus is often on the rigour of the process used to obtain inputs 
into any capital model. That process needs to be systematic and to generate 
good-quality documentation. The output pack needs to contain the scenario 
description and rationale for its selection, assumptions, a chronology of 
events, and robust loss estimates with justification of the amounts; as well as 
any other scenarios considered and discounted. Scenarios are rarely loaded 
into the operational risk system/software. Instead, the evidence is commonly 
kept in an Excel or Word format. Maintaining the library to a good stand￾ard ensures accessibility and evidenced decision-making. Actions emanating 
from the workshops can be uploaded into an action module, to enable 
tracking of progress until full resolution.
Measures of success
One of the measures of success is the number of actions that emanate from 
scenario workshops; even better if they lead to monetary investments in 
improving the control environment. This outcome is, unfortunately, under￾used. The Basel Committee notes that ‘overall, few banks develop action 
plans from their scenario analyses’.10
Industry benchmark
Best Practice Operational Risk Forum members participated in a live poll to 
examine the use of scenario analysis in operational risk management. 
Overall, this meeting revealed a positive story. The majority of participants 
considered that the added value of this core tool has been gradually 216 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
increasing as firms have developed better practices, with 38 per cent of re￾spondents noting significant improvement, as shown in Figure 8.8.
Firms were selective with their scenarios, with the majority (78 per cent) 
having fewer than 20 scenarios and the rest between 20 and 30. These 
numbers have remained largely consistent over the years, usually ranging 
between 10 and 40, with organizations generally planning to reduce the 
number of scenarios if it exceeded 30 (Figure 8.9).
Limiting the number of scenarios (as compared to RCSAs, for example) 
enables firms to do a better job of developing meaningful story lines, pro￾ducing preparatory information packs and leading effective workshops with 
participants. Good practices in this area included:
● Senior management engagement, and ownership from the executive 
sponsor. The majority of organizations agreed that senior management 
and the board took great interest in scenario outcomes.
● A thorough review of detailed story lines by workshop participants; at 
times this prompted further reflection and amendment to the narrative, to 
address a more urgent and pertinent topic more in the forefront of 
business participants’ minds.
Best Practice Operational Risk Forum, 2023
Figure 8.8 Industry poll: scenario analysis value-add
Remained the
same
Somewhat
improved
Somewhat
deteriorated
Has
signicantly
improved
38% 38%
12% 12%
Scenario analysis value-addScenario analysis 217
Despite the historic use of scenario assessment for risk measurement pur￾poses only, gone are the days of pure number generation. The industry seems 
to have had success tackling this challenge, with the majority of firms using 
the tool for both risk management and risk measurement purposes. However, 
actionability remained a challenge, and many firms ran workshops which 
did not lead to any further follow-up actions. This needs to remain an area 
of continued focus in the future.
Practical workplace exercise
Obtain a copy of the firm’s set of scenarios from the scenario library. Review 
it, considering the following questions:
1 What is the firm’s approach to scenario analysis? Is it driven by capital 
considerations and run primarily for risk measurement purposes, or risk 
management, or both?
2 Are scenarios clearly defined? Is the story line documented and does the 
documentation contain assumptions, a clearly described workshop 
rationale and justification of the resulting loss amount?
3 What actions have been considered following the workshop? Did the 
scenarios covered include an examination of the control environment 
and did any improvements result from the process?
Best Practice Operational Risk Forum, 2023
Figure 8.9 Industry poll: number of scenarios considered
Less than
20
Less than
50
Less than
100
Over 100
22%
78%
How many scenarios are considered?218 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
MAKE A DIFFERENCE (MAD) ACTION
Outline the key learnings and note down one specific action you will take 
after reading this chapter, to enhance your existing practices relating to 
scenario analysis.
4 Is there a comparison of scenarios with the firm’s insurance coverage?
5 What works well? Outline the strength of the process.
6 What could be improved? Note down potential areas of enhancement.
In summary, this chapter discussed scenario analysis, an instrument that 
utilizes proactive risk assessment thinking and applies it to extreme but 
plausible circumstances.
Now that all the core tools of the operational risk toolbox have been exam￾ined, the next chapter considers mechanisms that converges the core ele￾ments, commencing with the operational risk appetite.
Notes
1 Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2009) Observed Range of Practice in 
Key Elements of Advanced Measurement Approaches, www.bis.org/publ/
bcbs160b.pdf (archived at https://perma.cc/5FBU-QM9S)
2 Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2009) Observed Range of Practice in 
Key Elements of Advanced Measurement Approaches, www.bis.org/publ/
bcbs160b.pdf (archived at https://perma.cc/5FBU-QM9S)Scenario analysis 219
3 Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2009) Observed Range of Practice 
in Key Elements of Advanced Measurement Approaches, www.bis.org/publ/
bcbs160b.pdf (archived at https://perma.cc/5FBU-QM9S)
4 Bloomberg (2020) Interview with Nassim Nicholas Taleb, www.bloomberg.com/
news/videos/2020-03-31/nassim-taleb-says-white-swan-coronavirus-pandemic￾was-preventable-video (archived at https://perma.cc/F6PJ-WXWH)
5 The International Risk Governance Council (IRGC) IRGC Guidelines for 
Emerging Risk Governance (2015), irgc.org/risk-governance/emerging-risk/ 
a-protocol-for-dealing-with-emerging-risks/ (archived at https://perma.cc/
RCX9-CNGV)
6 Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2015) Corporate governance 
principles for banks, www.bis.org/bcbs/publ/d328.pdf (archived at https://
perma.cc/G325-V5BG)
7 Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2021) Revisions to the Principles for 
the Sound Management of Operational Risk, www.bis.org/bcbs/publ/d515.pdf
(archived at https://perma.cc/FX66-VY83)
8 Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2013) Principles for effective risk 
data aggregation and risk reporting, www.bis.org/publ/bcbs239.pdf (archived 
at https://perma.cc/46HX-HYW8)
9 Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2011) Operational Risk: 
Supervisory guidelines for the advanced measurement approaches, www.bis.
org/publ/bcbs196.pdf (archived at https://perma.cc/66QD-MLSQ)
10 Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2014) Review of the Principles for 
the Sound Management of Operational Risk, www.bis.org/publ/bcbs292.pdf 
(archived at https://perma.cc/H6CY-SUT5)Operational risk 09
appetite
What this chapter covers: The chapter discusses Operational Risk Appetite, 
a topic which continues to pose challenges for firms due to its essentially 
qualitative nature (Figure 9.1). The chapter considers two divergent opin￾ions, examining whether operational risk is consciously taken for reward or 
is merely mitigated downwards. It then proceeds to practical implementa￾tion, proposing a three-stage process to developing a risk appetite that is 
meaningful and used for decision-making. It goes on to present an approach 
for the expression of risk appetite using particular tools, and provides an 
assessment scale to help analyse the maturity of the approach. The chapter 
also provides examples and contains an industry benchmark.
FURTHER READING
● Financial Stability Board (2013) Principles for an Effective Risk Appetite 
Framework
Why recommended: Although slightly dated, this is an essential guide 
covering the risk appetite framework and definitions of capacity, 
tolerance and profile.
Risk reward equation and its application 
to operational risk
Financial services firms are in the business of taking risk and have been 
doing so for hundreds of years. When it comes to the neighbouring disci￾plines of credit and market risk, the risk–reward equation is well under￾stood: conservative lending is less profitable while loans to riskier sectors 
220Figure 9.1 Focus of Chapter 9: operational risk appetite
Governance, roles and responsibilities
Establish governance and clear roles across the Three Lines for managing operational risk.
Risk assessments
Assess risk exposure in 
process, business or 
function via RCSAs.
Supplement by
evaluating risks
emanating from change
activities via 
ORAs. 
Identify exposure from 
extreme but plausible 
events. Mitigate through
risk transfer to insurance.
Scenario analysis
Monitor risk and control 
performance through 
predictive indicators.
Act if indicators breach 
established appetite 
threshold. 
Key Risk Indicators
Reporting and decision-making
Review actual risk prole against set appetite, apply active risk management to enable achievement of strategic objectives.
Operational risk
events
Record and report risk 
events, act to minimize 
future exposure. 
Monitor trends against 
RCSAs and KRIs.
Risk appetite and risk capacity
Dene nature and types of risk accepted in pursuit of strategic objectives. Evaluate adequacy of capital resources.
Operational risk taxonomy
Embedding and maturity assessment
Training and education
Risk culture
221222 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
attract higher interest rates and generate better returns. This is described in 
Figure 9.2.
The same formula becomes less obvious when applied to operational 
risk. There are two main schools of thought on this subject.
The first one differentiates operational risk from credit and market risks, 
using the word contrary in explaining its nature.
Contrary to credit and market risk, operational risk:
● has no material upside in terms of return or income generation;
● cannot be capped; and therefore
● must be mitigated downwards.
This view is somewhat echoed by the European Banking Authority, who 
wrote that operational risk is by nature ‘unavoidable and it is neither will￾ingly incurred nor is revenue driven. Moreover, it is not diversifiable and 
thus it cannot be fully eliminated.’1
This attitude of risk mitigation can be illustrated by examining sub-cate￾gory 4 of the Basel operational risk taxonomy clients, products and business 
practices:
● Events in this contentious sub-category include unlicensed activity, 
breaches of regulation, inappropriate sales practices and unsuitable 
products.
● There is no upside in consciously choosing to contravene the regulation 
or offer ill-designed products. In fact, it is unethical and unlawful.
● The risk will inevitably materialize into incidents as a result of human 
errors, poor training or wilful misconduct. It is not possible to put a hard 
limit on the level of risk in terms of the number and value of losses as they 
cannot be completely eradicated – unless the firm chooses to exit the 
business altogether.
Figure 9.2 Risk–reward relationship
Takes risk
Receives return
Financial services
rm
Low
Low
High
High
Credit risk
Market riskOperational risk appetite 223
● Consequently, organizations revert to a risk reduction approach, 
implementing policies, providing training and enhancing detective 
mechanisms for early identification of non-compliance.
There is, however, a second viewpoint that uses the word similar instead of 
contrary.
In a similar way to credit and market risk:
● operational risk has to be looked at on a risk–reward basis;
● the reward aspect may include revenue from engaging in specific activities 
or cost reductions; and therefore
● the right level of risk is consciously taken in pursuit of strategic objectives.
When running training courses, I usually ask the audience to come up with 
examples where operational risk is taken for return. This commonly proves 
to be less familiar territory for participants, and it is typically more diffi￾cult for them to contemplate the ‘risk–reward’ concept compared to ‘risk 
mitigation’.
CASE STUDY 9.1
A client of an investment bank makes a request to trade a new product. 
To satisfy this demand, the bank develops a value proposition and carries out an 
operational risk assessment (ORA). While credit and market risks are within the 
firm’s appetite, product booking and accounting cannot be accommodated 
systematically and will need to be processed via manual workarounds. The firm 
acknowledges that the level of operational risk is high; but so is the reward 
being offered by the client. The proposal is discussed further in the light of the 
firm’s appetite, and is agreed with acceptance of the risk commensurate with 
the return.
The risk–reward philosophy applied to operational risk leads to a more 
commercially astute position, balancing the risk with just the right amount 
of mitigation. Too few controls will result in fines, client detriment and rep￾utational damage; but overdoing them, introducing excessive processes and 
procedures may render the proposal non-viable. The latter reasoning is gen￾erally underused by firms; not only senior managers but even some risk 224 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
practitioners themselves can feel quite uncomfortable talking about ‘letting 
go of controls’ and accepting even a small level of errors and losses. This is 
an area where the operational risk function can increasingly add value, in￾troducing a risk–reward equation to assist in arriving at balanced, sensible 
decisions. As discussed in Chapter 6, with the Risks and Opportunities as￾sessment, this approach reinforces positive risk management, encouraging 
appropriate risk taking while protecting the firm from an overly aggressive 
attitude.
This more entrepreneurial style also reflects the position expressed in the 
Financial Stability Board (FSB)’s guidelines on risk appetite; and therefore 
will serve as a base for the definition of operational risk appetite:2
DEFINITION: OPERATIONAL RISK APPETITE
Operational risk appetite represents an aggregate level and different types
of operational risk that ‘a financial institution is willing to assume in order to 
achieve its strategic objectives and business plan’.3
The FSB document is a helpful guide for any risk practitioner. It nevertheless 
recognizes that operational risk appetite is a more difficult summit to con￾quer due to the qualitative nature of the topic, and therefore goes no further 
into outlining what good looks like for this particular area.
Deliberations of this kind, on the nature of operational risk and the cho￾sen attitude, be it mitigated downwards or taken for reward, are important. 
They define the firm’s overall stance towards risk, and the language that will 
be used to describe it. They also stretch into more cultural aspects, namely 
whether the firm perceives itself as rather conservative or more entrepre￾neurial.
Three steps for developing an effective 
appetite statement
As is the case with most operational risk tools, there is no prescriptive or 
universally accepted operational risk appetite framework which perfectly 
suits every organization, sector or jurisdiction. In fact, it is perhaps the most 
embryonic element in the entire operational risk discipline.Operational risk appetite 225
Risk appetite is inextricably linked to measurement, which in itself re￾mains a process that is still to be fully mastered by the industry. Those in 
favour of quantitative approaches – and thus seeking a definitive number to 
express the appetite – may find that a risk appetite framework does not lend 
itself well to purely numeric limits and thresholds. In fact, as we will see 
from this chapter, many descriptors are primarily qualitative.
Also, creating an appetite is not about merely writing a set of statements: 
it involves providing a decision-making tool to enable prioritization and the 
deployment of resources, and to drive considered, risk-based decisions. The 
hardest part of it is fulfilling the use test and achieving embeddedness
throughout the organization. Appetite development is an iterative process 
where less is more; it is better to have an unsophisticated framework which 
is well embedded and understood, than a state-of-the-art appetite statement 
which does not translate into actions and behaviours.
Proposed below is a three-stage process for building an operational risk 
appetite, outlined in Figure 9.3.
It is suggested that the three steps below are followed when implementing 
an operational risk appetite:
● define the desirable risk level on a spectrum – both overall and for 
principal operational risk sub-types;
● develop qualitative statements at an aggregate operational risk level and 
for each principal risk sub-type;
● establish qualitative and quantitative limits and triggers.
Step 1: Defining desirable risk level on a spectrum
In the first instance, it is valuable to understand the overall types and levels 
of risk the organization is willing to take in pursuit of its objectives. In 
Figure 9.3 Three steps for developing an operational risk appetite
Risk
spectrum and
risk levels
Qualitative
statements
Limits and
triggers226 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
simple terms, this step explains how the company intends to remain profit￾able (i.e. by taking a given level of risk or accepting a particular level of 
reward), considering return requirements and the specific idiosyncrasies of 
the firm’s business model. This is an enterprise risk exercise which should 
be led by Operational Risk, jointly with other risk colleagues, to encom￾pass all risk categories and create a consolidated framework. Desired risk 
levels can be expressed with the help of a qualitative scale, which provides 
a useful point of reference for future discussions. The scales can be abso￾lute or relative.
An example of an absolute four-point scale is presented in Figure 9.4 
below:
Table 9.1 Risk appetite: relative scale example
Risk-averse Avoid or minimize risk; the firm is willing to accept below 
market risk return/incur losses significantly lower than peers
Neutral Adopt a balanced approach; control risk to achieve returns/incur 
losses in line with industry norms
Risk-tolerant Take a measured amount of risk; the firm is willing to accept 
some risk if the circumstances include reward in line with or 
above industry norms
Expansionary Actively pursue risk; the firm is willing to accept superior 
risk-adjusted reward/accept losses if reward is significantly 
above industry norm
Figure 9.4 Risk appetite: absolute scale example
Low
Reduce; adopt
conservative
approach
Moderate
Take risk
commensurate
with return
Minimal
Avoid; take as little
risk as possible
High
Actively accept
exposure to risk to
maximize reward
The risk range can also be expressed using a relative scale. An example of a 
four-point scale is included in Table 9.1:
The use of ranges and postures such as these enables a sensible conversation 
with the board; summarizing in a nutshell what kinds of risk the firm will 
actively pursue vs the ones it will aim to control or avoid. For example:Operational risk appetite 227
And positioned on the scale (Figure 9.5):
Risk type Risk appetite
Strategic risk high – actively accept exposure to risk to maximize 
reward
Operational risk moderate – take risk commensurate with return
Market risk low – reduce; adopt conservative approach
Credit risk low – reduce; adopt conservative approach
Figure 9.5 Positioning principal enterprise risks on the scale
Credit risk
Market risk
Operational
risk Strategic risk
Low
Reduce; adopt
conservative
approach
Moderate
Take risk
commensurate
with return
Minimal
Avoid; take as little
risk as possible
High
Actively accept
exposure to risk to
maximize reward
The attitude to operational risk taking, whether mitigated downwards or 
taken for reward, will define the position it occupies on the scale.
Ancillary to this discussion is the concept of risk tolerance; the words ap￾petite and tolerance are often used interchangeably when applied to opera￾tional risk. Organizations that adopt a mitigate downwards attitude towards 
operational risk frequently give preference to the term tolerance, signifying 
that the risk has to be (unwillingly) endured as it cannot be eliminated.
However, approaches vary:
● Tolerance in some firms can be greater than appetite. To use an example, 
the police’s appetite for speeding is set by the speed limit assigned to a 
road (30mph, for example) but the officers will often tolerate a higher 
speed (which may be 33mph) before they prosecute.
● Other firms adopt a stance that tolerance is lower than appetite. For 
instance, appetite will be set at a 33mph limit which should not be 
exceeded at any cost; consequently, tolerance is set below the appetite at 
30mph to provide an early warning sign.
Once the principal risk types have been placed on the appetite range, the 
same exercise needs to be conducted for the next level top or principal228 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
operational risks, which were discussed in Chapters 1 and 5. Top or princi￾pal risks are those inherent risks which, if not well controlled, will result in 
the most significant impact to the firm.
Due to the huge variety of possible risk sub-categories, considering risk 
appetite solely at an aggregate operational risk level – for example, lumping 
together financial crime, third party, people and other risk sub-types of an 
entirely different nature – is simply inadequate.
It is better to elaborate appetite statements for each principal 
operational risk sub-type that underlies the firm’s business thus addressing 
‘the nature, types and levels’ of operational risk the firm is willing to 
assume.4
Figure 9.6 provides an example of a firm that identifies five principal opera￾tional risk sub-types and expresses their desired risk level on a spectrum.
Figures 9.5 and 9.6, presented to the board simultaneously, should gener￾ate some discussion. If the firm has a high appetite for strategic risk and is 
planning to significantly expand, on-boarding clients from new businesses 
and geographies, how does this tie in with the fact that it accepts only a 
minimal level of financial crime risk? This may be more suitable for a con￾servative, mature organization which is mostly maintaining an existing cli￾ent base; since it has to be recognized that growth will inevitably generate 
an increased level of exposure to financial crime. If the board is not comfort￾able with that formulation, perhaps the firm’s strategic aspirations and busi￾ness plans need some revision. Alternatively, maybe the firm needs to double 
its investment in controlling financial crime risk, to maintain its minimal 
appetite level given expansion. Is the money on the table? This is the exact 
purpose of the scales, to generate debate on anticipated risk levels and the 
relationship between different elements of risk.
A question that frequently arises when working with risk ranges evolves 
around the exact meaning of terms, e.g. minimal, risk-averse, expansionary. 
To provide more colour and help define boundaries, the scale can broadly be 
based on the operational risk unified impact rating grid discussed in previ￾ous chapters. Accordingly, as illustrated in Figure 9.7, risk-averse appetite 
translates into tolerating low financial, client, regulatory and reputational 
impacts; while an expansionary stance assumes acceptance of at least one 
(usually financial) of the stated very high consequences.Operational risk appetite 229
Figure 9.6 Positioning principal operational risks on the scale
Legal risk
Information security
(including cyber)
risk
Execution risk
Third-party risk
Financial crime
risk
Low
Reduce; adopt
conservative
approach
Moderate
Take risk
commensurate
with return
Minimal
Avoid; take as little
risk as possible
High
Actively accept
exposure to risk to
maximize reward
Figure 9.7 Aligning appetite scale with the unified impact rating grid
Impact Description
Very high
High
Moderate
Low
Financial: Actual/potential loss greater than $xxx
Client: Serious client detriment/large proportion impacted
Reputation: Deep damage to the brand and market
value, sustained media coverage
Regulatory: Formal investigation resulting in action and fines
Financial: Actual/potential loss between $xx and $xxx
Client: High level of detriment
Reputation: Market commentary, serious damage to the
reputation, brand and value
Regulatory: May prompt investigation or regulatory action
Financial: Actual/potential loss between $x and $xx
Client: Moderate impact/small proportion or segment
Reputation: One-off media coverage, minor damage
to reputation, brand and value
Regulatory: Potential enquiry or one-off fine
Financial: Actual/potential loss below $x
Client: Minor impact or complaints
Reputation: Inconsequential
Regulatory: Unlikely to result in any regulatory action
Neutral
Adopt a balanced
approach
Risk tolerant
Take a measured
amount of risk
Risk-averse
Avoid or
minimize the risk
Expansionary
Actively pursue
risk for 
superior reward
Some firms prefer to use the ALARP principle as an alternative to appetite 
ranges.
The ALARP Principle – As Low As Reasonably Practicable – encourages 
the mitigation of identified risks by balancing the cost of mitigation with the 
benefits, and formally enabling acceptance of the residual operational risk.
ALARP is applied as a decentralized decision-making model and operates 
by placing accountability on individual senior managers and executives. 
They assume risks and defend the position of what is practicable in terms of 230 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
mitigation in each individual case. This can generate inconsistencies in ap￾plication. If this thinking is adopted, it is important that the second line 
operational risk function reviews and challenges decisions, to ensure process 
reliability and robustness of outcomes. It is also recommended to supple￾ment the ALARP approach with clear direction on desired appetite levels, 
via the use of qualitative ranges.
In summary, while qualitative scales are somewhat imprecise, they help to 
set the scene and provide soft guidance for better understanding the ap￾proach to risk taking within the organization. These scales are widely used 
by non-financial services firms, as they explain the appetite, at a high level, 
in pictures and language that are easy to comprehend. At times financial 
services firms, especially those applying more quantitative approaches to the 
operational risk capital calculation, favour numerical expressions and sta￾tistical probabilities – perhaps losing the softer explanatory element as well 
as the opportunity for honest board discussions. Perhaps this is something 
that can be learnt from non-financial services industries?
Step 2: Qualitative appetite statements
The second stage of the process involves assigning a qualitative risk appetite 
statement for operational risk overall and for principal risk sub-types.
The statement is a more detailed explanation, in written form, supporting 
the position of each risk on the spectrum. It aims to rationalize whether the 
risk will be actively pursued, controlled or avoided; and provides the rea￾sons for the chosen approach. Yet again, due to the qualitative nature of 
operational risk, descriptive statements are essential, and may include cul￾tural and behavioural nuances, which cannot be measured in numbers.
Starting from the overall level, the attitude to operational risk taking, 
mitigated downwards or taken for reward, will be explained further. 
Compare the following statements.
EXAMPLE 1
The firm’s tolerance for operational risk is minimal. It is not possible to 
eliminate operational risk, but the firm aims to reduce it. Operational risk 
tolerance is defined via a limit of $25 million on aggregate operational 
losses, which is then broken down to lower limits across sub-categories of 
operational risk including, among others, fraud, legal, compliance and 
money laundering.Operational risk appetite 231
This is a very basic outline which nevertheless appears in the annual reports 
of many financial services firms in some form or another. It is good practice 
to develop more elaborate statements; and challenge whether the firm indeed 
intends to apply a risk avoidance attitude to the entirety of its operational 
risk, as a blanket approach, or whether it is prepared to differentiate between 
sub-categories. Note, the term tolerance is used here, instead of appetite, to 
emphasize the desire to mitigate the risk downwards.
EXAMPLE 2
The firm takes operational risk consciously in pursuit of its strategic 
objectives. It believes that risk acceptance is often necessary to foster 
innovation and that it is neither possible nor necessarily desirable to 
eliminate all the operational risks inherent in its activities. The firm’s overall 
appetite is neutral, with a maximum loss appetite threshold of $10 million. 
For certain sub-categories, such as financial crime, conduct and regulatory 
compliance, the firm assumes a more conservative risk-averse attitude. 
Eight principal risk categories have been identified, namely financial crime, 
technology and information security, execution, conduct, regulatory 
compliance, change, people and third party and each has been assigned a 
qualitative risk appetite statement supplemented by various risk metrics. 
Each principal risk is owned by a named senior executive, who is 
accountable for devising appropriate controls and presenting the overall 
level of risk to the board. The board is ultimately responsible for agreeing 
the appetite for each risk. Breaches to the risk appetite must be escalated 
and actioned.
FEATURES OF OPERATIONAL RISK APPETITE 
STATEMENTS
✓ Easy to understand; this is crucial for subsequent embedding of risk 
appetite in the organization.
✓ Provide a definition of the risk sub-type; important to avoid second￾guessing of what is included.232 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
This expanded statement has several helpful attributes; specifically, it refers 
to accountability and response. Further features are outlined in the box 
above.
Considering these features, an example of an appetite statement for a 
sub-type of operational risk is provided in Table 9.2.
This statement for the third-party sub-type of operational risk follows 
the recommended format. It provides a definition, outlines the link to strat￾egy and points to the executive owner as well as delivering an explanatory 
narrative.
Similar statements need to be developed for the remaining top/principal 
operational risk sub-types.
Let us expand on two rather challenging aspects: accountability and re￾sponse frameworks.
Accountability framework
Accountability assumes that each of the key risk areas has clear ownership; 
either by a dedicated senior executive or a joint group or committee (de￾pending on the governance arrangements) responsible for devising appro￾priate controls and risk mitigation activities. This is challenging to achieve 
in practice as it requires a well-defined allocation of responsibilities within 
senior executive teams. Also, some risks span across multiple business lines 
and geographies.
As an example, technology risk is usually the responsibility of the chief 
technology officer (CTO) as the majority of controls reside with the IT func￾tion; alternatively it can be co-owned by the heads of the business, the pri￾mary users and drivers of technological solutions, and the CTO. Financial 
crime risk is not owned by Compliance, despite the fact that compliance is 
usually tasked with designing and owning the framework. Rather, it is the 
✓ Contain a link to strategic objectives; this sounds like an obvious point, 
but unfortunately it is still rare that operational risk statements are 
displayed with direct reference to strategy and business plans.
✓ Outline accountability, which may include a risk owner, subject matter 
expert or relevant committee.
✓ Contain a response framework, stating the consequences of breaching 
the appetite.Table 9.2 Example operational risk appetite statement
Principal 
operational 
risk sub￾type Definition
Linked to 
strategic 
objective
Risk 
owner
Risk 
appetite Risk appetite statement
Third-Party 
Risk 
(Outsourcing 
& Supplier)
The risk 
emanating 
from reliance 
on third 
parties, 
including 
incidents or 
failures of 
third parties 
to deliver on 
their 
obligations.
Confident 
customer 
experience
Chief 
operating 
officer 
(COO)
Moderate The firm relies on third parties in delivering core business 
activities and services to its clients. It is willing to accept 
moderate level of risk working with contracted third parties to 
gain access to new technological platforms, improve flexibility and 
efficiency. Clients and regulators expect the firm to manage these 
arrangements effectively. The firm aims to limit disruptions by 
conducting robust third-party due diligence and performing 
monitoring and oversight by a dedicated Outsourcing team. The 
firm has identified single points of failure and, where feasible, 
developed a substitution plan in case of critical provider failure or 
unavailability. Where substitution is not viable, the firm has 
enhanced oversight and actively takes part in third-parties’ testing 
of their resilience and recovery capabilities.
Elevated level of risk and breaches to appetite are escalated to the 
board and require action according to the firm's Response 
Framework.
The firm accepts that occasional minor disruptions may occur.
233234 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
duty of each and every employee and hence all senior executives to instil 
appropriate practices and behaviours within the organization to combat 
fraud and crime. Similarly, accountability for People risk is shared across all 
business units and support functions, while Human Resources provides pol￾icies and guidance. These kinds of risks should typically have joint owners 
in the first line, being the heads of major business units; or alternatively, the 
firm’s chief executive.
Discussions on ownership can be heated and contentious; to the extent 
that the risk owner column is sometimes removed altogether. Cultural as￾pects play a significant part in this area, and firms that have a collaborative, 
honest and risk-aware ethos commonly excel in agreeing their accountabil￾ity framework. With increasing supervisory focus on culture and conduct, 
and the introduction of personal accountability and certification regimes, 
the ownership of risks at the top of the house should align and conform to 
the broader accountability statements.
Response framework
In turn, the response framework deals with mechanisms to treat appetite 
breaches seriously and trigger robust action. One way of bringing this 
framework to life is by ensuring that significant breaches result in monetary 
penalties for the responsible owner or senior executive who is accountable 
to keep the risk within the limit; or perhaps a shared penalty for the whole 
senior executive team if they are jointly accountable for the risk sub-type 
which has caused the breach. This approach makes the instrument tangible 
and less of a theoretical exercise; but its success depends significantly on the 
firm’s ability to agree on the accountability framework described above. It is 
worth noting the Basel Committee’s view that ‘compensation policies should 
be aligned to the bank’s statement of risk appetite and tolerance’.5
Step 3: Limits and triggers
The final step consists of translating the appetite statements into limits and 
triggers that will help to measure actual risk exposure against established 
levels, indicating when the appetite has been – or is about to be – breached.
What tools are used to measure the appetite?
Common tools to measure operational risk appetite include:
● qualitative and quantitative – Key Risk Indicators;
● quantitative – losses and scenarios.Operational risk appetite 235
We have already examined these instruments in their respective chapters. 
Let’s review them in more detail in the context of the operational risk ap￾petite.
Key Risk Indicators
KRI metrics are important because they define what is acceptable (and, re￾spectively, unacceptable), thus setting standards and guiding behaviours. 
They are inextricably linked to the culture of the organization. As described 
in Chapter 7, indicators are developed for the key/top risks, which is exactly 
what we have at hand when it comes to the expression of appetite.
Quantitative measures are equally significant as they warn about poten￾tial capital erosion. The firm is only able to assume any given amount of risk 
within its risk capacity.
Capacity is the overall resource or, in other words, the budget, that the firm 
has at hand reflecting the maximum level of risk it is able to assume; and is 
inseparably linked to economic capital. The firm will not be able to sustain 
losses beyond its capacity, as it will become insolvent.
The FSB definition of risk appetite includes risk taking within the firm’s ca￾pacity,
6
 which – in the context of financial risk types such as credit and 
market risk – is represented by an amount of capital. For operational risk, 
strictly speaking, the definition is broader and includes, for example, the 
supply of people and systems; meaning that the firm will not be able to pro￾cess more transactions than humanly possible given the number of employ￾ees it recruits and the systems it operates. These factors are harder to 
incorporate into appetite considerations; therefore, where the term capacity
is used, it usually refers purely to financial resource.
Operational risk losses
Actual operational risk losses reflect the instances where risk has material￾ized. Organizations would not be able to absorb an unlimited amount of 
losses; and therefore, a threshold on the expected annual amount is an ad￾equate and the most commonly used quantitative measure. Its purpose is to 
signal when the level of crystallized events may pose a threat to the broader 
corporate objective of remaining profitable.236 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
This threshold can be absolute or relative, as illustrated in the following 
examples:
● absolute: the losses must not exceed $5 million;
● relative: the firm is prepared to tolerate a potential loss of 1% of recurring 
revenue.
It is important to note that these measures do not put a cap on losses; even 
if the firm is not willing to exceed a set amount, that may still happen. 
Rather, they serve as triggers for action. When the appetite is breached – or 
even better, before the breach, when approaching the limit – this warrants 
an immediate review and investigation of why the negative financial impact 
has exceeded the level that was agreed as acceptable; and requires the rele￾vant risk owner to come up with a plan of action. This may, at times, include 
drastic measures, for example having to discontinue a product or exit a 
business line/geography if it is not a viable, cost-effective proposition.
Scenario analysis
Scenarios supplement the loss threshold by measuring the level of unex￾pected operational risk losses that the organization is able to withstand. As 
discussed in Chapter 8, scenarios help a firm to explore and anticipate the 
impact of major changes or disruptions to its business. Setting an appetite 
for scenario outcomes – which in truth is rarely explicitly defined by firms – 
can help to guide the enterprise during, for example, a major change to its 
business model. It could signal, for instance, that the level of unexpected 
losses incurred from a given scenario may be above the acceptable level. In 
the case of outsourcing and supplier risk cited in Table 9.2, this could hap￾pen if, for example, further critical activities were outsourced to the same 
service provider, creating an intolerable dependency on a single third party.
Limits and triggers are a double-edged sword: while they are essential, 
they can also drive inappropriate behaviours. If an executive is set a quanti￾tative loss and/or scenario limit for which they are personally accountable, 
this could result in the executive being incentivized to hide or under-report 
losses, or to wilfully underestimate scenario outcomes. In a similar way, as 
described in Chapter 7, business units may attempt to game KRI thresholds 
in order to present a more positive picture.
Continuing to build on the example in Table 9.2, appetite measures for a 
sample sub-category of operational risk are presented in Table 9.3.Operational risk appetite 237
Table 9.3 Example: defining appetite measures
Principal 
operational 
risk sub￾type Appetite measures
Board approved 
threshold: 
AMBER – 
elevated; define 
path to GREEN
Board approved 
threshold: RED – 
unacceptable; 
immediate action 
needed
Third-Party 
Risk 
(Outsourcing 
& Supplier)
Losses: maximum total 
financial loss from 
third-party failures
> $1.5 million >$2 million
Scenario analysis
maximum estimate
>$25 million >$30 million
KRI1: Percentage of 
critical providers with 
service below expected 
SLA levels for 2 
consecutive months, 
without an action plan
>1% >5%
KRI2: Percentage of 
critical providers without 
resilience arrangements 
or with material failures 
identified during testing
> 5% > 10%
KRI3: Percentage of 
critical providers without 
defined succession plan/
not easily substitutable
> 20% > 30%
The measures highlighted above are used to monitor the level of risk in the 
following dimensions:
● actual amount of materialized losses, a backward-looking but factual 
measure;
● scenario estimate, a forward-looking metric;
● predictive control indicators (KRI1 and KRI2), which closely monitor 
performance levels against service level agreements (SLAs) and resilience 
capabilities; and238 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
● a predictive risk indicator (KRI3), reflecting the level of exposure to 
critical suppliers which have no identified alternative and therefore may 
in future represent a single point of failure.
The same process of designing and agreeing limits and triggers needs to be 
repeated for the remainder of top/principal operational risk sub-types.
A simple scale to assess the quality and maturity of the operational risk 
appetite is presented in Figure 9.8.
Monitoring risk profile and taking action
Risk appetite expresses the desired level of risk that an organization should 
be taking in pursuit of its objectives. In reality, the firm may be assuming less 
or more risk than intended; hence the need to monitor the actual exposure, 
or the firm’s risk profile, against the pre-agreed parameters.
This assessment is performed on a monthly or quarterly basis at the re￾spective governance committees, where actual values are reported against 
the appetite. An example of a risk profile report is presented in Figure 9.9.
Embedding the appetite
The risk appetite needs to be ‘used as a tool to promote robust discussions 
on risk’, and as a basis for decision-making.7
 Undoubtedly, though, embed￾ding it is often difficult to achieve in practice.
Figure 9.8 Appetite maturity ladder
QUALITATIVE
ONLY
Ranges or scales
(e.g. low/medium/high)
Not measurable – no 
quantitative metrics
QUANTITATIVE
ONLY
Limits or triggers
(e.g. single and
aggregate losses)
Capital focused 
Not actionable – not 
driving behaviours
QUALITATIVE AND
QUANTITATIVE 
Overall and by Top Risk
Qualitative and quantitative
Linked to strategy
Descriptive and easy to
understand
Accountability framework
Response framework
Communicated to staff and
embedded
RED ZONE: ineffective GREEN ZONE: effective
Provides direction, 
however vagueOperational risk appetite 239
The appetite is first developed at a corporate, firm-wide level. To enable it to 
really be used effectively, appetite needs to:
● be understood, debated and approved by the appropriate governance 
body, commonly the board;
● have regular and formal monitoring arrangements, via, for example, 
monthly or quarterly reviews by the risk committee and the board, where 
the actual risk profile is evaluated against the desired appetite levels;
● have effective limits and trigger points enabling escalation and action;
● have assigned owners at the executive level, ensuring accountability and 
requiring them to act;
● be appropriately documented and reviewed on a periodic basis.
For small to medium-sized organizations where the same senior executives 
sit at the table taking most of the relevant business and operational deci￾sions, a single top-of-the-house appetite is sufficient. For larger international 
firms with multiple lines of hierarchy, the appetite needs to be disseminated 
and translated at lower levels of the organization, or strata; for example, 
based on entity or business line:
● Business lines, usually at a global level, require an appetite statement 
which is cascaded from the corporate statement. Quantitative limits are 
then allocated to the business based on various parameters including 
their revenue share. For example, the threshold for the overall expected 
Figure 9.9 Monitoring risk profile against the appetite
Principal operational 
Risk sub-type Definition Risk owner Risk 
appetite 
Risk level 
relative to 
appetite
Trend
Third-party risk 
(outsourcing and 
supplier)
The risk emanating from 
reliance on third parties, 
including incidents or
failures of third parties
to deliver on their
obligations. 
Chief 
Operating 
Officer 
(COO)
Moderate
Elevated, 
define path
to GREEN
Expected losses Unexpected losses Key risk indicators
GREEN GREEN AMBER240 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
loss amount can be split into lower sub-component limits attributed to 
various businesses. Qualitative indicators may apply in exactly the same 
way (for example, conduct, people or fraud-related indicators); with 
business units being given identical or more restrictive thresholds. Some 
measures may be relevant to a specific area only; for instance, rogue 
trading metrics will be monitored by the markets business only and will 
not apply to other business lines.
● Material group entities, in particular, subsidiaries or legal entities that 
operate with their own board of directors, will also need to develop their 
own appetite, for approval by their board. The entity’s appetite statement 
will represent a hybrid cross-over between the business lines operating 
out of that entity alongside a cascade of the corporate statement.
● Statements need to operate consistently at a consolidated level and at 
sub-strata level.
● A response framework needs to be in place within both the business lines 
and the entities.
The ultimate responsibility for approving the appetite lies with the board of 
directors of the organization. The second line operational risk team plays a 
crucial role in developing the approach; articulating the firm’s position; 
working with subject matter experts (SMEs) and risk owners to make sense 
of the framework; and proposing statements and thresholds. It is an exciting 
opportunity to work with risk owners and senior executives to arrive at a 
meaningful appetite framework.
Common challenges and good practices
Common challenges
Challenges that practitioners may experience when developing and embed￾ding an operational risk appetite are as follows.
Losses only
A decade ago, operational risk appetite was defined via a limit on aggregate 
losses; sometimes additionally broken down to lower limits across principal 
sub-categories. While this is a good start, quantitative measures alone are 
insufficient as they are backward-looking (i.e. the losses have already crys￾tallized) and do not provide guidance on behaviours. They need to be Operational risk appetite 241
supplemented, as discussed in this chapter, with descriptive statements and 
qualitative Shading of circles should be consistent with figure 7.2 - medium 
dark =Amber, lighter = Green (ie reverse the shading).
Zero tolerance
A declaration of zero tolerance frequently features in the narrative. While 
this may work well in internal policies developed by Human Resources that 
articulate the firm’s position towards, for example, internal fraud commit￾ted by employees, it does not work well when applied to the appetite. If the 
firm has zero tolerance for fraud, it may as well consider exiting the busi￾ness, because some instances of fraud will inevitably occur. While a ‘zero 
fraud’ expression may be tempting to use, a better approach to the language 
would be to state that the firm has a risk-averse approach to financial crime, 
and aims to mitigate the risk by maintaining a robust control environment, 
while recognizing that occasional instances of fraud may occur.
Use of distributions and percentiles
Bringing statistics into this domain is not always helpful either. Poor exam￾ples include statements that ‘operational risk appetite is defined by the op￾erational risk loss value using a 99.5 per cent confidence level on the 
statistical aggregate loss distribution’. Such statements will not be easily 
understood by all staff, are not actionable and – similarly to zero tolerance – 
should be avoided.
Stakeholders not engaged
At times, operational risk faces lack of engagement from business units and 
subject matter experts, to the extent that it becomes, as articulated by one 
frustrated risk practitioner, like getting blood out of a stone. The best way 
forward is to find the correct risk owner, to whom the management of rel￾evant risk, and therefore its appetite, matter. This is not easy in organiza￾tions with vague accountability frameworks. The challenge may also arise at 
the board of directors’ level if the directors do not think they have any re￾sponsibility for or involvement in the risk appetite process, which is a rather 
worrying sign. Director education and executive briefings can somewhat 
mitigate the challenge.
Wordsmithing exercise
Appetite may be approached as an exercise to contribute to the annual report. 
Statements are developed by report writers in risk management or finance 242 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
teams, in silos, without collaboration, discussion or agreement. In this case the 
stated appetites do not carry weight and are not embedded in the organiza￾tion. It is important that the whole appetite cycle is followed, including es￾sential value-add board conversations.
Significant effort
Operational risk appetite, although not an embryonic topic, is still not stud￾ied carefully enough in most firms. Because of the difficulty deriving a mean￾ingful statement and metrics, people may give up on the effort. It is better to 
approach the topic as an iterative process, starting with simple statements 
and measures and enhancing them over time and as experience is gained, 
not aiming for perfection up-front.
Good practices
Overall and by top risk
As discussed in the chapter, operational risk appetite needs to be established 
at the overall operational risk level as well as for sub-categories of risk. The 
correct taxonomy plays a critical role and helps with the definition of the 
sub-categories. If the organization is using the Basel Committee taxonomy, 
it can make this process somewhat more difficult – for example the execu￾tion, delivery and process management risk sub-type – due to the sheer 
breadth of the category. It is good practice to develop more intuitive and 
fit-for-purpose categorizations as described in Chapter 1. The taxonomy 
will split the risk universe into principal risk sub-types for which appetite 
statements can then be developed.
Benchmark with industry peers
In addition to developing appetite frameworks, every year I research and 
analyse the appetite statements of both financial and non-financial services 
firms, to observe industry progress in this nascent area and extract good 
examples. These statements are publicly available as part of firms’ annual 
reports and can be easily located on the internet. This is a very useful exer￾cise, recommended for all those working on developing an appetite frame￾work. The research proves that, overall, steady progress is being made in 
this area, despite drastic divergence in the chosen approaches and the vari￾able quality of outputs.Operational risk appetite 243
Language easy to understand
As mentioned earlier, firms outside the financial services industry commonly 
achieve more clarity using simply worded statements, compared to financial 
services firms, some of which are constrained by statistical models, appear 
to favour probability-based measures and underestimate the importance of 
qualitative aspects. Statements do not have to be over-complicated; on the 
contrary, if they can be explained simply enough for every employee to un￾derstand, then the employees may in fact read them. It is even better if high￾lights of the appetite can be presented to all staff as part of management 
town halls or educational campaigns, helping larger numbers of staff to 
better understand their own organization.
Industry benchmark
Put simply, operational risk appetite is not easy to get right, and whenever 
the topic comes up it invariably ends in debate and split opinions over what 
constitutes an effective appetite statement. Nevertheless this remains an ex￾citing subject for discussion.
Presented below is a snapshot of the current landscape taken at the 
Advanced Operational risk training workshop in 2023.
Nature of operational risk: similar 
or different to other risk disciplines?
As shown in Figure 9.10, around a third of participants took a stance that 
operational risk is not willingly incurred and is expected to be mitigated 
downwards. On a more positive note, the remaining 67 per cent of respond￾ents were prepared to adopt a more entrepreneurial approach and to em￾brace risk-reward thinking for at least some of the sub-categories of 
operational risk in their firms, perhaps enabling more balanced conversa￾tions on risk appetite to take place. The result is almost identical to a similar 
poll taken in 2019; and demonstrates a split in views on the nature of op￾erational risk across the industry.
Expression of appetite
It is encouraging to see a high number of practitioners (66 per cent, as dem￾onstrated in Figure 9.11), expressing their risk appetite via both qualitative 244 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
and quantitative measures. Both are needed given the complex and broad 
nature of operational risk. This is a significant step forward from the 2019 
poll, where only 39 per cent of respondents had reached this level of matu￾rity; while others were either still in the process of developing an appetite 
statement or had just one type of metric in place.
Advanced Operational risk training workshop, 2023
Figure 9.10 Industry poll: approach to operational risk
Taken for
reward
Mitigated
downwards
Combination
of both
33%
67%
Approach to operational risk
Advanced Operational risk training workshop, 2023
Figure 9.11 Industry poll: expression of appetite (qualitative vs quantitative)
No op risk
appetite
Qualitatively Quantitatively Both
17%
66%
17%
Op Risk appetite is expressedOperational risk appetite 245
Appetite features
Overall, despite not yet being perfect, operational risk appetite was seen to 
be driving decision-making, risk levels were continuously monitored and 
breaches were being taken seriously, investigated and acted upon. This has 
become feasible as a result of the growing focus on top risks, those that were 
recognized by boards as potentially harmful to the achievement of firms’ 
strategic objectives. This link to firms’ wider business strategy has enabled 
more meaningful senior management conversations, and encouragement of 
the right behaviours within the firm as an outcome. As for staff communica￾tion, participants agreed that a simple summary of the operational risk ap￾petite would be beneficial, and could be useful for employees to better 
understand their firm’s approach to risk taking (see Figure 9.12).
Practical workplace exercise
Reflecting on the content of this chapter, obtain a copy of the firm’s opera￾tional risk appetite and review it, considering:
1 Is the appetite easy to understand and does it articulate the types and 
levels of risk the firm is willing to accept?
2 What approach has been adopted, mitigated downwards, taken for 
reward or a combination of both?
3 Are principal risk sub-types distinguished and have statements been set 
for them?
Advanced Operational risk training workshop, 2023
Figure 9.12 Industry poll: operational risk appetite features
Communicated to staff
1= strongly disagree, 5= strongly agree,
Drives behaviours
Helps in decision-making
Linked to strategy
3.5
3.5
3.3
3
Strongly agree
Strongly disagree
Operational risk appetite
= average rating246 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
4 What qualitative and quantitative measures are used?
5 What works well? Make notes of the features that you particularly like.
6 What can be improved? Note down potential appetite enhancements.
MAKE A DIFFERENCE (MAD) ACTION
Please note down one action that you will take after reading this chapter 
that will make a positive difference to the development of operational risk 
appetite.
In summary, this chapter proposed an approach to creating an operational 
risk appetite framework and statement, defining measures, and ensuring it 
remains a useful tool for decision-making.
Moving on, the next chapter focuses on operational risk reporting and com￾bines elements from all the tools examined in previous chapters.
Notes
1 European Banking Authority (2019) The EBA Methodological Guide: Risk 
indicators and detailed risk analysis tools, www.eba.europa.eu/sites/default/
documents/files/documents/10180/1380571/343e01d7-0c8f-4d7f-b59e-cc23a7b￾9dd9d/Revised%20EBA%20Methodological%20Guide%20%20Risk%20
Indicators%20and%20DRAT%20%2820%20March%202019%29.pdf
(archived at https://perma.cc/6LFW-9GV5)Operational risk appetite 247
2 Financial Stability Board (2013) Principles for an Effective Risk Appetite 
Framework, www.fsb.org/wp-content/uploads/r_131118.pdf (archived at 
https://perma.cc/E9S4-F5KZ)
3 Financial Stability Board (2013) Principles for an Effective Risk Appetite 
Framework, www.fsb.org/wp-content/uploads/r_131118.pdf (archived at 
https://perma.cc/9XFB-46D5)
4 Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2021) Revisions to the Principles for 
the Sound Management of Operational Risk, www.bis.org/bcbs/publ/d515.pdf
(archived at https://perma.cc/E45Y-GK3N)
5 Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2021) Revisions to the Principles for 
the Sound Management of Operational Risk, www.bis.org/bcbs/publ/d515.pdf
(archived at https://perma.cc/E45Y-GK3N)
6 Financial Stability Board (2013) Principles for an Effective Risk Appetite 
Framework, www.fsb.org/wp-content/uploads/r_131118.pdf (archived at 
https://perma.cc/F7TL-3EKU)
7 Financial Stability Board (2013) Principles for an Effective Risk Appetite 
Framework, www.fsb.org/wp-content/uploads/r_131118.pdf (archived at 
https://perma.cc/2LTZ-M6DB)Operational risk 10
reporting
What this chapter covers: The chapter stresses the significance of Reporting 
as the window through which Operational Risk communicates with the out￾side world and sends important messages to stakeholders (Figure 10.1). It 
discusses how results from the tools and instruments examined in previous 
chapters can be consolidated in a meaningful way for consumption by board 
and senior committees, without being excessively lengthy and verbose. It 
highlights practical ways of presenting an operational risk profile, getting 
right to the point and answering the vitally important so what? question, 
making reports succinct, punchy and actionable. The chapter includes ex￾amples and an industry benchmark.
FURTHER READING
● Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2013) Principles for Effective 
Risk Data Aggregation and Risk Reporting
Why recommended: a key regulatory document on the subject, outlining 
requirements on risk aggregation and reporting.
● Trevor Bentley (2002) Report Writing in Business: The effective 
communication of information, CIMA Publishing
Why recommended: A perfect read for those interested and willing to 
improve their report-writing skills.
Reporting: its role and its challenges
Operational risk reporting is a key activity. It is the culmination of all the 
hard work invested in designing framework tools which represent the best 
fit for the firm; and many days and weeks spent on embedding, training and 
248Governance, roles and responsibilities
Establish governance and clear roles across the Three Lines for managing operational risk.
Risk assessments
Assess risk exposure in 
process, business or
function via RCSAs.
Supplement by evaluating
risks emanating from
change activities via 
ORAs. 
Identify exposure from
extreme but plausible 
events. Mitigate through
risk transfer to insurance.
Scenario analysis
Monitor risk and control
performance through 
predictive indicators.
Act if indicators breach 
established appetite 
threshold. 
Key Risk Indicators
Reporting and decision-making
Review actual risk prole against set appetite, apply active risk management to enable achievement of strategic objectives.
Operational risk
events
Record and report risk 
events, act to minimize 
future exposure.
Monitor trends against
RCSAs and KRIs.
Risk appetite and risk Capacity
Dene nature and types of risk accepted in pursuit of strategic objectives. Evaluate adequacy of capital resources.
Operational risk raxonomy
Embedding and maturity assessment
Training and education
Risk culture
Figure 10.1 Focus of Chapter 10: operational risk reporting
249250 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
educating the business. It is the end-result of analysis, discussions, debates 
and sometimes arguments with colleagues to resolve issues, find solutions 
and agree action owners. It is the opportunity to package up all this content, 
so it is well worth investing in the best quality packaging – it will reap ben￾efits in the long term.
But caution: it also comes with a warning. Underinvestment in reporting 
will devalue the whole framework. Even when operational risk tools are 
operating effectively, if the reports are unclear, not well structured or not 
actionable, the readers – mostly senior executives who only see the final 
product – may not appreciate or make sense of the importance of the opera￾tional risk management process and information.
When starting an assignment with a new client, I usually ask for a set of the 
operational risk reports that are submitted to governance committees. They 
provide an invaluable insight on the quality and maturity of the framework. If 
the reports do not meet the expected standard, I tend to investigate from the 
end-product back to the beginning. Does the policy mandate the use of the 
right tools? Are the elements of the framework calibrated correctly, embedded 
and generating meaningful outputs? If there are challenges, they usually lie 
with the design or calibration of the tools, or their embeddedness. It is a real 
pity if in practice everything is working well but when it comes to the last 
step – packaging the content – the author did not do the content proud.
From the outset, writing and structuring operational risk reports to the 
board and senior committees is a demanding activity. More generic hurdles 
on report writing are compounded by the immense challenges emanating 
from the breadth and complexity of the operational risk discipline.
Generic challenges
Over the years, I have participated in and led many exercises to help com￾mittees self-assess their effectiveness. This is good governance practice. 
Members rate important aspects of their own practice, including committee 
composition; the manner in which meetings are conducted; the allocation of 
time to various topics on the agenda; the quality of information received; 
and other attributes which help them to evaluate whether the committee is 
effectively discharging its duties. Inevitably, reporting receives its fair share 
of feedback. The most common criticisms from committee members – who 
are after all the report recipients – include:
● papers being too lengthy (board and committee packs are rarely just in 
the hundreds – more likely thousands – of pages in length);Operational risk reporting 251
● not outlining the ask clearly – for example, is the paper for approval, 
opinion or information only;
● not providing an overall perspective;
● being backward- rather than forward-looking;
● not being timely;
● being too vague and unfocused.
And the list goes on.
When speaking to report writers – individuals or teams within depart￾ments tasked with drafting committee papers – they are also vocal on this 
topic, and raise plenty of reporting challenges, including:
● The absence of any brief from the board or senior executives on what 
they would like to see in the report. Are there any particular areas of 
interest? Authors frequently complain that no one has ever sat down with 
them to clearly explain what the recipients are looking for.
● The lack of a standard reporting template, leaving the writer to decide 
which style and format to use.
● A lack of training for report writers. What does good look like? How 
long, how detailed, structure, language, format? Word or PowerPoint?
● No feedback loop – after being written, reports usually disappear into a 
black hole. Authors rarely receive feedback on whether the information 
met recipients’ expectations, whether any actions emanated from the 
discussion and how they could do better next time.
Operational risk reporting challenges
All these challenges are relevant when it comes to operational risk report 
writing. In addition, operational risk faces some specific considerations:
● the breadth of the discipline, where every risk sub-type is important in its 
own right and deserves attention;
● multiple tools that generate significant output – losses, RCSAs, KRIs, 
scenarios – can all be presented using their own individual narratives, 
charts and graphs; and
● the fact that the discipline has both qualitative and quantitative 
components.
The objective of reporting is to present the overall operational risk profile, 
highlight pressure points, articulate whether the level of risk is within or 252 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
outside the appetite and drive decision-making. For example, the UK 
Corporate Governance Code provides guidance by stating that directors 
should receive ‘accurate, timely and clear information’, reinforcing that the 
board should always ensure that it has ‘the policies, processes, information, 
time and resources it needs in order to function effectively and efficiently’.1
Or, simply put, they need to know if there is a problem; and if so, what 
action needs to be taken to resolve it.
What makes a good report?
Three steps for effective report writing
Three steps for effective report writing, proposed in Figure 10.2, are de￾scribed in detail in this chapter.
Step 1: Data gathering
The first step in report writing consists of gathering accurate, timely and 
meaningful data. This involves extracting the outputs from operational risk 
tools – hopefully from the systems or, if not, from Excel spreadsheets or 
other sources – and collecting relevant inputs from first line business units. 
The industry faces continued focus on the quality and integrity of its data 
following the Basel Committee’s publication of its principles on risk data 
aggregation and reporting: these require firms ‘to generate accurate and reli￾able risk data’ which is ‘aggregated on a largely automated basis so as to 
minimize the probability of errors’.2
 This task is, however, mainly dependent 
on the firm’s IT capabilities and remains a challenge, as is recognized by the 
Basel Committee in their 2020 progress report. While firms had clearly 
‘made improvements to their data architecture and IT infrastructure’, there 
is ‘still much work to do in this area’.3
 A subsequent 2023 progress report 
by the Basel Committee yet again notes the delay in achieving compliance, 
Data Analysis,
interpretation
Opinion,
call for action
Figure 10.2 Three steps for report writingOperational risk reporting 253
‘seven years after the expected date of compliance’.4
 And so remediation 
programs continue as organizations strive to upgrade their processes and 
tools to overcome risk data challenges.
Once the information is collected, a pause to contemplate: whose role is 
it to make sense of the data and interpret what it means? If the Operational 
Risk department perceives that it is the role of senior executives – the report 
recipients – to answer the so what? question, then the activity stops here. 
This is especially true if there is a fast approaching deadline for the paper to 
be submitted to the committee. The collected raw data is then pasted into 
the report, inviting the readers to decide for themselves what they make of 
it. Let’s review an example of such a report.
EXAMPLE 1
Extract from an operational risk report
1 Operational risk events: This month, there have been 11 operational risk 
events, totalling $18 thousand. The largest loss of $9 thousand occurred 
in the Markets Division; further details are presented in Appendix X. 
There is a downward trend: overall ORE value is decreasing month on 
month since the beginning of the year, although the number of 
occurrences has increased from 7 to 11 a month in the last quarter.
2 RCSAs: There are four high residual risks in departmental RCSAs.
3 KRIs: There are no Red Key Risk Indicators this month.
This narrative is supplemented by:
● bar chart: operational risk events – actual losses, rolling 12 months;
● bar chart: operational risk events – number of events, rolling 12 months;
● pie chart: operational risk events split by Basel (or internal taxonomy) 
category;
● pie chart: operational risk events split by business unit;
● RCSA results table – total number of very high, high, moderate and low
risks by business unit;
● KRIs – a table with Green, Amber and Red indicators.
In reading this extract, inevitable questions arise. What does this mean? Is 
this good or bad? What, if any, action is needed? The burden of analysis is 254 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
passed on to the reader. While the bare facts may be somewhat interesting, 
without any interpretation from subject matter experts (SMEs) this report is 
difficult to digest, is not actionable, and ultimately will not allow board or 
committee members to function effectively and efficiently.
Therefore, we move on to Step 2.
Step 2: Analysis and interpretation
Typically, a substantive manual effort – or perhaps semi-automated if sys￾tems permit – is required to review the data and translate it into a story that 
answers the so what? question. This is, after all, the essential value-add of 
the Operational Risk teams, who are the SMEs best placed to interpret the 
data. They need to analyse it from all perspectives, considering, for example, 
the following questions:
● What are the key changes in the risk profile since the last report?
● Is the level of risk within or outside the stated appetite?
● Is there any evident deterioration – an increase in OREs (value or 
numbers), significant risks or Amber/Red KRIs? If so, why?
● Are the operational risk tools telling a consistent story?
● Are there common themes across different business units or support 
functions?
● Is there a common root cause of various OREs?
● Are there any controls that seem to keep failing repeatedly (for OREs), or 
controls that are poorly assessed by multiple departments (RCSAs)?
● Are there any indicators which have been Amber for more than two 
consecutive months? If so, why?
Practitioners must search for trends, themes and a story where every piece 
of data is adding to the narrative. In practice, this kind of in-depth research, 
with a list of rigorous investigative questions, is rarely discussed or agreed 
among the operational risk team. Use of sophisticated data analysis tools 
and application of data science and AI would be of immense help with this 
process. Basel committee notes that ‘new technologies such as artificial intel￾ligence have not yet materially impacted banks’ risk data aggregation and 
risk reporting processes’.5
 Despite being quite embryonic in operational risk 
space, some organizations are including exploration of techniques that offer 
future potential into the list of their priorities.Operational risk reporting 255
As a concept, operational risk appetite, as discussed in the previous chap￾ter, can also assist. If well defined, it ties the various tools together, reducing 
the need for a separate coverage of RCSAs, OREs, KRIs and scenarios. Even 
so, a diligent analyst will investigate beyond the appetite considerations. 
Actual financial losses may be within the appetite, but could have been 
prompted by a common control failing in different business units – provid￾ing a great opportunity to call the problem out and discuss any necessary 
action.
In sizeable operational risk teams, it is essential to agree the role of the 
report writer relative to the rest of the department.
The report writer is the executive advocate, stepping into the shoes of 
senior executives – the report recipients – and examining the document 
from their perspective.
The report sponsor is a senior executive member of the respective 
committee whose role is to review the paper for fitness and quality prior to 
its final submission.
The writer needs to challenge and refuse any raw data dumps provided by 
colleagues. If the data provides no insight and no story that answers the so 
what? question, the report writer should simply reject the input, explaining 
how it needs to be improved for subsequent submissions.
An additional important governance role is that of the report sponsor.
For risk reports, the sponsor is usually the chief risk officer, who reviews 
credit, market, operational, liquidity and other relevant papers. This process 
creates another opportunity to sit down and actively challenge the material. 
So it is good practice to mandate this kind of sponsor review for all senior 
committee and board papers.
Compare the following extract from a risk report after this kind of in￾depth analysis has been completed.256 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
After this second step, the report is likely shorter, and outputs from the ORE, 
RCSA and KRI frameworks have now been integrated into the analysis.
Step 3: Opinion, call for action
The third step takes us to the next level, aiming to provide an opinion and 
call for action. It reflects behind the scenes activity which happens in be￾tween the reporting cycles: the Operational Risk department acting on the 
story that emerged from the investigative analysis undertaken in the previ￾ous step. This step involves arranging meetings, discussing and agreeing ac￾tions and action owners. If applied to the earlier example, the report will be 
further enhanced as seen in the following example.
EXAMPLE 2
Extract from an operational risk report, after in-depth analysis
This month there have been 11 operational risk events, totalling $18 
thousand. Analysis of root causes and comparison with the RCSA and KRI 
data reveal that 8 out of 11 occurrences are due to the failure of the same 
control, namely segregation of duties. This control is rated as ineffective in 
three business units that use system X, due to manual workarounds 
required to operate it.
EXAMPLE 3
Extract from an operational risk report, after further activity
This month, there have been 11 operational risk events, totalling $18 
thousand. Analysis of root causes and comparison with the RCSA and KRI 
data reveal that 8 out of 11 occurrences are due to the failure of the same 
control, namely segregation of duties. A cross-functional working group 
facilitated by operational risk examined relevant cases and concluded that 
there is a significant risk of errors and future losses. A proposal to invest in 
enhancing the segregation of duties is presented for the committee’s 
approval: see agenda item X.Operational risk reporting 257
After this third step, as more time is spent on the analysis, with key messages 
being summarized for the recipients, the depth and quality of the paper is 
enhanced while the overall length is decreased; some of the individual ap￾pendices can now be removed as they have been integrated into the narrative.
The increased accountability of senior executives, as a result of the vari￾ous regulatory regimes, is driving a desire to move away from ambiguous 
charts, graphs and appendices to succinct and clearly worded, actionable 
content that can be revisited, if necessary, months or even years after being 
written. As we will see from the industry benchmark at the end of the chap￾ter, some operational risk reports are 20 to 30 pages long. There is a real 
danger of information overflow, with directors and senior managers missing 
vital pieces of information hidden in the voluminous reports.
The ideal length of value-add papers is under five pages, while being able 
to summarize this kind of content into one–two pages is an outstanding feat, 
bordering on brilliance.
‘If I had more time, I would have written a shorter letter’ is a quote at￾tributed to many, including Mark Twain and Winston Churchill. Spending 
more time on the analysis, key messages and storytelling increases the qual￾ity and decreases the length.
Helpful format and templates
While operational risk reporting diverges significantly across firms, a golden 
rule is to have an effective executive summary. Let’s examine an example of 
a page, presented in Figure 10.3, which frequently appears in some shape or 
form in operational risk reports.
Positive features of this example include:
● a quick preview, in a summarized format, of what is to follow on subse￾quent pages;
● focus on actionability with separate sub-section dedicated to actions;
● outline of prior month status, reflecting on dynamics.
What could be improved, as discussed at the beginning of this chapter, is the 
integration of separate elements – RCSAs, KRIs, losses and audit issues – 
into one story answering the holistic so what? question.RED GREEN
AMBER GREEN
Current month assessment Current month assessment
Operational Risk dashboard
Executive summary
Section A: Operational Risk events SECTION B: Risk and Control self-assessments
SECTION C: Audit issues SECTION D: Key Risk Indicators
Prior month assessment (summary):
Prior month assessment (summary): Prior month assessment (summary):
Prior month assessment (summary):
Actions taken or to be taken Actions taken or to be taken
Current month assessment Current month assessment
Actions taken or to be taken Actions taken or to be taken
Figure 10.3 Example of executive summary
258Operational risk reporting 259
This kind of report often starts with a short explanation of why the recipient 
is reading the paper (Context). For example:
● This is a quarterly operational risk update provided to the committee in 
line with its terms of reference; or
● The purpose of this ad hoc operational risk report is to brief the committee 
on a significant operational risk event, and outline actions taken to 
resolve it.
Context is important, as it helps the reader to answer the question which is 
frequently on their mind: why am I reading this?.
The next phase is Questions, providing opportunity for the writer to out￾line the scope of the paper and articulate what issues it will be addressing. 
The choice of questions is key. As an example, ‘good’ questions include:
● What are the key changes to the operational risk profile since the last 
report?
● Is the level of risk within the appetite?
● What actions are proposed for the committee’s approval?
The Conclusions then provide short answers to the above questions, for 
example:
● Since the last report there has been a moderate increase in the overall risk 
profile. Operational risk levels are elevated for Technology and 
Information security (same as last quarter), Outsourcing and Supplier
(new) and People risk (new), resulting from the pandemic and working 
from home (WFH) arrangements.
● While the level of operational risk remains within the appetite, there are 
six new early-warning Amber indicators for the three risk categories 
outlined above. Actions are on track for a path to Green in Technology 
and Information Security risk.
CQC: Context–Questions–Conclusions provides a solid structure for a board 
or committee paper.
Having written, read and helped to design hundreds of papers over my ca￾reer, out of the many possible approaches I favour the CQC concept of good 
report writing, also advocated by Board Intelligence.6Questions this paper addresses: Conclusions:
3
Input received Input sought
Quarterly Operational Risk update for the Risk Committee of the Board, per Committee´s Terms of Reference
Prepared by: head of Operational Risk Executive Sponsor: Chief risk officer
Conclusions:
Current quarter: AMBER
Moderate increase in risk profile
Main part of the report
Conclusions are expanded with a broader narrative, and supporting charts and graphs included. Main part of the report can be 2–3 pages long.
Movement Justification is included…
Summary
Previous quarter: AMBER Expected next quarter level: GREEN
In producing this paper, input has been received from the following departments… The committee is requested to agree proposed plan of action…
What actions are proposed for Committee´s approval?
1 What are the key changes to the operational risk profile since the last report? Conclusions:
2 Is the level of operational risk within the stated appetite? Conclusions:
Figure 10.4 Example operational risk report format
260Operational risk reporting 261
● The committee is requested to review and agree actions proposed to 
mitigate the People and Outsourcing and Supplier risks, bringing 
exposure within the desired appetite level.
Summary questions to avoid include:
● Individual questions on operational risk events, RCSA results or KRIs; 
analysis needs to be conducted integrating the outputs from these tools to 
extract a story, rather than presenting them separately.
● What is the operational risk profile? (as opposed to ‘what are the key 
changes since the last report?’). If there are no noteworthy changes for 
several quarters in succession, the paper runs the risk of becoming 
repetitive. If the profile is stable, the opening line can say so up-front, 
leaving room to focus instead on a particular risk sub-type, and perhaps 
do a deep dive into, for instance, legal risk or financial crime risk.
● What has the Operational Risk department been doing? For obvious 
reasons, boards and committees are more interested in outcomes than in 
the specific activities of employees.
An example reporting template is provided in Figure 10.4.
Common challenges and good practices
Common challenges
Challenges that firms may encounter when compiling board or committee 
operational risk reports.
Never-ending reporting cycle
Significant effort goes into the preparation of reporting documents, with 
hours spent compiling, drafting and redrafting them. One of the rather un￾fortunate implications of the personal accountability and certification re￾gimes is an even longer set of reports to boards and senior committees, 
prompted by a desire on the part of accountable individuals to document 
everything to the nth degree. By the time the reviews have been completed 
and approvals obtained, the next reporting cycle has already commenced 
and papers are due again. To avoid being caught up in a never-ending re￾porting saga, provide shorter updates on a monthly basis, and more com￾plete reports with detailed deep dives quarterly or semi-annually.262 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
Discipline too broad
As described earlier in the chapter, every operational risk sub-type is sig￾nificant in its own right and deserves attention. This makes it challenging to 
cover a broad spectrum of sub-categories succinctly in a single report. It is 
good practice to spread deep dives into different risk sub-types throughout 
the course of the year; covering, for example, Outsourcing and Supplier
risk in the first quarter, followed by Technology and Information Security
risk in the second. The schedule can be discussed with the committee chair, 
and dates for the presentations agreed in advance. This planning provides 
ample time to develop a value-added paper, after engaging with relevant 
SMEs. It also shortens the regular operational risk report and makes it less 
repetitive. This approach can also help to address the perpetual topic of 
various reports not being integrated. Often the Compliance function pre￾sents on financial crime, Information Security develops its own set of pa￾pers and the Legal department reports on legal risk. Additionally, the 
operational risk function presents on all of the above topics, given that they 
are also sub-sets of operational risk. This can create duplication or even 
confusion if there are discrepancies between two datasets. Working in col￾laboration and producing a joint report is an excellent initiative, though 
rarely done in practice.
Report writer removed from the front line
In larger operational risk departments, the reporting unit is usually sepa￾rate from the framework and oversight teams, who are in the front line 
talking to business units and support functions. This creates a challenge for 
report writers who do not have the full picture themselves and are depend￾ent on colleagues to submit intelligent insights. In this kind of structure, 
reporting team members need to take it upon themselves to educate their 
colleagues on what good looks like, and to push back on inputs of sub￾optimal quality.
Software not producing expected outcomes
Whether off-the-shelf or developed in-house, operational risk software is 
unlikely to deliver a finalized committee paper at the touch of a button. It 
can be very useful in the analysis and interpretation stage, allowing inter￾rogation of the data from different angles. But expert knowledge, time and 
effort is still required to produce the report, so it is best to avoid expecta￾tions of the software that are unrealistic.Operational risk reporting 263
Reports internally focused
Most organizations are largely internally focused and do not provide enough 
external perspective. It is good practice to actively engage with industry fo￾rums and trade associations, and to read external and regulatory reports to 
obtain a view of how the firm compares with its peers and the industry more 
broadly. What emerging risks are on the horizon? What are your peers fo￾cusing on? In this context another good question to add to the set of 
Questions highlighted earlier is ‘How does the firm’s profile compare to in￾dustry peers/external trends?’.
Data lacks integrity
As repeatedly highlighted by the Basel Committee, data integrity remains a 
challenge for most firms.7
 Many of the standard operational risk instru￾ments are manual, or even where software is used the outputs are not easy 
to aggregate. Some pieces of data quickly become out of date. Self-assessment 
of data quality, integrity and timeliness, with follow-up actions if needed, is 
a robust practice.
Good practices
Create a reference library
We have all been on the receiving end of a report that is poor and does not 
answer the so what? question. Generally, these will go straight into the bin, 
allowing us to move onto the next urgent task on our list. On the other 
hand, every time we come across a clear, concise report – where every piece 
of data is adding to the narrative – we can add it to a reporting ‘reference 
library’, to store ideas and give us a head start when producing the next 
document.
Know your audience
Knowing your audience helps greatly in delivering reports that are fit for 
purpose. For example, some recipients may be colour blind; worldwide 
there are approximately 300  million people with colour blindness.8
 For 
these people, a typical risk heatmap, filled with Red, Amber and Green KRIs, 
will not be well received and is better replaced with descriptive narrative. 
Alternatively, both colour and a descriptor (e.g. the word Amber) can be 
used simultaneously. Furthermore some senior executives may favour high￾level summaries while others will be highly detail orientated and will want 264 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
to search for supporting data. To manage this problem effectively, aim to 
solicit feedback proactively, initiating a dialogue with the committee or 
board to really understand their expectations and discuss what went well in 
the last report and what might be improved. This kind of feedback is rarely 
forthcoming if not asked for; it is best to take the initiative and seek it out.
Address report writing basics
As obvious as it sounds, it is important to address generic report-writing 
challenges, including developing a template, and providing training to re￾port writers and other team members who are tasked with submitting in￾puts. Ideally, appoint a person with excellent language skills in addition to 
operational risk expertise. Ensure that all graphs are annotated with ex￾planatory notes, so the audience is not left guessing as to their meaning.
Write steering and supervising papers
Boards and senior committees – some better than others, admittedly – bal￾ance their time between steering and supervising kinds of discussions. 
Steering the organization requires challenging whether the firm has the right 
strategy, risk appetite and risk culture, and if there are smarter ways of 
working. In turn, supervising evolves around monitoring if the agreed strat￾egy is on track, targets have been hit and level of risk is within the appetite.
Consequently, the Operational Risk department – and indeed all risk dis￾ciplines – write both types of papers to aid senior committees to exercise 
their dual role. Examples of supervising papers include the more common 
risk profile updates, risk appetite reports and escalation of material opera￾tional risk events. Steering papers are often more reflective and may involve 
external comparative benchmarks, such as comparison of own operational 
risk appetite with peers (risk appetite of peer firms can be easily extracted 
from publicly available disclosures); external view on top operational risks 
in contrast to internal risk profile; suggestion to introduce a new emerging 
risk horizon scanning process in line with industry best practice. Based on 
the live poll conducted by Best Practice Forum members, the majority (87 
per cent) of produced papers were of supervisory nature; and more steering￾type reports would be beneficial.
Append opinion to first line business units’ reports
First line business units and support functions should also produce or con￾tribute to committee and board papers. It is good practice to ask the risk 
owner in the first line to present on their own risk profile. This approach is Operational risk reporting 265
especially effective in cases where the first line is asking for investment to 
mitigate a material risk. It is also beneficial for celebrating success; if, for 
example, an area has been found to have significant flaws and subsequently 
took remedial actions, deriving meaningful lessons learnt which are worth 
sharing.
When first line business units and support functions are authoring re￾ports, the second line Operational Risk department can append its inde￾pendent opinion to the first line reports. This is a powerful technique that 
allows senior committees and the board to have the benefit of both sets of 
views.
Add value
Reporting is a start of the process, not the end of it. Every paper has its pur￾pose, be it, for example, to initiate further action or request input. When 
producing a document, ask yourself the question ‘Is it adding value?’. 
Inevitably, committee and board meetings run out of time, and papers for 
noting are usually taken as read and therefore skipped. This makes it even 
more important to develop reports that appear at the front of the pile, gen￾erating discussion and helping in decision-making. Some firms actively pro￾hibit papers that are for information only or for noting.
Industry benchmark
Operational risk practitioners from various financial services firms of differ￾ent sizes and geographical spread participated in a live poll to examine dif￾ferent aspects of operational risk reporting.
How long are operational risk reports?
There has been a positive change in this area: by 2023, reports to risk com￾mittees, executive committees and the board had somewhat decreased in 
length compared to previous years (also see 1st edition of the book). The 
majority of respondents (65 per cent) produced reports of around 10–12 
pages, while 29 per cent wrote more detailed papers of 20–30 pages (see 
Figure 10.5). In 2019, 7 per cent were producing voluminous papers over 50 
pages long; this practice was no longer observed in 2023.266 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
Have operational risk reports improved over the years?
A large majority of respondents (94 per cent) agreed that firms have grad￾ually evolved their ability to create shorter, punchier operational risk re￾ports which help boards and committees to take the right decisions. Of 
these, 12 per cent noted a substantial enhancement. This has been achieved 
predominantly via improved risk commentary, creating a meaningful nar￾rative to answer the so what? question. Structurally, a combination of a 
clear and succinct executive summary and a more developed risk appe￾tite – enabling reporting of the level of risk against an agreed appetite – 
have also aided the positive transformation. Experience gained over the 
years and understanding what boards view as a good report has also 
helped. There is no ‘one size fits all’ when it comes to board expectations 
of reporting. Some boards prefer succinct summaries while others like the 
report to go into substantial detail.
What are the key reporting challenges?
Reporting improvements were largely achieved at the expense of employees 
working longer and harder to process an ever-increasing volume of manual 
data. Arguably, the challenges around report writing have intensified in line 
with increased digitalization. In ranking order, time and capacity constraints 
came first, coupled with poor data and sub-optimal risk tools (see 
Figure 10.7). Participants lacked instant access to an up-to-date risk profile 
Under 20
pages
Under 50
pages
Over 50
pages
Under 5
pages
6%
29%
65%
What is the length of Op Risk report?
Figure 10.5 Industry poll: length of operational risk report
Best Practice Operational Risk Forum, 2023Operational risk reporting 267
Yes,
somewhat
Yes, greatly Not really
12%
6%
82%
Op Risk report has matured and improved
Figure 10.6 Operational risk report maturity
Poor or insufcient
data
Time/capacity
constraints
Sub-optimal Op
Risk tools
New aspects - e.g.,
resilience, ESG
Lack of direction/
guidance
1st
2nd
3rd
4th
5th
Rank Op Risk reporting challenges in order of
significance
Figure 10.7 Industry poll: operational risk reporting challenges
Best Practice Operational Risk Forum, 2023
Best Practice Operational Risk Forum, 2023
which could be generated at a click of a button. Considering we are in a 
digital age, risk professionals spend a notable amount of time assembling 
risk reports, manually extracting data from Excel spreadsheets and other 
sources, to create an aggregate view of the risk profile. On this basis the 
Basel Committee’s comments on the need for continued investment in tech￾nological tools in the risk arena remain valid to this day, reinforcing the 
strong case for advancement.268 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
Practical workplace exercise
Reflecting on the content of this chapter, obtain copies of operational risk 
reports submitted to the risk committee, board or other governance com￾mittee over the last year, selecting at least three reports for comparison pur￾poses. Review the reports, considering:
1 Has the report writer followed all the three steps outlined in this chapter?
2 Is there an opinion and call for action?
3 Is the report clear and well structured?
4 What works well? Make notes of the features that you particularly like.
5 What can be improved? Note down potential improvements for future 
reports.
MAKE A DIFFERENCE (MAD) ACTION
Please outline the learnings and note down one action that you will take 
after reading this chapter that will make a positive difference to operational 
risk reporting practices in your workplace.
In summary, this chapter discussed the crucial role of operational risk re￾porting, proposing an approach for developing concise, actionable and 
value-add reports.Operational risk reporting 269
Now that we have covered the core elements of the operational risk frame￾work, subsequent chapters move to describing supplementary aspects, start￾ing with training and education.
Notes
1 Financial Reporting Council (2018) The UK Corporate Governance Code, 
www.frc.org.uk/getattachment/88bd8c45-50ea-4841-95b0-d2f4f48069a2/2018-
UK-Corporate-Governance-Code-FINAL.pdf (archived at https://perma.
cc/47XG-5UUA)
2 Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2013) Principles for Effective Risk 
Data Aggregation and Risk Reporting, www.bis.org/publ/bcbs239.pdf (archived 
at https://perma.cc/Q3XQ-467P)
3 Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2020) Progress in Adopting the 
Principles for Effective Risk Data Aggregation and Risk Reporting, www.bis.
org/bcbs/publ/d501.pdf (archived at https://perma.cc/F9BM-7FXA)
4 Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2023) Progress in Adopting the 
Principles for Effective Risk Data Aggregation and Risk Reporting, www.bis.
org/bcbs/publ/d559.pdf (archived at https://perma.cc/B8NE-QYVE)
5 Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2023) Progress in Adopting the 
Principles for Effective Risk Data Aggregation and Risk Reporting, www.bis.
org/bcbs/publ/d559.pdf (archived at https://perma.cc/B8NE-QYVE)
6 Board Intelligence, www.boardintelligence.com/product (archived at https://
perma.cc/MET9-MZM7)
7 Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2023) Progress in Adopting the 
Principles for Effective Risk Data Aggregation and Risk Reporting, www.bis.
org/bcbs/publ/d559.pdf (archived at https://perma.cc/B8NE-QYVE)
8 Colour Blind Awareness, www.colourblindawareness.org/colour-blindness/
(archived at https://perma.cc/KA7G-M8C4)Operational risk 11
training and 
education
What this chapter covers: The chapter focuses on the importance of invest￾ing in upskilling colleagues across the organization on operational risk; and 
embedding further knowledge about the responsibilities across the firm 
(Figure 11.1). In an age of training fatigue – when employees can easily be 
overwhelmed by the number of mandatory training courses they need to 
complete – the chapter suggests useful hints and tips for deploying best-in￾class training programmes that employees will find educational, engaging 
and memorable.
FURTHER READING AND RESOURCES
● Becky Pike Pluth (2021) Webinars with WOW Factor: Tips, tricks and 
interactive activities for webinars, Creative Training Productions
Why recommended: This practical book covers the need-to-know of 
effective virtual training, and features activities that create connection, 
energize learners and keep the life in your training programmes.
● Additionally, there are very useful resources including free guides and 
trainer kits, as well as excellent courses to upskill your training 
capabilities available on the website www.bobpikegroup.com. These can 
be supplemented by books on specific topics:
● Facilitation: 
Becky Pike Pluth (2018) Training Difficult People, Creative Training 
Productions
270Operational risk training and education 271
Advocating for continuous risk education
Education is one of the most powerful things in life. As a professional 
trainer with over 20 years’ experience in delivering public and in-house 
courses, I feel passionate about this subject and always advocate for pro￾found investment in learning. Education is particularly important when it 
comes to operational risk management as it is vital for embedding the 
practices in the organization. The discipline is still relatively young and 
has not yet fully bedded down; therefore, there is a continuous need for 
managers and practitioners to keep constantly raising awareness, deliver￾ing impactful and relevant messages to ensure that all employees are con￾versant with and apply key risk management principles and concepts. 
Over the past decade, the need for risk education was repeatedly empha￾sized. A review conducted by the Basel Committee in 2014 noted that 
most firms ‘indicated that some form of operational risk training has been 
established but had plans to enhance existing training’.1
 An update to the 
sound practices issued by the Basel Committee in 2021 since strengthened 
the educational requirements, directing organizations to ensure that an 
‘appropriate level of operational risk training is available at all levels 
throughout the organisation’.2
 Yet in 2024, banks’ non-financial risk train￾ing was slammed as ‘inadequate’,3
 with a patchwork approach, lack of a 
minimum standard and employees left on their own to find training op￾portunities. Therefore, risk education requires ongoing investment in 
terms of time, thought and resources to maintain – and even excel – in 
delivering high quality learning.
● Public speaking:
Viv Groskop (2018) How to Own The Room: Women and the art of 
brilliant speaking, Bantam Press
● Influencing:
Thomas Harris (2012) I’m OK, You’re OK: A practical guide to 
transactional analysis, Arrow
Eric Berne (2016) Games People Play: The psychology of human 
relationships, Penguin LifeGovernance, roles and responsibilities
Establish governance and clear roles across the Three Lines for managing operational risk.
Risk assessments
Assess risk exposure in 
process, business or
function via RCSAs.
Supplement by evaluating
risks emanating from 
change activities via 
ORAs.
Identify exposure from
extreme but plausible 
events. Mitigate through
risk transfer to insurance.
Scenario analysis
Monitor risk and control
performance through 
predictive indicators.
Act if indicators breach 
established appetite 
threshold. 
Key Risk Indicators
Reporting and decision-making
Review actual risk profile against set appetite, apply active risk management to enable achievement of strategic objectives.
Operational risk 
events
Record and report risk 
events, act to minimize
future exposure.
Monitor trends against
RCSAs and KRIs.
Risk appetite and risk capacity
Define nature and types of risk accepted in pursuit of strategic objectives. Evaluate adequacy of capital resources.
Operational risk taxonomy
Embedding and maturity assessment
Training and education
Risk culture
Figure 11.1 Focus of Chapter 11: training and education
272Operational risk training and education 273
Building blocks for upskilling 
risk professionals
The educational journey must begin with the second line operational risk 
function. As discussed in Chapter 3, second line multipliers are tasked not 
only with engaging with the first line champions but also with passing on 
their own knowledge and inspiring the entire organization. Consequently, 
the skills and abilities of the second line team are a core factor in success￾fully implementing risk management tools and processes across the firm. 
The development of deep second line expertise leads to the department 
being perceived as a centre of excellence and each team member becoming 
an ambassador of good practices.
While specific training requirements may arise based on individual need 
assessments, there are several key skills that all team members should pos￾sess in order for them to become all-round role models. This key skillset 
consists of three essential building blocks proposed in Figure 11.2, and a 
number of bonus add-ons.
Operational risk framework and tools
The first learning objective is to achieve full proficiency with the framework 
and tools. It is difficult to educate others when one’s own knowledge is only 
partial. To excel, every second line employee needs to master all individual 
components of the framework – RCSAs, KRIs, appetite and others – as well 
as having a clear grasp of how the components relate to each other. In larger 
teams, employees may be split into sub-units, focusing on a particular aspect 
of operational risk management which they are practising continuously and 
in which they consequently develop deep expertise. These focused employ￾ees can (and should) be requested to routinely share their knowledge with 
Framework
and tools
External
perspective
and industry
acumen
Interpersonal
skills
Figure 11.2 Three educational building blocks for the second line teams274 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
the rest of the group. Instil the discipline of dedicating part of regular de￾partmental meetings to an overview by one of these specialists, covering 
their particular subject. Over time every component of the framework can 
be covered in a series of sessions, increasing everyone’s familiarity with the 
multifaceted framework and equipping the whole team with broad and co￾hesive knowledge. After this process, personnel will be well positioned to 
transfer skills to the rest of the organization. In fact, for staff working in the 
Operational Risk department there is simply no excuse for operating in silos 
or displaying limited know-how.
External perspective and industry acumen
Integrated framework knowledge allows employees to answer the how
question: how do we manage operational risk in our organization? 
Practitioners also need to be able to articulate why the tools have been de￾signed in a particular way. This is a more difficult challenge to surmount. 
Ideally it requires heuristic experience of working in multiple companies, 
enabling the practitioner to compare practices first hand, to reflect on what 
works and tailor the appropriate solutions. Knowledge of the why can, 
however, also be acquired by consciously seeking a perspective on how the 
firm’s operational risk management compares with industry best practices. 
As discussed in previous chapters, these practices are not set in stone; there 
is great divergence among financial services institutions in the use of the dif￾ferent framework elements. Successful professionals have their finger on the 
pulse. They are perceptive about where the industry is headed, conversant 
with regulatory priorities and areas of focus, and aware of how their own 
tools and processes relate to the benchmark.
Practical suggestions on how this wider perspective can be achieved are 
listed below:
● Researching, finding and joining practitioners’ forums. Nothing replaces 
the value of conversations between fellow professionals, performing 
comparative analysis and sharing real life successes and challenges.
● Subscribing to news feeds and magazines. Plenty of free subscriptions are 
available, including Operational Riskdata eXchange Association (ORX)4
and Risk Channel5
 which provide thoughtful insights that anyone can 
benefit from. Examples of paid platforms include: Thomson Reuters,6
 an 
industry leader in regulatory intelligence; Risk.net,
7
 which includes 
events, conferences and a magazine; and RiskSpotlight,8
 which offers a 
horizon scanning portal.Operational risk training and education 275
● Obtaining membership in professional organizations such as the Institute 
of Risk Management which enables access to seminars, a network of 
practitioners and an opportunity to obtain a qualification (Certificate in 
Operational Risk Management – CORM).9,10
● Attending external operational risk training courses. These are run by 
multiple organizations, Risk.net and Euronext11 being good examples.
● Inviting external guest speakers or trainers to share their views on 
particular topics.
● Asking first line colleagues to attend second line team meetings and talk 
about their risks.
Use all the means available to you to continuously gather and share intelli￾gence and stay abreast of industry developments.
Interpersonal: facilitation, speaking, influencing
Even with exceptional framework and industry knowledge, practitioners 
will not be successful if they are unable to relay it effectively. The impor￾tance of softer skills was emphasized when discussing multipliers, who com￾municate, collaborate and build strong relationships (see Chapter  3). 
Consequently, enhancing the ability of risk employees to engage with an 
audience and energize their stakeholders is crucial. As will be seen from the 
industry benchmark later in the chapter, firms tend to underinvest in the 
development of softer skills, and more focus is needed in this area.
Operational risk multipliers should be already spending a significant pro￾portion of their time out there talking to their audience; whether educating, 
making presentations or facilitating RCSAs, KRIs or scenario workshops.
Facilitation
Workshop facilitation involves leading a group of participants to success 
and providing them with the necessary resources and opportunities; it is the 
art of making meetings more effective.
Facilitation is a key skill which needs to be practised and mastered. It can be 
mistakenly assumed that anyone can step in and competently lead a workshop 
with any type of audience, instantly achieving the desired outcome. On the 276 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
contrary, sufficient thought and planning is needed on the prerequisites and 
capabilities required by the facilitator. Audiences can be unruly; and trying to 
facilitate a meeting or workshop without sufficient know-how or dexterity in 
handling problems can be a recipe for disaster. So important is this attribute 
that the outcome of a group session often depends significantly on the talents 
of its leader. At the other end of the spectrum, regrettably, I have witnessed 
poor workshop management being a major contributor to a sub-optimal 
RCSA programme.
Facilitation training prior to leading any RCSA, KRI or scenario work￾shop needs to include:
● The basics, covering organizational matters such as creating an agenda, 
setting expectations, managing time and delivering an outcome.
● Advanced components, including various workshop structures, agreeing 
ground rules, use of tools (Post-its and flipcharts for face-to-face 
workshops, interactive features of online platforms for virtual meetings), 
and a range of approaches to engaging participants and shaping group 
discussions, with particular focus on hybrid meetings which require more 
thought and preparation.
● Core and vital – but nevertheless frequently omitted – is an understanding 
of the different types of personalities attending the workshop, and a range 
of tactics for managing them. Tailored approaches can be used to handle 
disruptive participants such as the domineering, who overrules everything 
that is said; the sceptic, who constantly questions the value of the meeting 
and doubts whether anything useful will come of it; and the introvert, who 
holds valuable information but never speaks; among many others.
● Additional useful techniques for dealing with latecomers and distractions 
(for example, phones and laptops), disengagement (such as cameras 
switched off during virtual meetings), managing conflicts and drawing on 
the collective intelligence of the room.
If budget permits, invest in external facilitation masterclasses and/or certifi￾cations. Alternatively, assemble a library of essential books and online re￾sources as recommended in the beginning of the chapter.
CASE STUDY 11.1
A large international financial services firm launches operational risk 
assessments which it plans to execute via a series of workshops. Over the years, Operational risk training and education 277
the company has successfully applied a Six Sigma process improvement 
methodology, making it compulsory for every employee who commences a 
project to complete a masterclass covering methodological as well as leadership 
and facilitation aspects. Using this model as an example, Group Operational Risk 
decides to adopt the same proven tactic and mandates facilitation training for 
any member of staff expected to direct a workshop. This training consists of two 
half-day sessions and contains basic and advanced components of facilitation. It 
prepares participants administratively, mentally and emotionally for the task 
ahead and ensures uniformity in the firm’s approach to the workshops.
Public speaking
Public speaking deserves a special mention. A large number of candidates 
working in operational risk have an accounting, audit or operations back￾ground. These professions are by nature more introverted than, for example, 
sales and marketing. Public speaking may not be a natural strength of em￾ployees with this kind of background; so a conscious investment needs to be 
made in developing them to be dynamic, engaging and enthusiastic present￾ers. This is a valuable and transferrable skill: employees who master the art 
of public speaking are in great demand in any industry and will likely go 
further in their careers. Furthermore proficiency in public speaking is also 
immensely helpful in facilitation.
Build teams that excel by:
● starting with basics, training and coaching internally;
● having an observer sitting in and providing feedback to the presenter 
post-meeting;
● working with a coach to film the speech or presentation and then play it 
back, focusing on both content and delivery;
● exploring external public speaking courses;
● adding to the library of essential books, as suggested in the section on 
further reading.
Influencing
Those interested in psychology will acknowledge that not only is it a capti￾vating subject, but also very useful in the corporate world. The modus oper￾andi of operational risk employees is by influencing; they do not directly 278 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
manage business units or support functions, but are expected to be the effec￾tive collaborators, connectors and change agents of culture, transforming 
risk management thinking and the practices of the organization. Thus, any 
additional knowledge on how to improve influencing skills is most wel￾come.
A specific area where reading the dynamics is particularly beneficial is 
the relationship between a second line operational risk multiplier over￾seeing a first line operational risk champion. This multiplier–champion 
pair can be dysfunctional from the start. For example, you may have 
encountered a first line coordinator who, like a disobedient child, is 
chronically late in completing RCSA refresh, tardy with loss event re￾porting and continually missing the deadline for providing commentary 
on their risk profile. The second line multiplier, however, acts in a parent
capacity, always stepping in and helping their colleague out. This pair is 
locked in a parent–child relationship; with the first line getting away 
with poor behaviours and the second line constantly going above and 
beyond the call of duty. They need to recognize this dysfunction and take 
the relationship to a new adult–adult level, rebalancing their roles and 
responsibilities.
Another potential example is a parent in the first line speaking down to a 
child in the second line; perhaps scolding them for not having sufficient un￾derstanding of all the intricacies of the first line business; or maybe even 
asking them to come back only when they have read all the relevant policies 
and procedures.
For those interested in psychology, a number of excellent books explore 
transactional analysis and the famous parent–adult–child theory; two books 
have been recommended in the beginning of this chapter.
Additional areas for development
The breadth of the operational risk discipline leads to grand expectations 
around the general level of knowledge and skill of operational risk practi￾tioners. Whether realistic or not, all aspects of people, systems, processes 
and external environment are presumed to have been mastered by the risk 
practitioner. Therefore, increasing the general level of knowledge of opera￾tional risk professionals will invariably bear fruit. Useful areas employees Operational risk training and education 279
are encouraged to assimilate via internal (and where possible, external) 
courses include:
● areas of regulatory focus; for example, operational resilience, third-party, 
cyber, ESG;
● skills and processes helping employees to be more entrepreneurial and 
business-savvy, e.g. decision-making, project management and Six Sigma 
process improvement;
● topical know-how in the field of data, automation and traditional and 
generative artificial intelligence;
● financial risk management, whether credit, market or liquidity, as risk 
professionals frequently attend (or are members of) enterprise risk 
management committees, and holistic understanding of the broader 
risk management world is beneficial; and
● business-specific knowledge.
Table 11.1 Self-development objectives for second line operational risk 
practitioners
Rating Activities
Achieved 
Expectation
Keeps up to date on operational risk topics by reading 
relevant press/magazines, participating in external 
conferences and meetings.
Researches, prepares and delivers at least one educational 
presentation to the team on a chosen operational risk topic.
Achieved Plus Enrolls into and successfully obtains a recognized 
operational risk qualification or certification.
Joins a relevant industry body or group.
Researches, prepares and delivers a series of educational 
presentations to the team and first line business units 
support functions.
Exceeded 
Expectation
Authors an article published in a recognized professional/
industry magazine.
Delivers a presentation at a public forum or external 
conference. Is recognized as an industry expert, takes on a 
role as chair of a panel, forum or committee.
Designs and develops train-the-trainer presentations to the 
team and first line business units/support functions.
Mentors a team member on public speaking/facilitation.280 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
Encouraging employee self-development
Learning is a joint responsibility of the employee and their leader. While 
managing large international teams I always aimed to motivate staff to in￾vest in their self-development. I found it useful to outline clear pointers on 
what ‘good’ looks like, encouraging staff to use their initiative to progress 
on their educational journey. Table  11.1 is an example of a rating scale 
agreed at the beginning of the year, which is subsequently incorporated into 
the broader performance evaluation process at year end.
Cultivating first line risk coordinators
In Chapter  3, we discussed the importance of developing a network of 
champions in the first line. Champions, once appointed and in situ, need to 
be kept continuously energized and motivated, and education plays a crucial 
role in achieving this objective.
What do champions need to know? Essentially, they are an extension of 
the second line operational risk function, so the same kinds of educational 
resource and opportunity should be offered to them also.
In cases where the champion is a part-time role and they have more lim￾ited time, a more concise tuition programme can be developed:
● Training on operational risk framework and tools. It is particularly 
powerful when this training can be delivered by the organization’s second 
line experts, either in its entirety or in a combination with external 
trainers; as this explicitly reinforces the department’s position as a centre 
of excellence. This training can cover key framework components such as 
losses and near misses, RCSAs, KRIs and scenarios.
● Encouraging further studying to obtain a recognized operational risk 
qualification.
● Providing opportunities to join external training, offering tickets to 
operational risk conferences (where budget permits) or extending 
invitations to participate in industry forums.
● Facilitation training. If the firm is already running a good programme, it 
is beneficial to offer it to the first line champions who inevitably will end 
up leading meetings and workshops.
The second line can assist by developing minimum skillset requirements for 
first line coordinators; and undertaking a training needs analysis, to identify 
gaps between the skills held and knowledge required.Operational risk training and education 281
The educational journey: three steps 
towards memorable risk training
Once the second line is fully equipped with knowledge and first line cham￾pions have been well trained, it is time to launch a firm-wide campaign.
Training for the wider population of staff usually involves a combination 
of online modules and face-to-face sessions, since classroom-led training is 
widely recognized as being far more impactful than online tutorials. It is 
strongly recommended to include a programme for all new joiners as part of 
their overall induction, as well as periodic refresher sessions.
Outlined in Figure  11.3 are three suggested steps to deliver effective, 
memorable operational risk training.
Step 1: Design phase – high-quality materials 
and a theme
Education does not have to be boring, and there are many good alternatives 
to a set of dull training slides which merely recite Basel Committee guide￾lines on operational risk management. All firms have professionals whose 
job is to produce sleek and colourful promotional materials, ads and client 
presentations. Commonly, Marketing and Communications departments 
CASE STUDY 11.2
A two-day training programme is developed by the second line Operational Risk 
department, with the aim of raising the general standard of education on 
operational risk and making it more comprehensive. This programme contains an 
overview of all framework components and how they are implemented in the 
organization. The team works together to add interactive elements including 
group work, case studies and quizzes, which all enhance the participants’ 
experience. The course, piloted on first line champions, is delivered face-to-face, 
with each topic presented by a different speaker from the second line.
It receives excellent feedback. Delivery by internal personnel is praised and 
perceived as a strong point which immediately boosts the department’s 
reputation. Based on this experience, subsequent sessions are scheduled 
regularly in various locations across the country, allowing the maximum number 
of attendees to benefit from the training being offered.282 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
High-quality
design
Interactive
delivery
Continuous
improvement
Figure 11.3 Three steps for developing all-staff education
CASE STUDY 11.3
An all-staff operational risk training programme is being developed in a start-up 
firm. The chief executive understands and embraces the value of operational 
risk, eloquently comparing the organization with a newly built airplane: proper 
management of people, systems, processes and the external environment will all 
support a smooth journey. The Operational Risk department partners with 
Marketing and agrees on an aircraft theme for the programme, with a photo of 
the chief executive in the cockpit and key messages from the pilot. Each training 
participant receives a key ring in the form of a plane as a free gift. Employees 
understand the analogy and connect with the theme, and the training manages 
to achieve its objective of reaching out with simple messages and raising 
awareness.
employ creative people full of ideas of what ‘good’ looks like when it comes 
to capturing an audience’s attention. When developing operational risk 
training programmes, partner with experts and request their advice and help 
to design presentations for internal personnel that are not only impactful 
but visually appealing. This resource is not utilized nearly enough – 
Operational Risk departments need to reach out and speak much more to 
marketing, communications or other equivalent functions to take advantage 
of their skills and expertise. It is very fitting to mention here the brilliant 
work by The Bob Pike Group (included in recommended resources). The 
organization runs courses for all educators, from university teachers to risk 
professionals, on how to design and deliver impactful learning. From open￾ers and closers to use of music and videos to strengthen the message, the 
courses simply excel in taking training to the next level.
In terms of strengthening the message, one practical way is to find a 
meaningful theme which resonates with the firm’s strategy, objectives and 
aspirations. This makes the training more engaging, vivid and real.Operational risk training and education 283
Step 2: Delivery – interactive 
and with a sense of humour
Once the training materials have been developed, it is important to focus 
on the excellence of delivery. Consider various learning styles, be they vis￾ual, auditory or kinaesthetic (learning by doing), and design a programme 
which incorporates a mixture of approaches. Chinese philosopher 
Confucius is reputed to have said: ‘I hear and I forget. I see and I remem￾ber. I do and I understand.’ Interactive sessions where participants apply 
their learning in practice maximize the degree to which the material is 
absorbed. Reflecting on many years of my own teaching, the delegates al￾ways quote engagement and the doing part as a very enjoyable feature of 
the courses I have run.
For longer one- or two-day training sessions, it is effective to use group 
work, splitting participants into teams. Engaging exercises can be designed 
for each component of the framework:
● OREs – reviewing internal or external case studies of major operational 
risk failures;
● RCSAs – having a go at identifying top operational risks and plotting 
them on a heat map to practise risk identification;
● KRIs – creating indicators for a select top operational risk and setting 
thresholds, or sharing the best metrics currently used to manage risks and 
discussing their attributes;
● reporting – to reinforce the message that reporting should be succinct – 
selecting a film or a book and summarizing it in six words.
There is still time for attendee interaction even in shorter sessions. When 
introducing operational risk events, ask the audience to come up with an 
example of a recent event for all relevant categories of the taxonomy. At the 
end, running a short quiz with a few simple questions on definitions, thresh￾olds for loss reporting, roles and responsibilities works quite well.
Training should be fun, so light-hearted delivery works best. People like 
to laugh, and it is up to the trainer to find relevant yet humorous examples 
which reinforce the need for risk management. Clever use of personal sto￾ries, cartoons and images can be powerful. One video clip has two Australian 
comedians talking about the BP oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico; this conveys 
exceptionally well the need to think about risk proactively, and most par￾ticipants seem to find it very amusing.284 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
Trainers inevitably bring examples of industry disasters when talking 
about operational risk events. Instead of citing ordinary cases of technology 
failures or fines for money laundering, do some research and find more unu￾sual events. There is a rather interesting case of a teenager taking revenge on 
former bosses by sending some five million emails quoting a warning from 
a horror film, The Ring, which eventually led to the collapse of the firm’s 
servers under the weight of the email traffic.12 I always ask the audience to 
guess what was in the quote.
Step 3: Feedback and continuous evolution
A training module is only as good as the audience thinks it is. It is valuable 
to solicit feedback after each session, via a paper form or an online survey. 
Key questions to consider may include:
● Was the session useful and well delivered?
● Did the training provide learnings that you can apply in your daily job?
● Do you understand your role in managing operational risk?
It is useful to leave some room for free format comments and suggestions on 
how to improve the training. Attendees can then come up with creative ideas 
and fair criticism, which should be studiously examined with the aim to 
continuously improve the training offering.
Tailoring the content to the audience
What about training content? While there is no universal answer and the 
agenda depends on each firm’s individual circumstances, the emphasis should 
be on the relevance of the learning. Employees need to come out of the ses￾sion equipped with knowledge that they can directly apply in practice.
At its simplest level, all employees need to know:
● What is operational risk?
● How is it managed?
● What is my role in the process, and what should I be doing?
All staff should be able to recognize and report operational risk events 
(OREs); therefore the training must provide examples of what those are and 
guide employees on how to do those things. If the session is delivered to a Operational risk training and education 285
particular business or function, the content can be tailored to suit the audi￾ence, with relevant discussion around losses and near misses that can poten￾tially happen in their area. Chapter 4 articulated such examples for Human 
Resources and Trading.
Training covering RCSAs, KRIs, scenarios and ORAs is more targeted to 
those who are taking part in these exercises, and should be carried out in a 
timely manner, shortly before the workshops or even as part of them.
It is imperative to incorporate executive briefings for senior management. 
The same concept of relevance applies, in a similar way to employees, to 
assist senior executives to absorb the key information while also applying 
the concepts. Therefore, the best learning happens when executives:
● carry out a strategic risk assessment (see Chapter  5), identifying and 
evaluating risks that may prevent them from achieving their objectives;
● review their departmental RCSA, outlining what keeps them awake at 
night and debating mitigating actions for significant risks;
● act on the operational risk assessment of a new product which has 
highlighted a material risk area.
An introductory methodological presentation is beneficial, especially when 
it is followed immediately by a participation exercise.
Online training
It may not be possible to run ongoing face-to-face sessions for all staff. Web￾based refresher training can play a supportive role in delivering key mes￾sages to a larger target audience. However, a word of caution. We have all 
been there and done that – clicking through the pages quickly to get to the 
end in record time (‘phew, mandatory training completed’). So it takes twice 
as much creativity to design an online module that stands a chance of at￾tracting attention:
● Use the same first step as in face-to-face training, aiming for high-quality 
materials and a theme, to enhance attendees’ visual learning experience.
● Supplement the training materials with an auditory learning element, by 
including personal and impactful recorded video messages. These can be 
from senior leaders on the importance of risk management, or from 
employees on what risk management means to them in their daily jobs.
● Add questions and quizzes to incorporate the doing part. This is one of 
the few advantages of online modules, where tests are easy to administer. 286 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
Well-designed activities help to engage the learners, prompting them to 
maintain focus and participate actively in the training.
● Place the evaluation up-front, rather than at the end of the course. A 
session which starts with a test of current knowledge recognizes that 
some employees will already have a good grasp of core material. If they 
pass, they do not need to proceed with the full course, thus saving them 
time and retaining their goodwill.
● To add variety, consider embedding pointers and/or links to the internal 
company website. These could contain, for example, names and (ideally) 
photos of second line multipliers and first line champions, making them 
more personal and accessible; or a template for logging operational risk 
losses; or other relevant information.
● Develop a sequential progressive modular training programme, which 
builds on the knowledge imparted during previous modules.
● If an online module is re-used as refresher, ensure that materials and 
evaluations are significantly amended to reflect advances in both internal 
processes and the external environment. Integrate new recorded messages. 
There is nothing worse than the same training module being offered as a 
refresher year after year. If staff become over-familiar with the offering they 
will simply switch off. In this event not only is the training called into 
question but also the wider reputation of the Operational Risk department.
In conclusion, training in itself will not do the job of embedding operational 
risk management. It needs to be supported by a robust framework with 
meaningful tools and the right tone from the top. Education, however, can 
take the firm a long way forward in achieving this objective.
Common challenges and good practices
Common challenges
Challenges that may arise when designing and delivering educational pro￾grammes are outlined below.
Limited budget
Training has cost implications. While a lot can be achieved via internal 
means, there are undeniable benefits from investing in targeted external 
courses, where relevant. Operational risk courses and conferences, as well as Operational risk training and education 287
facilitation and public speaking programmes, can significantly enhance em￾ployee skillsets. A clear articulation of the investment being sought and the 
expected outcomes of the training, to help achieve senior level buy-in and 
approval, are therefore required.
Employees pushing back
Often, the challenge around training and education is a ‘why do I need to do 
this?’-type of comeback from staff. The training aids in embedding further 
knowledge about the responsibilities of colleagues across the firm and draws 
out the consequences of poor operational risk management. Understanding 
and managing firm’s risks is an enabler to meeting strategic objectives while 
remaining within defined risk appetite.
Training fatigue
While in the past end-users would be responsible for seeking out their own 
relevant training, the ever-increasing tsunami of regulation means that many 
other people are out there trying to achieve mandatory training objectives 
for everyone in the firm. Commonly folk are now chased by Compliance (to 
attend new conduct and culture training), Financial Crime (it’s time for your 
mandatory anti-money laundering refresh), Information Security (cyber risk 
update), Data Protection (the obligatory Global Data Protection Regulation 
education session), Health and Safety and many others. Operational risk is 
thus only part of a rather long queue. This makes it all the more important 
to stand out, with well-designed, memorable, engaging and meaningful 
learning that employees can truly benefit from. In addition, where possible, 
avoid organizational silos and look for synergies, developing joint modules 
where possible to relieve pressure on the end-user.
Apathy
At times, training workshops can be marred by apathy and/or poor attend￾ance on the part of business units or support functions. I always believe that 
leading by engagement is more powerful than via punishment or penalty. 
Persevere and continue to deliver excellent educational programmes. 
Through word of mouth, employees will get to hear about them, tag along 
and join in.
Missed opportunities
Over the years, I have interviewed multiple second line operational risk 
professionals. While many came across as all-round experts, quite a few 288 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
actually had experience of dealing with only one specific framework 
component, for example losses and near misses. They were not always 
proficient with other tools and could not always articulate how all the 
elements of the framework fitted together. When working in operational 
risk as an employee, be curious and strive to acquire a holistic under￾standing of the discipline and the surrounding business and regulatory 
environment. As a leader, be sure to always provide opportunities for 
cross-training and aim to develop a comprehensive pool of knowledge 
across all team members.
Good practices
Adopt entrepreneurial approach
Second line multipliers are key to the success of operational risk manage￾ment in the organization. To encourage a more entrepreneurial approach in 
the second line, it is beneficial to think of it as a consultancy firm which is 
rewarded based on the quality of its people. Could the operational risk func￾tion take off and branch out today, if it were hypothetically to start up as an 
independent company? Will the level of knowledge and interpersonal skills 
make it profitable? Would you hire them? If not, consider what further skill 
development is needed.
Appoint a training coordinator
Recognizing the importance of education, appoint a training coordinator 
within the second line, in coordination with the relevant Learning and 
Development or Human Resources department. This is usually not a full￾time role, but rather giving someone responsibility for thinking about the 
firm-wide training strategy and leading its implementation.
Embrace virtual learning
Covid-19 has taught us some valuable lessons about the effective use of 
virtual classrooms. What was previously an instructor-led session can now 
be delivered both face-to-face and virtually. Online platforms have excellent 
functionality, including live polls, whiteboards and break-out rooms. Other 
brilliant apps are available to facilitate brainstorming and group work, for 
example, Canva and Mentimeter. It takes some time to explore and master 
the features but I am really impressed with the varied offerings and online 
tools now available in the market.Operational risk training and education 289
Explore what is available on the market
When designing online training modules, it is beneficial to explore what is 
available off-the-shelf. Some suppliers, especially in compliance and finan￾cial crime, also develop operational risk training programmes. Because there 
is no standard application of the framework elements, however, any pur￾chased solution will need to be tailored, and supplemented by relevant ex￾amples, links and policy requirements. Still, providers such as Brainshark 
offer platforms on which unique, tailor-made training can be developed, 
offering a range of excellent features to help make the module more interac￾tive and engaging.13
Retain evidence
Nowadays, evidencing is key. Online modules store evidence of attend￾ance and pass rates, making them very effective for audit and control 
purposes.
Celebrate success
And lastly, celebrating success. Perseverance in training will continue to increase 
the overall level of knowledge in the organization. This, in turn, reinforces the 
correct use of the different framework components, embeds the right practices 
and strengthens the risk culture of the firm. The progress, reflected in the matu￾rity assessment (as described in Chapter 13), needs to be actively publicized and 
celebrated, to help embed operational risk management even further.
Industry benchmark
Practitioners from a wide range of financial services firms of different sizes 
and geographical spread joined the Best Practice Forum to participate in a 
live poll examining various aspects of operational risk training.
Starting with investment in their own skills and capabilities, both second 
line operational risk practitioners as well as embedded first line risk coordi￾nators noted that training budgets were at reasonable levels, thus offering 
adequate opportunities for continuous learning (see Figure 11.4). This is a 
positive development, as previously educational activities were targeted pri￾marily at second line risk resources. Inclusion of first line champions will 
enable them to make good progress in their learning, and develop an in￾creasingly good grasp of the concepts, framework, and core tools.290 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
Area of
focus-budget
allocated
Informally
developed￾no budget
84%
8%
Op Risk teams: soft skills development
8%
Not an area
of focus
Figure 11.5 Industry poll: operational risk soft skills development
Investment
in training
increased
Decreased
10%
45%
Op Risk skills and capabilities
45%
Remained
the same
Figure 11.4 Industry poll: investment in education of operational risk 
professionals
Best Practice Operational Risk Forum, 2023
Best Practice Operational Risk Forum, 2023
Training budgets, however, were mostly used for technical areas, such as 
advanced operational risk management, risk reporting, ESG, cyber, opera￾tional resilience, and most recently, data science and AI. As it relates to softer
qualities, while almost all participants (92 per cent) confirmed that some 
developmental activities were in place, only 8 per cent had actual spend al￾located (see Figure 11.5). Given the importance of softer skills, this area 
warrants further investment.Operational risk training and education 291
As it relates to firm-wide operational risk training, participants shared 
good practices, including:
● Educating the board, providing purposeful briefings and ensuring that 
each new board member receives a good overview;
● Engaging employees via gamification, such as risk competitions at 
Christmas (‘Riskmas competitions’);
● Including operational risk module at employee induction, to ensure new 
starters are adequately informed;
● Speaking at all-staff meetings and Town Halls on the value of risk 
management;
● Delivering tailor-made departmental briefings.
Due to constant attrition and inflow of new employees at all levels, it was 
agreed that training must be an ongoing activity. At busy times, however, it’s 
the education, which requires substantial time and resource investment, that 
was commonly descoped or delayed. Hence, members acknowledged that 
firm-wide operational risk training is not yet at its point of destination, and 
the Basel Committee’s conclusion on firms needing more risk learning re￾mains valid.
Practical workplace exercise
Review the operational risk training offering available within your firm. 
Consider the following questions:
1 Does the training strategy achieve the goal of developing the second line 
operational risk function into a centre of excellence?
2 Is the education sufficient to support first line champions?
3 What is the current level of staff knowledge and what can be done to 
increase it?
4 What works well? Make a note of the strong features of the current 
training programme.
5 What can be improved? Note down potential improvements to the 
current programme.292 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
In summary, this chapter discussed the crucial importance of education at all 
levels of the organization, proposing an approach for developing second line 
operational risk experts and transferring knowledge throughout the firm via 
well-designed and well-developed training.
Moving on, the next chapter continues the discussion with the topic of risk 
culture.
Notes
1 Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2014) Review of the Principles for 
the Sound Management of Operational Risk, www.bis.org/publ/bcbs292.pdf
(archived at https://perma.cc/7V33-DWSF)
2 Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2021) Revisions to the Principles for 
the Sound Management of Operational Risk, www.bis.org/bcbs/publ/d515.pdf
(archived at https://perma.cc/E45Y-GK3N)
3 Banking Risk & Regulation (2014), Banks’ non-financial risk training slammed 
as ‘inadequate’, https://www.bankingriskandregulation.com/banks-non-financial￾risk-training-slammed-as-inadequate/ (archived at https://perma.cc/S2WA-Y3HT)
MAKE A DIFFERENCE (MAD) ACTION
Please note down one action that you will take after reading this chapter 
that will make a positive difference to operational risk training in your firm.Operational risk training and education 293
4 Operational Riskdata eXchange Association (ORX), managingrisktogether.orx.
org/free-resources (archived at https://perma.cc/SWH8-VQGB)
5 Risk Channel, industryslice.com/RiskChannel (archived at https://perma.cc/
N59W-4HDC)
6 Thomson Reuters, www.thomsonreuters.com (archived at https://perma.cc/
SS2E-FBUS)
7 Risk.net, www.risk.net (archived at https://perma.cc/24ZN-3QN7)
8 RiskSpotlight, www.riskspotlight.com (archived at https://perma.cc/8LZ8-
MW6G)
9 Institute of Risk Management, www.theirm.org/join-our-community/about￾membership/ (archived at https://perma.cc/E2P6-TK6B)
10 Certificate in Operational Risk Management (CORM) www.ior-institute.org/
education/certificate-in-operational-risk-management (archived at https://
perma.cc/SUN8-QP3P)
11 Euronext Corporate Services Academy, www.corporateservices.euronext.com/
academy (archived at https://perma.cc/K399-YB7R)
12 Metro (2006) Sacked boy’s revenge emails, metro.co.uk/2006/08/24/sacked￾boys-revenge-emails-211474/ (archived at https://perma.cc/Z75D-F9TL)
13 Brainshark, www.brainshark.com/why-brainshark (archived at https://perma.
cc/V65F-YNA3)Risk culture 12
What this chapter covers: The chapter focuses on the least visible but most 
vital aspect of risk management – Risk Culture (Figure 12.1). It considers 
how to evaluate this key topic, and proposes ways of completing an assess￾ment via employee focus groups and the use of metrics. The chapter outlines 
practical steps that can be taken to embed the right ethos and behaviours. It 
goes on to highlight the importance of holding meaningful risk conversa￾tions across the firm; and reflects on the implications of the identity of op￾erational risk practitioners on the culture of the enterprise. The chapter also 
includes industry benchmark and case studies.
FURTHER READING
● Michael Power, Simon Ashby and Tommaso Palermo (2013) Risk Culture 
in Financial Organizations: A research report, London School of 
Economics
Why recommended: a very insightful report which still holds true today 
and sheds light on the multiple pockets of risk culture which may 
co-exist in a single organization; my favourite culture research out of 
multiple books and papers on the subject.
● David Royston-Lee and Sylvana Storey (2023) Brand You: Stand out from 
the crowd with authentic personal branding, Pearson
Why recommended: in this chapter, we touch upon the personal brand 
and identity of an operational risk professional. There is no better guide 
on developing a powerful brand than this book by two acclaimed 
authors. I would recommend it highly to anyone interested in developing 
their personal brand – or enhancing the brand of their Operational Risk 
department.
Understanding and measuring risk culture
Risk culture is not a new concept for operational risk practitioners. It is an 
integral part of the discipline, and features in Principle One of the Basel 
294Governance, roles and responsibilities
Establish governance and clear roles across the Three Lines for managing operational risk.
Risk assessments
Assess risk exposure in 
process, business or
function via RCSAs.
Supplement by evaluating
risks emanating from 
change activities via 
ORAs.
Identify exposure from
extreme but plausible 
events. Mitigate through
risk transfer to insurance.
Scenario analysis
Monitor risk and control
performance through 
predictive indicators.
Act if indicators breach 
established appetite 
threshold. 
Key Risk Indicators
Reporting and decision-making
Review actual risk profile against set appetite, apply active risk management to enable achievement of strategic objectives.
Operational risk
events
Record and report risk 
events, act to minimize
future exposure.
Monitor trends against
RCSAs and KRIs.
Risk appetite and risk capacity
Define nature and types of risk accepted in pursuit of strategic objectives. Evaluate adequacy of capital resources.
Operational risk taxonomy
Embedding and maturity assessment
Training and education
Risk culture
Figure 12.1 Focus of Chapter 12: risk culture
295296 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
Committee’s sound operational risk practices.1
 Historically, risk profession￾als have not only been involved in establishing and maintaining firms’ risk 
culture, but actually often took the lead in some organizations’ efforts, pos￾itively influencing ethos, values and behaviours.
DEFINITION OF RISK CULTURE
Risk culture is a social process that can be defined as an institution’s 
values, ‘norms, attitudes and behaviours related to risk awareness, risk 
taking and risk management’.2
By design, all the elements of an operational risk framework inevitably 
touch on themes of transparency, accountability and no blame. The effec￾tiveness of risk management is closely linked to and largely dependent on 
the firm’s culture. Organizations where the right values have been embedded 
are less likely to suffer damaging operational risk events, and stand a better 
chance of dealing with them effectively if they do occur.
It is, therefore, in the best interests of operational risk practitioners to be 
fully engaged on this topic. Two points before we move on to the main con￾tent of the chapter:
● An ample amount of literature has been published on the subject of 
culture. Regulators, industry bodies and consultancy firms have issued 
definitions, reports and guidelines which this chapter does not intend to 
replicate or re-interpret.
● Risk culture is undoubtedly a complex, multifaceted topic with no ‘recipe 
book’ answer. But practical steps can be taken to instil and embed the 
right behaviours throughout the organization.
Some form of culture assessment has become the norm within financial ser￾vices firms. Boards expect it and regulators require it. As noted, for instance, by 
the Australian Royal Commission, ‘all financial services entities should take 
proper steps to assess the entity’s culture’.3
 A benchmarking survey of over 50 
financial services firms revealed that, in general, firms’ culture was measured 
via employee surveys or focus groups, or alternatively metrics and dashboards.4
Interestingly, the top three methods used by organizations consisted of:
● employee exit interviews;
● employee surveys; andRisk culture 297
● appraisals and feedback received during the performance management 
process.
As demonstrated by the industry benchmark survey discussed at the end of 
the chapter, historically, cultural efforts in most organizations were led by 
the Human Resources function. But operational risk teams are now actively 
leading and contributing to these programmes.
The five-aspects risk culture assessment 
model
Any measure of culture is somewhat imprecise due to the complex nature of 
the subject. While organizations may have different perspectives, the work 
undertaken by the Financial Stability Board (FSB) represents a good place to 
start.5
 The proposed risk culture aspects model described in Figure  12.2 
takes into consideration FSB’s framework and focuses on five components: 
transparency, no blame, personal accountability, risk awareness and risk 
reward. It can be argued that these aspects are indicative of the firm’s cul￾tural ‘state of health’, and influence the firm’s ability to take the informed 
risk decisions necessary for achieving its strategic objectives. Organizations 
may add further factors that they feel are relevant to their firm.
The reasons why the five factors have been selected as particularly impor￾tant to the enterprise are articulated below:
● Transparency plays a significant role in information flows. It allows the 
transmission of messages without them being modified. For example, if a 
KRI is reported as Red, it does not get downgraded to Amber or Green
by the time it is escalated up the chain. Some senior managers, committees 
and boards do not deal well with Red indicators and other reports which 
raise alarms. As a result, true risks and issues can be demoted, leading to 
a lack of management focus or preventative action to mitigate potentially 
major problems.
● Cultivating no blame attitudes was discussed in Chapter 3 on operational 
risk events. A constructive approach to resolving problems, rather than 
pointing fingers, has a big influence on how employees act when things go 
wrong.
● Personal accountability is simply essential to move things forward and 
get things done. The institution can have transparent discussions around 298 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
areas of concern without attributing blame, but if no one is ready to step 
in and act, the issues are unlikely to get resolved. This is an area of 
particular regulatory focus, given the introduction of formal accountability 
regimes over recent years.
● Risk awareness has been a key theme throughout this book. It measures 
the extent to which employees understand risk and are aware of their 
own roles and responsibilities in managing it.
● Risk reward answers the question what’s in it for me?. If actions or 
behaviours result in no personal impact – in the form of either an incentive 
for good risk management or punishment for poor practices – it is harder 
to articulate the case respectively for or against them.
Transparency: honest presentation of information, true state of problems,
risks and issues. Encouraging employees to speak up to have an
environment of no surprises.
Risk awareness: every employee is aware of what risk means, thinks about
risk in their daily job and is aware of their responsibilities in managing risk.
Personal accountability: employees and senior management are ready to
personally take actions to resolve issues.
No blame: constructive approach to resolving the issues rather than
focussing on finding the person to blame.
1
2
3
4
5
Risk reward: risk management is reflected in employees’ reward and
remuneration.
Informed risk decisions
Figure 12.2 Risk culture aspects model
CASE STUDY 12.1
A small-size corporate bank adopts the risk culture aspects model to run 
diagnostics around its existing culture, identifying its areas of strength and 
weakness. It creates cross-departmental employee focus groups, facilitated 
by the operational risk function, to gauge staff members’ perceptions of how 
well or poorly the firm scores on a scale of 1 to 10 in each of the categories. 
The results, presented in Figure 12.3, are analysed and presented for 
discussion.Risk culture 299
Transparency: honest presentation of information, true state of problems,
risks and issues. Encouraging employees to speak up to have an
environment of no surprises.
Risk awareness: every employee is aware of what risk means, thinks about
risk in their daily job and is aware of their responsibilities in managing risk.
Personal accountability: employees and senior management are ready to
personally take actions to resolve issues.
No blame: constructive approach to resolving the issues rather than
focussing on finding the person to blame.
1
2
3
4
5
Risk reward: risk management is reflected in employees’ reward and
remuneration.
7
5
3
8
2
Figure 12.3 Risk culture assessment case study analysis
● Risk awareness achieves a high rating, 8 out of 10; employees recall and 
relate to ongoing efforts sponsored by the chief risk officer and chief 
executive to educate all staff on risk management. For example, the I AM Risk 
Thinking campaign encourages employees to Identify, Assess, Manage and 
Report on Risk, emphasizing that it is everyone’s responsibility (I AM 
Responsible, rather than my manager or someone in Risk department), thus 
developing risk thinking. This is followed by an introduction of a popular I AM 
Risk Thinking mailbox which all employees can use to informally identify 
particular risks or issues.
● Transparency also scores highly; overall, management encourages and 
welcomes the identification and escalation of issues across the enterprise.
● No blame culture varies markedly by area; while there are good behaviours in 
many departments, it transpires that there are pockets of poor practices 
within Technology and Finance.
● Personal accountability highlights a challenge; headcount cuts have resulted 
in employees becoming overstretched. While staff are eager to raise issues, 
they are reluctant to volunteer for additional responsibilities which add extra 
tasks to their already full agenda.
● Finally, Risk reward receives the lowest score and is not deemed functional 
by the focus groups. While aggressive risk taking in sales and trading is 
penalized, the actions and behaviours of non-revenue generating functions 
have no similar impact. Good or poor risk management has no bearing on 
compensation.300 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
In this case the Operational Risk department was able to facilitate focus groups 
and obtain insights into employees’ honest opinions due to its good standing, 
earning trust and a recognition of its impartiality. As highlighted later in the 
chapter, the identity of the operational risk professional, their individual per￾sonality, has a strong contributing effect on these cultural dynamics.
Metrics: culture and conduct dashboard
Culture is still widely considered as a primary root cause of major conduct 
failings in financial services. Often this view focuses on a firm’s broader 
culture (rather than its risk culture).
Numerous credible definitions of culture exist; we will use ‘habitual 
behaviours and mindsets that characterize an organization’.6
The study is perceived as insightful; it results in a range of tangible actions, 
including adopting this kind of evaluation as a matter of practice, and 
continuing regular culture health checks, via employee focus groups, on a 
semi-annual basis.
Conduct risk can be defined as the risk that a firm’s ‘decisions and 
behaviours lead to detrimental or poor outcomes for their customers, and 
the risk that the firm fails to maintain high standards of market behaviour 
and integrity’.7
But in recent years the ancillary terms conduct and conduct risk have become 
more prominent in supervisory publications, speeches and discussions.
Consequently the industry is undergoing a major strengthening of employ￾ees’ conduct obligations, the introduction of enhanced certification and ac￾countability regimes, and instruments such as the legally required banker’s 
oath.8
 The concepts of culture, risk culture and conduct are closely Risk culture 301
intertwined; though it would be fair to say that culture and conduct have a 
broader social and behavioural scope than risk culture. Organizations are 
expected to create firm-specific definitions of these key terms. Both the lan￾guage and the focus of these efforts vary significantly depending on the ju￾risdiction and the terms habitually used by the firms and their supervisors.
As with surveys and focus groups, operational risk practitioners need to 
actively join in the firm’s efforts to create culture and conduct dashboards; 
after all, many of the metrics will be relevant to operational risk, and may 
even be already monitored by the department. Perhaps risk culture metrics 
are the future as they can deliver more value than occasional, discrete em￾ployee surveys. Organizations quickly suffer from survey fatigue which pre￾vents them from being repeated often enough to keep track of changing risk 
cultures.
Figure 12.4 gives an example of such a dashboard. In this example, the 
dashboard measures the firm’s performance against four pillars that have 
been designated as important to the organization. Some of these aspects, for 
example, diversity and inclusion, refer to core values that are broader than 
risk awareness, risk taking and risk management (which together represent 
risk culture). The indicators in this dashboard were selected, together with 
their thresholds, via a rigorous management process, as discussed in 
Chapter 7.
The dashboard is typically presented to a relevant governance committee, 
which could be an operational risk committee, conduct risk forum, the main 
risk committee, the board or all of the above. This kind of metric enables the 
organization to continuously monitor agreed aspects of culture and con￾stantly drive the agenda forward.
Practical steps towards embedding 
risk culture
From evaluation to actions, undeniably, the operational risk function plays 
a key role in embedding the right ethos in the firm; so it is, to a great ex￾tent, a catalyst for positive change. Ideally, a clear tone from the top and 
firm-wide cultural programmes will have been established, which opera￾tional risk can participate in and contribute to. Sometimes, however, firms 
make minimal endeavours in this area and operational risk ends up being 
the sole department pushing the heavy load up the hill. Whichever Compliance breaches (e.g. personal account dealing, 
conflicts, gifts)
Pillar: Environment 
Employee use of confidential helpline
Conduct risk level (number of conduct-related risks
in RCSAs rated high and above)
Feedback/themes from employee exit interviews
Upheld client complaints related to mis-treatment/
mis-management
Customer goodwill payments (due to complaints)
Pillar: Clients
Pillar: Employees Pillar: Diversity and Inclusion
Senior committee diversity
Board diversity
Diversity and inclusion survey
Diagnostic: net promoter score (how likely is the client
to recommend the firm)
Performance management and developmental 
activities (completion and quality)
Employee well-being survey
Diversity development activities
CONDUCT AND CULTURE DASHBOARD
RED
RED
AMBER
GREEN
GREEN
GREEN
AMBER
GREEN
Products not performing as designed causing 
detriment (based on post-implementation review)
Unfair, unclear or misleading financial promotions
AMBER
GREEN
GREEN
AMBER Change programmes with potential client impact 
GREEN
AMBER
GREEN
GREEN
Figure 12.4 Example of conduct and culture dashboard
302Risk culture 303
circumstances apply, practitioners can spearhead the following set of ac￾tivities to influence behaviours across the organization.
Transparency
● Instituting incentives for transparency, such as thank you notes for 
reporting operational risk events.
● Via facilitation and challenge, helping first line business units to reflect the 
true state of risks, events and issues – neither under- nor overestimating them.
● By expressing opinions that are clear and independent, helping to transmit 
the right messages which consequently retain their true meaning (e.g. 
ensuring that Red KRIs are not diluted, when escalated upwards, by 
being downgraded to Amber or Green).
● Incorporating automated process workflows, for speedy dissemination 
and escalation of material issues to the right audience.
● Incentivizing high awareness of risks and issues.
No blame
● Developing trust with first line business units; being visible and approachable, 
having a known team member who serves as a liaison for every area and 
who can be contacted if employees have questions or doubts.
● Educating senior management on a no blame attitude; although this kind 
of venture does not always bear fruit, every attempt should be made.
● Setting the tone by chairing operational risk forums where issues are 
discussed openly and constructively.
● Documenting in policies that the firm has a no blame approach (i.e. a 
formal mechanism, although note that this can be less effective than 
establishing a no blame attitude more informally).
● Working with Human Resources to establish and analyse relevant 
metrics; for example, an increase in incidences of whistleblowing or the 
use of employee helplines may be indicative of potential problems that 
require focus.304 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
Personal accountability
● Collaborating with Human Resources to document roles and responsi￾bilities (for example, for first line risk owners, subject matter experts 
(SMEs) or risk champions) and ensure they align with broader statements 
of accountabilities.
● Developing instruments such as an RACI matrix (Responsible, 
Accountable, Consulted, Informed), to outline the respective roles that 
first and second line functions play in a process or activity.
● Embedding risk acceptance mechanisms, to alleviate pressure on front￾line functions and ensure formal agreement that no further action is 
needed in cases where it is not cost-effective.
● Prioritizing risks, issues and actions and focusing on what is important.
● Leading by example, stepping in to moderate any cross-functional operational 
risk events that have no single owner, until they are fully resolved.
Risk awareness
● Conducting employee training as discussed in the previous chapter, 
supplemented by other educational campaigns including social media 
posts, flash news and newsletters.
● Using opportunities to present at senior management meetings and 
employee town halls; working with the chief executive to incorporate key 
messages into their internal presentations; developing key questions that 
a board should be asking itself on risk culture.
● Encouraging employees to participate in and use operational risk 
tools at the ‘coal face’; working with RCSAs, KRIs and scenarios as a 
practical application is the best way of increasing understanding of 
the tools.
● Promoting the sharing and dissemination of lessons learnt, tips and hints; 
for example, via a monthly meeting of first line operational risk 
coordinators.
● Highlighting interdependencies, where risks can affect others in the 
delivery chain. Process improvement techniques including process flow 
charts can be very useful in achieving this aim.Risk culture 305
Risk reward
● Joining forces with Human Resources to incorporate risk management 
responsibilities into employees’ objectives and the performance 
management process.
● Considering operational risk event data in appraisals; a punitive method 
is quite commonly used for front-office/sales personnel, but this can be 
supplemented by reward mechanisms, for example, providing formal 
feedback on the performance of first line operational risk champions.
● Using compare and contrast reviews which present, for instance, logs of 
incidents across all departments; timely and accurate reporting can be 
recognized via some kind of departmental reward (e.g. a shared meal);
● Celebrating success: for example, introducing employee awards for the 
most improved process following an operational risk event; underscoring 
the importance of acknowledgement, appreciation and gratitude. To this 
end, one of the key messages from the 2023 Governance and Culture 
Reform Conference hosted by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
was on the power of recognition: ‘the most emphatic and deceptively 
simple takeaway that emerged was that to motivate desired behaviors, it 
is important to appreciate organizational staff and do so publicly’.9
Recognition is an important mechanism that is vastly underutilized.
● Agreeing reward and punishment mechanisms when embedding the use 
of operational risk appetite.
Role of risk conversations
Risk experts set the tone and the language of risk conversations. What 
words come to mind when picking up the phone, switching on the webcam 
or walking into the meeting room with business units and support func￾tions? What topics do operational risk professionals discuss?
Compare the two dialogues illustrated in Figure 12.5. The first box, risk 
administration, focuses on the process and has minimal content. It does not 
differentiate between low and high priority items, and focuses attention 
mainly on the mechanical aspects of the framework; aiming to just get things 
done, regardless of whether or not they are important. These discussions are 
usually brief and tend to be one-way, with operational risk chasing business 
units to take some kind of action or complete a form.306 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
In contrast, risk management discussions evolve around the content. They 
concentrate on what is important, with more time being spent on high-pri￾ority issues that matter, because they may prevent the firm from achieving its 
objectives or may crystallize into major incidents. These conversations are 
usually longer, deeper and contain a meaningful two-way exchange of opin￾ions.
It is important for operational risk teams to stand back and reflect on 
their risk conversations; as their tone and content will gradually be repli￾cated across the enterprise. If risk practitioners lead the way using a risk 
administration approach, that is how the whole risk discipline will soon be 
perceived: as administrative. It also affects the culture, which develops into 
a bureaucratic tick-box-type enterprise, with diminished faith in the second 
line risk function. By the same token, proper risk management discussions 
will send ripples through the business and will constantly repeat and rein￾force themselves, teaching business units what good looks like.
Impact of the identity of operational 
risk practitioners
As noted in the research report on risk culture in financial services men￾tioned earlier,10 ‘a significant aspect of the risk culture debate closely con￾cerns the organizational position of the risk function’.
RED ZONE: Risk administration GREEN ZONE: Risk management
• Have you logged the ORE? When
will you log it, it needs to be reported
as soon as possible?
• Have you attached the evidence? This 
field is blank.
• You have seven open actions. We
need to review all of them.
• Your RCSA is overdue. It needs to be 
completed by the end of this week.
• There are only three risks raised in
your RCSA. Please ensure RCSA 
completeness.
• Latest ORE highlights an issue with
control X. Let’s discuss how it can be
improved. Can this happen to other
units? 
• Reviewing open actions, there is one
high priority item. How is your progress
in obtaining the funding needed to fix
the issue? How can we help to move it 
forward? What is the risk in the meantime?
• Based on your RCSA, X is your top
risk. How is the new product/system
impacting this risk? Will it increase
even further? Let’s discuss. 
Figure 12.5 Risk conversationsRisk culture 307
Undoubtedly, the importance of the risk profession has been increasing and 
the demand for practitioners is on the rise. When searching to recruit an 
ideal candidate, employers insist on the combination of multiple skills; in￾cluding extensive experience in frameworks, knowledge of regulatory re￾quirements, in-depth specialist knowledge, quantitative or actuarial 
background, and excellent communication and influencing skills. This blend 
makes it almost impossible to recruit the kind of superhero who possesses 
all the required skills and qualities. Because the operational risk discipline is 
still maturing, there is not yet a distinct identity for a typical operational risk 
professional.
In 2018 I conducted an industry study around this identity issue, to try to 
understand how operational risk professionals perceive themselves in their 
role. The results are presented in Table 12.1.
A positive result, as seen in the table, is that the majority (52 per cent) 
viewed themselves as consultants and trusted advisors, adopting a col￾laborative approach and working in partnership with the business. 
Around 25 per cent of respondents related to the identity of facilitators 
Table 12.1 Industry study: identity of operational risk practitioner
Operational risk practitioners primarily see 
themselves as % participants
Police officer 15
Consultant 52
Translator 8
Facilitator 25
Table 12.2 Industry study: skills of operational risk practitioners
What knowledge and skills do you see as most 
important? % firms
Knowledge of regulatory requirements 7
Practical know-how (framework and tools) 73
Subject matter expertise (cyber, outsourcing, other) 7
Softer skills, influencing, facilitation 13308 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
– influencers who spend a significant proportion of their time engaging, 
educating and communicating with employees and senior management, 
for example, facilitating workshops and conducting road shows. These 
practitioners possess the traits of multipliers discussed in Chapter 3.
In cases where operational risk practitioners adopt a stance of police 
officers – emphasizing formal oversight, challenge and shareholder pro￾tection – they seem to lose some employees’ trust. This, in turn, has impli￾cations for the interactions between risk management and the business, 
and ultimately, for the wider risk culture of the firm. We discussed these 
characters, also called diminishers, in Chapter 3.
Do risk practitioners possess the necessary skills to effectively perform 
the role of trusted advisors? The same study, the results of which are pre￾sented in Table  12.2, highlighted that operational risk employees may 
overestimate the importance of practical know-how at the expense of 
softer influencing, facilitation and negotiation skills.
Having stayed very close to the live debate on the necessary skills of risk 
professionals, I have observed that an increasing number of practitioners 
embrace and master the softer qualities; despite the progress being some￾what slow. As mentioned in Chapter 11, further investment into this impor￾tant aspect would be undoubtedly beneficial.
CASE STUDY 12.2
An internal audit of an organization’s culture gives rise to a follow-up project 
looking at the alignment of employees’ expectations of the risk team compared to 
the firm’s core values. Its aim is to explore how risk professionals are perceived 
by others. This project is completed via an enterprise-wide internal survey, 
supplemented by employee focus groups. The results highlight that, on a positive 
note, risk teams are collaborative business partners; however, most people 
express a desire for more engagement via an informal conversational approach. 
As a result, the Risk department restructures its routine tasks to free up more 
time for informal interactions, and takes an action to invest in the team’s softer 
skillset.
Role of internal audit
Internal audit is a key partner which plays an important role in embedding 
sound practices and behaviours. As noted in the report entitled Culture and Risk culture 309
the Role of Internal Audit issued by the Chartered Institute of Internal 
Auditors, audit can be an essential contributor ‘in giving confidence to 
boards that measures put in place to change culture and thus behaviour are 
actually working’.11
Good practices include:
● a clear mandate to audit the culture of the enterprise;
● integrating culture as part of every audit, as well as conducting thematic 
reviews;
● providing an engagement rating of how business units choose to interact 
with audit;
● producing a risk management engagement and effectiveness grid, showing 
the performance of each managing director relative to their peers;
● offering an opportunity for the business to voice unedited feedback on 
audits, which in itself provides a good insight into the firm’s prevailing 
culture.
It is particularly powerful if the second and third lines, joined by HR, can all 
partner with each other on this complex subject, and think about what they 
can achieve with a joint, coordinated effort.
Common challenges and good practices
Common challenges
The following challenges may be encountered when embarking on the cul￾tural journey.
Lack of the right tone from the top
Many regulatory and academic publications cite the right tone from the top
and its significance to risk culture. In reality, at times the tone is either not 
right or not present. In these cases, the operational risk function is faced 
with the very difficult task of influencing behaviours by broadcasting the 
tone from the side (i.e. from the operational risk function itself). This is at 
the same time as the department is implementing framework tools, educat￾ing the units to manage risks and escalate events, to enable the firm to deal 
with threats that may prevent it from achieving its objectives. It is not only 
a challenge for the operational risk function but an inadequate substitute for 
the right tone from the top.310 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
Reactive approach
Culture work is easily forgotten as long as the organization is doing fine; 
when there is an unwanted trigger event, the subject is brought back into 
focus and becomes important again. This approach is rather reactive; proac￾tive mechanisms such as focus groups or metrics should be adopted to keep 
the work constantly ongoing.
Risk administration
Risk management executives may have an over-ambitious programme of 
work, for example enhancing risk framework tools or rolling out multiple 
RCSAs with tight deadlines. If this happens it raises the threat of turning the 
second line function into a purely administrative role, where the department 
concentrates on more mechanical aspects, getting things done, sometimes at 
the cost of quality and value-add. Conversations can easily slide into risk 
administration, affecting the risk brand and impacting the culture of the 
enterprise. Employees can also slip into a risk administration mindset, out 
of apathy or an unwillingness to focus on the content. It is important to 
periodically step back and listen to the words and the language being used; 
are the risk conversations good quality and adding value?
Cultural change programmes
Organizations invariably display excellence as well as flaws. Some struggle 
with accountability because they routinely apply a philosophy of consensus 
which slows down decision-making; others do not handle news of failures 
well. These vital aspects of the firm’s mindset need to be understood; includ￾ing the fact that the board and senior management are themselves an inte￾gral part of the culture. It is possible to drive change once the firm’s existing 
state is analysed and it demonstrates a desire to move forward, making ad￾justments via small and progressive steps and recognizing that managing 
risk culture is for life. Aggressive change programmes that aim to move from 
current to desired target state are unrealistic; culture being a social process, 
both states keep changing during the intervention.
Good practices
Working with the board
Risk culture is the area where the board’s engagement is key. It is good prac￾tice to develop a set of questions that a board should be constantly asking Risk culture 311
itself, to prompt good risk conversations. These may include, for example, 
how the board assesses the organization against the five aspects of risk cul￾ture described in this chapter; how it perceives the tone it is setting from the 
top; whether decisions are taken within the stated risk appetite; and what 
mechanisms are in place to ensure that new joiners absorb the desired values 
of the firm.
Conducting ongoing evaluation
Risk culture is ‘not a static thing but a continuous process which repeats and 
renews itself’.12 It is therefore good practice to conduct ongoing health 
checks, as described in the case study outlined above, where employee focus 
groups are run on a periodic basis rather than as a one-off effort. Changes 
are always occurring in the general environment in which firms operate and 
if the evaluation work is constant there is a better opportunity to pick them 
up. In general, focus groups are more useful than surveys, as they allow for 
more meaningful interactions and conversations around selected topics. 
Another powerful technique is participant observation, where, for example, 
an independent consultant is sitting in on risk committees, risk assessment 
exercises, internal audit reviews and other activities to observe behaviour at 
source and help the organization to conduct the assessment and interpret 
the results in an objective manner. This is one good reason why the help of 
external consultants is needed. If the organization performs and analyses the 
assessment, the interpretation itself is influenced by the prevailing risk cul￾ture and therefore may not be objective.
Beyond regulatory focus
Cultural change programmes often emerge due to a trigger event or regula￾tory criticism. Moving from rules to risk management to doing the ‘right 
thing’ displays the state of maturity of the firm. With the emergence of the 
terms conduct and conduct risk, many organizations commenced with an 
essentially supervision-driven approach, initially applying minimum regula￾tory standards; but subsequently have moved away from mere compliance 
to actively driving decision-making and outcomes.
Reflecting on the risk brand
It is good practice to consciously reflect on the brand of the Risk depart￾ment, which plays an important role in the cultural debate. Some risk teams 
come up with a motto, such as, for example, Collaborating to Safeguard 312 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
Sustainability, emphasizing an engaging and collaborative approach com￾bined with the authority of the risk function to act as a safeguard. This 
translates into partnering with the business to position it for success while 
being strong and decisive; clearly expressing an opinion when the level of 
risk is too high and the activity may be detrimental. The book included in 
recommended reading, Brand You: Stand out from the crowd with authentic 
personal branding, brilliantly emphasizes the importance of branding, not￾ing that it is an asset, and ‘if you develop it correctly, people will keep think￾ing and talking about you’.13
Industry benchmark
In 2024, Best Practice Operational Risk Forum members agreed that firms’ 
efforts to establish a strong risk culture, which had historically been led by 
the Human Resources department, had now largely migrated to the 
Operational Risk department (see Figure 12.6). This is a positive develop￾ment, as it enables a far more holistic approach to the subject of culture, 
going well beyond employee-related metrics. A challenging trend was noted, 
however, namely the proliferation of multiple overlapping culture-related 
activities. Often Compliance is driving conduct programmes, newly estab￾lished Sustainability teams are leading ESG (and in particular, Social- and 
Risk Compliance HR Other
69%
19%
6% 6%
Who is leading risk culture efforts?
Figure 12.6 Industry poll: leading risk culture efforts
Best Practice Operational Risk Forum, 2024Risk culture 313
Governance-related initiatives), while Human Resources is spearheading the 
development of strong corporate values. All of these initiatives inevitably 
cross over. The need for coordination was yet again discussed, with opera￾tional risk professionals either planning to intervene or already stepping in 
to connect the dots and align various risk culture activities.
Members acknowledged that the topic of risk culture was relatively high 
on the board agenda. Culture assessments were becoming more common, 
and boards were expected to periodically receive and review such evalua￾tions and the actions that emanated from them. Approaches varied, with 
some firms using annual staff questionnaires with a range of 40–60 ques￾tions; while others took the approach of leading focus groups or measuring 
risk culture via agreed metrics and KRIs (see Figure 12.7).
In terms of the state of the risk culture itself, participants’ response was 
mixed. It was noted that the Covid-19 pandemic placed strain on firms’ ef￾forts to maintain their risk culture. Enforced and prolonged working from 
home eroded corporate cohesiveness – the attitude of ‘we-ness’ that unites 
employees and helps them to remain motivated to accomplish set goals. 
According to a poll conducted in December 2020 at the Best Practice 
Operational Risk Forum, 86 per cent of risk professionals believed that risk 
culture had somewhat deteriorated in their organizations. Four years on, 
some forum members noted marginal improvement; while others were less 
convinced and believed that more could still be done.
Practitioners discussed what activities could give a boost to risk culture 
practices in their firms. Themes such as tone from the top and risk training – 
Is being measured and embedded
Is high on the Board’s agenda
Has improved as compared to last year
1 = strongly disagree, 5 = strongly agree,
3.1
3.8
3.3
Strongly agree
Strongly disagree
In your firm, risk culture
= average rating
Figure 12.7 Industry poll: risk culture
Best Practice Operational Risk Forum, 2024314 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
which consistently feature in industry polls – were perceived as the most 
impactful to improving risk culture, as illustrated in Figure 12.8.
In conclusion, risk culture is not a distinct project with a clear completion 
date. Rather it is an ongoing social process that requires continued efforts to 
actively influence, maintain and enhance an institution’s norms, attitudes 
and behaviours.
Practical workplace exercise
Reflect on the topic discussed in this chapter, considering its application in 
your organization:
1 How has the firm defined culture and what efforts and programmes are 
in place?
2 What is the role and involvement of operational risk teams in existing 
programmes?
3 Considering the five aspects of risk culture described in the chapter, where 
would your organization score highest?
4 What works well? Make a note of the strong elements of the firm’s 
culture.
5 What can be improved? Note down potential improvements.
More risk training
Tone from the top
Risk rewards
Penalties
Policies and
procedures
1st
2nd
3rd
4th
5th
What will improve risk culture the most?
Figure 12.8 Industry poll: improving risk culture
Best Practice Operational Risk Forum, 2024Risk culture 315
In summary, this chapter discussed the role of risk culture, the least visible 
but most vital aspect of risk management, and proposed practical steps op￾erational risk practitioners can take to influence ethos and behaviours.
Having examined all the tools of the operational risk framework, the next 
chapter will focus on evaluating the maturity of operational risk manage￾ment process in the organization.
Notes
1 Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2021) Revisions to the Principles 
for the Sound Management of Operational Risk, www.bis.org/bcbs/publ/d515.
pdf (archived at https://perma.cc/E45Y-GK3N)
2 Financial Stability Board (2014) Guidance on Supervisory Interaction with 
Financial Institutions on Risk Culture, www.fsb.org/wp-content/uploads/ 
140407.pdf (archived at https://perma.cc/QJ3C-ZLA7)
3 Royal Commission into Misconduct in the Banking, Superannuation and 
Financial Services Industry, www.royalcommission.gov.au/banking/final-report
(archived at https://perma.cc/4GRY-QKWP)
MAKE A DIFFERENCE (MAD) ACTION
Please note down one action that you will take after reading this chapter 
that will make a positive difference to risk culture, ethos and behaviours of 
your organization.316 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
4 Financial Conduct Authority (2018) Discussion paper, Transforming Culture 
in Financial Services, www.fca.org.uk/publication/discussion/dp18-02.pdf
(archived at https://perma.cc/U5PT-PR4Z)
5 Financial Stability Board (2014) Guidance on Supervisory Interaction with 
Financial Institutions on Risk Culture, www.fsb.org/wp-content/uploads/ 
140407.pdf (archived at https://perma.cc/QJ3C-ZLA7)
6 Financial Conduct Authority (2018) Discussion paper, Transforming Culture 
in Financial Services, www.fca.org.uk/publication/discussion/dp18-02.pdf
(archived at https://perma.cc/TS7L-WK3C)
7 Chartered Institute of Internal Auditors (2020) Conduct Risk, www.iia.org.uk/
resources/sector-specific-standards-and-guidance/financial-services/conduct￾risk/ (archived at https://perma.cc/N2BR-YVCM)
8 The Banker’s Oath, www.tuchtrechtbanken.nl/en/code-of-conduct/ (archived 
at https://perma.cc/53NR-5RGR)
9 Dechario, T, Five Messages from the 2023 Governance and Culture Reform 
Conference (2023), tellerwindow.newyorkfed.org/2023/07/18/five-messages￾from-the-2023-governance-and-culture-reform-conference/ (archived at https://
perma.cc/Y729-TT6J)
10 Power, M, Ashby, S and Palermo, T (2013) Risk Culture in Financial 
Organizations: A research report, London School of Economics, www.lse.ac.
uk/accounting/assets/CARR/documents/Risk-Culture-in-Financial￾Organisations/Final-Risk-Culture-Report.pdf (archived at https://perma.cc/
A8DM-5P9J)
11 Chartered Institute of Internal Auditors (2014) Culture and the Role of 
Internal Audit, www.iia.org.uk/media/598939/0805-iia-culture-report￾1-7-14-final.pdf (archived at https://perma.cc/SZ4C-PE7S)
12 Power, M, Ashby, S and Palermo, T (2013) Risk Culture in Financial 
Organizations: A research report, London School of Economics, www.lse.ac.
uk/accounting/assets/CARR/documents/Risk-Culture-in-Financial￾Organisations/Final-Risk-Culture-Report.pdf (archived at https://perma.cc/
ZX4A-FFEH)
13 Royston-Lee, D and Storey, S (2023) Brand You: Stand out from the crowd 
with authentic personal branding, PearsonEmbedding 13
and maturity 
assessment
What this chapter covers: This chapter discusses the Operational Risk 
Implementation Journey, from its early stages to being fully implemented; 
describing a ‘maturity ladder’ for measuring progress and outlining the key 
characteristics of each phase (Figure 13.1). The chapter considers what em￾beddedness looks like and how it can be measured. It then goes on to intro￾duce three pillars of embedded risk management and proposes a balanced 
scorecard with examples of metrics and indicators. The chapter includes 
results of live polls and an industry benchmark.
FURTHER READING
● Institute of Operational Risk (2020) Embedding an Operational Risk 
Management Framework: Operational risk sound practice guidance
Why recommended: A succinct guide that examines the critical success 
factors involved in achieving an embedded operational risk management 
framework.
● Christian Hunt (2023) Humanizing Rules: Bringing behavioural science to 
ethics and compliance, Wiley
Why recommended: This fascinating book takes the reader on a journey 
to embeddedness by arguing that rules should be made for HUMANS 
(that is, they need to be Helpful, Understandable, Manageable, 
Acceptable, Normal and Salient). If policy makers – usually second line 
Risk and Compliance functions – succeed in engaging with employees 
via a set of well-designed and articulated guidelines that work with – 
rather than against – the grain of natural human decision-making, that’s 
when the rules will be bought into and followed.
317Figure 13.1 Focus of Chapter 13: embedding and maturity assessment
Governance, roles and responsibilities
Establish governance and clear roles across the Three Lines for managing operational risk.
Risk assessments
Assess risk exposure in 
process, business or
function via RCSAs.
Supplement by evaluating 
risks emanating from 
change activities via 
ORAs. 
Identify exposure from 
extreme but plausible 
events. Mitigate through
risk transfer to insurance.
Scenario analysis
Monitor risk and control
performance through 
predictive indicators.
Act if indicators breach 
established appetite 
threshold. 
Key Risk Indicators
Reporting and decision-making
Review actual risk profile against set appetite, apply active risk management to enable achievement of strategic objectives.
Operational risk
events
Record and report risk 
events, act to minimize 
future exposure.
Monitor trends against 
RCSAs and KRIs.
Risk appetite and risk capacity
Define nature and types of risk accepted in pursuit of strategic objectives. Evaluate adequacy of capital resources.
Operational risk taxonom
y
Embedding and maturity assessment
Training and education
Risk culture
318Embedding and maturity assessment 319
The journey to maturity: 
three-step maturity ladder
The journey of implementing robust operational risk management practices 
in an organization is as challenging as it is exciting.
At the start of the journey, the firm may be operating as a novice, experi￾menting in a largely ad hoc and reactive manner. In this phase business units 
and support functions may show a tendency to push back on the new op￾erational risk requirements, exhibiting a natural reaction of resistance to 
change. They may refer to the elements of the framework as your processes, 
your assessments, your tools, implying that their role is to assist the 
Operational Risk department to accomplish whatever it requires, and con￾sequently deprioritizing the tasks in comparison to their own activities. In 
turn, the operational risk function finds itself vigorously reaching out with 
explanations, presentations and constant follow-ups to keep the risk man￾agement ship afloat.
This initial stage is gradually replaced by an intermediate phase, which 
involves implementing a more structured approach and building it into the 
firm’s routine business processes. In this phase operational risk practices are 
normalized. RCSAs, for example, become the norm, something that simply 
must be done, for multiple reasons including regulatory. This phase sees 
improved ownership by business units and support functions, for whom the 
use of the different risk framework elements – even if reluctantly at times – 
becomes a matter of habit.
The ultimate embedded stage is characterized by proactive risk manage￾ment, a clear value proposition, and an enhanced risk culture in the organi￾zation. As highlighted frequently in previous chapters, the real measure of 
success in operational risk is when functions actively want to use the frame￾work because it helps them in their decision-making. While in the first phase 
they may have been hesitant or sceptical, business departments now com￾plete risks and opportunities assessments for new products – because it is 
useful to them to draw out threats and benefits. In this culture, boards and 
governance committees rely on reports of the firm’s profile against risk ap￾petite to take decisions. The framework is fit for purpose. Tools are in sync. 
Outputs are compared and tell a coherent story. Information is actively used 
to achieve measurable process improvements and reduce surprises.Figure 13.2 Operational risk maturity ladder
EARLY STAGES 
• Basic framework
• Unbalanced roles: 
operational risk function 
is doing most of the work
• Limited value-add
EMBEDDED
• Framework and tools are
fit for purpose
• Operational risk function
is a trusted advisor 
• Continuous, measurable 
value-add
• Business units want to
 apply the tools as they
 aid in decision-making
• Notable impact of 
improvements on the 
balance sheet 
MANAGED
• Developed framework 
and tools
• Balanced roles and 
responsibilities
• Demonstrable value-add
• Operational risk 
management becomes 
the norm within the 
organization
320Embedding and maturity assessment 321
This progress can be reflected in a simple maturity ladder, as described in 
Figure 13.2. This version differentiates between three phases of maturity, 
but organizations can enhance and further develop the ladder as they see fit.
Three pillars of success: financial 
performance, use test, risk culture
Once a firm has embarked on its risk management implementation journey, 
it will want to measure its advancement across progressive levels of matu￾rity. Measurement helps to establish a baseline, and to set targets and im￾provement strategies to achieve the desired stage. Maturity model can be a 
powerful ‘diagnostic tool’ and a solution for ‘improving risk management 
system capabilities’.1
While firms may have widely varying views on what good risk manage￾ment looks like, an approach centred around three pillars – the financial 
performance, use test and risk culture – is proposed in Figure 13.3. These 
three pillars work in tandem to present a coherent overall picture of embed￾dedness, defined by the Basel Framework as the level to which operational 
risk management practices ‘have been embedded at all organizational lev￾els’.2
 In the context of operational risk, maturity cannot be achieved without 
holistic engagement and use of the relevant tools by the entire enterprise. 
Organizations may wish to add other pillars – and even parameters within 
each pillar – that they feel are relevant to their firm.
Let’s examine each pillar in more detail.
Financial performance
Operational risk should always be considered in the context of its impact on 
the firm’s balance sheet and profit & loss (P&L) position. If, as discussed in 
Figure 13.3 Three pillars of embedded operational risk management
Financial
performance Use test Risk culture322 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
Chapter 1, risk practitioners aim to sit at the strategy table and contribute 
to strategic decisions, P&L is often the mutual language used for these con￾versations. Operational risk becomes much more difficult to dismiss when it 
is presented in terms of hard numbers and not as ‘just a risk’.
Consequently – alas, there is no avoiding it – actual operational risk 
losses are an indicator of embedded risk management (or the lack of it). 
Simply put, if there is a steady upward trend in losses year-on-year, whether 
in growth or during periods of business stagnation and decline, the firm 
should be questioning its risk management capabilities.
By the same token, the upside of risk (or positive P&L benefit emanating 
from good operational risk management) also has to be quantified.
The following metrics can be useful to characterize both dimensions, 
losses and savings:
KRI1: Operational risk losses as a percentage of revenue, operating income 
or operating expense.
KRI2: Actual operational risk losses compared to appetite.
KRI3: Trend, number, value of losses in new products or investments relative 
to product/investment performance.
KRI4: Value of financial penalties (capital add-on, fines imposed for 
mismanagement of risk).
KRI5: Value of any savings, including reduction in cost due to process 
optimization, that emanate from operational risk initiatives (measure of 
the upside).
These measures need to be interpreted with caution; while an increase in 
losses is worrying, a sharp drop also needs to be investigated, as highlighted 
in Chapter 4. It may be providing a false comfort and could instead be in￾dicative of other factors – for example a change in leadership that has caused 
employees to simply stop reporting bad news.
Operational risk financial performance measures are not treated in a bal￾anced way in the industry. At times, firms try to measure the embeddedness 
and success of their operational risk management using only numbers (such 
as actual losses and capital position), thus underestimating the less tangible 
benefits of the framework, as discussed later in the chapter. At the other 
extreme, financial performance is sometimes excluded altogether, resulting 
in operational risk not being taken seriously and not treated on a par with 
other risk disciplines. For this reason, financial performance metrics should 
constitute an important pillar of the risk management framework, but must 
also be supplemented by other tools, namely the use test and risk culture.Embedding and maturity assessment 323
Use test
The importance of impact on the bottom line cannot be underestimated, but 
financial measures on their own cannot paint a complete picture. This is 
particularly true for smaller-sized firms that may have neither a large dataset 
of past losses nor multiple opportunities for savings. In this case the trend 
analysis can be less meaningful than for larger firms. The so-called use test – 
frequently referred to by the Basel Committee and regulators in various ju￾risdictions – goes to the heart of actively using risk tools to enhance live 
decision-making. The use test is a broad concept that encompasses many 
different aspects, from the risk framework and tools to responsibilities and 
value-add; collectively, all components covered in this book. It includes, for 
example:
● sophistication and fitness of the risk framework and toolset;
● clarity, usefulness and actionability of operational risk reporting;
● maturity and effectiveness of the operational risk appetite;
● responsibilities, brand and reputation of risk teams;
● roles and attitudes of functions outside the Risk department, including 
first line champions, subject matter experts (SMEs), and risk and control 
owners, as well as the board, senior management and other employees in 
the organization;
● the value proposition that emanates from risk management – it is 
impossible to truly embed risk management just by wielding a regulatory 
stick.
Some of the possible use test measures have been introduced in previous 
chapters. They may include:
KRI6: Number of material gaps emanating from gap analysis against Basel 
Committee Principles and other relevant requirements, as discussed in 
Chapter 2 (reflects the sophistication of risk framework and toolset).
KRI9: Gaps in accountability: percentage of ‘orphan’ RCSAs, or risks/KRIs 
with no owner assigned (measures whether business units have embraced 
their roles and responsibilities for the management of operational risk).
KRI10: Number of departments/areas without an established first line 
operational risk champion (similarly, presents a view on the 
accountability – or the lack of it).324 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
KRI7: Number and/or monetary value of investments in control 
improvements resulting from the use of operational risk tools (for 
example, emanating from RCSAs, OREs, SAs or KRIs; which demonstrate 
that significant risks are taken seriously, and that budget is allocated to 
enhancements where needed; indicative of the risk value proposition).
KRI8: Number or percentage of internal and external audit findings which 
were already known and self-identified via the use of operational risk 
tools (for example, RCSAs, SAs, KRIs, etc; again indicative of value 
proposition).
Risk culture
The topic of risk culture was discussed at length in the previous chapter. 
Undeniably, the effectiveness of operational risk management is closely 
linked to and largely dependent on the firm’s culture, which can either sup￾port or hinder it. Additional measures of success in this area, which supple￾ment financial performance and use test metrics, are as follows:
KRI11: Trend in employees’ views on risk culture of the organization and/
or their perception of the Risk department (obtained via employee 
engagement surveys, focus groups or other means).
KRI12: Number and trend of issues raised through established risk channels 
(e.g. risk mailbox).
KRI13: Number or percentage of material risks, ineffective controls or 
significant gaps with no actions or where actions are overdue (reflective 
of the overall strength of response or the absence of it).
KRI4: Number or percentage of risk acceptances vs actions related to risk 
reduction (a healthy score indicates a mature and balanced approach to 
risk management, including considerations of the cost-effectiveness of 
mitigation).
KRI15: Number of times the Operational Risk department is asked to 
participate in initiatives in an advisory capacity (this suggests a department 
that is well thought of, and seen as a reputable advisor).
The outcome-based measures proposed above can be displayed in a bal￾anced scorecard, as described in Figure 13.4. Collectively, they evaluate the 
embeddedness of risk management by reflecting on financial, use test and 
risk culture aspects. These measures partially overlap and fall into more 
than one category, as shown here in Figure 13.4.Embedding and maturity assessment 325
Business units’ self-assessment 
of embeddedness
As an alternative to metrics and measures, a powerful mechanism for evalu￾ating embeddedness is via business units’ own self-assessment of how well 
they believe they are doing. This can be accomplished using a guided ap￾proach, where the second line operational risk function creates a question￾naire for the business with a choice of possible answers. The units then select 
the state they believe they are in, corroborating their responses with facts 
and evidence. The second line operational risk team reviews and construc￾tively challenges the outputs.
An example extract from such a questionnaire for one component, RCSA, 
is presented in Table 13.1.
Self-assessment helps first line business units and support functions to 
understand what ‘good’ looks like, as well as to reflect on their own perfor￾mance.
Figure 13.4 Operational risk balanced scorecard
Financial
performance
KRIs
Risk culture KRIs
Value of financial
penalties
Losses in new
products relative
to performance
Value of savings
that emanate from
OR initiatives
Use test KRIs
Improving/
worsening
loss trends
Gaps in
accountability326 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
Table 13.1 Example questionnaire: self-assessment of embeddedness
RCSA 
aspects
Development phase: 
early stages
Development 
phase: 
managed
Development phase: 
embedded
Scope Unclear justification 
of scope and/or 
boundaries of RCSA.
No proactive risk 
identification.
Clearly defined 
boundaries of 
what is within 
and outside 
RCSA scope.
Scope is clearly 
defined, 
interdependencies 
with other RCSAs are 
understood.
Risk 
assessment
Risk profile is not in 
sync with actual 
OREs and KRIs.
Risk owner(s) not 
explicitly defined.
Control owner(s) not 
explicitly defined.
Risk 
identification and 
assessment is 
facilitated by first 
line operational 
risk champion, in 
coordination with 
risk owners.
Named risk owners 
proactively and 
regularly consider 
changes in risk 
environment, 
including emerging 
risks. There are 
minimal surprises 
from Internal Audit 
– risks are already 
known.
Control 
assessment
Control rating is not 
corroborated by 
evidence.
Control 
identification and 
assessment is 
facilitated by first 
line operational 
risk champion, in 
coordination with 
control owners.
Named control 
owners rate control 
design and 
effectiveness, with 
periodic testing of 
most important 
controls to support 
the assessment.
Actionability No actions emanate 
from the exercise.
Tactical actions 
are in place, with 
clear owners and 
target dates.
RCSAs are 
considered in tactical 
and strategic 
decisions. 
Consideration is given 
to risk reduction and 
risk acceptance, 
demonstrating a 
balanced approach.
(continued)Embedding and maturity assessment 327
RCSA 
aspects
Development phase: 
early stages
Development 
phase: 
managed
Development phase: 
embedded
RCSA 
refresh
RCSA is updated 
annually, and not 
used in between 
updates.
RCSAs are 
referred to and 
reviewed during 
periodic risk and 
control 
meetings.
Trigger-based refresh 
is in place, with 
triggers including 
material ORE, change 
initiatives and/or KRIs.
Completion 
and sign-off
RCSA is filled in by 
the risk champion 
without the 
involvement of 
subject matter 
experts (SMEs) or 
unit head. There is no 
evidence of sign-off.
RCSA is 
completed by 
the risk 
champion with 
active 
participation of 
SMEs. RCSA is 
signed off by the 
risk champion of 
the business 
unit.
RCSA is facilitated by 
the risk champion in 
collaboration with 
SMEs and unit head. 
There is evidence that 
the head of the unit 
signed off, confirming 
that RCSA is a true 
and fair reflection of 
the unit’s risk and 
control profile.
Table 13.1 (Continued)
Importance of retaining evidence
We now digress slightly from the subject of embedded risk management to the 
ancillary topic of retaining evidence. ‘Absence of evidence is not evidence of 
absence’ is a quote attributed to Professor Martin Rees, the English astrono￾mer and astrophysicist. Alas, auditors and financial services regulators would 
disagree; even if a firm is mature and constructive in its approach, if it is not 
able to produce convincing evidence of its operational risk management ac￾tivities, this simply equates to the firm not managing operational risk at all.
In 2019, I led a study on this topic with the Best Practice Operational 
Risk Forum. In a live poll, practitioners opined on the strength of evidencing 
of operational risk management within their firms, the results of which are 
presented in Table 13.2.
Good evidencing involves both a disciplined approach to record reten￾tion (including the required duration and storage media) and, most impor￾tantly, agreed policies and standards on the actual content of the records 
themselves.328 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
Table 13.2 Industry study: evidence of operational risk management
Strength of evidence % respondents
Insufficient 0
Partial 19
Adequate 81
Robust 0
What is retained as proof
Effective operational risk management can be demonstrated via the follow￾ing mechanisms:
● Business-as-usual operational risk tools, such as RCSAs, OREs and KRIs. 
The evidence may be stored in either an official system or other sources 
such as Excel spreadsheets, with a record of the results alongside actions 
and decisions taken.
● New product sign-off packs, which commonly include operational risk 
assessment.
● Risk consideration in change initiatives, either in the form of completed 
assessment(s) or the minutes of relevant committee meetings.
● Strategy documents and business plans. This area of record keeping was 
perceived by the forum as needing improvement from an operational risk 
perspective, which does not appear to be always explicitly considered in 
these documents.
● Risk assessments of technology changes.
Demonstrating challenge
When it comes to the role of the second line operational risk team, it is often 
difficult to effectively evidence all the good work the department does; in par￾ticular the oversight and challenge part, which will often take the form of dis￾cussion at a meeting or workshop, a phone or video call, email correspondence 
or all of the above.Embedding and maturity assessment 329
Second line challenge can be evidenced via:
● Detailed minutes of operational risk committees or other relevant 
governance meetings, documenting what was discussed and agreed. It is 
also good practice to note options or risks that were considered and 
discounted (and on what basis).
● A separate second line opinion appended to first line business unit reports, 
thus providing a record of views from both sides.
● A presentation of common themes based on an overall analysis of OREs, 
RCSAs and other tools; identifying areas of weakness followed by the 
results of second line thematic reviews or deep dives. This documentation 
approach not only demonstrates a robust thought process but also 
generates real value-add to the firm.
Consequently, when it comes to evidence, it is better to follow Charles Dickens 
than astronomers such as Professor Rees, perhaps using the quote, ‘Take noth￾ing on its looks; take everything on evidence. There’s no better rule.’
Common challenges and good practices
Common challenges
The following challenges may face organizations during their journey to 
embedding operational risk management practices.
Lack of cultural fit
At times, leaders join a firm from a different organization and immediately 
launch into building the blocks which proved successful in their previous 
place, without spending sufficient time analysing what might work in their 
new environment. This can lead to failure, as the maturity journey is unique 
to each individual firm, including its pace and sequencing, and ways of 
working effectively together.
Link to strategy not considered
As discussed in Chapter 1, at times operational risk domain tends to go its own 
way, proceeding with framework implementation in a manner and pace that 
are not in sync with the firm’s strategy and business goals. Keeping the vital 
link to what matters the most – the firm’s business goals – and being cognizant 330 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
of the bigger picture is crucial. The guidance on embedding operational risk 
framework issued by the Institute of Operational Risk also emphasizes the role 
of risk function is in supporting ‘strategic planning and objective setting’.3
Lack of evidence
Undoubtedly, the importance of retaining evidence has been increasing over 
the years. Firms with poor record retention practices are truly challenged 
during internal audit and external supervisory inspections. Evidence is also 
vital to the firm itself, in case it needs to look back and revisit prior deci￾sions; for example, a particular new product that was approved, together 
with risks that have been accepted. Operational risk teams must be con￾scious of keeping the appropriate proof, and educating first line business 
units and support functions on good practices.
Good practices
Measuring embeddedness and completing 
maturity assessment
Over the years, I have discussed the topic of maturity assessment with mul￾tiple regulators. They considered that the firms which did not complete such 
an assessment struggled to articulate to their supervisors a coherent picture 
of their current state, together with planned areas for development. By con￾trast, organizations that applied healthy practices of self-reflection and eval￾uation came across as cognizant of their strengths and weaknesses, 
transparent and prepared. These practices bring benefits to the firm itself, as 
well as external parties such as regulators. A globally accepted standard for 
risk management – ISO 31000:2009 – from the International Organization 
for Standardization also advises firms to develop strategies to advance their 
risk management maturity.4
Progressing elements in tandem
There is no clear demarcation between the stages of operational risk matu￾rity. The firm may be slightly more advanced in most aspects but stuck on 
one or two features, thus impeding its overall progress. For example, it may 
be progressing on target with a framework implementation project, but is 
not moving forward with embedding correct roles and responsibilities. In 
reality this often happens when a firm has to expedite the pace of deploy￾ment following regulatory criticism, perhaps having received a remediation Embedding and maturity assessment 331
requirement. In this case, additional efforts need to be refocused on agreeing 
the responsibilities with senior management and developing a system of re￾wards (and sometimes punishment) to progress advancement in the ac￾countability element, alongside any enhancements being considered to the 
framework itself. To achieve embeddedness, different components need to 
progress in tandem, at a sensible pace.
Applying behavioural science
In his book Humanizing Rules, Christian Hunt argues that in a complex, 
nuanced environments (such as financial services) black-and-white rules are 
less effective; rather, a more human-focused approach is needed.5
 This re￾quires reflecting on how the rules are designed, including, for example, con￾sidering whether they are salient, and whether employees will find what they 
are being asked to do appealing. This is a good way of thinking about the 
ultimate state of embeddedness, which cannot be achieved via mechanically 
imposed policies and frameworks. Organizations where risk teams thrive on 
engagement, use gamification, praise and incentives, as well as invest in 
clever marketing of operational risk tools to grab employees’ attention, gen￾erally make greater progress on the embeddedness journey.
Understanding aspirations
Some firms have no aspiration to be best-in-class in their operational risk 
framework and tools; they do not need a Rolls-Royce and will be satisfied 
with a simpler model. So it is important to define the appropriate point of 
arrival for the overall journey. Requirements need to be proportionate to the 
size and nature of the organization. This may mean that, for some firms, not 
all elements of the framework will need to be fully developed. A useful tool 
to accomplish this proportionate outcome is presented in Figure 13.5.
In this figure, 10 desired outcomes have been articulated by the organiza￾tion. The current position of each statement is outlined with crosses, while 
the desired state is marked with triangles. (Note: the embedded state re￾mains an aspiration for many of the statements, but not all; in some cases, a 
lower managed position would be deemed acceptable.)
Industry benchmark
The Best Practice Operational Risk Forum discussed common practices re￾lated to an evaluation of the embeddedness of operational risk management. Figure 13.5 Defining point of arrival
Embedded
Not started
x = current position on the 3-Step Maturity Ladder = desired state on the 3-Step Maturity Ladder
embedded and effective
1. First line champions
units 
management in first line
2. Full ownership of risk
events 
material operational risk
3. Root cause analysis for
4. Embedded RCSA
s
(quality, actions, decisions)
operational risk taxonomy 
5. Fully up-to-date
firm-wide 
6. Training and education
risk reporting
7. Integrated, actionable
audit 
risk, compliance and
8. Collaboration between
management
scenario analysis for risk
9. Extensive use of
regarded in the industry
10. Risk teams are well
Desired outcomes
Early stages
Managed x
x
x
x
x x x x
x
x
332Embedding and maturity assessment 333
Figure 13.6 Industry poll: operational risk maturity assessment
Yes,
methodically
Yes, somewhat
/ad-hoc
No
37%
63%
Op Risk maturity assessment is carried out
Best Practice Operational Risk Forum, 2023
As described in Figure 13.6, in 2023 63 per cent of respondents conducted 
a methodical evaluation of this topic in a structured way; while 37 per cent 
were still developing their practices. This is an improvement from previous 
years, driven in part by boards, internal and external auditors, and indeed 
regulators, who now frequently request these kinds of assessments from 
firms as a matter of routine.
In some firms, an assessment of the maturity of the operational risk pro￾cess is also incorporated as part of the annual control attestation, a detailed 
process where business units and support functions review and attest on 
their key controls. Alternatively, operational risk maturity can be evaluated 
separately. Most participants (69 per cent) believed that a joint effort be￾tween first line units and the second line Operational Risk department 
worked best to achieve useful results from the assessment.
It terms of relevant metrics for measuring embeddedness, many firms 
used all three types of indicators, namely use test, risk culture and financial 
measures, but clearly gravitated more towards use test indicators (as shown 
in Figure 13.7).
Other firms partnered with Internal Audit, Compliance and HR to obtain 
supplementary measures. These included an Internal Audit evaluation of 
risk culture, trends (positive or negative) in people-related concerns as 
captured by HR, or an increase in poorly (or well) rated Compliance-led 
assessments.334 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
Figure 13.7 Operational risk embeddedness: measures of success
Best Practice Operational Risk Forum, 2023
Other type metrics
2.5
3.9
3.4
3.3
Strongly disagree
Strongly agree
Use test metrics
Risk culture metrics
Financial metrics
Measures of embeddedness include
1= strongly disagree, 5= strongly agree, = average rating
It is arguably easier to identify progress in operational risk embeddedness 
if you are implementing a framework from scratch – i.e. right from the 
start of the journey – than looking back on it from a more mature per￾spective. Once processes are established, keeping up momentum and en￾suring continued advancement in those processes and metrics – rather 
than deterioration – requires energy, enthusiasm and clever strategizing. 
This is yet another of the difficult yet exciting challenges that operational 
risk professionals face.
Practical workplace exercise
Consider how your organization evaluates its advancement along the stages 
of operational risk maturity:
1 Is there a maturity model or other mechanism in place to facilitate assessment 
of how well embedded your operational risk practices really are?
2 Is embeddedness defined, alongside its measures of success?
3 Is there any awareness of where the organization is on its journey and 
what its plans or next steps are?
4 What works well? Make a note of the strong features of the current 
maturity evaluation process, if they exist.Embedding and maturity assessment 335
In summary, this chapter discussed the importance of evaluating the pro￾gress of implementation of operational risk management, and proposed a 
number of ways of measuring success.
Moving on, the next chapter will discuss the increasingly important topic of 
ESG, outlining practical ways of incorporating E, S and G risks into the 
operational risk framework.
Notes
1 Antonucci, D (2016) Risk Maturity Models: How to assess risk management 
effectiveness, Kogan Page, London
2 Basel Committee for Banking Supervision (2011) Operational Risk: Supervisory 
guidelines for the advanced measurement approaches, www.bis.org/publ/
bcbs196.pdf (archived at https://perma.cc/T5QN-5SC9)
MAKE A DIFFERENCE (MAD) ACTION
Please note down one action that you will take after reading this chapter 
that will meaningfully enhance an evaluation of the maturity of your firm’s 
operational risk journey.
5 What can be improved? Note down how the evaluation of the operational 
risk implementation journey could potentially be enhanced.336 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
3 Institute of Operational Risk (2020) Embedding an Operational Risk 
Management Framework: Operational risk sound practice guidance, www.
ior-institute.org/sound-practice-guidance (archived at https://perma.cc/8L6M￾DQ2R)
4 International Organization for Standardization, ISO 31000:2009, www.iso.org /
obp/ui/#iso:std:iso:31000:ed-1:v1:en (archived at https://perma.cc/35EB-GTAD)
5 Christian Hunt (2023) Humanizing Rules: Bringing behavioural science to 
ethics and compliance, WileyIncorporating 14
ESG into 
operational risk 
framework
What this chapter covers: Environmental, Social and Governance (ESG) 
matters are becoming increasingly important, not only at a strategic level 
but also in the construct of operational risk management activities 
(Figure 14.1). The chapter provides an overview of ESG and suggests that 
the acronym needs to be deconstructed into its separate elements: E, S and 
G. It highlights risk management requirements and outlines the ways of in￾corporating E, S and G into the operational risk taxonomy, presenting prac￾tical examples of how core framework tools can be applied to manage the 
risks. The chapter also contains a call for action for operational risk teams 
to actively collaborate across silos to avoid rework and duplication. It in￾cludes examples, results of live polls and industry studies.
FURTHER READING
● Basel committee on Banking Supervision (2022) Principles for the 
Effective Management and Supervision of Climate-Related Financial 
Risks.
Why recommended: Key document stipulating risk management 
requirements, on which national supervisors are basing their own 
requirements. Essential for risk management practitioners.
● European Banking Authority (2021) Report on Management and 
Supervision of ESG Risks for Credit Institutions and Investment Firms.
337338 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
Decomposing ESG into its elements: 
E, S and G
Without doubt, ESG considerations are becoming increasingly important 
for organizations and their teams, with businesses judged on their ESG per￾formance, and risk professionals tasked with integrating ESG risks into en￾terprise risk management frameworks. According to McKinsey, the 
three-letter acronym has risen to prominence with a ‘fivefold growth in in￾ternet searches for ESG since 2019’.1
 Consequently it has settled in with the 
myriad of other three-letter acronyms favoured by the corporate world – 
such as AML, GRC and BCP, among many – and has been fully embraced 
and adopted into the standard corporate vocabulary. The catch-all acronym 
‘ESG’, however, combines distinct and separate matters under one umbrella. 
It tends to be overused and misused, creating the misnomer of ESG risk.
It is therefore imperative to start by taking a closer look at the three ele￾ments of the acronym. A point to note is that – similarly to risk culture, as 
discussed in Chapter 12 – ESG is a complex and multifaceted topic, which 
has received substantial coverage from government and industry bodies, 
policy makers and consultancy firms. It is also a highly politicized term, 
embraced and viewed as mission-critical by some commentators but criti￾cized by others as ‘shorthand for hype and controversy’.2
 Accordingly, some 
jurisdictions have been amenable to advancing ESG initiatives, while others 
have been less prepared to move in that direction. Without expressing opin￾ions or entering into debates, the chapter aims to simplify ESG for the pur￾poses of viewing it through an operational risk lens only, and considers 
practical ways of embedding it into the operational risk framework. This 
practical approach is important, as it would be fair to note that more pro￾gress has been achieved in embedding ESG into financial risk frameworks, 
Why recommended: In contrast to the Basel Committee’s paper which 
focuses only on the climate-related subcomponent of the E, the EBA 
report embraces all three letters of the ESG acronym and hence 
represents an important comparative study text. For practitioners, it has 
a handy glossary and a useful set of Key Risk Indicators to consider.Governance, roles and responsibilities
Establish governance and clear roles across the Three Lines for managing operational risk.
Risk assessments
Assess risk exposure in 
process, business or
function via RCSAs.
Supplement by evaluating
risks emanating from 
change activities via 
ORAs. 
Identify exposure from 
extreme but plausible 
events. 
Mitigate through risk
transfer to insurance.
Scenario analysis
Monitor risk and control 
performance through 
predictive indicators. 
Act if indicators breach
established appetite
thresholds. 
Key Risk Indicators
Reporting and decision-making
Review actual risk profile against set appetite, apply active risk management to enable achievement of strategic objectives.
Operational risk 
events
Record and report risk
events, act to minimize
future exposure. 
Monitor trends against
RCSAs and KRIs.
Risk appetite and risk capacity
Define nature and types of risk accepted in pursuit of strategic objectives. Evaluate adequacy of capital resources.
Operational risk taxonom
y
Embedding and maturity assessment
Training and education
Risk culture
Figure 14.1 Focus of Chapter 14: interaction of E, S and G with operational risk framework
339340 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
such as credit and market risk. By contrast, an understanding of how to in￾tegrate ESG into operational risk is still in development.
E, S and G as part of sustainability
ESG elements are often combined within the concept of sustainability. The 
UN’s Sustainable Development Goals comprise a wide range of activities, 
from tackling poverty and providing access to health and nutrition, to 
achieving more peaceful and inclusive societies and managing the conse￾quences of climate change.
SUSTAINABILITY DEFINITION
The European Union defines sustainability as a focus on ‘development that 
meets the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future 
generations to meet their own needs’.3
In essence, sustainability is about responsible living, promoting prosperity 
while protecting the planet for future generations.
So the E, the environmental aspect of sustainability goals, considers ef￾fects on the environment, with climate-related risk being arguably the most 
researched subcategory, and often closely linked to other different environ￾mental aspects. (Due to the prominence of climate risk, the E is sometimes 
shorthanded to C&E, namely ‘climate-related and environmental’.) The E
comprises multiple objectives, including the need for action to reduce green￾house gas emissions and limit the effects of climate change. There is com￾mon agreement on the need for urgency in tackling alarming climate 
conditions, which for financial services firms can result (and have already 
resulted) in supply chain disruptions, system failures, and damage to prem￾ises and equipment. So out of the three letters of the ESG acronym, the E – 
and in particular its climate-related aspect – is a clear priority, with compa￾nies, regulators and politicians all focusing with determination on the 
subject.
In turn, the S – the ‘Social’ aspect of sustainability – refers to the impact 
that firms can have on society and the quality of life. It urges organizations 
to address topics such as diversity and inclusion, employee health and well￾being, and workplace safety. Risks can arise from inadequate labour stand￾ards and poor safety protocols, from mental health issues for employees Incorporating ESG into operational risk framework 341
caused by discrimination and from dealing with suppliers that apply unac￾ceptable practices such as child labour.
Last but not least, governance – the G aspect – refers to ‘the governance 
factors of decision making’,4
 which encompass business ethics, compliance 
practices of anti-bribery and anti-corruption, firms’ policies and procedures, 
and the wider responsibilities of the board and other stakeholders. Poor ap￾plication of the G can result in conflicts of interest, fraud and money laun￾dering, among a range of adverse outcomes, and can lead to high profile 
corporate scandals.
Use E, S and G as separate elements
Considering the three letters of the acronym, while each of the topics is un￾deniably significant, it is apparent that they are rather different in nature. 
Hurricanes and heatwaves driven by climate change have no direct correla￾tion with corporate diversity and inclusion scores, or bribery and corruption 
practices. In fact, McKinsey has noted that ‘ESG represents an odd and un￾stable combination of elements’.5
 Similarly, the Bank for International 
Settlements (BIS) paper on ‘Deconstructing ESG Scores: How to invest with 
your own criteria’6
 argues that there is no such thing as ESG investment, as 
it is nearly impossible to create a portfolio aligned with all three ESG values. 
Investors should separate and align their portfolios with E, S or G factors 
individually. Consequently the debate continues as to whether the combina￾tion of E, S and G in a single term is meaningful or, whether, as Jonathan 
Guthrie noted in the Financial Times, ‘ESG is a category error that needs 
unbundling’.7
Unfortunately, in the meantime, the inconsiderate bundling has bal￾looned, creating a world of ‘esg-ness’. As an example in the operational risk 
space, the publication of the top five non-financial risks for 2023 high￾lighted:
1 Cyber risk;
2 ESG (inclusive of climate risk);
3 Geopolitical risk;
4 Third-party risk;
5 Resilience and business continuity.8
From a practical perspective, the second top risk, which includes ‘the risks 
associated with a diverse range of issues such as climate change, greenhouse 342 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
gas emissions, deforestation, biodiversity, customer and employee relations, 
labor, human rights, supply chains, board management practices, diversity, 
equity and inclusion, compliance, and more’,9
 is not something that is easily 
manageable.
Therefore, it is recommended to approach the acronym with due care, 
using E, S and G separated into its three elements:
E, S and G NOT ESG
I have been running courses on this topic for several years and have often 
felt the need to pause and discuss the importance of decomposing the acro￾nym. Often participants enter the course with a preconception about ‘ESG 
risk’ which they feel they need to identify, assess, manage and report on.
There is a multitude of E, S and G-related risks stemming from E, S and 
G-related factors; rather than a single, all-inclusive ESG risk.
E, S and G: understanding risk management
Sustainability is often a key part of many firms’ strategies, as the financial 
services sector in particular is expected to play a vital role in transitioning to 
a greener economy. While the strategic agenda is being set and debated, 
firms also recognize that there are risks emanating from E, S and G factors, 
which can materialize through the traditional risk categories such as 
credit, market and operational risk, potentially impacting the firm’s P&L. 
Consequently, risk management frameworks should actively embrace the 
topic, while risk management professionals need to establish adequate iden￾tification, assessment, management and reporting practices.
Scope of risk management activities
The essence of regulatory requirements related to risk management can be 
demonstrated using the Basel Committee principles for the effective man￾agement and supervision of climate-related financial risks,10 which outline 
common sense practices such as:
● Identifying, assessing, managing and reporting on material climate￾related financial risks;
● Conducting scenario analysis to assess the resilience of business models;Incorporating ESG into operational risk framework 343
● Incorporating relevant considerations within risk appetite;
● Embedding through policies, procedures and internal controls;
● Enhancing accountability, via assigned climate-related responsibilities 
and robust governance; and
● Ensuring risk data aggregation capabilities account for climate-related 
risks.
Note that the Basel Committee principles in fact only address the E letter of 
the acronym, and, in particular, its climate-related subcomponent. In con￾trast, the ‘Report on Management and Supervision of ESG Risks’11 from the 
European Banking Authority (EBA) focuses on all three letters of the acro￾nym. In a similar vein are the EBA’s ‘Guidelines on the Management of ESG 
Risks’,12 establishing prerequisites across the whole spectrum of E, S and G 
factors. While the risk management requirements are similar in nature in 
these publications, there is a notable deviation in scope, which is reflective 
of a divergence in scope among firms on this topic. Some organizations cen￾tre their efforts on climate risk, while others divide their focus equally be￾tween E, S and G risk matters. The scope depends on the jurisdiction and the 
focus of the firms’ supervisors and policy makers.
Defining E, S and G risks
The EBA report proposes the following definition of ESG risks:
ESG risks are ‘the risks of any negative financial impact on the institution 
stemming from the current or prospective impacts of ESG factors on its 
counterparties or invested assets’.13
This definition is geared more towards financial risks, as it takes into ac￾count counterparty default or a reduction in the value of assets. In fact, in 
operational risk, negative impacts can emanate from the firm’s own prac￾tices, and can be broader than merely financial. I will therefore propose an 
alternative definition.
ALTERNATIVE DEFINITION OF E, S AND G-RELATED 
RISKS
E, S and G-related risks are the risks of negative impacts stemming from an 
organization’s E, S and G-related practices, or from the current or 
prospective impacts of E, S and G factors on its counterparties or invested 
assets.344 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
Inadvertently, by bundling the three letters together, the EBA’s definition 
may have helped spark the ‘esg-ness’ in risk management. But now we have 
ascertained that E, S and G come separated into their different elements, we 
can conclude that each of the letters individually needs to be viewed through 
a risk lens.
E, S and G interaction with operational risk framework 
elements
As outlined in Figure 14.1 at the start of the chapter, E, S and G risk man￾agement arguably touches on all the aspects of the operational risk frame￾work. This will be explored further below, starting with the supporting ele￾ments, outlined on the perimeter in Figure 14.1.
Risk culture
Risk culture is a pertinent topic here as E, S and G factors affect the long￾term sustainability of the firm (as well as the planet more broadly), and 
therefore have a deep connection to the values, beliefs and overall culture of 
the firm. Consequently, risk managers who are likely already involved in – 
or even leading – the firm’s culture-related efforts can help promote particu￾lar behaviours, engaging employees in sustainability initiatives and encour￾aging a culture of awareness and responsibility.
In this context, it is appropriate to consider the triangle pictured in 
Figure  14.2, which explores a firm’s motivation when approaching this 
topic.
● The initiative may be viewed merely through a compliance lens, aiming 
to meet minimum requirements, close audit comments or remove a 
capital add-on. In this case, the overall programme will be regulatory￾driven, likely led by the second line (Risk or Compliance function), 
Figure 14.2 The Triangle: firm’s motivation in addressing E, S and G
Compliance
Values and Beliefs
Opportunity
E, S and GIncorporating ESG into operational risk framework 345
without considering the wider opportunities or conducting strategic 
board conversations on how E, S and G fits into the institution’s business 
model.
● Alternatively, the programme can be regarded as an opportunity. As an 
example, the asset management industry thrives on proactively developing 
products to meet the demand for E, S and G investments as a result of 
changing consumer behaviour. In this case, the lead direction for the 
initiative would likely be provided by the business. However, if product 
opportunity is the only angle that matters, E, S and G will be viewed 
narrowly as a front office activity, with intellectual capacity being applied 
primarily to new fund development, while the firm’s own practices and 
behaviours may conflict with E, S and G priorities. For example non-eco￾friendly facilities, excessive printing, the use of plastic cups or poor 
diversity and inclusion scores might not be addressed. It is therefore 
important that the product opportunity aspect is in sync with the firm’s 
values and beliefs, which brings us to the third vertex.
● Values and beliefs motivate E, S and G programmes in organizations that 
are genuinely interested in the topic. Those firms are likely to be industry 
leaders that advocate widely for E, S and G matters, joining industry 
groups and leading activities to achieve a positive impact. In these firms, 
employees are likely to be hearing about E, S and G matters directly from 
the CEO and the board, who will be sponsoring the programme, and the 
discussions will revolve around being a leader in the space rather than a 
follower; setting industry standards and making a real impact for the 
benefit of future generations.
Organizations that excel in embedding E, S and G into their wider strategy – 
in addition to their risk management activities – are making use of the full 
triangle. All three motivations are combined in a coherent way to build a 
meaningful, value-added programme. In these cases, cultural education is 
beneficial, linking all the incentives together. If a firm has no genuine belief 
in the subject, its approach to E, S and G may be largely operational or even 
hypocritical, reflecting back a poor organizational culture.
Operational risk taxonomy
Taxonomy is an essential starting point in defining how E, S and G elements 
are tackled. Linking the three letters in a meaningful manner leads to coher￾ent and effective risk analysis, management and reporting. The opposite is 
also true – if the letters are not integrated or are connected sub-optimally, 346 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
this will inevitably cause confusion and duplication. The proposals for 
integrating E, S and G into the operational risk taxonomy are discussed in 
the respective sections of this chapter.
It is equally relevant to consider the wider corporate risk taxonomy, 
which usually sits above the operational risk taxonomy. Let’s review three 
examples of how three different organizations approached this task, as set 
out in Table 14.1.
In this example:
● Firm 1 perceives that E, S and G-related risks materialize into the 
traditional risk types of strategic, credit, market, non-financial and 
liquidity, and therefore makes no amendments to its existing risk 
taxonomy; this approach is recommended.
● Firm 2 singles out climate risk as a stand-alone risk type, which is elevated 
and added into the risk taxonomy in its own right; this approach may be 
viable in certain circumstances.
● Firm 3 incorporates ESG as a catch-all entry; as previously discussed, this 
approach should be avoided due to the breadth and diversity of 
components that fall under the E, S and G banner.
Table 14.1 Industry study: integrating E, S and G into the corporate risk 
taxonomy
Firm 1 Firm 2 Firm 3
Strategic Strategic and Business Credit
Credit Credit and Investment Traded market
Market Market Operational
Non-Financial Operational Financial Crime
Liquidity People Conduct
Legal and Compliance Pension
Reputational Technology
Information ESG
ClimateIncorporating ESG into operational risk framework 347
Training and education
As E, S and G is a relatively new discipline, end-user education is vital for 
achieving embeddedness in organizations. An industry survey run in 
202214 revealed that more than 35 per cent of respondents noted that no 
training on this subject was conducted at all. Yet ensuring a solid under￾standing of E, S and G is an excellent opportunity for collaboration across 
departments, whereby joint sessions might include a Sustainability team 
introducing the key concepts, the CEO or a member of the executive team 
explaining how these fit into the firm’s overall strategy, and then respective 
risk professionals – credit, market, operational – joining in to cover the 
risk management aspects. The Operational Risk department can also run 
topical training sessions, for example including a spotlight on the treat￾ment of E, S and G matters when performing its routine ORE or RCSA 
processes. There is no doubt the seriousness of E, S and G could make it a 
rather dry and humourless topic. Involvement of operational risk profes￾sionals, masters of training and education, as discussed in Chapter 11, can 
help to make the narrative interesting for stakeholders, increase enjoyment 
and get more people engaged in the programme.
Embedding and maturity assessment
Embedding and maturity assessment should also consider E, S and G fac￾tors, which can be important for maintaining competitive advantage and 
pursuing business opportunities as well as managing risks. In some juris￾dictions there is also regulatory prioritization of this topic, with the 
European Central Bank (ECB) for example outlining ‘material exposures 
to physical and transition risk drivers of climate change’ as a prioritized 
vulnerability for review in their list of priorities for 2024–2026.15 Thus a 
firm’s existing maturity assessment, while applying the same methodol￾ogy described in Chapter 13, can be expanded in scope to address the 
question of whether E, S and G integration into the operational risk 
framework works. There is also the opportunity for this to be addressed 
at an enterprise risk level, with integration into the operational risk 
framework being one of the components of the overall evaluation of E, S 
and G.
Next, we’ll examine the governance arrangements and risk reporting, as 
shown in Figure 15.1, stretching above and below the main toolset.348 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
Governance, roles and responsibilities
Risk professionals – credit, market, liquidity and operational – can work 
together, guided by the CRO, to agree a fit-for-purpose approach. This may 
include:
● Updating the enterprise risk management framework with references to 
E, S and G components, with an outline of how the topic is handled 
across the various risk disciplines.
● Amending Terms of Reference (TORs) of governance committees, from 
the Risk committee to Operational and Credit risk committees, to 
explicitly include responsibilities relating to the management of E, S and 
G-related risks (the recommended approach); alternatively, establishing a 
dedicated risk oversight committee for E, S and G matters (this is less 
desirable, as the existing risk governance structure should already be fit 
for purpose and able to accommodate new topics).
● Revising the organizational structure and role profiles, to reflect the firm’s 
approach to the Three Lines. This will largely depend on the stance taken 
with the Sustainability (or ESG) team. (We’ll refer to this as the 
Sustainability team throughout the rest of this chapter, as terminology 
varies widely between firms.) It is helpful if the Sustainability team:
● Owns E,S,G risk policy and methodology;
● Coordinates overall E, S and G risk exposure assessment;
● Aggregates information and coordinates risk reporting and risk 
appetite development across the risk disciplines;
● Provides firm-wide training and education;
● Performs horizon scanning for new E, S and G-related emerging 
risks;
● Develops expertise and serves as subject matter expert on the topic, 
partners with relevant industry bodies and commissions appropriate 
research.
● If this team is functional, the role of the Operational Risk department 
becomes much easier and pleasurable to execute. Therefore due 
consideration should be given to the clarity in the allocation of tasks 
early on in the programme.
● Even if E, S and G is not forming part of operational risk activities, it is 
beneficial to consider what other governance committees may require 
revision. For example, the TORs of New Product/New Business 
committees or similar governance bodies may merit revision.Incorporating ESG into operational risk framework 349
Reporting and decision-making
The aim here is to ensure that E, S and G risks are taken into account in 
risk-related reporting.
The operational risk report, discussed in Chapter 10, should not change, 
but rather should include periodic thematic updates on E, S and G risks, on 
a frequency agreed by the board and documented in the relevant TORs. This 
is a point of contention, as often new reports covering E, S and G risks are 
created from scratch, duplicating existing information. Documenting what 
is reported by the Sustainability team vs Risk department is also useful. 
There is a broader reporting challenge which requires a development of an 
E, S and G reporting framework aligned with international standards where 
applicable, for example the Global Reporting Initiative (GRI) or the 
Sustainability Accounting Standards Board (SASB). This matter is outside 
immediate operational risk responsibilities, but still useful to bear in mind.
Let’s now proceed to examining the three components of the acronym – 
E, S and G – as well as remaining core operational risk elements – in more 
detail.
The E in ESG
This section explores how the E element can be integrated into an existing 
operational risk framework, placing particular focus on the climate-related 
subcomponent.
Operational risk events
OREs are discussed in detail in Chapter 4. The process of identifying and 
gathering OREs should already be in place, enabling the firm to record inci￾dents such as the following:
● An employee submits a fraudulent expense report and claims $5,000;
● An ATM is destroyed, repaired at a cost of $50,000;
● A processing error results in a loss of $75,000;
● System failure leads to a major technology outage, resulting in customer 
harm and a regulatory fine of $350,000.
A subset of these events is of interest. Specifically, the ATM destruction 
needs to be further investigated to determine why it occurred; was it due to 350 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
an act of vandalism (not climate-related), or due to torrential rain leading to 
a flood (climate-related)? Similarly, what was the cause of system failure? 
Was it due to human error (not climate-related), or as a result of increased 
humidity due to a wetter winter (climate-related)?
At times, this process may necessitate the 5 Whys technique discussed in 
Chapter 4, with continual asking of the why question, to drill down into the 
problem and understand its true origin:
● Why did the incident occur? Due to system failure.
● Why did the system fail? Due to a malfunction of a hardware part.
● Why did the part malfunction? It was damaged by moisture.
● Why was there moisture? Due to too much humidity in the data centre.
● Why was there humidity in the data centre? We have experienced an 
unusually wet winter leading to a rise in humidity, which the cooling unit 
failed to control.
Here, at last, we arrive at the true cause, namely an excessively wet winter 
impacting humidity levels; and consequently we are able to attribute the 
event to climate-related drivers.
This type of investigation is needed to determine whether events that 
have materialized are relevant to the E category. It is recognized that the 
main challenge lies in potential data gaps. While the operational risk event 
database may be complete with descriptions of what went wrong, it may be 
missing the causes of the events. Working with organizations in my consul￾tancy capacity, in many cases we have had to embark on an interesting 
journey of trying to locate an individual who remembered the historic event 
and could talk about its cause.
In the example given above, the database would be updated to show that 
the event was caused by a climate-related driver.
INCORPORATING E INTO OPERATIONAL RISK 
TAXONOMY
The environmental (and specifically climate) aspect is not a separate risk 
type but a cause, or driver, of traditional operational risks materializing.Incorporating ESG into operational risk framework 351
Climate-related risk drivers are comprised of three components, namely 
physical, transition and liability.
● Physical risk accounts for acute events such as storms, heavy rain and 
heat waves as well as longer-term chronic shifts in climate.
● Transition risk encompasses the process of transitioning to a greener 
economy. It includes, among other things, changes in regulation, 
changes in consumer behaviour, technological developments or 
decreases in the value of particular investments resulting in stranded or 
uninsurable assets.
● Liability risk arises from climate-related legal actions, which might be 
incurred for failing to mitigate or adapt to the impact of climate change.
OREs caused by climate-related drivers will most obviously materialize in the 
Damage to Physical Assets Basel taxonomy category, which by definition al￾ready includes natural disasters. Additional impacted categories may include:
● Business Disruption and System Failure, as outlined in the earlier 
example, for a relevant subset of events;
● Employment Practices and Workplace Safety, for accidents related to 
unsafe working conditions as a result of flood or fire (or similar events);
● Third-party risk covering failures of service providers resulting from natural 
disasters, as part of Execution, Delivery and Process Management; and
● Clients, Products and Business Practices, specifically climate-related 
lawsuits, regulatory non-compliance or inadequate product features/
product mis-selling.
Suggested impacted taxonomy categories are highlighted in Figure 14.3. 
Primary categories are circled; secondary categories are marked with an arrow.
It is fair to note that not all categories are in scope; internal and external 
fraud, general execution errors and similar events are less relevant here.
In the same way, where a firm is using its own tailor-made taxonomy, 
relevant impacted categories would also need to be ascertained.
As we are discussing potential lawsuits and regulatory non-compliance, it 
is pertinent to consider broader climate-related risks which go beyond rain 
and heatwaves, splitting them into physical, transition and liability.Figure 14.3 Mapping of E to operational risk taxonomy
Internal fraud Theft, forgery, rogue trading/intentional mis-marking of positions
External fraud Third party theft and forgery, theft of information, hacking damage
Employment practices 
and workplace safety
Acts inconsistent with employment law – discrimination, unfair
dismissal, breach of employee health or safety, personal injury claims
Clients, products and 
business practices
Market manipulation, non-compliance with laws and regulations,
mis-selling of products, product defects, duciary breaches
Damage to physical 
assets Natural disasters, terrorism, vandalism
Business disruption 
and systems failure Utility disruptions, software failures, hardware failures
Execution, delivery and 
process management
Data entry errors, accounting errors, failed mandatory reporting,
incorrect or delayed payments, erroneous transactions
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
352Incorporating ESG into operational risk framework 353
The topic therefore encompasses issues that stretch beyond weather-related 
forces.
To enable the quick detection of climate-related OREs, the Basel 
Committee suggests incorporating a flag to mark the events with ‘root causes 
stemming from climate-related risk drivers’16 into a database or spreadsheet; 
or alternatively, if the organization is using a causal taxonomy in addition 
to a risk taxonomy (see Chapter 1), then the causal taxonomy can be 
amended accordingly.
A note on the need for reflection to determine that climate risk is not a 
separate operational risk sub-type. This is a point of contention in the indus￾try, and opinion is divided, as was discovered by the Best Practice Operational 
Risk Forum. Some 40 per cent of respondents treated climate as a cause, 
while 50 per cent approached it as a risk in its own right, and added it into 
their taxonomy; the remaining 10 per cent were undecided.
Adding climate as a risk will inevitably cause duplication with existing 
risks, events, KRIs and scenarios. In contrast, treating climate as a cause is 
supported by multiple regulatory publications. This includes the EBA, who 
in their review of good practices for climate-related and environmental risk 
management noted that ‘institutions broadly recognize C&E risks as risk 
drivers that materialize in existing risk categories’.17 ORX, the industry 
body that authored the reference operational risk taxonomy, also concurs, 
stating that climate constitutes a causal factor and therefore does not re￾quire a new event category.18
In conclusion, analysis of past losses is essential for understanding the 
level of organizational exposure to climate risk. If, as mentioned in Chapter 4, 
a firm does not have a clear understanding of its loss profile, it will be sig￾nificantly less equipped for effectively managing its forward-looking risks.
INCORPORATING E INTO OPERATIONAL RISK 
EVENTS
✓ Perform a look-back of existing OREs, and detect and analyse relevant 
events;
✓ If there is uncertainty about the relevance of the event (where the cause 
is either unknown or not clearly defined), supplement with any available 
details;
✓ Create an action plan for addressing data gaps, potentially aligning with 
existing risk data remediation projects;354 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
✓ Establish the means to spot relevant events promptly in the future, by 
either adding a climate ‘flag’ or amending a causal taxonomy;
✓ Carry out training and education to increase end-user awareness.
Operational risk assessments
Let’s consider another core tool of the framework, namely risk assessments. 
RCSAs were addressed in Chapter 5, and this section builds on the princi￾ples and methodology established there.
Risk and control self-assessment (RCSA)
As is the case for any risk assessment, the first step is to create a pre-reading 
pack including supplementary information. This preparatory pack needs to 
include:
● Relevant ORE analysis, as discussed above, providing a factual view on the 
frequency and severity of events stemming from climate-related drivers.
● Relevant external loss data: where internal data is insufficient or of sub￾optimal quality, it can be supplemented with pertinent external loss data.
● Previous RCSA or other risk assessment results.
● Additional external research that may be relevant. This can be, for example:
● Climate-related peer lawsuits, as an aid for evaluating liability risk;
● Regulatory priorities and/or penalties for non-compliance, for 
transition risk;
● Predictions on the risk of flood, wildfire and other threats to premises 
and facilities (such as branches and headquarters); these can be 
available from government registers, externally produced hazard maps 
and footprints, or other sources, and are essential for a better 
understanding of the firm’s exposure to physical risk.
There are obvious challenges related to the use of external research on the 
physical risk side. Firstly, such data may not be available and/or accessible 
for a given jurisdiction; and secondly, there are often disputes on whose re￾sponsibility it is to source and analyse such information. The debate often 
revolves around the role of the central Sustainability team vs the Operational 
Risk department vs Facilities, and in particular on where the knowledge and Incorporating ESG into operational risk framework 355
capability to address these matters should reside. From a practical perspec￾tive, it is essential that the teams agree their approach and relative responsi￾bilities early on, with the recommendation being for the Sustainability team 
to lead on sourcing and evaluating such data together with the Facilities 
department. This may necessitate partnering with contacts in academia to 
persuade them to launch, and perhaps even sponsor, forward-looking re￾search for those jurisdictions where it is not readily available.
Once the preparatory pack is ready, an RCSA workshop can be con￾ducted with relevant units. It can be top-down, with the CEO and executive 
team at the table; or bottom-up, with subject matter experts (SMEs) from 
the Business, Legal, Compliance, Facilities, IT, Procurement/Third-party and 
other relevant areas, facilitated jointly by the Sustainability team and the 
Operational Risk department. This is a thematic risk assessment, focusing 
on a particular theme (in this case, climate risk). During the workshop, 
physical, transition and liability risk drivers are examined and any material 
operational risks emanating from the assessment are identified and catego￾rized in line with the operational risk taxonomy. Some examples of risks 
that might be identified during this exercise are presented in Table 14.2.
Table 14.2 Examples of operational risks stemming from climate-related 
drivers
Cause Resulting operational risks
Physical risk Acute or chronic events, 
e.g. wildfires, flood/
precipitation, severe 
storm, sea level rise, 
wind and soil erosion 
1. Damage to premises: Branches or 
headquarters
2. Health & Safety: Workplace 
safety/staff injury resulting from 
physical hazard
3. Third-party risk: Failure of a critical 
third-party service provider
Transition risk Policy and regulatory 4. Regulatory risk: Inability to identify 
or correctly apply requirements
Change in consumer 
behaviour
5. Product risk: Defects in 
sustainability-related features
Liability risk Market sentiment 6. Legal risk: lawsuits for 
environmental impact of firm’s 
activitiesFigure 14.4 Example results of climate-related risk assessment
Risk grading matrix
Lo
w Mediu
m High
Unlikely Possible Likely
Very hig
h
Risk is unlikely to occur
in the foreseeable future
(over 5 years)
Risk may occur
in the next 1–5
years
Risk almost certain 
to materialize in the
next 12 months
Financial: Actual/potential loss greater than $xxx
Client: Serious client detriment/large proportion impacted
Reputation: Deep damage to the brand and market value, 
sustained media coverage 
Regulatory: Formal investigation up to suspension of license
Financial: Actual/potential loss between $xx and $xxx 
Client: High level of detriment
Reputation: Market commentary, serious damage to the
reputation, brand and value
Regulatory: May prompt investigation or regulatory action
Financial: Actual/potential loss between $x and $xx
Client: Moderate impact/small proportion or segment
Reputation: One-off media coverage, minor damage to 
reputation, brand and value
Regulatory: Potential enquiry and/or ne
Financial: Actual/potential loss below $x
Client: Minor impact or complaints
Reputation: Inconsequential
Regulatory: Unlikely to result in any regulatory action
Impact
Likelihood
6
1
3
2
Damage to 
premises:
branches or 
headquarters
Health and Safety:
workplace safety/ 
staff injury
5 4
Legal risk: lawsuits for environmental 
impact of rm’s activities
Third-party risk:
failure of a critical
service provider
Regulatory:
inability to identify
or correctly apply
requirements
Product: defects in 
sustainability-related
features
356Incorporating ESG into operational risk framework 357
Following this step, risks are evaluated based on the existing methodology 
and using the materiality matrix previously described in Figure 5.6. The re￾sults of the assessment are presented in a heatmap in Figure 14.4.
In this example, the organization’s risk profile is quite contained, as it 
has determined that its own facilities are less exposed to physical risk. 
However, transition and liability risks such as regulatory, legal and product, 
are more significant, and so is physical risk emanating from dependency on 
critical third-parties, and their possible lack of resilience to climate-related 
drivers. Against this background, areas are identified for further deep dive 
and action, including running a scenario analysis as described further in 
this chapter.
As noted in Chapter 5, heat maps are imprecise, and it is important to 
understand their limitations. Despite these constraints, they are a very useful 
tool in determining which areas are more material and thus in agreeing pri￾orities for subsequent exploration, remediation or risk transfer.
In other cases the firm’s geographical footprint may be more complex, 
with facilities spread out across counties and continents. In this case, a more 
granular physical risk analysis would be beneficial:
● Hazards can be split into sub-types (e.g. flood, fire, hurricane, etc);
● Subsequently each facility – such as office buildings, recovery site, third￾party locations (e.g. data centre) – can be assessed against each type of 
hazard;
● Based on the assessment, actions can be developed with a view to 
enhancing operational resilience, improving staff awareness and revisiting 
insurance cover.
Lastly, the risk assessment may also include developing a more sophisticated 
understanding of physical risk exposure via the use of probabilistic models, 
such as the catastrophe models widely used in the insurance industry.
Risks and opportunities assessment
As argued in Chapter 6, risk management as a discipline benefits from tak￾ing a balanced stance and focusing on the upside as well as the downside of 
risks. Climate-related risk assessment is no different and can be executed via 
a risks and opportunities assessment. The objective of this exercise is to 
tease out the opportunities, and ways in which they might be increased, in 
addition to minimizing the material risks. An example of this balanced view 
of risks and opportunities is presented in Figure 14.5.Figure 14.5 Example climate risks and opportunities assessment
Likelihood
Risks
Unlikely Possible Likely
Opportunities
Lo
w Mediu
m High
Likely Possible Unlikely
Very high
Lo
w Mediu
m High Very high Legal risk
Regulatory risk
Product defects
Third-party risk
Enhanced 
premises facilities
Revised
product 
offering
More resilient
supply chain
Likelihood
Impact
Impact
358Incorporating ESG into operational risk framework 359
In this illustration, the organization considers a range of opportunities:
● A revised product offering, including designing a range of products that 
will create a competitive edge.
● The opportunity to make its own premises and facilities more eco-friendly 
by using renewable energy; reducing waste and recycling furniture; 
decreasing paper consumption; and consolidating premises or data 
centres using a more efficient architecture – all vital in reducing the firm’s 
own carbon emissions.
● Increasing the resilience of the supply chain, achieved via supplier 
diversification, creating some redundancy in critical supply chain elements 
and enhancing contingency plans.
Opportunities are neither required nor overseen by most regulators and 
thus, sadly, are often omitted from the assessment, especially if the latter is 
tackled with a compliance ‘tick-box’ mindset. Needless to say, however, they 
are extremely beneficial from a business point of view, so an approach that 
takes into account both risks and opportunities is strongly recommended.
To summarize, key activities related to risk assessments involve the fol￾lowing.
INCORPORATING E INTO OPERATIONAL RISK 
ASSESSMENTS
✓ Conduct a pilot thematic workshop with relevant units, facilitated by the 
sustainability and operational risk teams, to identify material risks 
caused by climate-related drivers;
✓ Update relevant policies and procedures;
✓ Carry out training and education for end-users;
✓ Subsequently embed risk identification as part of the regular RCSA 
cycle;
✓ Furthermore, consider adopting a risks and opportunities approach.
Scenario analysis
As a tool, scenario analysis is worthy of special mention in the climate con￾text, as it lends itself very well to considering extreme but plausible events 
at both short and longer-term time horizons. Scenario analysis is thus an 360 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
excellent tool for exploring the operational risk impacts of climate-related 
factors. An example is presented in Figure 14.6.
In this example, the organization is using a bow-tie cause, event and im￾pact methodology, as described in Chapter 8, to review and enhance its ex￾isting scenario related to third-party failure. Climate-related considerations 
are added to the story line, which helps the firm to acknowledge that it does 
not in fact possess sufficient knowledge around the exposure of critical third 
parties to climate risk drivers. This results in the development of an action 
plan to carry out a review of all critical service providers, to ensure that due 
diligence and climate-related exposure assessments have been completed in 
line with policy. The firm also commits to revisiting its substitutability ar￾rangements.
If the organization is already conducting scenario analysis as described in 
Chapter 8, then it may not need to develop story lines from scratch. Scenarios 
are common for categories such as Damage to Physical Assets and Business 
Disruption and Systems Failure. Therefore, the objective is to build on the 
existing framework, strengthening the suite of scenarios, developing further 
plausible assumptions and delving into areas that may not have been fully 
explored.
Scenarios can be selected from the RCSA risks for a further deep dive. For 
example, if lawsuits have been specifically identified as an area of concern, 
they can be further explored to consider what action or inaction may lead 
to directors of the firm being sued. Additionally, this process presents a per￾fect opportunity to re-evaluate the adequacy of the firm’s insurance cover 
and other risk transfer mechanisms. The Institute of Risk Management 
Figure 14.6 Climate-related scenario example
•Dependence 
on multiple 
critical service 
providers
•Control 
framework is 
being put in 
place to meet
internal and 
regulatory 
requirements
•Slow progress in 
implementation
CAUSE CONSEQUENCE
•Client harm
and loss of
business
•Investigation
•Regulatory 
fine
Failure of critical third-party service provider:
the firm failed to embed a robust third-party
management process, complete risk assessment,
incorporating climate-related considerations.
Critical supplier of cloud service solutions suffers
a flood due to extreme weather event, which
results in extended downtime and inability to
meet the SLA.
1) Climate-related assessment of critical
third-party service providers
2) Service substitutability
SCENARIO STORY LINE
Assumed control failures:Incorporating ESG into operational risk framework 361
(IRM) supports a scenario approach for understanding the firm’s exposure 
to climate-related risk drivers, noting that this methodology can help in a 
number of ways.19 From a regulatory standpoint, the Basel Committee spe￾cifically cites the need for scenario analysis to ‘assess the resilience of… busi￾ness models and strategies… and determine the impact of climate-related 
risk drivers on… overall risk profile’.20
In conclusion, scenario analysis creates great value-add, with both risk 
measurement and risk management benefits emanating from it.
Risk appetite and Key Risk Indicators
The suggested approach to tackling operational risk appetite was outlined 
in Chapter 9. We have mentioned throughout this chapter that E, S and G 
risks materialize in existing operational risks; and therefore, no brand new 
appetite statements are necessary. Using the same approach as we suggested 
for scenario analysis, existing statements and monitoring metrics can be 
enhanced instead.
Let’s take a look at the example of an appetite statement for third-party 
risk described in Table 9.2:
The firm relies on third parties in delivering core business activities and 
services to its clients. It is willing to accept moderate level of risk working with 
contracted third-parties to gain access to new technological platforms, improve 
flexibility and efficiency. Clients and regulators expect the firm to manage these 
arrangements effectively. The firm aims to limit disruptions by conducting 
robust third-party due diligence and performing monitoring and oversight by 
a dedicated Outsourcing team. The firm has identified single points of failure 
and where feasible, developed a substitution plan in case of critical provider 
failure or unavailability. Where substitution is not viable, the firm has enhanced 
oversight and actively takes part in third-parties’ testing of their resilience and 
recovery capabilities.
Elevated level of risk and breaches to appetite are escalated to the board and 
require action according to the firm’s Response Framework. The firm accepts 
that occasional minor disruptions may occur.
The appetite remains valid overall; however, the statement in italics can be 
improved by incorporating key climate-related considerations, so it reads: 
The firm aims to limit disruptions by conducting robust third-party due 
diligence, which includes due diligence around third-party exposure to cli￾mate factors and performing monitoring and oversight by a dedicated 
Outsourcing team.362 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
This addition cites a specific new activity, namely, working closely with 
critical third parties to understand their own exposure to climate-related 
risks. This kind of provision needs to be put in place, to mitigate the risk of 
third-party failures.
Respectively, appetite monitoring will benefit from a new KRI (in addi￾tion to the ones mentioned in Table 9.3), for example:
KRI: % of critical providers with inadequate climate risk assessments or where 
assessments have not been completed.
With these small additions, the process of appetite setting and monitoring 
remains unchanged.
The S and the G in ESG
Now that we have considered the E, let’s turn our attention to the remain￾ing two letters of the acronym. As evidenced by an Airmic survey,21 the top 
three responses to the question about non-climate E, S and G aspects of 
concern were:
● Diversity, equity and inclusion (80.4%);
● Employee mental health (63%);
● Regulatory compliance, including sanctions (63%).
These are all familiar themes, which fall under the Social (S) and Governance 
(G) headings.
The essence of S
When considering the S factor, it is imperative to bear in mind that ‘the so￾cial aims of ESG are vaguer than the environmental ones’22 and that ‘refer￾ences to definition of social factors are generally more difficult to identify’.23
Areas of focus in these domains stretch from human rights to community 
relations. The rating agency S&P, which uses E, S and G factors as contribu￾tors in arriving at its overall opinion on a company’s creditworthiness, com￾ments on such things as:
● General Motors being ‘in the second week of a nationwide strike that has 
seen some 46,000 employees down tools’,24 noting that ‘labour issues fall 
under the social aspect’;25Incorporating ESG into operational risk framework 363
● Walmart Inc, the US superstore chain, announcing it ‘will stop selling 
handguns, as well as ammunition for handguns and short-barrel rifles’,26
opining that it had become ‘a more palatable choice for socially minded 
investors’.27
Due to how broad these topics are, and in the absence of a coherent stand￾ardized taxonomy, the firm needs to outline its own vision of what is in￾cluded in the S, how that connects to its strategy and values, and, in turn, 
how the firm defines the relevant risks.
From a practical perspective, without reinventing the wheel, social risks 
can be extracted from the existing operational risk framework. A potential 
mapping of social risks to the operational risk taxonomy can be as follows:
● Employment Practices and Workplace Safety, as a primary category, 
covers human capital management as well as safe working conditions;
● Under Execution, Delivery and Process Management, the risk of third 
parties/service providers failing to apply robust employment and safety 
practices.
Therefore, social risks may be defined as follows:
Social risks evolve around human capital management, including but not 
limited to well-being, equality, safety and labour standards, as well as suppliers’ 
relationship with their workforce.
PRACTICAL TIP: ‘HANDLING BOUNDARY EVENTS’
There are boundary events that span across E and S elements. An example 
would be a health and safety incident (a social matter, or S) caused by a 
flood because of torrential rain (a climate-related risk driver, or E). In this 
particular case, the suggestion is to capture it under the E banner.
Dependent on the firm’s size, nature and business model, it may be fitting to 
apply a wider definition of S, in which case additional categories may be 
impacted:
● Product defects and inadequate product introduction, as part of Clients, 
Products and Business Practices, as it can be argued that social 
responsibility includes a conscientious and reliable customer product and 
service offering;364 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
● Privacy and data security, under External Fraud, as keeping personal data 
safe provides customer protection, and is part of social responsibility, 
especially for retail businesses.
Consequently, the example definition given above may need to be expanded:
Social risks evolve around human capital management by the organization 
and its suppliers, as well as product and data responsibility to its customers, 
investors and stakeholders.
A potential mapping of S to the taxonomy is highlighted in Figure 14.7 with 
the primary categories circled and secondary categories marked with an 
arrow.
The firm can go even further and add risks emanating from its commu￾nity interactions, for instance under-achievement of strategic goals related 
to community aid programmes. The definition will then stretch across op￾erational and strategic risks. Where relevant, the composition of S and its 
risks can be reconciled with relevant jurisdictional guidance, such as UN 
Sustainable Development Goals or the European Pillar of Social Rights 
Action Plan. Each firm needs to decide on how widely or narrowly it is will￾ing to interpret the S element, and, in turn, social risks.
INCORPORATING S INTO THE OPERATIONAL RISK 
TAXONOMY
The social element is neither a cause nor a risk in its own right, it is a lens
through which we view traditional operational (and, potentially, strategic) 
risks. 
The social element bears some similarity with conduct risk discussed in 
Chapter 1, which is best interpreted as an overarching term to identify a 
multitude of risks that may result in poor customer outcomes. The social 
element (like governance, as we will see later) is also an overarching term
that will benefit from being mapped to specific taxonomy categories. Indeed, 
the similarity goes beyond mere taxonomy mapping, as the concepts of con￾duct, social and governance matters are closely interlinked. For example, the 
issue of poor employee working conditions is both a social and a conduct 
matter; bribery is both a conduct and a governance issue.Figure 14.7 Mapping of S to operational risk taxonomy
Internal fraud Theft, forgery, rogue trading/intentional mis-marking of positions
External fraud Third-party theft and forgery, theft of information, hacking damage
Employment practices
and workplace safety
Acts inconsistent with employment law – discrimination, unfair
dismissal, breach of employee health or safety, personal injury claims
Clients, products and
business practices
Market manipulation, non-compliance with laws and regulations,
mis-selling of products, product defects, duciary breaches
Damage to physical 
assets
Natural disasters, terrorism, vandalism
Business disruption
and systems failure Utility disruptions, software failures, hardware failures
Execution, delivery and 
process management
Data entry errors, accounting errors, failed mandatory reporting,
incorrect or delayed payments, erroneous transactions
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
365366 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
The beauty of mapping S into the operational risk taxonomy lies in the fact 
that it enables us to extract relevant data such as OREs, risks and KRIs, and 
thus to understand the exposure to S via the existing framework, without 
needing to create a brand new stand-alone framework and process. For ex￾ample, information can be obtained on past losses related to employment 
lawsuits, and analysis conducted on their materiality and frequency of oc￾currence. Similarly, forward-looking people-related risks can be filtered out, 
and their significance evaluated. This analysis paints a picture of the com￾pany’s social risk profile. Organizations may supplement it with further met￾rics/KRIs that they feel are relevant to their firm.
PRACTICAL TIP: DO NOT ‘OVER-MAP’
Approach the mapping of S to the operational risk taxonomy with caution, 
and do not ‘over-map’ S to multiple taxonomy categories. If we are not 
careful, everything can be interpreted as a social matter.
In my experience of consultancy and training on this topic, some perceived 
social as a separate risk category, and added it as such into the operational 
risk taxonomy. This treatment of S is not advisable, as it will inevitably re￾sult in overlaps and double counting.
On the opposite side of the spectrum, some organizations I’ve worked 
with questioned whether they in fact needed to highlight separately the so￾cial element and social risks. They felt that S was something they already 
did, and that it already fitted organically into their frameworks and activi￾ties. To a large extent they are right, as many components of the S element 
refer to activities led by the corporate HR department, risk management or 
others. Many of the practices that make up S have been mentioned through￾out this book, including, for example, the Conduct and Culture Dashboard 
presented in Figure 12.4. While considering the key pillars that fall under 
the conduct and culture heading, the firm may have already outlined core 
employee- and customer-related measures. It may already have dashboards 
with well-thought-out KRIs being presented to governance committees. 
There is most likely already a process through which the firm monitors top￾ics such as diversity and inclusion, and employee mental health. Given this, 
it is essential to understand existing practices, and not fall into the trap of 
the Sustainability team creating a social dashboard, only to find out that HR Incorporating ESG into operational risk framework 367
and/or the Risk department already report on similar information under a 
slightly different banner. Hence the call for action for operational risk pro￾fessionals.
CALL FOR ACTION
Collaborate with HR, Sustainability and other relevant units to:
● Map S-related risks to the operational risk taxonomy, and extract and 
analyse relevant information, if not done already;
● Review any existing activities that fit under the social banner;
● Agree a joint approach to risk management and risk reporting, avoiding 
duplication and instead building on existing practices;
● Jointly, consider how the organization can make improvements on the 
S element.
After all, whichever way S is approached, it is less about frameworks and 
definitions and more about the value-add it brings to the organization. S can 
be used as an opportunity to focus on important social activities and con￾sider what and how the firm can do better; and what, in turn, will make the 
firm better.
Understanding G
Just as the S element is potentially very broad in scope, the G element is even 
more so. As noted by the Financial Times, ‘governance is a catch-all title 
within a catch-all acronym’.28 Like the S examples cited earlier, here are 
some examples of the kind of governance topics that the rating agency S&P 
would comment on:
● The fact that Facebook Inc was facing ‘growing calls from shareholders 
for greater transparency and risk oversight’;29 S&P noted that ‘poor 
corporate governance practices have stood at the core of some of the 
biggest corporate scandals’.30
● A 2020 report, ‘WeWork slipping into ‘negative spiral’ as IPO hopes 
dim’,31 concluded that ‘companies like WeWork have been scrutinized for 
their lack of leadership accountability and oversight, as well as conflicts 
of interest’.32368 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
From these and other examples, the spirit of governance is clear; the challenge 
lies in the practical application and mapping of G into the taxonomy – yet again 
to avoid creating a separate framework but still understanding the risk profile.
Applying an analogous approach, governance risks can be extracted from 
the current operational risk framework, and mapped as follows:
● Clients, Products and Business Practices, as a primary category, with 
relevant risks of bribery and corruption, tax evasion, illicit financial 
flows, conflicts of interest and regulatory non-compliance;
● Under Execution, Delivery and Process Management, the potential risk 
that third parties or service providers commit acts of bribery and 
corruption, tax evasion or similar offences.
Again, there is an opportunity to apply a wider definition, and add other 
taxonomy categories:
● Under Execution, Delivery and Process Management, the risk of possible 
financial misstatements or disclosures, or incorrect books and records, 
since in financial services, balance sheet accuracy and transparency relies 
heavily on robust governance practices; and
● Under Business Disruption and Systems Failure, the risk of failure of a 
core system, based on the argument that good governance ensures 
responsible investment in and oversight of technology.
A potential mapping of G to the taxonomy is highlighted in Figure 14.8, with 
primary categories circled and secondary categories marked with an arrow.
INCORPORATING G INTO THE OPERATIONAL RISK 
TAXONOMY
Similarly to S, the governance element is neither a cause nor a risk in its 
own right, it is a lens through which we view traditional operational, 
balance sheet (asset-liability management) and, potentially, strategic risks.
Given that G is even broader than S, it is equally important not to over-map 
it to taxonomy categories. In one rather extreme case, a firm I worked with 
took the view that governance is a cause of the majority of operational risk 
events. Therefore, its G included:
● Mundane errors: Failure to apply four-eyes principles was viewed as poor 
governance;Figure 14.8 Mapping of G to operational risk taxonomy
Internal fraud Theft, forgery, rogue trading/intentional mis-marking of positions
External fraud Third party theft and forgery, theft of information, hacking damage
Employment practices
and workplace safety
Acts inconsistent with employment law – discrimination, unfair
dismissal, breach of employee health or safety, personal injury claims
Clients, products and
business practices
Market manipulation, non-compliance with laws and regulations,
mis-selling of products, product defects, duciary breaches
Damage to physical 
assets
Natural disasters, terrorism, vandalism
Business disruption
and systems failure Utility disruptions, software failures, hardware failures
Execution, delivery and 
process management
Data entry errors, accounting errors, failed mandatory reporting,
incorrect or delayed payments, erroneous transactions
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
369370 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
● Fraud: Inability to detect/prevent incidents was perceived as a governance 
flaw;
● Model risk: Errors or poor calibration signalled a failure of governance.
Their list of G went on and on. This is a very broad interpretation that 
would likely be both costly and unwieldy to implement, and might even 
serve to mask more important governance risks. If this approach is chosen, 
the organization needs to seriously consider what benefits this stance is in￾tended to bring.
In a similar way to S, G is less about definition and more an opportu￾nity to bring focus to the topics that should be already ingrained in the 
corporate DNA, such as good ethos, culture and corporate governance 
framework. In one sense, E, S and G could just as easily be transposed to 
read as ‘G, S and E’. This is based on the premise that all practices, 
whether good or bad, originate from the tone set at the top and from the 
conscientious (or not) application of governance arrangements in their 
broad sense. Corporate governance frameworks, if not fit-for-purpose, 
result in operational as well as balance sheet risk exposures. The G ele￾ment encourages to ensure, via robust reporting mechanisms and close 
two-way communication between the Board and the lower-level execu￾tive committees, that the Board is fully aware of the situation at the 
coalface. To help organizations evaluate their practices, the Organization 
for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) issued principles 
to help firms ‘evaluate and improve the legal, regulatory, and institu￾tional framework for corporate governance’,33 which is a valuable bench￾mark in this area.
Effective cross-functional coordination is also vital for addressing gov￾ernance-related risks. Almost certainly, the Compliance department will be 
leading on policies, education, and reporting related to anti-bribery and cor￾ruption, prohibition of engagement in illicit activities and management of 
conflicts of interest. Corporate Secretariat, Legal and Risk teams will be 
building and assessing the effectiveness of governance arrangements. The 
Operational Risk department may already be extracting and reporting on 
relevant risks and KRIs; and a plethora of other activities may already be 
under way. It is therefore essential that existing information is examined to 
point to existing governance-related risk management, to avoid the creation 
of a whole separate industry of G-related reports. Hence the call for action.Incorporating ESG into operational risk framework 371
CALL FOR ACTION
Collaborate with Compliance, Corporate Secretariat and Sustainability 
teams, or with other relevant units, to:
● Map G-related risks to the operational risk taxonomy, and extract and 
analyse relevant information, if not done already;
● Jointly examine how the G topic is addressed in the firm, what activities 
are in place and what information is available;
● Agree a joint approach on reporting, avoiding duplication and instead 
building on existing practices;
● Consider what the organization can do better on the G element.
Common challenges and good practices
Potential challenges related to integrating E, S and G into the operational 
risk framework can include the following.
Lack of involvement
Operational risk professionals are very busy individuals. On several occa￾sions when discussing the E, S and G topic, risk managers mentioned that, 
thankfully, the corporate Sustainability team was handling the integration, 
including its incorporation into the operational risk framework, so at least 
this task was off their table. This delegation is undesirable. Without active 
engagement from operational risk SMEs, who are clearly the most familiar 
with their own framework, other units end up taking the critical decisions on 
E, S and G integration, which usually leads to sub-optimal results. Operational 
risk professionals need to claim a seat at the E, S and G table, and take the 
lead in integrating E, S and G risk management into their own framework.
Focus on optics
In circumstances where the E, S and G programme is compliance-focused, 
senior management will usually demand quick results. This leads to empha￾sizing quantity over quality – for optics purposes, lengthy reports are devel￾oped from scratch, repeatedly mentioning the ESG acronym to create an 
impression of multiple ESG-related activities (whether strategic or related to 
risk management). Producing siloed reports, without thoughtfully examin￾ing existing practices and aligning components to existing activities, creates 
duplication and adds little value.372 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
Inconsiderate use of the acronym ‘ESG’ and taxonomy mapping
One of the key challenges is in the bundling of E, S and G components, re￾sulting in ‘ESG risk’ being considered as a top operational risk. In numerous 
industry surveys on top operational risks, the label ‘ESG risk’ repeatedly 
comes up. As discussed in this chapter, the term ‘ESG risk’ is a misnomer. 
Risk practitioners need to be more considerate in their use of the acronym 
and its elements. A related challenge is in the incorrect mapping to the risk 
taxonomy – or even the complete absence of any mapping – resulting in the 
appearance of new social and governance risks in the taxonomy. Gaining 
knowledge on E, S and G topics, reading regulatory literature and obtaining 
relevant qualifications will increase the overall level of awareness among 
operational risk practitioners and reduce inconsiderate usage.
Reliance on existing tools
Management of E, S and G-related operational risks relies on the existing 
framework components. If the tools are not well designed or are performing 
sub-optimally, adding new requirements will bring existing challenges to the 
fore, potentially leading to push-back and complaints from the first line. 
Rather, E, S and G can be used as an opportunity to make thoughtful revi￾sions, thus enhancing the overall framework.
Good practices
Developing accountability
In some jurisdictions, accountability regimes have prompted the appoint￾ment of a named individual responsible for the management of climate-re￾lated risks. This has resulted in more timely discussions on roles and 
responsibilities in this area, which have subsequently enabled the pro￾grammes to progress at speed. Defining roles and responsibilities, especially 
between the Sustainability department and the risk teams, helps to avoid 
grey areas and ensure effective implementation.
SWOT analysis applied to E, S and G
Operational risk practitioners excel in facilitating different types of assess￾ments. One tool that lends itself well to E, S and G is SWOT analysis – iden￾tifying Strengths, Weaknesses, Threats and Opportunities. Risk practitioners 
can aim to get involved in the firm’s broader strategic E, S and G programme, 
and lend their facilitation skills in running SWOT workshops.Incorporating ESG into operational risk framework 373
Reputational risk assessment
Reputational risk can be treated as a consequence of other risk types 
(mostly operational risk) materializing. In this case it can be evaluated in 
the risk assessment process as part of the risk grading matrix. An alterna￾tive approach is to view reputation as an asset, conducting a separate rep￾utational risk assessment of the risks stemming from E, S and G factors. 
This is usually a three-step process, which includes identifying key stake￾holders, developing material reputational risk scenarios and finally assess￾ing what scenarios will cause the most significant (whether positive or 
negative) stakeholder reactions. Reputational risk assessment in the E, S 
and G area is beneficial, as reputational damage invariably features as one 
of firms’ primary concerns.
Programme transparency and collaboration
E, S and G is usually an extensive, multi-year commitment, led as a strategic 
programme at a corporate level. Ideally, the programme is well established, 
with cross-functional representation from all relevant units, from Business to 
HR to Operational Risk, collaborating effectively, breaking the silos, ac￾knowledging existing practices and connecting the dots. During the education 
programmes I run on the E, S and G topic we usually discuss whether it is 
actually essential – or merely desirable – for Operational Risk to be involved 
in the broader programme. The unanimous response is that it is essential good 
practice for the Operational Risk department to be an integral part of the E, 
S and G programme, at least at the beginning or even throughout.
Industry benchmark
The Best Practice Operational Risk Forum has discussed the topic of E, S 
and G integration into the operational risk framework many times over the 
years, each time noting some, albeit slow, advancement in implementation. 
In 2022, 10 per cent of respondents confirmed significant progress, 40 per 
cent acknowledged it being on the way, 30 per cent had commenced work 
and 20 per cent had not yet started.
Participants reflected on numerous challenges with this integration pro￾cess, which perhaps explain the slower than expected advancement:
● 37% listed other pressing priorities, with the pace being slowed by the 
pandemic years and the subsequent challenging macro-economic and 
geopolitical environment. This resonated with a 2022 KPMG survey, 374 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
which showed that during times of economic uncertainty, CEOs had to 
reprioritize, with as many as ‘50 percent… pausing or reconsidering their 
existing or planned ESG efforts’.34
● Methodological difficulties were noted by 27% of participants. In par￾ticular, climate risk management requires investment in the development 
of the approach, and enhanced knowledge and skills in the Operational 
Risk department. Here, operational risk is somewhat lagging, with more 
progress achieved in credit and market risk areas. The Basel Committee 
acknowledges the challenge, commenting that ‘publicly available 
information regarding climate-related operational risks is scarcer than 
for other risk types, and therefore the whole risk category would benefit 
from more data and research’.35
● On this note, 18% raised concerns related to data quality and reliability; 
in particular, loss data may not clearly flag past climate-related losses, 
making it difficult to analyse the frequency and severity of relevant events.
● Lastly, 18% mentioned unclear roles and responsibilities, especially 
between Sustainability teams and the Operational Risk department, with 
ongoing debates on who should lead activities such as the thematic 
assessment, risk reporting or training and education.
The results of the live poll are presented in Figure 14.9.
Best Practice Operational Risk Forum, 2022
Figure 14.9 Industry poll: challenges of ESG integration
Other priorities Unclear roles and
responsibilities
Methodological
difculties
Poor/
insufcient data
What are E, S and G integration challenges?
18%
27%
37%
18%Incorporating ESG into operational risk framework 375
Given other priorities, operational risk professionals reflected on their time 
spent on E, S and G risk management. The majority (67 per cent) dedicated 
less than 5 per cent of their time to E, S and G matters; 33 per cent spent 
from 2 to 20 per cent; none spent over 20 per cent of their time.
Despite the challenges, there is growing interest in the topic, with increas￾ing numbers of practitioners signing up for relevant educational courses. 
Operational risk professionals need to continue to meaningfully embed E, S 
and G factors into their framework, working in collaboration with other 
units and assertively claiming a seat at the corporate E, S and G table.
Practical workplace exercise
Reflecting on the content of this chapter, review how your firm integrates E, S 
and G factors into its operational risk framework, considering the following:
● Does the scope include all the three letters of the acronym or the climate￾related component only?
● In the operational risk context, is climate treated as a risk or as a cause of 
other risks materializing?
● Has the exposure to risks stemming from E, S and G-related drivers been 
ascertained via the use of operational risk tools, as described in this chapter?
● Is the Operational Risk department collaborating well with the 
Sustainability and other teams?
● What works well? Make notes of the progress made and features that 
work well and deliver value.
● What can be improved? Note down potential future enhancements.
MAKE A DIFFERENCE (MAD) ACTION
Please note down one action that you will take after reading this chapter 
that will meaningfully enhance the integration of E, S and G-related risks 
into the operational risk framework in your organization.376 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
In summary, this chapter focused on practical ways to address the pertinent 
topic of managing the risks emanating from E, S and G factors, focusing on 
the effective integration of those risks within the operational risk framework.
The next chapter will discuss operational resilience, a subject that has also 
achieved a significant degree of focus from firms and regulators, and outline 
its links with operational risk management.
Notes
1 McKinsey (2022) Does ESG really matter – and why?, www.mckinsey.com/
capabilities/sustainability/our-insights/does-esg-really-matter-and-why
(archived at https://perma.cc/PF65-CNPL)
2 The Economist (2022) ESG should be boiled down to one simple measure: 
emissions, www.economist.com/leaders/2022/07/21/esg-should-be-boiled￾down-to-one-simple-measure-emissions (archived at https://perma.cc/4EL8-
VR46)
3 United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, eur-lex.europa.
eu/EN/legal-content/glossary/sustainable-development.html (archived at 
https://perma.cc/2G78-K6K7)
4 S&P Global (2020) What is the ‘G’ in ESG?, www.spglobal.com/en/research￾insights/articles/what-is-the-g-in-esg (archived at https://perma.cc/HV7L￾HRTC)
5 McKinsey (2022) Does ESG really matter – and why?, www.mckinsey.com/
capabilities/sustainability/our-insights/does-esg-really-matter-and-why
(archived at https://perma.cc/PF65-CNPL)
6 Bank for International Settlement (BIS) (2020) Deconstructing ESG scores: 
How to invest with your own criteria, www.bis.org/publ/work1008.pdf
(archived at https://perma.cc/74J8-PEL2)Incorporating ESG into operational risk framework 377
7 Guthrie, J (2022) ESG is a category error that needs unbundling, Financial 
Times, www.ft.com/content/c8b11672-4847-44ae-b132-788cb2383a2c
(archived at https://perma.cc/AN6D-86G5)
8 Center for Financial Professionals (CefPro) (2023) Non-Financial Risk (NFR) 
Leaders, www.cefpro.com/nfr-leaders/#1452775774465-27c1e69f-9d41
(archived at https://perma.cc/QSV6-BQ58)
9 Center for Financial Professionals (CefPro) (2023) Non-Financial Risk (NFR) 
Leaders, www.cefpro.com/nfr-leaders/#1452775774465-27c1e69f-9d41
(archived at https://perma.cc/QSV6-BQ58)
10 Basel committee on Banking Supervision (2022) Principles for the effective 
management and supervision of climate-related financial risks, www.bis.org/
bcbs/publ/d532.pdf (archived at https://perma.cc/87UK-J6MW)
11 European Banking Authority (2021) Report on Management and Supervision 
of ESG Risks for Credit Institutions and Investment Firms, www.eba.europa.
eu/sites/default/documents/files/document_library/Publications/Reports/
2021/1015656/EBA%20Report%20on%20ESG%20risks%20manage￾ment%20and%20supervision.pdf (archived at https://perma.cc/H6U8-8WD8)
12 European Banking Authority (2024) Draft Guidelines on the management of 
ESG risks, www.eba.europa.eu/sites/default/files/2024-01/c94fd865-6990-
4ba8-b74e-6d8ef73d8ea5/Consultation%20papaer%20on%20draft%20
Guidelines%20on%20ESG%20risks%20management.pdf (archived at https://
perma.cc/7PG2-CNUD)
13 European Banking Authority (2021) Report on Management and Supervision 
of ESG risks for Credit Institutions and Investment firms, www.eba.europa.eu/
sites/default/documents/files/document_library/Publications/Reports/
2021/1015656/EBA%20Report%20on%20ESG%20risks%20manage￾ment%20and%20supervision.pdf (archived at https://perma.cc/H6U8-8WD8)
14 Center for Financial Professionals (CefPro) (2022) ESG State of Play: Banks’ 
Compliance and Automated Reporting Trends, www.workiva.com/resources/
esg-state-play-banks-compliance-and-automated-reporting-trends (archived at 
https://perma.cc/MHP7-MLC7)
15 European Central Bank, ECB priorities 2024–2026, www.bankingsupervision.
europa.eu/banking/priorities/html/ssm.supervisory_priorities202312~
a15d5d36ab.en.html (archived at https://perma.cc/NM7L-6B73)
16 Basel committee on Banking Supervision (2022) Frequently asked questions on 
climate-related financial risks, www.bis.org/bcbs/publ/d543.pdf (archived at 
https://perma.cc/JWP6-BJ4C)
17 European Banking Authority (2022) Good practices for climate-related and 
environmental risk management, www.bankingsupervision.europa.eu/ecb/pub/
pdf/ssm.thematicreviewcercompendiumgoodpractices112022~b474fb8ed0.en.
pdf (archived at https://perma.cc/E47Z-JPAM)378 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
18 Operational Risk e-Xchange Data Association (ORX) (2022) Climate and 
Operational Risk: The ORX Approach, 5992322.fs1.hubspotusercontent-na1.net/
hubfs/5992322/Website/Resources/Member%20reports/2022/ORX%20
Climate%20Operational%20Risk%20-%20The%20ORX%20Approach%20
2022.pdf (archived at https://perma.cc/NB95-53YK)
19 IRM, Climate Change Risk Management Guidance, www.theirm.org/
media/2516912/climate-change-risk-management-guidance-report.pdf
(archived at https://perma.cc/VTG9-V7AD)
20 Basel committee on Banking Supervision (2022) Principles for the effective 
management and supervision of climate-related financial risks, www.bis.org/
bcbs/publ/d532.pdf (archived at https://perma.cc/87UK-J6MW)
21 Airmic (2022) Risk and resilience in a perfect storm, www.airmic.com/system/
files/technical-documents/Airmic%20survey%20report%202022%20A%20
Perfect%20Storm.pdf (archived at https://perma.cc/N755-GZAF)
22 Guthrie, J (2022) ESG is a category error that needs unbundling, Financial 
Times, www.ft.com/content/c8b11672-4847-44ae-b132-788cb2383a2c
(archived at https://perma.cc/AN6D-86G5)
23 European Banking Authority (2021) Report on Management and Supervision 
of ESG Risks for Credit Institutions and Investment Firms, www.eba.europa.
eu/sites/default/documents/files/document_library/Publications/Reports/
2021/1015656/EBA%20Report%20on%20ESG%20risks%20manage￾ment%20and%20supervision.pdf (archived at https://perma.cc/H6U8-8WD8)
24 S&P Global (2019) General Motors faces a new breed of strike, www.spglobal.
com/marketintelligence/en/news-insights/latest-news-headlines/54431339
(archived at https://perma.cc/BDW7-7EHB)
25 S&P Global (2020) What is the ‘S’ in ESG?, www.spglobal.com/en/research￾insights/articles/what-is-the-s-in-esg (archived at https://perma.cc/Q3TD￾XGV7)
26 S&P Global (2019) Walmart’s halt on gun, ammo sales could woo socially 
minded consumers, investors, www.spglobal.com/marketintelligence/en/
news-insights/latest-news-headlines/54330232 (archived at https://perma.
cc/2WNX-QTMK)
27 S&P Global (2020) What is the ‘S’ in ESG?, www.spglobal.com/en/research￾insights/articles/what-is-the-s-in-esg (archived at https://perma.cc/Q3TD￾XGV7)
28 Guthrie, J (2022) ESG is a category error that needs unbundling, Financial 
Times, www.ft.com/content/c8b11672-4847-44ae-b132-788cb2383a2c
(archived at https://perma.cc/AN6D-86G5)
29 S&P Global (2018) Shareholders push Facebook for change, Facebook pushes 
back, www.spglobal.com/marketintelligence/en/news-insights/latest-news￾headlines/shareholders-push-facebook-for-change-facebook-pushes-back￾44261008 (archived at https://perma.cc/32XD-GSX5)Incorporating ESG into operational risk framework 379
30 S&P Global (2020) What is the ‘G’ in ESG?, www.spglobal.com/en/research￾insights/articles/what-is-the-g-in-esg (archived at https://perma.cc/HV7L￾HRTC)
31 S&P Global (2020) WeWork slipping into ‘negative spiral’ as IPO hopes 
dim, www.spglobal.com/marketintelligence/en/news-insights/latest-news￾headlines/54444907 (archived at https://perma.cc/N8MC-Y6Y2)
32 S&P Global (2020) What is the ‘G’ in ESG?, www.spglobal.com/en/research￾insights/articles/what-is-the-g-in-esg (archived at https://perma.cc/HV7L￾HRTC)
33 Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development OECD (2023) 
Principles of Corporate Governance, www.oecd-ilibrary.org/sites/ed750b30-
en/index.html?itemId=/content/publication/ed750b30-en (archived at https://
perma.cc/6JMV-DBPL)
34 KPMG (2022) Great ESG expectations, kpmg.com/xx/en/home/insights/
2022/08/kpmg-2022-ceo-outlook/esg-and-diversity-trends.html (archived at 
https://perma.cc/FR9Q-4TFD)
35 Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2021) Climate-related risk drivers 
and their transmission channels, www.bis.org/bcbs/publ/d517.pdf (archived at 
https://perma.cc/9ULC-F84Z)Operational 15
resilience
What this chapter covers: The chapter introduces the topic of Operational 
Resilience, a subject that has achieved a prominent degree of focus from 
firms and regulators in recent years, particularly due to technology disrup￾tions, third-party failures and in the light of the Covid-19 pandemic. The 
chapter confirms that resilience has close links with the operational risk 
discipline and presents a call for action for operational risk teams to reach 
out, get involved and actively collaborate with resilience experts, to achieve 
a joined-up approach which is much needed in this space. The chapter in￾cludes industry benchmarks and the results of live polls which support the 
call for action.
FURTHER READING
● Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2021) Principles for 
Operational Resilience
Why recommended: Key document on operational resilience, on which 
national supervisors often base their own requirements. Essential for risk 
management practitioners, in addition to local regulatory guidance.
● Australian Prudential Regulation Authority (APRA) (2023) Prudential 
Standard CPS230, Operational Risk Management
Why recommended: An especially positive feature of the Australian 
approach is the inclusion of operational resilience requirements in their 
core operational risk management principles, emphasizing the close 
links between the two disciplines. In addition, the standard contains 
useful examples of how critical operations and tolerances for disruption 
can be articulated, which is helpful for both risk and resilience 
practitioners.
380Operational resilience 381
Operational resilience: a step up 
from its predecessor
Business continuity planning (BCP) has always been a part of the agenda of 
financial services firms, and an important component of the sound practices 
for the management of operational risk. And in a similar way to operational 
risk, it has always faced the challenge of being perceived as a rather admin￾istrative domain. Traditional business continuity activities, by way of illus￾tration, included completing a periodic business impact analysis, refreshing 
and testing the arrangements on an annual basis, and requesting employees 
to print and duly store a copy of the plan at home.
With increasing digitalization and reliance on technology, over the years 
the risk of serious disruptions has led to business continuity gaining more 
focus and upping its game. To combat what the Bank for International 
Settlements (BIS) calls ‘vulnerabilities brought about by technological 
change and an increasingly hostile cyber environment’,1
 firms have aug￾mented the depth of their recovery capabilities and doubled the frequency of 
their testing.
Subsequently the Covid-19 pandemic somewhat refocused what was pri￾marily a technology-related resilience discussion to include broader consid￾erations on firms’ preparedness, including their most important asset: their 
people. Covid-19 proved that many firms could quickly adapt and transfer 
their entire business operation to a home-working environment, support 
their employees and maintain service continuity. This was an extraordinary 
achievement. Indeed the European Banking Authority has recognized pub￾licly that ‘banks proved their resiliency’, and accordingly assessed opera￾tional resilience in the second quarter of 2020 as merely a medium-level 
risk, with a stable trend.2
But despite the undoubted accomplishment, is it too early to claim vic￾tory? Four years on in 2024, the European Banking Authority warned that 
● Bank of England (2021) Impact Tolerances for Important Business 
Services, and Financial Conduct Authority (2021) Building Operational 
Resilience
Why recommended: These documents by UK regulators provide valuable 
insights on how to achieve the key elements of an operational resilience 
framework in practice.382 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
Table 15.1 Operational resilience is a step up from its predecessor, business 
continuity
Response % of responses
Yes, a significant step up 62
Yes, somewhat 29
Same, a different name 9
information and communication technology (ICT) risks, IT security risks 
and cyber-related risks remain highly relevant, and that the ‘volume and 
frequency of cyber-attacks is unabatedly high’.3
 In Australia, after ‘a cyber 
attack at its biggest port operator... brought supply chains to a standstill’,4
as reported by Reuters, the government released its 2023–2030 Cyber 
Security Strategy, which includes the aim of becoming a ‘resilient region’.5
 In 
the US, following a highly disruptive ransomware attack, the Commodity 
Futures Trading Commission proposed new cybersecurity rules for broker￾ages and swaps dealers, to ‘bolster that foundational framework to promote 
operational resilience in the face of increasingly sophisticated cyber-attacks 
and heightened technological disruptions’.6
Is the resilience dialogue therefore shifting again, towards primarily com￾bating technology-related threats? And is operational resilience now clearly 
seen as a prominent area of focus, which requires continued attention?
In 2024, I ran a LinkedIn poll for my network of risk and resilience pro￾fessionals asking whether operational resilience was a step up from its pre￾decessor, business continuity. The results presented in Table 15.1 demonstrate 
that the vast majority of respondents (91 per cent) agreed, and out of these 
62 per cent perceived resilience to be a significant step up; while only a mi￾nority (9 per cent) viewed it as merely a name change.
OPERATIONAL RESILIENCE DEFINITION
While multiple definitions exist, the Basel Committee defines operational 
resilience as the ability to ‘deliver critical operations through disruption’, 
which enables a firm to ‘identify and protect itself from threats and potential 
failures, respond and adapt to, as well as recover and learn from disruptive 
events’.7Operational resilience 383
It can easily be argued that operational risk management supports the op￾erational as well as financial resilience of an institution. The identification 
and protection aspects of the above definition, in particular, are based on 
prudent and proactive risk management: recognizing, examining and miti￾gating threats and vulnerabilities. By assuming that disruptions are inevita￾ble and will eventually occur, post-event detective and corrective controls 
help firms to respond, recover and learn from incidents. Resilience implies 
building strength, not just the ability to continue as before. Resilience re￾quirements go further than business continuity, as will be seen below, and 
therefore operational resilience certainly represents a welcome addition and 
a step forward from business continuity:
Operational Resilience ≠ Business Continuity
And, as noted by the Basel Committee in its 2021 Principles for Operational 
Resilience:8
Operational Resilience Outcome of 
Operational Risk Management
So, the topics of risk and resilience are indeed interconnected. Indeed his￾torically, in many organizations the role of the Operational Risk department 
included overseeing – or even leading – its business continuity efforts. It is 
important to further explore these connections, especially as industry polls 
demonstrate that operational risk professionals appear to be struggling to 
find their optimum role in this stepped-up resilience domain (also see 
Chapter 16).
Integrating operational risk and resilience
The operational resilience lifecycle can be described in Figure 15.1. Let’s 
review some of these sub-components in more detail.
Maintain robust frameworks (Step 1)
Operational resilience relies on and converges core organizational frame￾works, including ICT/cyber and third-party risk – these being prominent 
operational risk sub-categories – as well as business continuity planning, a 
key control that mitigates operational risk failures. These frameworks 
collectively build a foundation of solid risk and control management, and 384 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
1.Maintain robust
operational risk, ICT,
third-party and BCP
frameworks 
2.Identify critical
operations and map
dependencies
3.Set tolerances for
disruption
4.Test
5.Monitor, manage,
handle disruptions
6.Conduct lessons
learnt
Figure 15.1 Operational resilience lifecycle
hence enable the firm’s preparedness to withstand disruptions. If these 
frameworks are in place and functioning, the job is already half done.
There are many areas within these frameworks where risk and resilience 
professionals can cooperate effectively. These include defining governance 
arrangements, preferably using existing structures such as the operational 
resilience forum, mentioned in Chapter 1, in addition to the risk committee 
and the board for effective oversight of resilience. They also include agreeing 
roles and responsibilities across the Three Lines, as well as putting continu￾ous effort into ensuring that the frameworks operate effectively, via moni￾toring, conducting control testing and thematic reviews.
Critical operations and their dependencies (Step 2)
As a further significant step to becoming resilient, an organization needs to 
achieve a shift in its mindset, developing a view of the firm from ‘outside-in’, 
in other words how a customer would see it. From the client’s perspective, 
when an expected service is not delivered or a commitment is not met, the 
question of whether the process broke down within the firm’s operations, 
technology or due to third-party failure is neither important nor visible. It is Operational resilience 385
People Facilities Technology Information Third
parties
Critical operation
Sub￾process
Figure 15.2 Critical operation dependencies
only the availability of the end product – the fact of the failure – that mat￾ters. In this light, it is becoming increasingly important for firms to under￾stand their end-to-end mission-critical services, and all their related 
dependencies, in order to make a solid commitment to clients that these 
services will continue to be delivered even during a disruption. In addition 
to policies and frameworks, this necessitates harnessing an end-to-end cus￾tomer-centric mentality; one in which employees look out beyond their own 
narrow silos to the overall impact on the end-client. This is presented in 
Figure 15.2.
Arguably, this is one of the enhancements that operational resilience 
brings compared to business continuity, in which a departmental approach 
is often applied. A departmental approach tends to be more siloed, with 
every unit outlining their own requirements, rather than a holistic, end-to￾end view driven by the perspective of what is important to the end-customer. 
Against this background, there are number potential areas for collaboration 
between risk and resilience functions.
Identifying critical operations
While the terminology may differ, mission critical services (referred to as 
critical operations throughout the rest of this chapter) are the essential core 
services of the firm, the disruption of which would have a material impact 
on the operation of the firm, its customers or even the economy more 
broadly. Critical operations are dependent on people, facilities, technology, 
information and third parties – and these interconnections need to be care￾fully identified and documented. Fortunately the laborious task of defining 
critical operations and mapping their dependencies may have already been 
accomplished, at least in part, in the implementation of the operational risk 
framework. This is especially so if, as discussed in Chapter 5, process risk 386 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
self-assessments (PRSAs) have been applied across the enterprise, enabling 
an end-to-end view of key processes.
But it may be that it is resilience colleagues, instead, who initiate the jour￾ney of documenting and inventorying the resources that deliver and support 
the firm’s critical operations. Indeed many organizations have made good 
progress in this area as part of enhancing their financial resilience and com￾plying with regulatory requirements around recovery and resolution plan￾ning. Financial resilience regulations in many jurisdictions preceded the 
issuance of operational resilience rules. That said, both form part of the 
same resilience continuum, with incidents and disruptions at the business￾as-usual end of the scale, and resolution at the extreme end of the spectrum. 
Resolution and day-to-day resilience have many features in common, in￾cluding the notion of critical operations and their dependencies.
Irrespective, it is crucial that operational risk teams also benefit from the 
work of resilience teams on the identification and mapping of critical opera￾tions. This is to ensure that future risk assessments are conducted on an in￾tegrated basis, and take into account the dependencies identified in the 
mapping process. Additionally, as noted in Chapter 5, cross-functional pro￾cess mapping exercises can help to optimize effectiveness and increase pro￾cess efficiency.
Developing a customer-centric mentality
In additional to formal policies and process maps, the topic of resilience has 
an equally (if not more) important softer aspect. Employees on the ground 
need to improve their understanding of how what they do impacts the whole 
critical operations supply chain and the firm’s external customers. If staff 
can visualize this kind of interconnectedness, it enables more thoughtful and 
robust preventative action, and speedier, more coherent responses. Do em￾ployees have a solid understanding of their firm’s critical operations, and do 
they apply a customer-centric mentality? And if not, what training and edu￾cation needs to be provided by risk and resilience colleagues to enhance it? 
Operational risk teams are already in the habit of delivering staff education, 
which provides an excellent opportunity to incorporate resilience compo￾nents, rather than creating two separate training programmes. Additionally, 
at a practical level, it is beneficial to link the OREs discussed in Chapter 4 to 
critical operations, by adding a dedicated field in the ORE reporting form 
presented in Appendix 2. Staff will be asked to consider whether the inci￾dent they are logging has in fact resulted in a disruption of a critical opera￾tion. This should demonstrate either a solid understanding of critical 
operations, or the absence of it (for example if employees repeatedly question Operational resilience 387
the meaning of the field ‘what are critical operations?’). In this way, a need 
for further training can be identified.
Consequently, areas for active teamwork between operational risk and 
resilience colleagues should include the review – or even restructuring – of 
existing RCSAs to extract meaningful risk information on critical opera￾tions, as well as jointly enhancing a customer-centric mentality among em￾ployees.
Tolerance for disruption and testing (Steps 3 and 4)
Another opportunity for collaboration presents itself when setting toler￾ances for disruption and testing resilience capabilities. Tolerances articu￾late the maximum level of disruption the organization is willing to 
accept, including the duration of the disruption, and need to be deter￾mined in connection to the firm’s risk appetite. (Regulatory guidance dif￾fers across jurisdictions on how these two concepts interact; namely, 
whether tolerance is within the risk appetite or if it applies at the ex￾treme end after the appetite has been exceeded.) Risk and resilience pro￾fessionals need to work together to ensure that risk appetite, discussed in 
Chapter 9, especially relating to ICT/cyber and third-party risk, is not in 
contradiction with the firm’s tolerances. Tolerances represent another 
step beyond business continuity, recovery time objectives (RTOs) and 
recovery point objectives (RPOs) – which are usually set at the lower 
level of the tolerance range and tend to express desired outcomes that are 
achieved with high probability.
Additionally, setting and testing tolerances requires firms to think through 
a range of severe but plausible scenarios. As outlined in Figure 15.3, this 
creates a meaningful overlap between the operational risk and resilience 
universes.
Story lines in the operational risk space may well touch on themes such 
as fraud, regulatory non-compliance or employment lawsuits. While these 
are important topics to explore, they do not necessarily impact a firm’s resil￾ience capabilities.
In turn, major breakdowns of external infrastructure might be consid￾ered in order to proactively develop contingency measures and review 
potential alternative means of operating. These kinds of scenarios may 
not be required for operational risk capital purposes, as a firm can hardly 388 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
be expected to hold capital against the risk of external failures such as 
unavailability of the power supply or the national payments network.
Consequently, the area of overlap consists of several topics of mutual 
interest. These might include:
● Cyber attacks, leading to data theft, corruption or system unavailability;
● Third-party failures;
● People unavailability;
● The E component of ESG, for example climate-driven disasters resulting 
in the destruction of premises; and
● Legacy technology failures.
Risk and resilience scenarios are aiming for different outputs: expected fi￾nancial loss in the case of operational risk; and estimated disruption in 
terms of, for example, duration, transaction volume or data loss in addition 
to potential expenditure in the case of operational resilience. Nevertheless, 
there are common themes that are relevant for both domains. By working 
together, the two teams can align their scenario story lines, enriching the 
whole experience on both sides and providing benefits for the firm overall.
Operational risk
scenario analysis
Operational resilience:
Tolerance for Disruption Overlap
Operational Risk
• Internal/external fraud
• Execution, e.g., payment errors
• Regulatory non-compliance
• Employment lawsuits
Operational resilience
• Failure of external
 infrastructure
• Failure of correspondent
Overlap
• Cyber attack
• Third-party failure
• People unavailability
• The E in E, S and G, e.g.,
 climate-related disaster
• Technology failure
Figure 15.3 Operational risk and resilience scenariosOperational resilience 389
In Chapter  8, the importance of using scenarios for risk management
purposes was discussed, including taking actions to improve the control 
environment. This approach and philosophy are even more crucial for resil￾ience purposes, where firms – in particular, boards and senior management – 
should be prioritizing their investment decisions on the basis of identified 
weaknesses that can threaten their ability to provide important business 
services. Developing scenario story lines, jointly running workshops with 
stakeholders to avoid duplication, and using operational risk structure, 
techniques and expert facilitation are all viable areas for conducting group 
work for risk and resilience colleagues.
Monitor environment, manage disruptions 
and learn lessons (Steps 5 and 6)
In order to remain within tolerances on an ongoing basis, it is critical to be 
able to avoid and recover from disruptions within set time frames and pa￾rameters, and to proactively identify and manage threats and vulnerabilities. 
As discussed in Chapter 1, each firm must decide how operational resilience 
fits into its taxonomy, enabling transparent and meaningful information 
flows across the organization. An example of a resilience dashboard is pre￾sented in Figure 15.4. This dashboard displays essential risk and control 
indicators by critical operation, based on their dependencies, which enables 
the firm to manage risk proactively.
Back to the topic of shifting mentality, organizations need to apply a 
critical operations lens to these reports, displaying the kind of information 
which enables an end-to-end view. This is a challenging task, because in real￾ity departments tend to both operate and report in silos.
Metric 2
People
Metric 1 Metric 1
Metric 2
Facilities
Third Parties
Critical Operation: X
AMBER
GREEN
Remedial action:
Metric 2
Metric 1 AMBER
AMBER
Metric 1
Metric 2
GREEN
GREEN
RED
AMBER
Remedial action:
Remedial action:
Remedial action: 
Remedial action: 
Technology and Information
Figure 15.4 Operational resilience reporting dashboard390 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
Another area for potential interaction between resilience and risk was de￾scribed in Chapter 4, Operational risk events. Organizations can look to 
implement a single notification route for material disruptive events, whether 
IT-related or not. The channel used for reporting of operational risk mate￾rial events can clearly be followed for swift escalation, enabling firms to re￾spond more quickly to an event as well as communicate promptly with 
customers, employees and regulators. Also, as mentioned earlier, the ORE 
process can be enhanced to establish a closer link to critical operations.
And last but not least: lessons learnt that are useful for operational resil￾ience purposes may already exist in the operational risk space, for example, 
from OREs. The structure, format and rigour of the risk event management 
process can be replicated for resilience purposes, and in fact, implemented 
on an enterprise-wide basis.
So there are numerous areas where collaboration can be improved, in￾cluding enhancing reporting capabilities to effectively monitor and manage 
threats and vulnerabilities; jointly developing response protocols and 
channels for the escalation of threats; and instituting a structured ‘lessons 
learnt’ process for operational resilience.
CALL FOR ACTION
In conclusion, this is a call for action for operational risk professionals to 
reach out and engage with operational resilience colleagues to:
● Treat operational resilience as an outcome of operational risk 
management, recognizing the strong links between the two disciplines;
● Collaborate on all aspects of the resilience lifecycle to ensure alignment;
● Focus on ICT/cyber and third party as significant operational risk 
sub-categories that pose an increased threat to resilience; and conduct 
control testing, deep dives and thematic reviews in these areas;
● Engage with the board to deliver a transparent view on resilience, and 
assist in prioritizing and targeting investments to enhance it;
● Continuously develop your own expertise, by studying relevant 
regulatory and industry developments.
Finally, a few observations on particular areas of regulatory focus on 
resilience.Operational resilience 391
Continued regulatory focus on operational 
resilience
There are many commonalities among the different regulatory approaches 
to operational resilience, including agreement that there is a clear need for 
enhancement in this area. As noted by the Basel Committee, ‘further work is 
necessary to strengthen banks’ ability to absorb operational risk-related 
events, such as pandemics, cyber incidents, technology failures and natural 
disasters’.9
 This creates a strong case for continued collaborative teamwork 
between risk and resilience professionals in the foreseeable future.
Many national supervisors have adopted – or are closely basing their re￾quirements on – the Basel Committee Principles issued in 2021. The chal￾lenge for operational risk and resilience professionals in global firms lies in 
integrating and converging various different national nuances:
● In the EU, the Digital Operational Resilience Act (DORA)10 is a notable 
piece of legislation that explicitly focuses on the technological aspect, 
concentrating on the resilience of critical ICT. Topics of particular focus 
in DORA include incident reporting, digital operational resilience testing 
and third-party requirements, where standards have certainly been 
elevated. With DORA coming into effect in 2025, there is urgency for 
firms in its implementation.
● This focus on the ICT aspect of resilience is also apparent in the US, 
where regulatory authorities have adopted a consolidated regime for 
systemically important organizations via the jointly issued Sound 
Practices to Strengthen Operational Resilience.11 This document 
specifically lists recommended practices for cyber risk management, with 
references to frameworks such as the National Institute of Standards and 
Technology Cybersecurity Framework (NIST),12 and the Federal Financial 
Institutions Examinations Council (FFIEC) Cybersecurity Assessment 
Tool.13 These tools serve to underscore the prominence of technology￾related resilience in the regulatory domain.
● In the UK, the focus has been on holistic resilience, whether technology￾related or more broadly. In many ways the UK and its regulators can be 
thought of as introducing measures to ensure operational resilience ahead 
of the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS) and other 
regulators. While this encouraged early focus on this important topic, it 392 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
has also resulted in a partial disconnect with the BCBS approach, with, 
for example, the UK considering:
● Important Business Services while the BCBS discuss critical operations;
● Impact tolerances (the maximum tolerable level of disruption for the 
PRA and the point at which the disruption would cause intolerable 
harm to consumers for the FCA) while the BCBS refer to an overall 
risk appetite for tolerance and disruption.
Nevertheless, joint regulatory papers14,15 published in the UK have 
proved valuable in providing a level of insight into how firms might 
strengthen their operational resilience by including useful examples of 
scenarios that can be used for setting and testing tolerances for disruption.
Arguably, the strength of the UK contribution is its ability to answer the 
question what might this look like in practice, while its weakness is its 
detachment from operational risk management, which is mentioned 
only in passing.
● In contrast, the approach adopted by the Australian Prudential 
Regulation Authority (APRA) is to include operational resilience 
requirements in its operational risk management principles,16 instead of 
issuing them in a separate document. This approach serves to emphasize 
the close links between the two disciplines. The Australian guidelines 
also helpfully stipulate what activities, at a minimum, must be defined 
as critical operations (for example, payments, deposit-taking and 
management, custody, settlements and clearing). This directive approach 
is particularly beneficial as many organizations operating under less 
prescriptive regimes found it challenging to calibrate the level of 
granularity at which critical operations should be defined. Tolerance 
levels, another somewhat ambiguous concept, are also explicitly 
articulated in the APRA requirements, requiring firms to focus on the 
maximum period of disruption time, maximum extent of data loss and 
minimum service level during the disruption.
Clearly, then, various different international guidelines already contain 
strong and effective features which can help practitioners and enhance their 
practices. Inevitably, organizations that adopt these approaches and prac￾tices, and continue to invest in building sound resilience capabilities – with 
risk and resilience practitioners working hand-in-hand – will emerge 
stronger than their peers, and better prepared to withstand any subsequent 
disruptions.Operational resilience 393
Industry benchmark
In 2024, Best Practice Operational Risk Forum members ranked top opera￾tional risks in order of significance (see Figure 15.5). The poll highlighted 
operational resilience as a prominent theme. Seven out of nine risks were 
interconnected and revolved around technology, presenting a net of poten￾tial technology-related threats to organizational resilience.
● Cyber risk remains a major threat to resilience, and is predicted to remain 
prominent in the risk charts for the foreseeable future. It is closely linked 
with third-party risk, due to an increased reliance on service providers to 
deliver technology-related services. In turn, Generative AI, a new entrant 
on the risk charts in 2024, has appeared due to growing concerns in a 
number of areas, including intellectual property/copyright and 
exploitation by malicious actors to create sophisticated cyber attacks.
● When it comes to change and execution, this is largely technology-driven, 
whether migrating to the cloud, replacing legacy technology, integrating 
Change and execution
Third-party
Cyber risk
Data management
Financial crime
Legacy technology
People and talent
Inability to comply with E, S
and G
AI
1st
2nd
3rd
5th
6th
7th
8th
9th
4th
Rank Top Operational Risks 2024
Figure 15.5 Industry poll: top operational risks 2024
Best Practice Operational Risk Forum, 2024394 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
new with old or outsourcing to a third-party. Poor change and integration 
could, in turn, cause legacy technology failure, resulting in potential 
customer and market detriment.
● With increased digitalization and reliance on systems, the amount of data
being used by firms continues to increase significantly. Whether residing 
on new or legacy systems, data mis-management can result in breaches, 
loss and corruption.
● All risks have a people component, related to skill set, succession and 
well-being. A prominent feature of that people component is key person 
dependency in the area of IT support, where the demand for skilled 
professionals far exceeds the available talent pool.
● Arguably, two remaining risks, financial crime, an inherent risk in 
financial services, and inability to comply with E, S and G requirements
due to increasing regulatory and societal pressures, have less impact on 
operational resilience.
On a more basic level – despite the high level of awareness and preparedness 
observed over the course of the Covid-19 pandemic, when resilience was at 
the forefront of everyone’s mind – familiarity with continuity planning has 
declined since then, as demonstrated in Figure 15.6. In 2023, only a small 
portion (12 per cent) of risk and resilience practitioners attending an opera￾tional resilience industry conference were confident that the majority of staff 
in their firms were closely familiar with BCP, implying yet again the need for 
ongoing training and awareness sessions, walk-throughs and simulations.
Yes, some
staff
Only a
few staff
members
Yes, all/ Not sure
majority
of staff
12%
44% 44%
Employees in my area are familiar with the BCP
Figure 15.6 Industry poll: employee familiarity with BCP
Operational resilience industry conference, 2023Operational resilience 395
At the same industry conference, confidence in firms’ business continuity 
planning was also mixed, with 43 per cent feeling that their BCP plan pro￾vides clear guidance and addresses a variety of scenarios; while the remain￾ing 57 per cent admitted that more work was needed, and that plans were 
of limited scope and would benefit from further guidance. This especially 
applied to technology-related topics covering cyber attacks, data corruption 
or system unavailability. On a positive note, 78 per cent of respondents con￾firmed that they were able to reach their staff promptly in an emergency 
situation, as updated employee lists are continuing to be well maintained.
Overall, these discussions clearly reflect the fact that resilience remains a 
prominent topic for financial services firms. Displaying agility, leadership 
and situational awareness, operational risk professionals must collaborate 
with resilience colleagues to embrace the evolving risk landscape, reaching 
across the silos to achieve effective risk management; and as an outcome, 
build more resilient organizations.
Great momentum was achieved during the Covid-19 pandemic, with risk 
and resilience clearly working in closer collaboration than ever before. There 
is no doubt that carrying forward this momentum and energy will be hugely 
beneficial for organizations in future years.
MAKE A DIFFERENCE (MAD) ACTION
Please note down one action that you will take after reading this chapter 
that will meaningfully enhance the integration of risk and resilience 
practices in your organization.396 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
In summary, this chapter discussed the importance of operational risk prac￾titioners getting involved in firms’ operational resilience activities, searching 
for synergies and implementing joint solutions.
Moving on, the final chapter will reflect on the future of the operational risk 
discipline and how key operational risk priorities can be rebalanced so that 
risk practitioners remain well positioned to face new challenges.
Notes
1 Bank for International Settlements (2020) FSI Briefs, Covid-19 and Operational 
Resilience: Addressing financial institutions’ operational challenges in a 
pandemic, www.bis.org/fsi/fsibriefs2.pdf (archived at https://perma.cc/H3WC￾4EB5)
2 European Banking Authority (2020) Risk dashboard data as of Q2 2020, www.
eba.europa.eu/sites/default/documents/files/document_library/Risk%20
Analysis%20and%20Data/Risk%20dashboard/Q2%202020/933053/EBA%20
Dashboard%20-%20Q2%202020.pdf (archived at https://perma.cc/VL9T￾7STP)
3 European Banking Authority (2020) Risk dashboard data as of Q3 2023, www.
eba.europa.eu/sites/default/files/2024-01/8039a4ea-6e61-45a9-a746-
058fd070c34a/EBA%20Dashboard%20-%20Q3%202023.pdf (archived at 
https://perma.cc/U4WG-WQPW)
4 Kaye, B (2023) Australia beefs up cyber defences after major breaches, Reuters, 
www.reuters.com/technology/cybersecurity/australia-goes-cyber-offensive-with￾sweeping-resilience-plan-2023-11-22/ (archived at https://perma.cc/X8EQ￾9LEP)
5 Australian Government, 2023–2030 Australian Cyber Security Strategy, www.
homeaffairs.gov.au/about-us/our-portfolios/cyber-security/strategy/2023-2030-
australian-cyber-security-strategy (archived at https://perma.cc/9BLP-3Y4V)
6 Beyoud, L (2023) Ion hack spurs new cybersecurity push for swaps dealers, brokers, 
Bloomberg, www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2023-12-13/us-regulator-floats￾cybersecurity-plan-in-response-to-ion-hack?leadSource=uverify%20wall (archived 
at https://perma.cc/T9XM-H3ZE)
7 Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2021) Principles for Operational 
Resilience, www.bis.org/bcbs/publ/d516.pdf (archived at https://perma.cc/
CFM7-KSKT)
8 Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2021) Principles for Operational 
Resilience, www.bis.org/bcbs/publ/d516.pdf (archived at https://perma.cc/
CFM7-KSKT)Operational resilience 397
9 Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2021) Principles for Operational 
Resilience, www.bis.org/bcbs/publ/d516.pdf (archived at https://perma.cc/
CFM7-KSKT)
10 Digital Operational Resilience Act (DORA), www.digital-operational-resilience￾act.com/DORA_Articles.html (archived at https://perma.cc/QY6D-DWL5)
11 Office of the Comptroller of the Currency OCC (2020) Sound Practices to 
Strengthen Operational Resilience, www.occ.gov/news-issuances/news￾releases/2020/nr-occ-2020-144a.pdf (archived at https://perma.cc/XLT7-EUGJ)
12 National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), Cybersecurity 
Framework, www.nist.gov/cyberframework (archived at https://perma.
cc/4T4J-KVGT)
13 Federal Financial Institutions Examinations Council (FFIEC), Cybersecurity 
Assessment Tool, www.ffiec.gov/cyberassessmenttool.htm (archived at https://
perma.cc/Y9Z6-SFTZ)
14 Bank of England (2021) Impact Tolerances for Important Business Services, 
www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/prudential-regulation/policy￾statement/2021/march/ps621.pdf (archived at https://perma.cc/KA6X￾S7DH)
15 Financial Conduct Authority (2021) Building Operational Resilience, www.fca.
org.uk/publication/policy/ps21-3-operational-resilience.pdf (archived at https://
perma.cc/DNZ7-FF4W)
16 Australian Prudential Regulation Authority (APRA) (2023) Prudential 
Standard CPS 230, Operational Risk Management, www.apra.gov.au/sites/
default/files/2023-07/Prudential%20Standard%20CPS%20230%20
Operational%20Risk%20Management%20-%20clean.pdf (archived at https://
perma.cc/MC59-68KY)Reflections on 16
the future of the 
operational risk 
discipline
What this chapter covers: The chapter reflects on the topical challenges facing 
operational risk management, and considers the role of the second line risk 
management function in technical areas such as third-party and cyber risk. It 
argues that the operational risk discipline is in fact not disintegrating as some 
commentators have suggested, and that risk professionals are adding signifi￾cant value as connectors: collaborating, reaching across silos and streamlining 
processes. The chapter also examines the risks and opportunities associated 
with generative AI, and encourages risk professionals to invest time exploring 
this subject. Finally, it reflects on how key operational risk priorities can be 
rebalanced to enable risk practitioners to remain well positioned to face new 
challenges. The chapter is largely based on a series of recent live polls which 
reflect the industry’s stance on the subjects under discussion.
FURTHER READING
There is no specific reading suggested for this particular chapter, other 
than daily news stories, which are an essential source of information given 
that new challenging topics are constantly emerging. Twenty years ago, 
while attending a strategic leadership programme at Oxford University, I 
took part in a fascinating discussion on whether a modern leader could truly 
be effective without being well informed. The conclusion was that was 
simply not feasible. Since then, I have made an effort to closely follow the 
news daily, including preferred sources such as the Risk Channel (noted in 
Chapter 11) which focus on risk angles in particular. I would recommend to 
find and follow your own preferred news sources, with a view to staying 
right up to date in a fast-changing world.
398Reflections on the future of the operational risk discipline 399
Think sharper, act smarter
In this final chapter, we will reflect on some of the challenges that opera￾tional risk professionals are currently facing. These challenges arise against 
the backdrop of a complex and evolving risk landscape which is also highly 
interconnected. This landscape features growing dependency on third par￾ties, constantly increasing cyber risk and a new emerging threat emanating 
from generative artificial intelligence (GenAI); overlaid with climate issues 
and ongoing geopolitical tensions. The World Economic Forum’s Global 
Risks Report 2024 highlights ‘a predominantly negative outlook for the 
world over the short term that is expected to worsen over the long term’, 
noting that ‘the majority of respondents... anticipate some instability and a 
moderate risk of global catastrophes’.1
In early 2024, I ran a LinkedIn poll for my network of risk professionals 
asking for opinions on whether the year 2024 would be more challenging
for operational risk teams. The majority (82 per cent) of respondents agreed, 
as indeed they had a year earlier, when 84 per cent of surveyed risk practi￾tioners in my LinkedIn poll affirmed that the year 2023 would be more 
challenging than 2022. Justin Trudeau, the Prime Minister of Canada, once 
noted that ‘the pace of change has never been this fast, yet it will never be 
this slow again’,2
 highlighting that year on year the bar is being raised ever 
higher. In this testing environment, when demands are continuing to in￾crease while budgets and resources (at best) remain at the same level, opera￾tional risk professionals must think sharper and act smarter. There is less 
room for risk administration and more impetus for value-added risk man￾agement.
Of course this shift might have been achieved already in cases where the 
operational risk discipline has reached its ultimate embedded stage, charac￾terized by proactive risk management and an enhanced risk culture, as de￾scribed in Chapter  13; allowing operational risk teams more time and 
resource to focus on new challenges. Yet judging from the industry work I 
do, risk professionals on the front line are telling a different story: namely 
that embedding operational risk and empowering the first line has far from 
reached its crux and is still very much work in progress.
On this basis, time dedicated to new challenges must be carved out of a 
day that is already filled to the brim with the usual embedding activities. So 
we will consider some areas where thinking sharper and acting smarter will 
be beneficial for the operational risk managers, helping them to re-prioritize 
their work and improve their effectiveness, by making greater use of tools 
such as AI and by collaborating more actively with other units.400 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
Third-party and cyber: establishing 
the optimum second line role
We start by examining the role of the Operational Risk department in third￾party and cyber risk management, two prominent risk sub-types, which, 
alongside the topic of operational resilience discussed in Chapter 15, appear 
to create the most tension for operational risk teams when it comes to roles 
and responsibilities.
It does appear that the second line is struggling to find its optimal posi￾tion in confronting cyber risk, third-party and operational resilience, as pre￾sented in Figure 16.1. Only 9 per cent of Best Practice Operational Risk 
Forum members rated the role of the Operational Risk department as ‘spot￾on’, with the rest considering either enhancement or an even a more radical 
re-think.
Third (and nth) party risk management
Over the past decade, many organizations have increased their engagement 
with suppliers in order to gain access to specialist expertise, streamline their 
processes and improve productivity. Consequently, firms’ dependency on 
third parties has also grown, especially as core information technology ser￾vices are now often outsourced to external cloud providers rather than 
hosted in-house; and the sub-outsourcing chains have become ever more 
complex. It is therefore not surprising that the associated risks have also 
May need
enchancement
Requires a
rethink
Spot on - well
dened
and executed
9%
36%
55%
Role of 2nd line risk in cyber, third-party
and resilience
Figure 16.1 Industry poll: role of second line risk in cyber, third-party and 
resilience
Best Practice Operational Risk Forum, 2023Reflections on the future of the operational risk discipline 401
increased. Since 2022, third-party risk has appeared prominently in the top 
five operational risks for the financial services sector, as assessed by the Best 
Practice Forum. And external statistics are pointing to a need for more focus 
on this area, as illustrated by the following examples:
● The European Central Bank reported that in 2022 banks under its 
supervision lost 148 million euros ‘due to unavailability or poor quality 
of outsourced services’,3
 a 360% increase from the previous year;
● The 2023 Mid-Year Cyber Claims Report4
 reveals that 28.9% of cyber 
insurance claims were caused by vendor breaches, signalling the evolving 
tactics of bad actors in targeting companies’ suppliers by using them as a 
gateway.
Regulators are aiming to strengthen industry practices in this area, pro￾ducing directives such as the European Banking Authority guidelines on 
outsourcing,5
 which outlines requirements for supplier management 
throughout the chain of third and fourth parties. Also worth noting in this 
area are the EU Digital Operational Resilience Act (DORA),6
 which zooms 
in on critical information communication technology (ICT) arrangements; 
and the Australian Prudential Regulation Authority requirement to man￾age the risks associated with the use of service providers as a core opera￾tional risk management principle,7
 which clearly reinforces this topic as an 
integral part of operational risk management. Third-Party Risk 
Management (TPRM) has risen to prominence, with organizations in￾creasingly recruiting TPRM specialists to embrace, comprehend and con￾trol the vast spectrum of risks in this area.
Against this background, it is paramount for operational risk profession￾als to exhibit leadership qualities and assert their own place in the TPRM 
arena.
A good foundation can be laid by reinforcing the message that the first 
line units are the ultimate owners of their own third-party arrangements, 
which are simply an extension of any arrangements they would have other￾wise made for themselves; while the specialist TPRM team owns the firm’s 
third-party policy, developing the firm’s expertise in TPRM risks and work￾ing closely with business owners to ensure that robust controls are in place. 
In this kind of structure the Operational Risk department focuses mainly on 
meaningful second line activities such as scenario analysis, thematic reviews, 
risk appetite and metrics. An example of allocated responsibilities is pre￾sented in Table 16.1.402 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
Table 16.1 Example responsibilities in third-party risk management
First line units/business 
owners
Central function 
(TPRM)
Second line operational 
risk
Own and manage third￾party relationships
Owns the 
outsourcing/third-party 
risk framework
Provides oversight and 
challenge to the central 
function and business 
owners
Own and manage controls 
and mitigation measures
Maintains a 
centralized register of 
third-party 
arrangements
Reviews/signs off on 
particular arrangements 
(notably critical 
arrangements)
Conduct due diligence and 
monitoring
Provides training and 
guidance to business 
owners
Facilitate development of 
risk appetite and 
supporting metrics/KRIs
Raise incidents, carry out 
lessons learnt
Conducts control 
testing to check that 
arrangements are 
managed in a 
compliant manner
Conducts thematic 
reviews and facilitates 
scenario analysis and ORE 
lessons learnt
Report on KRIs/pre￾defined metrics
Performs horizon 
scanning for new and 
emerging risks
Reports on the overall level 
of third-party risk
In reality, the roles are often neither clearly laid out, documented or explic￾itly agreed in the way set out in the table. For example the business owners 
may push back on being assigned the added duty of managing third-party 
arrangements (despite them being their own arrangements); while the cen￾tral TPRM function and operational risk teams may dispute the boundary 
of responsibility between them. In some cases a central function may not 
exist, and the Operational Risk department is asked to step in and assume 
both roles, TPRM as well as second line oversight. In my consultancy expe￾rience, as well as from running industry forums, third-party risk management 
always comes up as an area of challenge. And, as reflected by the Best 
Practice Forum, if this challenge is not addressed promptly and decisively, it 
may distract all parties from actual, much needed risk management. This 
conundrum is reflected in Figure 16.2, which represents a poll from the Best 
Practice Forum where only 17 per cent of respondents were confident 
that  their firm’s third-party risks were fully understood, enabling their Reflections on the future of the operational risk discipline 403
organization to answer the vital ‘so what?’ question, take necessary actions, 
enhance the supervision of their third-party arrangements and perhaps even 
exit some relationships.
On a more positive note, more firms do engage with their boards early on 
in the establishment of third-party relationships, developing an appetite 
statement and monitoring metrics, examples of which were discussed in 
Chapter 9. The Best Practice Forum poll highlighted in Figure 16.3 shows 
Yes, somewhat Could be
better dened
Yes, fully
17%
11%
72%
Third-party risks are well understood
Figure 16.2 Industry poll: understanding the third-party risk landscape
Best Practice Operational Risk Forum, 2023
Being
enhanced
Yes In
consideration
No
47%
29%
18%
6%
There is a board-approved risk appetite for TPRM
Figure 16.3 Industry poll: board-approved appetite for TPRM
Best Practice Operational Risk Forum, 2023404 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
CALL FOR ACTION
Advance the effectiveness of third-party risk management by:
● Recognizing that third-party risk is a significant area requiring focus 
(where firm engages service providers);
● Directing organizational efforts towards actual risk management and 
away from distracting debates on roles and responsibilities; this may 
require influencing, bringing clarity and seeking to pacify the conflict 
between various parties;
● Engaging with the board and advocating for third-party risk as a topic to 
be prioritized;
● Identifying emerging threats in collaboration with TPRM; and
● Continuously developing their own expertise in the TPRM arena.
that 47 per cent of respondents have made good progress in this area; despite 
not yet having full transparency. Board engagement is particularly impor￾tant if third-party risks are not fully understood, because in these cases an 
honest conversation is needed at an early stage; to agree a plan, resources 
and budget that enable the necessary transparency for effective decision￾making. The risk appetite framework can be a very effective tool here, and 
KRIs can be progressively enhanced as the firm’s third-party practices 
mature.
Ultimately, this chapter is less a step-by-step guide on how to manage the 
risks associated with service providers and instead addresses how opera￾tional risk practitioners might respond to the new challenges that are com￾ing their way, such that they remain relevant and current.
Hence the call for action for operational risk teams to find their seat at 
the third-party risk management table, early in the process, to ensure their 
firm is well positioned to manage its supplier risk.
The fact is that operational risk professionals are a new breed of leaders 
who are mastering the arts of facilitation and dealing with audiences at all 
levels of the firm, while at the same time giving the benefit of their consid￾erable technical expertise. They can have a positive influence and make a 
remarkable difference in all sorts of difficult situations. And third-party 
risk management is a good example of the kind of area where these skills 
are much needed.Reflections on the future of the operational risk discipline 405
Cyber-risk management
With successful attacks occurring every 0.65 seconds8
 in the US alone, cyber 
risk has been topping the risk charts for several years. And it is not going 
away in the next decade – Protiviti predicts cyber risk will occupy the top 
position in 2034,9
 and the World Economic Forum places it in eighth place 
over the same time horizon.10
In my experience of leading second line cyber risk teams which are ac￾countable to the board and the regulators, I am acutely aware of how prom￾inent and complex this area is. On the one hand, detailed technical standards 
such as the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) 
Cybersecurity Framework (version 2.0, highly praised by the industry, is￾sued in 2024)11 need to be both studied and then rigorously applied as the 
basis of firms’ organizational controls around cyber risk. On the other hand, 
relative simplicity is also needed to ensure board conversations are distilled 
down to the crucial questions. Is the organization exposed? Is it taking too 
much risk? What needs to be done? There is also a close connection to third￾party risk, as discussed above, as a firm’s cyber defence strategy must also 
extend to its service providers.
In a similar way to third-party risk, a live debate concerns the role of 
second line operational risk professionals. What constitutes the optimum 
second line capability to provide meaningful oversight and challenge, before 
major gaps in the firm’s cyber controls emerge?
To this end, I have been leading industry discussions on the role of opera￾tional risk, investigating whether the recruitment of cyber experts into the 
second line Operational Risk department, in addition to first line experts, is 
a must for effective oversight. The results of a poll I ran with Best Practice 
Forum are presented in Table 16.2. This shows that a majority of respond￾ents (59 per cent) opted for the duplication of expertise, while the remaining 
portion disagreed.
This question is directly linked to ongoing industry deliberations on the 
future of the operational risk discipline. Two options present themselves:
● Further specialization into niche areas of operational risk sub-types: 
whether cyber, third-party, model or other risk sub-categories, with di￾minishing use of generalists and ultimately the disintegration of opera￾tional risk as a discipline; or
● Further recognition of the uniqueness of operational risk generalist skills, 
and their extended use in a board advisory capacity.406 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
Passionate about the operational risk discipline, and an active supporter of 
many experienced individuals working in this field, I am certain that opera￾tional risk professionals have a uniquely brilliant set of skills. The discipline 
brings a combination of a curious mind, a focus on the risk angle and the 
ability to distil complex matters into simple statements, coupled with the 
soft skills associated with dealing with people. The value of such profession￾als is immense, and it is no surprise that the number of CROs with an op￾erational risk background is on the rise; whereas previously CROs came 
exclusively from a financial risk background, such as credit or market risk.
Returning to the particular topic of cyber risk, while IT experts are typi￾cally situated in the first line, tasked with ensuring cyber security by design, 
effective second line oversight can be provided by focusing on material risks
and key controls. This can be achieved via a combination of mechanisms 
which are particularly useful in smaller-size firms. These may include access￾ing third-party professional firms to carry out benchmarking and cyber ma￾turity assessment; working with insurance brokers to transfer the risk as 
well as identify the best cyber controls and the worst new trends; and study￾ing the respective frameworks with a view to challenging the IT departmen￾tal RCSA and picking up on obvious gaps. It is reassuringly clear from 
studying formal industry frameworks such as the NIST that they are still 
intuitive in their construction of the key cyber controls.
In my opinion, therefore, the recruitment of cyber experts into the second 
line is not necessarily the answer; great generalist skills, like those displayed 
by the operational risk professional, and the ability to tease out and sum￾marize material risks, are wholly complementary to detailed IT expertise, 
enabling the overall control framework to operate very effectively with 
combined collective efforts.
Response % of responses
Yes, absolutely 59
Not necessarily 35
No, ineffective to duplicate 6
Table 16.2 Is the recruitment of cyber experts in the second line Operational 
Risk department, in addition to first line cyber experts, a must
for effective oversight?Reflections on the future of the operational risk discipline 407
Another note on cyber risk is that it is not entirely about IT. In fact, a large 
proportion of the risk revolves around the human element. More than three￾quarters of Best Practice Forum members concurred that cyber risk has a 
significant people component, as demonstrated in Figure 16.4.
As Sabine Lautenschläger, a member of the Executive Board of the ECB 
noted, ‘we must keep in mind that cyber risk does not invariably arise from 
the technology itself but also from how we use it. It is people who are be￾hind the hacking. And often, it is people who leave doors unlocked and gates 
wide open for cyber criminals to sneak in. People play a big role when it 
comes to cyber resilience’.12 This clear statement signifies that effective and 
continuous employee education, working with the board and bringing the 
‘people’ element of the risk to the fore, is very much needed. These are all 
areas where operational risk professionals excel.
Has some
people
component
Has a
signicant
people
component
Predominantly
tech-related
6%
76%
18%
To what extend do you believe cyber is a
people risk?
Figure 16.4 Industry poll: is cyber a people risk?
Best Practice Operational Risk Forum, 2023
CALL FOR ACTION
Find your perfect place in cyber risk management by:
● Collaborating with IT experts to achieve a perfect complement of 
generalist and specialist skills;
● Accessing available expertise (whether external, group level or other);408 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
● Teasing out material risks and key controls;
● Assisting and encouraging the board to have essential conversations on 
cyber risk;
● Progressively enhancing your own skills.
Table 16.3 Example second line specialist functions
Operational risk sub-type Specialist oversight unit
Financial crime, Conduct, Regulatory Compliance Function
Cyber/Information security Information Security Unit
Third-party TPRM
Data management Data Protection Officer
Legal risk Legal department
Is operational risk disintegrating?
Deliberations on the role of operational risk teams in third-party and cyber risk 
bring us neatly to the broader question hinted at earlier: whether operational 
risk as a discipline is starting to disintegrate. The new ORX reference taxonomy, 
mentioned in Chapter 1, with its 16 distinct sub-categories replacing the origi￾nal seven categories defined by the Basel Committee, brought along with it a 
variety of specialist functions, which provide oversight of the respective risk 
sub-types. Some examples are outlined in Table 16.3.
These units, staffed with skilled professional resources, can sometimes 
be protective of their territory, often firmly making the point that it is their 
role to oversee the relevant risk sub-type. For example these specialist 
units may:
● Design their own risk assessments, using different methodologies and 
templates which are different in terminology, grading scales and approach 
compared to the operational risk assessments;
● Suggest their own processes for incident logging, which differ to OREs 
and exist alongside them; or
● Conduct training and education in parallel to operational risk teams.Reflections on the future of the operational risk discipline 409
If this situation is not addressed, it may leave operational risk teams with 
solely oversight of employment practices and a portion of the execution, 
delivery and process management sub-categories, as most other risk catego￾ries would have already been ‘taken’, distributed across the various special￾ist units.
Proliferation of risk assessments and incident logging methodologies is a 
particular and growing concern, as these processes are burdensome for end￾users, who are left both confused and struggling under an ever-increasing 
load of risk assessments. Different grading scales for rating risks add to the 
confusion, leading to a bad data foundation and sub-optimal decision-mak￾ing. Conversely, the best way forward is to collaborate with other depart￾ments to align methodologies, streamlining where possible and incorporating 
all risk assessments into the RCSA framework. The industry Best Practice 
Forum discussed whether this kind of alignment was a priority, and 75 per 
cent of members confirmed that it was on their agenda. In particular, mem￾bers reflected on areas where they had achieved success in aligning these 
tools and approaches, as presented in Table 16.4.
Table 16.4 Alignment successes
Alignment successes % of respondents
Adopted risk management software which serves 
as one true source for risks, controls, incidents 
and metrics
27
Agreed a common risk assessment methodology, 
with the same rating bands, impact and likelihood 
scales for all risk assessments
21
Combined multiple risk assessments (i.e. 
incorporated conduct and financial crime risk 
assessments into RCSAs)
21
Implemented one single risk taxonomy 
throughout the firm
16
Aligned governance of issues between 
Operational risk, Compliance and Internal Audit
5
Adopted a common risk-acceptance process 
across all second line units
5
Achieved joined-up reporting of top 10 risks
between Risk and Compliance
5410 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
It stands to reason that alignment and collaboration are recurring themes in 
this book. Indeed operational risk professionals can serve as vital connec￾tors, reaching across the silos and bringing different areas together. After all, 
the kind of risks mentioned in this section are all operational risk sub-types, 
and it is sensible and meaningful to adopt a coherent and joined-up ap￾proach to their management.
CALL FOR ACTION
Strive for alignment and collaborate with other units to:
● Agree on common terminology, methodology and data sources;
● Jointly listen to the voice of first line business and support units, who 
may be subject to multiple risk assessments;
● Jointly develop a plan to streamline the assessments and other practices 
where possible.
AI
A fascinating topic – and one impossible to ignore – artificial intelligence 
(AI) represents a must-examine area for operational risk professionals, both 
in terms of understanding the risks it poses and exploring the opportunities 
it provides. This applies to AI in general and, more particularly, generative 
AI, as will be seen below.
The use of AI skyrocketed during 2023 with the introduction of ChatGPT 
(generative pretrained transformer), a chatbot from OpenAI, which accord￾ing to Reuters achieved a record by reaching 100 million monthly active 
users in January 2023, just two months after launch, making it ‘the fastest￾growing consumer application in history’.13 On a personal level, my first 
encounter with ChatGPT came during an educational course I ran in early 
2023. I split participants into groups and asked them to discuss and note 
down what they perceived to be the core future skills of operational risk 
professionals, expecting a lively debate on this exciting topic. Interestingly, 
one group promptly typed the question into the ChatGPT app and trans￾posed the response onto their flip chart. This way of approaching a task by 
consulting ChatGPT, which at the time I may have perceived as unconven￾tional, now seems a rather conventional response, whether we like it or not, 
and neatly demonstrates the app’s widespread use.Reflections on the future of the operational risk discipline 411
Traditional application of AI in financial services
According to IBM, ‘Artificial intelligence, or AI, is technology that enables 
computers and machines to simulate human intelligence and problem-solv￾ing capabilities.’14
AI has been in use in financial services for over a decade. Proprietary al￾gorithms developed to perform a specific task are most commonly applied 
in algorithmic trading, telephone banking and pattern analysis to recognize 
money laundering and fraud. From a risk management perspective, the risks 
are largely addressed under model risk management, as each proprietary 
model must be rigorously assessed for fitness. Indeed model risk manage￾ment in itself has been an area of growing regulatory focus, due to the com￾plexity of models and the technical expertise needed to carry out model 
validation.
Technological developments, including AI, have been of great interest 
to the Best Practice Operational Risk Forum over the years. As is clear 
from the industry poll highlighted in Figure  2.8 in Chapter  2, back in 
2020 companies’ technological skill levels were extremely varied, and the 
use of AI in operational risk management was still at its inception. It has 
progressed somewhat since then. For example, algorithms are now em￾bedded into GRC software platforms which compare data, draw conclu￾sions and make recommendations, providing prompts for users to revisit 
relevant risks in the event of a material ORE. Others prompt to re-evalu￾ate control ratings in cases where analysis demonstrates sub-optimal con￾trol performance or the occurrence of multiple incidents. At the same 
time, it is important to recognize that there is still a vast range of techno￾logical sophistication among financial services firms, and to note that a 
number of organizations still manage operational risk via Excel spread￾sheets. Admittedly this is a declining trend, but even so operational risk 
systems are not yet generally seen as a top priority investment. More pro￾gress would be beneficial in this area, to take full advantage of benefits of 
technological advancement.
Generative AI
Generative AI is characterized by a broad range of capabilities, its ability to 
generate new content and respond to almost any question asked. We will use 
IBM’s definition, which presents generative AI as ‘deep-learning models that 
can generate high-quality text, images, and other content based on the data 
they were trained on’.15412 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
An advantage – which is simultaneously a threat – of open GenAI apps 
such as ChatGPT is their easy accessibility. There is general consensus on the 
corresponding risks, which are broader and more complex than in the more 
conventional, proprietary AI case. They include:
● Increased cyber risk: The exploitation of generative AI by malicious 
actors to create sophisticated scams and attacks is a worry for 99% of 
business and IT professionals according to Information Systems Audit 
and Control Association (ISACA); while 74% believe that ‘cybercriminals 
are harnessing AI with equal or even greater success than digital trust 
professionals’.16
● Misinformation and disinformation: This was a new entrant that shot 
straight into the number one risk position as cited by the Global Risk 
Report 2024,17 acknowledging the ease of access to AI which has ‘already 
enabled an explosion in falsified information’.
● Disclosure of confidential information/privacy concerns: Users may input 
sensitive data which later turns out to have been inadvertently memorized 
and mistreated by the AI, posing a threat to privacy. This angle of GenAI 
continues to attract significant government and regulatory attention: an 
inquiry into ChatGPT by Italy's Data Protection Authority reportedly 
found data privacy violations.18
● Legal and regulatory: This includes ‘identifying any legal or regulatory 
obligations that need to be met or may be breached by the use of AI’,19 as 
noted by the Monetary Authority of Singapore in their proactive paper 
‘Emerging Risks and Opportunities of Generative AI for Banks’.
● Traditional model risk, including bias and fairness, also needs to be 
addressed.
More widely there are also societal concerns around dependency on AI, in￾cluding the potential for over-reliance leading to diminished analytical abil￾ity and intuition. To this end, one of the top risks in 2024 noted by Edward 
Segal in Forbes is ‘inability to connect with others’,20 as social skills may be 
reducing with the ever-increasing amount of time being spent by individuals 
on their personal technological devices.
Job displacement is also frequently cited, with predictions that GenAI 
will perform better than human experts in many fields; in my opinion, how￾ever, AI will boost productivity rather than substitute smart, creative and 
intuitive individuals.
That being said, there are things to consider in terms of use of GenAI in 
operational risk management:
● It is simply too good to ignore;Reflections on the future of the operational risk discipline 413
● Its responses can be used as ideas and thought about – to the extent that 
any other sources or inputs are normally subject to review and 
consideration;
● Good prompt management helps, including practising asking questions 
and specifying what good looks like;
● It will not replace skilful and intuitive operational risk professionals, but 
rather will help them to produce better outputs;
● The risks associated with its use need to be well understood and carefully 
managed.
The application of GenAI in operational risk management – which tends to 
be more qualitative and text-based compared to other quantitative risk 
disciplines – can be extensive, and has the potential to save a great deal of 
time for operational risk practitioners. Use cases might include educational 
video clips and creative images to bring examples to life. Other more se￾cure/private use cases might include:
● Conducting ORE pattern analysis to search for similar root causes;
● Reviewing control library to identify the multitude of controls performing 
the same task despite being worded differently, to standardize and 
simplify RCSAs;
● Proposing story lines for scenario analysis; and the list goes on.
It is no surprise, then, that following the launch of ChatGPT many organiza￾tions have developed and adopted their own private versions of the app, 
which provide arguably the same benefits in a more secure environment.
In December 2023, the Best Practice Operational Risk Forum evaluated 
the progress made by firms with respect to GenAI, deliberating whether the 
risks associated with its use outweighed the opportunities. As presented in 
Figure 16.5, the jury was still out on this question, as the assessment was 
either still in progress or had not even started in some organizations.
As ISACA noted, ‘a mere 10% of organizations have formal, comprehen￾sive policies in place governing the use of AI technology, and 29% have no 
policy, and no plans to implement one at all’.21 This finding resonated with 
the Best Practice Forum, in the sense that the majority have either not yet 
firmed up their overall stance on generative AI or are still in the process of 
deliberation, as presented in Figure 16.6.
In one way, against this background, inaction represents action, and non￾prohibition signifies permission: employees may already be using a public 
version of ChatGPT and sharing proprietary information without specific 
internal guidance or a full understanding of the risks involved. There is 414 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
clearly a need for rapid mass education. ISACA notes that ‘just 7% of or￾ganisations are providing all employees with AI training’.22 Similarly, only a 
minority of firms had adequate knowledge of AI as a topic within opera￾tional risk management, as presented in Figure 16.7.
Risks outweigh
opportunities
Opportunities
outweigh risks
Assessment in
progress
Assessment
not started
17%
12%
59%
12%
Integrating Generative AI into Op Risk
Figure 16.5 Industry poll: integrating Generative AI into operational risk 
management
Best Practice Operational Risk Forum, 2023
Permitted Prohibited Under
discussion
Not yet
considered
5%
16%
42%
37%
Overall stance on Generative AI
Figure 16.6 Industry poll: overall stance on Generative AI
Best Practice Operational Risk Forum, 2023Reflections on the future of the operational risk discipline 415
In conclusion, it is recommended that operational risk professionals not 
only continue to actively explore AI as a tool for their own use, but also add 
their voice to the firm-wide programmes tasked with deliberating on AI ap￾plications.
In-depth Good Adequate More is
needed
6%
94%
Skills and knowledge of Op Risk teams: AI
Figure 16.7 Industry poll: knowledge of risk teams on AI
Best Practice Operational Risk Forum, 2023
CALL FOR ACTION
Accelerate the organizational pace of decision-making on GenAI by:
● Conducting your own research;
● Joining firm-wide projects tasked with developing the firm’s stance on 
AI; lending expertise and facilitating the assessment of risks and 
opportunities;
● Engaging with the board to ensure risks are understood;
● Progressively enhancing your own expertise.416 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
Call for action to call for action
Throughout this book, and especially in the three final chapters, the reader 
may have noticed multiple calls for action being put out to operational risk 
professionals. This paradigm reflects a dramatically elevated ask from mod￾ern risk practitioners. While 20 years ago operational risk teams were pri￾marily expected to report on loss data and carry out capital computations, 
nowadays many boards are seeking their independent opinion on the level 
of third-party and cyber risk; requesting their view on the firm’s risk culture; 
and reaching out for advice on how to proceed with generative AI. This el￾evated role is of course an honour for operational risk professionals, but at 
the same time is a heavy load to carry. Maintaining a trusted advisor posi￾tion in such a broad field requires deep knowledge of every topic residing 
under the operational risk umbrella. And we should bear in mind that these 
asks are on top of what are perceived to be the core operational risk duties, 
embedding and integrating operational risk management into the firm’s day￾to-day practices, and continuously educating and empowering first line 
business and support units.
In my experience of working with different organizations, operational 
risk professionals are overwhelmed with work. A saying attributed to 
Benjamin Franklin goes, ‘If you want something done, ask a busy person’. 
And so it is that requests for help, or calls for action, keep coming to opera￾tional risk professionals due to their unique skillsets and ability to execute 
effectively.
In reality, it is not feasible to satisfy all requests. So prioritization be￾comes critical. And prioritization was the word of the day when the Best 
Practice Operational Risk Forum discussed 2024 priorities.
Similarly to previous years, the perpetual topic of embedding and increas￾ing ownership of risk in the first line yet again topped the chart. This has 
been the case as long as I can remember running these surveys with the in￾dustry. Exercising prudent decision-making, by managing risks that may 
prevent first line areas from achieving their own objectives, seems intuitively 
the right thing to do. Yet participants agreed that this remains a challenge, 
and noted that operational risk teams spend a large proportion of their time 
working on the front line, constantly seeking to embed risk practices.
In contrast, engaging with the board and assisting with decision-making 
came third on the priority list. This is reflected in Figure 16.8.Reflections on the future of the operational risk discipline 417
Focus on topical areas (e.g. AI, Cyber,
Third-party, E, S and G)
Engage with Board/ExCo, act as
advisor for making better decisions
Continue educating and
empowering 1st line
Carry out assurance/themed reviews
Further develop Risk team’s skills and
capabilities of risk
Collaborate with other units (e.g.
compliance) to streamline
Upgrade/invest in risk system(s)
1st
2nd
3rd
5th
6th
7th
4th
Top operational risk priorities 2024
Figure 16.8 Industry poll: top operational risk priorities 2024
Best Practice Operational Risk Forum, 2024
Participants reflected whether the right proportion of time was being spent 
working bottom-up at the coalface, as opposed to top-down with the Board. 
Inevitably, situations will come up that require honest discussion on the few 
top initiatives achievable in a year. In the current rapidly evolving environ￾ment, operational risk professionals should perhaps be looking to rebalance 
their day, and reinvent themselves as board advisors, spending more time at 
a strategic level, advising and prioritizing. So that is the final call for action 
for operational risk professionals – to make a systematic inventory of all the 
calls for action that come into the department, and then spend time with the 
Board agreeing the areas of focus and accepting what can and will not be 
achieved during the year.
In turn, day-to-day embedding activities can gradually be delegated to the 
first line risk champions described in Chapter 3. As the risk champions make 
progress in their learning, and develop increasingly excellent relationships 
with the people they are working with, this will also enable second line op￾erational risk professionals to spend more value-added time with the board. 
This is a vitally important point of this chapter – and indeed, the whole 
book. Effective operational risk management of the future will be achieved 
via the first line business units owning risk management, well supported by 
embedded risk champions, and second line operational risk practitioners 
lending their valuable expertise at the strategic level.418 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
MAKE A DIFFERENCE (MAD) ACTION
Please note down one action that you will take after reading this chapter 
that will meaningfully enhance your department’s preparedness to face 
future challenges.
Notes
1 World Economic Forum (2024) The Global Risks Report 2024, www3.
weforum.org/docs/WEF_The_Global_Risks_Report_2024.pdf (archived at 
https://perma.cc/7JUW-AY38)
2 World Economic Forum (2018) Trudeau: ‘The pace of change has never been 
this fast’, www.youtube.com/watch?v=fTl1YNTNb0g (archived at https://
perma.cc/T37C-D2A7)
3 Reuters (2023) Euro zone banks lose millions of euros to poor IT outsourcing, 
www.reuters.com/markets/europe/euro-zone-banks-lose-millions-euros-poor￾it-outsourcing-2023-11-15/ (archived at https://perma.cc/EJ5M-E5LS)
4 Resilience (2023) 2023 Mid-Year Cyber Claims Report, 4526209.fs1.
hubspotusercontent-na1.net/hubfs/4526209/Claims%20Report/Resilience_20
23MidYearClaimsReport_Final10162023%20(1).pdf (archived at https://
perma.cc/96GX-2FJB)
5 European Banking Authority (2019) EBA Guidelines on Outsourcing 
Arrangements, extranet.eba.europa.eu/sites/default/documents/files/
documents/10180/2551996/38c80601-f5d7-4855-8ba3-702423665479/
EBA%20revised%20Guidelines%20on%20outsourcing%20arrangements.
pdf?retry=1 (archived at https://perma.cc/CPJ3-WP58)Reflections on the future of the operational risk discipline 419
6 Digital Operational Resilience Act (DORA), www.digital-operational-resilience￾act.com/DORA_Articles.html (archived at https://perma.cc/36UR-9XHG)
7 Australian Prudential Regulation Authority (APRA) (2023) Prudential 
Standard CPS230, Operational Risk Management, www.apra.gov.au/sites/
default/files/2023-07/Prudential%20Standard%20CPS%20230%20
Operational%20Risk%20Management%20-%20clean.pdf (archived at 
https://perma.cc/KX5K-Y6GN)
8 Comparitech (2024) 300+ Terrifying Cybercrime and Cybersecurity Statistics 
(2024 EDITION), www.comparitech.com/vpn/cybersecurity-cyber-crime￾statistics-facts-trends/ (archived at https://perma.cc/CB6Q-3W6V)
9 Protiviti (2023) Executive Perspectives on Top Risks for 2024 and 2034, www.
protiviti.com/uk-en/survey/executive-perspectives-top-risks (archived at https://
perma.cc/NFC6-QS33)
10 World Economic Forum (2024) The Global Risks Report 2024, www3.
weforum.org/docs/WEF_The_Global_Risks_Report_2024.pdf (archived at 
https://perma.cc/7JUW-AY38)
11 National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) (2024) The NIST 
Cybersecurity Framework 2.0, nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/CSWP/NIST.
CSWP.29.pdf (archived at https://perma.cc/Y3H3-ZRJW)
12 Bank for International Settlements (BIS) (2018) Sabine Lautenschläger: Cyber 
resilience – objectives and tools, www.bis.org/review/r180319c.htm (archived 
at https://perma.cc/X29Y-T87T)
13 Reuters (2023) ChatGPT sets record for fastest-growing user base – analyst 
note, www.reuters.com/technology/chatgpt-sets-record-fastest-growing-user￾base-analyst-note-2023-02-01/ (archived at https://perma.cc/ES32-PKZE)
14 IBM, What is artificial intelligence (AI)?, www.ibm.com/topics/artificial￾intelligence (archived at https://perma.cc/F4MA-26SJ)
15 IBM (2023) What is Generative AI?, research.ibm.com/blog/what-is￾generative-AI (archived at https://perma.cc/XE3T-W3SW)
16 Information Systems Audit and Control Association (ISACA) (2023) New 
Study: Business and IT professionals are worried about the exploitation of 
generative AI by bad actors, www.isaca.org/about-us/newsroom/press￾releases/2023/new-study-business-and-it-professionals-are-worried-about-the￾exploitation-of-generative-ai (archived at https://perma.cc/JX3C-MUQQ)
17 World Economic Forum (2024) The Global Risks Report 2024, www3.
weforum.org/docs/WEF_The_Global_Risks_Report_2024.pdf (archived at 
https://perma.cc/7JUW-AY38)
18 BBC (2024) ChatGPT: Italy says OpenAI's chatbot breaches data protection 
rules, www.bbc.co.uk/news/technology-68128396 (archived at https://perma.
cc/L8V5-GMS3)
19 Monetary Authority of Singapore (MAS) (2023) Emerging Risks and 
Opportunities of Generative AI for Banks, www.mas.gov.sg/-/media/mas/news/
media-releases/2023/executive-summary---emerging-risks-and-opportunities￾of-generative-ai-for-banks.pdf (archived at https://perma.cc/UK6Q-A8SM)420 Operational Risk Management in Financial Services
20 Segal, E (2023) The 9 biggest risks and threats that companies will face in 
2024, Forbes, www.forbes.com/sites/edwardsegal/2023/12/03/the-8-biggest￾risks-and-threats-that-companies-will-face-in-2024/ (archived at https://perma.
cc/U8FX-TNNU)
21 Information Systems Audit and Control Association (ISACA) (2023) New Study: 
Business and IT professionals are worried about the exploitation of generative AI 
by bad actors, www.isaca.org/about-us/newsroom/press-releases/2023/new-study￾business-and-it-professionals-are-worried-about-the-exploitation-of-generative-ai
(archived at https://perma.cc/JX3C-MUQQ)
22 Information Systems Audit and Control Association (ISACA) (2023) New 
Study: Business and IT professionals are worried about the exploitation of 
generative AI by bad actors, www.isaca.org/about-us/newsroom/press￾releases/2023/new-study-business-and-it-professionals-are-worried-about-the￾exploitation-of-generative-ai (archived at https://perma.cc/JX3C-MUQQ)APPENDIX 1
Operational Risk Champion: 
role description
● Risk management is the responsibility of each and every employee.
● The head of each Business Unit is ultimately accountable for ensuring 
that robust risk management practices are embedded within the 
respective Business Unit.
● The role of Risk Champion is to assist the head of the Business Unit in 
ensuring that risks are identified, assessed, managed and reported.
The position
The Risk Champion is the Subject Matter Expert and the main liaison point 
between the second Line Risk Function and the Business Unit, facilitating 
the implementation and embedding of the use of risk management tools and 
techniques within the Unit, supporting the Head in continuous development 
and enhancement of the business unit’s risk management practices.
Responsibilities
The Risk Champion’s responsibilities include:
● ensuring all staff in the department are familiar with the operational risk 
event (ORE) identification and reporting process; and that there is clear 
understanding of what constitutes an event and what course of action 
should be followed;
● ensuring OREs are reported when they occur; with root causes analysed 
and actions taken to prevent reoccurrence;
421422 Appendix 1
● ensuring the unit’s RCSAs are conducted; acting as a central liaison 
between second line risk department and the business unit in planning 
and organizing the RCSA workshops;
● ensuring the RCSA is fit for purpose and is a true reflection of the business 
unit’s risk profile;
● raising the awareness of the unit’s risk profile, ensuring all employees are 
familiar with and able to articulate the unit’s top risks and mitigating 
actions;
● assisting the business unit head in the development of key risk indicators 
and the establishment of appropriate thresholds;
● identifying the business unit’s risk training needs, and flagging new 
employees to the second line risk department for the provision of training;
● maintaining contact with other Risk Champions, to share information 
about relevant OREs, RCSA risks and lessons learnt;
● developing risk procedures/desk instructions relevant for the business 
unit as necessary;
● coordinating with second line risk department to implement any new 
risk-related initiatives, processes and/or tools;
● participating in other risk initiatives as appropriate.APPENDIX 2
Example operational risk 
event reporting template
Reporting business/function
Date of discovery
Date of occurrence (if known)
High-level description
Enter a clear and succinct description of the transaction/event that allows those 
who are not familiar with it to quickly understand the problem.
How was ORE discovered?
Provide an explanation as to how the ORE was discovered and the area that 
identified it.
Root cause (if known) – why did it occur?
Provide an explanation about the primary root cause of the event and any 
control breaks that contributed to the ORE occurring.
Actual or estimated cost
Consider any direct out-of-pocket costs of the event and any additional costs to 
resolve the issue (e.g. legal fees, consultancy costs to investigate/solve the 
problem); if a near miss, a rough estimate of potential exposure client/
reputational/regulatory impact.
If the value is unknown, say so, detailing steps being taken to determine the 
exposure.
Resolution target date
(continued)
423424 Appendix 2
(Continued)
Remedial action
Highlight action steps already taken and any further plans to close the issue 
and prevent reoccurrence, including the person responsible for completion and 
target resolution date.
Event category
Select the most appropriate taxonomy category from the menu.
Suspicious activity report filed (Y/N) 
Refer to Compliance Manual.
Status of loss: Pending/Incurred (paid)/Reserved/Recovered
If needed, discuss with finance, establishing a reserve or writing the amount 
off.
Cost centre/Reference accounting entries
Conduct (Y/N)
Highlight whether or not the event has a conduct element.
Operational resilience (Y/N)
Highlight if the event has resulted in a disruption of a critical operation.
Department head sign-offORA template
APPENDIX 3 TITLE: SPONSOR:
Taxonomy
category 
Risk
description
Inherent
risk level
Residual
risk level
INITIATIVE BRIEF DESCRIPTION
Provide a
short outline
of the
initiative,
summarizing
key risks and
opportunities
OPERATIONAL RISK:
Target date Owner Status
DETAILED ASSESSMENT
Actions
OPERATIONAL RISK ASSESSMENT – MATERIAL CHANGE INITIATIVE
KEY RISKS AND OPPORTUNITIES SUMMARY RECOMMENDATION
Include
recommendation
and rationale
to support
Go/No-Go
decision 
Likelihood
Risks
Unlikely Possible Likely
Opportunities
Low Medium Hig
h
Likely Possible Unlikely
Very high
Lo
w Medium Hig
h Very high
Likelihood
Impact
Impact
425APPENDIX 4
Table of 50 Key Risk Indicators
No. Risk or theme KRI description Why useful?
1 Change 
management
% of overdue and 
at-risk projects 
within active project 
portfolio
Presents overall health of 
change portfolio – overdue 
and ‘at-risk’ projects vs 
on-track ones
2 Change 
management
Number of change 
activities where 
post-implementation 
reviews (PIRs) 
highlighted material 
issues
Post-implementation 
reviews measure the 
success of project discipline; 
metrics tracks unsuccessful/
poorly implemented projects
3 Change 
management
% of employees in 
business areas 
undergoing change 
meeting or 
exceeding their 
expectations 
compared to the rest 
of the firm
Indicator of change fatigue, 
measures employee 
productivity levels in 
business areas undergoing 
change
4 Conduct and 
culture
Number of 
exceptions to the 
New Product 
Approval (NPA) 
process, where 
product went live 
prior to formal 
governance approval
Monitors new products 
traded/sold to the client 
by-passing new product 
governance
(continued)
426Appendix 4 427
No. Risk or theme KRI description Why useful?
5 Conduct and 
culture
Number of products 
that do not meet the 
target market
Identifies products that 
appeal to clients outside of 
the primary target market 
(based on complaints, 
incidents and annual product 
reviews)
6 Conduct and 
culture
% of operational risk 
events not reported 
within timeline 
required by the 
policy
Helps identify poor risk 
management/risk culture 
issues in terms of not being 
open and transparent in 
reporting events quickly
7 Conduct and 
culture
% of staff 
background checks 
with ‘high-risk’ 
observations/
high-risk social 
media profiles
Where periodic screening of 
existing employees is 
performed, including social 
media screening, flags 
‘high-risk’ observations
8 Conduct and 
culture
Number of new 
accounts proposed 
by relationship 
managers and not 
approved
Monitors instances of 
potential account opening 
outside of the appetite, 
where subsequent approval 
was not granted
9 Conduct and 
culture
Number of 
exceptions in 
product sales quality 
identified by quality 
assurance (QA) 
process
Monitors inappropriate sales 
identified via a spot-check 
quality assurance review
10 Cyber Remediation of 
critical vulnerabilities 
outside of the SLA
Monitors the speed of 
remediation of most 
important (critical) 
vulnerabilities that could be 
exploited
11 Cyber Number/% of 
unmanaged devices 
detected on network
Predictive indicator 
measures organization’s 
exposure to cyber risk; can 
also monitor % of network 
devices not meeting 
configuration standards
(Continued)
(continued)428 Appendix 4
No. Risk or theme KRI description Why useful?
12 Cyber Number/% of 
employees who 
failed phishing tests
Reflects on the overall level 
of staff awareness and 
identifies repeat offenders 
within staff, who continue to 
click on internally created 
educational phishing emails
13 Cyber Number/% of 
patches not updated 
within SLA
Predictive KRI; measures 
system health via timely 
installation of patches; can 
be narrowed down to critical 
systems
14 Cyber Number/% increase 
in intrusion attempts/
malware alerts
Continuous monitoring of 
the volume of alerts, 
identifying spikes
15 Cyber Number of table-top 
exercises to test 
response to a cyber 
incident conducted 
against plan
Monitors preparedness by 
ensuring periodic tests are 
conducted as planned; 
additional KRI can measure 
number of open actions 
emanating from the tests
16 Data breach % completion of 
mandatory 
information security 
training
Monitors adherence to 
mandatory employee 
training process
17 Data breach Volume of attempts: 
staff sending emails/
files to personal 
email addresses
Monitors email traffic 
focusing on attachments, 
identifying potential policy 
breaches
18 Financial crime % of new accounts 
opened with 
exceptions
Identifies non-standard 
accounts requiring additional 
approvals and sign-offs
19 Financial crime Open activity 
monitoring alerts not 
actioned within x 
days
Control indicator; monitors 
how promptly the alerts are 
investigated and resolved
(Continued)
(continued)Appendix 4 429
No. Risk or theme KRI description Why useful?
20 Financial crime Suspicious activity 
reports (SARs) – 
increase/decrease in 
cases reported
Monitors changes in volume 
and highlights spikes
21 Internal fraud Number of systems 
that permit staff to 
process payments or 
transactions single￾handedly
Highlights exceptions where 
segregation of duties is not 
enforced, presenting a 
higher risk of error and/or 
internal fraud
22 Internal fraud Critical systems with 
user access not 
re-certified on time
Control indicator of system 
re-certification process; 
focusses on user access to 
ensure joiners/transfers/
leavers are acted upon in a 
timely manner, preventing 
unauthorized access
23 Internal fraud % of movers or 
leavers with 
privileged access 
where access is 
removed outside of 
timescales
Identifies exceptions where 
leavers’ access was not 
removed in a timely way
24 Internal fraud Whistleblowing – % 
increase/decrease in 
cases reported
Monitors unusual spikes and 
falls in the use of 
whistleblowing process
25 Internal fraud Premises access – 
unusual working 
patterns
Highlights unusual access to 
facilities, for example after 
hours or on weekends
26 Internal fraud Number/% of staff 
that did not take 
mandatory leave
Monitors compliance with 
mandatory leave policy; 
applied to identified staff in 
scope, which can include 
trading, payments and 
others
(Continued)
(continued)430 Appendix 4
No. Risk or theme KRI description Why useful?
27 Internal fraud Trading policy 
breaches – trades in 
breach of trader’s 
mandate
For trading business, 
monitors trades that have 
been erroneously or 
deliberately entered in 
breach of the prescribed 
mandate
28 Legal & regulatory Horizon scanning: 
number of new 
regulatory initiatives/
consultations with 
potential significant 
impact in the next 6 
months
Monitors regulatory 
developments and potential 
volume of change expected 
in the near future
29 Legal & regulatory Timeframe pressure: 
deals requested to 
be completed in less 
that x days
Monitors potential increase 
in legal risk due to sub￾optimal deal execution as a 
result of time pressure
30 Legal & regulatory Litigation: value at 
risk of active legal 
claims
Provides insight into 
potential value of settlement 
for legal claims
31 Model risk Number of models 
that have not been 
validated/validation 
overdue
Identifies potential areas of 
model risk 
32 Model risk Results of blind test 
of HR algorithms for 
bias
Measures the success or 
failure of independent 
testing for bias of existing 
HR algorithms
33 Outsourcing/
third-party risk
Frequency of 
extreme weather 
events in critical 
supplier location
Monitors the average 
number of months between 
weather events that disrupt 
the business of the supplier
34 Outsourcing/
third-party risk
Number/% of 
supplier resiliency 
assessments 
overdue or with 
exceptions
Monitors timeliness and 
outcomes of proactive 
assessments of third-party 
resilience arrangements
(Continued)
(continued)Appendix 4 431
No. Risk or theme KRI description Why useful?
35 Outsourcing/
third-party risk
Number/% of 
material exceptions 
to standard contract 
clauses
Identifies a proportion of 
providers with non-standard 
legal contracts that require 
additional attention
36 Outsourcing/
third-party risk
Number/% of critical 
providers without 
defined exit plan/not 
easily substitutable
Assesses reliance on a 
critical supplier which cannot 
be substituted
37 People Number/% of 
non-permanent staff 
in service over 12 
months
Monitors long-term contract 
staff, indicating difficulties in 
filling open positions or a 
need to raise a permanent 
vacancy
38 People Number/% of offers 
for preferred 
candidates rejected
Provides a view on the firm’s 
attractiveness as an 
employer, and the risk of 
inability to recruit key staff
39 People Percentage of 
managers that have 
received training on 
managing remote 
and hybrid teams
Highlights areas that 
demand greater attention, 
before problems materialize
40 People Average spend on 
activities to promote 
employee wellbeing, 
as a % of operating 
income
Ensures that wellbeing 
remains at the top of senior 
management’s agenda
41 People Number and trend of 
employees logging 
over 60 hours per 
week for over 1 
month
Employee burnout indicator, 
important with the transition 
to remote or hybrid working. 
Working long hours should 
prompt workload review
(Continued)
(continued)432 Appendix 4
No. Risk or theme KRI description Why useful?
42 Technology failure End-of-Life hardware 
[software] as a % of 
overall hardware 
[software]
Predictive KRI; monitors 
reliance on software/
hardware that is approaching 
the end of the service 
contract and needs to be 
replaced
43 Technology failure Average time to 
mitigate the highest 
impact technology 
incidents impacting 
service level 
agreements (SLA)
Provides a view to the firm’s 
ability to recover quickly 
without significant internal 
or external impact
44 Technology failure Number of complex 
tests completed to 
stress business 
strategies
Predictive KRI; measures 
the success of operational 
resilience testing/planning
45 Technology failure % change requests 
not signed off or 
signed off with 
exceptions
Monitors technology change 
management process, 
ensuring robust governance 
is applied
46 Technology failure Number of critical 
systems that failed 
periodic disaster 
recovery test
Raises awareness of 
systems that failed to 
recover within stipulated 
recovery time objective 
(RTO)
47 Transaction 
processing
% staff with 2+ 
years’ experience vs 
total staff
‘Experience’ indicator, 
valuable for complex 
processing units [e.g. 
derivatives, corporate 
actions]
48 Transaction 
processing
Processing volume 
vs operations staff 
capacity
Monitors capacity and 
potential for over-stretching 
leading to risk of error
(Continued)
(continued)Appendix 4 433
No. Risk or theme KRI description Why useful?
49 Transaction 
processing
Number of cash/
stock breaks 
outstanding >30 
days at month end
Monitors effectiveness of 
reconciliation and 
investigation process via 
number of ‘aged’ 
discrepancies
50 Transaction 
processing
% straight-through 
processing rate
Assesses rate of 
transactions without manual 
intervention
(Continued)INDEX
NB: page numbers in italic indicate figures or tables.
accountability 232, 234, 297–99, 304, 372
advisory capacity 66, 324, 405
agile projects 150–51
ALARP principle 229–30
alignment success 409, 409–10
amber zone 60, 61
artificial intelligence (AI) 410
in financial services 411
generative 411–15, 414, 415
Australian Prudential Regulation Authority 
(APRA) 392
Bank for International Settlements (BIS) 381
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision 
(BCBS) 6, 9, 11, 12, 17, 26, 37, 41, 
44, 73, 76, 77, 89, 138, 158, 167, 
203, 205, 214, 215, 234, 242, 252, 
263, 267, 271, 281, 291, 323, 342, 
343, 353, 361, 374, 383, 391–92
Best Practice Operational Risk Forum
24–25, 43, 44, 67, 81, 96, 131, 145, 
161, 167, 215, 289, 312, 313, 327, 
331–32, 353, 373, 393, 400–405, 
407, 409, 411, 413, 416
The Bob Pike Group 282
boundary events 76, 77, 363
bow-tie model 14–18, 111, 120
business continuity planning (BCP) 294, 
294, 381, 395
Business Disruption and Systems 
Failure 351, 368
business units and support functions 1–2, 
15, 22, 50–53, 60, 80–81, 127, 140, 
157, 158, 178, 184, 211, 264–65, 
319, 325, 330, 333
cause-event-impact bow-tie 14–15, 15
change management 17, 138, 147, 
148, 155, 163
ChatGPT 410, 412, 413
client deposits 104
Clients, Products and Business Practices
13, 222, 351, 368
Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of 
the Treadway Commission (COSO) 7
compliance 35, 63, 78, 79, 91, 
151, 344–45
conduct risk 17, 300
confidential information/privacy 412
context-questions-conclusions (CQC)
259, 261
control design 121
control identification 118–20, 119, 120
control performance 121
corporate risk taxonomy 345–46, 346
Covid-19 pandemic 16, 60, 115, 169, 
206–8, 288, 313, 380–81, 394–95
critical operation dependencies 384–86, 385
cross-functional methodology 105
cultural change programmes 310
cultural fit 329
customer-centric mentality 386–87
customer due diligence (CDD) 91
cyber-risk management 405–7, 406, 412
data clean-up 23
data confidentiality 95
departmental RCSA 106, 129
detective and corrective controls 119
Digital Operational Resilience Act 
(DORA) 90, 391, 401
diminisher 58–59
documentation 117–18, 215, 329
drifter 57–58
EBA. see European Banking Authority (EBA)
emerging risks 208–10, 210
Employment Practices and Workplace 
Safety 351, 363
end-to-end mapping 105
Environmental, Social and Governance 
(E, S and G) 17, 338, 339, 340
challenges and practices 371–73
defined 340, 343–44
elements 341–42
embedding and maturity assessment 347
G element 367–68, 369, 370–71
governance, roles and 
responsibilities 348
industry benchmark 373–75, 374
operational risk events 349–51, 352, 353
reporting and decision-making 349
risk and control self-assessment 354–55, 
355, 356, 357
434Index 435
risk appetite and key risk 
indicators 361–62
risk culture 344–45
risk management activities 342–43
risks and opportunities assessment 357, 
358, 359
scenario analysis 359–61, 360
S element 362–64, 365, 366–67
sustainability 340–42
taxonomy 345–46, 346
training and education 347
the triangle 344, 344
escalation 82, 90, 116, 173, 390
ESG. see Environmental, Social and 
Governance (ESG)
European Banking Authority (EBA) 343, 
381–82
European Central Bank (ECB) 347
Execution, Delivery and Process 
Management 363, 368
executive advocate 255
expertise 18, 23–24, 128
Facebook Inc 367
facilitation 275–77
financial crime risk 232, 234
financial performance 321–22
Financial Stability Board (FSB) 224, 297
fit-for-purpose taxonomy 12, 77–78, 348
foreign exchange 73, 105
General Motors 362
generative AI 411–15, 414, 415
geopolitical risk 17–18
Global Data Protection Regulation 
(GDPR) 90
governance forums 21, 21
granularity 104–6, 392
green zone 60–61
heat maps 113, 115, 116
Humanizing Rules (Hunt) 331
Hunt, C. 331
Information Systems Audit and Control 
Association (ISACA) 412–14
information technology (IT) 148–49
inherent risk 3, 113–15
Institute of Risk Management (IRM)
360–61
internal audit 308–9
judgemental evaluation 120–21
Key Risk Indicators (KRIs) 32, 156, 166, 
167–69, 176, 235, 361–62, 426–33
aggregation 175, 177
challenges and practices 182–85
data collection 178
defined 167
design 178
industry benchmark 185–86, 186
money laundering/financial crime 172
monitoring and mitigation 178–79
periodic updates 179–81
poor staff 169–71
roles and responsibilities 181–82
selection 177
thresholds 172–74
unauthorized/rogue trading 171–72
validation 179
killer risks 115–16
knowing your audience 263–64
KRIs. see Key Risk Indicators (KRIs)
liability risk 351, 357
likelihood risk 113
Markets in Financial Instruments Directive 
(MiFID II) 152
materialized risk 4
maturity assessment, embedding and
33, 318, 319, 320, 321
balanced scorecard 324, 325
challenges and practices 328–31
embedded stage 319
financial performance 321–22
industry benchmark 331, 333, 
333–34, 334
point of arrival 331, 332
retaining evidence 327–29, 328
risk culture 324
self-assessment of embeddedness
325, 326–27
use test 323–24
minimum viable product (MVP) 151
model risk 13–14
money laundering/financial crime
105, 172
multiplier 59–62
National Institute of Standards and 
Technology (NIST) Cybersecurity 
Framework 405
New Product Approval (NPA) 147
no blame approach 297, 299, 303
online training 285–86
open question 109–11
operational resilience 17, 381–83, 382
critical operation dependencies
384–86, 385436 Index
operational resilience (Continued)
customer-centric mentality 386–87
dashboard 389, 389–90
defined 382
disruption and testing tolerance
387–89, 388
frameworks 383–84
industry benchmark 393, 393–95, 394
lifecycle 384
regulatory approach 391–92
operational risk 5, 5–9, 8
operational risk appetite 221, 224–25, 
225–27, 233
challenges and practices 240–43
defined 224
desirable risk level 225–30, 229
entity/business line 239–40
features of 231–32
industry benchmark 243–45, 244, 245
limits and triggers 234–38
measures 237, 237–38
monitoring risk profile 238, 239
qualitative statements 230–32, 234
quality and maturity 238, 238
and tolerance 227, 230–31
operational risk assessment (ORA)
137, 143
aggregation and monitoring 155–56
assessment 3, 30, 153–54
challenges and practices 157–60
change activities 139–40, 141
change landscape 146, 146
checking 154–55
defined 142
industry benchmark 160–63
integration 154
new products 147
potential methodological 143
process changes 152–53
projects 149–51
and RCSA 142
regulatory programmes 151–52
risk and opportunity assessment 142–43, 
144, 144–46
roles and responsibilities 156–57
scope-methodology-integration
138–39, 139
system changes 147–49
ORA template 425
Operational Riskdata eXchange Association 
(ORX) 11, 12, 13–14, 16–18, 24, 25, 
102, 111, 118, 124, 129, 274, 
353, 408
operational risk events (OREs) 23, 30, 71, 
72, 73, 74, 76, 349–51, 
352, 353, 390
analysis 86–87
challenges and practices 92–96
conduct-related events 91
data breaches 90
decline 94
escalation 82–83
human element 88–89
identification and notification 80–81, 82
industry benchmark 96, 96–98, 97
potential outcomes 73–74
reporting process 83–84, 84
reporting template 423–24
resolution and closing 85–86
roles and responsibilities 91–92
scope 73–77, 75
technology-related events 89–90
threshold 77, 77–78
unified impact rating grid 78–79, 79
validation 87–88
operational risk framework 30, 31, 34
benchmarking analysis 37–38, 38
benefits and tools 36
challenges and practices 40–42
external and internal requirements
34–36
industry benchmark 42–45, 43–45
linking components 32–33
planning implementation 38, 39, 40
regulatory requirements for 35
supporting elements 33
tools 30, 32
value proposition 35–36, 40–42
operational risk losses 235–36
operational risk priority 416–17, 417
operational risk professionals
306–8, 307
operational risk reporting 248, 249, 
250, 260
analysis and interpretation 254–56
challenges and practices 251–52, 261–65
data gathering 252–54
executive summary 257, 258
format and templates 257, 259, 261
generic challenges 250–51
industry benchmark 265–67, 266, 267
opinion and call for action 256–57
operational risk taxonomy 9, 18, 19–20, 
21–22
aggregation and reporting 10–11
back-testing 10
bow-tie model 14–18
categories 16–18, 21, 21–22
challenges and practices 22–24
common language 9
evolution of 11, 12
industry benchmark 24–26, 25, 26Index 437
landscape 13
management purposes 13–14
risk identification 10
risk measurement 9–10
simple language 12–13
value proposition 2, 7–8, 12–14
operational risk training and education
271, 272
challenges and practices 286–89
continuous improvement 284
coordinators 280–81
development areas 278–79
employee self-development 279, 280
external perspective and industry 
acumen 274–75
facilitation 275–77
framework and tools 273–74
high-quality design 281–82
industry benchmark 289–91, 290
influencing 277–78
interactive delivery 283–84
multipliers 275, 288
online training 285–86
public speaking 277
training content 284–85
opportunity 143, 144, 145, 155, 159, 
287–88, 345, 357, 359
opportunity cost 75–76
ORA. see operational risk assessment (ORA)
OREs. see operational risk events (OREs)
ORX. see Operational Riskdata eXchange 
Association (ORX)
outsourcing and supplier (third-party) 
category 13, 16
parent-child relationship 278
people category 16
people risk 234
personal accountability 297–99, 304
physical risk 351, 357
pinning the bow-tie approach 15
point of arrival 331, 332
post-implementation reviews (PIRs) 154–55
the postman 54–55
preventative and directive controls 119
prioritization question 112
problem solver 54
process changes 152–53
process mapping 105
process risk self-assessment (PRSA) 104–6, 
105, 109
product category 14, 14
programme transparency and 
collaboration 373
public speaking 277
RCs. see risk champions (RCs)
RCSAs. see risk and control self-assessments 
(RCSAs)
reactive approach 310
red zone 61–62
regulatory programmes 151–52
reporting cycle 261
report sponsor 255
reputational risk 373
residual risk 3, 112–13
response framework 234
risk administration 305, 306, 310
risk and control self-assessments 
(RCSAs) 101, 102, 354–55, 355, 
356, 357
acceptance 116–17
appetite 116
bow-tie model 110–11, 111, 120
challenges and practices 128–31
conclude and act 124
control identification 118–20, 119, 120
defined 103–4
documentation 117–18
escalation 116
granularity 104–6
high-level assessments 106–7
industry benchmark 131–33, 
131–33
inherent risk 113–15
judgemental evaluation 120–21
killer risks 115–16
leading question 111–12
marketing 125–26
measures of success 126, 126
open question 109–11
prioritization question 112
proactive risk identification 102–3
refresh 124–25
residual risk 112–13
roles and responsibilities 127
testing 121–22
velocity 115
workshops 123
risk appetite 4, 33, 361–62. see also
operational risk appetite
risk awareness 298, 299, 304
risk capacity 33, 235
risk champions (RCs) 55–57, 66–67, 67, 84, 
278, 417, 421–22
risk conversations 305–6, 306
risk culture 33, 294–97, 295, 324, 344–45
assessment model 297–300, 298, 299
awareness 298, 299, 304
challenges and practices 309–12
conversations 305–6, 306438 Index
risk culture (Continued)
and dashboard 300–301, 302
defined 296
industry benchmark 312–14, 312–14
internal audit 308–9
no blame approach 297, 299, 303
operational risk professionals
306–8, 307
personal accountability 297–99, 304
reward 298, 299, 305
transparency 297, 299, 303
risk for reward 2–3
risk grading matrix 114, 116
risk horizon scanning 209
risk impact 113
risk management activities 342–43
risk mitigation 3, 204, 222
risk owner 21, 50, 123, 234, 236, 
240, 241
risk reduction 3, 121, 223
risk reward 220, 222, 222–24, 298, 
299, 305
risk velocity 115
Sarbanes-Oxley regulation 34
scenario analysis (SA) 32, 190, 191, 192, 
236–38, 359–61, 360
aim of 192–93
bias 203, 204
case study 195–200, 199, 200
cause-event-impact approach 199, 199
challenges and practices 212–15
defined 201–2
emerging risks 208–10, 210
exploring and assessment 203
industry benchmark 215–17, 216, 217
learnings and actions 203–5
periodic updates 207–8
preparation 202
quantification 199, 200
roles and responsibilities 211
selection process 194, 195
validation 205–7
social risks 363, 364
Sound Practices to Strengthen Operational 
Resilience 391
staff attrition rate 171, 181
steering 264
strategic risk assessment (SRA)
106–9, 107
subject matter expert (SME)
18, 21
supervising 264
supplementary classification system 24
sustainability 312, 340–42, 347, 
348, 355
SWOT analysis 372
system enhancements 147–49
technology risk 232
Terms of Reference (TORs) 348
testing process 121–22
Third-Party Risk Management (TPRM)
13, 16, 400, 
400–404, 402, 403
Three Lines model 49, 50–53, 
51–53
challenges and practices 63–66
champion 55–57
diminisher 58–59
drifter 57–58
industry benchmark 66–68, 67
multiplier 59–62
the postman 54–55
problem solver 54
working with champions 62–63
transition risk 351, 357
trend analysis 94
unauthorized/rogue trading
171–72
use test 323–24
values and beliefs 345
virtual learning 288
virtual multipliers 66
Walmart Inc 363
WeWork 367
Wiseman, Liz 58
zero tolerance 180, 241www.koganpage.com/risk-compliance
Looking for another book?
Explore our award-winning 
books from global business 
experts in Risk and
Compliance
Scan the code to browse
439ISBN: 9780749478612 ISBN: 9781398605022
ISBN: 9781398614871 ISBN: 9781398610613
www.koganpage.com
More books from Kogan Page
440441
THIS PAGE IS INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK442
THIS PAGE IS INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK443
THIS PAGE IS INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK444
THIS PAGE IS INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK445
THIS PAGE IS INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK446
THIS PAGE IS INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK
