OpossumsOpossums
An Adaptive Radiation of New World
Marsupials
Robert S. Voss and Sharon A. Jansa
Johns Hopkins University Press
Baltimore© 2021 Johns Hopkins University Press All rights reserved. Published 2021
Printed in the United States of America on acid-free paper 9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  1
Johns Hopkins University Press
2715 North Charles Street
Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363
www.press.jhu.edu
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data Names: Voss, Robert S., author. | Jansa,
Sharon A., author.
Title: Opossums : an adaptive radiation of new world marsupials / Robert S. Voss and Sharon A.
Jansa.
Description: Baltimore : Johns Hopkins University Press, 2021. | Includes bibliographical
references and index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2020013111 | ISBN 9781421439785 (hardcover) | ISBN 9781421439792
(ebook) Subjects: LCSH: Opossums.
Classification: LCC QL737.M34 V67 2021 | DDC 599.2/76—dc23
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2020013111
A catalog record for this book is available from the British Library.
Special discounts are available for bulk purchases of this book. For more information, please
contact Special Sales at specialsales@jh.edu.
Johns Hopkins University Press uses environmentally friendly book materials, including
recycled text paper that is composed of at least 30 percent post-consumer waste, whenever
possible.For Louise EmmonsContents
Acknowledgment
Introduction
  I     PHYLOGENETIC CONTEXT AND HISTORICAL
BIOGEOGRAPHY
  1     Metatheria and Marsupialia
  2     South America, the Island Continent
  3     The Great American Biotic Interchange and Its Aftermath
II      OPOSSUM CLASSIFICATION AND DIVERSITY
  4     Taxonomic Accounts
III     OPOSSUM PHENOTYPES
  5     Morphology
  6     Physiology
  7     Behavior
IV     OPOSSUM NATURAL HISTORY
  8     Habitats
  9     Diets
10     Parasites11     Predators
12     Competitors and Mutualists
13     Population Biology
V     SYNTHESIS
14     Adaptive Radiation
Appendixes
1. A Checklist of Living Opossums (Didelphidae)
2. Fruit Taxa Eaten by Opossums in French Guiana
3. Prey Taxa Eaten by Opossums in Southeastern Brazil
References
IndexAcknowledgments
We are very fortunate in having colleagues who were willing to read early
drafts of our chapters and suggest improvements. In particular, we are
grateful to Robin Beck for reading Chapters 1, 2, and 3; to Vera Weisbecker
for reading Chapter 5; to Christine Cooper and John Harder for reading
Chapter 6; to Harry Greene for reading Chapters 9 and 11; to Lance
Durden, Agustín Jiménez, and Jessica Light for reading Chapter 10; and to
Gregory Adler for reading Chapters 8, 12, and 13. Any remaining errors of
fact, interpretation, or emphasis are, of course, our own.
Patricia J. Wynne drew all the line art for this volume with her
customary skill, attention to detail, and inimitable style. Photographic
material was made available by friends, colleagues, and freelance
photographers whose generosity we gratefully acknowledge, whether or not
we finally used their images for this volume: Víctor Acosta-Chaves,
Antoine Baglan, Eduardo Beltrocco, Gerardo Ceballos, Rodrigo Conte,
Mónica Díaz, Louise Emmons, Antoine Fouquet, Elí García-Padilla, Mario
Gómez-Martínez, Roland Kays, Jorge La Grotteria, José Martínez, José
Ochoa, Ricardo Ojeda, Pedro Peloso, Darío Podestá, Fiona Reid, Rogério
Rossi, Thiago Semedo, Thiago da Silveira, Pablo Teta, and Christian
Ziegler. Rights to reproduce the image in Figure 11.1 were purchased from
Superstock, Inc.
Patricia Wynne’s drawings of opossum manual osteology (Fig. 5.10) are
based on micro-CT scans expertly processed by Abigail Curtis for a grant
proposal that was never funded. We thank Kelly Kroft for photographing
the microfilariae (Fig. 10.1) in a blood smear that was originally prepared
by Kevin Olival, and we thank Agustín Jiménez for identifying adult wormsfrom the body cavity of the same specimen. We are grateful to Craig
Chesek for photographing the opossum skin in Fig. 4.10. Jan Ryser very
kindly sent us a copy of his 1990 doctoral dissertation on Didelphis.
Our decades-long research on opossums would have been far less
productive without many substantial contributions from our students,
including especially Juan Díaz-Nieto, Tom Giarla, Eliecer Gutiérrez, and
Silvia Pavan. Lorissa Fujishin and Carmen Martin helped generate much of
the sequence data on which our phylogenetic research was based. We are
also grateful to colleagues who collaborated in our work or supported it in
other tangible ways over the same period, especially Keith Barker, Robin
Beck, Ana Carmignotto, François Catzeflis, Louise Emmons, Dave Fleck,
David Flores, Al Gardner, Darrin Lunde, Ted Macrini, Jim Patton, Rogério
Rossi, Nancy Simmons, and Sergio Solari. Lastly, we thank Tiffany
Gasbarrini at Johns Hopkins University Press for her candid and insightful
advice and subsequent editorial support.OpossumsIntroduction
I am sensible how tedious I have been, in the Description of this one
Animal, and from a single Observation too.… But it being an
Animal, so very remarkable; and one too, sui Generis, or a distinct
Species from all others, I was the more inclin’d to be as particular as
I could, though not so much as I could have wished.
Tyson (1698: 159)
The scientific study of marsupials began with Edward Tyson’s dissection of
a female opossum in 1698. Transported alive from Virginia to London, but
“of late languishing and falling from its Meat,” it had just died in the
menagerie of the Royal Society. Alert to this rare opportunity to examine an
almost-fabulous North American species (Parrish, 1997), Tyson was
determined to make a thorough job of it. Wrapping up a lengthy report that
was published in the Philosophical Transactions of the Society, Tyson
concluded that the opossum was not the chimerical monster described by
earlier authors—“with a snowte lyke a foxe, a tayle lyke a marmasette,
eares lyke a batte, hands lyke a man, and feete lyke an ape” (Eden, 1555)—
but an entirely new kind of animal with organs admirably suited to its own
way of life. At one stroke, this pioneering treatise removed marsupials from
the realm of myth to the annals of zoology. Despite its quaint diction,
archaic punctuation, credulous repetition of travelers’ tales, and occasional
flights of poetry, Tyson’s work was thoroughly modern in conception, his
anatomical descriptions clear, his illustrations accurate and useful. It was a
good beginning.Opossums (family Didelphidae, order Didelphimorphia) are New World
marsupials. For more than a century after their discovery by Vicente Yáñez
Pinzón, the Spanish explorer who landed on the coast of Brazil in 1500 and
captured a female with pouch young, they were the only marsupials widely
known to Europeans. Subsequently eclipsed in the public imagination by
their more charismatic Australian relatives (kangaroos, koalas, etc.),
opossums remained for many years a somewhat obscure group, of interest
primarily to taxonomists and students of mammalian reproduction.
All of this changed in the early 1980s with the successful domestication
of the short-tailed opossum (Monodelphis domestica) and its subsequent
popularity as a model organism for laboratory research (VandeBerg, 1989;
VandeBerg and Robinson, 1997). In just a few years, knowledge of many
fundamental aspects of didelphid biology—especially development,
physiology, and behavior—increased dramatically, with important
contributions from dozens of research groups. More recently, the
publication of “the opossum” genome has produced a wealth of genetic data
from the same species (Belov et al., 2007; Gentles et al., 2007; Mikkelson
et al., 2007; Samollow, 2008). Welcome as it is, however, much of this new
information is difficult to interpret evolutionarily in the absence of relevant
information about didelphid phylogeny, comparative biology, and natural
history. Therefore, one purpose of this book is to provide essential context
for future didelphid research by summarizing current knowledge of
evolutionary relationships, phenotypic variation, and ecology. Such
information is now widely scattered in the literature, and much of it has yet
to be synthesized into any coherent account of opossum diversity.
Another motivation is to correct a strong ecogeographic bias in the
marsupial literature. Due to the research productivity of several generations
of Australian zoologists, much of the published information about
marsupial phenotypes and natural history concerns antipodean species
living in dry-temperate or -subtropical habitats. However, marsupials first
evolved in South America, where most of their living descendants inhabit
humid tropical environments. As quintessentially rainforest marsupials,
opossums merit rich phenotypic and natural-history documentation
equivalent to that long available for their arid-adapted Australian cousins.
Additionally, opossums are of interest to primatologists and
paleontologists as living models of extinct taxa. Some arboreal opossumsare thought to resemble early primates in key morphological and ecological
characteristics, so knowledge of didelphid natural history might shed light
on the adaptations of remote human ancestors. Opossums are also the most
diverse group of living mammals to retain a primitive (tribosphenic)
dentition, so knowledge of didelphid feeding behavior and diets can provide
insights about the trophic adaptations of early mammals. Primatologists and
paleontologists with such research interests have previously had no
authoritative reference to consult on relevant aspects of opossum biology,
and some have focused their attention on the North American species
(Didelphis virginiana), a very atypical opossum.
Lastly, it has become commonplace in textbooks and other semipopular
media to cast marsupials in the role of victims in a global struggle for
dominance with placental mammals. In this hackneyed scenario (Gould,
1980), marsupials became extinct in the northern hemisphere due to their
inability to compete with placentals, and they only held out in South
America as long as that continent—an island throughout much of the
Tertiary—was separated from North America by a marine barrier. Once the
Panamanian landbridge was formed, South American marsupial diversity
declined catastrophically as carnivores and other placental groups rushed in
to occupy the niches that marsupials once filled. Only in Australia, still an
island continent, did marsupials continue to flourish until the Recent arrival
of humans.
Although certain aspects of this narrative remain plausible, the current
composition of South American mammal faunas suggests a more nuanced
interpretation of marsupial-placental interactions. South American
rainforests are, indeed, numerically dominated by placental mammals, but
these habitats also support diverse marsupial faunas, including a dozen or
more sympatric opossum species at well-sampled Amazonian localities.
Clearly, didelphids are still thriving in the midst of placental competitors.
Three centuries after Tyson’s pioneering monograph, it is time to try and
understand how opossums have achieved this unique success.
Few mammalian higher taxa have been so consistently neglected by
scientific publishers as Didelphimorphia. In fact, this is the first book￾length treatment of opossums, although Hunsaker’s (1977) volume broadlyoverlapped our topic. Useful in its day, Hunsaker’s book has long been
obsolete. Opossum research has increased impressively over the last several
decades, not only with laboratory colonies of Monodelphis domestica, but
also on wild populations of numerous other species and in the fields of
taxonomy and phylogenetic inference. Remarkably, over half the references
cited in this volume have been published since the year 2000, impressive
testimony to the now very active pan-hemispheric community of opossum
researchers.
To keep this book within reasonable page limits, we assume that the
reader is familiar with basic concepts in evolutionary biology, ecology, and
systematics that would be tedious to explain in context. Fortunately, in this
age of electronic media, explanations of unfamiliar terminology can be
accessed in a few keystrokes, so it now seems unnecessary to define such
essential vocabulary as sexual selection, trophic niches, or monophyly. In
effect, this book is written for researchers and for students embarking on
careers in research.
A note on our references: faced with an almost overwhelming
embarrassment of riches in the scientific literature, we had to be selective.
Whenever possible, we cite review articles rather than long lists of relevant
studies, we cite only the most trenchant reports (usually flagged with “e.g.”)
among many alternatives, and we prefer to cite articles readily available
from widely disseminated online sources (such as JSTOR) rather than those
sequestered behind corporate paywalls. In other words, despite its length,
our reference list is not exhaustive, and we apologize in advance for any
blameworthy omissions.I
PHYLOGENETIC CONTEXT AND
HISTORICAL BIOGEOGRAPHY1
Metatheria and Marsupialia
Marsupials and placentals are sister taxa that include all living members of
Theria, the diverse (>6000 species) and familiar group of mammals that
give birth to live young (Fig. 1.1). Egg-laying monotremes (Prototheria) are
another major branch of mammals, but monotremes now consist of just a
few living taxa (echidnas and the platypus). Although marsupials and
placentals are both viviparous, these clades differ in several important
reproductive traits. Among others, gestation (intrauterine development) is
short in marsupials, which are born at an early stage of development and
complete their ontogeny externally, attached to teats that may or may not be
contained in a protective pouch; therefore, most of the total energy transfer
between a marsupial mother and her offspring is accomplished via lactation
rather than placentation. By contrast, placentals typically have a much
longer gestation and are born at a later stage of development, so
placentation accounts for a correspondingly larger fraction of total energy
transfer between mother and offspring (Chapter 6). Unfortunately,
reproductive physiology and the soft tissues that support it are not preserved
in the fossil record, so it is not known when the distinctive reproductive
differences between marsupials and placentals evolved. Lacking such
knowledge, many systematists restrict the names Marsupialia and
Placentalia to the “crown groups” of their respective clades. We follow this
convention and explain its use to distinguish marsupials (sensu stricto) from
their extinct relatives below.
Metatheria is the appropriate name for therian mammals that are more
closely related to marsupials than to placentals (Rougier et al., 1998;
Kielan-Jaworowska et al., 2004; Williamson et al., 2014); therefore, allmarsupials are metatherians, but not all metatherians are marsupials. In this
book we use Marsupialia and “marsupials” as equivalent terms for the
metatherian crown group: the clade that contains living metatherians, their
most recent common ancestor, and all of its descendants. Note that
genealogy—not extinction—is the key concept here, because many
marsupials (descendants of the last common ancestor of living
metatherians) are extinct. Extinct metatherians that do not belong to the
crown group are here referred to as stem metatherians. Thus, †Diprotodon
optatum, an extinct rhinoceros-sized (ca. 2800 kg; Wroe et al., 2004)
Pleistocene wombat relative from Australia, is a marsupial because it is
descended from the most recent common ancestor of living metatherians,
but † Mayulestes ferox, a South American Paleocene taxon, is a stem
metatherian because it is not a member of the crown clade (Rougier et al.,
1998; Forasiepi, 2009; Oliveira and Goin, 2015; Beck, 2017).a
Fig. 1.1. Phylogenetic relationships among higher taxa of mammals. Therian crown groups are
shaded. See text for explanations of taxon names.
The earliest known metatherian fossil was formerly thought to be
†Sinodelphys from the Early Cretaceous of China (Luo et al., 2003), but a
recent reanalysis of this and other contemporaneous Chinese fossilssuggests that they are all eutherians; apparently, the oldest known
metatherians are from somewhat younger (Albian, ca. 110 million years old
[Ma]) deposits in western North America (Bi et al., 2018). By the Late
Cretaceous, however, metatherians were widespread in Laurasia, as
indicated by numerous fossil taxa from Asia, North America, and Europe
(Kielan-Jaworowska et al., 2004; Williamson et al., 2014). Although several
metatherian taxa from the Late Cretaceous and Paleogene of North America
—including †Alphadon, †Herpetotherium, †Pediomys, and †Peradectes—
were once considered marsupials (and some were even classified as
didelphids; e.g., by Simpson, 1945), most phylogenetic analyses now
suggest that these were stem taxa rather than members of the crown clade.1
The Laurasian fauna appears to have been much reduced by the end￾Cretaceous (KPg) mass extinction event, and by the middle Miocene,
metatherians had become extinct throughout the northern hemisphere
(Eldridge et al., 2019).Table 1.1  Classification and Geographic Distribution of Recent Marsupials
Living marsupials are currently classified in seven orders, of which three
are restricted to the New World and four to Australasia (Table 1.1).
Opossums (Didelphidae) are placed in their own order, Didelphimorphia,
which is by far the most diverse of the three extant New World clades. The
other two New World orders—Microbiotheria and Paucituberculata—were
moderately diverse in the South American Tertiary (Chapter 2) but now
include just a handful of Recent taxa. Microbiotheria contains only one
living species, Dromiciops gliroides, which inhabits the wet-temperate
forests of Chile and southern Argentina (Hershkovitz, 1999; Patterson and
Rogers, 2008; Fontúrbel et al., 2012; Suárez-Villota et al., 2018). Living
paucituberculatans, sometimes known as “shrew-opossums,” include seven
currently recognized species in three genera that occur in wet-temperate
Patagonian forests and in climatically similar montane vegetation of the
tropical Andes (Patterson, 2008; Ojala-Barbour et al., 2013).Molecular phylogenetic studies consistently recover Didelphimorphia in
one or the other of two positions near the root node of Marsupialia. In
particular, recent analyses based on nuclear exon sequences (Meredith et al.,
2008, 2009; Duchêne et al., 2018) and other analyses based on
retrotransposon insertions (Nilsson et al., 2010; Gallus et al., 2015) place
Didelphimorphia as the sister group to all other marsupials (Fig. 1.2A),
whereas analyses of whole mitochondrial genomes (Mitchell et al., 2014)
and amino-acid alignments (Meredith et al., 2011) recover Paucituberculata
as the sister group to other marsupials (Fig. 1.2B). In the former scenario,
Paucituberculata is the sister group to Australidelphia, a supraordinal clade
that includes Microbiotheria and the Australasian radiation, whereas in the
latter scenario Didelphimorphia and Australidelphia are sister taxa. In both
topologies, the first three interordinal cladogenetic events gave rise to
lineages that are exclusively or primarily restricted to South America, so it
seems probable that much of early marsupial evolution occurred on that
continent.
To avoid confusion with other taxonomic conventions, we use
Didelphidae and “didelphids” as equivalent terms for the didelphimorphian
crown clade: the most recent ancestor of living opossums and all of its
descendants (Voss and Jansa, 2009). Other authors have referred living
opossums to as many as four families, but no multi-family opossum
classification has gained wide currency, and all proposed multi-family
schemes include paraphyletic taxa (e.g., “Marmosidae” sensu Hershkovitz,
1992). Also, to avoid confusion with other conventions, we reserve
Didelphimorphia and “didelphimorphians” for marsupials that are more
closely related to didelphids than to other Recent clades currently ranked as
Linnaean orders. Alternative concepts of Didelphimorphia that include
superficially opossum-like Mesozoic and Paleogene fossil taxa (e.g., Goin,
2003; Case et al., 2005; Gelfo et al., 2009) are not monophyletic.Fig. 1.2. Alternative hypotheses of phylogenetic relationships among New World marsupial orders
and Australasian taxa (Dasyuromorphia + Diprotodontia + Notoryctemorphia + Peramelemorphia):
A, results from analyses of nuclear exon sequences and retrotransposon insertions; B, relationships
based on analyses of whole mitochondrial genomes and amino-acid alignments (see text).
Australidelphia is the supraordinal clade that includes microbiotherians and Australasian marsupials.
Molecular estimates of key dates in didelphimorphian evolution are
important because most metatherian fossils consist of fragmentary
dentitions that are difficult to place phylogenetically, and because neither
didelphimorphians nor didelphids are unambiguously diagnosable by dental
characters (Voss and Jansa, 2009). Unfortunately, molecular estimates of
relevant dates vary widely due to differences in calibration points and
analytic methods. Whereas some node-based relaxed-clock methods suggestthat didelphimorphians split away from other marsupials sometime in the
Late Cretaceous (e.g., 71–86 million years ago [Ma]; Meredith et al., 2008;
Mitchell et al., 2014; Duchêne et al., 2018), other node-based estimates
place the origin of Didelphimorphia in the early Paleocene (ca. 64 Ma;
Jansa et al., 2014), as does a recent “tip-and-node” total-evidence estimate
(Maga and Beck, 2017). Similar uncertainty applies to molecular dating of
the didelphimorphian crown clade, which is usually construed as the split
between the Recent subfamilies Caluromyinae and Didelphinae. Node￾based relaxed-clock methods place this event anywhere from the late
Eocene (ca. 35–38 Ma; Meredith et al., 2008) to the late Oligocene (ca. 26
Ma; Jansa et al., 2014), and a late Oligocene date for the didelphimorphian
crown clade is also recovered by total-evidence dating, with or without
taking the fossilization process and sampling bias into account (Maga and
Beck, 2017; Beck and Taglioretti, 2019).
Taken together, these estimates imply a long interval of stem￾didelphimorphian evolution that preceded the first appearance of modern
(crown-clade) opossums. Whether this interval extended from the Late
Cretaceous to the late Eocene (as suggested by the dates in Meredith et al.,
2008) or from the early Paleocene to the late Oligocene (Jansa et al., 2014;
Beck and Taglioretti, 2019), the probable locus of stem-didelphimorphian
evolution, together with most of the subsequent Neogene diversification of
didelphids, was South America. A South American origin for
Didelphimorphia is suggested both by the absence of unequivocally
marsupial fossils in the North American record and by ancestral-area
reconstructions based on molecular phylogenies (e.g., Voss and Jansa,
2009). Therefore, the only plausible source of tangible clues about the
biogeographic context of early opossum evolution is the geological record
of South America.
a  Here, and subsequently, we use a printer’s dagger (†) to indicate extinct taxa.
NOTE
1. Current differences of opinion about the biogeographic origin of Marsupialia are based on the
contested relationships of several North American fossil taxa. Among recent publications, Case et al.
(2005) suggested that several Late Cretaceous fossils from the western interior of North America areearly representatives of “typically South American” marsupial groups. In particular, they claimed that
† Nortedelphys, a genus they referred to the family † Herpetotheriidae, represents the “Cohort
Ameridelphia” (a group within which they also included didelphids), and that †Ectocentrocristus and
several other extinct genera belong to the “Cohort Australidelphia” (which includes Australasian
marsupials). These inferences are problematic, however, because Case et al. (2005) did not perform
any phylogenetic analyses, and subsequent research has not supported their conclusions. Williamson
et al.’s (2012, 2014) analyses, for example, suggest that whatever †Nortedelphys might be, it is not a
herpetotheriid, whereas †Ectocentrocristus probably is a herpetotheriid and not a close relative of any
australidelphian marsupial. Additionally, no published phylogenetic study supports the monophyly of
Case et al.’s “cohorts.” Instead, their “Ameridelphia” seems to be a hodgepodge of stem and crown￾clade taxa, whereas their concept of Australidelphia includes taxa of genuinely ambiguous
relationships (e.g., †Polydolopidae) and others that clearly belong elsewhere (e.g., †Argyrolagidae,
which appears to be closely related to “ameridelphian” paucituberculatans; Sánchez-Villagra, 2001;
Beck, 2017).
Herpetotheriids, which occur from the Late Cretaceous to the early Miocene of North America,
are strikingly similar to marsupials, especially in possessing a well-developed alisphenoid tympanic
process (Gabbert, 1998), but the cochlea of †Herpetotherium (the only herpetotheriid in which this
organ is well preserved) has fewer cochlear turns than the reconstructed morphology of the marsupial
common ancestor (Horovitz et al., 2008). Although some phylogenetic reconstructions (e.g., Maga
and Beck, 2017) have recovered † Herpetotherium within the crown clade, analyses of the most
extensive dataset yet assembled for New World metatherians (Muizon et al., 2018) suggest that
†Herpetotheriidae is the sister group of Marsupialia.
Peradectids include numerous referred taxa from the Cretaceous and Paleogene of Asia, North
America, Europe, and Africa, but the monophyly of this group remains unsupported by phylogenetic
analyses of available character data (Williamson et al., 2012, 2014). Although most peradectids are
only known from dental fragments, the postcranial skeletons of several ambiguously identified
(allegedly peradectid) specimens from the Eocene of Germany were described by Kurz (2007), and a
well-preserved cranium of †Mimoperadectes houdei from the North American Eocene was described
by Horovitz et al. (2009). A phylogenetic analysis based on this new material recovered
†Peradectidae as the sister taxon of Didelphidae (i.e., within Marsupialia; Horovitz et al., 2009), but
the analyzed character data included at least one substantial error: † Mimoperadectes houdei was
described (and scored for phylogenetic analysis) as having an alisphenoid tympanic process. We
carefully examined the holotype of † M. houdei (USNM 482355, the only peradectid specimen in
which the ear region is preserved) and observed no trace of an alisphenoid tympanic process. Most
subsequent phylogenetic analyses of peradectid relationships (e.g., Maga and Beck, 2017; Muizon et
al., 2018) have recovered peradectids as stem metatherians, not marsupials.
In effect, there seems to be no compelling evidence that any Cretaceous or Tertiary North
American fossil taxon belongs to the crown clade Marsupialia. However, support for
phylogenetically crucial nodes in most published phylogenies is weak, so a North American origin
for Marsupialia is hard to rule out. An additional problem for phylogenetic inference about fossil
metatherians is the predominance of dental characters in most analyzed datasets, with a consequently
high probability of misleading results due to functional and developmental character correlations.
Clearly erroneous relationships among Recent marsupials recovered by parsimony analyses of
craniodental datasets (e.g., by Wilson et al., 2016; Carneiro, 2018) almost certainly result from this
problem. Methods exist for dealing with homoplasious character correlations (Dávalos et al., 2014),
but they have yet to be applied to metatherian phylogenetic inference.2
South America, the Island Continent
By the Late Cretaceous, South America was well on its way to becoming
the island continent it would remain throughout much of the Cenozoic.
Already separated from North America by an open seaway in the Late
Jurassic, South America had also drifted away from Africa as the
supercontinent of Gondwana began its piecemeal breakup, but landbridge
connections between South America, Antarctica, and Australia persisted
(Hay et al., 1999; Veevers, 2004; Seton et al., 2012). Although physical
geology tells us this much (and may eventually tell us more) about Late
Cretaceous geography, additional information can be inferred from fossil
faunas.
Not so long ago, the Late Cretaceous mammalian fauna of South
America was virtually unknown (Patterson and Pascual, 1972; Simpson,
1980). Subsequent discoveries, however, have replaced ignorance and
conjecture with a substantial body of tangible facts. In particular, the rich
Late Cretaceous assemblage from Los Alamitos in northern Patagonia
contains numerous archaic taxa—mostly “dryolestoids” and
gondwanatheres—but not a single therian mammal (Bonaparte, 1990; Goin
et al., 2012). Although the geochronology of the Los Alamitos Formation is
not well constrained, it is thought to be about 75 Ma (Flynn et al., 2012).
Because contemporaneous North American faunas were dominated by
therians (Cifelli et al., 2004; Williamson et al., 2014), the Los Alamitos
assemblage provides compelling evidence that the mammalian faunas of
North and South America were effectively isolated at this time.
By contrast, metatherians are abundantly represented in the
exceptionally well-preserved fossil fauna from Tiupampa, Bolivia, whichwas originally thought to be Late Cretaceous (Marshall and Muizon, 1988),
but is now regarded as Paleocene (Marshall et al., 1997; Gelfo et al., 2009).
Although the Tiupampa fauna (like the fauna from Los Alamitos) lacks
direct geochronological constraints (Flynn and Swisher, 1995), stratigraphic
correlations suggest that it is about 65 Ma (early Paleocene; Muizon et al.,
2018). Therefore, the most that can be said at present is that marsupial
ancestors probably entered South America sometime in the latest
Cretaceous (Maastrichian) or earliest Paleocene, perhaps simultaneously
with archaic “ungulates” and other taxa of undoubted North American
origin (e.g., pantodonts; Muizon et al., 2015), which also make their first
appearance in the South American record at about the same time.
Most paleontologists (e.g., Goin et al., 2012; Wilf et al., 2013) agree that
these arrivals are evidence for some transient connection between the two
American continents, presumably a short-lived Central American
archipelago (Redwood, 2019), but from the late Paleocene onward there is
no evidence that any mammalian faunal exchange occurred between North
and South America for several tens of millions of years. The breakup of the
Gondwanan supercontinent was not yet complete by the end of the
Mesozoic, however, because South America remained connected to
Antarctica. A narrow landbridge extending from Patagonia to the Antarctic
Peninsula, the so-called Weddellian Isthmus, seems to have persisted as a
corridor for faunal exchange throughout most of the Paleocene and perhaps
into the early Eocene (Scher and Martin, 2006; Reguero et al., 2014).
Sometime during this interval, one or more South American marsupial
lineages must have entered Antarctica and crossed the continent to populate
Australia, but that exciting narrative, which is still hypothetical in many
important respects (Woodburne and Case, 1996; Beck et al., 2008; Beck,
2012; Black et al., 2012), lies outside the storyline that leads to modern
opossums.
Although definitive dates for the last dry-land connection between South
America and Antarctica (late Paleocene or early Eocene) and for the final
uplift of the Panamanian isthmus (sometime in the Pliocene) are still
uncertain, there is no doubt that South America was truly an island
continent throughout much of the Tertiary, cut off from other landmasses to
the north and south by open seaways (Wilf et al., 2013). During this long
episode, on the order of 40–50 million years, the fossil record suggests thatonly four immigrant mammalian taxa reached South America. Of these, the
earliest were ancestors of living platyrrhine primates and caviomorph
rodents, both of which arrived sometime in the Eocene, almost certainly by
overwater dispersal, and probably from Africa (Antoine et al., 2011; Bond
et al., 2015). The other two, procyonid carnivorans (which first appear in
the late Miocene record) and cricetid rodents (in the early Pliocene),
heralded the mass invasion of the continent by North American taxa across
the Panamanian landbridge at the end of the Tertiary (Chapter 3).
Canonical accounts of metatherian evolution in insular South America
emphasized the morphological diversity said to have evolved from
“opossum-like” immigrant ancestors (Simpson, 1971, 1980; Patterson and
Pascual, 1972). However, not all contemporaneous researchers were
impressed by the phylogenetic evidence for this scenario (McKenna, 1980).
Such skepticism, which turns out to have been well founded, was prompted
by one of the more bizarre phenotypes assigned to this alleged adaptive
radiation: †Necrolestes, a burrowing, mole-like taxon. In fact, †Necrolestes
exhibits no convincingly diagnostic metatherian trait, and recent
phylogenetic analyses suggest that it was a late-surviving non-therian
“dryolestoid” (Rougier et al., 2012; O’Meara and Thompson, 2014).
Even disembarrassed of † Necrolestes, however, the fossil metatherian
fauna of South America was impressively diverse (Table 2.1). Five South
American metatherian lineages are currently ranked as Linnaean orders
(Didelphimorphia, Microbiotheria, Paucituberculata, † Polydolopimorphia,
and † Sparassodonta), and others might well be recognized as such. The
latter include a number of early (mostly Paleocene and Eocene) groups of
archaic aspect that remain to be convincingly associated with any
conventionally recognized higher taxon. †Caroloameghiniidae, for example,
has alternatively been classified in Didelphimorphia or †Peradectia, but not
on the basis of any explicitly phylogenetic analysis of character data.
Some fossil microbiotherians and paucituberculatans were perhaps not
unlike modern representatives of those groups, and most are thought to
have been rather small (ca. 20–500 g) insectivorous, frugivorous, or
insectivorous-frugivorous species (Abello et al., 2012, 2018).
Microbiotherians (living and extinct) are all rather similar morphologically,
but fossil paucituberculatans were phenotypically diverse, especially in the
Miocene, when several families are known to have occurred sympatricallyat some Patagonian localities. Argyrolagids, among the most unusual of all
South American metatherians, were small bipedal-hopping forms that may
have been herbivorous or granivorous inhabitants of semiarid habitats
(Simpson, 1970; Sánchez-Villagra and Kay, 1997). These odd little
creatures were once thought to be polydolopimorphians, but new
morphological evidence and recent phylogenetic analyses (Sánchez￾Villagra, 2001; Beck, 2017) suggest that they were paucituberculatans.
† Polydolopimorphia is a somewhat problematic taxon that formerly
contained argyrolagids (now believed to have been paucituberculatans).
Most polydolopimorphians have more or less bunodont (blunt-cusped)
molars, but they otherwise defy characterization because of the fragmentary
preservation of many included taxa. Only recently has sufficient
morphological character data become available to assess the relationships of
one included species, †Epidolops ameghinoi, which appears to have been a
metatherian stem taxon rather than a crown-clade marsupial (Beck, 2017).Table 2.1  Known Geological Occurrence of South American Metatherian Lineages
Sparassodonts were carnivorous or hypercarnivorous (exclusively flesh￾eating) metatherians, some of which were impressively large and may have
been convergent in appearance, behavior, and diet with placental
carnivorans. “Hathliacynid” sparassodonts (not, apparently, monophyletic;
Muizon et al., 2018) are often described as dog-like; some borhyaenoids
have been compared with mustelids, bears, or hyenas; and thylacosmilids
are strikingly—if superficially—similar to saber-toothed cats. Whether ornot such comparisons are really meaningful, functional analyses of
sparassodont morphology suggests that this clade was adaptively diverse,
especially in the Miocene (Argot, 2004; Prevosti et al., 2012; but see Croft
et al., 2018). Numerous sparassodonts are represented by well-preserved
fossils, and recent analyses have clarified many previously obscure aspects
of their evolutionary history. Among other phylogenetic inferences based on
current datasets, it now seems clear that sparassodonts were stem
metatherians rather than marsupials (Forasiepi, 2009; Engelman and Croft,
2014; Forasiepi et al., 2015; Muizon et al., 2018).
Only a few well-sampled South American paleofaunas are available to
illustrate taxonomic patterns of metatherian community composition as
these extant and extinct lineages waxed and waned in diversity over time
(Table 2.2). The earliest of these is the Paleocene fauna from Tiupampa,
Bolivia. This assemblage was originally thought to include
didelphimorphians (Marshall and Muizon, 1988; Muizon, 1998), but
subsequent research suggests that the two best-preserved Tiupampan
“didelphimorphians” (†Andinodelphys cochabambensis and †Pucadelphys
andinus) are stem metatherians rather than close opossum relatives
(Engelman and Croft, 2014; Forasiepi et al., 2015; Maga and Beck, 2017),
and the latest phylogenetic analyses place these taxa near the base of the
sparassodont radiation (Muizon et al., 2018). This important fauna also
includes two confirmed sparassodonts (†Mayulestes ferox and †Allqokirus
australis), an alleged microbiotherian ( † Khasia cordillerensis), one
polydolopimorphian ( † Roberthoffstetteria nationalgeographica), and
several species of archaic aspect and uncertain higher-taxonomic affinities.
In summary, with one rather dubious exception (†Khasia; see Carneiro et
al., 2018), most of the Tiupampan metatherians seem to be stem taxa.
By contrast, crown-clade marsupials (paucituberculatans and undoubted
microbiotherians) make up almost half of the early Oligocene fauna from
La Cancha, Argentina, although the dominant clade in terms of number of
species was † Polydolopimorphia (Goin et al., 2010). This remarkable
assemblage—regrettably consisting mostly of isolated teeth—includes the
last known representatives of two archaic lineages, †Caroloameghiniidae
and † Sternbergiidae, each of which is represented by a single species.
Sparassodonts, which dominate many younger (late Oligocene to mid-Miocene) faunas, are represented at La Cancha by just one species of
“hathliacynid.”
Table 2.2  Taxonomic Composition of Five Metatherian Paleofaunas from South America
The early Miocene fauna from the Santa Cruz Formation contains 25
metatherian species—4 microbiotherians, 10 paucituberculatans, and 11
sparassodonts (Abello et al., 2012; Prevosti et al., 2012)—but it is unlikely
that all of these occurred synchronously. A more realistic picture of
Santacrucian diversity is provided by the fauna from Fossiliferous Levels
1–7, which appear to be very close in age (Kay et al., 2012). This
assemblage contains 12 metatherian species, of which fully two-thirds are
sparassodonts. However, other stem metatherians are notably absent, and
although marsupials are present, didelphimorphians are not.
The middle Miocene La Venta fauna from Colombia is one of the earliest
known assemblages that contains unambiguously identifiable
didelphimorphians, and it is the earliest in which marsupials
(didelphimorphians, microbiotherians, and paucituberculatans) comprise the
majority of the metatherian community. Argyrolagids are absent, possibly
because the local paleoclimate (Kay and Madden, 1997) was too humid for
open-country bipedal hoppers. A noteworthy aspect of the La Venta
mammal fauna (which includes >70 species, not including bats) is the
complete absence of any immigrant North American taxa. Despitemolecular data suggesting that intercontinental biotic exchange was well
underway in plants and other organisms by the middle Miocene (Chapter 3),
the La Venta mammal fauna consists exclusively of endemic groups that
had been present in South America since the Eocene: metatherians,
xenarthrans, archaic “ungulates” (astrapotheres, litopterns, notoungulates),
primates, and caviomorph rodents.
The early Pliocene Monte Hermoso Formation is the source of the
earliest well-sampled fauna in which didelphimorphians are the dominant
metatherian group. Montehermosan didelphimorphians include eight
species of didelphids (including one “sparassocynid”).1 Sparassodonts,
nearing the end of their long geological tenure, are represented at Monte
Hermoso by just one “hathliacynid” and one thylacosmilid. Both of the
Montehermosan paucituberculatans are argyrolagids. Caenolestids and
microbiotherians are conspicuously absent at Monte Hermoso, both groups
probably having retreated by this time to the cold-temperate refugia that
both occupy today. Significantly, the Montehermosan fauna also includes
continental newcomers—procyonid carnivorans and cricetid rodents—
whose arrival signaled an end to the prolonged biogeographic isolation of
South America’s native mammals.
NOTE
1. “Sparassocynids,” which were once commonly assumed to be the sister group of didelphids
(e.g., by Forasiepi et al., 2009), are now believed to belong within the didelphid radiation (Beck and
Taglioretti, 2019). They appear to have been small hypercarnivorous creatures, probably adapted to
open habitats, and they differed most conspicuously from other opossums in the anatomy of their ear
region.3
The Great American Biotic Interchange and Its
Aftermath
Closure of the ancient seaways that separated North and South America
throughout much of the Tertiary was a prolonged process. Recently reported
geological evidence suggests the emergence of a Central American island
arc in the late Oligocene, with progressive shallowing of the intervening
straits by tectonic uplift throughout the Miocene; however, narrow marine
connections between the Pacific Ocean and the Caribbean Sea seem to have
persisted until the late Pliocene (Coates and Stallard, 2013; Jackson and
O’Dea, 2013). Dispersal rates of terrestrial organisms between North and
South America (estimated from molecular phylogenies) appear to show
significant increases at about 20 Ma and again at about 6 Ma, presumably in
response to the emergence of insular stepping stones and gap-narrowing,
and it is now clear that intercontinental dispersal proceeded on different
schedules for different groups (Bacon et al., 2015). However, there is no
compelling evidence for wholesale immigration of North American
mammals to South America—or vice versa—prior to emergence of a
definitive landbridge at about 2.8 Ma (Woodburne, 2010; O’Dea et al.,
2016).
As discussed in the preceding chapter, nonvolant North American
mammals are unlikely to have arrived in South America before about 11
Ma, because none are present in the well-sampled fauna from La Venta,
Colombia (Kay et al., 1997b). Additionally, it seems unlikely that many had
arrived before about 5 Ma, when only procyonid carnivorans and cricetid
rodents are recorded from the even better-sampled fauna of Monte
Hermoso, Argentina (Tomassini et al., 2013). Although proboscideans(gomphotheres) and tayassuids (peccaries) have been collected from
Amazonian sediments that are said to be at least 9.5 Ma (Campbell et al.,
2000; Frailey and Campbell, 2012), these claims are controversial (Mothé
and Avilla, 2015), and it seems improbable that such eurytopic large
mammals (living proboscideans and tayassuids occur in a very wide range
of environments, including savannas and deserts) should have lingered in
Amazonia for millions of years before their first appearance in Argentinian
sediments. Although the relevant geological record is ecogeographically
biased—productive fossil localities in South America are concentrated at
temperate latitudes (Carrillo et al., 2015)—and much may still be learned
from tropical paleontology (e.g., Antoine et al., 2016; Bloch et al., 2016),
the evidence at hand still supports essential aspects of the long-accepted
timeline for mammalian participation in the Great American Biotic
Interchange (GABI).
Mammalian faunal exchange following landbridge formation extended
over about 2 million years and involved numerous clades (Webb, 1976,
1985; Marshall et al., 1982). Immigrants to North America from the south
included opossums, sloths, armadillos (including glyptodonts), and
caviomorph rodents, whereas South America was invaded by North
American carnivorans (mustelids, canids, felids), proboscideans,
perissodactyls (tapirs, horses), and artiodactyls (peccaries, camels, deer).
These exchanges substantially increased the higher-taxonomic diversity of
faunas on both continents, allegedly resulting in ecological disequilibria,
but the biotic phenomena responsible for subsequent extinctions have been
widely debated.
It is reasonable to suppose that intercontinental dispersals may have had
a significant impact on South American metatherians because several North
American immigrant clades might have preyed upon or competed with
native taxa. Among early-arriving (pre-landbridge) immigrants that might
have had such adverse effects were procyonid carnivorans and crotaline
viperids (pitvipers). Procyonids first appear in the South American fossil
record at about 7 Ma (Reguero and Candela, 2011), but the earliest known
South American procyonids belong to already-endemic genera (e.g.,
†Cyonasua) that may have descended from even earlier immigrants. Most
Recent procyonids seldom eat opossums, but Procyon cancrivorus, the
largest living raccoon (ca. 3–7 kg; Emmons, 1997), is known to do so (Gattiet al., 2006), and Tertiary South American procyonids were much larger
than P. cancrivorus. Species of †Cyonasua, for example, are estimated to
have weighed between 13 and 28 kg (Tarquini et al., 2018). Additionally,
dental morphology suggests that South American fossil procyonids were
more carnivorous than Recent taxa (Soibelzon, 2011), so they might well
have preyed on opossums and other small metatherians, perhaps including
juvenile and subadult sparassodonts.
The earliest known fossil of a South American pitviper is from
Huayaquerian sediments (probably >6.8 Ma; Flynn and Swisher, 1995) in
central Argentina (Albino and Montalvo, 2006), but molecular dating based
on phylogenies of Recent taxa suggest that bothropoid pitvipers began to
radiate in South America between 10 to 23 Ma (Wüster et al., 2002; Alencar
et al., 2016). Although some living opossums are known to have evolved
impressive resistance to pitviper venom (Jansa and Voss, 2011; Voss and
Jansa, 2012), Miocene metatherians were presumably not venom resistant
and might have been easy prey for ophidian predators endowed with novel
sensory abilities and biochemical weaponry (Chapter 14).
Other immigrant clades that could have had an adverse impact on South
American metatherians as predators or competitors (estimated arrival times
after Woodburne, 2010) include cricetid rodents (6 Ma); canids and
mustelids (2.6 Ma); and cervids, felids, and tapirids (1.8 Ma). Living
canids, felids, and mustelids are known to eat Recent opossums (Chapter
11), and it is reasonable to assume that their extinct ancestors also preyed
on metatherians. Cricetid rodents, deer, and tapirs might seem like unlikely
opossum competitors, but living members of all three clades exhibit
substantial trophic-niche overlap with Recent opossums (Chapter 12). The
arrival times of many other immigrant placental taxa—especially those that
inhabit rainforest environments—are unknown, but it seems probable that
the South American metatherian fauna experienced monotonically
increasing predatory and competitive pressures throughout the episode of
faunal exchange that followed landbridge completion. Whether or not such
interactions were directly responsible for any extinctions, the fact remains
that, of a formerly diverse continental fauna of endemic metatherian
lineages, only didelphids, paucituberculatans, and microbiotherians are
known to have survived to the end of the Pliocene.During the Pleistocene (an interval of almost 2.6 million years), the
South American mammal fauna continued to receive new immigrant groups
and acquired a distinctively new continental character. Besides the
admixture of immigrant and endemic clades, one of the salient features of
the Pleistocene fauna was the extraordinary diversity and ecological
dominance of very large mammals. According to the latest tally (Cione et
al., 2009), over 30 species of late Pleistocene South American mammals
weighed >1000 kg, including ground sloths, glyptodonts, gomphotheres, a
camel, and a few surviving native ungulates (litopterns and notoungulates).
Equally impressive was the roster of large-but-not-gigantic (44–1000 kg)
mammals, which included species of bears, horses, tapirs, deer, peccaries,
and caviid rodents. Of this astonishing late Pleistocene megafauna, totaling
over 80 species, nearly all became extinct within a few thousand years,
approximately coincident with, or following shortly after, the arrival of
humans in South America (Cione et al., 2009).
Species in several other groups not conventionally recognized as
megafauna also went extinct at the end of the Pleistocene, including several
monkeys (Cartelle and Hartwig, 1996; Halenar and Rosenberger, 2013),
several canids (Prevosti et al., 2009), several caviomorph rodents (Kerber et
al., 2016; Mayer et al., 2016; Gomes et al., 2019), and a vampire bat (which
probably fed on megafauna; Trajano and de Vivo, 1991). Of these, all were
the largest in their respective lineages, and all but the vampire bat probably
weighed in excess of 10 kg. By contrast, opossums may have emerged
unscathed from the end-Pleistocene extinction event, presumably because
none was large.1 The largest known fossil didelphid appears to have been
† Thylophorops lorenzinii, a hefty (ca 8.6 kg; Zimicz, 2014) Pliocene
species, but no late Pleistocene opossum is known to have been larger than
the living North American Didelphis virginiana. Insofar as can be
determined from fossilized fragments, all of the didelphid species recorded
from the late Pleistocene are alive today, with the problematic exception of
†Sairadelphys tocantinensis.
2
South America’s indigenous (pre-GABI) mammals are sometimes
alleged to have been competitively inferior to late-arriving immigrant taxa
from North America (e.g., by Webb, 1976; MacFadden, 2006) or to have
been more vulnerable to predation (Faurby and Svenning, 2016). However,
although faunal interchange and subsequent survival may have favoredNorth American taxa in savanna habitats, the reverse was true in forested
environments. Today, descendants of North American immigrant groups
(carnivorans, perissodactyls, artiodactyls, squirrels, and cricetid rodents)
account for fewer than half the species of nonflying mammals in well￾sampled Amazonian faunas (Table 3.1).3 In these diverse communities,
didelphids are the second-most speciose group (after rodents), with a dozen
or more sympatric species recorded at several localities (Voss et al., 2019).
Not only did opossums survive contact with a host of invading placental
mammals before and after landbridge formation, but they successfully
invaded North America as well. As in South America, productive fossil
deposits in North America are concentrated at temperate latitudes, where
the first opossum (Didelphis) is not known to have appeared until about 0.8
Ma (Woodburne, 2010). However, at least 19 didelphid species in nine
genera now occur in tropical North America (Central America and southern
Mexico; Appendix 1), and one species (Didelphis virginiana) has extended
its geographic range in recent decades all the way to Canada, apparently
having become a human commensal in the process (Kanda et al., 2009;
Wright et al., 2012).
The stubborn survival of didelphids in placental-dominated faunas
throughout most of the Western Hemisphere, together with the extant
diversity of didelphids in modern Amazonian rainforests, effectively refute
the widespread stereotype that marsupials are poor competitors or hapless
prey. In the following chapter, we document the taxonomic diversity of
living didelphids and sketch the outlines of the ecological niches that they
currently occupy in communities of Recent mammals.Table 3.1  Nonvolant Rainforest Mammals of Paracou, French Guianaa
NOTES
1. Statistical analyses of Quaternary faunal data suggest that size is the only significant correlate
of late Pleistocene mammalian extinctions in the Western Hemisphere (Lessa and Fariña, 1996; Lessa
et al., 1997), a result consistent with the inference that the end-Pleistocene extinctions were primarily
anthropogenic (Cione et al., 2009; Sandom et al., 2014).
2. This strange taxon (described by Oliveira et al., 2011) exhibits no compelling didelphid
synapomorphies, has several dental traits not seen in any living opossum (e.g., absence of an anterior
cingulum, extreme reduction of M4), and has not been included in any phylogenetic analysis
sufficiently inclusive to test its alleged didelphid affinities. We are not, in fact, convinced that it is
even a marsupial.
3. The participation of bats in the GABI is not well documented in the fossil record, so counting
species descended from indigenous versus immigrant lineages in modern chiropteran faunas is
problematic. The available evidence from fossils and from phylogenetic reconstructions of New
World bat endemism (reviewed by López-Aguirre et al., 2018) suggest complex historical￾biogeographic scenarios rather than a clear distinction between North and South American lineages.II
OPOSSUM CLASSIFICATION AND
DIVERSITY4
Taxonomic Accounts
The classification of Recent didelphids has undergone many changes over
the last two decades, largely as the result of phylogenetic analyses of
genetic and phenotypic datasets. Although some nodes in opossum
phylogeny remain problematic, all of the monophyletic groups currently
ranked as subfamilies, tribes, and genera are robustly supported by a wide
range of evidence, including nuclear exon sequences, whole mitochondrial
genomes, karyotypes, and morphology (Voss and Jansa, 2009; Mitchell et
al., 2014; Amador and Giannini, 2016).
The following accounts provide thumbnail sketches of each genus and
higher taxon currently regarded as valid, including key aspects of
geographic distribution, habitats, behavior, and diet. Inevitably, much is
known about widespread and commonly encountered taxa, whose accounts
are correspondingly detailed, whereas less is known about others, whose
accounts are unavoidably brief. Unfortunately, the absence of definite
natural history information for some taxa has been supplemented with
conjecture and imagination in the semipopular literature, and it is useful to
identify such fictions here.
Subfamily Caluromyinae
Caluromyines include two genera, Caluromys (with three currently
recognized species) and Caluromysiops (with one). The monophyly of this
subfamily is strongly supported by phylogenetic analyses of both
morphological and molecular datasets (e.g., Voss and Jansa, 2009). Three of
the four living species are South American endemics, but one (Caluromys
derbianus) extends its range northward into Central America and southernMexico. These are medium-size (ca. 200–500 g) opossums with woolly fur,
long tails, and large eyes; all are thought to be highly arboreal and
predominantly frugivorous. To some primatologists, caluromyines closely
resemble cheirogaleid lemurs, and it has been suggested that they are
appropriate living models for testing adaptive hypotheses about early
primate evolution (Rasmussen, 1990).
Caluromys
Species of Caluromys (Fig. 4.1) occur in rainforest and semideciduous
forest from southern Mexico to northeastern Argentina. The South
American species occur in lowland forests, but Central American C.
derbianus is said to occur from sea level to about 2500 m (Bucher and
Hoffman, 1980). Trapping studies (e.g., Malcolm, 1991; Patton et al., 2000;
Lambert et al., 2005), spool-and-line tracking (Miles et al., 1981), nest
location (Delciellos et al., 2006; Lira et al., 2018), and direct observations
of free-ranging individuals (e.g., Charles-Dominique et al., 1981;
Rasmussen, 1990) provide compelling evidence that these opossums are
primarily active in the canopy and subcanopy and seldom descend to
ground level. Species of Caluromys are agile climbers—with strongly
prehensile appendages and strikingly primate-like gaits (Schmitt and
Lemelin, 2002; Lemelin and Schmitt, 2007; Youlatos, 2008, 2010; Dalloz et
al., 2012)—and foraging individuals make extensive use of small-diameter
supports, especially fine terminal branches (Rasmussen, 1990).Fig. 4.1. Caluromys derbianus in lowland dry forest near Diriamba, Carazo, Nicaragua (photo by
José Martínez)
The diet of Caluromys is thought to consist primarily of fruit, but
arthropods and small vertebrates are also eaten occasionally (Charles￾Dominique et al., 1981; Atramentowicz, 1982; Rasmussen, 1990; Casella
and Cáceres, 2006; Lessa and da Costa, 2010).1 In the most thorough field
study of any species of Caluromys to date, approximately 75% of the diet of
C. philander in a French Guianan rainforest was estimated to consist of
fruits, which included those of at least 23 species of trees, lianas, and
hemiepiphytes (Charles-Dominique et al., 1981; Atramentowicz, 1982,
1988). Additionally, all three species of Caluromys are known to visit
flowers to feed on nectar, which may be an important carbohydrate resource
in the dry season, when fruit is scarce (Chapter 9). Caluromys philander has
also been observed to eat gum, a possibly important source of complex
carbohydrates, for which its enlarged caecum might be a digestive
adaptation (Charles-Dominique et al., 1981). Most of the arthropods eaten
by Caluromys are insects (Charles-Dominique et al., 1981; Lessa and da
Costa, 2010), some of which are caught by patient visual and olfactory
searches along branches, but flying insects are sometimes snatched in
midair (Rasmussen, 1990). Among other reports of vertebrate predation,
Casella and Cáceres (2006) found the remains of birds and mammals in
dissected digestive tracts of C. lanatus from southeastern Brazil, and thisspecies is also known to enter live traps to eat cricetid rodents (Camargo et
al., 2017). We have observed C. philander to be attracted to bats caught in
mistnets, and it seems plausible that bats often fall prey to these opossums
while both are foraging in the canopies of fruiting or flowering trees.
Caluromysiops
The only currently recognized species of Caluromysiops, C. irrupta (Fig.
4.2), is known from fewer than a dozen museum specimens and from
several unvouchered observations, all of which were obtained at widely
scattered Amazonian rainforest localities in Peru and Brazil (Santori et al.,
2016). Caluromysiops is morphologically similar to Caluromys, so it is
probably ecologically similar as well, but field observations of behavior are
only available from a single Peruvian site where L.H. Emmons and her
colleagues watched free-ranging individuals in mature floodplain forest. At
this locality C. irrupta was repeatedly observed in the canopy at night (Fig.
4.2), where it visited flowers of the tree Quararibea cordata
(Bombacaceae) to consume nectar (Janson et al., 1981; Emmons, 2008).
Captive individuals eat fruit, and some are reported to also eat crickets,
newly hatched chicks, and mice (Collins, 1973).
Fig. 4.2. Caluromysiops irrupta in the subcanopy of lowland rainforest at Cocha Cashu, Madre de
Dios, Peru (photo by Louise H. Emmons)Subfamily Glironiinae
Glironia
The subfamily Glironiinae contains only Glironia venusta, the so-called
bushy-tailed opossum (Fig. 4.3). Rarely encountered over a wide
geographic range, this species seems to occur in both primary forest and
secondary vegetation throughout much of lowland Amazonia (Díaz and
Willig, 2004; Calzada et al., 2008; Ardente et al., 2013), but observations
and collected specimens have also been reported from dry forests (e.g., in
eastern Bolivia; Tarifa and Anderson, 1997) and in lower-montane Andean
forests (Arguero et al., 2017). This small (<200 g)2 opossum is either the
sister taxon of other Recent didelphids, the sister taxon of Hyladelphinae +
Didelphinae, or the sister taxon of Caluromyinae (Voss and Jansa, 2009;
Mitchell et al., 2014). Whichever position it occupies, G. venusta represents
a very long branch in didelphid phylogeny (Chapter 14) and exhibits
unusual morphological traits not seen or seldom seen in other opossums—
including enormous orbital fossae; large, strongly recurved, and laterally
compressed claws; and a weak dentition—all of which hint at distinctive
behaviors. Unfortunately, most published observations of free-ranging
individuals are based on fleeting glimpses; stomach contents of collected
specimens have never been examined, and rare opportunities to observe the
behavior of living captives have been unproductive. Therefore, little is
known about the natural history of this species.Fig. 4.3. Glironia venusta in lowland rainforest near Paranaíta, Mato Grosso, Brazil (photo by Thiago
da Silveira)
Free-ranging individuals have almost always been observed in trees (at
reported heights of 2–15 m above the ground), where they seem equally
agile climbing on large-diameter trunks, slender vertical stems, or vines;
there is one observation of an individual emerging from a tree hole at dusk
and ascending to the canopy, and other individuals first observed in
subcanopy vegetation subsequently retreated into the canopy when
disturbed (Emmons, 1997; Calzada et al., 2008; Silveira et al., 2014). The
rapid, nervous, squirrel-like movements of Glironia venusta, which include
leaping from one aboveground support to another and rapid movements on
large-diameter vertical trunks, are quite unlike the slower, more deliberateclimbing behavior of most other opossums (Emmons, 1997; Calzada et al.,
2008). Dietary information about G. venusta is almost entirely lacking.
Emmons (1997) reported one individual that seemed to be hunting insects
but at one point spent many seconds licking something from a branch, and
Silveira et al. (2014) observed a group of three juveniles licking up fluid
that seeped from cracks in a tree trunk. Despite such evidence of exudate
feeding, Glironia exhibits no dental adaptations for bark-gouging, so it
seems unlikely that exudates are a major food resource.
Subfamily Hyladelphinae
Hyladelphys
The subfamily Hyladelphinae contains only Hyladelphys kalinowskii, a tiny
(ca. 10–20 g) species that was first described in 1992 and is still known
from just a few specimens (Fig. 4.4). All known collecting localities and
sight records are from the Amazonian lowlands of eastern Peru, northern
Brazil, and the Guianas (Astúa, 2006). Phylogenetic analyses of molecular
data suggest that Hyladelphys is the sister taxon of the subfamily
Didelphinae (Chapter 14), and several of its morphological characteristics
are consistent with its intermediate position between caluromyines and
didelphines (Jansa and Voss, 2005).
The scant available natural history information about Hyladelphys
kalinowskii comes from haphazard encounters and a few individuals
trapped in the course of faunal inventories. To date, all reported nocturnal
observations of this species have been of individuals perched on stems,
leaves, or lianas within a few meters of the ground, and all diurnal
encounters have been of individuals asleep in leaf nests attached to
understory vegetation (Voss et al., 2001; P. Peloso, personal commun.;
Catzeflis, 2018), so it seems reasonable to infer that H. kalinowskii is
arboreal but probably not a canopy-dweller. In French Guiana, this species
has been found in both well-drained and swampy primary forest, in
secondary vegetation, and in native houses surrounded by slash-and-burn
garden plots (Catzeflis, 2018).
The nests occupied by Hyladelphys kalinowskii are of exceptional
interest because the leaves from which they are built are cemented together
and anchored to nearby vegetation by a mysterious white substance ofunknown origin (Catzeflis, 2018). A single individual maintained alive for a
few days at a field station ate orthopterans and fruit (Catzeflis, 2018), but
nothing else is known about the diet of this species.
Fig. 4.4. Hyladelphys kalinowskii in lowland rainforest near Oiapoque, Amapá, Brazil (above; photo
by Pedro Peloso) and in a leaf nest at La Trinité Natural Reserve, French Guiana (below; photo by
Antoine Fouquet)
Subfamily Didelphinae
The monophyly of Didelphinae, a clade that includes about 95% of living
opossums, is strongly supported by phylogenetic analyses of molecular
sequences, but it is not consistently recovered by analyses of morphological
data (Voss and Jansa, 2009). Several robustly supported clades withinDidelphinae are currently ranked as tribes in the Linnaean hierarchy:
Marmosini (Marmosa, Monodelphis, Tlacuatzin), Metachirini (Metachirus),
Didelphini (Chironectes, Didelphis, Lutreolina, Philander), and Thylamyini
(Chacodelphys, Cryptonanus, Gracilinanus, Lestodelphys, Marmosops,
Thylamys). Although Didelphini was long recognized as a clade by virtue of
a distinctive karyotype and large body size (e.g., by Reig et al., 1987), the
contents of Marmosini and Thylamyini were not effectively sorted out until
the advent of modern molecular systematics.
Tribe Marmosini
The term “marmosines” was formerly used synonymously with “murine
opossums” or “mouse opossums” to refer to the species that Tate (1933)
included in the genus Marmosa (sensu lato). In this book, however, we use
“marmosines” to refer to members of the monophyletic group that includes
Marmosa (sensu stricto), Monodelphis, and Tlacuatzin, but we will seldom
have cause to do so because this tribe has few diagnostic morphological
traits, and none that are unique to it. In effect, this is a genealogical
grouping of adaptively divergent forms for which only molecular support is
currently available.
Marmosa
Throughout most of the last century, the genus Marmosa (sensu Tate, 1933)
contained a phylogenetically heterogeneous collection of small, pouchless,
long-tailed, black-masked didelphids, including many species that are now
referred to other genera (Rossi et al., 2010). As defined by Voss and Jansa
(2009), Marmosa now includes Micoureus (formerly recognized as a valid
genus; Gardner, 2008) as a subgenus. Other subgenera (besides the
nominotypical subgenus) include Eomarmosa, Exulomarmosa, and
Stegomarmosa (Voss et al., 2014). The 18 currently recognized species of
Marmosa collectively range from northeastern Mexico (Tamaulipas)
throughout Central America and tropical South America to northern
Argentina. Most species occur in lowland rainforest (Fig. 4.5), but a few
inhabit gallery forests in savanna landscapes (Smith and Owen, 2015),
desert thornscrub (Thielen et al., 1997a), and montane forest (Nadkarni and
Wheelwright, 2000).Trapping results (e.g., O’Connell, 1979; Malcolm, 1991; Leite et al.,
1996; Lambert et al., 2005), spool-and-line tracking (Prevedello et al.,
2009), observations of free-ranging animals in the wild (Enders, 1935;
Charles-Dominique et al., 1981), and laboratory studies of locomotion (e.g.,
Delciellos and Vieira, 2006, 2009b) all suggest that species of Marmosa are
agile climbers that often use small-diameter arboreal substrates. Animals
released in capture-mark-recapture studies almost always choose arboreal
rather than terrestrial escape routes (O’Connell, 1979; Miles et al., 1981;
Prevedello et al., 2009), and nests are usually in abandoned bird nests, palm
crowns, tree cavities, and other arboreal refugia (Enders, 1935; Miles et al.,
1981; Timm and LaVal, 2000; Moraes and Chiarello, 2005b; Delciellos et
al., 2006). Apparently, species of the subgenus Micoureus are more
frequently active in the canopy and subcanopy than sympatric species of the
subgenus Marmosa, which are more often observed or captured in
understory vegetation (Charles-Dominique et al., 1981; Lambert et al.,
2005). Some species (e.g., M. isthmica, M. murina, M. macrotarsus) seem
to prefer dense secondary growth and other kinds of disturbed habitats to
climax vegetation (Enders, 1935; Guillemin et al., 2001; Voss et al., 2019).
In fact, members of the subgenus Micoureus seem to be the only species of
Marmosa commonly captured in tall primary forest (Malcolm, 1991; Patton
et al., 2000; Voss et al., 2001).Fig. 4.5. Marmosa zeledoni eating a cicada in understory vegetation at La Selva, Heredia, Costa Rica
(photo by Víctor Acosta-Chaves)
Published dietary analyses based on feces recovered from live-trapped
animals (e.g., Thielen et al., 1997b; Cáceres et al., 2002; Pinheiro et al.,
2002; Pires et al., 2012) invariably report that arthropods (mostly insects)
are more frequently eaten than fruit (as identified by ingested seeds).
However, these results might be biased (underestimating the importance of
fruit) if only the pulp of large-seeded fruits is consumed, and direct
observations of feeding behavior by free-ranging individuals suggests that
this may be the case (Charles-Dominique et al., 1981). Nevertheless, the
feeding behavior of both free-ranging individuals and captives (which
cannot be maintained on a fruit-only diet) clearly indicates that large insectsare actively stalked and avidly consumed (Enders, 1935; Acosta-Chaves et
al., 2018), and some species live in habitats where fruit is only available
seasonally, apparently subsisting exclusively on insects when fruit is scarce
(Thielen et al., 1997b). Small vertebrates (e.g., birds and amphibians) are
known to be eaten occasionally (Charles-Dominique et al., 1981; Cáceres et
al., 2002; Casella and Cáceres, 2006; Lessa and da Costa, 2010; Acosta￾Chaves et al., 2018), as are certain fruit-like flowers (Sperr et al., 2008) and
nectar (Janson and Emmons, 1990).
Monodelphis
Species of Monodelphis (Fig. 4.6) are small (<150 g) shrew-like opossums
with proportionately smaller eyes and ears than other didelphids; the limbs
and tail are short, and the tail lacks external modifications for prehension.
Also unlike other opossums—which are almost invariably drab, with
unpatterned substrate-matching fur in various shades of dull brown or gray
—several species of Monodelphis are brightly colored, and other species
have chipmunk-like dorsal stripes (see color photographs in Pavan et al.,
2014; Pavan and Voss, 2016). This genus includes 24 species in five
subgenera (Appendix 1) that collectively range from eastern Panama to
northern Argentina. Most species occur in lowland rainforest, but a few
(such as M. gardneri) occur in montane forest (Solari et al., 2012), some
(e.g., M. domestica) occur in dry forests (Streilein, 1982a), and at least one
(M. dimidiata) occurs in temperate grasslands (Pine et al., 1985; Baladrón
et al., 2012).Fig. 4.6. Monodelphis americana near Brasilia, Distrito Federal, Brazil (above; photo by Rodrigo
Conte); M. touan from French Guiana (below; photo by Antoine Baglan)
Many trapping studies (e.g., O’Connell, 1979; Malcolm, 1991; Patton et
al., 2000; Vieira and Monteiro-Filho, 2003; Lambert et al., 2005), one
radio-tracking study (Charles-Dominique et al., 1981), and numerous
haphazard observations reported by authors (e.g., Goeldi, 1894; Davis,
1947; Voss and Emmons, 1996) convincingly document the terrestrial
habits of Monodelphis, rainforest species of which forage in the litter layer,
inside hollow logs, under fallen trees, and in other dark ground-level refugia
sheltered and carpeted by decaying vegetable debris. However, some
species are said to occupy nests that may be a meter or more above ground
level (Davis, 1947; González and Claramunt, 2000). Although captiveindividuals are reportedly able to climb (Streilein, 1982a; González and
Claramunt, 2000), M. domestica is slow and unsteady when walking on
small-diameter substrates (Pridmore, 1992; Lemelin et al., 2003; Lammers
and Biknevicius, 2004), and it has obvious difficulty maintaining its balance
on slender branches that other opossums navigate with ease (Lemelin and
Schmitt, 2007). Most unusually (for didelphids), several species of
Monodelphis are known to be diurnally active—including M. americana,
M. dimidiata, M. emiliae, M. kunsi, M. scalops, and M. touan (see Davis,
1947; Nitikman and Mares, 1987; Charles-Dominique et al., 1981; Pine et
al., 1985; Vieira and Paise, 2011; Pheasey et al., 2018; Voss et al., 2019)—
whereas only one species (M. domestica) is definitely known to be
nocturnal (Streilein, 1982a; Seelke et al., 2014).
Consistent with their shrew-like appearance, species of Monodelphis are
restless, active predators that attack a wide range of invertebrate and
vertebrate prey. Examination of digestive tracts of wild-caught animals
consistently suggests a primarily insectivorous diet (Busch and Kravetz,
1991; Casella and Cáceres, 2006; Castilheiro and Filho, 2013), and captives
readily consume a wide variety of terrestrial arthropods (González and
Claramunt, 2000), including scorpions (Streilein, 1982a; Pheasey et al.,
2018). However, digestive tracts of M. dimidiata frequently also contain
rodent remains (Busch and Kravetz, 1991; Casella and Cáceres, 2006),
feces of M. domestica not infrequently contain squamate bones or scales
(Carvalho et al., 2019), and captives of several species of Monodelphis have
been observed to kill and eat frogs, squamates, and mice (Goeldi, 1894;
Streilein, 1982a; González and Claramunt, 2000; Pheasey et al., 2018).
Although seeds are sometimes found in stomachs of wild-caught
individuals, fruit does not appear to be an important part of natural diets
based on the studies cited above.
Tlacuatzin
A recent revision of Tlacuatzin, an endemic Mexican genus, recognized five
species (Arcangeli et al., 2018), four of which were formerly treated as
subspecies or synonyms of T. canescens (Fig. 4.7). These are small
opossums (about 40–60 g; Zarza et al., 2003) that externally resemble
Marmosa—pouchless, with long prehensile tails and blackish facial masks
—but they have 22 diploid chromosomes (Marmosa has 2n = 14), and thetwo genera differ in several technical details of craniodental morphology
(Voss and Jansa, 2003). The genus is widely distributed in tropical and
subtropical dry forests in western Mexico, the Yucatan Peninsula, and the
Tres Marias Islands.
Fig. 4.7. Tlacuatzin sinaloae in dry forest near the Chamela-Cuixmala biological station, Jalisco,
Mexico (photo by Elí García-Padilla)
Trapping studies suggest that Tlacuatzin is predominantly arboreal,
although it is sometimes also captured on the ground (Ceballos, 1990;
Kennedy et al., 2013), and some of the habitats in which it is found are so
sparsely vegetated that terrestrial locomotion must be frequent. Mating
occurs in trees, however, with both partners suspended upside down bytheir tails (Valtierra-Azotla and García, 1998), a copulatory posture that
strikingly resembles that described for captive Marmosa (Barnes and
Barthold, 1969). Most nests (made of dry leaves and lined with grasses or
plant fibers) are in tree cavities or shrubs, but abandoned bird nests are also
used as diurnal refugia (Ceballos, 1990). Species of Tlacuatzin seem to be
primarily insectivorous—feces of trapped individuals contain only insect
remains—although small vertebrates (e.g., lizards) and perhaps fruit are
also eaten (Ceballos, 1990; Zarza et al., 2003). At least one species, T.
balsasensis, is also known to visit cactus flowers to consume nectar (Ibarra￾Cerdeña et al., 2007), which is perhaps a seasonally important source of
calories and/or water.
Tribe Metachirini
Metachirus
The tribe Metachirini contains a single genus, Metachirus, that occurs in
lowland rainforests from southern Mexico to northern Argentina (Fig. 4.8).
Only one species, M. nudicaudatus, was recognized as valid for many
years, but Voss et al. (2019) summarized molecular and morphological
evidence for recognizing a second species, M. myosuros. These are large
(ca. 260–480 g), long-limbed opossums with tails that lack external
modifications for prehension. They superficially resemble species of
Philander (members of the tribe Didelphini) by having a conspicuous pale
spot above each eye, but Metachirus and Philander (both commonly known
as “four-eyed” opossums) are dissimilar in many other external and
craniodental traits and are not closely related to one another (Voss and
Jansa, 2009).
Whereas most rainforest opossums are arboreal or semiarboreal, species
of Metachirus are almost exclusively terrestrial. This behavior is
convincingly documented by spool-and-line tracking of individual animals
(Miles et al., 1981; Cunha and Vieira, 2002) and by numerous trapping
studies (e.g., Malcolm, 1991; Guillemin et al., 2001; Lambert et al., 2005),
all of which suggest that species of Metachirus seldom leave the ground.
Unusually for rainforest opossums, which typically nest in trees, nests of
Metachirus are constructed on the ground and carefully concealed in the
litter (Miles et al., 1981; Loretto et al., 2005).3 Equally remarkable is thecursorial gait of Metachirus, which flees by running rapidly away on the
forest floor, whereas many other sympatric opossums climb rather than run
to escape danger (Miles et al., 1981; personal obs.). Several aspects of the
postcranial skeleton and musculature of Metachirus are plausibly
interpreted as cursorial adaptations (Grand, 1983; Argot 2001, 2002, 2003),
and M. myosuros was found to be the most inept climber of seven rainforest
didelphids tested in the laboratory for acrobatic performance (Delciellos
and Vieira, 2009a).
Information about the diet of Metachirus is almost entirely based on
analyses of feces, which, unfortunately, are subject to several known
sources of bias (Chapter 9). Nevertheless, three studies with reasonably
large sample sizes suggest that M. myosuros (M. “nudicaudatus” of authors)
is predominantly insectivorous but also eats fruit and, occasionally, small
vertebrates (Santori et al., 1995; Cáceres, 2004; Lessa and da Costa, 2010).
Because species of Metachirus do not climb, most of the fruit they consume
probably consists of items picked and discarded by canopy frugivores.
Interestingly, M. myosuros seems to eat social insects—ants and termites—
in larger numbers than other sympatric opossums (Mathews, 1977; Santori
et al., 1995; Cáceres, 2004; Lessa and da Costa, 2010), although it exhibits
no apparent morphological adaptations for myrmecophagy. Unlike some
large opossums (members of the tribe Didelphini, see below), Metachirus is
not resistant to snake venom (Perales et al., 1994), and it is not known to eat
snakes.Fig. 4.8. Metachirus myosuros captured in lower-montane moist forest near Peñas Blancas Massif
Natural Reserve, Jinotega, Nicaragua (above). Details of nursing young (bottom left) and cranial
vibrissae (bottom right) are from the same individual. (Photos by Fiona Reid)
Tribe Didelphini
Members of the tribe Didelphini are large opossums, with average adult
weights of 300 g or more, and the largest species (Didelphis virginiana) can
weigh as much as 5000 g. In most other external traits, however, the four
living genera—Chironectes, Lutreolina, Philander, and Didelphis—are
strikingly dissimilar, and each occupies a distinct trophic niche in the
Neotropical ecosystems they inhabit. Despite this adaptive diversity, tribal
monophyly is supported by an impressive number of unique morphological
traits (Voss and Jansa, 2009).
Chironectes
Chironectes includes just the water opossum or yapok (C. minimus), which
occurs in tropical and subtropical forests from southern Mexico to Uruguay(Fig. 4.9). The world’s only semiaquatic marsupial, C. minimus is boldly
marked dorsally with black and silver bars and exhibits numerous
morphological adaptations to its unusual lifestyle. Among others, the fur is
water repellent, the hind feet are fully webbed, and the marsupium can be
closed to prevent pouch young from drowning (Enders, 1937; Augustiny,
1942). The hands are very large, with greatly elongated digits that end in
fleshy pads and vestigial claws; a fleshy tubercle supported internally by an
enlarged pisiform bone on the lateral aspect of the wrist may serve as a
rudimentary sixth digit; and the plantar epithelium exhibits several unusual
features that include unique sensory organs (Chapter 5). The tail is not
laterally flattened or otherwise modified for aquatic propulsion; although
lacking external modifications for prehension, it can be used for grasping
and transporting nest materials (Oliver, 1976).
Water opossums swim with alternate strokes of their webbed hind feet;
the forefeet and tail are not used for rectilinear swimming (Mondolfi and
Padilla, 1957; Fish, 1993). Although Chironectes is sometimes said not to
climb, individuals have been reliably reported to do so on occasion, rapidly
ascending slender streamside trees to escape human intruders (F.A. Reid,
pers. commun.). Water opossums forage in streams, so home ranges are
effectively linear and dendritic, tracing the course of local drainage patterns
(Galliez et al., 2009). Diurnal refugia are usually in shallow cavities among
stones and tree roots near the water’s edge (Zetek, 1930; Galliez et al.,
2009; Palmeirim et al., 2014), but water opossums have also been seen to
enter streamside burrows (presumably those made by other mammals, since
the nearly clawless forefeet are conspicuously unsuited for digging).
Chironectes uses its hands, which are sensitive tactile organs (Chapter 5), to
search for food in shallow water, a behavior similar to that observed in
raccoons and clawless otters (Mondolfi and Padilla, 1957; Davis, 1966;
Oliver, 1976). Anecdotal observations of stomach contents and prey
remains found in dens suggest that the natural diet of C. minimus consists
largely of freshwater crustaceans and fish (Zetek, 1930; Mondolfi and
Padilla, 1957). Captive individuals eat shrimp, fish, terrestrial vertebrates
(e.g., mice), and raw meat, but not fruit (Zetek, 1930; Davis, 1966;
Rosenthal, 1975; Oliver, 1976).4Fig. 4.9. Chironectes minimus on a stream bank in lowland moist forest, Bartola Wildlife Refuge, Río
San Juan, Nicaragua (photo by Fiona Reid)
Didelphis
Species of Didelphis (Fig. 4.10), sometimes known as “common
opossums,” are the largest living New World marsupials (ca. 600–5000 g).
They occur from southern Canada to central Argentina (approximately from
49° N to 39° S) and inhabit a wide range of environments, including
temperate woodlands and grasslands, tropical rainforests, tropical dry
forests, and savannas (Gardner, 1982; Cerqueira, 1985). Although six
species are currently recognized, only the Virginia opossum (D. virginiana),
black-eared opossums (D. auritus and D. marsupialis), and white-eared
opossums (D. albiventris, D. imperfecta, and D. pernigra) seem to be
phenotypically and ecologically distinct. Species of Didelphis are usually
allopatric, but the geographic ranges of D. virginiana and D. marsupialis
overlap in Mexico and northern Central America, where they are sometimes
sympatric but not, apparently, syntopic (Gardner, 1982). Similarly, the
ranges of black-eared and white-eared opossums sometimes overlap in
South America, where sympatry has been documented at several localities
(e.g., Cerqueira, 1985; Catzeflis et al., 1997). In South America, black￾eared opossums are predominantly lowland rainforest species, whereas
white-eared opossums typically inhabit temperate grasslands, savannas, dry
forests, montane forests, and alpine habitats (Handley, 1976; Cerqueira,
1985; Mares et al., 1989; Durant, 2002).Fig. 4.10. Didelphis albiventris in dry forest near Santo Tomé, Santa Fe, Argentina (above; photo by
Eduardo Beltrocco); a museum specimen of the same species showing white underfur (below; photo
by Craig Chesek)
Species of Didelphis are scansorial opossums that spend most of their
time on the ground, but they are also competent climbers. Predominantly
terrestrial locomotion is a practical necessity for D. virginiana and white￾eared opossums, both of which normally live in habitats with broken or
discontinuous woodland canopies, and which sometimes live in almost
treeless landscapes. Although black-eared opossums live in tall closed￾canopy forests, trapping studies (e.g., Malcolm, 1991; Lambert et al., 2005),
spool-and-line-tracking (Miles et al., 1981), and direct observations
(Charles-Dominique et al., 1981; Janson et al., 1981; Rasmussen, 1990;Tschapka and von Helversen, 1999) suggest that they are primarily active
on the ground or in understory vegetation, climbing trees only to rest,
groom, eat fruit, or visit nectar-producing flowers. In particular, spool-and￾line tracking suggests that D. marsupialis does not travel through the
canopy; instead, it ascends and descends by the same or adjacent trees
(Miles et al., 1981). Both black-eared and white-eared opossums released in
the course of capture-mark-recapture studies normally choose terrestrial
escape routes, even when trees are nearby (Streilein, 1982a; Fleck and
Harder, 1995). However, whereas D. virginiana and white-eared opossums
normally use terrestrial daytime refugia (burrows, hollow logs, crevices
among rocks; Hamilton, 1958; Streilein, 1982a), nests of D. marsupialis
and D. auritus are often in trees (Miles et al., 1981; Delciellos et al., 2006).
Although usually described as omnivores, common opossums are
perhaps more accurately described as generalized predators that also eat
fruit when it is available. Didelphis virginiana and white-eared opossums,
in particular, live in seasonal habitats where fruit is scarce or unavailable for
much of the year. Natural history studies of D. virginiana (reviewed by
Gardner, 1982) convincingly establish that the bulk of the natural diet of
this temperate species consists of small vertebrates (e.g., rabbits, rodents,
shrews, moles, ground-nesting birds, reptiles, and amphibians), but
invertebrates (especially insects and earthworms) also comprise a
substantial fraction, and fruit is often eaten in the summer and fall. In
anthropogenic landscapes, D. virginiana also eats a wide range of
agricultural products and other items that do not occur in undisturbed
natural habitats. The only dietary study of a Neotropical common opossum
based on a large sample of stomach contents (Cordero and Nicholas, 1987)
found that birds, mammals, insects, and fruit (in that order) were the most
important dietary items for D. marsupialis in anthropogenic landscapes of
northern Venezuela, but fecal analyses suggest that D. auritus might eat
more fruit in the Atlantic Forest than congeneric species do in other biomes
(Santori et al., 1995; Cáceres and Monteiro-Filho, 2001; Ceotto et al.,
2009). All dietary studies of common opossums, however, suggest that they
frequently eat small vertebrates. Several species (D. albiventris, D. aurita,
and D. virginiana) are known to eat venomous snakes and to be resistant to
snake venom (Voss and Jansa, 2012). Other unusual items in reported diets
of common opossums are toads (Hamilton, 1958; Garrett and Boyer, 1993;Laurance and Laurance, 2007) and the terrestrial (eft) stage of newts (Hart
et al., 2019), so it seems probable that Didelphis is also resistant to the
potent cardiotoxic and neurotoxic defenses of amphibians (Chapter 6).
Lutreolina
The genus Lutreolina includes just two species. The more widespread taxon
is L. crassicaudata (Fig. 4.11), which has a disjunct geographic range in
humid tropical and subtropical grasslands north and south of Amazonia. In
the northern part of its distribution, L. crassicaudata is found in the Llanos
and other savanna landscapes of Colombia, Venezuela, and Guyana. South
of the Amazon, L. crassicaudata inhabits the Cerrado, Pantanal, Pampas,
and contiguous grass- and sedge-dominated habitats of Paraguay, Uruguay,
eastern Bolivia, southern Brazil, and northern Argentina. However, at least
one insular population is known to occur in secondary forest (Cáceres et al.,
2002). A second species, L. massoia, occurs in montane forests of the Andes
in northwestern Argentina and southeastern Bolivia (Martínez-Lanfranco et
al., 2014).
Species of Lutreolina are strikingly weasel- or mink-like in external
appearance, with small eyes and ears, an elongate body, and short limbs; the
tail lacks external modifications for prehension. Because L. crassicaudata
usually occurs in treeless habitats, its normal locomotion must be
predominantly terrestrial. Although this opossum is alleged to swim and
dive well (e.g., by Marshall, 1978a), it has no morphological adaptations for
aquatic locomotion, its fur is not water repellent, and captive individuals do
not swim voluntarily (Davis, 1966). When compelled to do so, captive
Lutreolina swim competently, but they are no faster in the water than other
terrestrial opossums, and their locomotor performance does not suggest any
aquatic specialization (Santori et al., 2005). Alleged nesting habits
(Marshall, 1978a) appear to be unsupported by original observations in the
scientific literature and, together with the supposed aquatic skills of this
species, may be romantic fabrications.5
Lutreolina crassicaudata is alert, quick, and predatory in its movements
(personal obs.; Davis, 1966), and its short-faced skull (Astúa de Moraes et
al., 2000), carnassialized dentition (Voss and Jansa, 2003), and massively
developed temporalis musculature (Delupi et al., 1997) all suggest
carnivorous adaptations. Captive individuals eat a wide range of animals—mice, frogs, fish, earthworms, and shrimp—but not fruit (Davis, 1966).
Olrog (1979) conjectured that the local abundance of L. massoia
(misidentified as L. crassicaudata in his study) was correlated with mouse
population density, and he noted that these opossums can be trapped by
using mice as bait. In the single dietary study based on animals trapped in
the typical (natural grassland) habitat of L. crassicaudata, most analyzed
feces contained vertebrate remains, including the fur of 10 species of small
mammals (Monteiro-Filho and Dias, 1990). Unfortunately, other
information about the diet of wild L. crassicaudata have been obtained
from atypical situations—including a forested marine island (where most
identified prey consisted of crabs and beetles; Cáceres et al., 2002), more or
less urbanized landscapes (where insects, carrion, and garbage were eaten;
Facure and Ramos, 2011), and a naturalized landfill adjacent to a major city
(where seeds, presumably from fruit, and other plant remains were
identified in feces; Muschetto et al., 2011). At most, these studies of
ecologically marginal populations suggest that L. crassicaudata can subsist
on whatever is locally available, but they seem unlikely to indicate the
typical diet of this still poorly studied opossum. Lutreolina crassicaudata is
known to be resistant to snake venom (Perales et al., 1994) and to prey on
venomous snakes (Rodrigues, 2005).Fig. 4.11. Lutreolina crassicaudata at the Reserva Ecológica Costanera Sur, Buenos Aires, Argentina
(photo by Jorge La Grotteria)
Philander
Philander is a genus of eight currently recognized species (Fig. 4.12),
commonly known as “gray four-eyed opossums” or “pouched four-eyed
opossums,” that collectively range from southern Mexico to northern
Argentina; species of Philander occur primarily in lowland rainforest, but
they also inhabit gallery forests of the Chaco and Cerrado (Redford and
Fonseca, 1986; Emmons et al., 2006a; Huck et al., 2017a; Voss et al., 2018).
Most species of Philander are allopatric, such that only a single species is
locally present, but several species have overlapping geographic
distributions in western Amazonia, where as many as three can occur
sympatrically (Voss et al., 2018). There is some suggestion from
Amazonian trapping studies that sympatric species of Philander occur in
different habitats, either segregated by vegetational succession (i.e., in
secondary growth versus primary forest; Hice and Velazco, 2012) or by
flooding regime (Patton et al., 2000).
Although these are large opossums by didelphid standards, species of
Philander are substantially smaller than species of Didelphis, from which
they also differ externally by lacking long guard hairs and white underfur,and in having a prominent white spot above each eye—the “four-eyed”
phenotype that they share with Metachirus (Chapter 5). However, species of
Philander have grayish or blackish dorsal fur, and adult females have a
well-developed pouch, hence the common names that distinguish this genus
from brownish-furred and pouchless species of Metachirus.
Trapping studies (Malcolm, 1991; Patton et al., 2000; Lambert et al.,
2005), spool-and-line tracking (Cunha and Vieira, 2002), and direct
observation of radio-collared individuals in the wild (Charles-Dominique et
al., 1981) consistently indicate that species of Philander are primarily
terrestrial opossums that often climb in understory vegetation but which
never ascend to the canopy of primary forest. Corroborating evidence
includes laboratory tests of climbing ability, which suggest that Philander is
more agile on aboveground substrates than strictly terrestrial Metachirus
but less so than fully arboreal taxa like Marmosa and Caluromys (Delciellos
and Vieira, 2009a). Additionally, individuals released in capture-mark￾recapture studies run away on the ground more frequently than they choose
arboreal escape routes (Fonseca and Kierulff, 1989; Fleck and Harder,
1995). Nests are at ground level (e.g., in cavities among tree buttresses) or
in hollow trees, tangled lianas, open tree forks, and palm crowns from 8 to
10 m above the ground; some reported nests are spherical structures made
of leaves, possibly by the animal itself (Miles et al., 1981; Lira et al., 2018).
Many fieldworkers have remarked a preference for moist microhabitats,
noting frequent captures or sightings of Philander along the edges of
streams, rivers, or swamps (Davis, 1947; Hall and Dalquest, 1963; Handley,
1976; Fonseca and Kierulff, 1989; Julien-Laferrière, 1991).Fig. 4.12. Philander opossum from French Guiana (above; photo by Antoine Baglan); P. melanurus
attacking a coral snake in riparian forest near Matiguás, Matagalpa, Nicaragua (below; photo by
Mario Gómez-Martínez)
In French Guiana, Philander opossum was observed to forage almost
exclusively at ground level, searching for prey, fallen fruit, and other edible
items on the ground or among the branches and trunks of fallen trees
(Charles-Dominique et al., 1981). About 80% of examined stomach
contents in this exemplary study consisted of animal prey, especially
earthworms in the wet season, when large worms (up to 80 cm long) are
abundant in the leaf litter after heavy rains.6 Other prey recovered from
stomachs in French Guiana by the same investigators included insects and
arachnids, but in Central America P. opossum has been observed to prey onfrogs (Kluge, 1981; Ryan et al., 1981; Tuttle et al., 1981) and venomous
snakes (Gómez-Martínez et al., 2008). Fruits eaten by P. opossum in French
Guiana are those most commonly found on the ground under fruiting trees,
and this species is also known to feed on the nectar of root-parasitic
terrestrial herbs (Charles-Dominique et al., 1981). Fecal analyses of
Brazilian P. quica (P. “frenata” of authors) likewise indicate a diet that
includes vertebrates, invertebrates, and fruit (Santori et al., 1997; Cáceres,
2004; Ceotto et al., 2009; Macedo et al., 2010). Frequency data from these
studies suggest that P. quica eats vertebrates more frequently than do other
sympatric opossums of similar size (e.g., Metachirus myosuros and
Didelphis aurita). Identified vertebrate prey of P. quica includes small
mammals, birds, lizards, and venomous snakes (Santori et al., 1997;
Macedo et al., 2010), and this species is known to be resistant to snake
venom (Perales et al., 1994).
Tribe Thylamyini
Thylamyines include five genera of small mouse-like (“murine”) opossums,
all of which are endemic to South America. Many thylamyines superficially
resemble Marmosa, with which they were formerly confused by
taxonomists (e.g., Tate, 1933), but molecular phylogenetic analyses
(Chapter 14) consistently recover marmosines and thylamyines as separate
clades, and the same analyses provide strong support for a sister-group
relationship of thylamyines with Metachirus and didelphines (Chironectes,
Lutreolina, Philander, and Didelphis). Many thylamyines occur in lowland
tropical rainforest, but this group has also radiated in open habitats (e.g.,
savannas, deserts, and thorn scrub), and some species occur at high
elevations in the Andes and at high latitudes in Patagonia.
Chacodelphys
Chacodelphys is a monotypic genus of tiny (ca. 10 g) opossums.
Chacodelphys formosa is only known from two complete specimens, but
numerous cranial fragments have been recovered from owl pellets. Both of
the complete specimens and all of the owl pellets containing cranial
fragments were collected in subtropical mosaics of grassland and dry forest
in northern Argentina (Voss et al., 2004; Teta et al., 2006; Teta and Pardiñas,2007), where one specimen is definitely known to have been trapped in tall
grass (P. Teta, personal commun.). Remarkably mouse-like in external
appearance, Chacodelphys formosa has a short and apparently
nonprehensile tail, suggesting terrestrial habits, whereas its carnassialized
dentition suggests insectivory (Voss et al., 2004). Unfortunately, nothing
definite is known about its behavior or diet from direct observation, and
neither stomach contents nor feces are available for analysis.
Cryptonanus
Cryptonanus is a recently described genus that includes at least four species
known from scattered collection localities from French Guiana (Fig. 4.13)
to northern Argentina (Voss et al., 2005; D’Elía and Martínez, 2006; Baglan
and Catzeflis, 2016). These are small (<50 g) pouchless opossums with long
prehensile tails, superficially similar to Gracilinanus (see below) but
differing from members of that genus in several aspects of craniodental
morphology (Voss et al., 2005). Judging from vegetation maps, habitat
information recorded on specimen tags or in field notes, and a few
published observations, species of Cryptonanus live in savannas, marshes,
dry forests, scrub formations, and other more or less open lowland habitats,
but (apparently) never in closed-canopy rainforest (Voss et al., 2005).
Published behavioral observations of C. chacoensis suggest that it is an
agile climber that constructs aboveground nests in low vegetation (Massoia
and Fornes, 1972), despite the fact that most specimens of this and several
other congeneric species have been trapped on the ground, sometimes in
almost treeless habitats. Another species, C. guahybae, inhabits edges and
gaps in subtropical restinga forest, where it has been trapped both on the
ground and in low trees (Quintela et al., 2011). Nothing appears to be
known about the natural diet of any species of Cryptonanus, although C.
chacoensis is said to eat both raw meat and fruit in captivity (Massoia and
Fornes, 1972).
Gracilinanus
The six currently recognized species of Gracilinanus (Fig. 4.14)
collectively range from near the Panamanian border of Colombia southward
throughout most of the forested landscapes of tropical and subtropical
South America to northeastern Argentina; published collection localitiesrange from near sea level to about 4000 m (Teta et al., 2007; Creighton and
Gardner, 2008; Voss et al., 2009a). Although the genus was once thought to
be absent in Amazonia (e.g., by Costa et al., 2003), several specimens have
recently been collected there (Solari et al., 2006; Voss et al., 2009a), and it
seems likely that at least one species (G. emiliae) is widespread in the
region. Recorded habitats for the genus include lowland rainforest, lowland
dry forest, and montane (“cloud”) forest. Based on known distributions,
most species seem to be allopatric, but G. agilis and G. microtarsus are
known to occur sympatrically at several southeastern Brazilian localities
(Geise and Astúa, 2009).
Fig. 4.13. An undescribed species of Cryptonanus captured in coastal savanna near Sinnamary,
French Guiana (photo by Antoine Baglan)Fig. 4.14. Gracilinanus emiliae captured on the road to Petit Saut, south of Sinnamary, French
Guiana (photo by Sebastien Barrioz, courtesy of François Catzeflis)
Like many other didelphids that were once classified in the genus
Marmosa, species of Gracilinanus are small (ca. 10–50 g), pouchless,
black-masked opossums with long prehensile tails. The results of trapping
studies and inventory fieldwork (e.g., Handley, 1976; Voss et al., 2001,
2009a; Vieira and Monteiro-Filho, 2003; Smith et al., 2012) suggest that
species of Gracilinanus are primarily arboreal, and laboratory analyses of
locomotion (Delciellos et al., 2006; Delciellos and Vieira, 2009a, 2009b)
indicate that G. microtarsus is an agile climber and leaper, especially
among small-diameter substrates. Apparently, this species nests in trees
(Pires et al., 2010b).
Dietary information for Gracilinanus is only available from fecal
analyses of two Brazilian species, G. agilis and G. microtarsus.
Invertebrates (primarily insects) were the most frequently encountered
items in all studies that quantified both animal and plant components of
analyzed feces (Martins and Bonato, 2004; Martins et al., 2006a;
Bocchiglieri et al., 2010; Lessa and da Costa, 2010; Camargo et al., 2014;
Lessa and Geise, 2014), but frequent evidence of frugivory was also found.
In the most extensive analysis published to date (based on 422 fecalsamples; Camargo et al., 2014), the frequency of fruit consumption by G.
agilis was estimated to be about 86%, and the same study found remains of
small vertebrates (feathers, bird bones, and eggshell fragments) in just 4%
of examined samples.
Lestodelphys
Lestodelphys is a monotypic genus (Fig. 4.15) that occurs in deserts and
cold Patagonian grasslands in Argentina, approximately from 32° to 49° S.
It is the only didelphid genus that does not occur at tropical latitudes, and it
occurs farther south than any other living marsupial (Formoso et al., 2015).
Lestodelphys halli is small (ca. 50–90 g) but stoutly built; by comparison
with tropical forest opossums, it is short-faced, with small eyes and small
ears; the body is compact, with short limbs and tail. The tail is incrassate
(carrot-shaped and seasonally swollen with stored fat), an unusual trait that
—among other small mammals—is correlated with seasonally restricted
food resources (Morton, 1980). Among didelphids, only Lestodelphys and
its sister taxon Thylamys have incrassate tails.Fig. 4.15. Lestodelphys halli, a captive individual from Chubut province, Argentina (photos by Darío
Podestá)
Lestodelphys halli is a terrestrial species that might climb in low bushes,
but which must spend most of its life on the ground because woody
vegetation is sparse in habitats where it is known to occur (Chapter 8).
Captive animals introduced to terraria with sandy substrates immediately
begin to dig, and some captives build subterranean galleries lined with
grass, suggesting that natural refugia are often underground (Martin and
Udrizar Sauthier, 2011), possibly in tunnels of their own construction, but
apparently also in burrows constructed by rodents (Pearson, 2008). Captives
strongly prefer raw meat over insects or vegetable matter, and they
competently attack, kill, and eat mice (Birney et al., 1996a; Martin andUdrizar Sauthier, 2011). Stomach contents of trapped specimens have been
reported to contain both small-mammal fur and arthropods (Pearson, 2008;
Martin and Udrizar Sauthier, 2011), but during the austral winter, when
arthropods are inactive, L. halli must subsist for months at a time on
endotherms, probably cricetid rodents, which are abundant in the habitats
where it occurs and are sometimes found half-eaten in traps set by
collectors (Birney et al., 1996b). Summer diets include invertebrates
(especially scorpions and beetles), lizards, birds, and fruit (Zapata et al.,
2013).
Marmosops
Marmosops contains 19 currently recognized species (Fig. 4.16) that
collectively range from Panama to southern Brazil; recorded habitats
include lowland rainforest, dry forest, and montane (“cloud”) forest from
sea level to about 3000 m. Species of Marmosops are small (ca. 20–120 g)
pouchless opossums with blackish masks and long prehensile tails.
Although Marmosops and Marmosa—long confused by taxonomists—are
superficially similar, the two genera are easily distinguished by several
external and craniodental characters (Voss et al., 2004b), and they are not
closely related.
Trapping studies suggest that species of Marmosops are active both on
the forest floor and in understory vegetation, but they apparently never
climb into the canopy or subcanopy of tall lowland forest (Malcolm, 1991;
Patton et al., 2000; Voss et al., 2001; Vieira and Monteiro-Filho, 2003).
Free-ranging individuals encountered at night are often seen clinging to
small-diameter vertical stems or perching on horizontal branches within a
meter or two of the ground (personal obs.), but quantitative data from
spool-and-line tracking studies suggest that most locomotion is on the
ground (Leiner and Silva, 2007a; Loretto and Vieira, 2008). Slightly more
than half of 77 individuals of M. noctivagus released in a Peruvian live￾trapping study chose a terrestrial escape route (Fleck and Harder, 1995). By
contrast, in a Venezuelan live-trapping study, 93% of 64 released
individuals of M. carri escaped on the ground rather than by climbing trees,
and “even when placed in trees or on vines, individuals would climb down
and then run along the ground” (O’Connell, 1979: 76). In the Atlantic
Forest of southeastern Brazil, sympatric species of Marmosops may usedifferent vertical strata (M. paulensis apparently being more terrestrial than
M. incanus; Leiner et al., 2010), but in the Guiana region sympatric species
seem to segregate by forest type (M. pinheiroi apparently favors swampy
sites with waterlogged soil, whereas M. parvidens seems to prefer well￾drained sites; Voss et al., 2001).
Fig. 4.16. Marmosops parvidens, a captive individual from French Guiana (photo by Antoine
Baglan)
Dietary information about Marmosops is limited to the results of fecal
analyses of just two Brazilian species, one studied at a dry-forest site (M.
incanus; Lessa and da Costa, 2010) and the other in a premontane rainforest
(M. paulensis; Leiner and Silva, 2007b). Both species were found toconsume invertebrates (mostly insects) and fruit, although small vertebrates
and flower parts were eaten occasionally by M. paulensis. Unfortunately,
fecal analyses are biased (tending to overestimate the dietary importance of
hard-shelled invertebrates and small-seeded fruits; Chapter 9).
Nevertheless, fruits eaten by Marmosops species notably include those of
understory treelets that produce small crops over a long period of time (only
a few fruits ripening each night; Leiner and Silva, 2007a). The overall
impression gained from available data about habitat use and diet is that
species of Marmosops are semiarboreal denizens of the forest understory
that move about on the ground but also climb in low vegetation to search
for insects and small fruits.
Thylamys
Thylamys is a genus of nine currently recognized species (Fig. 4.17) that
occur from coastal Peru and central Brazil southward to central Patagonia—
approximately from 9° to 46° S—in both lowland and montane landscapes
from near sea level to about 4000 m (Giarla et al., 2010; Formoso et al.,
2011). Most species occur in xeric or semi-xeric open habitats, including
tropical tree savannas (Vieira and Palma, 1996; Cáceres et al., 2007),
temperate thorn scrub (Meserve, 1981; Lima et al., 2001), high-altitude and
high-latitude deserts (Ojeda and Tabeni, 2009; Braun et al., 2010), and
Patagonian steppe (Birney et al., 1996b). Like other “murine” opossums
(formerly placed in Marmosa), species of Thylamys lack pouches and have
dark circumocular masks, large ears, and prominent eyes; however, they
resemble Lestodelphys and differ from superficially similar species in other
genera by having incrassate, carrot-shaped tails that are seasonally swollen
with stored fat. Two species in the subgenus Xerodelphys have short tails
that lack external modifications for prehension, and their hands and feet
lack the well-developed friction pads that provide traction for climbing
smooth vertical stems in other didelphids; by contrast, seven species in the
subgenus Thylamys have longer tails with the usual prehensile surface near
the tip, and their hands and hind feet have well-developed friction pads
(Carmignotto and Montfort, 2006; Giarla et al., 2010).Fig. 4.17. Thylamys pallidior, a captive individual from Bahía Cracker, Chubut, Argentina (photo by
Darío Podestá)
Despite a substantial ecological literature for some species, surprisingly
little basic natural history information is available for any member of the
genus Thylamys. Most live in open habitats with widely spaced trees or
shrubs, so much locomotion is necessarily terrestrial, but some species are
known to climb, at least occasionally, in woody vegetation (Cáceres et al.,
2007; Albanese et al., 2011). Nests of T. elegans are said to be constructed
under rocks and in low trees or shrubs, where abandoned bird nests are also
sometimes used as diurnal refugia (Mann, 1978). Anecdotal accounts of
diets (unsupported by quantification or methodological details; e.g., Mann,
1978), as well as a few analyses of feces and stomach contents, suggest that
species of Thylamys are mostly insectivorous, but fruits and small
vertebrates are also said to be eaten on occasion (Meserve, 1981; Birney et
al., 1996b; Vieira and Palma, 1996; Albanese et al., 2012). Captive
individuals of T. elegans can be maintained on a pure insect diet, and when
offered a choice between insects and fruit, they always choose insects
(Sabat et al., 1995). However, the desert species T. pallidior is known to
also eat leaves throughout the year (Albanese et al., 2012). Because leaves
are absent or infrequent in the known diets of other opossums that inhabit
less xeric environments than T. pallidior, it seems probable that this desert
species eats leaves for their water content and not for any caloric value.Thylamys pallidior is the only New World marsupial that does not appear to
require free water, obtaining what it needs from what it eats and producing
a highly concentrated urine when deprived of succulent vegetable matter
(Díaz et al., 2001).7
Discussion
The current classification of didelphids, together with salient natural history
information, is summarized in Table 4.1. Altogether, 116 living species of
opossums are now recognized as valid, whereas only 87 species were
recognized by Wilson and Reeder (2005)—an increase of 33% in less than
two decades. New species are still being discovered in the field on an
almost yearly basis, so an accurate tally of living opossum species is still
unavailable. The outcome of future fieldwork can confidently be predicted
to increase the count, but the outcome of ongoing taxonomic research is less
predictable. Although revisionary studies sometimes result in the discovery
of new species, they can also result in new synonymies (e.g., Pavan et al.,
2014). Overall, however, it seems likely that the number of opossum
species will continue to increase, albeit perhaps more slowly, for at least
another decade.
By contrast, generic-level diversity seems more likely to remain stable:
only a single additional genus (Cryptonanus) has been described since
2005. Although it is often mooted that taxonomic categories above the
species level are biologically arbitrary, taxon membership is constrained by
monophyly, and groups of species are seldom named unless they share a
substantial number of phenotypic traits that set them apart from other clades
of the same rank. Didelphid genera, tribes, and subfamilies are nonarbitrary
in this sense, although it is certainly true that there are no hard-and-fast
criteria for deciding whether a clade should be ranked (for example) as a
tribe or as a subfamily. In practice, however, it is often useful to refer to
genera in discussing evolutionary and ecological phenomena. Besides being
demonstrably monophyletic and morphologically diagnosable (Voss and
Jansa, 2009), didelphid genera also tend to be ecobehaviorally distinctive.
Members of the same genus (congeners) often occupy similar habitats or
microhabitats, eat much the same food, and behave alike in other ways,
whereas members of different genera are frequently divergent in size,habitat occupancy, diet, or behavior. Such similarities and differences
suggest that ecological-niche occupancy often corresponds to generic
membership, and that many of the phenotypic traits used by taxonomists to
diagnose genera may have adaptive explanations.
Table 4.1  Summary of Didelphid Diversity
NOTES
1. Tyndale-Biscoe and Renfree (1987) claimed that Caluromys is folivorous but cited no
supporting evidence. As far as we are aware, there are no published observations to suggest that
leaves are a normal part of woolly opossum diets.
2. Only three weights of fully adult specimens of Glironia venusta have been reported in the
literature. Based on the variability seen in other taxa, it would be reasonable to expect adults of this
species to weigh anywhere from 100 to 200 g.
3. We are not aware of any evidence to support the claim that Metachirus “builds dens at the base
of trees, sometimes with multiple tunnel entrances in and around the roots” (Baker and Dickman,
2018: 39). Among other reasons to doubt this alleged behavior, the small-clawed forefeet of
Metachirus are entirely unsuited to tunneling.
4. Baker and Dickman (2018: 36) claimed that water opossums supplement their animal diets
“with fruits and semiaquatic plants,” and that females “dig 60-cm-long tunnels in riverbanks,” but no
supporting citations were provided for either statement, nor are we aware of any evidence for such
behaviors.
5. Several behaviors attributed to Lutreolina crassicaudata can be traced back to Lydekker (1894:
204), who quoted almost verbatim from W.H. Hudson’s (1892) popular and highly romanticized
natural history of the Pampas. According to Lydekker’s paraphrased version of Hudson’s account,Lutreolina is both terrestrial and aquatic in its habits and “dives and swims with ease … constructing
a globular nest of grass suspended from the flags and rushes.” Hudson did not trouble to explain how
he made such observations, nor have these behaviors been verified by subsequent researchers.
Nevertheless, Lydekker’s text has been repeatedly cited in the technical literature about Lutreolina,
and it is clearly the original source for unattributed statements about swimming ability and nest
construction in influential semipopular accounts. Other implausible behaviors attributed to
Lutreolina, such as Baker and Dickman’s (2018) absurd claim that it uses its tail as a spring to launch
itself “up to 60 cm” in attacks on human intruders, appear to be similarly untethered to factual
accuracy.
6. Other studies, however, have estimated the diet of Philander opossum in French Guiana to
consist of up to 50% fruit (Atramentowicz, 1988).
7. Remarkably, this species is one of the few mammals known to inhabit the Atacama, the oldest
and driest desert in the world, where it has been found at sites receiving less than 1 mm of annual
rainfall (Carmona and Rivadeneira, 2006).III
OPOSSUM PHENOTYPES5
Morphology
Morphology is the most accessible aspect of the phenotype, and it is all that
is usually preserved in the fossil record. Much more is known about
opossum morphology, which is easily studied from museum specimens,
than about opossum behavior and physiology, which require access to live
animals for observation and experiment. On the assumption that
morphology is shaped by natural selection to maximize the effectiveness of
evolved behaviors (locomotion, for example) or physiological traits (sense
perception, thermoregulation, reproduction), taxonomic variation in
morphology is an important source of evidence for ecological adaptations.
However, morphology can also be shaped by nonadaptive processes—such
as sexual selection—and it is important to distinguish adaptive from
nonadaptive trait variation in any evolutionary synthesis.
Rather than providing a comprehensive review of didelphid morphology,
which would not serve the primary goals of our book, this chapter briefly
describes the principal attributes that distinguish opossums from other
mammals (especially other marsupials), corrects a variety of
misconceptions about opossum morphology, and documents
ecobehaviorally correlated trait variation that is useful for reconstructing
opossum adaptive radiation. Among other organ systems neglected in this
incomplete survey, we do not consider skin glands, the male and female
reproductive tracts, or the respiratory, circulatory, and excretory systems.
Additionally, descriptions of the main sensory organs are deferred to
subsequent physiological accounts of mechanoreception, vision, hearing,
and chemosensation (Chapter 6).Size and Size Dimorphism
Living opossums are small to medium-sized marsupials, ranging in adult
weight from about 10 g in the smallest known species (e.g., Chacodelphys
formosa; Voss et al., 2004a) to more than 3000 g in some populations of the
largest species (Didelphis virginiana; Hamilton, 1958). Most didelphids,
however, weigh between about 20 and 500 g. Although histograms of
species mean weights include several discontinuities (Fig. 5.1), most gaps
are artifacts of averaging. The mean adult male weight of Marmosa
constantiae, for example, is 103 g, but the observed range for this species
(78–185 g; Voss et al., 2019) spans three size bins, including the gap
between 150 and 200 g in our figure. Despite such intraspecific variation,
there are noteworthy average size differences among certain clades.
Members of the tribes Marmosini and Thylamyini, for example, are all
small opossums (with mean adult weights <200 g), whereas members of the
tribe Didelphini are consistently larger (with mean adult weights >300 g).
The far-right end of the opossum size distribution is occupied exclusively
by species of Didelphis—the largest living opossums, with mean adult
weights >900 g—but these are not the largest opossums known to have ever
lived. That distinction apparently belongs to the Pliocene species
†Thylophorops lorenzinii, which may have weighed almost 9 kg (Zimicz,
2014).Fig. 5.1. Histogram of mean weights (in grams, g) for 95 species of opossums
Many didelphids exhibit obvious sexual size dimorphism, and in species
with statistically significant sex differences, males are always larger, on
average, than females (Table 5.1). In the most sexually dimorphic opossum
for which reliable data are available (Marmosa isthmica), adult males can
weigh almost 70% more than adult females, but sexual size dimorphism
might be even more pronounced in certain other species (e.g., Monodelphis
dimidiata; Baladrón et al., 2012). The smallest didelphids for which weight
data are available (Thylamys spp.) are among the least sexually dimorphic
in these comparisons, but large opossums are not consistently the most
dimorphic, and analyses of osteological data (Astúa, 2010) suggest that
opossums do not conform to Rensch’s rule, which states that male-biased
sexual size dimorphism is positively allometric (Abouheif and Fairbairn,
1997).1Table 5.1  Sexual Dimorphism in Adult Body Weights
Evidence from both laboratory and field studies (e.g., Barnes and Wolf,
1971; Cothran et al., 1985; Fernandes et al., 2010) suggests that the
proximate cause of sexual size dimorphism in opossums is the faster
postweaning growth rate of males (Chapter 6). Although sexual dimorphism
might have adaptive explanations—e.g., reduced intersexual competition
for food (Shine, 1989)—we are not aware of any compelling support for
such hypotheses in mammals. Instead, male-biased sexual size dimorphism
in mammals is significantly correlated with proxies for sexual selection
(Lindenfors et al., 2007). Relevant information about opossum mating
systems is sparse (Chapter 13), but in at least one sexually dimorphic
species (Didelphis virginiana), males are known to compete directly with
one another for access to estrous females, and male mating success is
positively correlated with body weight (Ryser, 1992). Therefore, it seems
reasonable to expect that taxonomic variation in opossum sexual size
dimorphism is accompanied by corresponding variation in the strength of
sexual selection for large males—a compelling topic for future research.
External Morphology
Most opossums are superficially unremarkable mammals, with pointed
muzzles, well-developed vibrissae, prominent eyes, membranous ears, soft
pelage, subequal limbs, pentadactyl feet, and naked tails. In some or all of
these respects, didelphids resemble other plesiomorphic marsupials (e.g.,
Dromiciops and dasyurids), as well as certain unspecialized placentals (e.g.,
solenodons, mouse lemurs, rice tenrecs, gymnures, and pen-tailed
treeshrews). Indeed, it seems likely that many external morphologicalfeatures of didelphids were inherited without substantial modification from
the therian common ancestor and reflect ancient, widely shared mammalian
adaptations.
Body Pelage
All didelphids have soft (non-spinous) fur. Some arboreal taxa (e.g.,
Caluromys) have somewhat woollier fur than others, but texture is hard to
define by objective criteria. Species of Didelphis appear shaggy (Fig. 4.10)
due to the numerous long guard hairs that project far beyond the denser
underfur, an odd trait for which no adaptive explanation has been suggested.
Water opossum fur strongly resists wetting, resulting in a trapped layer of
air when the animal is submerged, a phenomenon that is important for
buoyancy in this species (Fish, 1993), as it also is in other small
semiaquatic mammals (e.g., muskrats; Johansen, 1962).
The dorsal body pelage of most didelphids is uniformly colored and
unpatterned, usually some dull shade of brown or gray. Among other small
mammals, such drab coloration is usually attributed to selection for
background-matching crypsis, and experimental studies with rodents
support this hypothesis (e.g., Dice, 1947; Kaufman, 1974; Vignieri et al.,
2010). However, theory suggests that the phenotypic outcome of selection
for background-matching crypsis in any particular prey species depends on
many factors, including the typical substrate on which it is found, the visual
cues used by its predators, and the spectrum of ambient light in its
microhabitat (Merilaita and Stevens, 2011). For arboreal didelphids, the
relevant substrate is perhaps tree bark, whereas for terrestrial species it is
probably soil or litter, and nocturnal opossums might more frequently be
detected by predators with rod-dominated vision, whereas diurnal opossums
might be subject to predation by species with cone-rich retinas. Careful
measurements of ambient light in forests have discovered significant
spectral differences from canopy to understory and from shade to gaps
(Endler, 1993). Therefore, selection for background-matching camouflage
could be expected to produce a range of dorsal pelage pigments, even
among sympatric species, perhaps explaining how opossums with grayish
fur and others with brownish or reddish fur can be cryptic in the same
macrohabitat.Among the few exceptions to the rule that opossum dorsal fur is drab
and unpatterned are Chironectes—boldly banded dorsally with black and
gray (Fig. 4.9)—and several colorful species of Monodelphis. The banded
pattern seen in the water opossum does not, to our knowledge, resemble
that of any other semiaquatic mammal, and it has no obvious explanation in
terms of background-matching crypsis; possibly, it is an example of
disruptive coloration (Caro, 2005), in which high-contrast color boundaries
intersect the body outline, making it more difficult for predators to
recognize. Several diurnal species of Monodelphis (including M.
americana, M. gardneri, M. iheringi, and M. scalops; Pavan and Voss,
2016) have brownish dorsal fur that is longitudinally striped with black
(Fig. 4.6), and clever experiments with plasticine models suggest that such
striping reduces detectability by predators (Leone et al., 2019).2
Interestingly, two striped species of Monodelphis have evolved sexually
dimorphic pelage. Adult male M. americana have completely reddish dorsal
fur in which the striped pattern seen in females and juveniles is indistinct or
absent, whereas adult male M. scalops develop a reddish head and rump
separated by a grizzled-grayish midbody. In both M. americana and M.
scalops, males are so divergently colored from females and juveniles that
they were once considered different species (Pavan et al., 2014). Assuming
that the striped phenotype of juveniles and females is optimally cryptic for
the species, the brighter coloration of adult males in M. americana and M.
scalops presumably incurs a fitness cost that must be overcompensated by
some reproductive advantage, perhaps conspecific mate recognition
mediated by female choice (Duda and Costa, 2015).
The hair bases of the dorsal fur are grayish in most opossums, but
species of Didelphis uniquely exhibit white underfur (Fig. 4.10). Gray￾based dorsal fur is widespread among nocturnal small mammals, but white
underfur is highly unusual. The underfur of Didelphis spp. is prominently
exposed when the animal is threatened and its long guard hairs are
piloerected, resulting in a highly distinctive whitish appearance that might
be aposematic, a possibility we consider elsewhere (Chapter 7).
The ventral pelage likewise exhibits noteworthy taxonomic variation. In
some opossum species the ventral fur is partially or entirely gray-based
because the individual hairs are grayish basally and abruptly paler (usually
whitish, yellowish, orange, or brownish) distally; the overall color of theventral fur then depends on the degree to which the dark basal pigmentation
shows through the paler superficial coloration. In other species, the ventral
fur is partially or entirely “self-colored,” a traditional taxonomic descriptor
that applies when the individual hairs have the same pigmentation (usually
whitish or yellowish) from root to tip. Because differences in the patterning
of gray-based versus self-colored ventral pelage are frequently conspicuous
among closely related congeners that are otherwise difficult to distinguish
by external characters (Patton et al., 2000: Fig. 41; Voss et al., 2018: Fig.
11), it seems likely that this character has often been under directional
selection. Additionally, the ventral pelage of some species is characterized
by bright fugitive pigments. The ventral fur of live Monodelphis emiliae,
for example, is bright pink (Pavan and Voss, 2016: Fig. 14), but this color
survives for just a few hours post mortem. Because the ventral pelage is
exposed when threatened individuals stand on their hind legs during
aggressive displays (Chapter 7), its pattern and coloration may serve some
signaling function, perhaps for species recognition.
Facial Markings
The fur surrounding the eye is not distinctively colored in Caluromysiops,
Lutreolina, and Monodelphis, but most other didelphids have a more or less
distinct circumocular mask of dark (usually blackish) fur that contrasts with
the paler (usually brownish, whitish, or grayish) color of the crown and
cheeks. In many dark-masked opossums (e.g., Marmosa zeledoni; Fig. 4.5),
this marking extends anteriorly from the eye toward the bases of the
mystacial vibrissae, and in a few species (e.g., Glironia venusta; Fig. 4.3) it
also extends posteriorly to the base of the ear. The adaptive significance of
dark masks, which are widespread in vertebrates, has been debated, and it
seems unlikely that a common explanation applies to all of the taxa that
exhibit such markings (Ficken et al., 1971; Ortolani, 1999; Caro, 2011).
Among opossums, dark masks tend to be best developed in the smaller
arboreal species, possibly to reduce light reflectance from the circumocular
pelage in dark environments dappled with moonlight. However, in
Didelphis albiventris, a large and aggressive savanna species (Fig. 4.10),
bold black lines through the eyes are elements of a conspicuous black-and￾white-striped facial pattern that has been interpreted as aposematic in
ecobehaviorally similar carnivores (Newman et al., 2005).Another distinctive facial marking is the pale spot above each eye that is
consistently present in species of Metachirus and Philander, resulting in the
“four-eyed” phenotype by which these animals are commonly known (Figs.
4.8, 4.12). Parsimony optimizations suggest that pale supraocular spots
evolved independently in these genera (Voss and Jansa, 2009: Appendix 5),
raising the question as to why this unusual trait evolved twice in opossums.
Pale supraocular spots in didelphids are neither sexually dimorphic nor
ontogenetically variable, so they seem unlikely to serve any social-signaling
function. Philander and Metachirus are broadly sympatric, but if one taxon
is mimicking the other to gain some fitness advantage, the nature of that
advantage is unclear. To our knowledge, the adaptive significance of similar
markings in other mammals (e.g., the pteropodid bat Styloctenium wallacei)
is unknown, and we have no plausible hypothesis to offer here.
Vibrissae
All didelphids are well-provided with vibrissae, long tactile hairs that are
grouped into discrete tracts on the head and limbs (Lyne, 1959; Brown,
1971). The mystacial vibrissae (whiskers)—located just behind the nose on
each side of the rostrum (Fig. 4.8)—are under voluntary muscular control
and are used for active exploration of the physical environment. Associated
behaviors include “whisking,” in which these hairs are repetitively and
rapidly swept back and forth, scanning for nearby physical objects,
especially when the animal is navigating complex spaces in low-light
conditions (Mitchinson et al., 2011).
Ecobehavioral correlations with vibrissal morphology have been noted at
higher-taxonomic levels (e.g., when comparing marsupial orders or
families; Lyne, 1959), and terrestrial opossums do seem to have somewhat
shorter vibrissae than arboreal forms, but vibrissal contrasts are seldom
striking in pairwise comparisons of similar-sized opossums with differing
habits. For example, the mystacial vibrissae are only slightly shorter in
terrestrial Monodelphis domestica (22 ± 2 mm) than they are in arboreal
Marmosa robinsoni (27 ± 2 mm), and they are about the same length in
semiaquatic Chironectes minimus as they are in scansorial Didelphis
marsupialis. Although Marshall (1978b) alleged that the water opossum has
“supernumerary facial bristles,” only the usual mystacial, genal,
supraorbital, and interramal vibrissae are present in the specimens weexamined. Such conservatism suggests that vibrissal mechanoreception has
not been under intense diversifying selection in the course of didelphid
adaptive radiation. However, there is osteological and histological evidence
that the mystacial vibrissae of Chironectes are more richly innervated—and,
therefore, presumably more sensitive—than those of other didelphids
(Sánchez-Villagra and Asher, 2002).
Eyes and Ears
The eyes and external ears (pinnae) differ in size among opossums (Figs.
4.1–4.17), but this aspect of taxonomic variation has yet to be quantified or
convincingly correlated with ecobehavioral traits. Sensory physiology
(Chapter 6) suggests that nocturnal species should have larger eyes than
diurnal species, and that arboreal species should have larger pinnae than
terrestrial species, but measurements of eye diameter and pinna length have
yet to be compiled across the family for relevant comparative analyses. The
pinnae of many didelphids can be folded up (appearing crumpled) when the
animal is alarmed or threatened; according to Barnes (1977), this folding is
possible because the ear cartilage consists of many small pieces joined by
striated muscle.
Wrist
The wrists of males and females are externally similar in most didelphids,
but striking sexual dimorphism is present in some small arboreal and
scansorial taxa (Fig. 5.2). Prominent hairless tubercles supported internally
by carpal ossifications are exhibited by adult males of Cryptonanus,
Gracilinanus, Marmosops, Tlacuatzin, and some species of Marmosa,
whereas the wrist is externally featureless in conspecific females and
immature males. Two distinct kinds of these sexually dimorphic tubercles
can be distinguished: lateral (“ulnar”) tubercles supported internally by the
pisiform and medial (“radial”) tubercles supported by the prepollex. Lunde
and Schutt (1999) suggested that these unusual structures—apparently
unknown among other mammals—function as clasping devices during
copulation. By contrast, Chironectes has carpal tubercles that are neither
sexually dimorphic nor ontogenetically variable (Fig. 5.4A, 5.4B). In this
taxon, juveniles and adults of both sexes possess a fleshy process, supported
internally by the pisiform, on the outside of the wrist. The function of thisstructure, which resembles a sixth digit, is unknown, but it perhaps assists
the water opossum in detecting or securing fish or other aquatic prey.
Fig. 5.2. Ventral view of left forefoot (manus) of male and female specimens of Marmosops pinheiroi
illustrating external features of the plantar (volar) surface and the wrist. Digits are designated with
Roman numerals from medial to lateral. In this sexually dimorphic species, males have larger hands
than females, and they have a prominent carpal tubercle that is thought to be used for copulatory
clasping.
Hand
The didelphid forefoot (manus) is provided with five well-developed claw￾bearing digits, and there is abundant behavioral evidence that opossums are
capable of manual prehension (Chapter 7). Although didelphids are
conservative in many aspects of manual morphology, they are not all alike,
and some taxonomic differences can be correlated with microhabitat use
and locomotor behavior. Arboreal opossums have relatively longer fingers
than terrestrial taxa, an adaptation for grasping small-diameter supports that
is more easily quantified osteologically than externally (see below), butarboreal and terrestrial species also differ in externally obvious digital
proportions (Table 5.2). In terrestrial opossums—as well some scansorial
species and the water opossum—the third manual digit is longer than the
other fingers (Figs. 5.3A, 5.3B), proportions that correspond to the
mesaxonic morphotype of comparative anatomists (e.g., Brown and Yalden,
1973; Patel and Maiolino, 2016). In most arboreal species, by contrast, the
third and fourth manual digits are subequal and longer than the other
fingers, corresponding to the paraxonic morphotype (Fig. 5.3C); in
opossums with a paraxonic manus, dV is also substantially longer than it is
in species with mesaxonic forefeet. A third condition, the ectaxonic
morphotype, is seen in Caluromysiops and Caluromys (Fig. 5.3D), whose
fourth manual digit is slightly, but distinctly, the longest finger.
Table 5.2  Several External-Morphological Traits Associated with Locomotion
These taxonomic differences are easily understood in functional terms.
Arboreal opossums use a zygodactylous grip, grasping small-diameter
supports between the second and third digits (Youlatos, 2010; Antunes et
al., 2016). In other words, digits I and II oppose digits III–V, and in species
that support their weight on vertical stems with a friction grip, these sets ofdigits must subtend a sufficiently wide arc for friction forces generated by
muscular effort to resist the downward pull of gravity (Cartmill, 1974,
1985). Elongation of dIV and dV increases the arc subtended by the manus,
thereby increasing the diameter of supports that can be effectively climbed
by friction.
Fig. 5.3. Dorsal views of right forefoot: A, Monodelphis brevicaudata; B, Marmosops incanus; C,
Marmosa robinsoni; D, Caluromys philander
Taxonomic differences in manual claw size are also correlated with
locomotor habits. Most scansorial and arboreal didelphids that climb in
understory vegetation (e.g., on slender vertical stems, twigs, and vines)
have small claws that do not extend much (if at all) beyond the large, fleshyapical pad of each manual digit (Figs. 5.3B, 5.3C), but some arboreal taxa
known to frequent the canopy and subcanopy (where they must often
negotiate trunks and limbs too wide to be climbed by friction alone) have
claws that extend well beyond the fleshy apical pads (Fig. 5.3D). Glironia
venusta, an arboreal species that exhibits squirrel-like agility on large￾diameter vertical trunks (Chapter 4), has exceptionally large, laterally
compressed, and strongly recurved claws. The longest claws in the family,
however, belong to strictly terrestrial taxa such as Monodelphis (Fig. 5.3A)
and Lestodelphys, whose documented behaviors include scratching or
burrowing in soil. The vestigial manual claws of the water opossum (Fig.
5.4A) are embedded in the fleshy apical pad of each elongated finger.
Like many other plantigrade mammals (Brown and Yalden, 1973), most
didelphids have 11 fleshy pads on the hairless ventral (plantar or volar)
surface of the manus: two near the wrist, four among the bases of the digits,
and one at the apex of each digit (Fig. 5.2). The thickened epidermis that
covers these plantar pads is provided with dermatoglyphs (friction or
papillary ridges resembling those on human fingertips; Hamrick, 2001).
Plantar pads tend to be larger and to have more pronounced dermatoglyphs
in arboreal opossums than in terrestrial species (Argot, 2001), but the water
opossum uniquely lacks any trace of plantar pads or dermatoglyphs;
instead, its hand is provided with integumentary structures unlike those of
any other mammal.
Chironectes uses its hands to locate and grasp aquatic prey (Chapter 4),
derived functions for which these appendages are uniquely specialized. In
addition to the previously mentioned carpal tubercle and vestigial claws,
special features of the water opossum manus include two kinds of papillae
on its naked skin. First, the entire plantar surface (including the palm and
the undersides of the digits) is densely covered with microscopically
dentate papillae—the “Hornpapiller” (horn papillae) of Brinkmann (1911).
These unusual structures have fleshy bases, but they are divided distally
into multiple sharp, cornified tips, giving the skin a rough, sandpapery
texture that is probably useful for securing slippery prey. Second, scattered
among the horn papillae on the plantar surface, but also present on the
naked dorsal surface of the distal phalanges and on the dorsal surface of the
carpal tubercle (Fig. 5.4), are numerous smoothly hemispherical papillae
that are richly innervated and appear to have a tactile function; theirhistological structure is unlike that of any other cutaneous sensory organ
known in mammals, but it strikingly resembles that of sensory papillae
found on the tongues of ducks (Brinkmann, 1911). Since these papillae lack
a proper name and deserve future attention from sensory physiologists, we
propose that they be called Brinkmann’s organs after the Danish
morphologist who first described them in substantive detail.3
Fig. 5.4. Dorsal and ventral views of left forefoot (A, B) and hind foot (C, D) of the water opossum,
Chironectes minimus. Stipple indicates the approximate distribution of Brinkmann’s organs (see
text).Hind Foot
Most didelphids have a hind foot (pes) with five separate, well-developed
digits, of which the fully opposable and clawless hallux (dI) is set off at a
wide angle from the others (Fig. 5.5). The exception is Chironectes, whose
pedal digits are loosely bound together by webs of skin to form a paddle￾like swimming organ.4 Remarkably, however, the hallux of web-footed
Chironectes remains fully opposable, and this extraordinary animal is fully
capable of pedal prehension. Although the hallux tends to be maximally
developed in arboreal species, it is always long enough to contact the tips of
the other digits when they are flexed, even in terrestrial taxa such as
Lestodelphys, Lutreolina, and Monodelphis. The second digit bears an
asymmetrical grooming claw with a rounded apex, but the remaining pedal
digits are armed with claws that are sharp, laterally compressed, and
dorsoventrally recurved like those of most other plantigrade mammals
(Brown and Yalden, 1973). In strictly terrestrial opossums (Lestodelphys,
Lutreolina, and Monodelphis), the third pedal digit is longer than the
adjacent second and fourth digits. By contrast, dII, dIII, and dIV are
subequal (none distinctly longer than the others) in Didelphis albiventris
and D. virginiana. Among all other didelphids (including Didelphis
marsupialis), the second, third, and fourth pedal digits progressively
increase in length, such that dIV is the longest toe opposing the hallux. It is
noteworthy that the relative lengths of pedal digits do not strictly covary
with those of the manual digits, as they might be expected to do if
transformations of the pes and manus were functionally or developmentally
determined by the same factors. For example, whereas dIV is the longest
pedal digit in Marmosops, dIII is the longest manual digit in that genus.Fig. 5.5. Ventral view of right hind foot of Gracilinanus marica (after Boas, 1918)
The hind foot of most didelphids has dermatoglyph-bearing plantar pads
resembling those previously described for the forefoot, and both the pads
and their dermatoglyphs are better developed in arboreal than in terrestrial
species (Argot, 2002). The conspicuous exception is Chironectes, whose
webbed hind feet (Figs. 5.4C, 5.4D) lack any trace of plantar pads or
dermatoglyphs. Instead, the plantar surface of the hind foot of the water
opossum is covered by flat scales, among which are scattered Brinkmann’s
organs—the small, hemispherical sensory papillae previously described on
the skin of the hands.Pouch and Mammae
Although possession of a pouch (marsupium) that contains and protects the
nursing young is inextricably associated with the word “opossum” in the
minds of many people, most didelphids lack a pouch. Pouchless opossums
include species of Cryptonanus, Glironia, Gracilinanus, Hyladelphys,
Lestodelphys, Marmosa, Marmosops, Metachirus, Monodelphis, Thylamys,
and Tlacuatzin. In these genera the nursing young are not enclosed by any
protective structure (Fig. 4.8). By contrast, well-developed pouches are
consistently present in adult females of Caluromys, Chironectes, Lutreolina,
Didelphis, and Philander. The presence or absence of a pouch is uncertain
for two genera: Caluromysiops is said to have one (Izor and Pine, 1987),
but no actual description of it has been published, whereas the external
morphology of Chacodelphys is known from just a single male specimen.
The only known phenotypic trait that correlates with presence of a pouch
in opossums is size: most pouchless species are small (with mean adult
weights <200 g) and all pouched species are substantially larger (with mean
adult weights >300 g). Species of Metachirus (with adult weights of 250–
500 g) are the only large opossums known to lack a pouch. Phylogenetic
reconstructions (Voss and Jansa, 2009) suggest that a marsupium evolved
independently at least twice, once in the common ancestor of Caluromyinae
(including Caluromys and Caluromysiops) and again in the common
ancestor of Didelphini (Chironectes, Lutreolina, Philander, and Didelphis),
but taxonomic differences in pouch morphology do not correlate with
phylogenetic relationships. For example, the marsupium of Caluromys
philander uniquely consists of deep lateral skin folds that enclose the
nursing young and open in the midline—resembling the morphology that
Tyndale-Biscoe and Renfree (1987: Fig. 2.8) incorrectly attributed to
didelphids in general—whereas in Caluromys lanatus, Didelphis, and
Philander the lateral pockets are joined posteriorly, forming a more
extensive enclosure that opens anteriorly. Yet another condition is seen in
Chironectes and Lutreolina, in which the lateral pockets are connected
anteriorly, forming a marsupium that opens posteriorly. In Chironectes the
pouch is said to be closeable by muscular contractions, such that the nursing
young are protected from drowning while the mother is submerged (Enders,
1937).In all opossums that possess a pouch, the mammae are contained inside
it, but the mammae of pouchless taxa are variously distributed. The
taxonomic details need not concern us here (for a full account, see Voss and
Jansa, 2009), but in species with only a few (up to about seven) mammae,
the teats are confined to the same more or less inguinal position that the
pouch would occupy if it were present. Species with larger numbers of
mammae have additional teats positioned anteriorly, usually in pairs, along
the upper abdomen and lower thorax. The total number of teats exhibits
considerable taxonomic variation—from four (e.g., in Hyladelphys
kalinowskii; Voss et al., 2001) to 27 (in Monodelphis dimidiata; Pavan and
Voss, 2016)—suggesting a corresponding variation in litter size that
remains to be convincingly correlated with latitude, habitat, and other life
history traits (Chapter 13).
Scrotum
Like many placental mammals, marsupials carry their testes in a pendulous
scrotum, but in marsupials the scrotum is anterior to the penis, whereas the
penis is anterior to the scrotum in most placentals. Opossum scrota are often
sparsely furred, so the scrotal skin is usually exposed. The scrotal
integument appears whitish or pinkish in some species, but in others it is
bright blue, resembling the vividly colored scrotal skin of vervet monkeys
(Cramer et al., 2013). Although this trait has not been comprehensively
surveyed in the family, didelphids with blue scrota include species of
Caluromys, Hyladelphys, Gracilinanus, Marmosa, Marmosops, and
Thylamys. However, some members of some of these genera do not have
blue scrota, and scrotal coloration may be ontogenetically variable among
conspecific individuals (Barnes, 1977).
The blue coloration of opossum scrotal skin is structural (not pigmental)
and results from the coherent scattering of reflected light by quasi-ordered
arrays of parallel dermal collagen fibers (Prum and Torres, 2004).
Mammalian structural colors are present only in opossums and
cercopithecid primates, and they are thought to have evolved in the context
of social signaling by taxa with trichromatic color vision (Prum and Torres,
2004). However, although this hypothesis makes sense for structurally
colored primates (species of Chlorocebus and Mandrillus)—diurnal, highly
social, and presumably trichromatic—it seems problematic for opossums,which are nocturnal, solitary, and probably lack trichromatic color vision
(Chapter 6). Therefore, the blue scrota of opossums merit additional
research.
Tail
The mammalian tail is a multipurpose organ, frequently used for balance,
but often modified in different lineages for grasping, propulsion, social
displays, thermoregulation, defense, and other functions (Hickman, 1979).
The tail of most didelphids is a slender, muscular organ, approximately
round in cross section and tapering evenly from base to tip, but two
thylamyine genera (Thylamys and Lestodelphys) have carrot-shaped,
incrassate tails that are seasonally distended by stored fat (Chapter 6).
Surprisingly, the tail of the water opossum (Chironectes) is not externally
modified for swimming and lacks the specialized caudal features—such as
lateral flattening or ventral keels of stiff hairs—seen in other semiaquatic
mammals such as otter shrews (Tenrecidae: Potamogale), desmans
(Talpidae: Desmana, Galemys), and muskrats (Cricetidae: Ondatra).
Most didelphids have a tail that is substantially longer than the combined
length of the head and body, but some taxa are much shorter-tailed (Table
5.2). The known range of relative tail length in the family is bracketed on
the one hand by Gracilinanus emiliae and Marmosa lepida—arboreal
species with tails that are >60% longer than the combined length of the
head and body, on average—and on the other by species of Monodelphis—
terrestrial opossums with tails that can be less than half as long as the head
and body. Although arboreal taxa are not always longer-tailed than
terrestrial forms, the caudal ratio (tail length divided by head-and-body
length) is correlated with arboreality. All very long-tailed opossums (with
caudal ratios >1.50) are arboreal or scansorial, and all very short-tailed
opossums (with caudal ratios <0.80) are probably terrestrial.
Body pelage (soft fur composed of ordinary coat hairs that are not
associated with epidermal scales) extends to a variable extent onto
didelphid tails. Body fur extends onto the dorsal surface of the tail all the
way to the tip in Caluromysiops (Fig. 4.2) and Glironia (Fig. 4.3), and it
extends onto the tail base for a centimeter or more in several other taxa
(e.g., Caluromys derbianus; Fig. 4.1), but in most other opossums the tail
appears macroscopically naked from base to tip. The exposed caudal skin inall didelphids is visibly scaly except on the ventral surface near the tip,
where the epidermis is variously modified for prehension in arboreal and
scansorial species.
All didelphids are probably capable of caudal prehension to some extent
(e.g., using their tails to carry nesting material; Chapter 7), but external
morphological features associated with grasping ability are variably
developed in the family. The unfurred caudal surfaces of the water opossum
(Chironectes), several strictly terrestrial taxa (Lestodelphys, Lutreolina,
Metachirus, and Monodelphis), and two others with unknown locomotor
behaviors (Chacodelphys and species in the subgenus Xerodelphys of
Thylamys) are covered with unmodified scales from base to tip. By contrast,
the ventral surface of the tail of all other opossums is provided with a distal
prehensile surface that is transversely creased and scaleless, and the tip of
the tail has a fleshy pad bearing dermatoglyphs. Some strictly arboreal taxa
additionally exhibit basal modifications for grasping. Whereas the unfurred
ventral surface of the tail base in most didelphids is covered by smooth
scales, the scales on the underside of the base of the tail are heavily
cornified, forming hard raised tubercles in Glironia (da Silva and Langguth,
1989: Fig. 1), Caluromysiops, and some species of Caluromys.
The exposed skin of didelphid tails is variously pigmented. Some species
have uniformly colored tails that are usually grayish or brownish, but many
species have tails that are distinctly paler distally. In most taxa with pale
caudal markings, the basal color is grayish or brownish, and the transition is
either gradual, the basal color fading to whitish distally (e.g., in Metachirus;
Fig. 4.8), or irregularly mottled (e.g., as in Caluromys; Fig. 4.1). However,
in most species of Didelphini (Chironectes, Didelphis, Lutreolina, and
Philander), the tail is blackish basally with an abruptly white tip (Figs. 4.9,
4.10). The adaptive significance of contrastingly colored tail tips has been
debated, and it seems probable that no general explanation (e.g., predator
deflection or caudal luring; Ortolani, 1999) applies to all of the mammalian
species that exhibit such markings. However, differences in tail-tip
coloration among three sympatric species of Philander in southwestern
Amazonia—where specimens of P. pebas have tails that are usually less
than ¼ white, P. canus have tails that are about to ⅓ to ½ white, and P.
mcilhennyi have tails that are usually >½ white (Voss et al., 2018)—
suggests a possible role in species recognition.Skeleton
Because only mineralized tissues are normally preserved in the fossil
record, vertebrate morphologists have lavished more attention on the
skeleton than on any other organ system. Mammalian skeletal features of
particular interest for evolutionary inference are teeth, cranial foramina, and
limb bones, which are often informative about trophic, sensory, and
locomotor adaptations, respectively. To interpret the adaptive significance
of skeletal features of extinct mammals, the ecological and behavioral traits
of Recent species with similar morphologies is key. In this context,
opossum skeletal morphology has been studied for clues about the ecology
and behavior of basal therians, stem metatherians, and early primates (e.g.,
Crompton and Hiiemae, 1969, 1970; Lemelin, 1999; Argot, 2001, 2002,
2003). However, conserved aspects of skeletal morphology among opossum
species known to differ in adaptively important ecobehavioral traits suggest
that there are also limits to what can be inferred from bones and teeth.
Skull and Mandible
The opossum head skeleton (Fig. 5.6) exhibits many primitive therian
features and closely resembles the inferred phenotype of the marsupial
common ancestor. All of the usual cranial bones are present in much the
same gross configuration as in basal therians, and the sutures that separate
them are ontogenetically persistent. There is an essential sameness to
opossum skulls because their basic architecture is similar. All opossums
have the same number and kinds of teeth (see below), so the bony structures
that support the dentition and surround the oral cavity are similar from
genus to genus. Among other shared features, didelphids have a prominent
rostrum enclosing a large nasal cavity that contains a well-developed array
of turbinals (Rowe et al., 2005; Macrini, 2012). Likewise, all opossums
have convergent orbits (Pilatti and Astúa, 2016), and the ear region is
osteologically similar from genus to genus, despite minor differences of
interest primarily to taxonomists (e.g., Reig et al., 1987). Opossum
mandibles have all the usual mammalian processes for articulation and
muscular insertion, and the symphysis is always unfused.Fig. 5.6. Cranial and mandibular views of Monodelphis brevicaudata: A, dorsal view of skull; B,
frontal view of upper incisor arcade; C, ventral view of skull; D, lateral view of skull; E, lateral view
of mandible; F, dorsal view of mandible. Dental abbreviations are explained in the text
Opossum skulls exhibit taxonomic variation in size and shape (see
illustrations in Voss and Jansa, 2009), but size and shape are not
independent aspects of cranial form. The developmental correlation of size
and shape—ontogenetic allometry—follows the same general pattern in
didelphids that it does in other therian mammals (Flores et al., 2018). In
general, bony structures that enclose precociously maturing soft tissues,
such as the brain and the eyes, tend to scale with negative allometry,
whereas bones that contain the dentition as well as the crests and processes
associated with the masticatory musculature tend to be isometric or to scalewith positive allometry. Therefore, younger (smaller) individuals have
relatively larger braincases and orbits but smaller rostrums and less
prominent muscular sculpturing than larger (older) individuals. Similar
proportional differences can be observed when comparing the adult skulls
of smaller versus larger species, a related phenomenon known as static
allometry. Multivariate analyses suggest that size (including static￾allometric shape) accounts for most of the interspecific variance in cranial
measurements of adult opossums (Chemisquy et al., 2020; Jansa et al.,
unpublished).
Nevertheless, a few size-independent cranial differences—differences in
shape that cannot be explained by allometry—hint at ecological
adaptations. The short-faced, somewhat mustelid-like skull of Lutreolina
crassicaudata, for example, is often noted in connection with that species’
predatory habits (e.g., by Astúa de Moraes et al., 2000), whereas the
enormous orbital fossae of Glironia venusta suggest a correspondingly
prominent sensory role for vision. For some cranial trait variation there is
supporting evidence from soft-tissue anatomy to support functional
interpretation (Sánchez-Villagra and Asher, 2002), but the functional cranial
morphology of didelphids has not received the attention that has been
devoted to this topic in other mammals (e.g., Kay and Kirk, 2000;
Crumpton and Thompson, 2013; Dumont et al., 2014), so the adaptive
significance of most interspecific differences is obscure.
Dentition
Like most heterodont mammals, opossums possess four morphologically
and functionally distinct kinds of teeth, including (from anterior to
posterior) incisors, canines, premolars, and molars. Like other marsupials,
but unlike placental mammals, opossums have only two dental loci—the
last premolar locus in the upper and lower jaws—with deciduous (milk)
precursors. All adult didelphids normally have 50 teeth, of which there are
five incisors (I1–I5), one canine (C1), three premolars (P1–P3), and four
molars (M1–M4) in each upper jaw and four incisors (i1–i4), one canine
(c1), three premolars (p1–p3), and four molars (m1–m4) in each lower jaw.
Opossum incisors are small teeth that are obviously used for
mechanically undemanding tasks; they are conspicuously unsuited for
forceful gnawing, gouging, stabbing, or any of the other vigorous dentalactivities reported for mammals with enlarged chisel-shaped or blade-like
incisors (Ungar, 2010). Didelphis virginiana uses these teeth for scooping
up soft food (Hiiemae and Crompton, 1971), and Lestodelphys halli is
reported to use them for skinning mice (Martin and Udrizar Sauthier, 2011),
but opossum incisors are presumably also used for nipping and grasping in
many other contexts, including grooming and ectoparasite removal.
The upper incisor dentition is arrayed in a more or less parabolic arcade
in front of the canines. These teeth consist of a styliform I1 that is always
separated from I2–4 by a distinct gap, whereas the posterior incisors have
buccolingually flattened, sharp-edged, and closely spaced crowns. The
lower incisors are procumbent teeth, undifferentiated in crown morphology,
with no gaps among them. Cineradiography (Bhullar et al., 2019) and
manipulation of crania and mandibles suggest that the lower incisors
occlude with I2–4 by simple edgewise contact. The first upper incisor (I1)
does not occlude with any lower tooth, and its morphology does not suggest
any obvious trophic function, but the much-worn crowns of older
specimens suggest that it is often used for something, possibly grooming.
The canines of most opossums are unicuspid fangs like those of many
other mammals, but the canines of small opossums sometimes have
accessory cusps, and the lower canines of some small species are
procumbent and premolariform (Voss and Jansa, 2009). The canines are the
only teeth in opossum dentitions that are often sexually dimorphic, and
upper-canine height is consistently the most dimorphic craniodental
measurement in size-dimorphic species (Table 5.3). Although canine sexual
dimorphism has yet to be systematically surveyed in the family, visual
comparisons suggest that it is greatest in certain high-latitude species such
as Monodelphis dimidiata (see Pine et al., 1985; Chemisquy and Prevosti,
2014) and Didelphis virginiana (Fig. 5.7), although not all opossums that
live at high latitudes are sexually dimorphic.
Canines are obviously important trophic structures (opossums invariably
kill their prey by biting; Chapter 7), but they may also function as
advertisements of fighting ability. Canine weaponry is prominently exposed
in the gape display that all opossums use when threatened by predators or
rivals (Fig. 4.12), and this behavior—like the tooth-exposing snarls of
carnivorans—doubtless conveys information about the owner’s readiness
and capacity to inflict fitness costs on opponents (Parker, 1974). Defenseagainst predators is not a plausible explanation for didelphid canine
dimorphism because predation probably affects males and females equally.
However, males of some opossum species are known to compete with one
another for reproductive access to females (Ryser, 1992), and larger canines
might confer a decisive advantage in such contests with or without actual
fighting, so sexual selection seems like a plausible explanation (Rico￾Guevara and Hurme, 2019). Although it has been hypothesized that
opossum canine dimorphism is an allometric byproduct of sexual selection
for larger male body size (Chemisquy and Prevosti, 2014),5 research on
other mammals suggests that canine weaponry can be the primary target of
sexual selection (Thorén et al., 2006), and we suspect that this may also be
true of didelphid species with large-fanged males.
Table 5.3  Sexual Dimorphism in Selected Craniodental Dimensions of Didelphis virginianaa
Unlike the multifunctional anterior dentition, the cheek teeth—premolars
and molars—are used exclusively for food reduction. The permanent
premolars of most opossums are laterally flattened blade-like teeth, each
with a single main cusp that may or may not be flanked by small accessory
cusps. This taxonomically widespread (and undoubtedly primitive) therian
morphology has received little attention from functional morphologists, but
descriptions of opossum feeding behavior and close inspection of
photographs (e.g., Figs. 4.5 and 4.15) suggest that the primary function of
these teeth is to cut large food items into pieces that are small enough for
subsequent molar chewing. Their knife-like morphology seems suited for
this purpose, and cineradiographic imaging has shown that the two posterior
pairs of upper and lower teeth (P2/p2 and P3/p3) occlude edge-to-edge in asimple slicing stroke when the working-side jaws are closed (Bhullar et al.,
2019).
Fig. 5.7. Skulls of male (A) and female (B) specimens of Didelphis virginiana (from Highlands
County, Florida) illustrating sexual dimorphism in canine size
Premolar morphology exhibits modest taxonomic variation in the family
(Voss and Jansa, 2009). The first upper and lower teeth (P1/p1) are always
small and non-occluding, and p2 is usually the tallest lower premolar, but
P2 and P3 vary in relative size from genus to genus. In opossums known to
have mixed diets of invertebrates and fruit (e.g., species of Gracilinanus,
Marmosa, and Marmosops; Chapter 9), P2 and P3 are subequal in size, but
in predominantly frugivorous opossums (Caluromys spp.), P2 is larger than
P3, whereas in all primarily faunivorous opossums (e.g., species of
Monodelphis, Didelphini, Thylamys, and Lestodelphys halli), P3 is
consistently larger. This makes functional sense because soft items like fruit
are presumably easier to fit in the mouth and cut up with the more anterior
tooth, whereas greater mechanical advantage—from a tooth closer to thejaw joint—is probably needed to subdivide more resistant items such as
insect exoskeletons or vertebrate bones and ligaments.
Didelphid molars are good examples of the tribosphenic morphotype that
characterized basal therians, but which is now retained by only a few other
living taxa (Ungar, 2010). When the jaws are closed, the principal cusps and
interconnecting crests of tribosphenic molars form a series of interlocking
triangles and basins. Such teeth effectively process a wide range of diets
because their cusps, crests, and basins work together to puncture, cut, crush,
and grind many different kinds of food.
The details by which food is reduced by opossum molars—first worked
out by careful analysis of wear facets and later extended by cineradiography
(Crompton and Hiiemae, 1970; Bhullar et al., 2019)—are beyond the scope
of this book, but the essential features of tribosphenic functional
morphology are easily understood. In the course of a single unilateral
chewing sequence (chewing is done on one side of the mouth at a time),
food is first punctured and pulped by the main cusps—without any tooth-to￾tooth contact—as the jaws are repeatedly and forcefully brought together by
muscular contractions. Once the bolus is broken down to the point where
dental contact is possible, it is cut up into fragments as the lower- and
upper-molar crests shear past one another, and it is simultaneously crushed
and ground up in the basins of the upper and lower teeth.6
The initial cuspal pulping of food followed by cutting, crushing, and
grinding between occluding dental surfaces are hallmark features of
tribosphenic mastication, but these mechanical functions are not equally
important for different kinds of food. The soft fruits known to be eaten by
opossums (Chapter 9) require minimal processing: merely pulping such
items is probably sufficient to burst fragile cell walls and release the easily
digested sugary fluids they contain. Animal tissues, by contrast, are more
biomechanically challenging. Insects are protected by an indigestible
chitinous exoskeleton that must be broken open to expose soft tissues to
digestive enzymes, and in vitro experiments have shown that protein
digestibility increases with decreasing fragment size (Moore and Sanson,
1995). Dismembering vertebrate prey (cutting though tendons, ligaments,
and bones) is the task of the premolar dentition (see above), but vertebrate
skin, muscle, and viscera are tough, resistant tissues that must still be
reduced by molar chewing to facilitate rapid digestion.Consistent with such expectations, the molars of frugivorous opossums
(e.g., Caluromys) have less occlusal relief (lower cusps with shorter crests)
and wider basins than the molars of faunivorous taxa (e.g., Lutreolina and
Lestodelphys), whose molars typically have taller cusps, longer crests, and
narrower basins (Voss and Jansa, 2009). Additionally, more faunivorous
taxa have relatively larger posterior molars than frugivorous taxa (Fig. 5.8),
presumably because mechanical advantage is gained by chewing more
resistant food with teeth closer to the jaw joint. Unfortunately, few of these
functionally relevant features of opossum molar dentitions are captured in
two-dimensional projections of individual teeth, which appear to show a
strong phylogenetic effect but no significant correlation with diet
(Chemisquy et al., 2015). Although more sophisticated methods of tooth￾shape quantification (e.g., Boyer, 2008; Santana et al., 2011) might provide
more interpretable results, we agree with Chemisquy et al. (2015) that the
functional versatility of tribosphenic molars and the mixed diets of most
species plausibly explain the essential conservatism of opossum molar
teeth.Fig. 5.8. Occlusal views of left upper molar dentitions: A, Caluromys philander; B, Glironia venusta;
C, Marmosa rutteri; D, Marmosops soinii; E, Lestodelphys halli. This sequence illustrates the
progressive enlargement of transverse shearing crests (especially of the posteriormost teeth) from
frugivorous C. philander to faunivorous L. halli.
Axial Skeleton
Numerous features of didelphid vertebrae and ribs are correlated with
locomotor behavior (Argot, 2003), but only a few are noteworthy here. The
thoracic and lumbar elements of arboreal opossums are clearly designed to
increase the stability of the trunk, which must remain rigid (resisting
sagittal bending) when the animal spans canopy gaps by bridging and
cantilevering (Chapter 7). Most remarkably, the ribs of Caluromys (and
Caluromysiops; Flores, 2009) are anteroposteriorly expanded, appearingvery wide in lateral view.
7 By contrast, the axial morphology of terrestrial
opossums such as Metachirus allows much greater sagittal flexibility, an
attribute that is probably important for cursorial locomotion. Most
scansorial didelphids exhibit intermediate phenotypes that are plausibly
explained by locomotor behaviors that place less extreme mechanical
demands on the axial skeleton.
Fig. 5.9. Left lateral views of cervical vertebrae 2–7 of Didelphis marsupialis (A) and Philander
opossum (B) illustrating the expanded and ankylosed neural processes in the former species, an
adaptation that may prevent cervical dislocation by predators (see text)
A striking exception is Didelphis, whose unusually rigid vertebral
column defies functional explanation in terms of locomotion (Argot, 2003).
In particular, sagittal and lateral bending of the neck is prevented by the
tight articulation of hypertrophied neural processes of the cervical vertebrae
(Fig. 5.9). Immobilization of the cervical vertebrae, whether by actual
fusion of adjacent bones or by tight articulation of hypertrophied processes,
is an uncommon trait in mammals, for which various adaptive explanations
have been proposed (VanBuren and Evans, 2017). Argot (2003) plausibly
suggested that the vertebral reinforcements seen in Didelphis spp. aredefensive, protecting these physically awkward and slow-moving opossums
from predatory attacks, a hypothesis subsequently explored by Giannini et
al. (2011).
Appendicular Skeleton
Opossum girdle and limb elements exhibit numerous locomotor
adaptations, some of which are common to all examined taxa, whereas
others reflect functional divergence among genera with distinctive
locomotor habits (Argot, 2001, 2002). Like other noncursorial small
mammals, most didelphids have a crouching posture in which the proximal
long bones (humeri and femora) are more frequently positioned horizontally
than vertically, and limb movements are three-dimensional rather than
parasagittal (Jenkins, 1971).8 Didelphid appendicular elements are
correspondingly well designed to permit a wide range of motion, which is
obviously advantageous for negotiating the spatially complex environments
that most species inhabit. Most remarkably, the didelphid upper ankle
(cruroastragalar) joint allows full reversal of the hind foot, such that the
animal can descend vertical surfaces head-first (Jenkins and McClearn,
1984).
Adaptive divergence among didelphids is reflected in appendicular
proportions, joint morphology, and the configuration of bony processes for
muscular origin and insertion (Hildebrand, 1961; Argot, 2001, 2002).
Appendicular traits that can be quantified by measurement are of special
interest for evolutionary analyses, but relevant data are currently available
from just a few taxa. Among several morphometric outliers, Chironectes
resembles semiaquatic placental mammals by having proximal limb bones
(humeri and femora) that are short in proportion to more distal limb
elements, whereas Metachirus converges on cursorial forms by having
forelimbs that are short in proportion to its hindlimbs. The clearest
correlations with locomotor behavior, however, are provided by
measurements of hand and foot bones.Fig. 5.10. Right manual skeletons of Marmosa murina (A) and Monodelphis domestica (B)
illustrating the relatively short metacarpals (shaded) and long phalanges of Mar. murina (an arboreal
species) by comparison with metacarpal/phalangeal proportions in Mon. domestica (a terrestrial
species)
The hand skeleton includes wrist elements (carpals), the long bones of
the palm (metacarpals), and the finger bones (manual phalanges). The foot
skeleton includes ankle elements (tarsals), the long bones of the sole
(metatarsals), and the toe bones (pedal phalanges). As noted earlier, arboreal
opossums have relatively longer fingers and toes than terrestrial opossums,
and these proportions can be quantified by computing ratios between
measurements of the phalanges and the metapodials with which they
articulate. Such ratios (phalangeal indices) are positively rank-correlated
with arboreality in both marsupials and primates and appear to reflect
adaptations for manual and pedal prehensility in both groups (Lemelin,
1999; Weisbecker and Warton, 2006). Opossum sister taxa with divergent
locomotor habits (e.g., Marmosa and Monodelphis) have correspondingly
disparate phalangeal indices, and their osteological phenotypes are visibly
distinct (Fig. 5.10).
Viscera
The abdominal and thoracic viscera of opossums have received little
attention from comparative morphologists, but most of the principal
nonreproductive organs (heart, lungs, liver, kidneys, etc.) seem
unremarkable in the few species that have been examined to date (e.g.,
Marmosa robinsoni; Barnes, 1977). The digestive tract, however, is notablefor its simplicity: the stomach is simple and undivided, and the intestines
are very short. According to Barnes (1977), the combined length of the
small intestine, caecum, and colon was just 176 mm for a specimen of
Marmosa robinsoni by comparison with 653 mm for a rodent of similar size
(Meriones unguiculatus). This anatomical simplicity is consistent with
opossum diets, which provide an abundance of easily digestible nutrients:
protein from animal prey and simple carbohydrates from fruit (Chapter 9).
By contrast, herbivores have more compartmentalized and much longer
digestive tracts because complex carbohydrates in foliage and other plant
structural tissues must be broken down by microbial fermentation, either in
a multichambered stomach, an elaborate caecum, or a greatly expanded
proximal colon. (All three anatomical arrangements for microbial
fermentation are seen in herbivorous Australasian marsupials; Hume, 1999).
Modest taxonomic variation in the relative lengths of opossum gut
segments hints at differences in nutritional physiology, but in the absence of
accurate dietary information, specific trophic adaptations are hard to
identify (Santori et al., 2004). The most that can be said at present is that no
opossum is known to exhibit a digestive morphology compatible with
herbivory. The only anatomical evidence that complex carbohydrates might
be important in the diet of any taxon is the sacculated caecum and proximal
colon of Caluromys philander, which differ strikingly from the tubular
structure of these organs in other didelphids (Charles-Dominique et al.,
1981; Santori et al., 2004). As remarked by Charles-Dominique et al.
(1981), this might have something to do with gum consumption, because
plant exudates contain polysaccharides that are resistant to mammalian
digestive enzymes and must be broken down by microbial activity (Chapter
9).
Central Nervous System
The central nervous system of Didelphis virginiana has been studied in
considerable detail (Johnson, 1977), but little comparative information is
available from other opossums. The neuroanatomical details are of no
compelling interest here, but researchers have emphasized that few of the
observed differences between marsupial and placental brains seem to have
real functional consequences. The well-known absence of a corpuscallosum in marsupials, for example, is compensated by alternative
pathways of neocortical hemispheric connection (e.g., via an enlarged
anterior commissure; Ashwell, 2010).
Of all the measures of central nervous system functionality that could be
imagined, none, perhaps, is cruder than brain weight, and yet weighing
brains (or, equivalently, measuring brain volume) has long been popular
among comparative morphologists. Because, on average, larger animals
have larger brains than smaller animals, brain-size comparisons are usually
quantified in terms of encephalization: the residual for a species from the
value predicted by a regression of brain weight on body weight. A
considerable literature has long assumed a close relationship between
encephalization and intelligence (Jerison, 1985), so the notion that
marsupials are relatively smaller-brained than placental mammals (Jerison,
1973; Striedter, 2005) may have contributed to the widespread belief that
marsupials are not very smart.
Unfortunately, early studies of mammalian encephalization included
brain and body weights from just a few marsupials and were misleading on
this point. The only marsupial represented in Jerison’s (1973) influential
dataset, for example, was Didelphis virginiana, which is, in fact, rather
small-brained (Weisbecker and Goswami, 2014). Recent analyses that
include data from a wider range of taxa suggest that marsupials and
placentals are similarly encephalized, and that opossums, in particular, are
not statistically distinguishable from nonprimate placentals in relative brain
size (Weisbecker and Goswami, 2010, 2014). In effect, opossums and
placentals seem to be equivalently endowed with neural tissue, despite
considerable taxonomic variation about the central tendency in both groups.
In a much-cited article on opossum brain size, Eisenberg and Wilson
(1981) claimed that arboreality and an associated “demographic strategy” of
longer life span and smaller litter size are positively correlated with
encephalization. Although subsequent analyses of larger marsupial datasets
with more sophisticated methods (e.g., Weisbecker et al., 2015) have found
no statistically significant correlation of encephalization with arboreality,
they do confirm a significant negative correlation between encephalization
and litter size. These results—and others reported by Weisbecker et al.
(2015)—suggest that brain size is energetically constrained, but that
encephalization seems to lack consistent behavioral correlates.Discussion
Didelphids resemble early therians in many morphological features, and
they retain numerous traits that are probably ancestral for marsupials. No
opossum is—or, insofar as known, ever was—very large; none is
digitigrade or syndactylous; none has traits associated with fossorial
locomotion, gliding, or bipedal hopping; none is diprotodont or has
bilophodont or selenodont molars; and none has a digestive tract suitable
for processing foliage or other plant structural tissues. The contrasting
morphological features of many Australasian marsupials are correlated with
major ecobehavioral transformations associated with an impressive adaptive
radiation that occurred in the virtual absence of competing therian clades
(Black et al., 2012). By contrast, taxonomic variation in morphology among
living opossums is on a much more modest scale and reflects a
correspondingly limited range of adaptations.
In general, adaptive morphological divergence among opossums is more
apparent in traits correlated with locomotion than in traits correlated with
other aspects of behavior or ecology. In particular, a large suite of
morphological characters distinguishes arboreal taxa on the one hand from
terrestrial taxa on the other, with scansorial taxa exhibiting intermediate
morphologies. Arboreal opossums, of which Caluromys is the paradigmatic
example, possess many locomotor traits classically associated with tetrapod
climbing behavior (Cartmill, 1974, 1985), notably including strongly
prehensile appendages (hands, feet, and tails) and trunk skeletons designed
to resist sagittal bending. Although terrestrial opossums (such as
Monodelphis and Metachirus) retain some ability for manual, pedal, and
caudal prehension, they are demonstrably less endowed in these respects
than arboreal taxa, and their trunk skeletons allow much more dorsoventral
flexibility. The only opossum with a locomotor phenotype that substantially
diverges from this spectrum of arboreal-to-terrestrial morphologies is
Chironectes, which exhibits several adaptations (e.g., water-resistant
pelage, webbed hind feet, and postcranial skeletal proportions) that are
widely shared with semiaquatic placental mammals.
Adaptive variation among opossums is also apparent in morphological
traits related to diet, among which dental features (especially premolar and
molar proportions) are more readily interpretable than seemingly minortaxonomic differences in gut morphology. Opossums also differ in
morphological features that are probably adaptations for avoiding detection
by predators (e.g., concealing or disruptive dorsal pelage coloration), for
surviving predatory attacks (fused cervical vertebrae in several species of
Didelphis), for reproduction (presence/absence of a pouch, number of
mammae), for energy storage (incrassate tails in Lestodelphys and
Thylamys), and, possibly, for species recognition (ventral pelage coloration,
tail markings). That we cannot plausibly identify many additional
morphological adaptations is perhaps more an artifact of our ignorance than
an indication that they do not exist. However, it will become clear in
subsequent chapters that some adaptively important physiological traits
(e.g., snake-venom resistance) and behaviors (ophiophagy) have no
morphological correlates, such that morphology alone provides an
incomplete record of opossum phenotypic evolution.
Lastly, there remain several taxonomically variable traits that are
probably the result of sexual selection. This topic has previously received
little attention in the didelphid literature, but information summarized in the
present chapter suggests that sexual selection has shaped several aspects of
opossum morphology including size dimorphism (widespread in the family,
but not present in all taxa), dimorphic pelage coloration (in at least two
species of Monodelphis), osseous structures of the wrist (in several arboreal
or scansorial genera), and dental weaponry. In particular, sexually
dimorphic opossum canine teeth fit the recognition criteria for intrasexually
selected weapons (Rico-Guevara and Hurme, 2019) and merit comparisons
with better-known and more thoroughly researched examples of dental
weapons in other mammals (Plavcan and van Schaik, 1992; Thorén et al.,
2006). Because canine height is easily measured from museum specimens,
dimorphism in this dimension might serve as a useful proxy for sexual
selection in future comparative studies.
NOTES
1. Note that weight is proportional to volume, which scales as the cube of linear dimensions, so
sexual dimorphism in taxonomic measurements seems less impressive than sexual dimorphism in
weight. For example, sexual dimorphism in adult head-and-body length of Marmosa isthmica is only
1.15 (males 15% larger than females), by comparison with 1.68 (males 68% larger) for sexual
dimorphism in weight of the same species (data from Rossi et al., 2010).2. Although it seems probable that longitudinal striping is an adaptation for concealment from
predators, it is not clear how it should be classified among the several commonly recognized optical
tricks by which this effect is achieved. Leone et al. (2019) refer to striping as an example of
disruptive coloration, but Caro (2005) interpreted striping as pattern-blending crypsis. However, this
is perhaps a distinction without a difference.
3. Hamrick (2001) described the horn papillae of Chironectes, but he did not mention
Brinkmann’s organs. Hamrick thought that the horn papillae might have a tactile function, but their
heavily cornified tips and lack of special innervation is more consistent with a mechanical role in
securing prey.
4. By contrast, digits II and III are tightly bound together by skin—a condition known as
syndactyly—in many Australasian marsupials. Statements to the contrary notwithstanding, no
didelphid is even incipiently syndactylous (Weisbecker and Nilsson, 2008; Voss and Jansa, 2009).
5. Unlike most teeth, which do not increase in size after the crown is fully erupted, the canines of
didelphids (and other faunivorous marsupials; Aplin et al., 2010) are larger in older adults than in
younger animals because the root is continuously extruded from the alveolus throughout life (Voss
and Jansa, 2009).
6. For readers familiar with tribosphenic nomenclature, the principal shearing action in marsupial
molars is accomplished when the postmetacristae of the upper molars occlude with the paracristids of
the lower molars, and the crushing action occurs by a double mortar-and-pestle effect as the
protocone of each upper molar is driven into the talonid basin of each occluding lower molar, and
each lower-molar hypoconid is simultaneous driven into the trigon basin of each occluding upper
tooth. From this position (known as centric occlusion), the food contained in the talonid and trigon
basins is then ground up as the lower jaw rotates on its long axis such that the inner (lingual) surface
of the hypoconid is drawn across the outer (labial) surface of the protocone. This mandibular rotation
corresponds to the so-called lingual phase of the masticatory cycle (Mills, 1967), which Crompton
and Hiiemae (1969, 1970) claimed does not occur in opossums, but which has recently been
observed using more sophisticated methods of cineradiographic analysis (Bhullar et al., 2019).
7. Anteroposteriorly expanded ribs increase thoracic rigidity by reducing the spaces occupied by
intercostal musculature, an adaptation that is also seen in other arboreal mammals such as anteaters,
slow-climbing primates, and some tree shrews (Granatosky et al., 2014).
8. This generalization is based on cineradiographic observations of Didelphis virginiana, but
photographs (e.g., in Chapter 4) suggest that most opossums have similar postures. A probable
exception is Metachirus, whose erect stance (Fig. 4.8) and limb movements more closely resemble
those of cursorial mammals (L.H. Emmons, personal commun.; R.S.V., personal obs.).6
Physiology
Physiology is a broad field, and it is far beyond the scope of this book to
review all of the physiological processes that have been investigated with
didelphid models. Instead, we focus on topics that are relevant for
understanding ecological adaptations, including some that have been
alleged to constrain marsupial evolution in various ways. In addition, some
early misconceptions about opossum physiology have been corrected by
subsequent studies, and it is useful to summarize that research here.
Metabolism, Energy Reserves, and Water Balance
Metabolism and Thermoregulation
Measurements of basal metabolic rate (BMR, the mass-specific
maintenance rate of energy use at thermoneutrality)1 are about 25% to 30%
lower, on average, for marsupials than they are for placental mammals of
equivalent body size (MacMillen and Nelson, 1969; Dawson and Hulbert,
1970; Hayssen and Lacy, 1985), but there are several noteworthy and
ecologically relevant exceptions. Xenarthrans, for example, have
significantly lower BMRs than marsupials of equivalent size, whereas
BMRs for marsupials are indistinguishable from those of similar-sized
primates and bats (Hayssen and Lacy, 1985). Didelphids were originally
thought to have somewhat higher BMRs than Australian marsupials of the
same size (McNab, 1978), but subsequent studies suggest that this is not the
case; in fact, didelphids seem to be metabolically typical marsupials
(Cooper et al., 2009, 2010).
Although McNab (1978, 1986) proposed several ad hoc adaptive
explanations for taxonomic variation in marsupial BMRs, some of theanomalous values that seemed to need explaining in his data were erroneous
(Thompson, 1988), and recent analyses of larger marsupial datasets (with
corrected values for some species) have not discovered many statistically
significant correlations between BMRs and ecological variables. For
example, marsupial BMRs are not significantly correlated with diet, as was
once believed. In fact, there is really very little residual variation to explain
because body weight accounts for >97% of the taxonomic variation in
marsupial basal metabolic rates (Withers et al., 2006).
Below thermoneutrality many didelphids lower their body temperature
(Tb) in response to cooler ambient temperatures (Ta); such thermolability
conserves energy that would otherwise be spent in maintaining a steeper
gradient between Tb and Ta (Ribeiro and Bicudo, 2007; Cooper et al., 2009,
2010). Some small didelphids also conserve energy by entering torpor, a
spontaneously reversible hypometabolic state accompanied by reductions of
body temperature, heart rate, and ventilation (breathing) rate. Although
torpor has only been reported in the literature from seven species in five
genera (Gracilinanus, Lestodelphys, Marmosa, Monodelphis, and
Thylamys; Geiser and Martin, 2013; Riek and Geiser, 2014), it might be
taxonomically widespread. Among those species studied to date, torpor
reduces body temperature by 6°C to 24°C, with correspondingly depressed
metabolic rates that range from 17% to 81% of normal BMR (Riek and
Geiser, 2014). Torpor is entered spontaneously by some species provided
with ad libitum food and maintained at relatively high ambient temperature,
apparently as part of their normal circadian cycle (Fig. 6.1), but other
species are only reported to enter torpor when deprived of food or when
subjected to low ambient temperatures (Bozinovic et al., 2005; Cooper et
al., 2009; Busse et al., 2014). Because torpor has been reported from both
tropical species (e.g., Marmosa robinsoni; McNab, 1978) and temperate
forms (e.g., Lestodelphys halli; Geiser and Martin, 2013), it is clearly not
just an adaptation for survival in cold climates. Instead, torpor seems to be
an ecologically widespread mechanism for energy conservation (or for
reducing evaporative water loss; see below) in small marsupials, and its
essential physiological characteristics do not seem to differ between
didelphids and Australian taxa (Riek and Geiser, 2014).Like other marsupials, opossums lack brown fat (Barnes, 1977; Hayward
and Lisson, 1992), a special kind of adipose tissue that is important for
nonshivering thermogenesis in small-bodied placental mammals (Oelkrug
et al., 2015). Nevertheless, opossums (and other marsupials) can defend
high body temperatures against prolonged cold exposure by other
mechanisms (Dawson and Olson, 1988), including increased liver oxidative
capacity (Villarin et al., 2003) and, probably, muscular nonshivering
thermogenesis (Nowack et al., 2017). Because other vertebrate endotherms
lacking brown fat (e.g., birds) have radiated spectacularly, it seems unlikely
that the absence of this tissue in opossums and other marsupials is a
significant physiological handicap.
Fig. 6.1. Daily pattern of heterothermy in captive Monodelphis domestica (redrawn from Busse et al.,
2014). The diurnal decrease in body temperature (Tb
) often starts around the beginning of the light
phase, and subsequent rewarming typically starts a few hours before the dark phase begins. Lowered
light-phase Tb
 in this nocturnal species is accompanied by spontaneous torpor, even at high ambient
temperature and without food deprivation.
Energy Reserves
Small mammals that live in seasonally hostile environments survive
predictable episodes of resource scarcity by storing food, entering
prolonged dormancy, and/or by catabolizing energy reserves (ordinarywhite fat). Neither food storage nor seasonal dormancy (hibernation) has
been reported for any didelphid species, and substantial fat reserves are
only known to occur in a few taxa. Free-living tropical opossums are
typically lean and lack substantial amounts of adipose tissue, but captive
Marmosa robinsoni are said to accumulate subcutaneous fat (Barnes, 1977),
and wild individuals presumably do so as well when food is abundant. The
temperate North American opossum Didelphis virginiana was long prized
by rural hunters for its succulent fat, which made for a toothsome (if
greasy) meal on many a farmhouse table when other meat was scarce
(Hartman, 1952). According to two unpublished theses cited by Harder and
Fleck (1997), as much as one-third of the winter energy requirements of D.
virginiana are met through catabolism of fat and muscle. The anatomical
distribution of stored fat in D. virginiana has not been described in the
literature, but large quantities of fat do not appear to be stored in the tail,
which remains a slender, muscular organ even in visually obese individuals
at the onset of winter.
By contrast, species of Thylamys and Lestodelphys have incrassate tails
that are periodically distended with stored fat (Figs. 4.15, 4.17). Anecdotal
observations that the caudal fat of captive animals is visibly diminished or
replenished in just a few days of fasting or food abundance, respectively,
suggest that this tissue is primarily useful as a short-term energy reserve
(Martin and Udrizar Sauthier, 2011). Incrassate tails are known to occur in a
wide range of other small mammals, including some Australian marsupials;
according to Morton (1980), this trait is typically associated either with
seasonal dormancy or with insectivory in arid habitats. Because no opossum
is known to hibernate, the latter circumstance better fits the didelphid
examples of caudal fat storage.2
Water Balance
Rainforest mammals have little need to conserve water under normal
circumstances, but species that live in arid habitats must avoid dehydration
by various mechanisms (Degen, 1997). Torpor, which reduces evaporative
water loss by decreasing the ventilation rate, has been suggested as one
means of water economy by arid-adapted mammals (Geiser and Brigham,
2012), including some didelphids (Busse et al., 2014), but a more frequently
studied mechanism is renal-concentrating ability. To date, the urinarycharacteristics of only a few arid-adapted opossums have been studied, but
the results suggest an impressive ability to conserve water by this means.
Observed urine osmotic concentrations of Monodelphis domestica (which
inhabits the semiarid Caatinga) are said to approach or exceed those of
many Australian desert marsupials (Christian, 1983), whereas Thylamys
“pusillus” (probably T. pallidior) of the Monte Desert is reported to produce
an even more highly concentrated urine (Díaz et al., 2001). Few as they are,
these studies suggest that at least some didelphids have evolved effective
adaptations to arid conditions despite their rainforest ancestry.
Reproduction, Growth, and Longevity
Reproduction
The essential features of marsupial reproduction—short uterine
embryogenesis, extremely altricial neonates, and prolonged lactation—have
been admirably reviewed elsewhere (Tyndale-Biscoe and Renfree, 1987)
and need not be described in detail here. Based on the few opossum species
that have been reasonably well studied, didelphids do not seem to differ
from Australian taxa in any of these key reproductive traits (Table 6.1). On
average, the period of lactation (birth to weaning) is about five times as
long as gestation. Among the taxa studied to date, Caluromys philander is
noteworthy for its substantially longer gestation and longer interval from
birth to weaning by comparison with members of the subfamily
Didelphinae. Ovulation is spontaneous in all studied opossum species
except Monodelphis domestica, in which pubescent females do not ovulate
in the absence of males (Fadem, 1987). Because estrus is delayed by
lactation, another litter is not conceived while the young from a previous
litter are still nursing. The age of females at first estrus ranges from 127
days (in M. domestica) to about 280 days (in Marmosa robinsoni), but it is
noteworthy that age of female puberty is unknown for any caluromyine.
The energetics of reproduction have only been investigated in detail for a
single opossum species, Monodelphis domestica. Reproductively active
female M. domestica assimilate about twice as much energy in the interval
from conception to weaning (ca. 1260 Kcal) than nonreproductive females
(about 590 Kcal) over an equivalent time period (Hsu et al., 1999). Because
daily energy assimilation by female M. domestica during gestation andearly lactation does not differ significantly from that of nonreproductive
females, almost the entire energetic cost of reproduction is incurred late in
lactation, especially in the weeks immediately before weaning, when energy
assimilation rises sharply (Fig. 6.2). These results clearly indicate that late
lactation is the most energy-demanding period for reproductive female
opossums, and that it is likely to be physiologically stressful unless food is
abundant in the habitat.
The same study (Hsu et al., 1999) compared the energetics of
reproduction in Monodelphis domestica with the energetics of reproduction
in a similar-sized placental mammal, the hamster Mesocricetus auratus.
Maternal mass-specific assimilated energy (kilocalories per gram maternal
body weight) was significantly greater in hamsters than in opossums during
gestation, but not during lactation nor over the entire interval from
conception to weaning. Although the energetic cost of reproduction
(kilocalories per young per day) was higher in hamsters than in opossums,
the reproductive interval (conception to weaning) is correspondingly shorter
in hamsters. As estimated in this comparative study, opossums appear to
produce young at lower cost per offspring, but over a longer reproductive
interval, than do like-sized placental mammals.
Because young marsupials are continuously attached to the mammae
(nipples) for the first few weeks of postnatal life, the number of mammae
sets an absolute upper limit on litter size (Russell, 1982; Tyndale-Biscoe
and Renfree, 1987). However, not all nipples are functional, and not all
nursing young survive to weaning, so the number of weaned young per
litter is often less than the number of nipples (Reynolds, 1952; Barnes and
Barthold, 1969; Russell, 1982). Field estimates of litter size are usually
based on numbers of attached young or (for females captured without
attached offspring) on numbers of obviously used nipples. Mean litter sizes
determined by such criteria vary more than threefold among species: from
about four in Caluromys philander (in French Guiana; Julien-Laferrière and
Atramentowicz, 1990) to about 14 in Marmosa robinsoni (in Venezuela;
O’Connell, 1989). Statistical analyses suggest that opossum litters are, on
average, smaller in species that live in wet tropical habitats and larger in
species that live in seasonally dry habitats or at high latitudes (Battistella et
al., 2019), but litter size can also vary among conspecific populations. Mean
litter size varies geographically in widespread species of commonopossums, apparently in response to length of the breeding season;
populations with shorter breeding seasons have larger litters than
populations with longer breeding seasons, presumably due to selection for
higher per-litter reproductive effort when the probability of successfully
raising multiple litters is lower (Rademaker and Cerqueira, 2006).
Table 6.1  Key Reproductive Features from Captive Studies of Five Didelphid SpeciesFig. 6.2. Average weight-normalized assimilated energy (Kcal/day) of reproductively active short￾tailed opossums (Monodelphis domestica) and hamsters (Mesocricetus auratus). Dashed lines
indicate the average assimilated energy of nonreproductive conspecific females maintained under the
same ambient conditions (redrawn from Hsu et al., 1999).
Postweaning Growth
The only extensive growth data available from known-age captives of any
didelphid species were obtained in the course of nutritional research with
Monodelphis domestica. In this study (Cothran et al., 1985), growth was
modeled by sigmoidal functions fitted separately to weight data for males
and females from birth to 550 days. The results (Fig. 6.3) suggest that
growth rates are substantially higher for males than for females, resulting in
ever-increasing sexual size dimorphism with advancing age. Although the
fitted growth curves seem to show accelerated male growth even before
weaning, weanling weights for males (ca. 23 ± 4 g) and females (ca. 22 ± 4
g) are not significantly different. Therefore, sexual size dimorphism in this
species appears to result almost entirely from the higher postweaning
growth rate of males. Unfortunately, the authors did not plot the actualweights they obtained, so it is difficult to assess how well these functions fit
their data. The growth curves for both sexes seem to reach asymptotic
values (ca. 91 g for females and 136 g for males), but asymptotes estimated
by curve-fitting can be artifactual (Zullinger et al., 1984). Cothran et al.
(1985) noted that some wild-caught males are much larger (170–180 g) than
any raised in their laboratory, and although there might be several
alternative explanations for this, one possibility is that male M. domestica
continue to grow indefinitely. Indeterminate growth has been suggested for
some opossums (e.g., by Gardner, 1973), but other analyses seem to
indicate that adults do not increase in size beyond a certain age (e.g.,
Tyndale-Biscoe and Mackenzie, 1976; Bergallo and Cerqueira, 1994).
Because none of these studies appear to be conclusive, and because it is
possible that growth may be asymptotic in some species but not in others,
this topic merits further investigation.
Longevity
Marsupials are not, in general, long-lived mammals (Austad and Fischer,
1991), and opossums are no exception. Field studies of several species
indicate that wild populations experience almost complete annual turnover,
and that few individuals survive for more than a single breeding season
(Chapter 13). Captive animals, of course, can be expected to live longer
than free-living conspecifics exposed to predators and parasites, but the
interpretation of captive lifespans (Collins, 1973) is complicated by the fact
that the maintenance requirements of most opossums are poorly understood.Fig. 6.3. Sigmoidal functions (von Bertalanffy’s equations) fitted to growth data from captive-bred
cohorts of male and female Monodelphis domestica (redrawn from Cothran et al., 1985)
In laboratory colonies of Monodelphis domestica, a species that thrives
in captivity, natural death usually occurs between 36 and 42 months of age;
the maximum recorded lifespan is 55 months, but evidence of senescence
appears as early as 18 months, with the onset of reproductive decline in
females (VandeBerg, 1989). An early onset of physiological senescence has
also been reported for Didelphis virginiana—another species that is easy to
maintain in captivity—in which third-year females (that is, females entering
their second breeding season) exhibit markedly decreased fertility (Jurgelski
and Porter, 1974). Other opossums that have been successfully maintained
in captivity seem to have similar lifespans to those reported for M.
domestica (e.g., “about three years” for Philander quica; Hingst et al.,
1998), but caluromyines may be an exception. Some individuals of
Caluromysiops irrupta captured in the wild are known to have lived for
almost seven years in zoos (Izor and Pine, 1987). Because arboreality is
correlated with increased longevity in statistical analyses of mammaliandatasets (e.g., Shattuck and Williams, 2010), even such slender evidence of
a similar correlation within Didelphidae is intriguing.
Theory predicts that senescence will occur earlier in species subject to
higher extrinsic mortality than in species subject to lower extrinsic
mortality (Williams, 1957). This expectation has been abundantly supported
by laboratory and field research with a variety of animal taxa, notably
including Austad’s (1993) comparison of aging phenomena in wild
populations of Didelphis virginiana exposed to different levels of natural
predation (Chapter 11). Information about senescence in relation to
predation in additional opossum species would be welcome, as would
information about the demographic impact of parasitism (Chapter 10) on
wild populations of both arboreal and terrestrial taxa.
Sensory Physiology
The size of sensory organs tends to be positively correlated with their
functional importance for the organism, so the large and well-developed
eyes, pinnae, turbinal bones (supporting the olfactory epithelium), and
vibrissae of opossums suggest that vision, hearing, smell, and touch are
correspondingly acute. Indeed, direct observations of foraging behavior of
free-ranging and captive animals have shown that opossums locate prey by
sight, sound, and odor (McManus, 1970; Charles-Dominique et al., 1981;
Tuttle et al., 1981; Rasmussen, 1990). All three senses are surely also
important for predator avoidance, and vibrissal mechanoreception doubtless
plays a key role in navigating dark, cluttered spaces. Although it seems
indisputable that opossum sensory physiology is crucial for survival in
these and other contexts, there are few relevant experimental studies, so
sensory function must often be inferred from morphological or genomic
clues.
Vision
The opossum eye and its associated neural structures are comparable to
those of placental mammals with excellent vision (e.g., felids and primates;
Oswaldo-Cruz et al., 1979; Volchan et al., 2004; Lutz et al., 2018) and seem
well designed to provide good nocturnal imaging ability. Optokinetic
experiments with Monodelphis domestica suggest that visual acuity in thisspecies equals or exceeds that of laboratory rodents measured by the same
method (Dooley et al., 2012), and larger opossums could be expected to
have even more acute vision, as could like-sized species with larger eyes
(Kiltie, 2000; Veilleux and Kirk, 2014). Like other nocturnal mammals
(Peichl, 2005), opossums have strongly rod-dominated retinas. In Didelphis
virginiana, the ratio of cone cells (useful primarily in strong light) to rod
cells (which provide most visual input at low light levels) ranges from 1:50
at the center of the retina to 1:120 at the retinal periphery (Kolb and Wang,
1985); in Thylamys elegans, cones comprise just 0.4% to 1.2% of retinal
photoreceptors (Palacios et al., 2010). A tapetum lucidum—the reflective
retinal layer that serves to amplify photoreception in many nocturnal
vertebrates—is present in some opossums (e.g., Didelphis) but apparently
not in others (e.g., Marmosa; Walls, 1939; Oswaldo-Cruz et al., 1979).
Whether or not opossums have color vision is the topic of some
controversy. Vertebrate color vision is based on cone photopigments
encoded by opsin genes (Jacobs and Rowe, 2004; Jacobs, 2009, 2010),
which can be classified as either short-wave-sensitive (SWS) or long-wave￾sensitive (LWS). Although it is assumed that color vision is absent in taxa
with only one expressed cone opsin gene, color vision is not necessarily
present in species with two or more cone opsins, because color vision also
requires neural mechanisms for comparing the output of cone
photoreceptors with different spectral sensitivities; therefore, behavioral
evidence of color discrimination is important. Most mammals have only
two cone opsin photopigments (one each from the SWS1 and LWS gene
families; Peichl, 2005) and are thought to be capable of only dichromatic
color vision (equivalent to red-green color blindness in humans). Fully
trichromatic mammalian color vision is known to be present only in some
primates (by duplication of the LWS opsin gene) and a few Australian
marsupials (in which the pigmental basis for color perception is still
unknown).
Early behavioral experiments with Didelphis virginiana suggested that
this species has trichromatic color vision (Friedman, 1967), but those
experiments may have been inadequately controlled for confounding
brightness cues (Jacobs and Williams, 2010; Gutierrez et al., 2011). Two
cone opsins (SWS1 and LWS) have been found in didelphid retinas (Hunt et
al., 2009; Palacios et al., 2010), suggesting that opossums are biochemicallyequipped for dichromatic color vision, but cones are so sparsely represented
in opossum retinas that the importance of cone-based vision seems doubtful
(Walls, 1942). Electroretinographic measurements of Didelphis virginiana
suggest that this species has only a single functional class of cone
photoreceptors with a peak spectral sensitivity corresponding to that of an
LWS opsin (Jacobs and Williams, 2010). By contrast, a recent behavioral
study suggests that D. albiventris has dichromatic color vision (Gutierrez et
al., 2011), and electroretinography suggests that Thylamys elegans has two
classes of cone photoreceptors with spectral peaks corresponding to SWS1
and LWS opsins (Palacios et al., 2010). In effect, there is evidence that
some didelphids are functionally monochromatic (as are nocturnal
procyonids and some nocturnal primates), whereas others might be
dichromats.
Hearing
Hearing is important for communication in some social species (e.g.,
humans, marmots, and meerkats) and for navigation by echolocating taxa
(bats and cetaceans), but for most mammals the primary function of hearing
is sound localization: the ability to quickly locate the source of unexpected
sounds—such as those made by predators or prey—so that the eyes can be
brought to bear for additional sensory input. Sound localization can be
based on binaural cues (obtained by comparing the auditory input from left
and right ears) or monaural cues (obtained from comparing auditory input
from a single ear in different positions; Heffner and Heffner, 1992).
Binaural cues include the time difference between sounds impinging on
the left and right ears. A function of the interaural distance, this time
difference (∆t) is obviously greater, and therefore more reliably detected,
for large species (with widely spaced ears) than for small species (with
close-set ears). For sound originating at an azimuth of 90 degrees (directly
to the right or left), ∆t is about 786 microseconds for a human (with an
interaural distance of 180 mm) versus about 39 microseconds for a mouse
(with an interaural distance of 9 mm; Heffner and Heffner, 1992). Another
binaural cue is the difference in the frequency-intensity spectra (∆fi)
incident on the two ears, which is caused by the sound shadow cast by the
head itself. This spectral difference is frequency dependent, because high￾frequency sounds are more attenuated by the head than low-frequencysounds, but ∆fi is also size dependent, because large heads cast more
effective sound shadows than small heads. Therefore, all else being equal,
large mammals are better at binaural sound localization than small
mammals, but small mammals can do better at using binaural spectral cues
if their ears are tuned to higher frequencies.
Monaural sound localization is largely dependent on the morphology and
mobility of the pinnae. In effect, each pinna acts like an auditory funnel that
selectively admits and sometimes amplifies high frequencies along its
directional axis but attenuates high frequencies from other directions (low
frequencies are much less affected by pinna position; Heffner and Heffner,
1992). Because species with small heads and close-set ears are relatively
ineffective at binaural sound localization, monaural cues are expected to be
correspondingly more important for small mammals. Additionally,
monaural cues are crucial for three-dimensional sound localization because
binaural cues are not effective at locating sounds in the vertical plane,
which impinge simultaneously on both ears. Therefore, all else being equal,
arboreal or scansorial species of small mammals would be expected to have
larger pinnae than strictly terrestrial species.
Audiograms are only available for three didelphid species (Ravizza et
al., 1969; Frost and Masterton, 1994), all of which exhibit a range of best
sensitivity that extends well into the ultrasonic spectrum (above the upper
limit of human hearing, ca. 20 kHz): about 4–32 kHz in Didelphis
virginiana and about 8–64 kHz in Monodelphis domestica and Thylamys
elegans. These results are consistent with the expectations of sound￾localization theory, which predicts a greater reliance on higher frequencies
in species with small heads and close-set ears for the reasons explained
above. However, all three species are much less sensitive at all tested
frequencies than most placental mammals. For example, the average lowest
auditory threshold of the three opossum species is 24 decibels (dB),
whereas that of Rattus norvegicus is 0.4 dB (Frost and Masterton, 1994).3
Nevertheless, D. virginiana exhibits excellent sound-localization acuity by
comparison with a wide range of tested placental exemplars (Heffner,
1997).Olfaction
Mammals have several distinct chemosensory organs (Breer et al., 2006),
but the detection of airborne odorant molecules is primarily accomplished
by the main olfactory epithelium of the nasal cavity.
4 This specialized
mucosa is supported by the turbinals, paper-thin scrolls of bone that are
constantly ventilated by inspired air (Rowe et al., 2005). Airborne
molecules—typically volatile organic compounds—are detected by millions
of primary olfactory neurons with dendrites embedded in the main olfactory
epithelium. The axons of these receptor cells pass through perforations in
the cribriform plate at the back of the nasal cavity to synapse with
secondary neurons in the olfactory bulb of the forebrain. Remarkably, each
primary olfactory neuron expresses just one olfactory receptor (OR) gene
and fires only in response to the odorant molecule or molecules that bind to
the protein it encodes. Many hundreds of OR genes are present in most
mammalian genomes, plausibly accounting for the very wide range of odors
that humans and other tested species can distinguish (Firestein, 2001; Reed,
2004).
Table 6.2  Number of Functional Olfactory Receptor (OR) Genes in 12 Mammalian Genomesa
Among other aspects of olfactory performance that might be subject to
natural selection, sensitivity and discriminatory ability seem likely to be
paramount. Opossums have yet to be included in any experimental study of
olfactory sensitivity (e.g., Wackermannová et al., 2016), and no
morphological or genetic proxies for olfactory sensitivity are known. Thesize of a species’ OR gene repertoire, however, is often assumed to be
correlated with the organism’s ability to discriminate odors. Data on the
number of functional OR loci are available from genomic sequencing of
several dozen mammalian species, among which Monodelphis domestica
stands out as among the best endowed for olfactory discrimination (Table
6.2).
Touch
Mechanoreception is an anatomically dispersed function, but the most
exquisitely sensitive mammalian touch receptors are the vibrissae: large
sinus hairs typically found on the head and limbs. To oversimplify the
function of a surprisingly versatile and taxonomically diversified structure,
each vibrissa acts as a lever that transmits and multiplies the pressure
caused by contact with objects in the environment to a bundle of sensory
cells wrapped around its base (Patrizi and Munger, 1966; Loo and Halata,
1991; Brecht et al., 1997). Opossums are provided with a full complement
of mammalian vibrissae (Lyne, 1959), of which the mystacial hairs—the
large “whiskers” found on either side of the rostrum just behind the nose
(Fig. 4.8)—are the most prominent and best studied. Mammalian mystacial
vibrissae are richly innervated, with primary sensory neurons forming large
bundles of afferent fibers that pass through the infraorbital foramen to
synapse with secondary sensory neurons in the trigeminal ganglion.
Mystacial vibrissae are associated in some mammals with a
characteristic behavior, whisking, that has been extensively studied in
laboratory rodents. Whisking is caused by rapid contractions and
relaxations of intrinsic and extrinsic mystacial muscles that cause the
whiskers to be swept backward and forward in wide arcs that intercept any
object within reach of the longest hairs (Mitchinson et al., 2011; Grant et
al., 2013; Sofroniew and Svoboda, 2015). Whisking behavior in opossums
seems to be essentially similar to that of laboratory rodents, suggesting a
similar role for their mystacial vibrissae in actively sensing the spatial
configuration of adjacent space during exploratory behavior (Mitchinson et
al., 2011). Additionally, the mystacial vibrissae of Monodelphis domestica
and laboratory rodents project to equally large areas of the primary
somatosensory cortex, where stimuli from individual vibrissae are similarly
processed (Ramamurthy and Krubitzer, 2016). These observations suggestthat opossums and laboratory rodents are likely to obtain equivalently
complex information from mystacial mechanoreception; in the latter, such
information includes the distance, relative motion, size, shape, and surface
texture of nearby objects (Sofroniew and Svoboda, 2015).
As discussed earlier, the sensory papillae found on the plantar skin of the
hands and feet of Chironectes minimus (Brinkmann’s organs; Chapter 5)
also seem likely to be specialized mechanoreceptors. Although these
remarkable structures are plausibly useful for underwater foraging, their
sensory physiology remains completely unknown. Because C. minimus is
neither difficult to capture (Voss et al., 2001) nor unusually challenging to
maintain in captivity (Oliver, 1976), there is an obvious opportunity here
for innovative sensory research on this ecobehaviorally unique marsupial.
Toxin Resistance
By contrast with the topics discussed above, which concern physiological
functions common to most mammals, toxin resistance is an unusual trait
that only a few taxa are known to possess. Although the distinction is
chemically arbitrary, biological toxins are commonly classified by delivery
method: as venoms, if delivered by injection, or as poisons, if delivered by
ingestion. Examples of toxin resistance in opossums include resistance to
snake venoms and to the poisonous skin secretions of amphibians. Because
both traits enable opossums to consume prey that would otherwise be
unavailable, toxin-resistant phenotypes can validly be considered trophic
adaptations.
Snake-Venom Resistance
Snake-venom resistance is known to occur in some hedgehogs, some
mongooses, a few mustelids, and members of the opossum tribe Didelphini.
What these unrelated mammals have in common is ophiophagy, a diet that
includes venomous snakes (Voss and Jansa, 2012). Among didelphids,
snake-venom resistance and/or ophiophagy has been documented for
species of Didelphis, Lutreolina, and Philander (Vellard, 1945, 1949;
Werner and Vick, 1977; Sazima, 1992; Oliveira and Santori, 1999;
Almeida-Santos et al., 2000; Rodrigues, 2005; Gómez-Martínez et al.,
2008).Snake venoms are complex mixtures of toxic molecules. Recent
proteomic research suggests that most venoms contain several dozen toxic
proteins and peptides that act synergistically to shut down vital
physiological functions, such as breathing or hemostasis (Fox and Serrano,
2008; Calvete, 2010; Mackessy, 2010). Whereas neurotoxic venoms
typically cause victims to suffocate by poisoning membrane function at
neuromuscular synapses, hemotoxic venoms cause massive bleeding by
attacking hemostatic proteins. Although some opossums are known to
attack and eat snakes with neurotoxic venom (Gómez-Martínez et al.,
2008), laboratory studies of venom resistance in didelphids have focused
primarily on snake venoms with hemotoxic effects.
Two primary mechanisms of snake-venom resistance have been
identified in opossums and other ophiophagous mammals: toxin￾neutralizing serum factors and adaptive changes in venom-targeted
substrate or ligand molecules. Toxin-neutralizing serum factors were the
first to be discovered and characterized (e.g., by Vellard, 1945; Perales et
al., 1986, 1994; Catanese and Kress, 1993; Jurgilas et al., 2003). These
factors confer “transferable immunity,” so called because serum from
venom-resistant opossums affords some protection to experimentally
envenomed laboratory species. Insofar as known, all toxin-neutralizing
serum factors are non-enzymatic glycoproteins paralogous with human
plasma alpha 1B-immunoglobulins (Neves-Ferreira et al., 2010). They are
not antibodies; in fact, no antibodies to snake venoms are apparently
produced by ophiophagous opossums, presumably because endogenous
antitoxins clear venom antigens from the bloodstream too rapidly for an
antibody-mediated immune response to occur.
Adaptive changes in venom-targeted substrate or ligand molecules are
less biomedically interesting than toxin-neutralizing serum factors because
the resulting immunity is nontransferable, so this mechanism of venom
resistance has received correspondingly less attention. The best-known
examples among placental mammals are amino-acid substitutions in a
synaptic membrane protein that inhibit binding by snake-venom
neurotoxins (Barchan et al., 1992; Drabeck et al., 2015). Another example,
now understood in comparable detail, consists of amino-acid substitutions
in opossum von Willebrand factor (vWF) that inhibit binding by C-type
lectins found in pitviper venom (Jansa and Voss, 2011). A crucial bloodprotein, vWF initiates primary hemostasis (formation of a platelet plug),
and the substitutions that inhibit binding with snake-venom toxins are
present in the group of large opossums known to attack and eat pitvipers
and to resist the toxic effects of pitviper venom (Didelphis, Lutreolina, and
Philander; see above).
Although multiple mechanisms of snake-venom resistance are known to
occur in opossums that eat venomous snakes (Voss and Jansa, 2012), the
molecular basis of resistance has been determined for just a few toxins:
metalloproteinases and A2 phospholipases (both neutralized by serum
factors) and C-type lectins (neutralized by adaptive changes in ligand
molecules). Because snake venoms contain dozens of toxic compounds,
venom resistance must be a correspondingly complex trait, of which we are
just beginning to understand the molecular details.
Resistance to Amphibian Toxins
Opossum resistance to ingested amphibian poisons is less well documented
than snake-venom resistance, but Didelphis marsupialis and D. virginiana
are known to eat toads (Anura: Bufonidae), which are protected by
bufadienolides (Hayes et al., 2009), and D. virginiana also eats newts
(Urodela: Salamandridae), which are protected by tetrodotoxin and related
compounds (Mebs et al., 2010). Evidence that common opossums consume
such potently toxic prey with impunity comes from analyses of stomach
contents (reviewed by Gardner, 1982), feeding experiments (Hart et al.,
2019), and anecdotal but compelling field observations (Garrett and Boyer,
1993; Laurance and Laurance, 2007). Unfortunately, most studies of
opossum food habits are based on analyses of feces (Chapter 9), which
seldom preserve morphological evidence of amphibian consumption
(Hamilton, 1958), so the dietary importance of poisonous amphibians is
hard to assess from the literature.
Bufadienolides belong to a class of steroid compounds known as cardiac
glycosides that produce their toxic effects by inhibiting the sodium￾potassium pump (Na+/K+-ATPase) in cardiac muscle cells. Cardiac
glycosides are produced as secondary metabolites by numerous plants (e.g.,
milkweeds) and by toads, but some herbivorous insects (e.g., milkweed
bugs) and a few toad-eating vertebrates (including the hedgehog Erinaceuseuropaeus) have evolved convergent amino-acid substitutions in Na+/K+-
ATPase that confer physiological resistance to these defensive toxins
(Ujvari et al., 2015).
Tetrodotoxin, by contrast, produces its toxic effects by selectively
binding with voltage-gated sodium (Nav) channels in muscle and nerve
membranes. Because no biosynthetic pathway for tetrodotoxin has yet been
identified in metazoans, tetrodotoxin-defended vertebrates (e.g., newts;
Yotsu-Yamashita et al., 2012) are thought to acquire toxicity either via
symbiotic bacteria or through the food chain. Resistance to tetrodotoxin has
evolved in several taxa—notably in newt-eating snakes—by amino-acid
substitutions in muscular and neuronal Nav channels (Soong and Venkatesh,
2006).
Although the mechanisms by which common opossums resist the toxic
effects of amphibian chemical defenses have yet to be investigated,
repeated discoveries of molecular convergence among bufadienolide- and
tetrodotoxin-resistant taxa (Soong and Venkatesh, 2006; Ujvari et al., 2015)
suggest that similar amino-acid substitutions in Na+/K+-ATPase and Nav
channels could be expected among toad- and newt-eating didelphids.
Interestingly, research on other vertebrates that eat poisonous amphibians
suggests that the evolution of toxin resistance incurs physiological costs,
some of which have been demonstrated experimentally (Brodie and Brodie,
1999; Lee et al., 2011), whereas others have been inferred from
phylogenetic reversals (Ujvari et al., 2015). Given the molecular targets of
bufadienolides and tetrodotoxin, it seems reasonable to assume that the
physiological costs of toxin-resistant molecular phenotypes include reduced
cardiac and neuromuscular performance, which would be interesting
physiological traits to compare in toxin-resistant and -nonresistant species
of opossums.
Discussion
Although it is often claimed that marsupials are evolutionarily and
ecologically “constrained” by various aspects of their metabolic and
reproductive physiology (e.g., McNab, 1978, 1986; Goin et al., 2016), it is
not clear that any metabolic or reproductive trait has inhibited the adaptive
radiation of opossums. To be sure, didelphids are maximally diverse inlowland tropical rainforests—uniquely permissive environments with stable
temperature regimes, abundant rainfall, and diverse food resources—but
opossums occur at higher latitudes (to 49° N and S), at higher elevations (to
at least 4000 m in the Andes), and in drier habitats (with <1 mm of annual
rainfall) than those occupied by placental clades of comparable crown age
that are seldom described as physiologically “constrained” (e.g., platyrrhine
primates and phyllostomid bats; Rojas et al., 2016; Silvestro et al., 2019). In
effect, opossums as a group do not appear to be strikingly handicapped
metabolically or reproductively by comparison with sympatric placental
radiations.
Available information likewise suggests that opossums are provided with
sensory abilities comparable to those of other nocturnal mammals, although
possibly with somewhat less sensitive hearing and perhaps with better-than￾average olfactory acuity. Unfortunately, most relevant observations derive
from research on just a few species, which might not be typical of the
family in all respects. It does seem safe to conclude, however, that
opossums as a group are neither obviously deficient nor unusually endowed
with respect to known aspects of visual, auditory, olfactory, or tactile
sensation. However, future research on species with unique morphologies
(e.g., Chironectes) is certain to enhance understanding of opossum sensory
adaptations.
The only known physiological trait that would seem to confer an
ecological advantage on some opossums is their ability to resist the toxic
effects of snake venom and, apparently, amphibian poisons. Such
phenotypes are surely advantageous, because they allow toxin-resistant
species to exploit otherwise dangerous prey that might be key for survival
during periodic episodes of resource scarcity (Chapter 9). These, however,
are trophic adaptations possessed by a single clade of opossums and do
nothing to explain the persistence of the group as a whole in competitor-rich
Neotropical habitats. Thus, if there were some general explanation for the
evolutionary success of didelphids, it would not appear to reside in any
known aspect of their physiology.NOTES
1. The “maintenance rate of energy use” implies that metabolic measurements are obtained from
subjects that are inactive, nongrowing, nonreproductive, and postabsorptive; thus, there are abundant
sources of experimental error. Metabolic rates are typically quantified in terms of oxygen
consumption (ml O2
/hr), and for comparative purposes the mass-specific basal rate (ml O2
/g·hr) is
the quantity of interest. Because metabolic rates scale with negative allometry, larger endotherms
have, on average, lower (mass-specific) BMRs than smaller endotherms (Withers et al., 2016).
2. Contra McNab (1978), no tropical rainforest marsupial is known to store fat in its tail. All
opossums with incrassate tails inhabit arid or semiarid habitats subject to seasonal drought and
resource scarcity (Chapters 4 and 8).
3. The relative insensitivity of opossum hearing is plausibly attributed by Ravizza et al. (1969) to
energy loss at the tympanum, which is attached at its circumference to a thin bony ring (the tympanic
annulus), whereas the tympanum in rodents and many other placental mammals is attached to a
completely ossified auditory bulla.
4. Another olfactory structure, the vomeronasal organ, is crucially important for the detection of
pheromones and other chemical signals that mediate reproduction and social behavior in mammals.
This accessory chemosensory system has received much research attention with laboratory colonies
of Monodelphis domestica (see Harder and Jackson, 2010), but like other aspects of the social
phenotype (e.g., scent glands and scent-marking behavior), we do not treat it here.7
Behavior
Behavior is the principal interface between morphology and physiology on
the one hand and the environment on the other, so the adaptive significance
of morphological and physiological traits is often difficult to understand in
the absence of behavioral context. To date, only a few didelphid species
(e.g., Caluromys philander, Didelphis virginiana, and Monodelphis
domestica) have been studied in any behavioral detail, but much of what we
know about them is based on observations of captive individuals.
Unfortunately, because captives are seldom exposed to the full range of
stimuli encountered in their native habitat, some adaptively important
behaviors might escape the attention of laboratory researchers.
Didelphid behavioral studies were last reviewed by Kimble (1997), who
discussed several topics that are not considered here (e.g., vocalizations,
scent marking, and learning). Instead, we focus on behaviors that are
relevant for understanding taxonomic variation in morphological traits, or
that contribute to our understanding of ecological adaptations. Additionally,
we emphasize observations of behavior by unrestrained animals in their
natural habitats, a category of information that has expanded rapidly in the
recent literature.
Diel Activity
Most didelphids are nocturnal (Fig. 7.1). Nocturnal activity has been
reported for many species based on direct observations of free-ranging
individuals in the wild (e.g., Enders, 1935; Charles-Dominique et al., 1981;
Janson et al., 1981; Tuttle et al., 1981; Rasmussen, 1990; Ryser, 1992), on
the results of trapping studies and automated photography (Vieira andBaumgarten, 1995; Oliveira-Santos et al., 2008; Norris et al., 2010; Gregory
et al., 2014), and on telemetry of radio-collared animals (Sunquist et al.,
1987; Ryser, 1995; Galliez et al., 2009). Nocturnal activity can also be
inferred from the abundant remains of some species in owl pellets
(Carmona and Rivadeneira, 2006; Motta, 2006; Teta et al., 2009).
Observations of nocturnal activity by some opossum species has also been
reported from captive studies (e.g., Park et al., 1940; McManus, 1971;
Bucher and Fritz, 1977).1 By contrast (and with exceptions as noted below),
most didelphids are not normally active in the daytime, as indicated by the
methods mentioned previously, by the absence of diurnal observations at
sites where opossums are known to be abundant (e.g., Voss et al., 2001),
and by diurnal nest occupancy (e.g., Loretto and Vieira, 2011).
Fig. 7.1. Histogram of diel activity by free-ranging Marmosa paraguayana documented by
automated photography in southeastern Brazil. Bars represent hourly frequencies of 90 time-stamped
camera-trap photographs (redrawn from Oliveira-Santos et al., 2008)
More or less compelling evidence of nocturnality from such sources is
available for members of most didelphid genera (Table 4.1), but relevantdata are deficient or equivocal for Lestodelphys, Lutreolina, and
Chacodelphys. Only captive observations of diel activity are available for
Lestodelphys, which seems to be predominantly nocturnal but is sometimes
active in the daytime (Martin and Udrizar Sauthier, 2011). Although
Lutreolina crassicaudata is said to be nocturnal (Marshall, 1978a), we have
found no explicit description of nocturnal activity by this mink-like species
—which often inhabits dense grass that probably conceals it from visually
oriented predators—and there is at least one report of diurnal activity in the
wild (Rodrigues, 2005). Very little is known about the diel activity of
Chacodelphys, whose nocturnal habits are suggested only by remains found
in owl pellets (Teta et al., 2006; Teta and Pardiñas, 2007).
By contrast, several species of Monodelphis are known to be diurnally
active (Chapter 4). These species are among the most colorful and boldly
marked members of the family Didelphidae, suggesting that their pelage
pigmentation (presumably adaptive either for concealment or species
recognition; Chapter 5) has evolved under different light conditions than
those encountered by other opossums. Because diurnally active species of
Monodelphis include members of all five subgenera (Pavan and Voss,
2016), diurnal activity might be ancestral for the genus. In fact, the only
species of Monodelphis definitely known to be nocturnal is M. domestica,
whose relevant behaviors and metabolic rhythms are attested by both field
observations (Streilein, 1982a) and laboratory experiments (e.g., Busse et
al., 2014; Seelke et al., 2014). With such taxonomic variation, and with a
high-coverage genome available (Samollow, 2008), species of this genus
would seem to be ideal subjects for researching the genetic basis of diel
activity patterns in mammals.
Lunar Phobia
The activity of nocturnal mammals is often affected by bright moonlight,
but lunar effects on mammalian behavior vary considerably from taxon to
taxon (Prugh and Golden, 2014). The woolly opossum Caluromys philander
exhibits classic lunar phobia, reducing its nightly activity when the moon is
near full (Julien-Laferrière, 1997), but the activities of several other
nocturnal opossums (e.g., Didelphis marsupialis, Metachirus nudicaudatus;
Pratas-Santiago et al., 2016) seem unaffected by lunar phase, and at leastone species (Didelphis albiventris; Huck et al., 2017b) is said to be more
active in bright moonlight than when the moon is dark. Risk of detection by
visually oriented predators is often suggested as an explanation for lunar
phobia, and it seems plausible that C. philander is more vulnerable to owls
(Charles-Dominique et al., 1981) as it forages for fruit in the brightly
moonlit canopy by comparison with terrestrial and scansorial opossums,
which might be less vulnerable to avian predation while foraging in the
heavily shaded and densely cluttered forest understory. Additional
information about the effects of moonlight on opossum behavior would be
useful for evaluating this and other hypotheses (besides predation risk) that
might account for species differences (Prugh and Golden, 2014).
Locomotion
Like other tetrapods, opossums use a variety of locomotor behaviors to
traverse different substrates. Although distinct suites of behavioral traits
seem to be associated with arboreal, terrestrial, and semiaquatic
locomotion, only a few species have been studied in this context, so
generalizations are still elusive. Nonetheless, some opossum behaviors
associated with locomotion on different substrates strikingly resemble those
previously reported among other mammals with convergent habits, lending
credibility to adaptive interpretations.
Species of Caluromys are often active on small-diameter substrates in
the forest canopy and subcanopy (Charles-Dominique et al., 1981;
Rasmussen, 1990). Locomotion on small-diameter arboreal substrates is a
biomechanically challenging activity where falling is an omnipresent
hazard and gaps among adjacent supports of unknown reliability must often
be negotiated. Field and laboratory studies of locomotion by C. derbianus
and C. philander (e.g., Rasmussen, 1990; Schmitt and Lemelin, 2002;
Lemelin et al., 2003; Lemelin and Schmitt, 2007; Youlatos, 2008, 2010;
Dalloz et al., 2012) have reported numerous primate-like behaviors in these
species, including diagonal-sequence walking (placement of a hind foot is
followed by placement of the contralateral forefoot), powerful hallucal
grasping with the hind feet, and zygodactylous grasping with the forefeet.
Other characteristic arboreal behaviors of Caluromys described by these
studies include below-branch quadrupedal locomotion, foot-hanging (abelow-branch suspensory posture with only the hind feet supporting the
body), tail-hanging (a below-branch suspensory posture with only the tail
supporting the body), bridging (spanning gaps with at least three feet
anchored), and cantilevering (spanning gaps with only the hind feet
anchored).
Locomotor behavior in Monodelphis domestica, a terrestrial species, has
only been studied in the laboratory, primarily for the purpose of
comparisons with Caluromys (Lemelin et al., 2003; Lemelin and Schmitt,
2007). Not surprisingly, M. domestica is slow and unsteady on small￾diameter substrates (dowels and branches), often slipping or falling from
supports that C. philander negotiates with ease. None of the primate-like
arboreal behaviors reported for Caluromys (see above) seem to have been
observed for M. domestica, which (among other differences) primarily uses
lateral-sequence rather than diagonal-sequence gaits.
Studies of gait mechanics provide a good example of how biomechanical
analyses can support adaptive explanations for observed behavioral
differences. Theoretically, the lateral-sequence walking gaits favored by
Monodelphis domestica and most other terrestrial mammals improve
stability on level substrates by maximizing the support provided by large
tripods that enclose the animal’s center of gravity (Hildebrand, 1980). By
contrast, the diagonal-sequence walking gaits preferred by Caluromys
philander and many primates appear to enhance stability during arboreal
locomotion by ensuring that a grasping hind foot is placed on a tested
support below the animal’s center of gravity just before the contralateral
forefoot strikes down on an untested support (Cartmill et al., 2002).
Interestingly, Didelphis virginiana—a scansorial species—uses both lateral￾and diagonal-sequence walking gaits (White, 1990).
Jumping or leaping has seldom been reported in field studies of free￾ranging opossums, but it must often be necessary in order for arboreal
animals to cross gaps in canopy or subcanopy vegetation that are too wide
to be bridged or spanned by cantilevering.2 Consistent with this expectation,
arboreal opossums (e.g., Caluromys philander, Gracilinanus microtarsus,
and Marmosa paraguayana) can be induced to jump longer distances
between elevated supports than can scansorial species (Didelphis
marsupialis and Philander quica), and at least one terrestrial species(Metachirus myosuros) cannot be induced to jump at all (Delciellos and
Vieira, 2009b).
Like many other mammals, terrestrial and scansorial opossums (e.g.,
Lutreolina and Didelphis) swim competently by quadrupedal paddling,
using both lateral- and diagonal-sequence strokes of the forelimbs and
hindlimbs (Fish, 1993; Santori et al., 2005). By contrast, the water opossum
Chironectes swims with alternate strokes of its webbed hind feet only, as do
many semiaquatic placental mammals (e.g., desmans [Desmana], beavers
[Castor], and muskrats [Ondatra]). The forefeet of Chironectes are not used
for swimming but are held outstretched under the chin, with the digits
unflexed; apparently, the tail is not used for rectilinear swimming (Mondolfi
and Padilla, 1957; Fish, 1993).
Digging is perhaps not appropriately considered a mode of locomotion
(except for fossorial taxa), but it seems relevant to remark in this section
that most opossums do not dig at all. Indeed, the small-clawed forefeet of
many species (Figs. 5.3B, 5.3C) are obviously unsuited for digging,
especially in root-filled forest soils. Species of Monodelphis (Fig. 5.3A) are
much longer-clawed and have been reported to scratch around in loose soil
and leaf litter, but they appear to dig infrequently (Pheasey et al., 2018). By
contrast, desert-dwelling Lestodelphys, whose long claws resemble those of
Monodelphis, is said to dig burrows in captive enclosures and has been
found occupying burrows in the wild.
Feeding
Many mammals use only the mouth for food procurement, but didelphids
often use their prehensile hands to secure and manipulate edible objects
(Figs. 4.5, 4.15). Potentially dangerous prey—such as scorpions—are
sometimes pinned to the ground with the forefeet before being bitten
(Streilein, 1982a; Pheasey et al., 2018), but in other cases biting seems to
precede forefoot involvement (Oliveira and Santori, 1999; Almeida-Santos
et al., 2000), and intraspecific variation in premasticatory forefoot use
suggests that this behavior may depend on prey size and prey defenses;
fuzzy caterpillars, for example, are often scratched or rolled with the
forefeet to remove irritating hairs before being eaten (González and
Claramunt, 2000). Both terrestrial opossums (e.g., Monodelphis domestica;Streilein, 1982a) and arboreal species (e.g., Caluromys derbianus;
Rasmussen, 1990) have been observed to snatch flying insects from the air
with their forefeet. As previously noted, the water opossum (Chironectes)
uses its hands to search for and grasp underwater prey prior to oral
processing (Mondolfi and Padilla, 1957; Rosenthal, 1975; Oliver, 1976).
Most descriptions of didelphid feeding behavior (including those cited
above and many others) describe the use of the hands to transfer food to the
mouth or to position large items in the mouth for biting.
Some aspects of feeding behavior are relevant for dietary inferences
based on indirect evidence, such as fecal analysis. Small opossums, for
example, preferentially consume the head, thorax, and abdomen of large
insects but often discard the legs and wings (Enders, 1935; Pheasey, et al.,
2018). Because legs and wings can be important for prey identification, the
importance of large insects in the diets of small opossums might be
consistently underestimated from scat samples. Similarly, mice are partially
or completely skinned before they are eaten by small opossums (González
and Claramunt, 2000; Martin and Udrizar Sauthier, 2011), so taxonomically
diagnostic hairs might be absent or infrequent in scat. Detailed observations
about fruit eating are scarce, but some opossums are reported to swallow
only the pulp of large-seeded fruits (Charles-Dominique et al., 1981;
Atramentowicz, 1988).
Like most other mammals, opossums first orally grasp food items with
the anterior dentition, but as previously noted (Chapter 5), the incisors are
unlikely to play a major role in food procurement or food reduction.
Instead, killing bites, when necessary, are delivered with the canines. In all
described cases of opossums feeding on mechanically resistant objects (e.g.,
vertebrate prey too large ingest whole), the item is next positioned with one
or both forefeet for unilateral biting by the postcanine dentition until it is
separated into sufficiently small fragments for intraoral chewing (Hiiemae
and Crompton, 1971; González and Claramunt, 2000; Pheasey et al., 2018).
Careful examination of photographs suggests that food separation prior to
intraoral chewing is primarily accomplished with the premolars, which
seem appropriately designed for this purpose (Chapter 5). Intraoral chewing
involves complex, precise movements of the tongue and jaws that have
been closely observed with cineradiography in functional-morphological
studies of Didelphis virginiana and Monodelphis domestica (Hiiemae andCrompton, 1971; Bhullar et al., 2019). In this stage of mastication, food is
processed exclusively by the molar dentition.
Social Behavior
Like most nocturnal mammals, didelphids are normally solitary (Charles￾Dominique, 1983). Apart from agonistic encounters, matings, and brief
interactions of unknown significance, adult opossums do not usually
associate with one another in the wild, and nests are almost always found to
be occupied either by single adult individuals or by a single lactating female
and her nursing offspring.3 Apparently, didelphids do not exhibit
allogrooming, a behavior known to reduce social tension in other mammals
(McManus, 1970; Charles-Dominique, 1983; Russell, 1984; González and
Claramunt, 2000). No compelling evidence of pair-bonding or even of
prolonged postweaning associations of mother and offspring has been
reported for any opossum species. Indeed, captive studies of several species
have reported that cannibalism can occur if mother and offspring are not
promptly separated at weaning (Barnes and Wolf, 1971; Charles￾Dominique, 1983; Atramentowicz, 1995; Hingst et al., 1998).
Agonistic Behavior, Fighting, and Passive Defense
Agonistic encounters among conspecifics and reactions to threats from
other species are always accompanied by oral gaping, the so-called open￾mouth display (McManus, 1970; Streilein, 1982c; González and Claramunt,
2000; Martin and Udrizar Sauthier, 2011). This behavior (Fig. 4.12) exposes
the upper and lower canines—the only effective morphological weaponry
that opossums possess—and doubtless signals the animal’s capacity and
willingness to bite. Another noteworthy agonistic behavior is the semierect
or fully bipedal stance that many small opossums assume in both
conspecific and interspecific confrontations (Enders, 1935; Beach, 1939;
Streilein, 1982b; González and Claramunt, 2000; Martin and Udrizar
Sauthier, 2011). Apparently, large opossums (e.g., species of Didelphis;
McManus, 1970; Streilein, 1982c) do not adopt such upright postures.
Actual fighting among conspecifics has seldom been described and is
presumably rare, except, perhaps, when food resources are very
concentrated (Charles-Dominique, 1983), and in the context of sexualcompetition. According to Ryser (1992), who studied radio-collared
Didelphis virginiana during the mating season in Florida, several males
typically compete for access to an estrous female, and males were often
observed to have wounds, suggesting that severe fighting occurs during
these episodes. Staged encounters between captive adult males usually
involve fighting, during which most attacks are directed at the head, throat,
and shoulder; typical wounds sustained in such fights are canine punctures
(McManus, 1970); remarkably, prior residency in the enclosure where
fights were staged did not appear to confer any advantage, nor were any
effective submission postures observed. Therefore, this species seems to
lack some of the behavioral cues commonly used by other mammals to
avoid or de-escalate combat.
Some species of common opossums use passive defense when attacked
by predators. The best known of such behaviors is death feigning—
sometimes called “playing possum” or “thanatosis.” Death-feigning appears
to be better developed in Didelphis virginiana than in other congeneric
species, but in the absence of any detailed ethological studies of
Neotropical common opossums, this impression might be misleading. The
subject of considerable folklore (Hartman, 1952), feigned death in D.
virginiana is a highly stereotyped behavior that is consistently exhibited
only when the animal is seized by the neck and violently shaken, typically
by a dog (Norton et al., 1964; Franq, 1969; Gabrielsen and Smith, 1985).
Unlike sleeping animals, opossums feigning death are fully conscious; the
eyes remain open, and the behavior is always preceded by defecation and
release of fluid from the anal glands. “Recovery” occurs quickly, typically
just as soon as the attacker leaves the scene.
Most researchers have concluded that feigning death helps Didelphis
avoid predation, but it is not clear why a hungry predator should lose
interest in a dead victim. One plausible explanation involves the noxious
substances that some death-feigning species secrete when they are attacked:
feigning death might inhibit the predator’s killing behavior and gain time
for defensive secretions to work their deterrent effects (Rogers and
Simpson, 2014).
4 As far as we are aware, the chemistry of anal gland
secretions by common opossums has not been investigated, but the paste or
fluid secreted by these glands is sometimes described as foul smelling, and
it might also have physiological effects on predators if ingested. Otheraspects of the morphology and behavior of common opossums support the
notion that death feigning has evolved as part of a complex defensive
adaptation, key aspects of which remain obscure. To the best of our
knowledge, death feigning has not been documented as a consistently
exhibited behavior in any other mammal.5
Nesting
Sleeping places must be chosen carefully if animals are to be concealed
from predators and sheltered from the elements while unconscious. The
fauna of disease-bearing hematophagous insects to which the animal is
exposed while asleep can also be affected by nest location (Gaunt and
Miles, 2000). Thus, nesting behavior (including site choice and nest
construction) has potentially important fitness consequences. For the
purposes of this review, “nests” will refer to the diurnal refugia of nocturnal
opossums because nothing is known about the nocturnal refugia of diurnal
species.
Not surprisingly, arboreal and scansorial opossums tend to nest in trees,
whereas the nest sites of terrestrial opossums are at or near ground level
(Miles et al., 1981; Loretto et al., 2005; Moraes and Chiarello, 2005b;
Delciellos et al., 2006; Lira et al., 2018). The most commonly reported
nesting places of arboreal and scansorial species include tree cavities,
tangled lianas, and (especially) leaf accumulations in palm crowns (Miles et
al., 1981; Moraes and Chiarello, 2005b; Lira et al., 2018). Bird nests,
however, are sometimes appropriated by small opossums (Enders, 1935;
Cáceres and Pichorim, 2003), and Didelphis aurita is known to occupy the
abandoned tree nests of coatis (Monticelli-Almada and Gasco, 2018). Two
species, Philander quica and Hyladelphys kalinowskii, are known to occupy
aboveground nests built entirely of leaves and possibly made by the animals
themselves; however, whereas the leaf nests of P. quica are said to simply
be woven together (Lira et al., 2018), those of H. kalinowskii are cemented
together and fastened to supporting understory vegetation with a white
substance of unknown origin (Catzeflis, 2018).
Ground-level nesting sites are also diverse. Didelphis virginiana
occupies a wide range of refugia, including hollow logs and the abandoned
burrows of other mammals (skunks, armadillos, woodchucks, foxes, etc.;Gardner, 1982). In the dry Caatinga habitats of northeastern Brazil, D.
albiventris is said to favor cavities in rocky outcrops (Streilein, 1982a). The
ground-level and subsurface leaf-litter nests of Metachirus myosuros are
said to be carefully camouflaged (almost impossible to detect visually) and
defended by unique behaviors (Loretto et al., 2005). The Patagonian
opossum Lestodelphys halli may excavate subterranean galleries or use
abandoned rodent burrows for nesting (Martin and Udrizar Sauthier, 2011).
Most opossums provision their sleeping places with dry leaves, grass, or
other suitable bedding. This nesting material is transported using the tail, a
remarkable behavior that has been reported for at least 11 species in seven
genera (Delgado-V. et al., 2014).6 Automated video cameras have also
recorded at least one female Didelphis marsupialis using its pouch to
transport nesting material. Such investments of time and effort are
presumably advantageous when the same nest is occupied continuously (or
repeatedly) over an extended period of time, and radiotelemetry suggest that
this is often the case (e.g., Fitch and Shirer, 1970; Lira et al., 2018).
Research with captive Monodelphis domestica suggests that females build
nests more consistently and use more nesting material than males, and that
both sexes build better quality nests at lower ambient temperatures than
they do at warmer temperatures (Fadem et al., 1986).
Mating
Copulatory behavior has only been described for four didelphid species and
appears to differ between terrestrial and arboreal taxa. Whereas two
terrestrial taxa (Didelphis virginiana and Monodelphis domestica;
Reynolds, 1952; Trupin and Fadem, 1982) copulate while lying on their
sides on the ground, at least two arboreal species (Marmosa robinsoni and
Tlacuatzin canescens; Barnes and Barthold, 1969; Valtierra-Azotla and
García, 1998) copulate while one or both partners are suspended from
elevated supports by their tails. According to Barnes and Barthold (1969),
male M. robinsoni are unable to achieve erection and intromission without
overhead purchase for the tail.Care of Young
Care of the young is exclusively provided by the female opossum (Russell,
1984). In early postnatal life, opossum maternal behavior is rudimentary.
Neonates climb from the cloaca to the nipples unassisted, and any neonates
that fail to attach to a nipple are ignored and left to die (Reynolds, 1952;
Barnes and Barthold, 1969). Female Didelphis are said to pay little or no
attention to nursing young during the weeks-long interval that they are
continuously attached to the nipples, but females of Caluromys and
Philander have been observed to lick nursing young (presumably to clean
them; Charles-Dominique, 1983), and a female Marmosa was observed to
retrieve experimentally detached young and to help them reattach (Beach,
1939). Once the young have opened their eyes and are not constantly
attached, the female leaves them in the nest as she forages or carries them
about on her back until they are weaned; this interval ranges from about a
week to over six weeks, depending on the species (Reynolds, 1952; Julien￾Laferrière and Atramentowicz, 1990; Atramentowicz, 1995). The spectacle
of female opossums heavily burdened with offspring at this stage of
development (Fig. 7.2) is compelling evidence that leaving young behind in
the nest must sometimes incur an unacceptably high risk of loss due to
predation or other accidents.
Fig. 7.2. Female Marmosa murina carrying unweaned young in French Guiana (photo by Antoine
Baglan)Discussion
Many of the didelphid behaviors described above and in other reviews (e.g.,
Kimble, 1997) are unexceptionally mammalian. Most mammals are
nocturnal, and a solitary lifestyle is almost universal among nonflying
nocturnal species. The absence of any male involvement in care of the
young, and the termination of maternal care at weaning are also widespread
(and possibly ancestral) mammalian traits. Additional aspects of opossum
behavior mentioned in other chapters—in connection with sensory
physiology (Chapter 6), dietary habits (Chapter 9), and population biology
(Chapter 13)—are likewise familiar from ethological research with a wide
range of other taxa. Therefore, although some opossum species have
eccentric habits, opossums as a group do not appear to be behaviorally
unusual mammals.
As might be expected, didelphids exhibit a much narrower range of
behaviors than Australasian marsupials, which include taxa of widely
differing autecologies. No opossums glide, hop bipedally, or travel
underground; none forms pair bonds, engages in allogrooming, or lives in
herds or family groups. However, didelphid variation in behavioral traits
does not appear notably impoverished by comparison with behavioral
variation within ecologically similar Australasian clades of roughly
equivalent crown age, such as dasyurids or peramelids. In fact, didelphids
and dasyurids are behaviorally similar in many respects (Croft, 2003).
Among opossums, the main axis of ethological variation concerns
arboreal versus terrestrial adaptations. This pattern of behavioral disparity is
clearest in locomotor traits—obviously because tree-living and ground￾dwelling species encounter distinctly different substrates as they go about
their nightly rounds—but nest-site selection, lunar phobia, and mating
behavior might be other behavioral correlates of vertical stratification.
Chironectes is clearly an outlier due to its semiaquatic habits, Lestodelphys
seems to be the only opossum that digs, and Didelphis virginiana is the only
species definitely known known to feign death, but opossum behavioral
research is still in its infancy, and it seems probable that future research will
discover behavioral phenotypes unique to other taxa that currently seem to
be ethologically indistinguishable.NOTES
1. Note, however, that behavioral observations in captivity do not always agree with field data.
Captive water opossums (Chironectes), for example, are said to often be active in the daytime
(Oliver, 1976), whereas field studies consistently indicate nocturnal habits (Voss et al., 2001; Galliez
et al., 2009; Leite et al., 2013). The reason for such discrepancies is not certainly known, but as Croft
(2003: 333) remarks, “In captivity, feeding times are quickly learnt and thus may confound the
timing and expression of foraging behavior.”
2. The only reported observations of unforced leaping by opossums seem to be Enders’ (1935)
account of locomotion by Marmosa isthmica and Charles-Dominique et al.’s (1981) description of M.
demerarae (“On peut facilement le reconnaître dans le haut des arbres, à sa course rapide et saccadée,
et aux nombreux sauts qu’il fait entre les branches”).
3. Of 346 records of five species of opossums using artificial nest boxes in southeastern Brazil,
89% were of solitary individuals, 8% were of females with nursing young, and just 3% were of
“multiple individuals” (Astúa et al., 2015). The latter category is, unfortunately, uninterpretable
because no information was provided about age or relatedness. The same authors report a single
(equally uninterpretable) observation of communal denning by Didelphis albiventris in an urban
setting.
4. Curiously, this hypothesis is ignored in Humphreys and Ruxton’s (2018) review of death
feigning, which does not mention opossums at all.
5. Other phenotypic attributes of Didelphis that seem relevant in this context include white
underfur (Fig. 4.10), which, when exposed by piloerection, makes the animal unmistakable for any
other, and might be an aposematic signal (Chapter 5). Common opossums are also slow for their size,
which is also true of many aposematic species (e.g., porcupines and skunks) that rely on defenses
other than speed to escape predators (Garland, 1983). Lastly, the peculiar vertebral reinforcements
(including ankylosed cervical elements; Fig. 5.9), which have no plausible explanation in the context
of locomotion (Argot, 2003; Giannini et al., 2011), might make the animal harder to kill and (like
feigned death) might buy time for a chemical defense to take effect. According to Coulson (1996),
death feigning is unknown among Australian marsupials. Ewer (1968) claimed that African ground
squirrels (Xerus erythropus) and “the fox” (presumably Vulpes vulpes) feign death, but we have not
been able to locate any other reference to such behavior in either species.
6. Caudal transportation of nesting material has been observed in taxa with (e.g., Caluromys and
Marmosa) and without (e.g., Metachirus and Monodelphis) external evidence of tail prehensility.
Illustrations of opossums carrying nesting material with their tails are in Oliver (1976), González and
Claramunt (2000), Dalloz et al. (2012), and Delgado-V. et al. (2014). Similar behaviors have been
reported for a few Australian marsupials but not for any placental mammal.IV
OPOSSUM NATURAL HISTORY8
Habitats
The ecological context of opossum evolution consists of a hierarchy of
environments—biome, habitat, and microhabitat—that are important for
understanding locomotory and dietary adaptations and much else besides.
Biomes (identified in our text with capital letters) are large contiguous
regions of more or less homogeneous climate that typically contain mosaics
of floristically and structurally distinct habitats. The Cerrado biome of
central Brazil, for example, includes a wide range of grassland and dry￾forest formations (Eiten, 1972; Oliveira-Filho and Ratter, 2002), whereas
Amazonia includes lowland rainforest as well as isolated patches of
savanna vegetation (Pires and Prance, 1985). However, what most
zoologists would call a habitat (e.g., lowland rainforest) can also include a
patchwork of local vegetation types (e.g., well-drained primary forest, palm
swamps, etc.) that differ in ecologically significant ways. Additionally, most
habitats contain distinct microhabitats (canopy, subcanopy, understory, etc.),
each with important properties for its animal inhabitants.
The important but sometimes misused terms sympatry and syntopy merit
brief discussion. The former denotes two or more species living at the same
locality (within dispersal range of one another), whereas the latter is used
for multiple species living in the same habitat. Species cannot be syntopic
unless they are sympatric, but sympatric species are not necessarily
syntopic. Because biologists can reasonably differ about what constitutes a
habitat versus a microhabitat (primary and secondary rainforest, for
example), syntopy is necessarily a somewhat subjective concept, but the
distinction from sympatry is nevertheless important.Below we review the principal kinds of habitats occupied by opossums,
noting their geographic distribution, climate, and other ecological
characteristics, especially physical structure and food resources. For the
purpose of this review, we use “habitat” to designate the predominant
vegetation type in which a species is usually found. Often (but not always),
this corresponds to the local climax formation, but human disturbance, fire,
poor drainage, and other factors often result in quite distinct plant
communities that coexist side-by-side at localities where only a single
“habitat” is indicated on large-scale vegetation maps. For specimens
unaccompanied by ecologically informative field notes, such maps provide
the only available information about habitat occupancy, and for some
species that is all we have to go by.
Habitat Occupancy
Opossums collectively occur in a wide range of habitats from about 49° N
(in southern Canada) to about 49° S (in southern Argentina), and from sea
level to about 4000 m in the Andes. Although some species are
geographically widespread, most are consistently associated with just one
kind of habitat, with the result that each species is normally exposed to a
limited range of physical and biotic conditions to which it is adapted in one
way or another. In particular, habitat occupancy largely determines the
range of available food resources and the physical structure of sheltering
vegetation. Because opossum diversity varies dramatically among habitats
(Table 8.1), it is important to understand why some habitats support larger
numbers of species than others.
Lowland Rainforest
Most opossums (about 55% of currently recognized species; Appendix 1)
live in tropical lowland rainforest, the dominant climax vegetation below
about 1500 m elevation in areas that receive about 2000 mm or more of
annual rainfall, from southern Mexico to southeastern Brazil (Fig. 8.1).
Tropical lowland rainforest is replaced by montane forest (“cloud forest”) at
elevations above about 1500 m in the Andes, it grades into dry forest across
isopleths of decreasing rainfall in both Central and South America, and it
merges imperceptibly with moist subtropical forests in southern Brazil,eastern Paraguay, and northeastern Argentina. In Central America, lowland
rainforest principally occurs along the Caribbean coast, which receives
substantially more rainfall than the Pacific side. In South America, lowland
rainforest occurs along the Pacific coast of western Colombia and
northwestern Ecuador (a very wet region known as the Chocó), in
discontinuous patches along the Caribbean littoral of Colombia and
northern Venezuela, throughout most of the Guianas and the Amazon Basin
(collectively known as Amazonia), and along the coastline of southeastern
Brazil (the so-called Atlantic Forest, or Mata Atlântica). Rainforest also
extends as a riparian formation into drier landscapes, thus accounting for
the presence of Amazonian and Atlantic Forest species along major rivers in
the Cerrado (Johnson et al., 1999).
Table 8.1  Numbers of Syntopic Opossum Species at Seven South American LocalitiesFig. 8.1. Geographic distribution of lowland rainforest (dense stipple) in relation to biomes
dominated by dry forests, montane forests, savannas, and deserts in Central and South America. High
elevations in the Andes separate the trans-Andean rainforests from Amazonia, whereas the “Dry
Diagonal” of Chaco, Cerrado, and Caatinga separates Amazonia from the Atlantic Forest
Primary lowland tropical rainforest has a closed canopy—typically some
25–45 m high in the Neotropics—that is persistently leafy throughout the
year (Richards, 1952). Emergent trees are massively buttressed (Fig. 8.2),
and palms are usually abundant in the subcanopy and understory; woody
climbers (lianas), stranglers, and hemiepiphytes are other characteristic
growth forms, and the undergrowth is typically dominated by saplings,
treelets, and giant herbs. Due to rapid decomposition of fallen leaves and
other debris, the litter layer is usually sparse, barely concealing the mineral
topsoil, which is often exposed on hill slopes and ridgetops.
At upland sites (far from river floodplains), lowland rainforest can
extend monotonously as a more or less homogeneous formation for many
miles, interrupted only by treefalls, blowdowns, and narrow breaks along
the larger streams. By contrast, floodplain landscapes in western Amazonia
are complex mosaics of successional vegetation that can includemonospecific stands of fast-growing pioneer trees, canebrakes, swamps,
and old-growth forest (Terborgh, 1983; Puhakka and Kalliola, 1995).
Secondary growth—successional vegetation regenerating in abandoned
agricultural clearings (Guariguata and Ostertag, 2001)—is also present
throughout the rainforested Neotropics, and a variety of seasonally flooded
formations adds additional habitat complexity to the riparian landscapes of
central Amazonia (Prance, 1979).
Fig. 8.2. Understory of primary lowland rainforest at Paracou, French Guiana (photo by Robert
Voss). Fourteen species are sympatric at this well-sampled locality, of which eight (Didelphis
imperfecta, D. marsupialis, Hyladelphys kalinowskii, Marmosops parvidens, Mps. pinheiroi,
Metachirus nudicaudatus, Monodelphis touan, and Philander opossum) are known to occur in the
primary forest understory.
The distinguishing trophic characteristic of lowland tropical rainforest
for resident vertebrate faunas is the high productivity and prolonged
availability of diverse food resources. In particular, insects and other
terrestrial arthropods are active throughout the year, as are numerous small
vertebrates (notably amphibians and reptiles). Additionally, most woody
rainforest plant species (70% to 94% of those at representative Neotropical
sites; Jordano, 2000) produce fleshy fruits to attract vertebrate seed
dispersers. Because fleshy-fruit-bearing rainforest plants include a wide
range of growth forms (canopy trees, lianas, understory treelets,hemiepiphytes, etc.) that produce fruits differing in size, presentation, and
other physical characteristics, they afford ample opportunity for niche￾partitioning by vertebrate frugivores (Smythe, 1986; Fleming et al., 1987;
Levey et al., 1994). However, even rainforests experience seasonal
fluctuations in resource abundance, such that both primary and secondary
production tend to be greatest in the rainy season and least available to
vertebrate consumers in the dry season (Janson and Emmons, 1990).
Rainforest primary productivity (e.g., of fruit and new leaves) is also
spatially heterogeneous, being highest in the sunlit canopy, where many
frugivorous and folivorous animals are also found. By contrast, productivity
is substantially lower in the shaded understory, the fauna of which is largely
sustained—directly or indirectly—by a steady rain of detritus (fruit,
flowers, leaves, and wood) from overhead. Nevertheless, primary
production can be high at or near ground level in gaps—treefalls,
blowdowns (Nelson et al., 1994), river margins, and so forth—where
understory frugivores and other consumers (e.g., folivorous insects) are
often concentrated (Hallé et al., 1978; Levey, 1990; Wunderle et al., 2005).
The distinguishing structural features of lowland tropical rainforest are
the wide separation of the canopy from the ground and the complex woody
architecture of the intervening space. Whether or not distinct strata are
recognizable (Grubb et al., 1963), vegetation profiles of primary
Neotropical rainforest (e.g., in Richards, 1952) illustrate an almost￾continuous volume of tree crowns extending from the understory to the
canopy. Although large-diameter vertical trunks are a conspicuous feature
of lowland rainforest, lianas offer alternative routes of canopy access for
understory species, or of understory access for canopy dwellers. Another
relevant aspect of Neotropical rainforest architecture is that adjacent tree
crowns in the canopy and subcanopy are often interconnected by lianas or
are close enough to be bridged or leaped across. By contrast, the crowns of
treelets and giant herbs in the heavily shaded understory of primary
rainforest are sometimes widely separated, such that small climbing animals
often cannot move from one understory plant to another without descending
to the ground.Lowland Dry Forest
Many of the larger opossums that live in rainforest are also found in
geographically contiguous dry forests, but some small species (e.g.,
Gracilinanus agilis, Monodelphis domestica, Marmosops ocellatus,
Thylamys pusillus, and Tlacuatzin canescens) are primarily or exclusively
dry-forest species. The climatic conditions that support dry-forest
vegetation vary widely, but several months of severe drought seem to be
key (Murphy and Lugo, 1986). At most dry-forested Neotropical study sites
(Fig. 8.3), the dry season is from four to eight months long, and annual
rainfall varies from about 700 to 1600 mm (Gentry, 1995). Dry forest is the
dominant climax vegetation on the Yucatan Peninsula, along most of the
Pacific coast of Mexico and Central America, along parts of the Caribbean
coast of Colombia and Venezuela, in some rain-shadowed Andean valleys,
along the Pacific coast of southwestern Ecuador and northwestern Peru, and
across the so-called Arid Diagonal (of Chaco, Cerrado, and Caatinga) that
separates Amazonia from the Atlantic Forest (Gentry, 1995). However,
savannas can occur under the same climatic conditions that support dry
forests, and more or less extensive grasslands are present as fire-maintained
subclimax vegetation, or where soils are so poor that they cannot support
woody plants, in many dry-forested regions, especially the Cerrado
(Oliveira-Filho and Ratter, 2002).Fig. 8.3. Dry forest in the Serra do Amolar, Mato Grosso do Sul, Brazil (photo by Rogério Rossi).
Only an incomplete species list is available from this locality, but as many as 12 didelphid species
occur sympatrically in similar vegetation elsewhere in southwestern Brazil and eastern Bolivia.
Dry forests are deciduous formations in which the woody vegetation is
partially to almost completely leafless during the dry season, but they vary
considerably in other characteristics (Murphy and Lugo, 1986). Whereas
some dry forests—usually those with >1000 mm of annual rainfall—are
almost as tall and structurally complex as rainforest, others—typically in
drier regions or on poorer soils—are much reduced in canopy height; in
even drier climates, dry forest grades into desert thornscrub. In general, dry
forest can be characterized as less tall, structurally simpler, less species-rich
(especially in large trees), with a more open canopy, and with fewer
epiphytes than rainforest (Murphy and Lugo, 1986; Gentry, 1995).
Characteristic morphological traits of dry-forest woody plants include
thorns, photosynthetic bark, and conspicuous flowers; among other floristic
features, cacti (especially arborescent species) become increasingly
prominent in dry-forest communities along gradients of increasing aridity
(Gentry, 1995; Killeen et al., 1998).
Due to their shorter growing seasons, dry forests are generally less
productive than rainforest (Murphy and Lugo, 1986), and fewer species of
woody plants (only about 30% to 60% in representative dry-forest floras;
Jordano, 2000) produce fleshy fruits to attract vertebrate seed dispersers.The defining ecological characteristic of dry forest, however, at least insofar
as resident vertebrate faunas are concerned, is the pronounced seasonality
of primary and secondary production. In particular, fruiting and leaf flush
are concentrated at the onset of the rainy season (van Schaik et al., 1993),
which is also when insect prey are most abundant (Janzen, 1973a; Ceballos,
1995). By contrast, the dry season is famine time for active resident
(nondormant and nonmigratory) dry-forest vertebrates, when few dietary
options are reliably available.
Montane (Cloud) Forest
Many didelphids that inhabit lowland rainforest also occur on the lower
slopes of the Andes and other mountains, but some species (e.g.,
Gracilinanus aceramarcae, Marmosa tyleriana, Marmosops creightoni, and
Monodelphis gardneri) are montane-forest endemics. Montane forests (Fig.
8.4) occur discontinuously in the highlands of Mexico and Central America,
more or less continuously along the Andes (especially on the eastern slopes)
from Colombia to northwestern Argentina, and as islands in a sea of
lowland rainforest or dry forest on many small mountain ranges and
isolated peaks along the Caribbean coast of Venezuela, across the Guiana
highlands, and in southeastern Brazil.
Several distinct montane-forest formations have traditionally been
recognized by tropical plant ecologists (e.g., Lower Montane Rainforest,
Upper Montane Rainforest, Subalpine Rainforest; Grubb, 1977; Webster,
1995), whereas other researchers have suggested that forest structure and
plant communities change continuously with elevation on wet tropical
mountains, such that discrete life zones cannot be recognized (Lieberman et
al., 1996). However, there is universal consensus that montane forest differs
from lowland rainforest in many important respects, and that the differences
are greater in proportion to the elevational separation of the forests being
compared. Directly or indirectly, such differences result from the adiabatic
lapse rate of air temperature with elevation (about 0.6°C per 100 m in the
humid tropics) and the presence of low-lying clouds (fog). In general, the
lower limit of montane forest approximately coincides with the fog line,
which is lower on isolated peaks, on small mountain ranges, and on
outlying spurs than it is along the main range of major cordilleras. In theAndes, the transition from lowland rainforest to cloud forest often occurs in
the interval from 1400 to 1600 m above sea level.
Fig. 8.4. Montane forest at 2700 m above sea level in Parque Nacional Río Abiseo, San Martín, Peru
(photo by Pedro Peloso). Undescribed species of Gracilinanus, Marmosa, and Marmosops were
trapped at this locality and at nearby sites with similar vegetation (Silvia Pavan, personal commun.).
With increasing elevation on humid tropical mountains, forests dwindle
in canopy height (from ca. 25–45 m in the lowlands to only a few meters
near treeline); palms, lianas, and giant herbs become less abundant and
eventually drop out completely; vascular and nonvascular epiphytes
become more abundant; and plant species richness decreases (Richards,
1952; Grubb, 1977; Webster, 1995; Lieberman et al., 1996). The ground￾litter layer increases in depth at higher elevations (e.g., from about 3 cm at
300 m above sea level to >10 cm at 2020 m in Panama; Olson, 1994), and
the epiphyte-laden trunks and horizontal branches of upper-montane forest
trees accumulate their own litter. Near treeline, an almost-continuous carpet
of wet debris and moss extends from ground level into the treetops,
effectively homogenizing the substrate traversed by arboreal and terrestrial
animals.
Whereas lower-montane forests are perhaps nearly as productive as their
lowland counterparts,1 primary productivity at higher elevations is reduced
by persistently cold temperatures, fog (which reduces incident solarradiation), and possibly also by a shortage of mineral nutrients (Grubb,
1977). Anecdotal evidence of extremely slow plant growth at high
elevations on wet tropical mountains (Terborgh, 1971; Janzen, 1973b)
suggests that upper-montane forest plants are unlikely ever to produce
substantial fruit crops. Reduced primary productivity and persistent cold
(which directly affects insect growth rates) are almost certainly responsible
for the reduced diversity and abundance of arthropods at high elevations in
the tropics, as well as for the very marked scarcity of large insects in alpine
habitats (Mani, 1968; Janzen et al., 1976; Olson, 1994).
Other Habitats
Only a few didelphids live in arid landscapes, among which we include the
tropical thornscrub surrounding the northern part of the Gulf of Venezuela
(inhabited by Marmosa xerophila; Fig. 8.5), the temperate thornscrub of
northern Chile (inhabited by Thylamys elegans; Meserve, 1981), the
Atacama and Monte deserts (inhabited by Thylamys pallidior; Carmona and
Rivadeneira, 2006; Albanese and Ojeda, 2012), and the Patagonian shrub￾steppe (inhabited by Lestodelphys halli; Zapata et al., 2013). All of these
habitats receive substantially less than 500 mm of annual rainfall and have
sparse woody vegetation consisting of only a few dozen drought-resistant
species of spiny shrubs and small trees (Sarmiento, 1976; Paruelo et al.,
2007). Although only a small fraction of woody plant species bear fleshy
fruits in most desert floras (Bronstein et al., 2007), the thornscrub
surrounding the Gulf of Venezuela includes abundant cacti (whose fruits are
a seasonally important source of calories); additionally, insects are active
throughout the year at this latitude (Thielen et al., 1997b). By contrast, cacti
are less abundant in high-latitude South American deserts (Mourelle and
Ezcurra, 1996), where insects are inactive during the austral winter (Pol and
Casenave, 2004), a time of resource scarcity for small nonhibernating
vertebrate secondary consumers.Fig. 8.5. Tropical thornscrub on the Paraguaná Peninsula, Falcón, Venezuela (photo by José Ochoa).
Apparently, Marmosa xerophila is the only species of small nonvolant mammal that occurs in this
habitat, which receives less than 500 mm of rainfall annually.
Grasslands are another habitat where few opossums are found. In fact,
only Didelphis albiventris, Lutreolina crassicaudata, and Monodelphis
dimidiata are definitely known to occur in extensive areas of treeless grassy
vegetation (e.g., the pampas and campos of Argentina and Uruguay; Paruelo
et al., 2007; Bó et al., 2002). Consisting of a single stratum of low
herbaceous plants, few (if any) of which produce fleshy fruits, grasslands
typically support a limited range of nonflying vertebrates, mostly
herbivores, granivores, and predators. Significantly, D. albiventris, L.
crassicaudata, and M. dimidiata all belong in the latter category. Other
grasslands sparsely inhabited by opossums occur in subtropical habitat
mosaics of the Chaco (Fig. 8.6) and in the once-extensive tropical savannas
of the Cerrado.
Only a single didelphid (Didelphis virginiana) occurs in the deciduous
forests of eastern North America. These forests are distinguished from other
habitats treated in this review by experiencing marked seasonal fluctuations
in temperature but not in precipitation; leaf loss in such habitats is therefore
a vegetative adaptation to temperatures too low to sustain primary
production, not to seasonal water deficit (Barnes, 1991). Fewer than half of
the woody plant species in most temperate deciduous forests produce fleshyfruits (Jordano, 2000), which are generally available to vertebrate
consumers only in the summer and early fall. Because most insects are
dormant in cold weather, winter is a time of food scarcity as well as cold
stress for most temperate deciduous-forest vertebrates, many of which
migrate to warmer latitudes or hibernate until the spring (Kitchings and
Walton, 1991). For nonhibernating and nonmigratory vertebrate secondary
consumers large enough to eat them, small endotherms (e.g., insectivores,
rodents, rabbits, and birds) are among the few reliable winter food resources
in cold-temperate habitats.
Fig. 8.6. Subtropical Chacoan grassland at Reserva El Bagual, Formosa, Argentina (photo by Pablo
Teta). Lutreolina crassicaudata and Chacodelphys formosa occur locally in this habitat, and several
other species (e.g., Cryptonanus chacoensis, Thylamys pusillus) occur along its brushy margins.
Microhabitat Use
Animals are not, in general, randomly dispersed in the habitats they occupy,
tending to occur more frequently in some parts than in others for a variety
of reasons. For small nonflying vertebrates, microhabitat use can be
motivated by efficiency of locomotion, resource distribution, protection
from predators, or interference from competing species. Without
considerable research effort, it is seldom possible to explain observedpatterns of microhabitat use, but the patterns themselves are often obvious
and easily quantified.
Most research on microhabitat use by sympatric opossums has been
carried out at forested study sites. Evidence for species differences in forest
microhabitat use comes from an impressive range of methods, including
direct observation (e.g., Charles-Dominique et al., 1981; Rasmussen, 1990),
trapping studies (Malcolm, 1991; Leite et al., 1996; Lambert et al., 2005),
spool-and-line tracking (Miles et al., 1981; Cunha and Vieira, 2002), and
artificial nests (Delciellos et al., 2006). Fortunately, all of these approaches
yield broadly congruent results (Table 8.2).
Table 8.2  Microhabitat Use by Rainforest Opossums
By far the most commonly reported pattern of differential microhabitat
use by sympatric forest opossums is vertical stratification, whereby
syntopic species use different levels of the forest. For practical reasons
(traps are hard to place in treetops and unspooled threads are difficult to
recover much above head height), most studies of vertical stratification
recognize only three strata: ground level (including such low, horizontal
substrates as fallen branches and logs), the undergrowth (e.g., treelets, giant
herbs, and other aboveground substrates below about 3 m), and the
“canopy” (including the subcanopy, effectively including all vegetation >3m above the ground). Although qualitative descriptions of vertical
stratification (e.g., Charles-Dominique et al., 1981; Miles et al., 1981) are
sometimes persuasive, the null hypothesis that species occur equiprobably
at all levels in the forest has often been rejected based on statistical tests
(e.g., by Malcolm, 1991; Leite et al., 1996; Cunha and Vieira, 2002;
Lambert et al., 2005). Furthermore, inferences about use of different
vertical strata are impressively correlated with morphological traits (e.g.,
Lemelin, 1999; Argot, 2001, 2002) and with laboratory assessments of
locomotor behavior (Delciellos and Vieira 2006, 2009a, 2009b), so the
aggregate evidence that forest opossums use different vertically defined
microhabitats, and that they are adapted to do so, is compelling.
In effect, all rainforest opossums seem to be vertical microhabitat
specialists in the sense that each species uses some stratum more frequently
than others. Additionally, closely related species typically resemble one
another in vertical stratum use, such that genera can be broadly
characterized as (for example) canopy or understory taxa. Thus, Central
American Caluromys derbianus is primarily active in the canopy and
subcanopy (Rasmussen, 1990), as is C. philander in northeastern Amazonia
(Charles-Dominique et al., 1981) and C. lanatus in southwestern Amazonia
(Patton et al., 2000). Likewise, the predominantly terrestrial habits of
Philander opossum in northeastern Amazonia (Charles-Dominique et al.,
1981) strikingly resemble those of P. quica in the Atlantic Forest (Cunha
and Vieira, 2002). Different species of Marmosops seem to have essentially
similar vertical distributions in both Amazonian and southeastern Brazilian
rainforests (Patton et al., 2000; Voss et al., 2001; Leiner et al., 2010), and
species of Monodelphis seem to be strictly terrestrial wherever they occur.
Therefore, vertical microhabitat use seems to be a taxonomically conserved
trait.
By contrast, sympatric congeners often occur in different kinds of
vegetation within the local rainforest matrix, resulting in what might be
termed horizontal microhabitat segregation. For example, trapping results in
southwestern Amazonia suggest that Philander mcilhennyi occurs in upland
forest whereas P. “opossum” (probably P. pebas; Voss et al., 2018) occurs in
adjacent riparian (seasonally flooded) forest. In the same region, Marmosa
constantiae (“Micoureus demerarae”) occurs in upland forest but sympatric
M. rutteri (“Mic. regina”) occurs in seasonally flooded riparian forest(Patton et al., 2000). In French Guiana, Marmosops parvidens prefers well￾drained primary forest, whereas sympatric M. pinheiroi prefers adjacent
swamp forest (Voss et al., 2001). In southern Brazil, Didelphis aurita occurs
in the forest interior, whereas sympatric D. albiventris occupies the forest
edge (Cáceres and Machado, 2013). These (and other) examples suggest
that horizontal microhabitat selection is more taxonomically labile than
vertical segregation, a conjecture that would be interesting to test in a
phylogenetic context when detailed information about both phenomena
become more widely available.
Discussion
Tropical lowland rainforest is a uniquely congenial habitat for opossums,
which decline in syntopic species richness (alpha diversity) along gradients
of increasing aridity, elevation, and latitude. Dry forests, montane forests,
grasslands, deserts, and temperate habitats have correspondingly
depauperate opossum faunas.2 Because similar diversity gradients have
been reported for other Neotropical mammals (Voss and Emmons, 1996), a
common cause seems likely. Research on South American primates—which
show similar ecogeographic diversity gradients—suggests that species
richness is largely determined by primary productivity, which is greatest at
tropical lowland sites with good soils and abundant rainfall (Kay et al.,
1997a); invariably, the climax vegetation in such situations is rainforest.
Although the ecological mechanisms by which higher primary productivity
sustains more diverse animal communities are not entirely clear (Cusens et
al., 2012), high opossum diversity in lowland rainforest surely has
something to do with the prolonged annual abundance of insect prey and
fruit by comparison with sparser and more seasonal trophic resources in
other habitats.
In addition to high productivity, the structural complexity of rainforest
vegetation may also be conducive to opossum syntopy. Because locomotion
on different substrates requires disparate morphological and behavioral
phenotypes (Chapters 5 and 7), structurally complex vegetation probably
makes it difficult for locomotor generalists to compete with species that are
specialized to move about more effectively on the ground, on vertical
trunks, or on fine terminal branches. By contrast, there may be feweropportunities for spatial partitioning and species coexistence in grasslands,
deserts, and other habitats with structurally simpler vegetation.
Habitat partitioning by vertical stratification seems to be a ubiquitous
property of opossum communities in tropical forests, and congeneric
species seem to occupy similar vertical niches throughout Central America,
Amazonia, and the Atlantic Forest. Vertical-niche conservatism is probably
explained by morphological and behavioral adaptations for locomotion, but
it is possibly also reinforced by evolved behaviors to escape predation by
snakes, raptors, and carnivores that are also vertically distributed (Chapter
11). Additionally, animal prey and fruit are unevenly distributed from the
forest floor to the canopy, so vertical stratification may be a major driver of
trophic divergence (Chapter 9).
Horizontal microhabitat segregation is another correlate of high opossum
diversity in rainforest communities. An apparently labile trait, it may be an
important mechanism for coexistence of recently diverged species
following secondary contact, and an essential prelude to evolutionary
divergence in other niche dimensions. Horizontal microhabitat segregation
in the complex mosaics of riverine successional vegetation, palm swamps,
flooded forests, and upland forests in western Amazonia might also explain
the remarkably high sympatric diversity predicted by geographic range
overlap, which could exceed 20 opossum species in some parts of that
region.3
NOTES
1. According to Murray et al. (2000), about 81% of the tree species at Monteverde (ca. 1500 m), a
lower-montane cloud forest in Costa Rica, produce vertebrate-dispersed fruits versus about 91% of
the tree species at nearby La Selva (30 m), a lowland rainforest research station.
2. Note however, that forest-grassland mosaics, especially where the Cerrado interdigitates with
tropical or subtropical evergreen forest (e.g., at Mbaracayú, in eastern Paraguay; Owen et al., 2018),
can sometimes have high sympatric diversity due to an added component of beta diversity.
3. For example, between the Yavarí and the Ucayali Rivers in northeastern Peru, where Voss et al.
(2019) recorded 19 opossum species and noted that another four might also occur.9
Diets
Diet is a fundamental aspect of a species’ ecological niche, and it is often
correlated with other important natural history traits, such as habitat
occupancy, diel activity, resource competition, and parasitism. Because
trophic adaptations can include a wide range of morphological,
physiological, and behavioral characteristics, dietary information is often
crucial for understanding phenotypic evolution. There are, however, several
methodological and conceptual issues associated with ecological and
evolutionary interpretations of dietary data, and these have sometimes been
ignored or oversimplified in the literature on didelphid diets.
Sources of Dietary Information
Information about opossum diets typically comes from examination of feces
or stomach contents, from observations of free-ranging animals in their
native habitats, and from feeding experiments with captives. Each method
has limitations, but each also contributes unique insights. Unfortunately,
dietary data are entirely lacking for many species.
Frequency data based on analyses of feces obtained from trapped
animals during mark-recapture studies (Table 9.1) provide unequivocal
evidence that many opossums routinely eat invertebrates and fruit. Without
exception, the invertebrate phylum most abundantly represented by
macroscopic fragments in didelphid feces is Arthropoda, and by far the
most commonly eaten arthropod class is Insecta. Based on these data, most
opossums could be described as fruit-eating insectivores (or as insect-eating
frugivores), but several methodological caveats are in order.As many authors (e.g., Dickman and Huang, 1988) have acknowledged,
frequency data from scat-based studies tend to overestimate the dietary
importance of invertebrates with hard exoskeletons and to underestimate the
importance of soft-bodied prey. In particular, the dietary contribution of
invertebrates lacking exoskeletons altogether, such as earthworms
(Lumbricidae) and slugs (shell-less pulmonate gastropods) might be missed
completely unless a special effort is made to detect microscopic hard parts
(e.g., setae and radulas; Pernetta, 1976; Wroot, 1985). Similarly, the dietary
importance of large-volume, easily digested prey tissues—such as
vertebrate muscle and viscera—might be underestimated by fecal frequency
data, even if some indigestible bits (fur, feathers, scales, bones, etc.) are
also eaten. Additionally, feces provide no clear indication as to whether
ingested vertebrate prey were killed or encountered as carrion, although the
presence of dipteran larvae is sometimes cited as evidence for scavenging
(e.g., by Carvalho et al., 2005).
Table 9.1  Exemplar Didelphid Diets Based on Fecal Analyses
Fecal analysis is also problematic for inferences about frugivory and
other feeding behaviors. Seeds in feces provide the primary evidence for
fruit consumption, but large seeds might not be swallowed. As a result, the
dietary contribution of large-seeded fruits could be underestimated if onlypulp is ingested, and the importance of small-seeded fruits might be
correspondingly overestimated. Fungi, a potentially important food resource
for many small mammals (Fogel and Trappe, 1978), entirely lack
macroscopic hard parts and are also unlikely to be detected in feces that are
not examined under high magnification for spores (Mangan and Adler,
2000). Other potentially important foodstuffs such as gum and nectar leave
few macroscopic traces in the lower digestive tract, so gummivory and
nectarivory—feeding syndromes known to be important for other
Neotropical mammals—are difficult to detect by fecal analysis. In fact, the
common practice of washing opossum feces on coarse screens prior to
examination (Santori et al., 1995; Cáceres, 2002, 2004; Cáceres et al., 2002;
Ceotto et al., 2009; Zapata et al., 2013) virtually guarantees that much
potentially important microscopic dietary evidence (earthworm setae,
fungal spores, pollen, etc.) is lost.
Many disadvantages of fecal analysis could be avoided by examining
stomach contents, but stomachs can only be obtained from dead specimens,
so this method is not an option for nondestructive ecological studies.
Nevertheless, stomach contents provide uniquely important information
about the relative volume of ingested items (Pineda-Munoz and Alroy,
2014), and such information can suggest different dietary inferences than
frequency data. Cordero and Nicolas (1987), for example, found insects in
49% of examined stomachs of Didelphis marsupialis, but estimated that
they comprised only 15% of the total volume, whereas birds were found in
only 13% of examined stomachs but accounted for 21% of the total volume.
Undigested stomach contents can also provide evidence for consumption of
soft-bodied prey and other material that is hard to detect in feces. For
example, stomach-based dietary studies (e.g., Hamilton, 1958; Charles￾Dominique et al., 1981) suggest that didelphids do eat earthworms,
sometimes in considerable amounts.
Direct observation of free-living individuals is the method of choice in
dietary studies of diurnal mammals such as primates (Terborgh, 1983;
Nickle and Heymann, 1996), and it has also been used successfully with
radio-collared nocturnal species (e.g., kinkajous and porcupines; Kays,
1999; Lima et al., 2010). Only a few researchers have directly observed
radio-collared opossums feeding in the wild, but their results confirm that
fecal analyses provide a biased and incomplete picture of didelphid diets. Inparticular, Charles-Dominique et al. (1981) and Atramentowicz (1988)
observed that rainforest opossums do not ingest the seeds of most of the
fruit species they commonly eat, swallowing just the pulp; therefore, only
the smallest seeds are found in feces. Field observations have also shown
that some opossums eat gum and nectar (Charles-Dominique et al., 1981;
Gribel, 1988; Aléssio et al., 2005; Ibarra-Cerdeña et al., 2007; Martins and
Gribel, 2007), dietary habits that have yet to be reported from any study
based on analyses of scat. Lastly, direct observations in the wild clearly
indicate that some opossums are active predators of small vertebrates and
are not simply consumers of carrion (Kluge, 1981; Tuttle et al., 1981;
Rodrigues, 2005; Gómez-Martínez et al., 2008; Acosta-Chaves et al., 2018).
Fig. 9.1. Histogram of protein, carbohydrate, and lipid content of diets chosen by captive opossums
in cafeteria experiments. Asterisks indicate species data from single experiments (all other species are
represented by averaged data from multiple experiments; redrawn from Astúa de Moraes et al.,
2003). The lack of obvious discontinuities in protein/carbohydrate ratios in these data suggest an
interspecific continuum from predominant frugivory to predominant faunivory rather than discrete
dietary categories.
Feeding experiments with captive animals under controlled conditions
can be used to test hypotheses about food preference, to elucidate predatory
interactions, and to gain insight into food-handling behaviors that affect the
interpretation of scat analyses. Experiments with these objectives have
seldom been used to study opossum food habits, but Astúa de Moraes et al.
(2003) summarized the results of cafeteria trials that provided compellingevidence for taxonomic differences in macronutrient consumption (Fig.
9.1). Among other unique insights about didelphid diets gained from
observing captive animals, staged encounters of Didelphis with live
pitvipers confirm anecdotal accounts that these large opossums actually kill
and eat venomous snakes with impunity (Oliveira and Santori, 1999;
Almeida-Santos et al., 2000). Similarly, the behavior of Lestodelphys halli
presented with live mice makes it clear that this ferocious small predator
competently attacks, kills, and eats sympatric rodents (Birney et al., 1996a;
Martin and Udrizar Sauthier, 2011), despite the fact that examined feces
collected in summer months contain mostly arthropods (Zapata et al.,
2013).
In summary, fecal analysis is a biased source of information about
didelphid diets and should be supplemented with other techniques to gain a
more complete picture of what opossums really eat. On the other hand,
observations of field behavior unsupported by analyses of scat or stomach
contents are often insufficient to positively identify ingested food (Emmons,
2000). Therefore, the most compelling marsupial dietary studies (e.g.,
Charles-Dominique et al., 1981; Dennis, 2002) have used multiple methods.
Diversity, Nutritional Quality, and Availability of Food
Resources
Foods known to be eaten by opossums include invertebrates, small
vertebrates, fruit, nectar, gum, and fungi. Most of these are taxonomically
diverse categories, some have distinct nutritional qualities, and each may be
available on different schedules and in different places in didelphid habitats.
Because the diversity, nutritional value, and spatiotemporal availability of
food resources are all important aspects of a species’ trophic niche, these
topics merit attention.
Invertebrates
Dietary studies based on large samples of feces or stomachs suggest that
most didelphids do not specialize on a single kind of invertebrate prey.
Although Coleoptera (beetles) and Formicidae (ants) are the arthropod taxa
most frequently found in didelphid feces, Blattaria (roaches) and Orthoptera
(katydids, crickets, etc.) are also commonly identified in scat, and severalother arthropod taxa are sometimes consumed in large numbers. Diplopoda
(millipedes) and Opiliones (harvestmen), in particular, are often eaten by
litter-foraging opossums (e.g., Metachirus myosuros; Cáceres, 2004),
whereas Hemiptera and Lepidoptera seem to be eaten more frequently by
arboreal species (e.g., Marmosa paraguayana; Pinheiro et al., 2002; Pires et
al., 2012). Some arthropod taxa only appear frequently in opossum scat
from particular habitats. Decapod crustaceans, for example, are commonly
eaten by terrestrial opossums only in coastal forests (e.g., Cáceres et al.,
2002), whereas Isoptera (termites) seem to be eaten more frequently in the
Cerrado than elsewhere (e.g., Martins et al., 2006a), and scorpions might be
an important dietary resource only in arid habitats (Zapata et al., 2013).
Spiders, isopods, and centipedes are also eaten occasionally, as are most
other higher taxa of large (>5 mm) terrestrial arthropods, with the
interesting exception of Dermaptera (earwigs).1 Gastropods appear to be
minor elements of some opossum diets (Martins et al., 2006a; Leiner and
Silva, 2007b), although their frequency is perhaps underestimated for the
methodological reasons discussed above. As previously remarked,
earthworms are only known to be eaten by opossums based on stomach
content analyses, which are available for just few species.
Authors of many dietary studies have claimed that didelphids prey
opportunistically on invertebrates, but few investigators have actually
compared frequencies of prey taxa in feces or stomachs with independent
estimates of invertebrate abundance in local habitats. Among those who
have done so, Thielen et al. (1997b) found that Marmosa xerophila prefers
Orthoptera, despite the fact that Coleoptera was more frequently found in
feces. Camargo et al. (2014) detected a seasonal preference of Gracilinanus
agilis for Hemiptera and Isoptera, and their results also suggested that G.
agilis avoids eating ants (although ants were, paradoxically, more
frequently identified in feces than other insect orders). Such results are too
few to generalize about, but it would be consistent with the better￾documented behavior of other mammals (such as tamarins; Nickle and
Heymann, 1996) if didelphids were to prefer large phytophagous insects
lacking mechanical or chemical defenses (e.g., cicadas and katydids;
Acosta-Chaves et al., 2018) over smaller arthropods or those protected by
spines or defensive toxins. Indeed, it seems likely that ants—perhaps
overrepresented in fecal frequency data because they are swallowed wholeand are easily identified in scat—may often be ingested accidentally with
fruit, trap bait, or other food items.
By contrast with fruit, most invertebrates are high in protein but low in
carbohydrates and lipids (Redford and Dorea, 1984). Although adult
arthropods are protected by indigestible chitinous exoskeletons, most are
easily crushed and cut into fragments by tribosphenic molars (Chapter 5),
so handling costs are probably minimal. Direct observations of Marmosa
killing and dismembering large insects, however, suggests that the hardest
parts are often discarded (Enders, 1935), so heavily armored arthropods
might be avoided by very small opossums.
With some noteworthy exceptions—ants, termites, aposematic species,
and blood-feeding dipterans—insects are hard to find in the tropical forest
understory by day (Elton, 1973). Instead, most large, biochemically
unprotected tropical forest insects (e.g., katydids; Nickle and Castner, 1995)
are nocturnal, concealing themselves in the daytime by hiding in the litter
layer, inside hollow logs and tree cavities, under loose bark, in hanging
clusters of dead leaves, in the rolled new leaves of large monocots, and so
forth. By night, however, large invertebrates occur on a wide variety of
forest substrates, including tree trunks (important avenues of insect
migration between the litter layer and the canopy), green stems (favored by
phloem-feeding Hemiptera), understory and canopy foliage (grazed by
larval Lepidoptera and many orthopterans), and the forest floor (the
principal habitat of detritivores and their arachnid predators; Janzen, 1973a;
Penny and Arias, 1982; Adis, 1988; Basset, 2001).
At high latitudes most invertebrates are dormant in the winter, but
invertebrates can fluctuate in abundance even in tropical habitats. No single
sampling method is sufficient to census the entire invertebrate fauna of
interest, but a variety of methods suggest that, in tropical habitats with
distinctly seasonal rainfall, insect biomass increases early in the rainy
season (more or less synchronously with, or just preceding, peak leaf flush;
Janzen, 1973a; Boinski and Fowler, 1989; Janson and Emmons, 1990;
Levings and Windsor, 1996; Smythe, 1996). Earthworms—which, in the
tropics, are most abundant in forests with annual precipitation between
2000 and 4000 mm—remain deep underground during the dry season but
move closer to the soil surface during the rainy season (Fragoso andLavelle, 1992), and some large species are active in the litter layer at night
after heavy rains (Charles-Dominique et al., 1981).
Vertebrates
Dietary studies based on feces or stomach contents suggest that small
mammals, birds, squamates, and anurans (in that order) are the vertebrate
prey most frequently consumed by didelphids. Unfortunately, vertebrate
bone fragments in didelphid scat are seldom identified even to class, so this
ranking may reflect preservational artifacts. In particular, taxa lacking
indigestible integumental structures such as hair, feathers, and scales may
be systematically under-represented in published frequency data obtained
from fecal analyses.2 Rodents are more frequently identified in opossum
scat and stomachs than other mammals (e.g., Busch and Kravetz, 1991),
although small didelphids are sometimes eaten by large opossums (e.g.,
Monodelphis by Philander; Macedo et al., 2010), and Didelphis virginiana
often eats shrews, moles, and rabbits in addition to rodents (Hamilton,
1958). Birds in opossum scat are so infrequently identified that no
taxonomic generalizations are possible; most, perhaps, are nestlings.3
Lizards and snakes are about equally represented among the squamates
identified in dietary analyses, but anuran remains found in scat are seldom
identified even to family.
Vertebrate soft tissues—muscle and viscera—are rich in protein and
lipids, and they are highly digestible (Hume, 1999). However, there may be
costs associated with the capture and consumption of vertebrate prey.
Rodents, for example, can deliver painful and potentially crippling wounds
with their sharp incisor teeth so, unless they are much smaller than their
attacker, they must be dispatched with care by opossums that are dentally
equipped to deliver killing bites. Vertebrates that are too large to be
swallowed whole must be reduced to smaller chunks by biting through
mechanically resistant skin, bones, and ligaments. Additionally, some
biochemically defended vertebrate prey—such as toads (Garrett and Boyer,
1993; Laurance and Laurance, 2007), newts (Hart et al., 2019), and
venomous snakes (Voss and Jansa, 2012)—are unlikely to be eaten except
by opossums that have evolved molecular mechanisms for neutralizing
ingested or injected toxins (Chapter 6).Small vertebrates are longer-lived than most invertebrates, and (with the
exception of ectothermic taxa at high latitudes and amphibians in seasonally
dry habitats) they are active throughout the year. Vertebrate prey is therefore
likely to be a persistent food resource for tropical opossums. At high
latitudes, where ectothermic taxa are dormant in cold weather, small
mammals and birds may be key winter food resources for the few opossum
species that live in such hostile environments. Small mammals, birds,
lizards, snakes, and anurans are found at all levels in tropical forests—from
the litter layer to the canopy—so they are potentially available to any
opossum large and active enough to eat them.
Fruit
Opossums eat a wide variety of fruit, as documented by several exemplary
studies based on direct observation of feeding behavior and examination of
stomach contents in French Guiana. Fruits eaten by three sympatric
rainforest opossums, for example, included 44 plant species in 21 families,
representing canopy trees, understory treelets, lianas, stranglers, and
hemiepiphytes (Atramentowicz, 1988). Twenty-two species of fruits eaten
by opossums were biochemically assayed in the same study and were found
to have pulp that was rich in sugars or lipids but low in protein. The pulpy
parts of fruits actually eaten by didelphids (aril, exocarp, epicarp, mesocarp,
pericarp, sarcotesta, etc.) are either exposed or weakly protected at maturity
(when the fruit is ripe), so most of these items are also consumed by other
sympatric vertebrates, including birds, bats, kinkajous, and primates
(Charles-Dominique et al., 1981; Guillotin et al., 1994; Simmen and
Sabatier, 1996). Insofar as known, opossums seem to be generalist
frugivores that lack coevolved dietary adaptations to particular plant taxa or
to particular kinds of fruit (Atramentowicz, 1988). Some opossums,
however, exhibit marked preferences for particular fruit taxa but actively
avoid others, and it would be interesting to know the basis for such
behaviors. Although nutrient content would seem like an obvious basis for
choice, phenological predictability might be another (Leiner and Silva,
2007b).
Fruits produced by canopy trees—which typically have large,
synchronously ripening crops—may be eaten in situ by arboreal opossums,
or they may be consumed on the ground by terrestrial species (Charles-Dominique et al., 1981). The latter probably benefit from the wasteful
behavior of canopy-foraging diurnal birds and monkeys, which often
dislodge or pick and discard uneaten fruits, leaving a substantial fraction of
the daily production of ripe pulp on the forest floor for nocturnal foragers.
By contrast, understory treelets have smaller fruit crops, some of which
ripen over extended fruiting periods (e.g. Piper spp.; Fleming, 1981; Leiner
and Silva, 2007b), and these spatiotemporally dispersed resources are
probably harvested in situ by arboreal or scansorial species that are small
and agile enough to be supported by slender terminal branches.
Of course, the availability of fruit pulp in sufficient quantities to support
a frugivore community for more than a few weeks out of the year is
primarily a tropical phenomenon (Jordano, 2000), so opossums that inhabit
temperate latitudes (e.g., Didelphis virginiana and Lestodelphys halli)
necessarily rely on vertebrate or invertebrate prey for much of the annual
cycle. Even in the tropics, however, fruit is not equally available at all
times. Instead, more or less predictable temporal patterns of abundance and
scarcity seem to characterize almost all tropical forests, especially those
with strongly seasonal rainfall (Chapter 8). During periods of fruit scarcity
—usually corresponding to the local dry season—frugivorous tropical
mammals rely on stored fat reserves, switch to other (less calorically dense)
food resources, or migrate to edaphically wetter habitats with asynchronous
fruiting phenologies (Charles-Dominique et al. 1981; Terborgh, 1986; van
Schaik et al., 1993). For species that lack significant fat reserves and are
unable to move long distances, alternative food resources (“fallback” foods;
Constantino and Wright, 2009) may be key to survival at such times.
Nectar and Gum
Soon after Sussman and Raven (1978) claimed that New World marsupials
do not visit flowers, multiple observations of nectar-feeding didelphids
were published by researchers working in western Amazonia (Janson et al.,
1981), Panama (Steiner, 1981, 1983), and French Guiana (Charles￾Dominique et al., 1981). Decades later, the list of plant taxa known to be
visited by opossums includes a wide diversity of growth forms from both
moist and dry tropical forests at geographically widespread localities (Table
9.2). By contrast, gum consumption by didelphids is not well documented,
nor (to our knowledge) have plants with edible exudates been inventoried atany Neotropical forest study site. However, only a few tree species seem to
be routinely exploited by local populations of gummivorous callitrichines
(e.g., in northeastern Peru; Garber and Porter, 2010), so it is possible that
gum is not, in general, a botanically diverse food source.
Table 9.2  Flowers Visited by Opossums
By comparison with fruit pulp and animal prey, nectar and gum are low￾quality food resources. Most nectars available in large amounts to
mammalian flower visitors are dilute solutions of hexose sugars—easily
digestible but without significant quantities of other nutrients (Nicolson and
Thornburg, 2007). Gums consist primarily of complex polysaccharides that
are resistant to mammalian digestive enzymes and require fermentation by
gut bacteria; however, they may contain useful minerals, such as calcium(Power, 2010). Because didelphids lack dental adaptations for gouging bark
(Chapter 5), it is likely that they parasitize the bark-gouging activities of
diurnal gum-eating mammals such as marmosets, and this behavior has, in
fact, been observed (Aléssio et al., 2005).
Without exception, plants known to be visited for nectar by opossums at
sites with highly seasonal rainfall flower in the dry season (e.g., Quararibea
cordata at Cocha Cashu in southeastern Peru; Janson et al., 1981). At sites
without a severe dry season, however, opossums have been reported to visit
flowers throughout the year (Julien-Laferrière, 1999; Tschapka and von
Helversen, 1999). Apparently, edible exudates are available throughout the
year to primate consumers (e.g., in northeastern Peru; Garber and Porter,
2010) and, presumably, also to opportunistically gum-feeding opossums.
Fungi
Mycophagy is not commonly reported for New World marsupials (Fogel
and Trappe, 1978), but one dietary study of Panamanian cloud-forest
mammals (Mangan and Adler, 2000) found spores of arbuscular
mycorrhizal fungi in the feces of Marmosa mexicana and Marmosops
invictus. Because conventional methods of fecal analysis are unlikely to
detect mycophagy for the reasons already explained, and because fungi are
abundant in most opossum habitats, this resource might be a cryptic
component of many didelphid diets. Wallis et al. (2012) reviewed
information about the macronutrient content of fungi and noted that some
fungal species could be a rich source of amino acids and digestible protein.
We are not aware of any phenological studies of fungal species known to be
eaten by Neotropical mammals, but two studies of mycophagy by
Neotropical rodents suggest that sporocarp consumption varies seasonally
(Janos et al., 1995; Mangan and Adler, 2002). By contrast, fungi are a year￾round dietary staple for some species of Neotropical rainforest primates
(Hanson et al., 2006; Hilário and Ferrari, 2010). Future studies of opossum
diets should include methodology to detect and quantify consumption of
this potentially important food resource.Discussion
Didelphids have often been described as omnivores, but this description is
simultaneously uninformative and potentially misleading. Although most
opossums do, in fact, eat both animal and plant tissues, they do not eat
everything. In particular, didelphids do not eat seed endosperm, the
mainstay of many rodent diets, for which they lack appropriate dental
adaptations. Likewise, most opossums do not normally eat leaves, the
principal fodder of some sympatric placental mammals (e.g., sloths) and of
many Australian marsupials. Contrary to some fanciful accounts of
metatherian biogeography (Leigh et al., 2014), neither didelphids nor any
other New World marsupial is known to eat pollen. If fungi, which are
commonly eaten by some Australian marsupials, are actually consumed in
significant amounts by opossums, compelling evidence for this is not yet
available.
Instead, a mixed diet of invertebrates (primarily insects) and fruit seems
to characterize most didelphids, which—in this respect—are notably similar
to some sympatric primates (e.g., tamarins; Peres, 1993), bats (e.g.,
phyllostomids; Giannini and Kalko, 2004), and Paleotropical mammals
(e.g., treeshrews; Emmons, 2000). These trophic resemblances are not
surprising because insects and fruit are permissive foods, requiring no
special anatomical or physiological adaptations to obtain, mechanically
reduce, or digest. In fact, mammals that exploit a mixed diet of insects and
fruit appear to share no morphological or physiological attributes other than
those inherited from their common therian ancestor—which might well
have had a similar diet.
There are, to be sure, many exceptions (Chapter 4). Small vertebrates,
which supplement the insectivorous-frugivorous diets of most opossums,
are important (if not predominant) in the diets of several large species (e.g.,
of Didelphis, Lutreolina, and Philander), and even small opossums that live
at high latitudes (e.g., Lestodelphys halli) might be almost exclusively
carnivorous for parts of the year when fruit is unavailable and insects are
inactive. Species of Monodelphis appear to be mostly insectivorous and to
seldom eat fruit, whereas Caluromys appears (by most accounts) to be
primarily frugivorous and to consume only small numbers of insects.Insofar as known, Chironectes eats mainly fish and crustaceans and does
not eat fruit at all.
Although some authors have proposed trophic-niche classifications for
opossums, others have argued that discrete dietary categories are misleading
because many species have broadly overlapping diets along a continuum
from frugivory to animalivory (Astúa de Moraes et al., 2003). Indeed, many
accounts cited above suggest that didelphids are opportunistic, generalist
consumers that simply eat whatever is locally and temporally available to
satisfy their metabolic requirements for carbohydrates, lipids, proteins, and
other macronutrients. The lack of morphological evidence for special
trophic adaptations tends to support this view, as does seasonal and
geographic variation in reported diets. Implicit in many accounts of
opossum trophic ecology (and explicit in our own) is the notion that food
availability is largely determined by habitat or microhabitat occupancy:
fruit, for example, is maximally abundant in the rainforest canopy,
invertebrate prey on the ground, and crustaceans and fishes in streams. By
this logic, opossum diets are secondary consequences of habitat occupancy
or microhabitat segregation.4
This seems like a perfectly valid interpretation of the results from
cafeteria experiments and fecal analyses discussed earlier. However,
information about food choice in captivity and about routinely consumed
diets in the wild can be uninformative about evolutionarily and ecologically
important trophic adaptations. Optimal foraging theory tells us that
preferred foods should be those that are easy to harvest, process, and digest;
inevitably, such foods will tend to be widely used by many species, all of
which will then seem like opportunistic dietary generalists. But dietary
staples can be in seasonally short supply, and when they are, some species
may fall back on different foods that require special phenotypes to consume
effectively. Because such fallback foods (Marshall and Wrangham, 2007;
Constantino and Wright, 2009) may be key to survival in hard times, these
may be the principal drivers of dietary specialization.
Phenotypic specialists can function as ecological generalists because
some resources are intrinsically easy to use, even by consumers that
have evolved specialized traits to exploit less-favored resources.… As
paradoxical as it may sound, consumers can be elaborately designedby natural selection to exploit resources that account for only a small
portion of their diet, are utilized relatively poorly, and are frequently
ignored in favor of other resources. (Robinson and Wilson, 1998:
231–232)
The concept of fallback foods was initially proposed to explain “Liem’s
Paradox,” the observation that some species with unusual trophic
morphologies often seem to have rather generalized diets (Liem, 1980). As
we have seen, didelphids exhibit a limited range of trophic morphologies—
for example, modest taxonomic differences in dental traits and
gastrointestinal proportions—which provide some evidence of dietary
divergence but do not suggest any extraordinary specialization. Not all
trophic adaptations are morphological, however, and other aspects of
didelphid phenotypes tell a different story.
Snake-venom resistance is perhaps the most compelling example of
opossum dietary specialization and trophic adaptation. As described in
Chapter 6, several members of the tribe Didelphini (species of Didelphis,
Lutreolina, and Philander) are known to eat pitvipers and to be highly
resistant to pitviper venom. For those opossums that can eat them,
venomous snakes may be an important fallback food at times when
preferred resources are scarce. Indeed, no other explanation seems
plausible, because venom resistance is a genetically complex trait—almost
certainly involving amino-acid substitutions in dozens of metabolically
important proteins (Voss and Jansa, 2012)—that is unlikely to have evolved
without sustained natural selection for ophiophagy. Because ophiophagous
mammals (venom-resistant opossums, mongooses, hedgehogs, etc.) do not
share any special morphological traits in common (Voss and Jansa, 2012),
ophiophagy could be thought of as a cryptic dietary specialization, and if
ophiophagy is only important when other foods are scarce, then snakes will
not often appear in fecal samples, even of species that are physiologically
adapted to eat them.
Other opossum trophic adaptations might also be morphologically
inapparent and difficult to detect by routinely analyzed dietary data. As
discussed earlier in this chapter, fecal samples are often rinsed on coarse
screens before macroscopic sorting of seeds and insect fragments, so diets
rich in soft-bodied invertebrates and fungi (for example) cannot berecognized by such methods. Because soft-bodied invertebrates and fungal
fruiting structures are often biochemically protected, these items might also
be important fallback foods for toxin-resistant species. Toxic amphibians
(toads and newts) might be another such resource. Future researchers
should be alert to the possibility that opossum dietary specializations are
more likely to be behavioral or physiological than morphological, and they
should pay more attention to diets during seasons of food scarcity than to
what is eaten when food is abundant.
NOTES
1. Earwigs are present in most didelphid habitats, adult earwigs are well within the size range of
invertebrate prey commonly eaten by opossums, and earwig cercal forceps would be unmistakable
were they often found in didelphid feces. However, in our review of dietary studies (based on a
cumulative total of >2600 fecal and stomach samples from 16 opossum species), we encountered
only two reports of dermapteran consumption, both consisting of single individuals (Santori et al.,
1995, 1997). Earwigs are known to deploy defensive chemicals (Gasch et al., 2013), which would
appear to effectively deter mammalian predation based on this circumstantial evidence.
2. See Hamilton (1958), who remarked that fecal analyses of Didelphis virginiana probably
underestimate the dietary importance of toads (Bufonidae), which comprised a substantial fraction of
undigested stomach contents in his study.
3. The Virginia opossum is often implicated as a bird-nest predator in North American habitats
(e.g., by Henry, 1969; Wilcove, 1985; Crooks and Soulé, 1999), and other opossum species are
apparently responsible for nest predation in the Neotropics (Brightsmith, 2005; Menezes and Marini,
2017).
4. This possibility was recently discussed by Finotti et al. (2018), who reported statistically
significant correlations between data from Astúa et al.’s (2003) dietary experiments and a numerical
index of vertical microhabitat use. However, some species in Astúa et al.’s study were omitted
without explanation, so it is not clear whether or not Finotti et al.’s results were biased by data
selection.10
Parasites
Like most other mammals, didelphids are hosts to numerous arthropod,
helminth, and protozoan symbionts. Most arthropod symbionts are
ectoparasites, whereas symbiotic helminths (“worms”) and protozoans are
endoparasites, but life cycles, effects on host fitness, and other
characteristics vary greatly within each of these groups. In the absence of
any published review of didelphid parasitology, we provide brief synopses
of relevant information in the accounts that follow. In describing parasitic
arthropods, we distinguish temporary parasites (which spend only the
feeding stage of their life cycle on opossum hosts) from permanent parasites
(which spend their entire life cycle on the host). In discussing parasitic
helminths, the distinctions among definitive hosts (in which reproduction
occurs), intermediate hosts (in which larval or nymphal stages are passed),
and paratenic hosts (used only for dispersal; Chubb et al., 2009) are
likewise important.
Arthropods
Arthropod parasites of opossums include mites, ticks, and chiggers (Acari);
flies (Diptera); lice (Phthiraptera); and fleas (Siphonaptera). At least 17
families belonging to these higher taxa may routinely parasitize didelphids
(Table 10.1). By contrast, some mites that are occasionally found in
didelphid fur (e.g., macrochelids, pygmephorids; Whitaker and Wilson,
1974; Whitaker et al., 2007) are phoretic rather than parasitic—using
opossum hosts solely for transportation—and are not considered further
here. Similarly, rove beetles (Staphylinidae: Amblyopinini) are sometimes
found in didelphid fur and were once thought to be parasitic blood feeders,but amblyopinines are now thought to be phoretic predators that benefit
their hosts by eating fleas and mites (Ashe and Timm, 1987). Lastly, several
groups of hematophagous insects, including mosquitos (Diptera: Culicidae),
sand flies (Diptera: Psychodidae), and kissing bugs (Hemiptera:
Reduviidae) have only transient contact with opossums and are not usually
considered to be truly parasitic.
Table 10.1  Some Arthropod Parasites of Didelphidsa
Ticks (Ixodida) are temporary blood-feeding ectoparasites of
amphibians, reptiles, birds, and mammals (Hoogstraal and Kim, 1985;
Durden, 2006). Most soft ticks (Argasidae) parasitize reptiles and birds, but
Ornithodoros chironectes was described from larvae infesting the water
opossum (Jones and Clifford, 1972), larvae of O. marmosae commonly
infest Marmosa robinsoni (Jones et al., 1972), and adults of Argas miniatus
have been found on Thylamys macrurus (Cáceres et al., 2007). Althoughmany species of hard ticks (Ixodidae) have been reported from didelphids,
Neotropical opossums are important hosts of just four species: Ixodes
amarali, I. loricatus, I. luciae, and I. venezuelensis (Guglielmone et al.,
2011). Adults of these species are primarily found on large opossums—
especially Didelphis and Philander—but their larvae and nymphs usually
feed on cricetid rodents (Díaz et al., 2009; Labruna et al., 2009). Because
cricetids and didelphids have only been sympatric for a few million years
(Chapter 3), such host-parasite relationships must have evolved relatively
recently (Guglielmone et al., 2011). The North American opossum
Didelphis virginiana is often parasitized by species of the ixodid genera
Amblyomma, Dermacentor, and Ixodes (Durden and Wilson, 1990; Pung et
al., 1994), which include known vectors of several rickettsial diseases
(Azad and Beard, 1998). Indeed, ticks in general (and ixodids in particular)
are important vectors of many microbial parasites and pathogens (Durden,
2006).
Laelapids are large, active mites that are often found in opossum fur, but
it is not known whether or not they are true parasites. Some Old World
laelapids feed on vertebrate blood or lymph (Radovsky, 1985, 1994), but
blood has not been found in the digestive tracts of Neotropical laelapids,
and some acarologists (e.g., Martins-Hatano et al., 2002) believe that they
might be nest-inhabiting scavengers that use mammalian hosts only for
transportation (phoresis). All of the laelapid species commonly recovered
from didelphids (e.g., by Furman, 1972; Martins-Hatano et al., 2002;
Gettinger et al., 2005) belong to the genus Androlaelaps. Typically, only
adult female Androlaelaps are found in opossum fur, the immature stages
and males presumably remaining in the nest (Martins-Hatano et al., 2002).
The only macronyssid mites that commonly parasitize opossums belong
to the genus Ornithonyssus. Species of Ornithonyssus are blood-feeding
ectoparasites, two of which—O. bacoti and O. wernecki—are often found
on didelphids (e.g., in Venezuela; Saunders, 1975). Ornithonyssus bacoti
(commonly known as the tropical rat mite) is now cosmopolitan, although it
is thought to have evolved in South America (Radovsky, 1985, 1994). This
species also infests many sympatric species of rodents and is known to
transmit filarial nematodes, trypanosomes, and other microbial parasites
and pathogens (Valiente-Moro et al., 2005).Little is known about the biology of trombidiform mites known to
parasitize didelphids. Demodicids are permanent endoparasites that inhabit
mammalian hair follicles, skin glands, lymph nodes, subdermal fascia, and
other internal tissues (Nutting, 1985); the only two demodicids known from
opossums were both found in the cerumen (earwax) glands of the external
auditory canal of Didelphis (Nutting et al., 1980). The myobiid mites found
on didelphids are permanent ectoparasites that attach themselves to
individual hairs with specialized clasping organs; they may have coevolved
closely with their mammalian hosts (species of Archemyobia only occur on
didelphids, whereas related genera are found on microbiotheriids,
caenolestids, and Australian marsupials; Fain, 1994). Chiggers
(Trombiculidae) are temporary skin-feeding ectoparasites; the six-legged
larvae are parasitic, but the eight-legged post-larval stages are free-living
predators of soil micro-arthropods. Neotropical didelphids are commonly
infested with larval chiggers, especially species of Eutrombicula and
Odontocarus (Brennan and Reed, 1975).
Sarcoptiform mites that parasitize opossums are even more obscure.
Atopomelids, dromiciocoptines, and listropsoralgids are permanent
ectoparasites that live in mammalian fur and seem to be quite host-specific;
only a few atopomelids and dromiciocoptines are known to parasitize
didelphids, but Neotropical listropsoralgids infest at least 13 didelphid
species in six genera and seem appropriately characterized as opossum
specialists (Bochkov and OConnor, 2008; Bochkov and Wauthy, 2009;
Bochkov, 2011; Bochkov et al., 2013). By contrast, echimyopodids and
glycyphagids are temporary dermal parasites—only the follicle-inhabiting
deutonymphs are parasitic (OConnor, 1982; Fain et al., 1972)—and
echimyopodids, at least, do not appear to be very host-specific (OConnor et
al., 1982). Other sarcoptiform clades that occasionally parasitize didelphids
are discussed by Bochkov (2011).
The larvae (maggots) of New World botflies (Diptera: Oestridae:
Cuterebrinae) are temporary subcutaneous endoparasites of a wide variety
of mammals (Catts, 1982). They are infrequently found on marsupials, but a
few studies have reported high local infestation rates (Bossi and Bergallo,
1992; Cruz et al., 2009). Although botfly maggots are large and repulsive,
their infestation is brief and the wounds they cause usually heal quickly (in
part because antimicrobial substances are secreted by the feeding larva;Colwell et al., 2006). In the only field study to date of the impact of botfly
parasitism on an opossum, infested individuals of Gracilinanus agilis were
found to be mildly anemic (despite the fact that botfly larvae do not feed on
blood), but their body condition was unaffected by comparison with botfly￾free individuals in the same population (Zangrandi et al., 2019).
Lice are permanent fur-dwelling ectoparasites commonly found on many
Neotropical mammals, but they seem to be infrequently reported from
opossums (e.g., in Venezuela; Emerson and Price, 1975). The only lice
consistently associated with didelphids belong to the trimenoponid genus
Cummingsia, other species of which occur on caenolestid marsupials and
cricetid rodents (Timm and Price, 1985). To date, the only opossums known
to host these lice are species of Gracilinanus, Marmosops, and
Monodelphis (Timm and Price, 1985; Price and Emerson, 1986).
Fleas are temporary blood-feeding ectoparasites (the larval and pupal
stages occurring in nests or in the soil). Most of the fleas reported from
didelphids in large-scale faunal surveys (e.g., Tipton and Machado-Allison,
1972) and regional studies (e.g., Pinto et al., 2009; Lareschi et al., 2010) are
species of the hystrichopsyllid genus Adoratopsylla, but some pulicids
(especially Ctenocephalides felis and Pulex simulans) and rhopalopsyllids
(especially Polygenis spp.) are also commonly found on opossums (Linardi,
2006). Stephanocircids, which are sometimes said to be marsupial fleas
(Traub, 1985), are more frequently collected from cricetid rodents than
from marsupials in South America (e.g., in Venezuela; Tipton and
Machado-Allison, 1972). Like many other temporary blood-feeding
ectoparasites, fleas are important vectors of microbial disease organisms,
some of which are known to infect opossums (e.g., rickettsiae; Azad and
Beard, 1998).
Helminths
Helminth (“worm-like”) parasites of didelphids include acanthocephalans
(spiny-headed worms), cestodes (tapeworms), digeneans (flukes),
nematodes (roundworms), and pentastomids (tongue worms). Didelphids
are definitive hosts for most helminths, but they are intermediate hosts of
pentastomids, the definitive hosts of which are often predatory reptiles,
especially large snakes (Riley, 1986). Because pentastomids have only beenreported in a single study of didelphid helminths (Tantaleán et al., 2010),
this group is not considered further here.
Members of at least 35 helminth families are known to parasitize
opossums (Table 10.2), but any account of didelphid helminth parasites
must be qualified by recognizing several important sampling biases. First,
only abdominal and thoracic viscera—stomach, intestines, liver, heart,
lungs, and so forth—are routinely examined for endoparasites (e.g., by Ellis
et al., 1999; Gomes et al., 2003; Jiménez et al., 2008, 2011; Torres et al.,
2009), so helminths that infest other sites—for example, the cranial sinuses,
middle ear, central nervous system, muscles, and lymph—are probably
underreported in local and regional surveys. Second, most information
about helminth diversity comes from just a few countries with active
parasitological research programs, including the United States (e.g., Potkay,
1970; Alden, 1995), Mexico (Monet-Mendoza et al., 2005; García-Prieto et
al., 2012), Brazil (Vicente et al., 1997; Thatcher, 2006; Pinto et al., 2011),
and Argentina (Lunaschi and Drago, 2007). Therefore, scant information is
available from vast areas with diverse opossum faunas but few resident
parasitological researchers (e.g., the tropical Andes, the Guianas, and much
of Central America). Lastly, most information about opossum helminths
comes from large, easily collected host taxa—notably species of Didelphis
and Philander—with the result that relatively little is known about the
endoparasites of smaller and more elusive opossums (Gracilinanus,
Marmosops, Monodelphis, Thylamys, etc.).
Adult acanthocephalans attach to the intestinal mucosa of their definitive
vertebrate hosts with an evertable hooked proboscis and absorb nutrients
through their integument (Fig. 10.1A, 10.1B). Acanthocephalans that
parasitize terrestrial mammals usually have insects as intermediates hosts,
but some acanthocephalan life cycles also involve one or more paratenic
hosts (used for dispersal) in which development does not proceed (Nickol,
1985). Therefore, opossums might acquire acanthocephalan parasites by
eating insect intermediate hosts (commonly beetles and orthopteroids) or by
eating paratenic hosts (typically frogs, lizards, and snakes; Nickol, 1985).
Didelphids are known to be parasitized by members of four
acanthocephalan families, of which Oligacanthorhynchidae is the most
frequently reported. Species of the genus Oligacanthorhynchus, for
example, have been reported from species of Caluromys, Didelphis,Marmosa, Philander, and Thylamys. Significant harm to opossum hosts
may be caused by acanthocephalan parasitism (Alden, 1995), although few
case studies have been reported. Mature adult females of Gigantorhynchus
ortizi, which have been found in the intestines of several rainforest
opossums, are impressively large (>200 mm; Sarmiento, 1954), and
considerable numbers of this species are sometimes found in infested hosts
(Tantaleán et al., 2010).Table 10.2  Some Helminth Parasites of DidelphidsAdult cestodes, like acanthocephalans, are intestinal parasites that lack
an alimentary canal and absorb nutrients through their integument. Most
tapeworms infesting didelphids belong to the order Cyclophyllidea, but a
new genus of proteocephalidean tapeworms was recently described from
Didelphis marsupialis by Cañeda-Guzmán et al. (2001). Neotropical
opossums are usually parasitized by anoplocephalid tapeworms of the
genera Linstowia and Mathevotaenia, the intermediate hosts of which are
probably insects. By contrast, the tapeworms most commonly found in the
Virginia opossum are species of Mesocestoides (Mesocestoididae), the
intermediate or paratenic hosts of which are small vertebrates (rodents,
birds, reptiles, or amphibians). Tapeworms seem to cause little visible
damage to infested opossum hosts (Alden, 1995), and no cases of morbidity
or mortality attributable to cestode parasitism of didelphids seem to have
been reported. Infestation rates often seem to be quite low—for example,
Tantaleán et al. (2010) found no tapeworms in 40 examined specimens
representing eight didelphid species—but high frequencies are sometimes
reported (Ellis et al., 1999; Byles et al., 2013).Fig. 10.1. Parasitic helminths: A, large acanthocephalans (Gigantorhynchus ortizi) spilling from the
cut intestines of Metachirus myosuros (photo by Mónica Díaz); B, the same species clinging to the
inner wall of the bowel (photo by Mónica Díaz); C, larval nematodes (Onchocercidae:
Skrjabinofilaria sp.) nestled among erythrocytes in a Giemsa-stained blood smear from Marmosa
robinsoni (photo by Kelly Kroft)
Digeneans have complex life cycles, often involving several hosts, of
which the first is always a mollusk (Chubb et al., 2009). Although flukes
representing at least eight families have been reported from opossum hosts,
only a few genera seem to commonly parasitize didelphids, notably
Brachylaima (Brachylaimidae; reported from species of Didelphis and
Lutreolina), Zonorchis (Dicrocoeliidae; from Caluromys and Didelphis),
Podospathalium (Diplostomidae; from Didelphis, Metachirus,Monodelphis, and Philander), Paragonimus (Paragonimidae; from
Didelphis and Philander), and Rhopalias (Rhopaliidae; from Chironectes,
Didelphis, Lutreolina, Metachirus, and Philander). The life cycles of only a
few digenean species known to parasitize didelphids have been worked out,
but most opossum flukes are probably acquired by ingesting intermediate or
paratenic hosts (Kearn, 1998). Lung flukes are known to cause pulmonary
lesions in opossums (García-Márquez et al., 2010), and intestinal flukes
sometimes occur in sufficiently large numbers that they must have negative
effects on host nutrition (Nettles et al., 1975). Nevertheless, digenean
parasites are usually less prevalent than parasitic nematodes (e.g., in
Mexican populations of Didelphis virginiana; Monet-Mendoza et al., 2005),
so the net effect of digenean parasitism on the demography of opossum
hosts is almost certainly less than that of nematodes.
Nematodes are by far the most diverse and important group of helminths
that parasitize opossums. Multiple parasitic nematode species have been
reported from all well-sampled didelphid populations (e.g., by Foster, 1939;
Silva and Costa, 1999; Gomes et al., 2003; Lopes-Torres et al., 2009; Byles
et al., 2013); nematode infestation rates are typically quite high (Alden,
1995; Ellis et al., 1999; Monet-Mendoza et al., 2005; Lopes-Torres et al.,
2009); and there is clear evidence, at least from the well-studied Virginia
opossum, that nematodes can cause significant harm to their hosts (Nettles
et al., 1975; Gray and Anderson, 1982; Duncan et al., 1989; Snyder et al.,
1991). The 14 nematode genera most commonly reported from didelphids
(Table 10.3) represent a diversity of parasitic life cycles (Anderson, 2000).
Most parasitic nematodes live in the digestive tract, shedding their eggs
into the gut lumen, from which they are passed in feces. In some taxa—for
example, Cruzia, Trichuris, and (probably) Aspidodera—the eggs are
transmitted directly from definitive host to definitive host. Alternatively,
eggs passed in feces are ingested by an intermediate host (typically
earthworms or insects), wherein they hatch and larval development begins;
species of Subulura, Physaloptera, Turgida, Pterygodermatites, Spirura,
and Capillaria exemplify this common type of life cycle, which is
completed when the definitive host ingests the intermediate host or a
paratenic host (often a reptile or amphibian). Less commonly, eggs hatch in
the environment and free-living larvae infect an intermediate host, from
which they subsequently pass up the food chain through one or moreparatenic hosts to the definitive host; species of Gnathostoma (the first
intermediate hosts of which are copepods) exemplify this type of life cycle.
By contrast, many onchocercids (including species of Dipetalonema and
Litomosoides) occur in the abdominal and thoracic cavities rather than
digestive viscera, and their transmission does not involve the food chain;
instead, microscopic larvae (microfilariae) develop in the uteri of female
worms and migrate to the host’s bloodstream (Fig. 10.1C), where they are
accessible for transmission by blood-feeding arthropod vectors (dipterans,
ticks, macronyssid mites, etc.), which also serve as intermediate hosts.
Apparently, nothing definite is known about the life cycles of
Travassostrongylus and Viannaia, which include many common opossum
parasites.
Table 10.3  Parasitic Nematode Genera Widely Reported from Didelphid Hostsa
Protozoans
Among the single-celled eukaryotic (“protozoan”) parasite genera known to
infest didelphids are euglenozoans (e.g., Leishmania, Trypanosoma),
several apicomplexans (Babesia, Eimeria, Hepatozoon, Sarcocystis), and
metamonads (Giardia, Tetratrichomonas). The biology of most protozoan
species that infest opossums is poorly known, and no general review is
attempted here. Instead, we briefly discuss the exceptions: two relatively
well-studied microbes that also cause human disease. We note in passingthat species of Plasmodium, apicomplexan hemoparasites that cause malaria
in primates, rodents, birds, and lizards, are not known to infect marsupials.
The best-studied protozoan parasites of opossums are members of the
kinetoplastidean euglenozoan order Trypanosomatida. This medically
important taxon includes Trypanosoma cruzi, the causative agent of Chagas
disease, one of the most serious zoonotic illnesses in the New World
tropics. Like many other trypanosomatids (Lukeš et al., 2014), the
transmission cycle of T. cruzi typically includes both invertebrate and
vertebrate hosts. The invertebrate hosts of T. cruzi are hematophagous bugs
of the reduviid subfamily Triatominae, whereas the vertebrate hosts are
mammals. In the lingo of medical epidemiologists (e.g., Brener, 1973),
triatomines are said to be “vectors” and nonhuman mammals to be
“reservoirs” of T. cruzi, but such anthropocentric terminology
oversimplifies the variety of transmission cycles by which this parasite is
apparently maintained in nature (Jansen et al., 2015).
Triatomine hosts acquire Trypanosoma cruzi when they ingest
trypomastigotes (the flagellated, infective, extracellular stage of the
parasite) with a blood meal from an infected mammal. Within the insect
gut, trypomastigotes transform to epimastigotes (a flagellated but
noninfective extracellular stage), which then undergo binary fission before
transforming back into infective trypomastigotes in the rectum.
Transmission to another mammalian host occurs when the insect feeds
again, simultaneously defecating trypomastigotes that are probably licked
up as the bitten mammal grooms the wound site. Ingested typomastigotes
penetrate a wide variety of mammalian tissues, especially muscle and glia,
where they transform into amastigotes (an unflagellated intracellular stage)
that undergo binary fission about every 12 hours until the infected cell is
filled, whereupon they transform into trypomastigotes that enter the
bloodstream to infect other cells or to be taken up by the next blood-feeding
triatomine (Brener, 1973).
Trypanosoma cruzi is a genetically diverse generalist parasite that is
known to infect at least 180 species of wild, commensal, and domesticated
mammals from the southern United States to central Argentina (Noireau et
al., 2009). Didelphids are commonly infected with T. cruzi throughout the
known range of the parasite, but many other sympatric mammals—
including artiodactyls, bats, carnivorans, and primates—often sustainequally high infection rates. The prevalence of T. cruzi infections among
opossums sampled by recent parasitological surveys in six Brazilian biomes
—Amazonia, Atlantic Forest, Caatinga, Cerrado, Pantanal, and Pampas—
ranged from 6% to 51% (Jansen et al., 2015). This parasite is most
commonly reported from species of Didelphis, but perhaps only because
these large opossums are easy to trap; other didelphid genera that T. cruzi is
known to infect include Caluromys, Gracilinanus, Marmosa, Monodelphis,
and Philander (Coura and Junqeira, 2015; Jansen et al., 2015), so it would
be reasonable to expect T. cruzi to infect almost any tropical or subtropical
opossum species.
The special interest of opossums for researchers working on
Trypanosoma cruzi is due to the fact that this parasite is apparently capable
of invading the anal (“scent”) glands of several didelphid species, where
epimastigotes (otherwise found only in triatomines) then proliferate in the
extracellular lumen and produce infective trypomastigotes (Deane et al.,
1984; Lenzi et al., 1984). Because the glandular contents are expelled with
feces—either during normal defecation or as part of the defensive behavior
previously described for Didelphis (Chapter 7)—it seems plausible that
opossums might directly transmit the parasite to other mammals (e.g., to
attacking carnivorans), thus bypassing the usual triatomine intermediary
host (Carreira et al., 2001). To some researchers, this unique ability of
didelphids to sustain the otherwise “invertebrate” cycle of T. cruzi in the
anal glands is evidence for an ancient coevolutionary relationship between
host and parasite.
Other medically important opossum parasites belong to the
trypanosomatid genus Leishmania, species of which cause cutaneous,
mucocutaneous, and visceral leishmaniases in human populations
throughout the tropical lowlands of Central and South America. Twenty-one
Neotropical species of Leishmania are currently recognized, of which at
least seven are known to occur in opossums (Lainson, 2010; Quaresma et
al., 2011). Insofar as known, all of the Neotropical species of Leishmania
are transmitted from mammalian host to mammalian host by phlebotomine
sand flies (Diptera: Psychodidae). Species of Leishmania are intracellular
parasites of mammals; sand flies ingest mammalian blood or epithelial cells
containing amastigotes, from which flagellum-bearing promastigotes
develop in the insect’s gut; the promastigotes then secrete a gut-blockinggel, forcing the fly to regurgitate before it ingests its next blood meal,
thereby depositing the gel and the parasites it contains on mammalian skin
to complete the normal transmission cycle (Bates, 2007). The species of
Leishmania most commonly associated with didelphid hosts is L.
amazonensis, which is known to infect Caluromys, Didelphis, Marmosa,
Marmosops, Metachirus, and Philander in addition to sympatric
carnivorans and rodents (Rotureau, 2006; Lainson, 2010). Marsupial
infections with Leishmania are said to be externally inapparent (Rotureau,
2006; Lima et al., 2013), suggesting that didelphids may be coevolved
natural hosts of this parasite. Infection prevalence of Leishmania spp. in
opossums sampled by parasitological surveys in some areas of high
zoonotic leishmaniasis can be as high as 33%, but infection rates in
sympatric rodents can be even higher (Lima et al., 2013).
Parasite Diversity
Parasite diversity can be quantified in several different ways (Poulin, 2007):
(1) at the faunal level, by counting all the parasite species known to infest a
single host species anywhere in its geographic range; (2) at the level of the
so-called component community, by counting all the parasite species that
infest a given local population of a host species; and (3) at the level of the
so-called infracommunity, by estimating the mean number of parasite
species that infest individual hosts. Obviously, infracommunities must be
subsets of component communities, which must in turn be subsets of the
larger parasite fauna that infests the host species throughout its range.
The total parasite fauna known to infest a host species might be large if
the ecogeographic range of the host is extensive. Widespread host species
that occur in several different biomes might support several distinct
component communities of temporary ectoparasites if the nonfeeding stages
require different soils, climates, or other abiotic attributes for off-host
survival. Widespread host species might also support numerous distinct
component communities of helminth parasites acquired by eating habitat- or
biome-specific intermediate or paratenic hosts. These seem like reasonable
explanations for the very large number of macroparasites known to infest
Didelphis virginiana, for example, which ranges across several biomes
from Central America to Canada. A total endoparasite fauna of 70 helminthspecies (including 7 acanthocephalans, 8 cestodes, 21 digeneans, and 34
nematodes) have been recorded from D. virginiana in the United States and
Mexico (Alden, 1995; García-Prieto et al., 2012), whereas component
communities of helminths from local parasite surveys of this host are
consistently much smaller (e.g., 12 species in southern Illinois; Alden,
1995). Therefore, parasite faunas (in the comprehensive, species-wide
sense) are of little, if any, ecological or physiological significance.
Of greater potential ecological interest is the number of parasite species
that infest local host populations, the component-community richness.
However, this number—like other measures of biological extent—is
sample-size dependent, because component-community richness
monotonically increases as more hosts are examined (up to some
asymptotic value, presumably). Also, if many local parasite species each
infest only a small number of host individuals, then component-community
richness is a poor predictor of infracommunity richness. The latter is
perhaps the most biologically relevant measure of parasite diversity, and
because it is a measure of central tendency rather than extent, it is not
sample-size dependent.
Although infracommunity richness values have seldom been reported in
published studies of didelphid parasites, an estimate of the average number
of parasite species per host individual can be computed from infestation
frequency data (usually reported as “prevalence” and scaled as percentages)
on the assumption that parasite infestations are independent.1 Comparisons
of such estimates with component-community richness from nine studies of
didelphid gastrointestinal helminths (Table 10.4) suggest that individual
opossums are usually infested by fewer than half the species in the
corresponding component community. As reported by the single study
known to us of opossum ectoparasites that provides relevant frequency data
(Durden and Wilson, 1990), the component community that infests
Didelphis virginiana in central Tennessee includes 12 species (of fleas,
ticks, and mites), but the estimated mean infracommunity richness is only
about two species. Based on this and other studies, it would seem
reasonable to expect that opossum macroparasite component communities
often include 10 or more species of helminths and perhaps an equivalent
number of arthropod ectoparasites; of these, however, individual opossumsmight often be infested, on average, by no more than three or four helminth
species and perhaps by only one or two species of ectoparasites.
Such numbers are difficult to put into comparative perspective because
there are only a few quantitative results from parasitological studies of
sympatric placental mammals of equivalent body size and trophic habits.
Perhaps the best comparative data are available from several surveys of the
endo- and ectoparasites of raccoons (Procyon lotor) in the southeastern
United States. In the aggregate, these studies suggest that raccoons are
about equally parasitized as Virginia opossums. For example, the mean
infracommunity richness of gastrointestinal helminths (estimated from
infestation frequencies) in a sample of 30 raccoons from Arkansas
(Richardson et al., 1992) is about 5.5 species per host individual. In the only
comparative study of ectoparasite faunas from sympatric opossums and
raccoons (Pung et al., 1994), estimates based on infestation frequency data
yield similar infracommunity richness estimates (about 1.8 ectoparasite
species per host individual). Few as they are, these data suggest that
opossums do not suffer substantially higher (or lower) rates of parasitism
than co-occurring placental mammals of similar size and habits.
Table 10.4  Ten Opossum Gastrointestinal Helminth Communitiesa
Discussion
Although opossums are infested by a wide range of metazoan parasites, all
the arthropod and helminth higher taxa (families, orders, etc.) that
commonly parasitize opossums also parasitize other small mammals
(Morand et al., 2006), and research on medically important trypanosomatids
suggests that the same is true of parasitic protozoans. Additionally, the scant
literature on opossum parasite communities suggest that didelphids areneither much more nor much less heavily parasitized than sympatric
placental species. In effect, didelphids seem, parasitologically speaking, to
be rather ordinary mammalian hosts.
Parasitism is, nevertheless, a potentially important aspect of opossum
natural history. As reviewed above, several groups of blood-feeding
ectoparasites (fleas, ticks, and mites) are known to transmit microbial
disease agents, and some helminth parasites cause visible lesions in infected
tissues or are so large and/or so numerous that they must often have adverse
effects on host fitness. The physiological consequences of protozoan
infestations for opossum hosts have never been assessed, but it seems likely
that intracellular trypanosomatid parasitism must eventually result in tissue
damage and suboptimal somatic performance. Therefore, selection might be
expected to favor anatomical, behavioral, and physiological traits that
minimize the probability that individuals will become infested, or that
minimize the severity of established infestations.
The obvious first line of defense against ectoparasitism is grooming, a
very frequent mammalian behavior (Hart, 1992). Opossum grooming
behavior involves licking, hind-foot scratching, and biting (McManus,
1970; González and Claramunt, 2000), and it appears to be remarkably
effective in parasite removal. In an experimental study, captive Didelphis
virginiana removed over 96% of the larval ticks with which they were
inoculated, presumably by grooming (Keesing et al., 2009). Morphological
traits that might facilitate ectoparasite removal during grooming include the
spoon-shaped claw on digit II of the hind foot (Fig. 5.5), which has no
plausible locomotory function, and the tweezer-like morphology of the first
upper incisor (Fig. 5.6), which has no apparent role in feeding.
Adaptations that minimize endoparasitism might be behavioral (e.g.,
avoidance of prey infested by larval helminths; careful choice of nesting
sites) or physiological (e.g., immune responses to helminth and protozooan
infestations), but no relevant observations on these topics have been
published for opossums. However, it is noteworthy that olfactory genes
(which might encode odorant receptor molecules to detect parasite-infested
prey) and genes associated with immune response are among the most
abundant loci in the Monodelphis domestica genome (Goodstadt et al.,
2007), as they are in many other mammals for which entire genome
assemblies are currently available. Whether or not opossums (or any othermammal) are capable of olfactory discrimination between parasite-free and
parasite-infested prey is apparently unknown, although the necessary
experiments would seem to be relatively straightforward. Heritable genetic
variation for ecto- and endoparasite resistance, presumably mediated at
least in part by the immune system, is known to occur in a wide range of
mammalian species (Charbonnel et al., 2006), but relevant observations are
not yet available for didelphids.
The potentially important role of parasitism in other aspects of opossum
biology also remains uninvestigated. For example, research on placental
mammals suggests that parasite infestations can affect phenomena as
diverse as mate choice (Kavaliers and Colwell, 1995), population regulation
(Pedersen and Greives, 2008), and predator avoidance (Berdoy et al., 2000).
Thus, there is much to learn in the years ahead as opossum parasitology
moves beyond taxonomic descriptions, faunal inventories, and biomedical
studies to test evolutionary hypotheses in the field and laboratory.
NOTE
1. This seems to often be true as a first approximation because the sum of infestation frequencies
is very close to mean infracommunity richness in every published opossum macroparasite survey that
provides relevant data.11
Predators
Predation is thought to be both a major cause of mortality and a potent
agent of natural selection in most animal populations, but its evolutionary
importance for marsupials has long been unappreciated (Coulson, 1996).
Unfortunately, most evidence of predation on didelphids is anecdotal, so its
role in shaping relevant morphological traits (e.g., concealing coloration;
Chapter 5), physiological phenomena (senescence; Chapter 6), behaviors
(lunar phobia; Chapter 7), and demographic variables (survivorship rates;
Chapter 13) is still largely conjectural. Below we briefly consider the major
vertebrate taxa known to prey on opossums and discuss the evidence for
their probable impact on didelphid evolution.1
Predator Taxa
Snakes
Boas (family Boidae) are constricting snakes that locate their prey by active
searching and by waiting in ambush; visual, olfactory, and infrared-sensory
cues are probably used for prey capture. Neotropical boas are mostly
nocturnal and include arboreal, terrestrial, and aquatic taxa. Several
treeboas (genus Corallus) are known to eat didelphids, including species of
Caluromys (Fig. 11.1), Didelphis, Gracilinanus, Marmosa, Metachirus, and
Philander (Pizzatto et al., 2009; Henderson and Pauers, 2012). The apparent
paradox of arboreal snakes eating nonarboreal opossums (such as
Metachirus) is explained by the characteristic posture of some of these
boas, which are said to coil around the trunks of small trees close to the
ground with the head oriented downward, presumably to ambush terrestrial
prey (Henderson and Pauers, 2012). The formidable terrestrial species Boaconstrictor (to about 5 m; Murphy and Henderson, 1997) has been reported
to eat Didelphis (Sawaya et al., 2008; Pizzatto et al., 2009) and probably
takes other large didelphids as well. The genus Epicrates includes several
smaller terrestrial boas that might eat didelphids, but only E. crassus is
apparently known to do so (Pizzatto et al., 2009). The huge aquatic boa
Eunectes murinus (to at least 7 m; Murphy and Henderson, 1997) lives in
the same rainforest streams as the water opossum (Voss et al., 2001), but it
is only definitely known to eat Didelphis (Pizzatto et al., 2009).
Fig. 11.1. Emerald treeboa (Corallus caninus) swallowing a woolly opossum (Caluromys philander)
in lowland rainforest of Pará state, Brazil (photo by Jany Sauvanet)Neotropical pitvipers are mostly nocturnal ambush predators that use
infrared-sensitive pit organs, olfaction, and visual cues to locate prey; both
arboreal and terrestrial pitvipers are known to eat opossums (Voss, 2013).
As discussed elsewhere (Chapter 9), Didelphis, Lutreolina, and Philander
are known to attack and eat venomous snakes, but even venom-resistant
opossums are apparently eaten by some large pitvipers. Other didelphids are
not known to be venom resistant, and it is likely that most are eaten, at least
occasionally, by sympatric pitvipers. Pitvipers that are definitely known to
eat opossums include species of Bothriechis, Bothriopsis, Bothrocophias,
Bothrops, Crotalus, and Lachesis.
Only a few other snakes (“colubrids” sensu lato) are definitely known to
eat opossums (Pinto and Lema, 2002; Mesquita et al., 2011; Patrón et al.,
2011), but most Neotropical colubrids that prey on small mammals
probably take opossums on occasion. Such species include, inter alia, active
diurnal predators in the genera Drymarchon, Mastigodryas, Masticophis,
Philodryas, and Spilotes, as well as predominantly nocturnal species of
Clelia and Pseudoboa (Duellman, 1990; H.W. Greene, personal commun.).
Because most small mammals are nocturnal, diurnal colubrids probably
attack sleeping prey in their daytime refugia, which are probably located by
olfaction and visual cues.
Birds
Opossums are preyed upon by many raptors, including hawk-like birds
(Accipitridae) and owls (Strigidae and Tytonidae). Neotropical accipitrids
definitely known to eat opossums include species commonly known as
eagles (Izor, 1985; Klein et al., 1988; Piana, 2007), hawks (Granzinolli and
Motta, 2006; Tortato, 2009), and kites (Scheibler, 2007). Because
accipitrids are diurnal, most opossums eaten by these visually oriented
raptors are probably taken at dawn or dusk. Numerous species of owls
probably eat didelphids, but dietary data for these nocturnal raptors are
usually obtained from regurgitated pellets, which are seldom found in
rainforests (where they decompose quickly). Therefore, most published
analyses of owl diets are from dry-forest and savanna habitats, where barn
owls (Tyto alba), in particular, are often reported to eat small opossums
(e.g., by Motta, 2006; Carmona and Rivadeneira, 2006; Teta et al., 2009;
Baglan and Catzeflis, 2016). The spectacled owl (Pulsatrix perspicillata) isa rainforest species large enough to take Didelphis, but it also preys on
Caluromys and smaller opossums (Charles-Dominique et al., 1981; Timm et
al., 1989; Gómez de Silva et al., 1997).
Mammals
Although didelphids sometimes prey on one another, definite evidence of
such behavior is rare. Among the few known examples are Wilson’s (1970)
report of Didelphis marsupialis attacking and eating an individual of
Philander melanurus, one report of “Marmosa sp.” in the diet of Lutreolina
crassicaudata (see Monteiro-Filho and Dias, 1990), one report of an
unidentified species of Monodelphis in the diet of Philander quica (see
Macedo et al., 2010), and one report of unidentified young opossums in the
diet of Marmosa paraguayana (see Pires et al., 2010a). By contrast, reports
of placental mammals preying on didelphids are much more abundant.
Placentals that prey on opossums include cats (Felidae), dog-like
carnivorans (Canidae), weasel-like carnivorans (Mustelidae), coatis and
raccoons (Procyonidae), and monkeys (Cebidae). Neotropical cats,
predominantly nocturnal, include active and ambush predators, and most of
them are known to prey on opossums. In particular, didelphids appear to be
eaten frequently by pumas (Puma concolor), ocelots (Leopardus pardalis),
margays (Leopardus wiedii), and jaguarundis (Puma yagouaroundi)
(Konecny, 1989; Chinchilla, 1997; Meza et al., 2002; Bianchi and Mendes,
2007; Rocha-Mendes et al., 2010). Interestingly, opossums are absent or
rare in reported jaguar (Panthera onca) diets, except in the Chaco (Taber et
al., 1997). Elsewhere, common opossums (Didelphis) are seldom eaten by
big cats (Pratas-Santiago et al., 2017), and there is statistical evidence from
at least one study that jaguars actively avoid eating D. marsupialis (see
Weckel et al., 2006).
Canids are active diurnal predators, and most species are likely to prey
on sympatric opossums. However, published reports of didelphids in
Neotropical canid diets are less common than published records of felid
predation, and all are from “wolves” or “foxes” inhabiting semiarid habitats
rather than rainforest (Simonetti et al., 1984; Motta et al., 1996; Gatti et al.,
2006; Varela et al., 2008; Castro and Emmons, 2012). Dietary knowledge of
the widespread rainforest canids Atelocynus microtis and Speothos
venaticus is very limited and neither is certainly known to eat opossums,but both probably do so when the opportunity offers. In temperate North
America, Didelphis virginiana is preyed upon by coyotes (Canis latrans),
foxes (Vulpes vulpes), and feral dogs (Gardner, 1982).
Records of other carnivorans preying on didelphids are uncommon, but
diurnal tayras (Eira barbara), grisons (Galictis vittata), coatis (Nasua spp.),
and the nocturnal Neotropical raccoon (Procyon cancrivorus) are tireless
foragers that probably overpower and eat most of the smaller vertebrates
they encounter, and all are known to eat opossums occasionally (Bisbal,
1986; Konecny, 1989; Gatti et al., 2006; Rocha-Mendes et al., 2010).
Monkeys may seem like unlikely predators, but species of Cebus are known
to hunt and kill a variety of arboreal small mammals, including opossums
(Resende et al., 2003; Milano and Monteiro-Filho, 2009), and even
marmosets (Callithrix) are known to prey opportunistically on small
didelphids (Camargo et al., 2017).
Discussion
Snakes, raptors, and carnivorans are important vertebrate predators in most
terrestrial ecosystems (e.g., Jaksic et al., 1981; Greene, 1988), and all have
been reported to prey on opossums (Table 11.1). Unfortunately, the relevant
literature is clearly biased by abundance, because more published records of
predation are available for common than for rare prey taxa. In fact, no
published records of predation are available for the rare (or elusive) genera
Caluromysiops, Glironia, and Hyladelphys. Additionally, owl and hawk
vomitus is more easily found in semiarid habitats (deserts, savannas, and
scrubland) than in rainforest, plausibly accounting for the lack of avian
predation records for some common rainforest opossums (e.g., species of
Marmosops).Table 11.1  Recorded Predators of Opossumsa
Because of these (and other) biases, few generalizations emerge from the
literature cited above. However, it is noteworthy that no predator seems to
specialize on didelphids. Instead, all of the snakes, raptors, and carnivorans
known to eat opossums are also known to prey on a wide range of other
small vertebrates, especially rodents. Although opossums sometimes
comprise a large fraction of reported predator diets (e.g., of ocelots in
Belize; Konecny, 1989), no published comparisons of observed dietary
frequencies with estimated encounter rates (e.g., Emmons, 1987;
Granzinolli et al., 2006) suggest that didelphids are preferred over other
mammalian prey.
Predation pressure on opossum populations has seldom been quantified,
but two field studies of radio-collared Didelphis virginiana suggest that it
can have a major impact. Predation accounted for more than half (53%) of
30 naturally occurring opossum deaths observed in a protected area in
Florida (Ryser, 1990), whereas coyotes alone accounted for 76% ofopossum mortality in a protected area in Kansas (Kamler and Gipson,
2004). Although comparable information is lacking for tropical opossum
populations, the cumulative demographic impact of predation by sympatric
snakes, raptors, and placental mammals is probably substantial. At one
well-studied Amazonian rainforest site, for example, at least 40 vertebrate
species could prey on opossums, including 13 snakes, 15 raptors, and 12
placentals (Table 11.2). Almost equivalent numbers of potential predators
are present in Central American rainforests (Greene, 1988), in Brazilian
savannas (Rodrigues et al., 2002; Valdujo et al., 2009), and perhaps in other
tropical biomes. Of course, not every opossum species is vulnerable to
every sympatric predator, but most tropical opossums probably have
multiple predators with diverse hunting behaviors and sensory abilities.
Thus, Didelphis marsupialis is known to be preyed upon by at least 10 taxa
that probably co-occur throughout most of its geographic range, including
two boas (Boa constrictor and Corallus spp.), two large accipitrids (Harpia
harpyja and Spizaetus ornatus), spectacled owls, pumas, ocelots,
jaguarundis, grisons, and tayras (Bisbal, 1986; Klein et al., 1988; Konecny,
1989; Chinchilla, 1997; Piana et al., 2007; Pizzatto et al., 2009; Henderson
and Pauers, 2012). Predator communities are less diverse at south-temperate
latitudes than in the tropics, but at least 17 species (2 snakes, 12 raptors, and
3 placental mammals) are potential predators of small mammals in the
semiarid shrublands of north-central Chile, and most of them probably eat
the single species of local opossum (Thylamys elegans), although only three
owls and the fox Pseudalopex culpaeus are definitely known to do so
(Jaksic et al., 1993).Table 11.2  The Río Manu Predator Communitya
Predation pressure is not necessarily correlated with numbers of
sympatric predator species because ecological interactions can sometimes
reduce the net impact of predation on prey populations (Sih et al., 1998).
Additionally, the presence of refugia (concealing vegetation, burrows, etc.)
can significantly decrease the vulnerability of prey, so species with only a
few sympatric predators in open habitats (such as the Patagonian steppe
inhabited by Lestodelphys halli) might well suffer higher predation than an
otherwise similar species with more predators in densely vegetated habitats.
Some didelphids with unusual lifestyles might escape attack from many of
the taxa that persecute other opossums, but habitat specialists may be
vulnerable to habitat-specific risks; water opossums, for example,
perilously share their aquatic habitats with mammal-eating caimans and
anacondas (Magnusson et al., 1987; Voss et al., 2001).
In summary, it seems likely that no opossum species is immune from
predation, and that most (if not all) didelphids are routinely eaten by
multiple sympatric predator species. Especially in the tropical rainforests
where most didelphids live today, and where most of didelphid evolutionary
history probably transpired (Chapter 14), the diversity of sympatric
predators using disparate tactics and sensory systems to encounter
mammalian prey would seem to guarantee that opossums have been subject
to relentless selection for behavioral and morphological crypsis, sensoryvigilance, and other phenotypic traits that tend to prevent, deter, or deflect
predatory attacks (Coulson, 1996; Ruxton et al., 2004; Caro, 2005).
Fig. 11.2. Survivorship curves (top panel) and mortality rates (bottom panel) for adult Didelphis
virginiana at a mainland study site with carnivoran predators and on an island without carnivorans
(redrawn from Austad, 1993)
Predation also seems likely to be responsible for the high extrinsic
mortality that has been hypothesized to explain the remarkably short
reproductive lifespans and early senescence of many—if not all—opossums
(Chapter 13). Evidence for the probable role of predation in shaping
relevant demographic rates was reported by Austad (1993), who
documented higher survivorship and lower age-specific mortality in apopulation of Didelphis virginiana on an island lacking mammalian apex
predators (bobcats and feral canids) by comparison with survivorship and
mortality in an adjacent mainland population with a full complement of
predators (Fig. 11.2). Consistent with theory, opossums from the island
population exhibited retarded senescence relative to mainland individuals.
The potential role of predation in shaping other aspects of opossum
autecology is unclear. However, it is possible that sufficiently numerous or
effective predators could keep opossum population densities well below the
carrying capacity of local habitats, which might account for the lack of
evidence for density dependence and the absence of any demonstrable
effects of interspecific competition in some demographic studies (e.g.,
Troyer et al., 2014). To address such issues, however, we need more than
anecdotes and assumptions. As in so many other aspects of ecological
research, quantification is key, and future research on opossum natural
history would benefit from effective efforts to numerically assess the impact
of predators on their marsupial prey.
NOTE
1. To our knowledge, only a single example of invertebrate predation on opossums—a large
mygalomorph spider preying on Marmosops noctivagus (von May et al., 2019)—has been reported in
the literature, but large mygalomorphs (“tarantulas”) are abundant in many tropical habitats and
might often prey on small opossums despite the lack of additional evidence for such interactions.12
Competitors and Mutualists
In addition to parasites and predators, animals have to contend with species
that compete with them for essential resources. Competition—by definition,
any interspecific interaction that harms both participants—is usually a less
conspicuous phenomenon than either parasitism or predation, but it is often
thought to be important in structuring ecological communities, and it has
sometimes been invoked as an explanation for extinctions in biogeographic
scenarios (e.g., the Great American Biotic Interchange; Chapter 3). To keep
this account within manageable limits, we restrict our consideration of taxa
that potentially compete with opossums to placental mammals, although we
cannot rule out the possibility that resource competition with birds and
other vertebrates might also be important.
By contrast with competition, mutualisms are interspecific interactions
that yield reciprocal benefits, and they are believed to be crucial for
maintaining ecosystem functionality (Bascompte and Jordano, 2007). Seed
dispersal and pollination, in particular, are important mutualisms sustained
between plants on the one hand and frugivorous and nectarivorous animals
on the other, but plants do not necessarily benefit from all of the frugivores
and nectarivores that visit them. There is, furthermore, much taxonomic
variation in the quality of seed-dispersal and pollination services provided
by animals that mutualistically eat fruits and visit flowers. In the absence of
much relevant detail, our treatment of these topics is necessarily superficial,
but the data at hand seem adequate to suggest several interpretations of
opossum-plant interactions.Competition
Everywhere that opossums live, they coexist with, and are usually
outnumbered by, placental mammals. In the deciduous woodlands of
temperate North America, the Virginia opossum (Didelphis virginiana) co￾occurs with several dozen placental species, whereas Neotropical opossums
can co-occur with almost 200 placental species at some Amazonian
localities (Voss and Emmons, 1996). Many sympatric placental taxa seem
likely to compete with opossums for food and other resources, but there is
not much compelling evidence to support this expectation.
Demonstrating interspecific competition in the wild is notoriously
difficult, and only experimental results are widely regarded as conclusive.
The only relevant field experiment known to us compared Virginia opossum
diets and population characteristics between control plots and plots from
which raccoons (Procyon lotor) had been removed by live-trapping
(Kasparian et al., 2002, 2004). Raccoons and Virginia opossums live in the
same habitats and eat much the same food, so it is reasonable to expect that
Virginia opossum diets and/or demography would be affected by raccoon
removal, but the results of Kasparian et al.’s experiment were inconclusive.
In the absence of other experimental studies, we assess the potential for
niche overlap as the basis for inferring competition. In particular, we focus
on trophic overlap to identify potential competitors, because trophic
resources are thought to be limiting for didelphid populations (e.g., by
Charles-Dominique et al., 1981), and because taxonomic differences in
other niche dimensions (e.g., circadian activity, locomotor behavior) do not
preclude competition for food. Fruit eaten by diurnal mammals, for
example, is not subsequently available for consumption by nocturnal
species, nor are insects gleaned from foliage by bats available for
consumption by nonflying mammals that forage in the same vegetation.
Such exploitative competition, which results simply from the depletion of
shared resources without direct interspecific contact, is probably much
more common than interference competition, whereby individuals of one
species physically displace individuals of another while foraging.
Interference competition between marsupials and placentals is known to
occur—for example, at flowering or fruiting trees (Kays et al., 2012;
Breviglieri and Kuhnen, 2016)—but it is seldom reported. By contrast,published dietary data suggest that a wide range of sympatric placentals
might compete exploitatively with opossums for food.
Potentially Competing Taxa
Dasypodid armadillos (Dasypus spp.) consume small ectothermic
vertebrates, litter invertebrates, and fallen fruit (Szeplaki et al., 1988;
Emmons, 1997; Loughry and McDonough, 2013; Voss and Fleck, 2017),
including many of the same invertebrate taxa (e.g., Diplopoda, Coleoptera,
Oligochaeta) also eaten by terrestrial opossums that live in the same
habitats. In lowland tropical rainforests, dasypodid armadillos are nocturnal,
increasing the likelihood that they encounter the same prey as sympatric
opossums. Chlamyphorid armadillos, on the other hand, are either fossorial
(e.g., Cabassous spp.) or so much larger and more divergent in their
foraging behavior (e.g., Priodontes maximus, which tears apart rotten logs)
as to seem unlikely to overlap substantially in diet with sympatric
opossums.
Members of the bat family Phyllostomidae are adaptively diverse,
including frugivorous, nectarivorous, omnivorous, and animalivorous
species (Giannini and Kalko, 2004). Among other resources, phyllostomids
exploit many of the same fruits (e.g., Cecropia, Ficus, Piper; Charles￾Dominique, 1986; Fleming, 1986), nectar sources (e.g., Mabea, Ochroma;
Steiner, 1983; Kays et al., 2012), insects (e.g., katydids, caterpillars; Kalka
and Kalko, 2006), and small vertebrates (e.g., frogs; Ryan et al., 1981) that
sympatric opossums are known to eat. With the exception of vampires, all
phyllostomids can be considered potential competitors of at least some
sympatric didelphids.
New World monkeys trophically resemble opossums in having diets that
usually include both ripe fruit pulp and insects, although some atelids and
pitheciids also eat foliage and seeds (Rosenberger, 1992). Large monkeys
primarily forage in the canopy and subcanopy (Mittermeier and van
Roosmalen, 1981; Terborgh, 1983), where they eat many of the same fruits
consumed in situ by arboreal opossums; however, the same fruits, once
fallen, are also eaten on the forest floor by terrestrial species. By contrast,
marmosets (Callithrix spp.), tamarins (Saguinus spp.), and other
callitrichines forage for insects and small fruits in the primary forest
understory, along forest edges, and in secondary growth (Rylands, 1993),where they might compete trophically with small opossums (e.g., Marmosa
spp.) that frequent such habitats and eat similar items. Primates have also
been observed to compete with opossums for nectar (Kays et al., 2012) and
exudates (Aléssio et al., 2005).
Living procyonids include several taxa that overlap broadly in diet,
substrate use, and/or diel activity with opossums and might compete
directly with them for essential resources. Kinkajous (Potos flavus) and
olingos (Bassaricyon spp.), in particular, are nocturnal-arboreal
frugivores/nectarivores that consume many of the same plant resources as
syntopic arboreal and scansorial opossums (Charles-Dominique et al., 1981;
Julien-Laferrière, 1999; Kays, 1999, 2000), and kinkajous have been
observed to physically displace opossums feeding in the same canopy trees
(Kays et al., 2012). Coatis (Nasua spp.), although diurnal, have a mixed diet
of fallen fruits, litter arthropods, and small vertebrates (Kaufmann, 1962;
Alves-Costa et al., 2004; Hirsch, 2009) that is strikingly similar to the diets
of large syntopic terrestrial opossums (e.g., Didelphis spp.). As noted above,
the North American raccoon (Procyon lotor) forages nocturnally in
temperate woodland habitats for items that are also consumed by the
Virginia opossum (Kissell and Kennedy, 1992), whereas the Neotropical
raccoon (P. cancrivorus) is a riparian species that might compete with
syntopic opossums such as Philander and Chironectes for frogs,
crustaceans, and other semiaquatic or aquatic prey.
The North American striped skunk (Mephitis mephitis) and spotted
skunks (Spilogale spp.) are terrestrial omnivores with diets that include
many of the same items consumed by syntopic Virginia opossums (e.g.,
Hamilton, 1936; Cantú-Salazar et al., 2005). Neotropical hog-nosed skunks
(Conepatus) are poorly characterized ecologically, but they are nocturnal,
terrestrial, and appear to favor open habitats. Available dietary data are all
from high latitudes (e.g., Travaini et al., 1998; Donadio et al., 2004), where
C. chinga is known to eat a wide variety of invertebrates and small
vertebrates, many taxa of which are also consumed by sympatric opossums
(e.g., Lestodelphys and Lutreolina).
Mustelids include several taxa that are potential competitors with
opossums. In North America, weasels (e.g., Mustela frenata) take many of
the same species of rodents and other small mammals eaten by syntopic
Virginia opossums. In the Neotropics, a case for potential competition couldbe made for the river otter (Lontra longicaudis), which occurs syntopically
with the water opossum (Chironectes minimus) and, although diurnal, feeds
on essentially similar items (fish and crustaceans; Pardini, 1998; Quadros
and Monteiro-Filho, 2001; Galliez et al., 2009). Grisons (Galictis spp.)
might also overlap trophically with some of the larger sympatric opossums,
but their food habits, especially in rainforest, are not well documented, and
their primary interaction with opossums might be predatory rather than
competitive.
Although most ungulates (artiodactyls and perissodactyls) are folivorous
grazers or browsers, Neotropical rainforest deer, peccaries, and lowland
tapirs eat substantial quantities of fruit (Bodmer, 1989; Henry et al., 2000;
Gayot et al., 2004), including many of the same families, genera, and
species of fruits eaten by terrestrial opossums.
Many terrestrial caviomorph rodents—including nocturnal spiny rats
(Proechimys spp.,), diurnal agoutis (Dasyprocta spp.), diurnal acouchies
(Myoprocta spp.), and nocturnal pacas Cuniculus paca)—are at least
partially frugivorous (Smythe, 1978; Dubost, 1988; Dubost and Henry,
2006). The few available lists of fruits consumed by terrestrial caviomorphs
(e.g., Adler, 1995; Beck-King et al., 1999) contain many taxa eaten by
opossums. In addition, some arboreal caviomorphs are partially
frugivorous, including the widespread porcupine Coendou prehensilis
(Charles-Dominique et al., 1981) and some smaller rat-like species
(Mesomys spp. and Makalata didelphoides; Emmons, 1997).
Neotropical cricetid rodents (subfamily Sigmodontinae) are an
adaptively diverse group that includes many open-country granivores or
grazers that are unlikely to compete with opossums. Forest-dwelling
sigmodontines, however, are all at least partially insectivorous, and many
also eat fruits that are eaten by sympatric opossums (Guillotin, 1982;
Casella and Cáceres, 2006). Some semiaquatic taxa (e.g., Ichthyomys) occur
syntopically with water opossums (Chironectes minimus) and eat many of
the same prey items (aquatic insects, crustaceans, and sometimes fish; Voss,
1988).
Diffuse Competition
Multiple sympatric species in most of these placental clades are present in
many Neotropical habitats, where the aggregate potential for trophic-resource competition seems correspondingly high (Table 12.1). Of course,
not every opossum species is likely to compete with every sympatric
placental, but for every opossum species there are likely to be at least
several placentals that forage for similar kinds of food in similar places.
Water opossums (Chironectes), for example, share rainforest streams with
otters and semiaquatic cricetids; woolly opossums share tree crowns with
primates and arboreal procyonids; small didelphines (e.g., species of
Gracilinanus, Marmosa, and Marmosops) search for insects and small fruits
in the same understory vegetation patrolled by insectivorous and
frugivorous phyllostomids; and terrestrial opossums must subsist on what is
missed or rejected by foraging armadillos, coatis, ungulates, and rodents.
Therefore, most opossums are probably exposed to diffuse competition, the
summed effect of resource depletion by multiple competing species
(MacArthur, 1972; Pianka, 1974).
Although diffuse competition is impossible to quantify in species-rich
tropical communities, there are reasons to expect that it might have a
substantial effect on opossum populations. First, the numbers of potentially
competing placental species at several well-sampled Neotropical localities
are large, far exceeding the number of opossum species in most faunas
known to us.1 Second, in any particular microhabitat, opossums are often
sandwiched between potential competitors that are larger (e.g., primates,
carnivores, ungulates) and others that are smaller (e.g., bats), an awkward
position that (at least in theory; MacArthur, 1972) could make them
especially vulnerable to resource depletion. Lastly, as small to medium￾sized nonvolant mammals, opossums are less mobile than many sympatric
placentals—e.g., bats, ungulates, and the larger primates—some of which
are known to migrate seasonally from local habitats with low resource
availability to neighboring sites where resources are more abundant. In
other words, most opossums probably stay put and make do with what is
left when more mobile competitors depart for richer pickings elsewhere.Table 12.1  Numbers of Placental Mammals that Might Compete Trophically with Opossums at Four
South American Localities
To quantify the potential for resource overlap between opossums and
sympatric placentals, we tabulated the fruit and prey taxa consumed by
potentially competing mammalian species in two rainforested regions. Data
on fruit consumption was compiled from several field studies in French
Guiana, where research on seed dispersal has resulted in numerous
published dietary studies of frugivorous mammals. The most extensive
available data on prey consumption, by contrast, is from the Atlantic Forest
of southeastern Brazil, from which many dietary studies of secondary
consumers have been published over the last several decades. Both datasets
are incomplete in the sense that dietary data are not available from all
potentially competing local taxa, and both are coarsely resolved
taxonomically (fruits identified usually only to genus, prey commonly
identified only to order), but for now this is the best information available.
In French Guiana, three species of opossums are known to consume
fruits belonging to 45 genera of plants, of which sympatric placentals (bats,
primates, procyonids, and ungulates) consume fruits of 40 genera, or about
89% (Appendix 2). Of the five plant genera whose fruits were found to be
eaten only by opossums in these studies, four—Xylopia (Annonaceae),
Monstera (Araceae), Pera (Euphorbiaceae), and Loreya (Melastomataceae)
—are known from other Neotropical studies to be consumed by bats,
primates, and/or procyonids. Just one genus—Dichapetalum
(Dichapetalaceae)—produces fruits for which opossums are the only known
mammalian consumers; however, this genus includes only two local species
of lianas (Mori et al., 2002) and seems unlikely to constitute an important
trophic resource for any mammal.
In southeastern Brazil, 11 species of opossums are known to prey on 25
animal higher taxa (mostly orders in the Linnaean hierarchy), of whichsympatric placental mammals (primates, procyonids, and cricetids) also
prey on 24, or about 96% (Appendix 3). The sole higher taxon exclusively
preyed upon by opossums in this tabulation is Psocoptera, a group of tiny
insects (commonly known as barklice) that are unlikely to be an important
food source.
Mutualistic Interactions
Seed Dispersal
As reviewed earlier in this volume (Chapter 9), many opossums eat fruit,
and as we have just seen, a large number of plants have fruit that is at least
occasionally eaten by opossums. However, although the purpose of fleshy
fruits is to provide nutritional rewards for seed dispersal, not all frugivores
disperse seeds. Many species of mammals and birds are known to spit out
large seeds, consuming only the pulp of large-seeded fruits. In such cases,
the animal-plant interaction is not mutualistic, because only the animal
benefits.
Opossums eat many species of fruits without dispersing the seeds. Of 44
species of fruits eaten by three species of radio-tracked didelphids in French
Guiana, the seeds of only 19 species (43%) were ingested (Charles￾Dominique et al., 1981; Atramentowicz, 1988). These opossum-dispersed
plant species (Table 12.2) represent a diversity of growth forms (trees,
stranglers, lianas, epiphytes, shrubs, etc.), but all have small seeds (<10 mm
long). Many are from pioneer plant taxa that usually occur in canopy gaps
and secondary vegetation, but other seeds dispersed by opossums in this
study are from plants that occur in primary forest.
Studies of opossum-mediated seed dispersal have also been carried out
in the Atlantic Forest of southeastern Brazil. As in French Guiana, seeds
dispersed by opossums in the Atlantic Forest are invariably small, and they
are usually from pioneer species (Cáceres et al., 1999; Pinheiro et al., 2002;
Carvalho et al., 2005; Leiner and Silva, 2007b). Some of the same plant
families that are opossum-dispersed in French Guiana are also opossum￾dispersed in southeastern Brazil (e.g., Araceae, Cecropiaceae,
Melastomataceae, Moraceae, and Piperaceae), but Solanaceae (a family that
is primarily dispersed by birds and bats in the Guianas) is notably well
represented in lists of opossum-dispersed seeds from the Atlantic Forest.Only a few relevant studies have been carried out in the Cerrado of
central Brazil, where seeds of Cecropiaceae, Moraceae, and Piperaceae are
conspicuously absent from didelphid feces (Lessa and da Costa, 2010;
Camargo et al., 2011; Lessa et al., 2013). Instead, species of
Melastomataceae (especially Miconia), Myrtaceae, and Rubiaceae seem to
predominate among the seeds ingested by opossums in this dry-forested
biome. The seed taxa dispersed by opossums in other tropical biomes are
poorly documented, but Marmosa xerophila disperses the seeds of at least
four species of cacti in the desert thornscrub of northern Venezuela (Thielen
et al., 1997b). Because fruit is only a minor component of didelphid diets at
temperate latitudes (Chapter 9), seed dispersal by opossums seems unlikely
to be ecologically important there.
Of course, seed dispersal is only effective if seeds are still viable after
they have passed through the gut of the animal that swallowed them, and
several experimental studies have assessed the viability of seeds ingested by
opossums (e.g., Cáceres et al., 1999; Cáceres and Monteiro-Filho, 2000;
Lessa et al., 2013). The results suggest that many seeds recovered from
opossum feces germinate at about the same rate as “control” seeds (seeds
extracted directly from ripe fruits), although some species of opossum￾ingested seeds fare better (have higher germination rates) and a few fare
worse than conspecific “controls.” Seed latency—the average time required
for opossum-ingested seeds to germinate in these experiments—varied
considerably according to plant species. In Lessa et al.’s (2013) study,
latency ranged from 12 ± 3 days for seeds of Cipocereus minensis
(Cactaceae) passed by Marmosops incanus to 171 ± 8 days for seeds of
Cordiera sessilis (Rubiaceae) passed by Didelphis albiventris; as suggested
by the authors, such disparate latencies suggest different germination
strategies in habitats with seasonally variable conditions for seedling
establishment.Table 12.2  Plant with Seeds Dispersed by Opossums (Caluromys philander, Didelphis marsupialis,
Philander opossum) in French Guiana
Plants with seeds dispersed by opossums are often dispersed by other
vertebrates as well. In French Guiana, opossum-dispersed seeds are usually
also dispersed by bats, primates, kinkajous, and/or birds (Table 12.2); the
few apparent exceptions are uncommon and poorly researched species.
Bats, monkeys, and birds are also implicated as dispersal agents for many
Atlantic Forest plants with opossum-dispersed seeds (Cáceres et al., 1999;
Cáceres and Monteiro-Filho, 2000; Vieira and Izar, 1999). Relevant data
from other biomes are sparse, but Stenocereus griseus, the cactus whose
seeds are most commonly recovered from the feces of Marmosa xerophilain Venezuelan coastal deserts, is also known to be dispersed by bats and
birds (Naranjo et al., 2003).
Pollination
Similar to the distinction we have just discussed between frugivory and
seed dispersal, nectarivory is not synonymous with pollination. Many
animals that visit flowers are nectar robbers, not pollinators, so their flower￾visiting habits do not benefit the plant. Pollen transport is obviously a
minimal qualification for a flower-visiting animal to act as a pollinator, but
to be effective in this role—at least for self-incompatible, dioecious, or
dichogamous plants—animals must carry pollen from the anthers of one
individual to the stigmas of another conspecific.2 Pollination is hard to
observe directly, so plant-pollinator relationships are usually inferred from
indirect evidence, typically animal phenotypes and floral traits. Only
animals with color vision, for example, are likely to be important
pollinators of brightly pigmented flowers, only flying animals are likely to
pollinate flowers suspended in midair on slender peduncles, and only
nocturnal animals are likely to pollinate flowers that are only open at night.
Thus, floral attractants (e.g., color, scent, and nectar chemistry), floral
morphology, and the timing of anthesis (flower opening) are typically
associated with different pollinator taxa, with the result that various
“syndromes” of correlated traits are widely recognized as evidence for
pollination by butterflies, moths, bees, birds, bats, and so forth (Fenster et
al., 2004).
Many flowers are visited by multiple species of animals, so careful
observations are often necessary to judge which animals are the primary
pollinators, which are secondary, and which are exploiting floral resources
without any reciprocal benefit to the plant. Inflorescences of the night￾flowering understory palm Calyptrogyne ghiesbreghtiana, for example, are
visited by opossums, bats, katydids, and beetles; field studies of this system
suggest that bats are the primary pollinators, although visiting opossums
may also result in some seed set, whereas katydids and beetles are floral
herbivores whose visits are mainly destructive (Cunningham, 1995; Sperr et
al., 2008). Blossoms of the night-flowering canopy tree Ochroma
pyramidale are visited by opossums, carnivorans, primates, birds, and bees,
but exclusion experiments suggest that bees are not pollinators, and whereassome opossums lap nectar from the cup-shaped flowers while contacting
the anthers (Fig. 12.1), others do not. Apparently, only bats and large
nonflying mammals—kinkajous, olingos, and night monkeys—routinely
transport pollen of this tree species (Wilkinson and Boughman, 1998; Kays
et al., 2012).
Similar observations and experiments suggest that the primary
pollinators of most opossum-visited flowers are bats or other nocturnal
mammals, but two species appear to be pollinated primarily by birds, and
another two by insects (Table 12.3). Opossums are probably nectar robbers
for some of these species—such as Phenakospermum guyannense—but
they may be secondary pollinators for others (e.g., Calyptrogyne
ghiesbreghtiana). Only three species remain as candidates for effective
pollination by opossums.
Opossums might be important pollinators of the rainforest tree
Quararibea cordata, although flowers of this species are also visited by
other animals (primates, procyonids, bats, birds, and insects), and no
exclusion experiments have been carried out to narrow the range of possible
mutualists; however, the floral morphology of Q. cordata does not conform
to any of the syndromes typically associated with bat, bird, or insect
pollination, so pollination by some sort of nonflying mammal seems
plausible. Inflorescences of the rainforest liana Marcgravia nepenthoides
are visited by both bats and opossums, but Tschapka and von Helversen
(1999) interpreted the unusual floral morphology of this plant, which has
enormous nectaries that are widely separated from the flowers, as evidence
for opossum pollination. Stronger evidence for opossums as primary
pollinators of the night-blooming tree Pseudobombax tomentosum was
summarized by Gribel (1988), who recorded 169 flower visits by
Caluromys lanatus but only six visits by bats; moreover, the faces of C.
lanatus visitors were in close contact with the stamens while the animals
were drinking nectar from the upright, cup-shaped flowers, and individual
opossums were observed to move among conspecific flowering individuals
on the same night, thus potentially effecting cross pollination.Fig. 12.1. Caluromys derbianus visiting balsa flowers (Malvaceae: Ochroma pyramidale) on Barro
Colorado Island, Panama (photos by Christian Ziegler). Note that the opossum’s head in the lower
photo is in contact with the anthers as it laps nectar from the bottom of the upright corolla.Table 12.3  Primary Pollinators of Plants with Flowers Visited by Opossums
Discussion
The data available to assess trophic-resource overlap between opossums
and sympatric placental mammals are (to say the least) far from what could
be desired. Among other difficulties, methods for quantifying diets have not
been consistently applied in field studies of different taxa. Primate diets, for
example, are usually studied by direct observation of feeding behavior
(summarized as time budgets), whereas dietary studies of nocturnal species
are typically based on stomach contents (summarized volumetrically) or
fecal analysis (summarized as occurrence frequencies). Therefore, the only
common currency among relevant dietary studies for our purposes ispresence/absence data, which—due to uncertain taxonomy and
identification difficulties—could only be tabulated for fruits at the generic
level and for prey at the ordinal level.
Such crude procedures are problematic for inferring competition. Coarse
taxonomic resolution of dietary data always inflates estimates of trophic￾resource overlap because sympatric predators (or frugivores) can eat many
or all of the same higher taxa but do not necessarily eat the same species
(Greene and Jaksic, 1983). For example, two sympatric species of rainforest
tamarins (Saguinus) each consume large numbers of katydids (Orthoptera:
Tettigoniidae), but of the 39 katydid species identified in their combined
diets, only three were eaten by both (Nickle and Heymann, 1996).
Presence/absence scoring of data can also inflate estimates of resource
overlap if different taxa are eaten in different proportions. For example,
sympatric species of short-tailed fruit bats (Carollia) eat most of the same
species of Piper, but each bat species prefers different fruit species, which
they eat in different proportions (Andrade et al., 2013).
Given such inadequacies, the data compiled for this chapter simply
suggest that there are no obvious differences in the kinds of foods
consumed by opossums on the one hand and by sympatric placental
mammals on the other, and we doubt that any additional insights can be
wrested from these crude dietary comparisons. In effect, the potential for
diffuse trophic competition surely exists, but our data are not informative
about whether such competition is ecologically important. Instead, progress
in understanding potentially competitive relationships between opossums
and sympatric placental mammals is more likely to come from detailed field
studies of trophic behavior accompanied by fully resolved taxonomic
determinations of diet. The only such study known to us suggests that two
species with superficially similar autecologies—Caluromys philander and
Potos flavus, both nocturnal-arboreal frugivores—are not close competitors,
largely as a consequence of their body size difference (Julien-Laferrière,
1999). More studies of this kind would contribute to a better assessment of
opossum-placental trophic competition than we are currently able to
provide.If the existing evidence for trophic competition between opossums and
placental mammals is weak, the evidence that opossums are significant
participants in mutualistic relationships with plants is weaker still.
Opossums are sometimes said to be important seed dispersers (Cáceres,
2006), but the importance of opossum-mediated seed dispersal relative to
seed dispersal by other vertebrate taxa that consume the same fruit species
has not been convincingly assessed in any of the studies we reviewed.
Given that most opossum-dispersed plants are also serviced by other
frugivores, just how ecologically important is opossum seed dispersal?
Two important factors that affect the contribution of seed dispersers to
plant reproduction are the numbers of seeds dispersed and the quality of
dispersal (Howe and Smallwood, 1982; Schupp, 1993), neither of which
have been quantified for participants in any plant-frugivore system for
which opossums are candidate mutualists. True, opossum scats sometimes
contain impressive quantities of seeds—scats of Didelphis marsupialis each
had an average of about 500 seeds of Cecropia obtusifolia in one Mexican
rainforest study (Medellín, 1994). However, the proportion of seeds
dispersed by opossums versus those dispersed by other sympatric frugivores
was not estimated, and the short distances that seeds were moved from the
parent trees by D. marsupialis (about 13 m, on average) suggest that more
mobile taxa such as bats and birds (which also disperse C. obtusifolia seeds;
Estrada et al., 1984) might make greater contributions to the fitness of this
gap-colonizing plant.
More generally, if ideal sites for seedling establishment and growth are
unpredictable in time and space, as seems likely for pioneer species of
plants, then flying vertebrates are probably more important seed dispersers
than opossums.3 By contrast, opossums might be important mutualists for
plants with seeds that must be deposited in particular places where
opossums predictably go. Conceivably, opossums might be important
dispersers of seeds of epiphytes and hemiepiphytes (including stranglers)
that need to germinate on branches or in tree crotches that are often used for
travel or as resting places by arboreal didelphids. There are hints of such
possible mutualisms in the literature cited above, but none have been the
primary focus of any study. In fact, many studies of didelphid seed dispersal
have been carried out in human-modified landscapes that are not ideal
places to detect coevolved interactions with primary-forest plants.Similar considerations suggest that opossums are not important
mutualists for most of the plant-pollinator systems in which they
occasionally participate. More mobile species—flying or nonflying—seem
likely to be more effective pollinators, especially in tropical rainforests
where conspecific plants are often very widely dispersed. The unique
exception, a tree for which opossums may, in fact, be important pollinators,
grows along the edges of gallery forest, where conspecific individuals occur
close enough together to be visited by individual opossums in a single night
(Gribel, 1988).
We suspect that opossums are more frequently exploiters of mutualisms
sustained by other species than they are important sustainers of mutualisms
on their own or in combination with other taxa. Fortunately, not all
exploiters have significant negative impacts on mutualisms (Bronstein,
2001). Seed-spitting, for example, is far less destructive than seed
predation, and it is possible that pulp removal actually enhances seedling
recruitment even in the absence of seed dispersal (Fedriani et al., 2012).
Nectar-robbing also seems benign by comparison with flower destruction
(e.g., by insects; Cunningham, 1995). Therefore, even if opossums seldom
provide reciprocal benefits to the plants whose fruit and nectar they
consume, it seems unlikely that their exploitative activities have a net
destabilizing influence on the webs of mutualism that sustain the diversity
of Neotropical ecosystems.
NOTES
1. The only exception seems to be in the desert thornscrub of northwestern Venezuela (Fig. 8.5),
where Marmosa xerophila is said to be the only resident species of nonvolant small mammal
(Thielen et al., 1997a).
2. The breeding systems of most tropical plants with growth forms that produce opossum-visited
flowers—trees, shrubs, and lianas—seem to require cross-pollination (Bawa, 1974; Zapata and
Arroyo, 1978).
3. The average distance that seeds are moved obviously depends on many factors, but mobility
seems likely to be important. By comparison with the modest nightly movements of opossums (e.g.,
423 m traveled per night, on average, for Marmosa paraguayana; Moraes and Chiarello, 2005a), bats
are far more mobile (e.g., 4.7 km/night for Carollia perspicillata; Heithaus and Fleming, 1978).13
Population Biology
Population-level phenomena are the emergent results of interactions
between individual phenotypes and the environment over time, and they
ultimately determine the geographic range and evolutionary fate of species.
Demographic information is important for a wide range of research
purposes, but populations of behaviorally cryptic animals are difficult to
study, and for most species of opossums, relevant data are entirely lacking.
The best we can do at this point is to summarize current knowledge about
the use of space by conspecific individuals, reproductive seasonality,
population turnover, and a few other related topics. Fortunately,
considerable progress in our understanding of tropical opossum
demography has been made in recent years, notably by teams of Brazilian
researchers committed to multiyear studies of populations in the Cerrado
and the Atlantic Forest. This account is richer and more substantive as a
consequence of their ongoing efforts.
Spatial Distribution
Home Range and Territoriality
Although older studies of didelphid ecology based on capture-mark￾recapture methods often described opossums as “nomadic” (e.g., Reynolds,
1945; Fleming, 1972; O’Connell, 1979), subsequent research using
radiotelemetry has shown that most nondispersing adult opossums occupy
well-defined home ranges qualitatively resembling those of other small
mammals (Gillette, 1980; Sunquist et al., 1987; Julien-Laferrière, 1995;
Ryser, 1995; Moraes and Chiarello, 2005a; Leite et al., 2016). Estimating
the home range of an organism—the area normally traversed by individualsin the course of their subsistence and reproductive activities—is the topic of
a formidably large technical literature (Laver and Kelly, 2008). We will not
attempt a methodological critique here, except to note that home-range
estimates from radiotelemetry are probably more accurate than those
obtained by capture-mark-recapture studies, unless the trapping effort is
very intensive and employs multiple grids (Lira and Fernandez, 2009).
However, estimates from capture-mark-recapture data are all that are
available for some species.
The geometry of the home range varies with microhabitat use and
introduces a source of potential bias that is easily understood but difficult to
correct for in taxonomic comparisons. Whereas home ranges of terrestrial
species are approximately two-dimensional and can appropriately be
quantified as areas, arboreal species live in three dimensions. However,
home ranges of arboreal opossums are never quantified as volumes, and the
bias introduced by representing three-dimensional living spaces as areas is
unknown. Uniquely, water opossums (which occur only along streams)
have linear home ranges, which are appropriately quantified as lengths
(Galliez et al., 2009; Leite et al., 2016).
Available measurements of home-range size for a handful of didelphid
species (Table 13.1) suggest that males have larger home ranges than
females, although the observed difference is thought to be insignificant for
some species (e.g., Caluromys philander; Julien-Laferrière, 1995), and
sample sizes are often too small to test for sex differences. However, sexual
dimorphism in home-range size in Ryser’s (1995) study of Didelphis
virginiana and Shibuya et al.’s (2018) study of Gracilinanus agilis are
highly significant, the former documenting an order-of-magnitude
difference between the sexes and the latter a twofold difference. The only
other inference suggested by these scant data is that larger species may have
larger home ranges than smaller species, but it should be noted that the
largest reported home ranges are both from studies of Didelphis (which
might have large home ranges for some other reason), and that the two
smallest home-range estimates are from capture-mark-recapture studies
(which might be prone to underestimation; Moraes and Chiarello, 2005a).
Opossums are sometimes described as nonterritorial, in the sense that
individuals do not seem to defend any exclusive space (Charles-Dominique,
1983). This does, in fact, appear to be true of Caluromys philander (Fig.13.1), in which male and female home ranges overlap with one another in
all combinations: male-male, male-female, and female-female
(Atramentowicz, 1982; Julien-Laferrière, 1995). Apparently, male home
ranges of other didelphids typically also overlap those of multiple
individuals of both sexes, but in several species—including Chironectes
minimus, Didelphis marsupialis, Gracilinanus agilis, Marmosa
paraguayana, M. robinsoni, and Marmosops paulensis—female home
ranges are reported to not overlap with one another, or to exhibit only
narrow overlap, suggesting intrasexual territoriality (Fleming, 1972;
Sunquist et al., 1987; Pires and Fernandez, 1999; Leiner and Silva, 2009;
Leite et al., 2016; Shibuya et al., 2018).
Table 13.1  Estimates of Home-Range Size for Seven Opossum SpeciesFig. 13.1. Home ranges (approximated by minimum convex polygons) of two male and four female
individuals of Caluromys philander mapped by radiotelemetry in primary forest in French Guiana
(redrawn from Julien-Laferrière, 1995)
Sex differences in territoriality are thought to result from sex differences
in reproductive strategies and resource defense (Ostfeld, 1990). In taxa
without paternal care, males maximize reproductive success by mating with
multiple females and, when females are widely dispersed, must have large
home ranges to monitor the sexual receptivity of as many neighbors as
possible. Consistent with this expectation, male home ranges of Didelphis
virginiana are twice as large in the breeding season (when they overlap the
home ranges of five to seven neighboring females) than they are in the
nonbreeding season (Ryser, 1992). By contrast, female reproductive successcould be enhanced by territoriality if resources are relatively sparse,
patchily distributed, and slowly renewed. During the reproductive season,
for example, Marmosops paulensis is said to consume the fruit of
understory treelets (Piper spp.) that occur in patches and produce only a
few ripe infructescences per night over an extended fruiting period; thus,
female territoriality in M. paulensis might have evolved to secure exclusive
access to such a resource (Leiner and Silva, 2009). An alternative
explanation for female territoriality is that it deters infanticide (Wolff,
1993). In species with promiscuous mating systems—such as the Virginia
opossum (Ryser, 1992; Beasley et al., 2010)—infanticide by males might be
prevented by multiple matings, which effectively confuse paternity (Wolff
and Macdonald, 2004); therefore, the main threat of infanticide is from
conspecific females. Because the danger of infanticide is greatest for
mammals that leave offspring in the nest (Wolff and Peterson, 1998), young
didelphids are probably most vulnerable to infanticide during the weeks￾long interval between teat detachment and weaning (Chapter 7).
Unfortunately, available information is insufficient to assess these
alternative explanations of female territoriality in didelphids, although there
are tantalizing hints that infanticide might be a relevant factor (e.g., Pires et
al., 2010a).
Population Density
Estimating animal abundance is another methodologically challenging
research topic, especially when the organisms of interest are behaviorally
cryptic. Mammalian population density estimates are usually based either
on sight transects or capture-mark-recapture trapping programs, both of
which have been applied in studies of opossum ecology. However, whereas
sight transects are the method of choice for large diurnal mammals, trapping
studies seem to provide more reliable data for estimating the abundance of
small nocturnal taxa (Malcolm, 1990). Unfortunately, some species are
more easily captured than others using standard trapping equipment (Voss
and Emmons, 1996; Voss et al., 2001), so no single trapping protocol is
likely to yield optimal results for all species. Additionally, opossum
population densities are known to fluctuate dramatically from one year to
the next—a local population of Didelphis virginiana, for example, wasobserved to vary fivefold in abundance over a three-year study (Kasparian
et al., 2004), so results from short-term projects may be unreliable.
Estimates of didelphid population density based on multiyear capture￾mark-recapture trapping programs vary widely among the few species for
which data are available (Table 13.2). Although theory predicts that, all else
being equal, larger species should be less abundant than smaller species
(Peters and Raelson, 1984), no consistent relationship between size and
population density is apparent in these results. To be sure, the lowest
density estimates (6–7 individuals per square kilometer) are both from
studies of large species (Didelphis marsupialis and D. virginiana) and the
highest (1130 individuals per square kilometer) is from the smallest species
studied (Gracilinanus microtarsus), but there is considerable variation
among estimated densities of conspecific populations (e.g., a 21-fold
difference between the highest and lowest estimates for D. marsupialis),
and some large species (e.g., Metachirus nudicaudatus) have estimated
densities equivalent to those of much smaller species (e.g., Marmosa
demerarae).
Regressions of population density on body size always fail to account for
a substantial residual variance that can sometimes be correlated with trophic
level and biogeography (at constant body size, for example, herbivores tend
to be more abundant than carnivores, and temperate-zone mammals are said
to be more abundant than tropical mammals; Peters and Raelson, 1984), so
it is instructive to compare these empirically estimated opossum densities
with predictions from regression models based on Neotropical forest
mammals sorted by trophic categories (Robinson and Redford, 1986). Such
comparisons (Table 13.3) suggest remarkably poor agreement between
model predictions and empirically estimated densities for most species.
Apparently, size is an inadequate predictor of opossum population density,
even when trophic level is also taken into account.
Site-to-site variation in densities of conspecific populations could have
several nonexclusive explanations, including estimation error (Pollock et
al., 1990), geographic variation in habitat productivity (Emmons, 1984),
and other circumstances that might cause local populations to seem
anomalously sparse or unusually dense. Some of these issues have been
discussed in the didelphid literature. Julien-Laferrière (1991), for example,
attributed large differences in estimated abundances of three speciesbetween two study sites in French Guiana to habitat productivity: much
higher densities of Caluromys philander, Didelphis marsupialis, and
Philander opossum were reported from a high-productivity secondary forest
than in a lower-productivity primary forest. Similarly, Malcolm (1990)
attributed the low densities of D. marsupialis and other mammals at his
central Amazonian study site—by comparison with densities previously
reported by other investigators for the same taxa in western Amazonia—to
the decreased productivity of local forests growing on poor soils. Habitat
productivity, however, seems unlikely to explain why D. marsupialis
appears to be at least three times more abundant at a Venezuelan dry-forest
site than it is at any rainforest study site, nor why Gracilinanus microtarsus
is 10 times more abundant in a Brazilian dry forest than could be expected
based on its size and diet.
Table 13.2  Estimates of Opossum Population DensityaTable 13.3  Predicted and Observed Population Densities of Six Neotropical Opossum Species
In effect, the ecological determinants of opossum population densities
remain to be understood. Based on the best information at hand, it would
seem reasonable to think that most opossums occur at densities of more
than 10 but fewer than 200 individuals per square kilometer in most tropical
habitats, and perhaps no greater precision can be expected for inference
over such a broad range of taxa and environments.
Reproduction and Demography
Reproductive Seasonality
Although some opossum species appear to reproduce throughout the annual
cycle at equatorial rainforest sites that lack a well-defined dry season (e.g.,
in the Guianas; Atramentowicz, 1986a; Julien-Laferrière and
Atramentowicz, 1990; Catzeflis et al., 1997, 2019), most didelphids in other
circumstances are distinctly seasonal breeders, even where sympatric
placental mammals are not (O’Connell, 1989; Gentile et al., 2000).1 In
general, opossum reproductive seasonality increases with latitude and with
wet/dry seasonality. The effect of latitude on reproductive seasonality is
best illustrated by Rademaker and Cerqueira’s (2006) reproductive studies
of Didelphis, which suggest that length of the breeding season (first mating
to last weaning in the annual cycle) tends to decrease with increasing
distance from the equator in both hemispheres. Even at tropical latitudes,
however, annual breeding activity can be constrained by precipitationschedules, and this climatic factor probably accounts for much of the scatter
about the central tendency in Rademaker and Cerqueira’s (2006) data.
Reproductive seasonality in didelphids is widely believed to result from
the timing of breeding activity such that late lactation and weaning coincide
with maximum availability of local food resources (Fleming, 1973;
O’Connell, 1989; Julien-Laferrière and Atramentowicz, 1990; Gentile et al.,
2000; Martins et al., 2006b; Rademaker and Cerqueira, 2006; Kajin et al.,
2008; Barros et al., 2015). As described previously (Chapter 6), late
lactation is when the energy requirements of reproductive females are
highest, and newly weaned juveniles are unpracticed foragers that
presumably benefit from abundant resources in the environment. For most
didelphids, insects and fruit are important dietary items, and both of these
tend to be most abundant in the rainy season at tropical latitudes (Chapter
8). In the temperate zone, insects and fruit are most abundant in the late
spring and summer. Therefore, in order that late lactation and weaning
coincide with peak resource abundance, tropical didelphids in habitats with
pronounced wet and dry seasons usually begin to breed in the dry season,
whereas didelphids at high latitudes begin to breed in the winter.
In Didelphis virginiana, for example, the interval from conception to
weaning (gestation plus lactation; Table 6.1) is about 113 days, so the first
matings of the year in central Missouri (ca. 38° N) occur in early February,
and the resulting cohort of young is weaned in May (Reynolds, 1945).
Another round of mating (following the post-lactational estrus) results in a
second cohort that is mostly weaned by late August. In this more or less
typical North American population, females are nonreproductive from mid￾September through January, about five and a half months.2
At tropical latitudes, reproductive episodes can also be tightly
synchronized within a single breeding season. In the Venezuelan Llanos,
where there is a severe six-month dry season, Didelphis marsupialis
produces discrete cohorts of young in two well-defined annual peaks of
littering (Sunquist and Eisenberg, 1993). The first cohort is born near the
middle of the dry season and is weaned just as the rains begin, whereas the
second (the product of post-lactational mating) is born several weeks into
the rainy season (Fig. 13.2). The young of a sparse third cohort (born near
the end of the rainy season) seldom survive to weaning.Fig. 13.2. Seasonal reproduction by Didelphis marsupialis in the Llanos of northern Venezuela
(redrawn from Sunquist and Eisenberg, 1993). Three distinct cohorts are born in each annual
breeding season, of which the first is weaned just at the start of the rainy season and the last just at
the end.
Most didelphid populations with conspicuously seasonal reproduction
seem to produce two cohorts of young per year in successive reproductive
episodes within the same breeding season, but some populations of small
opossums are thought to produce only one annual cohort in a single
synchronized breeding episode. The best-documented examples of
populations thought to produce only one annual cohort include
Gracilinanus microtarsus in seasonally dry savanna woodlands of the
Brazilian Cerrado (Martins et al., 2006b, 2006c) and Marmosops paulensis
at a wet premontane site in the Atlantic Forest (Leiner et al., 2008).
Although superficially dissimilar in climate and vegetation, both
populations are subject to seasonally limited food resources (Martins et al.,
2006a; Leiner and Silva, 2007b), and both live at relatively high latitudes
(22° and 24° S, respectively). We have not seen compelling evidence that
any equatorial opossum population reproduces only once per breeding
season.3Mating System
Information about opossum mating systems is only available for Didelphis
virginiana. In this species, which was studied by radiotelemetry and direct
observation in Florida (Ryser, 1992), adult males patrol the home ranges of
five to seven neighboring adult females, visiting each one starting about 10
days before her estrus begins. Approximately six male home ranges overlap
the home range of each female, so several males may visit the same female
simultaneously, and on the night of estrus they compete directly with one
another for mating; associated male behaviors include aggressive
vocalizations, chasing, and fighting. Male mating success is nonrandom
with respect to body size, because successful males are significantly heavier
than unsuccessful males. Observed mating success of individual males per
breeding season ranged from zero to three matings, with most (30 out of 50)
males failing to mate even once. Although individual females were not
observed to mate more than once per breeding episode in this Florida study,
genetic analyses of 64 females and their pouch young in Indiana suggest
than many litters of D. virginiana have two or more sires (Beasley et al.,
2010).
As described in Ryser’s (1992) study, the mating system of the Virginia
opossum corresponds to “overlap promiscuity,” a system believed to be the
direct consequence of solitary habits and at least temporarily overlapping
male and female home ranges (Wittenberger, 1979). Given that solitary
habits and intersexually overlapping home ranges appear to be common
opossum attributes, it seems reasonable to expect that most didelphids have
similar mating systems. However, the apparent lack of sexual size
dimorphism in some species (Chapter 5) suggests that taxonomic variation
exists in the traits that determine male mating success.
Dispersal
Overlap promiscuity would seem to favor male-biased dispersal—in which
juvenile males disperse farther than juvenile females—to avoid kin
competition and to prevent inbreeding (Lawson Handley and Perrin, 2007),
but it is not clear that this is really the case. Although some behavioral
studies (cited by Wright et al., 1995) suggest that female Didelphis
virginiana are philopatric and that males disperse, a landscape-scale studyof microsatellite variation in this species found no evidence for male-biased
dispersal (Beatty et al., 2012). Thus, even in this well-studied taxon, the
topic of dispersal is obviously one that merits additional research.
Unfortunately, no more than anecdotal observations of dispersal are
available from field studies of other didelphid species.
Generation Time, Fecundity, and Survivorship
For continuously breeding populations in wet tropical habitats, generation
time is perhaps equivalent to the age of female sexual maturity, possibly
anywhere from four to nine months depending on the species (Table 6.1).
However, very few (if any) females in seasonally reproducing populations
seem to breed in the season of their birth (Sunquist and Eisenberg, 1993;
Regidor and Gorostiague, 1996; Martins et al., 2006c; Kajin et al., 2008;
Leiner et al., 2008; Lopes and Leiner, 2015), so generation times even for
small species can be almost as long as a year. In the only study to have
computed this key demographic parameter by life-table analysis, the mean
generation time in a seasonally breeding rainforest population of Didelphis
aurita was estimated to be 331 days (Kajin et al., 2008).
Based on a handful of multiyear studies of wild opossum populations, it
appears that most individuals of most species reproduce for just one
breeding season. This phenomenon, which is accompanied by high post￾reproductive mortality in both sexes, has been reported for several small
marmosines and thylamyines (Pine et al., 1985; Lorini et al., 1994; Thielen
et al., 1997a; Martins et al., 2006c; Leiner et al., 2008; Baladrón et al.,
2012; Barros et al., 2015; Lopes and Leiner, 2015). Some of these are
thought to be truly semelparous (with a single reproductive episode,
followed by complete adult mortality), but, to date, true semelparity has
only been convincingly documented for Marmosops paulensis in the
Atlantic Forest (Leiner et al., 2008).4 Possibly more widespread is complete
adult mortality following two reproductive episodes in the same breeding
season (as documented for Gracilinanus agilis; Lopes and Leiner, 2015) or
high but incomplete adult mortality following a single reproductive episode
(as in G. microtarsus; Martins et al., 2006c). However, high post￾reproductive adult mortality is also characteristic of several large species
(e.g., Didelphis aurita, D. albiventris, and D. virginiana), most individuals
of which are also thought to breed for a single season only (Sunquist andEisenberg, 1993; Regidor and Gorostiague, 1996; Woods and Hellgren,
2003; Kajin et al., 2008).
Fecundity can be defined in various ways, but per-female annual
reproductive output is the most readily computed statistic from data on
opossum reproductive activity. Obtained by multiplying the average number
of litters birthed per year by average litter size, this quantity ranges from a
little less than 9 (for Didelphis marsupialis) to almost 20 (for Marmosa
robinsoni), but most estimates seem to cluster in the range of 10 to 12
young per year (Table 13.4). On the assumption that roughly half are
females, the potential for rapid population growth is obvious.
Table 13.4  Per-Female Annual Reproductive Output (Fecundity) for Seven Opossum Species
In habitats that are not chronically overrun with opossums, such high
fecundity must be counterbalanced by substantial pre-reproductive
mortality. Not surprisingly, survivorship curves reconstructed from capture￾mark-recapture data (O’Connell, 1989; Kajin et al., 2008) are concave (type
III), but demographic inference from such results is not entirely
straightforward. In general, mortality cannot be distinguished from
emigration in capture-mark-recapture studies, so survivorship curves
reconstructed from study-grid residency could reflect either or both
processes. Nevertheless, concave survivorship functions are what we would
expect of species that produce large numbers of offspring in habitats with
periodically deficient food resources (Chapter 8) and with numerous
resident predators of various kinds (Chapter 11).
Population Dynamics
The obvious consequence of high post-reproductive adult mortality is rapid
population turnover. In “semelparous” (or “semi-semelparous”) opossums,the generations are almost non-overlapping and, for several months of the
year, populations of such species consist only (or primarily) of immature
individuals (Leiner et al., 2008; Baladrón et al., 2012; Lopes and Leiner,
2015). However, population turnover is rapid even for unambiguously
iteroparous species. For continuously reproducing populations of rainforest
opossums in French Guiana, for example, annual turnover was estimated to
be 84% for Caluromys philander, 97% for Philander opossum, and 100%
for Didelphis marsupialis (Atramentowicz, 1986b).
Sensitivity analyses of matrix models based on data from a long-term
study of Didelphis aurita in the Atlantic Forest suggest that changes in
pouch-young and weanling survival have larger effects on population
growth than changes in other vital rates (Ferreira et al., 2013), confirming
the intuition of many researchers that these vulnerable early stages are
demographically crucial. Because pouch young are known to be “aborted”
in times of food scarcity (Atramentowicz, 1986a), when weanlings might
also be expected to starve, environmental factors that determine resource
availability during lactation and weaning are probably the main causes of
year-to-year fluctuations in opossum population densities.
Environmental effects on juvenile survivorship and other demographic
parameters can be density independent (or “exogenous,” such as
precipitation) or density dependent (or “endogenous,” such as intraspecific
competition). The relative importance of such effects on opossum
populations has been analyzed in several recent analyses of data from long￾term field projects (Lima et al., 2001; Ferreira et al., 2013, 2016; Troyer et
al., 2014). Although generalizations from this handful of studies might be
premature, it seems that rainfall (with or without a lag time) has generally
positive effects on opossum population growth rates, and that density￾dependent effects (thought to be mediated by intraspecific competition)
might also be important. By contrast, two studies that looked for effects of
interspecific competition on population growth rates both failed to find any
(Troyer et al., 2014; Ferreira et al., 2016).
Discussion
In an early generalization about opossum population biology,
Atramentowicz (1986b) described the three species of large didelphids thatshe studied in French Guiana as having high population densities, high
reproductive rates, and rapid population turnover. As we have seen,
however, opossum population densities exhibit substantial taxonomic and
site-to-site variability, as one might well expect of any ecologically
diversified and widely distributed group of mammals. Although high
fecundity and rapid population turnover do appear to be common themes of
opossum demography among the taxa studied to date, there is a dearth of
relevant information about species with reproductive morphologies that
suggest different life history traits and that may have correspondingly
disparate population dynamics.
Some opossums have only a few nipples—Hyladelphys, for example,
has just four (Voss et al., 2001)—and must, therefore, have small litters
(Chapter 6). To sustain fecundity equivalent to that suggested above (10–12
offspring annually per female), female Hyladelphys must routinely have
several litters per year. Alternatively, such fecundity might be unnecessary
to sustain population replacement if immature and subadult survivorship is
high, or if females survive to reproduce over multiple years. The
demography of small-littered opossums (which include Glironia, also with
four nipples) would be interesting to investigate, as would the population
dynamics of species with unusual lifestyles (such as Chironectes) or that
live in extreme habitats (such as Lestodelphys).
The topic of reproductive synchrony has not, perhaps, received the
attention it deserves from opossum demographers. It is not at all clear why
female didelphids should produce their litters almost simultaneously within
breeding seasons. Two possibilities merit consideration in this context. One
is female infanticide, the risk of which could be minimized by individuals
timing their reproduction to coincide with that of adjacent conspecifics,
such that neighbors are simultaneously attempting to raise their own litters
and protect their own young rather than marauding for juvenile victims
(Agrell et al., 1998). Another possible explanation is that female
reproductive synchronization tends to increase sperm competition, which
(under some circumstances) might enhance female fitness (Fisher et al.,
2006, 2013; Shuster et al., 2013). To date, however, compelling evidence to
support either (or both) of these nonexclusive alternative hypotheses is
essentially nonexistent.Whatever terminology is adopted for the opossum syndrome of brief
(typically uniseasonal) reproductive activity and early senescence,
didelphids clearly occupy the “fast” end of the fast-slow continuum of
marsupial life histories, especially by comparison with folivorous
Australasian taxa that have only one or two young per year over long
reproductive lifespans (Fisher et al., 2001). Small dasyurids, however, are
also “fast” reproducers, an apparently convergent resemblance for which
various explanations have been proposed (Cockburn, 1997; Kraaijeveld et
al., 2003; Fisher et al., 2013). A detailed critique of this literature is beyond
the scope of our volume, but several aspects of dasyurid “semelparity,”
including strong sexual dimorphism in post-reproductive mortality, seem to
have no exact analogue among opossums. Future research carefully
designed to quantify survival functions and test relevant causal hypotheses
(e.g., about the role of sexual selection versus high extrinsic mortality)
should help explain why both clades have evolved similar demographic
strategies, or whether their demographic similarities are more apparent than
real.
NOTES
1. According to Streilein (1982a, 1982b), Monodelphis domestica reproduces throughout the year
in the semiarid Caatinga of northeastern Brazil, but an analysis of a large series of Caatinga
specimens suggests that M. domestica is, in fact, a seasonal breeder (Bergallo and Cerqueira, 1994).
2. Similar reproductive scheduling has been reported for other populations of Didelphis
virginiana, including those in much warmer climates (e.g., Florida; Sunquist and Eisenberg, 1993).
3. Streilein (1982a) claimed that Didelphis albiventris produces only a single litter annually in the
Caatinga (ca. 7° S), but his data (Streilein, 1982c) suggest two reproductive episodes per breeding
season—the same pattern typically observed elsewhere for this species and for other congeners.
4. “Semelparity” means reproducing only once (Cole, 1954). For female mammals this means
having a single litter, but the term is nonsensical when applied to males, which (by definition) are
never parous, and which are not known, in any mammalian species, to die after a single copulation.
Unfortunately, the term has been corrupted in current usage to refer to dasyurid species in which
males die after one breeding season but females can survive to reproduce in another (Braithwaite and
Lee, 1979), and it has recently been used for opossum species in which females produce two litters in
a single breeding season (Lopes and Leiner, 2015). The semantic damage is probably irreversible, so
more precise language should be used to distinguish how reproductive effort is distributed within or
between breeding seasons. In Kirkendall and Stenseth’s (1985) suggested terminology, females of
Marmosops paulensis in the population studied by Leiner et al. (2008) seem to be uniseasonal￾uniparous, whereas females of Gracilinanus agilis studied by Lopes and Leiner (2015) are
uniseasonal-iteroparous.V
SYNTHESIS14
Adaptive Radiation
As we have now seen, opossums are deeply embedded in the web of trophic
relationships and symbioses that sustain the Neotropical ecosystems they
inhabit, and for which they are adapted morphologically, physiologically,
and behaviorally. What we still lack is a plausible narrative of when and
how members of this remarkable marsupial clade came to occupy the
geographic regions and ecological niches they currently occupy. What was
their ancestral habitat, and when did they begin to enter others? How
quickly did they diversify and evolve novel phenotypes? Was their
evolutionary trajectory a smooth one, or was it punctuated by unusual
opportunities or traumas?
Such questions are commonly bundled together under the rubric of
adaptive radiation, a central concept in evolutionary biology, but a
somewhat controversial one. Whereas some researchers reserve the term for
the evolution of ecological diversity within a rapidly speciating lineage,
others apply it more generally to the evolutionary divergence of a
monophyletic group into a variety of adaptive forms regardless of rate
(Glor, 2010; Givnish, 2015). We understand adaptive radiation in the latter
sense, and we use it in contradistinction to nonadaptive radiation, which
results when lineage diversification is not accompanied by ecological
divergence (Gittenberger, 1991; Czekanski-Moir and Rundell, 2019). In
fact, both phenomena can occur at different hierarchical levels in the
evolution of a single clade (Losos et al., 2006; Rundell and Price, 2009),
and both may have been important in opossum evolution.1
In the absence of an adequately informative fossil record, our
reconstruction of historical patterns of lineage accumulation(diversification), phenotypic divergence (disparity), and biogeography is
based almost entirely on information from Recent species. Unfortunately,
studies of adaptive radiation based on living forms can be misleading for a
variety of reasons (Hunt and Slater, 2016). We acknowledge this
shortcoming, and, toward the end of this chapter, we mention several
examples of vanished clades and extinct morphologies in the sparse
geological record of opossum evolution.
Diversification in Ecological and Geographic Context
Inferences about diversification phenomena based on molecular
phylogenies can be biased by incomplete taxon sampling and inconsistent
taxonomic resolution (Nee et al., 1994; Heath et al., 2008; Faurby et al.,
2016). Although various fixes have been proposed for incomplete taxon
sampling, none are needed for our analyses of opossum diversification,
because sequence data are now available from almost all currently
recognized species. Fortunately too, most didelphid genera have been
revised within the last decade using comparable methods and data (e.g., by
Giarla et al., 2010; Gutiérrez et al., 2010; Rossi et al., 2010; Pavan et al.,
2014; Díaz-Nieto and Voss, 2016; Voss et al., 2018), such that more or less
uniform criteria for species delimitation have been applied throughout.
Phylogenetic error and inaccurate fossil calibrations are other relevant
issues for diversification analyses, but highly congruent opossum
phylogenies have been obtained from analyses of different datasets (e.g., by
Voss and Jansa, 2009; Mitchell et al., 2014; Amador and Giannini, 2016),
and similar timetrees have been recovered by recently published relaxed￾clock analyses using different sets of fossil calibrations and assumptions
(Jansa et al., 2014, unpublished; Beck and Taglioretti, 2019). Therefore,
there is reason for modest confidence that the diversification results
reported below are unlikely to be grossly misleading, except insofar as the
absence of fossil information might bias inference.
Taxon-dense opossum phylogenies obtained from analyses of molecular
sequence data (Fig. 14.1) include the usual mix of depauperons (species￾poor lineages; Donoghue and Sanderson, 2015) and species-rich clades.
Several ancient opossum lineages (e.g., caluromyines, Glironia, and
Hyladelphys) are species-poor, but younger depauperons (e.g.,Chacodelphys, Chironectes, Lestodelphys, Metachirus, Tlacuatzin) are
scattered among more speciose lineages throughout the tree. Although most
genera are polytypic, just three of them (Marmosops, Monodelphis, and
Marmosa) contain over 50% of extant opossum species. Some diversity
contrasts between sister groups—for example, Hyladelphys (with just one
currently recognized species) versus Didelphinae (with >100)—are striking
and invite speculation about evolutionary causes, but stochastic modeling of
speciation and extinction suggests that net diversification rates have been
approximately constant across opossum lineages (Jansa et al., unpublished).
This is not to say that causal explanations for unbranched lineages on the
one hand or speciose clades on the other are inappropriate, but simply that
no example of either category appears to be a statistically significant outlier.Fig. 14.1. A time-calibrated phylogeny (timetree) of Recent opossums based on partitioned
maximum-likelihood analysis of six nuclear loci for 116 species (some of which have yet to be
named; Jansa et al., unpublished). The contents of polytypic genera are cartooned as isosceles
triangles with bases proportional to the number of species they contain and heights proportional to
crown ages. Only the contents of polytypic tribes are indicated.
Timetrees based on relaxed-clock methods suggest that the most recent
common ancestor of living opossums lived sometime in the Oligocene.
Point estimates range from about 32 Ma (in the early Oligocene; Jansa et
al., unpublished) to about 24 Ma (in the late Oligocene; Beck and
Taglioretti, 2019), but 95% credible intervals include a wide temporal range
—from the late Eocene to the early Miocene. Geographic optimizations
(Jansa et al., 2014) securely locate the ancestral homeland as SouthAmerica, so if the Oligocene dates are accurate, the opossum common
ancestor must have shared the continent with members of numerous other
metatherian groups, presumably including caroloameghiniids, sternbergiids,
microbiotheriids, argyrolagids, pichipilids, polydolopids, rosendolopids,
“hathliacynids,” “borhyaenids,” and proborhyaenids (Chapter 2).
Phylogenetic optimizations of habitat occupancy suggest that this
hypothetical ancestor was a rainforest species (Jansa et al., 2014,
unpublished; Mitchell et al., 2014), and that most subsequent opossum
evolution leading to extant taxa occurred in South American rainforests
until the late Miocene, when several lineages (including the ancestors of
Chacodelphys + Cryptonanus, Lestodelphys + Thylamys, and Lutreolina)
may have invaded dry-forest or nonforest (open) habitats. This scenario is
plausible because humid tropical forests essentially similar to modern
Amazonian vegetation have been a permanent feature of South America
since at least the Eocene (Burnham and Johnson, 2004; Maslin et al., 2005).
The Mexican endemic genus Tlacuatzin—which split away from other
marmosines at about 20 Ma (in the early Miocene)—is an ecogeographic
exception, but it is uncertain when this lineage crossed the seaway (or
seaways) that still separated North and South America and began its
ecological transition to dry-forest occupancy. Other North American
endemic species (Didelphis virginiana, Marmosa mexicana, and Philander
vossi) are descended from much younger immigrant lineages that may have
crossed an emergent Panamanian isthmus in the Pliocene (Jansa et al.,
2014).
Phylogenetic optimizations of behavioral traits suggest that the
Oligocene common ancestor was arboreal or scansorial, and that most of its
descendants remained arboreal or scansorial throughout the Tertiary (Jansa
et al., unpublished). However, the ancestors of Monodelphis and
Metachirus may have become terrestrial by the early or middle Miocene,
and the ancestor of Lutreolina may have done so in the late Miocene; other
terrestrial lineages, including the ancestors of Chacodelphys and
Lestodelphys, did not diverge from their scansorial sister taxa until the
Pliocene. The ancestor of Chironectes may not have begun transitioning to
semiaquatic life until the late Miocene.Fig. 14.2. A lineage-through-time graph based on the timetree in Figure 14.1. This semi-log plot
illustrates an approximately constant rate of lineage accumulation from the Oligocene to the Recent,
interrupted only by a hypothesized mass extinction event at about 11 Ma. Gray shading indicates
95% credibility intervals around date estimates.
Lineage-through-time graphs indicate an approximately constant rate of
net diversification from the Oligocene to the present, with just one
statistically significant interruption (Fig. 14.2). Bayesian analyses that allow
for episodic changes in speciation and extinction rates (May et al., 2016)
suggest that a mass extinction event at about 11 Ma might have
exterminated as much as 90% of contemporaneous opossum diversity
(Jansa et al., unpublished).2 Whereas previous estimates of opossum
diversification parameters based on a uniform (constant-rate) birth-death
model suggested a low rate of net diversification (ca. 0.11 species/Ma) and
a high extinction fraction (ca. 0.77) throughout the course of opossum
phylogeny (Jansa et al., 2014), estimates from models that allow for mass
extinction suggest a somewhat higher background net-diversification rate
(ca. 0.13 species/Ma) and a lower background extinction fraction (ca.0.57).3 Inferring extinction from molecular phylogenies is notoriously
problematic, but simulations suggest that current estimators of background
extinction are reasonably unbiased in the absence of among-lineage
diversification-rate variation (Rabosky, 2010), whereas estimates of mass
extinction are robust even in the presence of such heterogeneity (May et al.,
2016). Given that there appears to be no significant rate heterogeneity
among didelphid lineages, these results plausibly indicate that both
background and episodic extinction have had a substantial impact on
opossum diversification.
Historical Patterns of Disparity
Optimizations of phenotypic traits on opossum phylogenies suggest that the
Oligocene ancestor of the crown clade was small (<200 g), black-masked,
and pouchless, with unpatterned dorsal pelage, paraxonic forefeet,
unwebbed hind feet, a slender prehensile tail, and subequal P2/P3 (Jansa
and Voss, 2009; Amador and Giannini, 2016; Jansa et al., unpublished).
Phenotypes closely resembling this ancestral condition are conserved
among arboreal Recent taxa with mixed diets of insects and fruit (e.g.,
Marmosa), whereas living taxa with markedly divergent morphologies are
terrestrial or semiaquatic and predominantly or exclusively faunivorous
(Chapter 5). Most of the distinct adaptive types represented among modern
opossums (Table 4.1) seem likely to have been established or incipient by
the end of the Miocene, when 12 lineages directly ancestral to Recent
genera had already appeared. Nevertheless, a few highly divergent
phenotypes, notably the suite of distinctive traits that distinguish Didelphis
from Philander, Chacodelphys from Cryptonanus, and Lestodelphys from
Thylamys did not evolve until the early Pliocene.
Evolutionary models fitted to morphometric data provide statistical
estimates of rates of phenotypic divergence that are not obtainable from
discrete character data. Size accounts for a large fraction of the variation
among measured external and craniodental dimensions of adult opossums,
but residual (size-independent) shape variation in external dimensions is
significantly correlated with locomotor habits, and shape variation in
craniodental dimensions is possibly correlated with diet (Jansa et al.,
unpublished). Bayesian analyses of morphometric divergence suggest thatopossum size evolution proceeded at a more or less constant pace—without
significant changes in rate—throughout the radiation of the crown clade.
Evolution of external shape also appears to have proceeded without
significant rate variation, but craniodental shape disparity increased
significantly in several lineages with unusual or unknown trophic niches
(Hyladelphys, Monodelphis, Chironectes, and Chacodelphys; Jansa et al.,
unpublished).
Discussion
Analyses of opossum adaptive radiation provide no evidence for the early
burst of rapid diversification and phenotypic evolution that theory predicts
can occur when evolving lineages encounter new ecological opportunities
(Schluter, 2000). New ecological opportunities can arise in a variety of
circumstances (Stroud and Losos, 2016), but none seem to fit the
ecogeographic context of opossum evolution. As we have seen, the
opossum crown clade evolved on a continent that was already occupied by
numerous other metatherian taxa (Chapter 2), any or all of which might
have constrained its subsequent diversification and disparity. Additionally,
our reviews of morphological, physiological, and behavioral phenotypes
(Chapters 5–7) suggest that opossums are not—as a group—characterized
by any unique trait or combination of traits likely to have conferred a
special adaptive advantage. Therefore, if any ecological opportunity was
encountered by the most recent common ancestor of living opossums, it is
not readily apparent from evidence reviewed in this volume. We conjecture
that didelphimorphian stem taxa (still unknown as fossils) insinuated
themselves ecologically amid other contemporaneous metatherians, and that
lineages ancestral to Recent opossums began to slowly diversify as archaic
lineages (e.g., caroloameghiniids and sternbergiids) dwindled to extinction
toward the end of the Paleogene.
The analyses reported above likewise provide no evidence for density￾dependent cladogenesis, an allegedly common phenomenon that is often
hypothesized to result either from niche-filling or from declining
opportunities for allopatric speciation with clade age (Phillimore and Price,
2008; Pigot et al., 2010). Instead, the approximately constant background
rate of opossum diversification suggests that the didelphid radiation was notconstrained by either process, and that Neotropical landscapes are not yet
saturated with opossums. Interestingly, analyses of several other South
American vertebrate radiations of comparable crown age—ovenbirds
(Derryberry et al., 2011), parrots (Schweizer et al., 2014), monkeys
(Aristide et al., 2015), and bats (Rojas et al., 2016)—also suggest density￾independent diversification, which might be a shared feature of continental
radiations in tectonically and climatically dynamic regions (Derryberry et
al., 2011).
By contrast, an episode of mass extinction at or near the transition from
the middle to the late Miocene is a unique feature of opossum
diversification history. Previously, we (Jansa et al., 2014) suggested two
explanations for this event: (1) flooding of the western Amazon Basin by
Lake Pebas, an enormous (>106 km2) wetlands complex that may have
compressed rainforest faunas onto neighboring shields and mountains; or
(2) the arrival of immigrant predators that might have decimated native
faunas of vulnerable prey taxa. Of these alternatives, the first might be
expected to have equally affected the diversification histories of other
nonaquatic Amazonian vertebrate clades. However, recently published
analyses of platyrrhine primates (Aristide et al., 2015) and noctilionoid bats
(Rojas et al., 2016) show no indication of Miocene mass extinctions, nor
does the timing of lake formation (which began at about 23 Ma; Wesselingh
et al., 2002) coincide with the estimated date for opossum mass extinction.
Therefore, the Lake Pebas hypothesis now seems implausible, and the
predation hypothesis merits closer scrutiny.
The early evolution of the opossum crown clade did not, of course, occur
in predator-free circumstances. Among other vertebrate secondary
consumers in the Paleogene and early Neogene of South America were
several groups of formidable aspect: large boas, “terror birds”
(phorusrhacids), and sparassodonts (Argot, 2004; Degrange et al., 2010;
Albino and Brizuela, 2014). Presumably, opossums and other South
American mammals of the middle Miocene were adept at avoiding or
surviving encounters with these long-familiar native taxa. By contrast, the
sudden appearance of novel predators may have had abrupt and devastating
effects on native prey populations.
The novel predators in question were crotaline viperids (pitvipers) and
procyonid carnivorans, both of which arrived from North America, almostcertainly by overwater dispersal, sometime in the Miocene (Chapter 3).
Neotropical pitvipers are nocturnal ambush predators that locate their
endothermic prey by olfaction, vision, and infrared imaging. Numerous
extant pitvipers are known to eat Recent opossums (Chapter 11), and there
is no reason to suppose that ancestral pitvipers, newly arrived in South
America, did not prey on Miocene didelphids. Although opossums had
previously been exposed to boas, which have a superficially similar array of
sensory abilities, the infrared-imaging organs and supporting neural
structures of pitvipers are far more sophisticated than those of boas, and it is
assumed that their ability to image nocturnal endothermic prey is
correspondingly superior (Goris, 2011). Also possessed of a highly effective
venom delivery system (Cundall, 2002), pitvipers were formidable
predators loosed on a continental fauna of naïve prey, and they radiated
rapidly to fill a wide range of niches throughout tropical and temperate
South America (Wüster et al., 2002). Although some didelphids
subsequently evolved biochemical resistance to pitviper venom toxins
(Chapter 6), such complex adaptations presumably take time to evolve and
may not have done so rapidly enough to save many contemporaneous
opossum lineages from extinction. The principal difficulty with the notion
of pitvipers as primary agents of opossum mass extinction, however, is
timing. Although the earliest recorded fossil South American pitviper is
from the late Miocene (Chapter 3), viperid timetrees based on molecular
phylogenies (Alencar et al., 2016, 2018) suggest that crotalines began to
radiate in South America around 17 Ma, seemingly too early to account for
an extinction event at around 11 Ma.
By contrast, the arrival of procyonid carnivorans cannot have occurred
much before about 12 Ma, the youngest date associated with the well￾sampled fossil fauna from La Venta, Colombia, which contains neither
procyonids nor any other immigrant North American mammal (Kay et al.,
1997b). Procyonids first appear in the South American record at about 7 Ma
as an already-endemic genus (Cyonasua) in northwestern Argentina
(Reguero and Candela, 2011), but the interval from 12 to 7 Ma remains
sufficiently poorly known, especially at tropical latitudes, that an earlier
arrival cannot be ruled out. Miocene South American procyonids were
substantially larger and more carnivorous than Recent procyonids, some of
which do eat opossums, at least occasionally (Chapter 11). As inheritors ofcarnivoran phenotypes honed by long interaction with Holarctic prey taxa,
it would be surprising if Miocene procyonids did not possess novel
predatory behaviors for which the native fauna was unprepared. Forelimb
functional morphology suggests that Miocene procyonids were primarily
terrestrial (Tarquini et al., 2019), so their predatory impact was perhaps
most keenly felt by ground-dwelling taxa.
Ecological research on invasive species has conclusively shown that
novel predators are a frequent cause of biotic extinctions (Mooney and
Cleland, 2001; Salo et al., 2007). The outcome of predator invasions,
however, depends crucially on innate prey vulnerabilities and complex
ecological interactions (Sih et al., 2010), so not all native prey taxa are
necessarily affected, or affected to the same degree. We speculate that
several South American vertebrate radiations with reconstructed timetrees
that show no indication of a Miocene mass extinction event (e.g., furnariids,
platyrrhines, and phyllostomids; see above) may have been less vulnerable
than opossums to pitviper and/or carnivoran predation, perhaps due to
larger body size and greater encephalization (in the case of primates) or to
flight and arboreal roosting habits (birds and bats).
Recent opossums are descended from just 10 lineages that escaped the
middle-to-late Miocene mass extinction, but other lineages that survived the
Miocene left no living descendants. Among these were members of a
remarkable high-latitude Pliocene fauna—including species of
† Hyperdidelphys, † Sparassocynus, and † Thylophorops—with unusual
phenotypes (large size, highly carnassialized dentitions, and/or accessory
auditory sinuses) that have been interpreted as adaptations for trophic
niches (hypercarnivory) and sensory abilities (low-frequency hearing) that
are not represented among living opossums (Goin and Pardiñas, 1996; Goin
et al., 2009b; Zimicz, 2014; Beck and Taglioretti, 2019). These taxa were
contemporaneous with fossil taxa of modern aspect (species of Didelphis
and Lutreolina), and their disappearance by the end of the Pliocene—
possibly due to biotic interactions with landbridge immigrant taxa such as
canids, felids, and mustelids—is compelling evidence that extinctions may
have substantially reduced the ecological scope of the didelphid radiation
and so affected our perception of what it means to be an opossum.History written by the victors is often biased by suppressed testimony, and
evolutionary narratives based exclusively on molecular phylogenies and
Recent phenotypes suffer from a similarly limited perspective. Living
opossums are consummate survivors, victors in the struggle for existence
throughout a long and eventful Cenozoic history. That their story is not the
whole story of the clade to which they belong is indisputable. But, among
the numerous metatherian lineages that once populated the Western
Hemisphere, didelphids alone remain as vital participants in numerous
modern ecosystems on both American continents. Returning at last to the
question posed in our introduction: how did opossums achieve this unique
evolutionary success?
The answer to any such question is necessarily speculative, but it seems
relevant to note that ecological equivalents to opossum phenotypes are
present in most Paleotropical faunas. Resemblances between opossums and
strepsirrhine (“prosimian”) primates have been discussed at some length by
authors (e.g., Charles-Dominique, 1983; Rasmussen, 1990; Lemelin and
Schmitt, 2007), whereas treeshrews (Emmons, 2000; Selig et al., 2019) and
erinaceids (especially gymnures; Corbet, 1988) are other groups with
striking morphological and ecobehavioral similarities to opossums. Such
observations suggest that there is a stable niche, especially in lowland
rainforest habitats, for small nonvolant mammals with mixed diets of
insects, small vertebrates, and fruit. As we have seen, this can be regarded
as the core opossum niche, from which other adaptive types subsequently
evolved.
But even stable niches can be invaded, and if marsupials are poor
competitors, why were they not eventually displaced when immigrant
placental mammals with similar diets arrived in South America? Again, no
definitive answers are possible, but a plausible explanation is niche
incumbency (Rosenzweig and McCord, 1991): opossums were already
there and intricately adapted to local environments and the native biota, so
they might have been hard to displace. Indeed, the preceding chapters
provide a substantial review of the numerous phenotypic adaptations and
ecological interactions that might have anchored opossums to their native
habitats and made them resilient incumbents. Although the role of niche
incumbency is hard to assess in historical scenarios, its potential importance
is supported by ecological studies of invasive species in modern faunas.Such studies suggest that competitive interactions with invaders seldom
drive resident taxa to extinction (Mooney and Cleland, 2001; Davis, 2003).
In fact, competition with the native opossum fauna may have constrained
the adaptive radiation of immigrant placental taxa. For example, opossum
incumbency may explain why the Neotropical fauna includes only a single
genus of nocturnal primates (Wright, 1996), and it may explain the
otherwise puzzling failure of shrews—a speciose group in African and
Asian rainforest faunas—to radiate in the lowland Neotropics.
Finally, we are led to question the logic by which marsupials have come
to be regarded as poor competitors. As we have seen (Chapter 1),
marsupials did not become extinct in North America, because they were
never there. North American Paleogene “marsupials” were stem
metatherians: archaic mammals that eventually disappeared from the
continental fauna along with many other ancient lineages, including stem
eutherians, “condylarths,” stem primates, stem carnivorans, and so forth
(Rose, 2006; Halliday et al., 2017). Similarly, most of the metatherian
lineages that went extinct in South America were also stem taxa rather than
members of the crown group (Chapter 2). Although it is certainly true that
paucituberculatan marsupials were more diverse in the South American
fossil record than they are today, they reached their peak diversity after the
arrival of primates and caviomorph rodents, and their decline preceded the
arrival of other potentially competing placental clades in the Pliocene. The
evidence that marsupials compete poorly with placentals is similarly weak
in Australia, where almost all end-Pleistocene and Recent extinctions can be
attributed to predation—either by humans (Saltré et al., 2016) or by
introduced carnivorans (Woinarski et al., 2015, 2019)—not to competition.
To all appearances, opossums continue to thrive in modern ecosystems,
including anthropogenic landscapes; clearly, they are here to stay.
Nevertheless, it behooves us to learn as much as we can about their current
diversity, phenotypic adaptations, and ecological relationships in natural
habitats with intact faunas and floras while opportunities to do so yet
remain. This volume will, we hope, provide a foundation for future
advances in opossum research.NOTES
1. Closely related opossum species (e.g., members of the subgenus Sciophanes of Marmosops;
Díaz-Nieto and Voss, 2016) are usually allopatric, differ in characters that have no obvious adaptive
significance, and seem to be ecologically similar, so it is possible that the initial stages of lineage
diversification are nonadaptive, and that ecological divergence accompanies the establishment of
sympatry following secondary contact. This scenario, which essentially resembles the hierarchical
process hypothesized by Losos et al. (2006), suggests a key role for community assembly in shaping
opossum adaptive radiation.
2. The 95% credible interval for the proportion of contemporaneous lineages that went extinct at
about 11 Ma is 0.68–0.92, with a median value of around 0.82 (Jansa et al., unpublished).
3. Net diversification rates and extinction fractions are calculated from fitted estimates of the
“birth” (speciation) rate, λ, and the “death” (extinction) rate, μ. Net diversification is then computed
as λ − μ and the extinction fraction as μ/λ (Nee et al., 1994). Terminology is not standardized,
however, and μ/λ is also known as the “relative extinction rate” (e.g., by Rabosky, 2010).Appendix 1
A Checklist of Living Opossums (Didelphidae)
Below we list all of the didelphid species currently recognized as valid (to January 2020). Our
subfamilial, tribal, and generic classification follows the system explained in Chapter 4. Additionally,
we use subgeneric nomenclature to identify monophyletic groups of species in several genera
following Voss and Jansa (2009) for Caluromys, Giarla et al. (2010) for Thylamys, Voss et al. (2014)
for Marmosa, Díaz-Nieto et al. (2016) for Marmosops, and Pavan and Voss (2016) for Monodelphis.
For each species we provide an indication of their continental distribution (NA, North America
[including Central America]; SA, South America) and macrohabitat(s). Macrohabitat abbreviations
(De, desert [including semideserts]; DF, dry forest; Gr, grassland; MF, montane forest; RF, rainforest;
TF, temperate forest) are separated by commas and listed in order of predominance for species
occurring in more than one type of vegetation if predominance is known (Caluromys philander, for
example, occurs primarily in rainforest, but is sometimes also found in dry forest); however, if it is
not known which of two or more macrohabitats is predominant, these are listed in alphabetical order
and separated by slashes (e.g., Marmosa mexicana).
Caluromyinae (4 spp.) Caluromys (Caluromys) philander (SA; RF, DF) Caluromys (Mallodelphys)
derbianus (SA, NA; RF, DF, MF) Caluromys (Mallodelphys) lanatus (SA; RF) Caluromysiops
irrupta (SA; RF) Glironiinae (1 sp.) Glironia venusta (SA; RF, DF) Hyladelphinae (1 sp.)
Hyladelphys kalinowskii (SA; RF) Didelphinae (110 spp.) Marmosini (50 spp.) Marmosa
(Eomarmosa) rubra (SA; RF) Marmosa (Exulomarmosa) isthmica (SA, NA; RF) Marmosa
(Exulomarmosa) mexicana (NA; DF/MF/RF) Marmosa (Exulomarmosa) robinsoni (SA, NA; DF,
RF, MF) Marmosa (Exulomarmosa) simonsi (SA; DF) Marmosa (Exulomarmosa) xerophila (SA;
De) Marmosa (Exulomarmosa) zeledoni (SA, NA; MF/RF) Marmosa (Marmosa) macrotarsus
(SA; RF) Marmosa (Marmosa) murina (SA; RF) Marmosa (Marmosa) tyleriana (SA; MF)
Marmosa (Marmosa) waterhousei (SA; RF) Marmosa (Micoureus) alstoni (NA; MF) Marmosa
(Micoureus) constantiae (SA; RF) Marmosa (Micoureus) demerarae (SA; RF) Marmosa
(Micoureus) germana (SA; RF) Marmosa (Micoureus) paraguayana (SA; RF) Marmosa
(Micoureus) phaea (SA; MF) Marmosa (Micoureus) rapposa (SA; DF/MF) Marmosa (Micoureus)
rutteri (SA; RF) Marmosa (Stegomarmosa) andersoni (SA; RF) Marmosa (Stegomarmosa) lepida
(SA; RF) Monodelphis (Microdelphys) americana (SA; RF) Monodelphis (Microdelphys)
gardneri (SA; MF) Monodelphis (Microdelphys) iheringi (SA; RF) Monodelphis (Microdelphys)
scalops (SA; RF) Monodelphis (Monodelphiops) dimidiata (SA; Gr, RF) Monodelphis
(Monodelphiops) unistriatus (SA; RF?) Monodelphis (Monodelphis) arlindoi (SA; RF)
Monodelphis (Monodelphis) brevicaudata (SA; RF) Monodelphis (Monodelphis) domestica (SA;
DF) Monodelphis (Monodelphis) glirina (SA; RF) Monodelphis (Monodelphis) palliolata (SA;RF, DF) Monodelphis (Monodelphis) sanctaerosae (SA; DF?) Monodelphis (Monodelphis) touan
(SA; RF) Monodelphis (Monodelphis) vossi (SA; Gr?) Monodelphis (Mygalodelphys) adusta (SA;
RF, MF) Monodelphis (Mygalodelphys) handleyi (SA; RF) Monodelphis (Mygalodelphys) kunsi
(SA; DF) Monodelphis (Mygalodelphys) osgoodi (SA; MF) Monodelphis (Mygalodelphys)
peruviana (SA; RF, MF) Monodelphis (Mygalodelphys) pinocchio (SA; RF) Monodelphis
(Mygalodelphys) reigi (SA; MF) Monodelphis (Mygalodelphys) ronaldi (SA; RF) Monodelphis
(Mygalodelphys) saci (SA; RF) Monodelphis (Pyrodelphys) emiliae (SA; RF) Tlacuatzin
balsasensis (NA; DF) Tlacuatzin canescens (NA; DF) Tlacuatzin gaumeri (NA; DF) Tlacuatzin
insularis (NA; DF) Tlacuatzin sinaloae (NA; DF) Metachirini (2 spp.) Metachirus myosuros (SA,
NA; RF) Metachirus nudicaudatus (SA; RF) Didelphini (17 spp.) Chironectes minimus (SA, NA;
RF, MF) Didelphis albiventris (SA; DF/Gr) Didelphis aurita (SA; RF) Didelphis imperfecta (SA;
Gr) Didelphis marsupialis (SA, NA; RF) Didelphis pernigra (SA; MF) Didelphis virginiana (NA;
TF) Lutreolina crassicaudata (SA; Gr) Lutreolina massoia (SA; MF) Philander andersoni (SA;
RF) Philander canus (SA; DF/RF) Philander mcilhennyi (SA; RF) Philander melanurus (SA,
NA; RF) Philander opossum (SA; RF) Philander pebas (SA; RF) Philander quica (SA; RF)
Philander vossi (NA; DF) Thylamyini (41 spp.) Chacodelphys formosa (SA; Gr?) Cryptonanus
agricolai (SA; DF/Gr?) Cryptonanus chacoensis (SA; DF/Gr?) Cryptonanus guahybae (SA; DF)
Cryptonanus unduaviensis (SA; DF/Gr?) Gracilinanus aceramarcae (SA; MF) Gracilinanus
agilis (SA; DF) Gracilinanus dryas (SA; MF) Gracilinanus emiliae (SA; RF) Gracilinanus
marica (SA; MF) Gracilinanus microtarsus (SA; RF) Gracilinanus peruanus (SA; RF)
Lestodelphys halli (SA; De) Marmosops (Marmosops) caucae (SA; MF, RF) Marmosops
(Marmosops) creightoni (SA; MF) Marmosops (Marmosops) incanus (SA; RF) Marmosops
(Marmosops) noctivagus (SA; RF, MF) Marmosops (Marmosops) ocellatus (SA; DF) Marmosops
(Marmosops) paulensis (SA; MF) Marmosops (Marmosops) soinii (SA; RF) Marmosops
(Sciophanes) bishopi (SA; RF, DF) Marmosops (Sciophanes) carri (SA; MF/RF) Marmosops
(Sciophanes) chucha (SA; MF/RF) Marmosops (Sciophanes) fuscatus (SA; MF/RF) Marmosops
(Sciophanes) handleyi (SA; MF) Marmosops (Sciophanes) invictus (NA; MF?) Marmosops
(Sciophanes) juninensis (SA; MF) Marmosops (Sciophanes) magdalenae (SA; MF/RF)
Marmosops (Sciophanes) ojastii (SA; MF/RF) Marmosops (Sciophanes) pakaraimae (SA; MF)
Marmosops (Sciophanes) parvidens (SA; RF) Marmosops (Sciophanes) pinheiroi (SA; RF)
Thylamys (Thylamys) elegans (SA; De) Thylamys (Thylamys) macrurus (SA; DF) Thylamys
(Thylamys) pallidior (SA; De) Thylamys (Thylamys) pusillus (SA; DF) Thylamys (Thylamys)
sponsorius (SA; MF) Thylamys (Thylamys) tatei (SA; DF?) Thylamys (Thylamys) venustus (SA;
MF) Thylamys (Xerodelphys) karimii (SA; DF) Thylamys (Xerodelphys) velutinus (SA; DF)Appendix 2
Fruit Taxa Eaten by Opossums and Sympatric Placental Mammals
in French GuianaAppendix 3
Prey Taxa Eaten by Opossums and Sympatric Placental Mammals
in Southeastern BrazilReferences
Abello, M.A. 2013. Analysis of dental homologies and phylogeny of Paucituberculata (Mammalia:
Marsupialia). Biological Journal of the Linnean Society 109: 441–465.
Abello, M.A., E. Ortiz-Jaureguizar, and A.M. Candela. 2012. Paleoecology of the Paucituberculata
and Microbiotheria (Mammalia, Marsupialia) from the late Early Miocene of Patagonia. Pages
156–172 in S.F. Vizcaíno, R.F. Kay, and M.S. Bargo, eds. Early Miocene paleobiology in
Patagonia: high-latitude paleocommunities of the Santa Cruz Formation. Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.
Abello, M.A., N. Toledo, and E. Ortiz-Jaureguizar. 2018. Evolution of South American
Paucituberculata (Metatheria: Marsupialia): adaptive radiation and climate change at the Eocene￾Oligocene boundary. Historical Biology doi:10.1080/08912963.2018.1502286.
Abouheif, E., and D.J. Fairbairn. 1997. A comparative analysis of allometry for sexual size
dimorphism: assessing Rensch’s rule. American Naturalist 149: 540–562.
Acosta-Chaves, V.J., A. Sosa-Bartuano, B.H. Morera-Chacón, and J.E. Jiménez-Castro. 2018.
Records of preys hunted by the Zeledon’s mouse opossum Marmosa zeledoni Goldman, 1911
(Didelphimorphia: Didelphidae) in Costa Rica. Food Webs 16: e00094.
Adis, J. 1988. On the abundance and density of terrestrial arthropods in central Amazonian dryland
forests. Journal of Tropical Ecology 4: 19–24.
Adler, G.H. 1995. Fruit and seed exploitation by Central American spiny rats, Proechimys
semispinosus. Studies on Neotropical Fauna and Environment 30: 237–244.
Adler, G.H., A. Carvajal, S.L. Davis-Foust, and J.W. Dittel. 2012. Habitat associations of opossums
and rodents in a lowland forest in French Guiana. Mammalian Biology 77: 84–89.
Agrell, J., J.O. Wolff, and H. Ylönen. 1998. Counter-strategies to infanticide in mammals: costs and
consequences. Oikos 83: 507–517.
Aguiar, L.M., R.F. Moro-Rios, T. Silvestre, J.E. Silva-Pereira, D.R. Bilski, F.C. Passos, M.L.
Sekiama, and V.J. Rocha. 2011. Diet of brown-nosed coatis and crab-eating raccoons from a
mosaic landscape with exotic plantations in southern Brazil. Studies on Neotropical Fauna and
Environment 46: 153–161.
Albanese, S., and R.A. Ojeda. 2012. Habitat use by a Neotropical desert marsupial (Thylamys
pallidior): a multi-scale approach. Mammalian Biology 77: 237–243.
Albanese, S., D. Rodríguez, and R.A. Ojeda. 2011. Differential use of vertical space by small
mammals in the Monte Desert, Argentina. Journal of Mammalogy 92: 1270–1277.
Albanese, S., M.A. Dacar, and R.A. Ojeda. 2012. Unvarying diet of a Neotropical desert marsupial
inhabiting a variable environment: the case of Thylamys pallidior. Acta Theriologica 57: 185–188.Albino, A.M., and S. Brizuela. 2014. An overview of the South American fossil squamates.
Anatomical Record 297: 349–368.
Albino, A.M., and C.I. Montalvo. 2006. Snakes from the Cerro Azul Formation (upper Miocene),
central Argentina, with a review of fossil viperids from South America. Journal of Vertebrate
Paleontology 26: 581–587.
Alden, K.J. 1995. Helminths of the opossum, Didelphis virginiana, in southern Illinois, with a
compilation of all helminths reported from this host in North America. Journal of the
Helminthological Society of Washington 62: 197–208.
Alencar, L.R.V., T.B. Quental, F.G. Grazziotin, M.L. Alfaro, M. Martins, M. Venzon, and H. Zaher.
2016. Diversification in vipers: phylogenetic relationships, time of divergence, and shifts in
speciation rates. Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution 105: 50–62.
Alencar, L.R.V., M. Martins, and H.W. Greene. 2018. Evolutionary history of vipers. Pages 1–10 in
eLS [Encyclopedia of Life Sciences]. Chichester, UK: John Wiley and Sons.
Aléssio, F.M., A.R.M. Pontes, and V.L. da Silva. 2005. Feeding by Didelphis albiventris on tree gum
in the northeastern Atlantic Forest of Brazil. Mastozoología Neotropical 12: 53–56.
Almeida-Santos, S.M., M.M. Antoniazzi, O.A. Sant’Anna, and C. Jared. 2000. Predation by the
opossum Didelphis marsupialis on the rattlesnake Crotalus durissus. Current Herpetology 19: 1–
9.
Alves-Costa, C.P., G.A.B. da Fonseca, and C. Christófaro. 2004. Variation in the diet of the brown￾nosed coati (Nasua nasua) in southeastern Brazil. Journal of Mammalogy 85: 478–482.
Amador, L.L., and N.P. Giannini. 2016. Phylogeny and evolution of body mass in didelphid
marsupials (Marsupialia: Didelphimorphia: Didelphidae). Organisms, Diversity, and Evolution 16:
641–657.
Anderson, R.C. 2000. Nematode parasites of vertebrates, their development and transmission, 2nd
ed. New York: CABI Publishing.
Andrade, T.Y., W. Thies, P.K. Rogeri, E.K.V. Kalko, and M.A.R. Mello. 2013. Hierarchical fruit
selection by Neotropical leaf-nosed bats (Chiroptera: Phyllostomidae). Journal of Mammalogy 94:
1094–1101.
Antoine, P.-O., L. Marivaux, D.A. Croft, G. Billet, M. Ganerød, C. Jaramillo, T. Martin, et al. 2011.
Middle Eocene rodents from Peruvian Amazonia reveal the pattern and timing of caviomorph
origins and biogeography. Proceedings of the Royal Society B 279: 1319–1326.
Antoine, P.-O., M.A. Abello, S. Adnet, A.J.A. Sierra, P. Baby, G. Billet, M. Boivin, et al. 2016. A 60-
million-year Cenozoic history of western Amazonian ecosystems in Contamana, eastern Peru.
Gondwana Research 31: 30–59.
Antunes, V.Z., A.C. Delciellos, and M.V. Vieira. 2016. Postural climbing behaviours of didelphid
marsupials: parallels with primates. Oecologia Australis 20: 54–69.
Aplin, K.P., K.M. Helgen, and D.P. Lunde. 2010. A review of Peroryctes broadbenti, the giant
bandicoot of Papua New Guinea. American Museum Novitates 3696: 1–41.
Arcangeli, J., J.E. Light, and F.A. Cervantes. 2018. Molecular and morphological evidence of the
diversification in the gray mouse opossum, Tlacuatzin canescens (Didelphimorphia), with
description of a new species. Journal of Mammalogy 99: 138–158.
Ardente, N., D. Gettinger, R. Fonseca, H.G. Bergallo, and F. Martins-Hatano. 2013. Mammalia,
Didelphimorphia, Didelphidae, Glironia venusta Thomas, 1912, and Chironectes minimus
(Zimmermann, 1780): distribution extension for eastern Amazonia. Check List 9: 1104–1107.
Argot, C. 2001. Functional-adaptive anatomy of the forelimb in the Didelphidae, and the
paleobiology of the Paleocene marsupials Mayulestes ferox and Pucadelphys andinus. Journal of
Morphology 247: 51–79.Argot, C. 2002. Functional-adaptive analysis of the hindlimb anatomy of extant marsupials, and the
paleobiology of the Paleocene marsupials Mayulestes ferox and Pucadelphys andinus. Journal of
Morphology 253: 76–108.
Argot, C. 2003. Functional-adaptive anatomy of the axial skeleton of some extant marsupials and the
paleobiology of the Paleocene marsupials Mayulestes ferox and Pucadelphys andinus. Journal of
Morphology 255: 279–300.
Argot, C. 2004. Evolution of South American mammalian predators (Borhyaenoidea): anatomical
and palaeobiological implications. Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society 140: 487–521.
Arguero, A., L. Albuja, and J. Brito. 2017. Nuevos registros de Glironia venusta Thomas, 1912
(Mammalia, Didelphidae) en el suroriente de Ecuador. Mastozoología Neotropical 24: 219–225.
Aristide, L., A.L. Rosenberger, M.F. Tejedor, and S.I. Perez. 2015. Modeling lineage and phenotypic
diversification in the New World monkey (Platyrrhini, Primates) radiation. Molecular
Phylogenetics and Evolution 82: 375–385.
Ashe, J.S., and R.M. Timm. 1987. Predation by and activity patterns of “parasitic” beetles of the
genus Amblyopinus (Coleoptera: Staphylinidae). Journal of Zoology London 212: 429–437.
Ashwell, K.W.S. 2010. Overview of marsupial brain organization and evolution. Pages 18–39 in
K.W.S. Ashwell, ed. The neurobiology of Australian marsupials. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.
Astúa, D. 2006. Range extension and first Brazilian record of the rare Hyladelphys kalinowskii
(Hershkovitz, 1992) (Didelphimorphia, Didelphidae). Mammalia 70: 174–176.
Astúa, D. 2010. Cranial sexual dimorphism in New World marsupials and a test of Rensch’s rule in
Didelphidae. Journal of Mammalogy 91: 1011–1024.
Astúa, D., R.A. Carvalho, P.F. Maia, A.R. Magalhães, and D. Loretto. 2015. First evidence of
gregarious denning in opossums (Didelphimorphia, Didelphidae), with notes on their social
behavior. Biology Letters 11: 20150307.
Astúa de Moraes, D., E. Hingst-Zaher, L.F. Marcus, and R. Cerqueira. 2000. A geometric
morphometric analysis of cranial and mandibular shape variation of didelphid marsupials. Hystrix
(n.s.) 10: 115–130.
Astúa de Moraes, D., R.T. Santori, R. Finotti, and R. Cerqueira. 2003. Nutritional and fibre content
of laboratory-established diets of Neotropical opossums (Didelphidae). Pages 228–237 in M.
Jones, C. Dickman, and M. Archer, eds. Predators with pouches, the biology of carnivorous
marsupials. Collingwood, Australia: CSIRO Publishing.
Atramentowicz, M. 1982. Influence du milieu sur l’activité locomotrice et la reproduction de
Caluromys philander (L.). Revue d’Ecologie (La Terre et la Vie) 36: 373–395.
Atramentowicz, M. 1986a. Disponibilités trophiques et rythmes de reproduction chez trois
marsupiaux didelphidés de Guyane. Memoires du Muséum National d’Histoire Naturelle
(nouvelle série) Série A, Zoologie 132: 123–130.
Atramentowicz, M. 1986b. Dynamique de population chez trois marsupiaux didelphidés de Guyane.
Biotropica 18: 136–149.
Atramentowicz, M. 1988. La frugivorie opportuniste de trois marsupiaux didelphidés de Guyane.
Revue d’Ecologie (La Terre et la Vie) 43: 47–57.
Atramentowicz, M. 1995. Growth of pouch young in the bare-tailed woolly opossum, Caluromys
philander. Journal of Mammalogy 76: 1213–1219.
Augustiny, G. 1942. Die Schwimmanpassung von Chironectes. Zeitschrift für Morphologie und
Ökologie der Tiere 39: 276–319.
Austad, S.N. 1993. Retarded senescence in an insular population of Virginia opossums (Didelphis
virginiana). Journal of Zoology London 229: 695–708.Austad, S.N., and K.E. Fischer. 1991. Mammalian aging, metabolism, and ecology: evidence from
the bats and marsupials. Journal of Gerontology 46: B47–B53.
Azad, A.F., and C.B. Beard. 1998. Rickettsial pathogens and their arthropod vectors. Emerging
Infectious Diseases 4: 179–186.
Bacon, C.D., D. Silvestro, C. Jaramillo, B.T. Smith, P. Chakrabarty, and A. Antonelli. 2015.
Biological evidence supports an early and complex emergence of the Isthmus of Panama.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Science USA: 112: 6110–6115.
Baglan, A., and F. Catzeflis. 2016. Barn owl pellets collected in coastal savannas yield two additional
species of small mammals for French Guiana. Mammalia 80: 91–95.
Baker, A., and C. Dickman. 2018. Secret lives of carnivorous marsupials. Canberra: CSIRO
Publishing.
Baladrón, A.V., A.I. Malizia, M.S. Bó, M.S. Liébana, and M.J. Bechard. 2012. Population dynamics
of the southern short-tailed opossum (Monodelphis dimidiata) in the pampas of Argentina.
Australian Journal of Zoology 60: 238–245.
Barchan, D., S. Kachalsky, D. Neumann, Z. Vogel, M. Ovadia, E. Kochva, and S. Fuchs. 1992. How
the mongoose can fight the snake: the binding site of the mongoose acetylcholine receptor.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 89: 7717–7721.
Barnes, B.V. 1991. Deciduous forests of North America. Pages 219–344 in E. Röhrig and B. Ulrich,
eds. Temperate deciduous forests (Ecosystems of the World, vol. 7). Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Barnes, R.D. 1977. The special anatomy of Marmosa robinsoni. Pages 387–413 in D. Hunsaker, ed.
The biology of marsupials. New York: Academic Press.
Barnes, R.D., and S.W. Barthold. 1969. Reproduction and breeding behaviour in an experimental
colony of Marmosa mitis Bangs (Didelphidae). Journal of Reproduction and Fertility
(supplement) 6: 477–482.
Barnes, R.D., and H.G. Wolf. 1971. The husbandry of Marmosa mitis as a laboratory animal.
International Zoo Yearbook 11: 50–54.
Barros, C.S., T. Püttker, and R. Pardini. 2015. Timing and environmental cues associated with
triggering of reproductive activity in Atlantic Forest marsupials. Mammalian Biology 80: 141–
147.
Bascompte, J., and P. Jordano. 2007. Plant-animal mutualistic networks: the architecture of
biodiversity. Annual Review of Ecology, Evolution, and Systematics 38: 567–593.
Basset, Y. 2001. Invertebrates in the canopy of tropical rainforests. How much do we really know?
Plant Ecology 153: 87–107.
Bates, P.A. 2007. Transmission of Leishmania metacyclic promastigotes by phlebotomine sand flies.
International Journal for Parasitology 37: 1097–1106.
Battistella, T., F. Cerezer, J. Bubadué, G. Melo, M. Graipel, and N. Cáceres. 2018. Litter size
variation in didelphid marsupials: evidence of phylogenetic constraints and adaptation. Biological
Journal of the Linnean Society 126: 40–54.
Bawa, K.S. 1974. Breeding systems of tree species of a lowland tropical community. Evolution 28:
85–92.
Beach, F.A. 1939. Maternal behavior of the pouchless marsupial Marmosa cinerea. Journal of
Mammalogy 20: 315–322.
Beasley, J.C., W.S. Beatty, Z.H. Olson, and O.E. Rhodes, Jr. 2010. A genetic analysis of the Virginia
opossum mating system: evidence of multiple paternity in a highly fragmented landscape. Journal
of Heredity 101: 368–373.
Beatty, W.S., J.C. Beasley, G. Dharmarajan, and O.E. Rhodes, Jr. 2012. Genetic structure of a
Virginia opossum (Didelphis virginiana) population inhabiting a fragmented agricultural
landscape. Canadian Journal of Zoology 90: 101–109.Beck, R.M.D. 2012. An “ameridelphian” marsupial from the early Eocene of Australia supports a
complex model of southern hemisphere biogeography. Naturwissenschaften 99: 715–729.
Beck, R.M.D. 2017. The skull of Epidolops ameghinoi from the early Eocene Itaboraí Fauna,
southeastern Brazil, and the affinities of the extinct marsupialiform order Polydolopimorphia.
Journal of Mammalian Evolution 24: 373–414.
Beck, R.M.D., and M.L. Taglioretti. 2019. A nearly complete juvenile skull of the marsupial
Sparassocynus derivatus from the Pliocene of Argentina, the affinities of “sparassocynids”, and
the diversification of opossums (Mammalia; Didelphimorphia; Didelphidae). Journal of
Mammalian Evolution doi:10.1007/s10914-019-09471-y.
Beck, R.M.D., H. Godthelp, V. Weisbecker, M. Archer, and S.J. Hand. 2008. Australia’s oldest
marsupial fossils and their biogeographical implications. PLoS ONE 3(3): 1–8.
Beck-King, H., O. von Halversen, and R. Beck-King. 1999. Home range, population density, and
food resources of Agouti paca (Rodentia: Agoutidae) in Costa Rica: a study using alternative
methods. Biotropica 31: 675–685.
Belov, K., C.E. Sanderson, J.E. Deakin, E.S.W. Wong, D. Assange, K.A. McColl, A. Gout, et al.
2007. Characterization of the opossum immune genome provides insights into the evolution of the
mammalian immune system. Genome Research 17: 982–991.
Berdoy, M., J.P. Webster, and D.W. Macdonald. 2000. Fatal attraction in rats infected with
Toxoplasma gondii. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London B 267: 1591–1594.
Bergallo, H.G., and R. Cerqueira. 1994. Reproduction and growth of the opossum Monodelphis
domestica (Mammalia: Didelphidae) in northeastern Brazil. Journal of Zoology London 232: 551–
563.
Bhullar, B.-A.S., A.R. Manafzadeh, J.A. Miyamae, E.A. Hoffman, E.L. Brainerd, C. Musinsky, and
A.W. Crompton. 2019. Rolling of the jaw is essential for mammalian chewing and tribosphenic
molar function. Nature 566: 528–532.
Bi, S., X. Zheng, X. Wang, N.E. Cignetti, S. Yang, and J.R. Wible. 2018. An Early Cretaceous
eutherian and the placental-marsupial dichotomy. Nature 558: 390–395.
Bianchi, R.C., and S.L. Mendes. 2007. Ocelot (Felis pardalis) predation on primates in Caratinga
Biological Station, southeast Brazil. American Journal of Primatology 69: 1173–1178.
Bigio, N.C., and R.S. Secco. 2012. As espécies de Pera (Euphorbiaceae s.s.) na Amazônia brasileira.
Rodriguésia 63: 163–207.
Birney, E.C., J.A. Montjeau, C.J. Phillips, R.S. Sikes, and I. Kim. 1996a. Lestodelphys halli: new
information on a poorly known Argentine marsupial. Mastozoología Neotropical 3: 171–181.
Birney, E.C., R.S. Sikes, J.A. Monjeau, N. Guthmann, and C.J. Phillips. 1996b. Comments on
Patagonian marsupials from Argentina. Pages 149–154 in H.H. Genoways and R.J. Baker, eds.
Contributions in mammalogy: a memorial volume honoring Dr. J. Knox Jones, Jr. Lubbock, TX:
Museum of Texas Tech University.
Bisbal, F.J. 1986. Food habits of some Neotropical carnivores in Venezuela (Mammalia, Carnivora).
Mammalia 50: 329–339.
Black, K.H., M. Archer, S.J. Hand, and H. Godthelp. 2012. The rise of Australian marsupials: a
synopsis of biostratigraphic, phylogenetic, palaeoecologic, and palaeobiogeographic
understanding. Pages 983–1078 in J.A. Talent, ed. Earth and life: global biodiversity, extinction
intervals, and biogeographic perturbations through time. Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands.
Bloch, J.I., E.D. Woodruff, A.R. Wood, A.F. Rincon, A.R. Harrington, G.S. Morgan, D.A. Foster, et
al. 2016. First North American fossil monkey and early Miocene tropical biotic exchange. Nature
533: 243–246.
Bó, M.S., J.P. Isacch, A.I. Malizia, and M.M. Martínez. 2002. Lista comentada de los mamíferos de
la Reserva de Biósfera Mar Chiquita, provincia de Buenos Aires, Argentina. MastozoologíaNeotropical 9: 5–11.
Boas, J.E.V. 1918. Zur Kenntnis des Hinterfusses der Marsupialier. Biologiske Meddelelser Det
Kongelige Danske Videnskabernes Selskab 1(8): 1–23 + 2 pls.
Bocchiglieri, A., A.F. Mendonça, and J.B. Campos. 2010. Diet composition of Gracilinanus agilis
(Didelphimorphia, Didelphidae) in dry woodland areas of Cerrado in central Brazil. Mammalia
74: 225–227.
Bochkov, A.V. 2011. Evolution of parasitism in mammal-associated mites of the Psoroptidia group
(Acari: Astigmata). Entomological Review 91: 1206–1215.
Bochkov, A.V., and B.M. OConnor. 2008. Morphology and systematics of the mite subfamily
Dromiciocoptinae (Acari: Myocoptidae), with descriptions of two new species. Annals of the
Entomological Society of America 101: 289–296.
Bochkov, A.V., and G. Wauthy. 2009. A review of the genus Listropsoralges (Acari: Psoroptidae),
with the descriptions of two new species. Acta Parasitologica 54: 269–275.
Bochkov, A.V., B.M. OConnor, and P. Grootaert. 2013. Revision of the family Listropsoralgidae
Fain, 1865 (Acariformes: Sarcoptoidea)—skin parasites of marsupials and rodents. Zootaxa
3611(1): 1–69.
Bodmer, R.E. 1989. Frugivory in Amazonian Artiodactyla: evidence for the evolution of the ruminant
stomach. Journal of Zoology London 219: 457–467.
Boinski, S., and N.L. Fowler. 1989. Seasonal patterns in a tropical lowland forest. Biotropica 21:
223–233.
Bonaparte, J.F. 1990. New Late Cretaceous mammals from the Los Alamitos Formation, northern
Patagonia. National Geographic Research 6: 63–93.
Bond, M., M.F. Tejedor, K.E. Campbell, Jr., L. Chornogubsky, N. Novo, and F. Goin. 2015. Eocene
primates of South America and the African origin of New World monkeys. Nature 520: 538–542.
Bossi, D.E.P., and H. de G. Bergallo. 1992. Parasitism by cuterebrid botflies (Metacuterebra
apicalis) in Oryzomys nitidus (Rodentia: Cricetidae) and Metachirus nudicaudatus (Marsupialia:
Didelphidae) in a southeastern Brazilian rain forest. Journal of Parasitology 1992: 142–145.
Boyer, D.M. 2008. Relief index of second mandibular molars is a correlate of diet among prosimian
primates and other euarchontan mammals. Journal of Human Evolution 55: 1118–1137.
Bozinovic, F., G. Ruiz, A. Cotés, and M. Rosenmann. 2005. Energetics, thermoregulation and torpor
in the Chilean mouse-opossum Thylamys elegans (Didelphidae). Revista Chilena de Historia
Natural 78: 199–206.
Braithwaite, R.W., and A.K. Lee. 1979. A mammalian example of semelparity. American Naturalist
113: 151–155.
Braun, J.K., N.L. Pratt, and M.A. Mares. 2010. Thylamys pallidior (Didelphimorphia: Didelphidae).
Mammalian Species 42: 90–98.
Brecht, M., B. Preilowski, and M.M. Merzenich. 1997. Functional architecture of the mystacial
vibrissae. Behavioural Brain Research 84: 81–97.
Breer, H., J. Fleischer, and J. Strotmann. 2006. The sense of smell: multiple olfactory subsystems.
Cellular and Molecular Life Sciences 63: 1465–1475.
Brener, Z. 1973. Biology of Trypanosoma cruzi. Annual Review of Microbiology 27: 347–382.
Brennan, J.M., and J.T. Reed. 1975. A list of Venezuelan chiggers, particularly of small mammalian
hosts (Acari: Trombiculidae). Brigham Young University Science Bulletin (Biol. Ser.) 20(1): 45–
75.
Breviglieri, C.P.B., and V.V. Kuhnen. 2016. Resource-defense behavior: first report of an agonistic
interaction between the opossum Didelphis aurita and the bat Artibeus lituratus. Folia Zoologica
65: 243–247.Brightsmith, D.J. 2005. Competition, predation, and nest niche shifts among tropical cavity nesters:
ecological evidence. Journal of Avian Biology 36: 74–83.
Brinkmann, A. 1911. Om Hudens Bygning paa Haand og Fod hos Chironectes variegatus.
Videnskabelige Meddelelser fra den naturhistoriske Forening i Kjøbenhavn 1910: 1–17, 1 pl.
Brodie, E.D., III, and E.D. Brodie, Jr. 1999. Costs of exploiting poisonous prey: evolutionary trade￾offs in a predator-prey arms race. Evolution 53: 626–631.
Bronstein, J.L. 2001. The exploitation of mutualisms. Ecology Letters 4: 277–287.
Bronstein, J.L., I. Izhaki, R. Nathan, J.J. Tewksbury, O. Spiegel, A. Lotan, and O. Alstein. 2007.
Fleshy-fruited plants and frugivores in desert ecosystems. Pages 148–177 in A.J. Dennis, E.W.
Schupp, R.J. Green, and D.A. Westcott, eds. Seed dispersal: theory and its application in a
changing world. Wallingford, UK: CAB International.
Brown, J.C. 1971. The description of mammals. 1. The external characters of the head. Mammal
Review 1: 151–168.
Brown, J.C., and D.W. Yalden. 1973. The description of mammals. 2. Limbs and locomotion of
terrestrial mammals. Mammal Review 3: 107–134.
Bucher, J.E., and H.I. Fritz. 1977. Behavior and maintenance of the woolly opossum (Caluromys) in
captivity. Laboratory Animal Science 27: 1007–1012.
Bucher, J.E., and R.S. Hoffmann. 1980. Caluromys derbianus. Mammalian Species 140: 1–4.
Burnham, R.J., and K.R. Johnson. 2004. South American palaeobotany and the origins of Neotropical
rainforests. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London B 359: 1595–1610.
Busch, M., and F.O. Kravetz. 1991. Diet composition of Monodelphis dimidiata (Marsupialia,
Didelphidae). Mammalia 55: 619–621.
Busse, S., D. Lutter, G. Heldmaier, M. Jastroch, and C.W. Meyer. 2014. Torpor at high ambient
temperature in a Neotropical didelphid, the grey short-tailed opossum (Monodelphis domestica).
Naturwissenschaften 101: 1003–1006.
Byles, B., F. Catzeflis, R.P. Scheibel, and F.A. Jiménez. 2013. Gastrointestinal helminths of two
species of mouse opossums (Marmosa demerarae and Marmosa murina) from French Guiana.
Comparative Parasitology 80: 210–216.
Cáceres, N.C. 2002. Food habits and seed dispersal by the white-eared opossum, Didelphis
albiventris, in southern Brazil. Studies on Neotropical Fauna and Environment 37: 97–104.
Cáceres, N.C. 2004. Diet of three didelphid marsupials (Mammalia, Didelphimorphia) in southern
Brazil. Mammalian Biology 69: 430–433.
Cáceres, N.C. 2006. O papel de marsupiais na dispersão de sementes. Pages 255–269 in N.C.
Cáceres and E.L.A. Monteiro-Filho, eds. Os marsupiais do Brasil: biologia, ecologia e evolução.
Campo Grande: Universidade Federal de Mato Grosso do Sul.
Cáceres, N.C., and A.F. Machado. 2013. Spatial, dietary, and temporal niche dimensions in ecological
segregation of two sympatric, congeneric marsupial species. Open Ecology Journal 6: 10–23.
Cáceres, N.C., and E.L.A. Monteiro-Filho. 2000. The common opossum, Didelphis aurita, as a seed
disperser of several plants in southern Brazil. Ciência e Cultura 52: 41–44.
Cáceres, N.C., and E.L.A. Monteiro-Filho. 2001. Food habits, home range, and activity of Didelphis
aurita (Mammalia, Marsupialia) in a forest fragment of southern Brazil. Studies on Neotropical
Fauna and Environment 36: 85–92.
Cáceres, N.C., and M. Pichorim. 2003. Use of an abandoned mottled piculet Picumnus nebulosus
(Aves, Picidae) nest by the Brazilian gracile mouse opossum Gracilinanus microtarsus
(Mammalia, Didelphidae). Biociências 11(1): 97-99.
Cáceres, N.C., V.A.O. Dittrich, and E.L.A. Monteiro-Filho. 1999. Fruit consumption, distance of
seed dispersal and germination of solanaceous plants ingested by common opossum (Didelphis
aurita) in southern Brazil. Revue d’Ecologie (La Terre et la Vie) 54: 225–234.Cáceres, N.C., I.R. Ghizoni, Jr., and M.E. Graipel. 2002. Diet of two marsupials, Lutreolina
crassicaudata and Micoureus demerarae, in a coastal Atlantic Forest island of Brazil. Mammalia
66: 331–340.
Cáceres, N.C., R.P. Napoli, W.H. Lopes, J. Casella, and G.S. Gazeta. 2007. Natural history of the
marsupial Thylamys macrurus (Mammalia, Didelphidae) in fragments of savannah in
southwestern Brazil. Journal of Natural History 41: 1979–1988.
Calvete, J.J. 2010. Snake venomics, antivenomics, and venom phenotyping: the ménage à trois of
proteomic tools aimed at understanding the biodiversity of venoms. Pages 45–72 in R.M. Kini,
K.J. Clemetson, F.S. Markland, M.A. McLane, and T. Morita, eds. Toxins and Hemostasis.
Dordrecht: Springer.
Calzada, J., M. Delibes, C. Keller, F. Palomares, W. Magnusson. 2008. First record of the bushy￾tailed opossum, Glironia venusta Thomas, 1912, (Didelphimorphia) from Manaus, Amazonas,
Brazil. Acta Amazonica 38: 807–810.
Camargo, N.F. de, R.M.S. Cruz, J.F. Ribeiro, and E.M. Vieira. 2011. Frugivoria e potencial dispersão
de sementes pelo marsupial Gracilinanus agilis (Didelphidae: Didelphimorphia) em áreas de
Cerrado no Brasil central. Acta Botanica Brasilica 25: 646–656.
Camargo, N.F. de, J.F. Ribeiro, A.J.A. de Camargo, and E.M. Vieira. 2014. Diet of the gracile mouse
opossum Gracilinanus agilis (Didelphimorphia: Didelphidae) in a Neotropical savanna:
intraspecific variation and resource selection. Acta Theriologica 59: 183–191.
Camargo, N.F. de, N.Y. Sano, and E.M. Vieira. 2017. Predation upon small mammals by Caluromys
lanatus (Didelphimorphia: Didelphidae) and Callithrix penicillata (Primates: Callitrichidae) in the
Brazilian savanna. Mammalia 81: 207–210.
Campbell, K.E., Jr., C.D. Frailey, and L.R. Pittman. 2000. The late Miocene gomphothere
Amahuacatherium peruvium (Proboscidea: Gomphotheriidae) from Amazonian Peru: implications
for the great American faunal interchange. Instituto Geológico Minero y Metalúrgico Boletin (ser.
D) 23: 1–152.
Cañeda-Guzmán, I.C., A. de Chambrier, and T. Scholz. 2001. Thaumasioscolex didelphidis n. gen., n.
sp. (Eucestoda: Proteocephalidae) from the black-eared opossum Didelphis marsupialis from
Mexico, the first proteocephalidean tapeworm from a mammal. Journal of Parasitology 87: 639–
646.
Cantú-Salazar, L., M.G. Hidalgo-Mihart, C.A. López-González, and A. González-Romero. 2005.
Diet and food resource use by the pygmy skunk (Spilogale pygmaea) in the tropical dry forest of
Chamela, Mexico. Journal of Zoology 267: 283–289.
Carmignotto, A.P., and T. Monfort. 2006. Taxonomy and distribution of the Brazilian species of
Thylamys (Didelphimorphia: Didelphidae). Mammalia 2006: 126–144.
Carmona, E.R., and M.M. Rivadeneira. 2006. Food habits of the barn owl Tyto alba in the National
Reserve Pampa del Tamarugal, Atacama desert, north Chile. Journal of Natural History 40: 473–
483.
Carneiro, L.M. 2018. A new species of Varalphadon (Mammalia, Metatheria, Sparassodonta) from
the upper Cenomanian of southern Utah, North America: phylogenetic and biogeographic insights.
Cretaceous Research 84: 88–96.
Carneiro, L.M., E.V. Oliveira, and F.J. Goin. 2018. Austropediomys marshalli gen et sp. nov., a new
Pediomyoidea (Mammalia, Metatheria) from the Paleogene of Brazil: paleobiogeographic
implications. Revista Brasileira de Paleontologia 21: 120–131.
Caro, T. 2005. Antipredator defenses in birds and mammals. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Caro, T. 2011. The functions of black-and-white coloration in mammals: review and synthesis. Pages
298–329 in M. Stevens and S. Merilaita, eds. Animal camouflage, mechanisms and function.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.Carreira, J.C.A., A.M. Jansen, M.N. Meirelles, F.C. Silva, and H.L. Lenzi. 2001. Trypanosoma cruzi
in the scent glands of Didelphis marsupialis: the kinetics of colonization. Experimental
Parasitology 97: 129–140.
Carrillo, J.D., A. Forasiepi, C. Jaramillo, and M.R. Sánchez-Villagra. 2015. Neotropical mammal
diversity and the Great American Biotic Interchange: spatial and temporal variation in South
America’s fossil record. Frontiers in Genetics 5 (451): 1–11.
Cartelle, C., and W.C. Hartwig. 1996. A new extinct primate among the Pleistocene megafauna of
Bahia, Brazil. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 93: 6405–6409.
Cartmill, M. 1974. Pads and claws in arboreal locomotion. Pages 45–83 in F.A. Jenkins, Jr., ed.
Primate locomotion. New York: Academic Press.
Cartmill, M. 1985. Climbing. Pages 73–88 in M. Hildebrand, D.M. Bramble, K.F. Liem, and D.B.
Wake, eds. Functional vertebrate morphology. Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press
Cartmill, M., P. Lemelin, and D. Schmitt. 2002. Support polygons and symmetrical gaits in
mammals. Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society 136: 401–420.
Carvalho, F.M.V., F.A.S. Fernandez, and J.L. Nessimian. 2005. Food habits of sympatric opossums
coexisting in small Atlantic Forest fragments in Brazil. Mammalian Biology 70: 366–375.
Carvalho, R.F. de, D.C. Passos, and L.G. Lessa. 2019. Diet variations in short-tailed opossum
Monodelphis domestica (Didelphimorphia, Didelphidae) due to seasonal and intersexual factors.
Mastozoología Neotropical 26: 340–348.
Case, J.A., F.J. Goin, and M.O. Woodburne. 2005. “South American” marsupials from the Late
Cretaceous of North America and the origin of marsupial cohorts. Journal of Mammalian
Evolution 12: 461–494.
Casella, J., and N.C. Cáceres. 2006. Diet of four small mammal species from Atlantic Forest patches
in south Brazil. Neotropical Biology and Conservation 1: 5–11.
Castilheiro, W.F.F., and M.S. Filho. 2013. Diet of Monodelphis glirina (Mammalia: Didelphidae) in
forest fragments in southern Amazon. Zoologia 30: 249–254.
Castro, J.M., and L.H. Emmons. 2012. Variation in diet and resources. Pages 37–55 in L.H. Emmons,
ed. The maned wolves of Noel Kempff Mercado National Park (Smithsonian Contributions to
Zoology 639). Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution Scholarly Press.
Catanese, J.J., and L.F. Kress. 1993. Opossum α1
-proteinase inhibitor: purification, linear sequence,
and resistance to inactivation by rattlesnake venom metalloproteinases. Biochemistry 32: 509–
515.
Catts, E.P. 1982. Biology of New World bot flies: Cuterebridae. Annual Review of Entomology 27:
313–338.
Catzeflis, F. 2018. Hyladelphys kalinowskii in French Guiana: new observations and first notes on its
nesting biology. Mammalia 82: 431–437.
Catzeflis, F., C. Richard-Hansen, C. Fournier-Chambrillon, A. Lavergne, and J. Vié. 1997. Biométrie,
reproduction et sympatrie chez Didelphis marsupialis et D. albiventris en Guyane française
(Didelphidae: Marsupialia). Mammalia 61: 231–243.
Catzeflis, F.M., B.K. Lim, and C.R. da Silva. 2019. Litter size and seasonality in reproduction for
Guianan rodents and marsupials. Studies on Neotropical Fauna and Environment 54: 31–39.
Ceballos, G. 1990. Comparative natural history of small mammals from tropical forests in western
Mexico. Journal of Mammalogy 71: 263–266.
Ceballos, G. 1995. Vertebrate diversity, ecology, and conservation in Neotropical dry forests. Pages
195–220 in S.H. Bullock, H.A. Mooney, and E. Medina, eds. Seasonally dry tropical forests.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.Ceotto, P., R. Finotti, R. Santori, and R. Cerqueira. 2009. Diet variation of the marsupials Didelphis
aurita and Philander frenatus (Didelphimorphia, Didelphidae) in a rural area of Rio de Janeiro
state, Brazil. Mastozoología Neotropical 16: 49–58.
Cerqueira, R. 1985. The distribution of Didelphis in South America. Journal of Biogeography 12:
135–145.
Charbonnel, N., J.G. de Bellocq, and S. Morand. 2006. Immunogenetics of micromammal￾macroparasite interactions. Pages 401–442 in S. Morand, B.R. Krasnov, and R. Poulin, eds.
Micromammals and macroparasites. Tokyo: Springer.
Charles-Dominique, P. 1983. Ecology and social adaptations in didelphid marsupials: comparisons
with eutherians of similar ecology. Pages 395–422 in J.F. Eisenberg and D.G. Kleiman, eds.
Advances in the study of mammalian behavior (American Society of Mammalogists Special
Publication 7). Shippensburg, PA: American Society of Mammalogists.
Charles-Dominique, P. 1986. Inter-relations between frugivorous vertebrates and pioneer plants:
Cecropia, birds and bats in French Guyana. Pages 119–135 in A. Estrada and T.H. Fleming, eds.
Frugivores and seed dispersal. Dordrecht: Dr. W. Junk.
Charles-Dominique, P., M. Atramentowicz, M. Charles-Dominique, H. Gérard, A. Hladik, C.M.
Hladik, and M.F. Prévost. 1981. Les mammifères frugivores arboricoles nocturnes d’une forêt
guyanaise: inter-relations plantes-animaux. Revue d’Ecologie (La Terre et la Vie) 35: 341–435.
Chemisquy, M.A., and F.J. Prevosti. 2014. It takes more than large canines to be a sabretooth
predator. Mastozoología Neotropical 21: 27–36.
Chemisquy, M.A., F.J. Prevosti, G. Martin, and D.A. Flores. 2015. Evolution of molar shape in
didelphid marsupials (Marsupialia: Didelphidae): analysis of the influence of ecological factors
and phylogenetic legacy. Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society 173: 217–235.
Chemisquy, M.A., S.D. Tarquini, C.O. Romano Muñoz, and F.J. Prevosti. 2020. Form, function and
evolution of the skull of didelphid marsupials (Didelphimorphia: Didelphidae). Journal of
Mammalian Evolution doi:10.1007/s10914-019-09495-4.
Chinchilla, F.A. 1997. La dieta del jaguar (Panthera onca), el puma (Felis concolor) y el manigordo
(Felis pardalis) (Carnivora: Felidae) en el Parque Nacional Corcovado, Costa Rica. Revista de
Biología Tropical 45: 1223–1229.
Christian, D.P. 1983. Water balance in Monodelphis domestica (Didelphidae) from the semiarid
Caatinga. Comparative Biochemistry and Physiology 74A: 665–669.
Chubb, J.C., M.A. Ball, and G.A. Parker. 2009. Living in intermediate hosts: evolutionary
adaptations in larval helminths. Trends in Parasitology 26: 93–102.
Cifelli, R.L., J.J. Eberle, D.L. Lofgren, J.A. Lillegraven, and W.A. Clemens. 2004. Mammalian
biochronology of the latest Cretaceous. Pages 21–42 in M.O. Woodburne, ed. Late Cretaceous and
Cenozoic mammals of North America. New York: Columbia University Press.
Cione, A.L., E.P. Tonni, and L. Soibelzon. 2009. Did humans cause the late Pleistocene–early
Holocene mammalian extinctions in South America in a context of shrinking open areas? Pages
125–144 in G. Hayes, ed. American megafaunal extinctions at the end of the Pleistocene.
Dordrecht: Springer.
Coates, A.G., and R.F. Stallard. 2013. How old is the Isthmus of Panama? Bulletin of Marine Science
89: 801–813.
Cockburn, A. 1997. Living slow and dying young: senescence in marsupials. Pages 163–174 in N.
Saunders and L. Hinds, eds. Marsupial biology: recent research, new perspectives. Sydney:
UNSW Press.
Cole, L.C. 1954. The population consequences of life history phenomena. Quarterly Review of
Biology 29: 103–137.Collins, L.R. 1973. Monotremes and marsupials: a reference for zoological institutions. Washington,
DC: Smithsonian Institution Press.
Colwell, D.D., M.J.R. Hall, and P.J. Scholl. 2006. The oestrid flies: biology, host-parasite
relationships, impact and management. Wallingford, UK: CABI Publishing.
Constantino, P.J., and B.W. Wright. 2009. The importance of fallback foods in primate ecology and
evolution. American Journal of Physical Anthropology 140: 599–602.
Cooper, C.E., P.C. Withers, and A.P. Cruz-Neto. 2009. Metabolic, ventilatory, and hygric physiology
of the gracile mouse opossum (Gracilinanus agilis). Physiological and Biochemical Zoology 82:
153–162.
Cooper, C.E., P.C. Withers, and A.P. Cruz-Neto. 2010. Metabolic, ventilatory, and hygric physiology
of a South American marsupial, the long-furred woolly mouse opossum. Journal of Mammalogy
91: 1–10.
Corbet, G.B. 1988. The family Erinaceidae: a synthesis of its taxonomy, phylogeny, ecology, and
zoogeography. Mammal Review 18: 117–172.
Cordero R., G.A., and R.A. Nicolas B. 1987. Feeding habits of the opossum (Didelphis marsupialis)
in northern Venezuela. Fieldiana Zoology (new series) 39: 125–131.
Costa, L.P., Y.L.R. Leite, and J.L. Patton. 2003. Phylogeography and systematic notes on two species
of gracile mouse opossums, genus Gracilinanus (Marsupialia: Didelphidae) from Brazil.
Proceedings of the Biological Society of Washington 116: 275–292.
Cothran, E.G., M.J. Aivaliotis, and J.L. Vandeberg. 1985. The effects of diet on growth and
reproduction in gray short-tailed opossums (Monodelphis domestica). Journal of Experimental
Zoology 236: 103–114.
Coulson, G. 1996. Anti-predator behaviour in marsupials. Pages 158–186 in D.B. Croft and U.
Ganslosser, eds. Comparison of marsupial and placental behaviour. Fürth, Germany: Filander
Verlag.
Coura, J.R., and A.C.V. Junqeira. 2015. Ecological diversity of Trypanosoma cruzi transmission in
the Amazon Basin: the main scenaries [sic] in the Brazilian Amazon. Acta Tropica 151: 51–57.
Cramer, J.D., T. Gaetano, J.P. Gray, P. Grobler, J.G. Lorenz, N.B. Freimer, C.A. Schmitt, and T.R.
Turner. 2013. Variation in scrotal color among widely distributed vervet monkey populations
(Chlorocebus aethiops pygerythrus and Chlorocebus aethiops sabaeus). American Journal of
Primatology 75: 752–762.
Creighton, G.K., and A.L. Gardner. 2008 (“2007”). Genus Gracilinanus Gardner and Creighton,
1989. Pages 43–50 in A.L. Gardner, ed. Mammals of South America, vol. 1. Marsupials,
xenarthrans, shrews, and bats. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Croft, D.A., R.K. Engelman, T. Dolgushina, and G. Wesley. 2018. Diversity and disparity of
sparassodonts (Metatheria) reveal non-analogue nature of ancient South American carnivore
guilds. Proceedings of the Royal Society B 285: 20172012.
Croft, D.B. 2003. Behaviour of carnivorous marsupials. Pages 332–346 in M. Jones, C. Dickman,
and M. Archer, eds. Predators with pouches, the biology of carnivorous marsupials. Collingwood,
Australia: CSIRO Publishing.
Crompton, A.W., and K. Hiiemae. 1969. Functional occlusion in tribosphenic molars. Nature 222:
678–679.
Crompton, A.W., and K. Hiiemae. 1970. Molar occlusion and mandibular movements during
occlusion in the American opossum, Didelphis marsupialis L. Zoological Journal of the Linnean
Society 49: 21–47.
Crooks, K.R., and M.E. Soulé. 1999. Mesopredator release and avifaunal extinctions in a fragmented
system. Nature 400: 563–566.Crumpton, N., and R.S. Thompson. 2013. The holes of moles: osteological correlates of the
trigeminal nerve in Talpidae. Journal of Mammalian Evolution 20: 213–225.
Cruz, L.D., F.R. Fernandes, and A.X. Linhares. 2009. Prevalence of larvae of the botfly Cuterebra
simulans (Diptera: Oestridae) on Gracilinanus microtarsus (Didelphimorphia: Didelphidae) in
southeastern Cerrado from Brazil. Revista Brasileira de Entomologia 53: 314–317.
Cummings, A.R., and J.M. Read. 2016. Drawing on traditional knowledge to identify and describe
ecosystem services associated with northern Amazon’s multiple-use plants. International Journal
of Biodiversity Science, Ecosystem Services & Management 12: 39–56.
Cundall, D. 2002. Envenomation strategies, head form, and feeding ecology in vipers. Pages 149–
161 in G.W. Schuett, M. Höggren, M.E. Douglas, and H.W. Greene, eds. Biology of the vipers.
Eagle Mountain, UT: Eagle Mountain Publishing.
Cunha, A.A., and M.V. Vieira. 2002. Support diameter, incline, and vertical movements of four
didelphid marsupials in the Atlantic Forest of Brazil. Journal of Zoology London 258: 419–426.
Cunningham, S.A. 1995. Ecological constraints on fruit initiation by Calyptrogyne ghiesbreghtiana
(Arecaceae): floral herbivory, pollen availability, and visitation by pollinating bats. American
Journal of Botany 82: 1527–1536.
Curay, J., F. Sornoza-Molina, and J. Brito. 2019. Predación de la raposa de cuatro ojos Philander
opossum (Mammalia, Didelphidae) por el gavilán campestre Rupornis magnirostris (Aves,
Accipitridae). Avances en Ciéncias e Ingenierías B 11: 222–227.
Cusens, J., S.D. Wright, P.D. McBride, and L.N. Gillman. 2012. What is the form of the productivity￾animal-species-richness relationship? A critical review and meta-analysis. Ecology 93: 2241–
2252.
Czekanski-Moir, J.E., and R.J. Rundell. 2019. The ecology of nonadaptive speciation and
nonadaptive radiations. Trends in Ecology & Evolution 34: 400–415.
Dalloz, M.F., D. Loretto, B. Papi, P. Cobra, and M.V. Vieira. 2012. Positional behaviour and tail use
by the bare-tailed woolly opossum Caluromys philander (Didelphimorphia, Didelphidae).
Mammalian Biology 77: 307–313.
da Silva, M.N.F., and A. Langguth. 1989. A new record of Glironia venusta from the lower Amazon,
Brazil. Journal of Mammalogy 70: 873–875.
Dávalos, L.M., P.M. Velazco, O.M. Warsi, P.D. Smits, and N.B. Simmons. 2014. Integrating
incomplete fossils by isolating conflicting signal in saturated and non-independent morphological
characters. Systematic Biology 63: 582–600.
Davis, D.E. 1947. Notes on the life histories of some Brazilian mammals. Boletim do Museu
Nacional (nova série) Zoologia 76: 1–8.
Davis, J.A., Jr. 1966. Maverick opossums. Animal Kingdom 69: 112–117.
Davis, M.A. 2003. Biotic globalization: does competition from introduced species threaten
biodiversity? BioScience 53: 481–489.
Dawson, T.J., and A.J. Hulbert. 1970. Standard metabolism, body temperature, and surface areas of
Australian marsupials. American Journal of Physiology 218: 1233–1238.
Dawson, T.J., and J.M. Olson. 1988. Thermogenic capabilities of the opossum Monodelphis
domestica when warm and cold acclimated: similarities between American and Australian
marsupials. Comparative Biochemistry and Physiology 89A: 85–91.
Deane, M.P., H.L. Lenzi, and A. Jansen. 1984. Trypanosoma cruzi: vertebrate and invertebrate cycles
in the same mammal host, the opossum Didelphis marsupialis. Memórias do Instituto Oswaldo
Cruz 79: 513–515.
Degen, A.A. 1997. Ecophysiology of small desert mammals. Berlin: Springer.
Degrange, F.J., C.P. Tambussi, K. Moreno, L.M. Witmer, and S. Wroe. 2010. Mechanical analysis of
feeding behavior in the extinct “terror bird” Andalgalornis steulleti (Gruiformes: Phorusrhacidae).PLoS ONE 5(8): e11856.
Delciellos, A.C., and M.V. Vieira. 2006. Arboreal walking performance in seven didelphid marsupials
as an aspect of their fundamental niche. Austral Ecology 31: 449–457.
Delciellos, A.C., and M.V. Vieira. 2009a. Allometric, phylogenetic, and adaptive components of
climbing performance in seven species of didelphid marsupials. Journal of Mammalogy 90: 104–
113.
Delciellos, A.C., and M.V. Vieira. 2009b. Jumping ability in the arboreal locomotion of didelphid
marsupials. Mastozoología Neotropical 16: 299–307.
Delciellos, A.C., D. Loretto, and M.V. Vieira. 2006. Novos métodos no estudo da estratificação
vertical de marsupiais neotropicais. Oecologia Brasiliensis 10: 135–153.
Delgado-V., C.A., A. Arias-Alzate, S. Aristizábal-Arango, and J.D. Sánchez-Londoño. 2014. Uso de
la cola y el marsupio en Didelphis marsupialis y Metachirus nudicaudatus (Didelphimorphia:
Didelphidae) para transportar material de anidación. Mastozoología Neotropical 21: 129–134.
D’Elía, G., and J.A. Martínez. 2006. Registros uruguayos de Gracilinanus Gardner y Creighton,
1989 y Cryptonanus Voss, Lunde y Jansa, 2005 (Didelphimorphia, Didelphidae). Mastozoología
Neotropical 13: 245–249.
Delupi, L.H., M.H. Carrera, and J.J. Bianchini. 1997 (“1995”). Morfología comparada de la
musculatura craneal en Lutreolina crassicaudata (Desmarest, 1804) y Didelphis albiventris Lund,
1840 (Marsupialia: Didelphidae). Physis (C) 53: 19–28.
Dennis, A.J. 2002. The diet of the musky rat-kangaroo, Hypsiprymnodon moschatus, a rainforest
specialist. Wildlife Research 29: 209–219.
Derryberry, E.P., S. Claramunt, G. Derryberry, R.T. Chesser, J. Cracraft, A. Aleixo, J. Pérez-Emán,
J.V. Remsen, Jr., and R.T. Brumfield. 2011. Lineage diversification and morphological evolution
in a large-scale continental radiation: the Neotropical ovenbirds and woodcreepers. Evolution 65:
2973–2986.
Díaz, G.B., R.A. Ojeda, and M. Dacar. 2001. Water conservation in the South American desert mouse
opossum, Thylamys pusillus (Didelphimorphia, Didelphidae). Comparative Biochemistry and
Physiology 130A: 323–330.
Díaz, M.M., and M.R. Willig. 2004. Nuevos registros de Glironia venusta y Didelphis albiventris
(Didelphimorphia) para Perú. Mastozoología Neotropical 11: 185–192.
Díaz, M.M., S. Nava, and A.A. Guglielmone. 2009. The parasitism of Ixodes luciae (Acari: Ixodidae)
on marsupials and rodents in Peruvian Amazonia. Acta Amazonica 39: 997–1002.
Díaz-Nieto, J.F., and R.S. Voss. 2016. A revision of the didelphid marsupial genus Marmosops, part
1. Species of the subgenus Sciophanes. Bulletin of the American Museum of Natural History 402:
1–70.
Dice, L.R. 1947. Effectiveness of selection by owls of deer mice (Peromyscus maniculatus).
Contributions from the Laboratory of Vertebrate Zoology University of Michigan 34: 1–20.
Dickman, C.R., and C. Huang. 1988. The reliability of fecal analysis as a method for determining the
diet of insectivorous mammals. Journal of Mammalogy 69: 108–113.
Donadio, E., S. di Martino, M. Aubone, and A.J. Novaro. 2004. Feeding ecology of the Andean hog￾nosed skunk (Conepatus chinga) in areas under different land use in north-western Patagonia.
Journal of Arid environments 56: 709–718.
Donoghue, M.J., and M.J. Sanderson. 2015. Confluence, synnovation, and depauperons in plant
diversification. New Phytologist 207: 260–274.
Dooley, J.C., H.M. Nguyen, A.M.H. Seelke, and L. Krubitzer. 2012. Visual acuity in the short-tailed
opossum (Monodelphis domestica). Neuroscience 223: 124–130.
Drabeck, D.H., A.M. Dean, and S.A. Jansa. 2015. Why the honey badger don’t care: convergent
evolution of venom-targeted nicotinic acetylcholine receptors in mammals that survive venomoussnake bites. Toxicon 99: 68–72.
Dubost, G. 1988. Ecology and social life of the red acouchy, Myoprocta exilis; comparison with the
orange-rumped agouti, Dasyprocta leporina. Journal of Zoology London 214: 107–123.
Dubost, G., and O. Henry. 2006. Comparison of diets of the acouchy, agouti, and paca, the three
largest terrestrial rodents of French Guiana. Journal of Tropical Ecology 22: 641–651.
Duchêne, D.A., J.G. Bragg, S. Duchêne, L.E. Neaves, S. Potter, C. Moritz, R.N. Johnson, S.Y.W. Ho,
and M.D.B. Eldridge. 2018. Analysis of phylogenomic tree space resolves relationships among
marsupial families. Systematic Biology 67: 400–412.
Duda, R., and L.P. Costa. 2015. Morphological, morphometric, and genetic variation among cryptic
and sympatric species of southeastern South American three-striped opossums (Monodelphis:
Mammalia: Didelphidae). Zootaxa 3936: 485–506.
Duellman, W.E. 1990. Herpetofaunas in Neotropical rainforests: comparative composition, history,
and resource use. Pages 455–505 in A.H. Gentry, ed. Four Neotropical rainforests. New Haven,
CT: Yale University Press.
Dulmen, A. van. 2001. Pollination and phenology of flowers in the canopy of two contrasting rain
forest types in Amazonia, Colombia. Plant Ecology 153: 73–85.
Dumont, E.R., K. Samadevam, I. Grosse, O.M. Warsi, B. Baird, and L.M. Dávalos. 2014. Selection
for mechanical advantage underlies multiple cranial optima in New World leaf-nosed bats.
Evolution 68: 1436–1449.
Duncan, R.B., Jr., C.R. Reinemeyer, and R.S. Funk. 1989. Fatal lungworm infection in an opossum.
Journal of Wildlife Diseases 25: 266–269.
Durant, P. 2002. Notes on white-eared opossum Didelphis albiventris Lund, 1840 from Mérida
Andes, Venezuela. Revista de Ecología Lantinoamericana 9: 1–7.
Durden, L.A. 2006. Taxonomy, host associations, life cycles, and vectorial importance of ticks
parasitizing small mammals. Pages 91–102 in S. Morand, B.R. Krasnov, and R. Poulin, eds.
Micromammals and macroparasites. Tokyo: Springer.
Durden, L.A., and N. Wilson. 1990. Ectoparasitic and phoretic arthropods of Virginia opossums
(Didelphis virginiana) in central Tennessee. Journal of Parasitology 76: 581–583.
Eden, R. 1555. The Decades of the newe worlde or west India, conteynyng the navigations and
conquests of the Spanyardes, with the particular description of the moste ryche and large landes
and Ilandes lately founde in the west Ocean perteynyng to the inheritaunce of the kinges of
Spayne [etc.]. Londini: In aedibus Guilhelmi Powell. [Reprinted and edited by Edward Arber
(1885) in “The first three English books on America” (Edinburgh: Turnbull & Spears).]
Eisenberg, J.F., and D.W. Wilson. 1981. Relative brain size and demographic strategies in didelphid
marsupials. American Naturalist 118: 1–15.
Eiten, G. 1972. The Cerrado vegetation of Brazil. Botanical Review 38: 201–341.
Eldridge, M.D.B., R.M.D. Beck, D.A. Croft, K.J. Travouillon, and B.J. Fox. 2019. An emerging
consensus in the evolution, phylogeny, and systematics of marsupials and their fossil relatives
(Metatheria). Journal of Mammalogy 100: 802–837.
Ellis, R.D., O.J. Pung, and D.J. Richardson. 1999. Site selection by intestinal helminths of the
Virginia opossum (Didelphis virginiana). Journal of Parasitology 85: 1–5.
Elton, C.S. 1973. The structure of invertebrate populations inside Neotropical rain forest. Journal of
Animal Ecology 42: 55–104.
Emerson, K.C., and R.D. Price. 1975. Mallophaga of Venezuelan mammals. Brigham Young
University Science Bulletin (Biol. Ser.) 20(3): 1–77.
Emmons, L.H. 1984. Geographic variation in densities and diversities of non-flying mammals in
Amazonia. Biotropica 16: 210–222.Emmons, L.H. 1987. Comparative feeding ecology of felids in a Neotropical rainforest. Behavioral
Ecology and Sociobiology 20: 271–283.
Emmons, L.H. 1997. Neotropical rainforest mammals (2nd ed.). Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Emmons, L.H. 2000. Tupai: a field study of Bornean treeshrews. Berkeley: University of California
Press.
Emmons, L.H. 2008 (“2007”). Genus Caluromysiops Sanborn, 1951. Pages 11–12 in A.L. Gardner,
ed. Mammals of South America, volume 1. Marsupials, xenarthrans, shrews, and bats. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Emmons, L.H., V. Chávez, N. Rocha, B. Phillips, I. Phillips, L.F. del Aguila, and M.J. Swarner. 2006.
The non-flying mammals of Noel Kempff Mercado National Park (Bolivia). Revista Boliviana de
Ecología y Conservación Ambiental 19: 23–46.
Enders, R.K. 1935. Mammalian life histories from Barro Colorado Island, Panama. Bulletin of the
Museum of Comparative Zoology 78: 385–502, pls. 1–5.
Enders, R.K. 1937. Panniculus carnosus and the formation of the pouch in didelphids. Journal of
Morphology 61: 1–26.
Endler, J.A. 1993. The color of light in forests and its implications. Ecological Monographs 63: 1–27.
Engelman, R.K., and D.A. Croft. 2014. A new species of small-bodied sparassodont (Mammalia:
Metatheria) from the middle Miocene locality of Quebrada Honda, Bolivia. Journal of Vertebrate
Paleontology 34: 672–688.
Estrada, A., R. Coates-Estrada, and C. Vazquez-Yanes. 1984. Observations on fruiting and dispersers
of Cecropia obtusifolia at Los Tuxtlas, Mexico. Biotropica 16: 315–318.
Ewer, R.F. 1968. Ethology of mammals. New York: Plenum Press.
Facure, K.G., and V.N. Ramos. 2011. Food habits of the thick-tailed opossum Lutreolina
crassicaudata (Didelphimorphia, Didelphidae) in two urban areas of southeastern Brazil.
Mammalian Biology 76: 234–236.
Fadem, B.H. 1987. Activation of estrus by pheromones in a marsupial: stimulus control and
endocrine factors. Biology of Reproduction 36: 328–332.
Fadem, B.H., D.B. Kraus, and R.H. Sheffet. 1986. Nest-building in gray short-tailed opossums:
temperature effects and sex differences. Physiology and Behavior 36: 667–670.
Fain, A. 1994. Adaptation, specificity, and host-parasite coevolution in mites (Acari). International
Journal for Parasitology 24: 1273–1283.
Fain, A., A.W.A.M. de Cock, and F.S. Lukoschus. 1972. Parasitic mites of Surinam XVII.
Description and life cycle of Marsupialichus marsupialis sp. n. from Didelphis marsupialis
(Glycyphagidae: Sarcoptiformes). Acarologia 14: 81–93.
Faurby, S., and J.-C. Svenning. 2016. The asymmetry in the Great American Biotic Interchange in
mammals is consistent with differential susceptibility to mammalian predation. Global Ecology
and Biogeography 25: 1443–1453.
Faurby, S., W.L. Eiserhardt, and J.-C. Svenning. 2016. Strong effects of variation in taxonomic
opinion on diversification analyses. Methods in Ecology and Evolution 7: 4–13.
Fedriani, J.M., M. Zywiec, and M. Delibes. 2012. Thieves or mutualists? Pulp feeders enhance
endozoochore local recruitment. Ecology 93: 575–587.
Fenster, C.B., W.S. Armbruster, P. Wilson, M.R. Dudash, and J.D. Thomson. 2004. Pollination
syndromes and floral specialization. Annual Review of Ecology, Evolution, and Systematics 35:
375–403.
Fernandes, F.R., L.D. Cruz, E.G. Martins, and S.F. dos Reis. 2010. Growth and home range size of
the gracile mouse opossum Gracilinanus microtarsus (Marsupialia: Didelphidae) in Brazilian
Cerrado. Journal of Tropical Ecology 26: 185–192.Ferreira, G.A., E. Nakano-Oliveira, G. Genaro, and A.K. Lacerda-Chaves. 2013. Diet of the coati
Nasua nasua (Carnivora: Procyonidae) in an area of woodland inserted in an urban environment
in Brazil. Revista Chilena de Historia Natural 86: 95–102.
Ferreira, M.S., M. Kajin, M.V. Vieira, P.L. Zangrandi, R. Cerqueira, and R. Gentile. 2013. Life
history of a Neotropical marsupial: evaluating potential contributions of survival and reproduction
to population growth rate. Mammalian Biology 78: 406–411.
Ferreira, M.S., M.V. Vieira, R. Cerqueira, and C.R. Dickman. 2016. Seasonal dynamics with
compensatory effects regulate populations of tropical forest marsupials: a 16-year study.
Oecologia 182: 1095–1106.
Ficken, R.W., P.E. Matthiae, and R. Horwich. 1971. Eye marks in vertebrates: aids to vision. Science
173: 936–939.
Finotti, R., R. Cerqueira, and M.V. Vieira. 2018. Frugivory vs. insectivory in marsupials of the
Atlantic Forest: trade-offs in the use of vertical strata. Oecologia Australis 22: 191–200.
Firestein, S. 2001. How the olfactory system makes sense of scents. Nature 413: 211–218.
Fish, F.E. 1993. Comparison of swimming kinematics between terrestrial and semiaquatic opossums.
Journal of Mammalogy 74: 275–284.
Fisher, D.O., I.P.F. Owens, and C.N. Johnson. 2001. The ecological basis of life history variation in
marsupials. Ecology 82: 3531–3540.
Fisher, D.O., M.C. Double, S.P. Blomburg, M.D. Jennions, and A. Cockburn. 2006. Post-mating
sexual selection increases lifetime fitness of polyandrous females in the wild. Nature 444: 89–92.
Fisher, D.O., C.R. Dickman, M.E. Jones, and S.P. Blomberg. 2013. Sperm competition drives the
evolution of suicidal reproduction in mammals. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
110: 17910–17914.
Fitch, H.S., and H.W. Shirer. 1970. A radiotelemetric study of spatial relationships in the opossum.
American Midland Naturalist 84: 170–186.
Fleck, D.W., and J.D. Harder. 1995. Ecology of marsupials in two Amazonian rain forests in
northeastern Peru. Journal of Mammalogy 76: 809–818.
Fleming, T.H. 1972. Aspects of the population dynamics of three species of opossums in the Panama
Canal Zone. Journal of Mammalogy 53: 619–623.
Fleming, T.H. 1973. The reproductive cycles of three species of opossums and other mammals in the
Panama Canal Zone. Journal of Mammalogy 54: 439–455.
Fleming, T.H. 1981. Fecundity, fruiting pattern, and seed dispersal in Piper amalago (Piperaceae), a
bat-dispersed tropical shrub. Oecologia 51: 42–46.
Fleming, T.H. 1986. Opportunism versus specialization: the evolution of feeding strategies in
frugivorous bats. Pages 105–118 in A. Estrada and T.H. Fleming, eds. Frugivores and seed
dispersal. Dordrecht: Dr. W. Junk.
Fleming, T.H., R. Breitwisch, and G.H. Whitesides. 1987. Patterns of tropical vertebrate frugivore
diversity. Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics 18: 91–109.
Fleming, T.H., C. Geiselman, and W.J. Kress. 2009. The evolution of bat pollination: a phylogenetic
perspective. Annals of Botany 104: 1017–1043.
Flores, D.A. 2009. Phylogenetic analyses of postcranial skeletal morphology in didelphid marsupials.
Bulletin of the American Museum of Natural History 320: 1–81.
Flores, D.A., N. Giannini, and F. Abdala. 2018. Evolution of post-weaning skull ontogeny in New
World opossums (Didelphidae). Organisms, Diversity & Evolution 18: 367–382.
Flynn, J.J., and C.C. Swisher, III. 1995. Cenozoic South American land mammal ages: correlations to
global geochronologies. Society for Sedimentary Geology Special Publication 54: 317–333.
Flynn, J.J., R. Charrier, D.A. Croft, and A.R. Wyss. 2012. Cenozoic Andean faunas[:] shedding new
light on South American mammal evolution, biogeography, environments, and tectonics. Pages51–75 in B.D. Patterson and L.P. Costa, eds. Bones, clones, and biomes[:] the history and
geography of Recent Neotropical mammals. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Fogel, R., and J.M. Trappe. 1978. Fungus consumption (mycophagy) by small animals. Northwest
Science 52: 1–31.
Fonseca, G.A.B., and M.C.M. Kierulff. 1989. Biology and natural history of Brazilian Atlantic Forest
small mammals. Bulletin of the Florida State Museum (Biological Sciences) 34: 99–152.
Fontúrbel, F.E., M. Franco, M.A. Rodríguez-Cabal, M. Daniela-Rivarola, and G.C. Amico. 2012.
Ecological consistency across space: a synthesis of the ecological aspects of Dromiciops gliroides
in Argentina and Chile. Naturwissenschaften 99: 873–881.
Forasiepi, A.M. 2009. Osteology of Arctodictis sinclairi (Mammalia, Metatheria, Sparassodonta) and
phylogeny of Cenozoic metatherian carnivores from South America. Monografías del Museo
Argentino de Ciencias Naturales (n.s.) 6: 1–174.
Forasiepi, A.M., F. Goin, and A.G. Martinelli. 2009. Contribution to the knowledge of the
Sparassocynidae (Mammalia, Metatheria, Didelphoidea), with comments on the age of the Aisol
Formation (Neogene), Mendoza Province, Argentina. Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology 29:
1252–1263.
Forasiepi, A.M., M.J. Babot, and N. Zimicz. 2015. Australohyaena antiqua (Mammalia: Metatheria,
Sparassodonta), a large predator from the Late Oligocene of Patagonia. Journal of Systematic
Palaeontology 13: 503–525.
Formoso, A.E., D.E. Udrizar Sauthier, P. Teta, and U.F.J. Pardiñas. 2011. Dense sampling reveals a
complex distributional pattern between the southernmost marsupials Lestodelphys and Thylamys
in Patagonia, Argentina. Mammalia 75: 371–379.
Formoso, A.E., G.M. Martin, P. Teta, A.E. Carbajo, D.E. Udrizar Sauthier, and U.F.J. Pardiñas. 2015.
Regional extinctions and Quaternary shifts in the geographic range of Lestodelphys halli, the
southernmost living marsupial: clues for its conservation. PLoS ONE
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0132130.
Foster, A.O. 1939. Some helminths of the woolly opossum in Panama. Transactions of the American
Microscopical Society 58: 185–198.
Fox, J.W., and S.M.T. Serrano. 2008. Exploring snake venom proteomes: multifaceted analyses for
complex toxin mixtures. Proteomics 8: 909–920.
Fragoso, C., and P. Lavelle. 1992. Earthworm communities of tropical rain forests. Soil Biology and
Biochemistry 24: 1397–1408.
Frailey, C.D., and K.E. Campbell, Jr. 2012. Two new genera of peccaries (Mammalia, Artiodactyla,
Tayassuidae) from upper Miocene deposits of the Amazon Basin. Journal of Paleontology 86:
852–877.
Franq, E.N. 1969. Behavioral aspects of feigned death in the opossum Didelphis marsupialis.
American Midland Naturalist 81: 556–568.
Friedman, H. 1967. Colour vision in the Virginia opossum. Nature 213: 835–836.
Frost, S.B., and R.B. Masterton. 1994. Hearing in primitive mammals: Monodelphis domestica and
Marmosa elegans. Hearing Research 76: 67–72.
Furman, D.P. 1972. Laelapid mites (Laelapidae: Laelapinae) of Venezuela. Brigham Young
University Science Bulletin (Biol. Ser.) 17(3): 1–58.
Gabbert, S.L. 1998. Basicranial anatomy of Herpetotherium (Marsupialia: Didelphimorphia) from
the Eocene of Wyoming. American Museum Novitates 3235: 1–13.
Gabrielsen, G.W., and E.N. Smith. 1985. Physiological responses associated with feigned death in the
American opossum. Acta Physiologica Scandinavica 123: 393–398.
Galliez, M., M.S. Leite, T.L. Queiroz, and F.A.S. Fernandez. 2009. Ecology of the water opossum
Chironectes minimus in Atlantic Forest streams of southeastern Brazil. Journal of Mammalogy 90:93–103.
Gallus, S., A. Janke, V. Kumar, and M.A. Nilsson. 2015. Disentangling the relationship of the
Australian marsupial orders using retrotransposon and evolutionary network analyses. Genome
Biology and Evolution 7(4): 985–992.
Garber, P.A., and L.M. Porter. 2010. The ecology of exudate production and exudate feeding in
Saguinus and Callimico. Pages 89–108 in A.M. Burrows and L.T. Nash, eds. The evolution of
exudativory in Primates. New York: Springer.
García-Márquez, L.J., J.L. Vázquez-García, D. Osorio-Sarabia, V. León-Régagnon, L. García-Prieto,
R. Lamothe-Argumedo, and F. Constantino-Casas. 2010. Lung lesions in opossums (Didelphis
virginiana) naturally infected by Paragonimus mexicanus in Colima, Mexico. Veterinaria México
41: 65–70.
García-Prieto, L., J. Falcón-Ordaz, and C. Guzmán-Cornejo. 2012. Helminth parasites of wild
Mexican mammals: list of species, hosts, and geographical distribution. Zootaxa 3290: 1–92.
Gardner, A.L. 1973. The systematics of the genus Didelphis (Marsupialia: Didelphidae) in North and
Middle America. Special Publications of the Museum of Texas Tech University 4: 1–81.
Gardner, A.L. 1982. Virginia opossum. Pages 3–36 in J.A. Chapman and G.A. Feldhamer, eds. Wild
mammals of North America. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Gardner, A.L. 2008 (“2007”). Mammals of South America, volume 1. Marsupials, xenarthrans,
shrews, and bats. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Garland, T., Jr. 1983. The relation between maximal running speed and body mass in terrestrial
mammals. Journal of Zoology London 199: 157–170.
Garrett, C.M., and D.M. Boyer. 1993. Bufo marinus (cane toad). Predation. Herpetological Review
24: 148.
Gasch, T., M. Schott, C. Wehrenfennig, R.-A. Düring, and A. Vilcinskas. 2013. Multifunctional
weaponry: the chemical defenses of earwigs. Journal of Insect Physiology 59: 1186–1193.
Gatti, A., R. Bianchi, C.R.X. Rosa, and S.L. Mendes. 2006. Diet of two sympatric carnivores,
Cerdocyon thous and Procyon cancrivorus, in a restinga area of Espirito Santo state, Brazil.
Journal of Tropical Ecology 22: 227–230.
Gaunt, M., and M. Miles. 2000. The ecotypes and evolution of triatomine bugs (Triatominae) and
their associated trypanosomes. Memórias do Instituto Oswaldo Cruz 95: 557–565.
Gayot, M., O. Henry, G. Dubost, and D. Sabatier. 2004. Comparative diet of the two forest cervids of
the genus Mazama in French Guiana. Journal of Tropical Ecology 20: 31–43.
Geise, L., and D. Astúa. 2009. Distribution extension and sympatric occurrence of Gracilinanus
agilis and G. microtarsus (Didelphimorphia, Didelphidae), with cytogenetic notes. Biota
Neotropica 9: 269–276.
Geiser, F., and R.M. Brigham. 2012. The other functions of torpor. Pages 109–121 in T. Ruf, C.
Bieber, W. Arnold, and E. Milesi, eds. Living in a seasonal world. Berlin: Springer.
Geiser, F., and G.M. Martin. 2013. Torpor in the Patagonian opossum (Lestodelphys halli):
implications for the evolution of daily torpor. Naturwissenschaften 100: 975–981.
Gelfo, J.N., F.J. Goin, M.O. Woodburne, and C. de Muizon. 2009. Biochronological relationships of
the earliest South American Paleogene mammalian faunas. Palaeontology 52: 251–269.
Gentile, R., P.S. D’Andrea, R. Cerqueira, and L.S. Maroja. 2000. Population dynamics and
reproduction of marsupials and rodents in a Brazilian rural area: a five-year study. Studies of
Neotropical Fauna and Environment 35: 1–9.
Gentles, A.J., M.J. Wakefield, O. Kahany, W. Gu, M.A. Batzer, D.D. Pollock, and J. Jurka. 2007.
Evolutionary dynamics of transposable elements in the short-tailed opossum Monodelphis
domestica. Genome Research 17: 992–1004.Gentry, A.H. 1995. Diversity and floristic composition of Neotropical dry forests. Pages 146–194 in
S.H. Bullock, H.A. Mooney, and E. Medina, eds. Seasonally dry tropical forests. Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.
Gettinger, D., F. Martins-Hitano, M. Lareschi, and J. Malcolm. 2005. Laelapine mites (Acari:
Laelapidae) associated with small mammals from Amazonas, Brazil, including a new species from
marsupials. Journal of Parasitology 91: 45–48.
Giannini, N.P., and E.K.V. Kalko. 2004. Trophic structure in a large assemblage of phyllostomid bats
in Panama. Oikos 105: 209–220.
Giannini, N.P., P. Gaudioso, D.A. Flores, and T.J. Gaudin. 2011. A possible function for an enigmatic
synapomorphy of Didelphis. Mammalian Biology 76: 512–514.
Giarla, T.C., R.S. Voss, and S.A. Jansa. 2010. Species limits and phylogenetic relationships in the
didelphid marsupial genus Thylamys based on mitochondrial DNA sequences and morphology.
Bulletin of the American Museum of Natural History 346: 1–67.
Gill, G.G., Jr., R.T. Fowler, and S.A. Mori. 1998. Pollination biology of Symphonia globulifera
(Clusiaceae) in central French Guiana. Biotropica 30: 139–144.
Gillette, L.N. 1980. Movement patterns of radio-tagged opossums in Wisconsin. American Midland
Naturalist 104: 1–12.
Gittenberger, E. 1991. What about nonadaptive radiations? Biological Journal of the Linnean Society
43: 263–272.
Givnish, T.J. 2015. Adaptive radiation versus “radiation” and “explosive diversification”: why
conceptual distinctions are fundamental to understanding evolution. New Phytologist 207: 297–
303.
Glor, R.E. 2010. Phylogenetic insights on adaptive radiations. Annual Review of Ecology and
Systematics 41: 251–270.
Godfrey, G.K. 1975. A study of oestrus and fecundity in a laboratory colony of mouse opossums
(Marmosa robinsoni). Journal of Zoology London 175: 541–555.
Goeldi, E.A. 1894. Critical gleanings on the Didelphyidae of the Serra dos Orgãos, Brazil.
Proceedings of the Zoological Society of London. 1894: 457–467.
Goin, F.J. 1997. New clues for understanding Neogene marsupial radiations. Pages 187–206 in R.F.
Kay, R.H. Madden, R.L. Cifelli, and J.J. Flynn, eds. Vertebrate paleontology in the Neotropics: the
Miocene fauna of La Venta, Colombia. Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution Press.
Goin, F.J. 2003. Early marsupial radiations in South America. Pages 30–42 in M. Jones, C. Dickman,
and M. Archer, eds. Predators with pouches: the biology of carnivorous marsupials. Collingwood,
Australia: CSIRO Publishing.
Goin, F.J. 2006. A review of the Caroloameghiniidae, Paleogene South American “primate-like”
marsupials (?Didelphimorphia, Peradectoidea). Paleontographica Abteilung A 278: 57–67, pl. 1.
Goin, F.J., and U.F.J. Pardiñas. 1996. Revisión de las especies del género Hyperdidelphys Ameghino,
1904 (Mammalia, Marsupialia, Didelphidae). Su significación filogenética, estratigráfica, y
adaptativa en el Neogeno del Cono Sur suadmericano. Estudios Geológicos 52: 327–359.
Goin, F.J., A.M. Candela, M.A. Abello, and E.V. Oliveira. 2009a. Earliest South America
paucituberculatans and their significance in the understanding of “pseudodiprotodont” marsupial
radiations. Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society 155: 867–884.
Goin, F.J., N. Zimicz, M. de los Reyes, and L. Soibelzon. 2009b. A new large didelphid of the genus
Thylophorops (Mammalia: Didelphimorphia: Didelphidae) from the late Tertiary of the Pampean
Region, Argentina. Zootaxa 2005: 35–46.
Goin, F.J., M.A. Abello, and L. Chornogubsky. 2010. Middle Tertiary marsupials from central
Patagonia (early Oligocene of Gran Barranca): understanding South America’s Grande Coupure.Pages 69–105 in R.H. Madden, A.A. Carlini, M.G. Vucetich, and R.F. Kay, eds. The paleontology
of Gran Barranca. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Goin, F.J., J.N. Gelfo, L. Chornogubsky, M.O. Woodburne, and T. Martin. 2012. Origins, radiations,
and distribution of South American mammals. Pages 20–50 in B.D. Patterson and L.P. Costa, eds.
Bones, clones, and biomes: the history and geography of Recent Neotropical mammals. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Goin, F.J., M.O. Woodburne, A.N. Zimicz, G.M. Martin, and L. Chornogubsky. 2016. A brief history
of South American metatherians: evolutionary contexts and intercontinental dispersals. Dordrecht:
Springer.
Gomes, A.C., G. Lessa, C. Cartelle, and L. Kerber. 2019. New fossil remains of Quaternary
capybaras (Rodentia: Caviomorpha: Caviidae) from the intertropical region of Brazil: morphology
and taxonomy. Journal of South American Earth Sciences 91: 36–46.
Gomes, D.C., R.P. da Cruz, J.J. Vicente, and R.M. Pinto. 2003. Nematode parasites of marsupials and
small rodents from the Brazilian Atlantic Forest in the state of Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. Revista
Brasileira de Zoologia 20: 699–707.
Gómez de Silva, H., M.P. Pérez-Villafaña, and J.A. Santos-Moreno. 1997. Diet of the spectacled owl
(Pulsatrix perspicillata) during the rainy season in northern Oaxaca, Mexico. Journal of Raptor
Research 31: 385–387.
Gómez-Martínez, M.J., A. Gutierrez, and F. DeClerck. 2008. Four-eyed opossum (Philander
opossum) predation on a coral snake. Mammalia 72: 350–351.
González, E.M., and S. Claramunt. 2000. Behaviors of captive short-tailed opossums, Monodelphis
dimidiata (Wagner, 1847) (Didelphimorphia, Didelphidae). Mammalia 64: 271–285.
Goodstadt, L., A. Heger, C. Webber, and C.P. Ponting. 2007. An analysis of the gene complement of a
marsupial, Monodelphis domestica: evolution of lineage-specific genes and giant chromosomes.
Genome Research 17: 969–981.
Goris, R.C. 2011. Infrared organs of snakes: an integral part of vision. Journal of Herpetology 45: 2–
14.
Gould, S.J. 1980. Sticking up for marsupials. Pages 289–295 in S.J. Gould, ed. The panda’s thumb,
more reflections in natural history. New York: W.W. Norton.
Granatosky, M.C., P. Lemelin, S.G.B. Chester, J.D. Pampush, and D. Schmitt. 2014. Functional and
evolutionary aspects of axial stability in euarchontans and other mammals. Journal of Morphology
275: 313–327.
Grand, T.I. 1983. Body weight: its relationship to tissue composition, segmental distribution of mass,
and motor function III. The Didelphidae of French Guiana. Australian Journal of Zoology 31:
299–312.
Grant, R.A., S. Haidarliu, N.J. Kennerley, and T.J. Prescott. 2013. The evolution of active vibrissal
sensing in mammals: evidence from vibrissal musculature and function in the marsupial opossum
Monodelphis domestica. Journal of Experimental Biology 216: 3483–3494.
Granzinolli, M.A.M., and J.C. Motta, Jr. 2006. Small mammal selection by the white-tailed hawk in
southeastern Brazil. Wilson Journal of Ornithology 118: 91–98.
Gray, J.B., and R.C. Anderson. 1982. Observations on Turgida turgida (Rudolphi, 1819) (Nematoda:
Physalopteroidea) in the American opossum (Didelphis virginiana). Journal of Wildlife Diseases
18: 279–285.
Greene, H.W. 1988. Species richness in tropical predators. Pages 259–280 in F. Almeda and C.M.
Pringle, eds. Diversity and conservation of tropical rainforests. San Francisco: California
Academy of Science.
Greene, H.W., and F.M. Jaksic. 1983. Food-niche relationships among sympatric predators: effects of
level of prey identification. Oikos 40: 151–154.Gregory, T., F.C. Rueda, J. Deichmann, J. Kolowski, and A. Alonso. 2014. Arboreal camera trapping:
taking a proven method to new heights. Methods in Ecology and Evolution 5: 443–451.
Gribel, R. 1988. Visits of Caluromys lanatus (Didelphidae) to flowers of Pseudobombax tomentosum
(Bombacaceae): a probable case of pollination by marsupials in central Brazil. Biotropica 20:
344–347.
Gribel, R., P.E. Gibbs, and A.L. Queiróz. 1999. Flowering phenology and pollination biology of
Ceiba pentandra (Bombacaceae) in central Amazonia. Journal of Tropical Ecology 15: 247–263.
Grubb, P.J. 1977. Control of forest growth and distribution on wet tropical mountains: with special
reference to mineral nutrition. Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics 8: 83–107.
Grubb, P.J., J.R. Lloyd, T.D. Pennington, and T.C. Whitmore. 1963. A comparison of montane and
lowland rain forest in Ecuador. I. The forest structure, physiognomy, and floristics. Journal of
Ecology 51: 567–601.
Guariguata, M.R., and R. Ostertag. 2001. Neotropical secondary forest succession: changes in
structural and functional characteristics. Forest Ecology and Management 148: 185–206.
Guglielmone, A.A., S. Nava, and M.M. Díaz. 2011. Relationships of South American marsupials
(Didelphimorphia, Microbiotheria and Paucituberculata) and hard ticks (Acari: Ixodidae) with
distribution of four species of Ixodes. Zootaxa 3086: 1–30.
Guillemin, M.-L., M. Atramentowicz, and D. Julien-Laferrière. 2001. The marsupial community.
Pages 121–128 in F. Bongers, P. Charles-Dominique, P.-M. Forget, and M. Théry, eds. Nouragues:
dynamics and plant-animal interactions in a Neotropical rainforest. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Guillotin, M. 1982. Rythmes d’activité et régimes alimentaires de Proechimys cuvieri et d’Oryzomys
capito velutinus (Rodentia) en forêt Guyanaise. Rev. Ecol. (Terre Vie) 36: 337–371.
Guillotin, M., G. Dubost, and D. Sabatier. 1994. Food choice and food competition among the three
major primate species of French Guiana. Journal of Zoology London 233: 551–579.
Gutierrez, E.A., B.M. Pegoraro, B. Magalhães-Castro, and V.F. Pessoa. 2011. Behavioral evidence of
dichromacy in a species of South American marsupial. Animal Behaviour 81: 1049–1054.
Gutiérrez, E.E., S.A. Jansa, and R.S. Voss. 2010. Molecular systematics of mouse opossums
(Didelphidae: Marmosa): assessing species limits using mitochondrial DNA sequences, with
comments on phylogenetic relationships and biogeography. American Museum Novitates 3692: 1–
22.
Halenar, L.B., and A.L. Rosenberger. 2013. A closer look at the “Protopithecus” fossil assemblages:
new genus and species from Bahia, Brazil. Journal of Human Evolution 65: 374–390.
Hall, E.R., and W.W. Dalquest. 1963. The mammals of Veracruz. University of Kansas Publications
Museum of Natural History 14: 165–362.
Hallé, F., R.A.A. Oldeman, and P.B. Tomlinson. 1978. Tropical trees and forests: an architectural
analysis. Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
Halliday, T.J.D., P. Upchurch, and A. Goswami. 2017. Resolving the relationships of Paleocene
placental mammals. Biological Reviews 92: 521–550.
Hamilton, W.J. 1936. Seasonal food of skunks in New York. Journal of Mammalogy 17: 240–246.
Hamilton, W.J., Jr. 1958. Life history and economic relations of the opossum (Didelphis marsupialis
virginiana) in New York State. Cornell University Agricultural Experimental Station Memoir 354:
1–48.
Hamrick, M.W. 2001. Morphological diversity in digital skin microstructure of didelphid marsupials.
Journal of Anatomy 198: 683–688.
Handley, C.O., Jr. 1976. Mammals of the Smithsonian Venezuelan Project. Brigham Young
University Science Bulletin (biol. ser.) 20(5): 1–89.
Hanson, A.M., M.B. Hall, L.M. Porter, and B. Lintzenich. 2006. Composition and nutritional
characteristics of fungi consumed by Callimico goeldii in Pando, Bolivia. International Journal ofPrimatology 27: 323–346.
Harder, J.D., and D.W. Fleck. 1997. Reproductive ecology of New World marsupials. Pages 175–203
in N. Saunders and L. Hinds, eds. Marsupial biology: recent research, new perspectives. Sydney:
UNSW Press.
Harder, J.D., and L.M. Jackson. 1999. Opossums. Encyclopedia of Reproduction 3: 515–523.
Harder, J.D., and L.M. Jackson. 2010. Chemical communication and reproduction in the gray short￾tailed opossum (Monodelphis domestica). Vitamins and Hormones 83: 373–399.
Hart, B.L. 1992. Behavioral adaptations to parasites: an ethological approach. Journal of Parasitology
78: 256–265.
Hart, S.L., M.M. Spicer, T. Wrynn, T.L. Chapman, and K.L. Spivey. 2019. Palatability and predator
avoidance behavior of salamanders in response to the Virginia opossum (Didelphis virginiana).
American Midland Naturalist 181: 245–258.
Hartman, C.G. 1952. Possums. Austin, TX: University of Texas Press.
Hay, W.W., R.M. DeConto, C.N. Wold, K.M. Wilson, S. Voigt, M. Schulz, A.R. Wold, et al. 1999.
Alternative global Cretaceous paleogeography. Geological Society of America Special Paper 332:
1–47.
Hayden, S., M. Bekaert, T.A. Crider, S. Mariani, W.J. Murphy, and E.C. Teeling. 2010. Ecological
adaptation determines functional mammalian olfactory subgenomes. Genome Research 20: 1–9.
Hayes, R.A., M.R. Crossland, M. Hagman, R.J. Capon, and R. Shine. 2009. Ontogenetic variation in
the chemical defenses of cane toads (Bufo marinus): toxin profiles and effects on predators.
Journal of Chemical Ecology 35: 391–399.
Hayssen, V., and R.C. Lacey. 1985. Basal metabolic rates in mammals: taxonomic differences in the
allometry of BMR and body mass. Comparative Biochemistry and Physiology 81A: 741–754.
Hayward, J.S., and P.A. Lisson. 1992. Evolution of brown fat: its absence in marsupials and
monotremes. Canadian Journal of Zoology 70: 171–179.
Heath, T.A., D.J. Zwickl, J. Kim, and D.M. Hillis. 2008. Taxon sampling affects inferences of
macroevolutionary processes from phylogenetic trees. Systematic Biology 57: 160–166.
Heffner, R.S. 1997. Comparative study of sound localization and its anatomical correlates in
mammals. Acta Otolaryngologica (suppl.) 532: 46–53.
Heffner, R.S., and H.E. Heffner. 1992. Evolution of sound localization in mammals. Pages 691–715
in D.B. Webster, R.R. Fay, and A.N. Popper, eds. The evolutionary biology of hearing. New York:
Springer-Verlag.
Heithaus, E.R., and T.H. Fleming. 1978. Foraging movements of a frugivorous bat, Carollia
perspicillata (Phyllostomatidae). Ecological Monographs 48: 127–143.
Henderson, R.W., and M.J. Pauers. 2012. On the diets of Neotropical treeboas (Squamata: Boidae:
Corallus). South American Journal of Herpetology 7: 172–180.
Henry, O., F. Feer, and D. Sabatier. 2000. Diet of the lowland tapir (Tapirus terrestris L.) in French
Guiana. Biotropica 32: 364–368.
Henry, V.G. 1969. Predation on dummy nests of ground-nesting birds in the southern Appalachians.
Journal of Wildlife Management 33: 169–172.
Hershkovitz, P. 1992. The South American gracile mouse opossums, genus Gracilinanus Gardner and
Creighton, 1989 (Marmosidae, Marsupialia): a taxonomic review with notes on general
morphology and relationships. Fieldiana Zoology (new series) 39: i–vi, 1–56.
Hershkovitz, P. 1999. Dromiciops gliroides Thomas, 1894, last of the Microbiotheria (Marsupialia),
with a review of the family Microbiotheriidae. Fieldiana Zoology (New Series) 93: 1–60.
Hibert, F., D. Sabatier, J. Andrivot, C. Scotti-Saintagne, S. Gonzalez, M.-F. Prévost, P. Grenand, J.
Chave, H. Caron, and C. Richard-Hansen. 2011. Botany, genetics, and ethnobotany: a crossed
investigation on the elusive tapir’s diet in French Guiana. PLoS ONE 6 (10): e25850.Hice, C.L., and P.M. Velazco. 2012. The nonvolant mammals of the Reserva Nacional Allpahuayo￾Mishana, Loreto, Peru. Special Publications of the Museum of Texas Tech University 60: [i–ii], 1–
135.
Hickman, G.C. 1979. The mammalian tail: a review of functions. Mammal Review 9: 143–157.
Hiiemae, K., and A.W. Crompton. 1971. A cinefluorographic study of feeding in the American
opossum, Didelphis marsupialis. Pages 299–334 in A.A. Dahlberg, ed. Dental morphology and
evolution. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Hilário, R.R., and S.F. Ferrari. 2010. Feeding ecology of a group of buffy-headed marmosets
(Callithrix flaviceps): fungi as a preferred food resource. American Journal of Primatology 72:
515–521.
Hildebrand, M. 1961. Body proportions of didelphid (and some other) marsupials, with emphasis on
variability. American Journal of Anatomy 109: 239–249.
Hildebrand, M. 1980. The adaptive significance of tetrapod gait selection. American Zoologist 20:
255–267.
Hingst, E., P.S. D’Andrea, R. Santori, and R. Cerqueira. 1998. Breeding of Philander frenata
(Didelphimorphia, Didelphidae) in captivity. Laboratory Animals 32: 434–438.
Hirsch, B.T. 2009. Seasonal variation in the diet of ring-tailed coatis (Nasua nasua) in Iguazu,
Argentina. Journal of Mammalogy 90: 136–143.
Hoogstraal, H., and K.C. Kim. 1985. Tick and mammal coevolution, with emphasis on
Haemaphysalis. Pages 505–568 in K.C. Kim, ed. Coevolution of parasitic arthropods and
mammals. New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Hopkins, H.C. 1984. Floral biology and pollination ecology of the Neotropical species of Parkia.
Journal of Ecology 72: 1–23.
Horovitz, I., S. Ladevèze, C. Argot, T.E. Macrini, T. Martin, J.J. Hooker, C. Kurz, C. de Muizon, and
M. Sánchez-Villagra. 2008. The anatomy of Herpetotherium cf. fugax Cope, 1873, a metatherian
from the Oligocene of North America. Palaeontographica (Abteilung A) 284: 109–141.
Horovitz, I., T. Martin, J. Bloch, S. Ladevèze, C. Kurz, and M.R. Sánchez-Villagra. 2009. Cranial
anatomy of the earliest marsupials and the origin of opossums. PLoS ONE 4(12): 1-9.
Howe, H.F., and J. Smallwood. 1982. Ecology of seed dispersal. Annual Review of Ecology and
Systematics 13: 201–228.
Hsu, M.J., D.W. Garton, and J.D. Harder. 1999. Energetics of offspring production: a comparison of a
marsupial (Monodelphis domestica) and a eutherian (Mesocricetus auratus). Journal of
Comparative Physiology B 169: 67–76.
Huck, M., C.P. Juarez, M.A. Rotundo, V.M. Dávalos, and E. Fernandez-Duque. 2017a. Mammals and
their activity patterns in a forest area in the Humid Chaco, northern Argentina. Check List 13:
363–378.
Huck, M., C.P. Juárez, and E. Fernández-Duque. 2017b. Relationship between moonlight and nightly
activity patterns of the ocelot (Leopardus pardalis) and some of its prey species in Formosa,
northern Argentina. Mammalian Biology 82: 57–64.
Hudson, W.H. 1892. The naturalist in La Plata. London: Chapman and Hall.
Hume, I.D. 1999. Marsupial nutrition. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Humphreys, R.K., and G.D. Ruxton. 2018. A review of thanatosis (death feigning) as an anti-predator
behaviour. Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology 72(22): 1–16.
Hunsaker, D., III. 1977. The biology of marsupials. New York: Academic Press.
Hunt, D.M., J. Chan, L.S. Carvalho, J.N. Hokoc, M.C. Ferguson, C.A. Arrese, and L.D. Beazley.
2009. Cone visual pigments in two species of South American marsupials. Gene 433: 50–55.
Hunt, G., and G. Slater. 2016. Integrating paleontological and phylogenetic approaches to
macroevolution. Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics 47: 189–213.Ibarra-Cerdeña, C., V. Sánchez-Cordero, P. Ibarra-López, and L.I. Iñiguez-Dávalos. 2007.
Noteworthy record of Musonycteris harrisoni and Tlacuatzin canescens pollinating a columnar
cactus in west-central Mexico. International Journal of Zoological Research 3: 223–226.
Izor, R.J. 1985. Sloths and other mammalian prey of the harpy eagle. Pages 343–346 in G.G.
Montgomery, ed. The evolution and ecology of armadillos, sloths, and vermilinguas. Washington,
DC: Smithsonian Institution Press.
Izor, R.J., and R.H. Pine. 1987. Notes on the black-shouldered opossum, Caluromysiops irrupta.
Fieldiana Zoology (New Series) 39: 117–124.
Jackson, J.B.C., and A. O’Dea. 2013. Timing of the oceanographic and biological isolation of the
Caribbean Sea from the tropical eastern Pacific Ocean. Bulletin of Marine Science 89: 779–800.
Jacobs, G.H. 2009. Evolution of colour vision in mammals. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society B 364: 2957–2967.
Jacobs, G.H. 2010. Recent progress in understanding mammalian color vision. Ophthalmic and
Physiological Optics 30: 422–434.
Jacobs, G.H., and M.P. Rowe. 2004. Evolution of vertebrate colour vision. Clinical and Experimental
Optometry 87 (4–5): 206–216.
Jacobs, G.H., and G.A. Williams. 2010. Cone pigments in a North American marsupial, the opossum
(Didelphis virginiana). Journal of Comparative Physiology A 196: 379–384.
Jaksic, F.M., H.W. Greene, and J.L. Yanez. 1981. The guild structure of a community of predatory
vertebrates in central Chile. Oecologia 49: 21–28.
Jaksic, F.M., P.L. Meserve, J.R. Gutierrez, and E.L. Tabilo. 1993. The components of predation on
small mammals in semiarid Chile: preliminary results. Revista Chilena de Historia Natural 66:
305–321.
Janos, D.P., C.T. Sahley, and L.H. Emmons. 1995. Rodent dispersal of vesicular-arbuscular
mycorrhizal fungi in Amazonian Peru. Ecology 76: 1852–1858.
Jansa, S.A., and R.S. Voss. 2005. Phylogenetic relationships of the marsupial genus Hyladelphys
based on nuclear gene sequences and morphology. Journal of Mammalogy 86: 853–865.
Jansa, S.A., and R.S. Voss. 2011. Adaptive evolution of the venom-targeted vWF protein in opossums
that eat pitvipers. PLoS ONE 6(6): e20997.
Jansa, S.A., F.K. Barker, and R.S. Voss. 2014. The early diversification history of didelphid
marsupials: a window into South America’s “splendid isolation.” Evolution 68: 684–695.
Jansen, A.M., S.C.C. Xavier, and A.L.R. Roque. 2015. The multiple and complex and changeable
scenarios of the Trypanosoma cruzi transmission cycle in the sylvatic environment. Acta Tropica
151: 1–15.
Janson, C.H., and L.H. Emmons. 1990. Ecological structure of the nonflying mammal community at
Cocha Cashu Biological Station, Manu National Park, Peru. Pages 314–338 in A.H. Gentry, ed.
Four Neotropical rainforests. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Janson, C.H., J. Terborgh, and L.H. Emmons. 1981. Non-flying mammals as pollinating agents in the
Amazonian forest. Biotropica 13(2, suppl.): 1–6.
Janzen, D.H. 1973a. Sweep samples of tropical foliage insects: effects of seasons, vegetation types,
elevation, time of day, and insularity. Ecology 54: 687–708.
Janzen, D.H. 1973b. Rate of regeneration after a tropical high elevation fire. Biotropica 5: 117–122.
Janzen, D.H., M. Ataroff, M. Fariñas, S. Reyes, N. Rincon, A. Soler, P. Soriano, and M. Vera. 1976.
Changes in the arthropod community along an elevational transect in the Venezuelan Andes.
Biotropica 8: 193–203.
Jenkins, F.A., Jr. 1971. Limb posture and locomotion in the Virginia opossum (Didelphis
marsupialis) and in other non-cursorial mammals. Journal of Zoology London 165: 303–315.Jenkins, F.A., Jr., and D. McClearn. 1984. Mechanisms of hind foot reversal in climbing mammals.
Journal of Morphology 182: 197–219.
Jerison, H.J. 1973. Evolution of the brain and intelligence. New York: Academic Press.
Jerison, H.J. 1985. Animal intelligence as encephalization. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society of London B 308: 21–35.
Jiménez, F.A., J.K. Braun, M.L. Campbell, and S.L. Gardner. 2008. Endoparasites of fat-tailed mouse
opossums (Thylamys: Didelphidae) from northwestern Argentina and southern Bolivia, with the
description of a new species of tapeworm. Journal of Parasitology 94: 1098–1102.
Jiménez, F.A., F. Catzeflis, and S.L. Gardner. 2011. Structure of parasite component communities of
didelphid marsupials: insights from a comparative study. Journal of Parasitology 97: 779–787.
Johansen, K. 1962. Buoyancy and insulation in the muskrat. Journal of Mammalogy 43: 64–68.
Johnson, J.I., Jr. 1977. Central nervous system of marsupials. Pages 157–278 in D. Hunsaker, III, ed.
The biology of marsupials. New York: Academic Press.
Johnson, M.A., P.M. Saraiva, and D. Coelho. 1999. The role of gallery forests in the distribution of
Cerrado mammals. Revista Brasileira de Biologia 59: 421–427.
Jones, E.K., and C.M. Clifford. 1972. The systematics of the subfamily Ornithodorinae (Acarina:
Argasidae). V. A revised key to larval Argasidae of the western hemisphere and description of
seven new species of Ornithodoros. Annals of the Entomological Society of America 65: 730–
740.
Jones, E.K., C.M. Clifford, J.E. Keirans, and G.M. Kohls. 1972. The ticks of Venezuela (Acarina:
Ixodoidea) with a key to the species of Amblyomma in the western hemisphere. Brigham Young
University Science Bulletin (Biol. Ser.) 17(4): 1–40.
Jordano, P. 2000. Fruits and frugivory. Pages 125–164 in M. Fenner, ed. Seeds: the ecology of
regeneration in plant communities (2nd ed.). Wallingford, UK: CABI Publishing.
Julien-Laferrière, D. 1991. Organisation du peuplement de marsupiaux en Guyane française. Revue
d’Ecologie (La Terre et la Vie) 46: 125–144.
Julien-Laferrière, D. 1995. Use of space by the woolly opossum Caluromys philander (Marsupialia,
Didelphidae) in French Guiana. Canadian Journal of Zoology 73: 1280–1289.
Julien-Laferrière, D. 1997. The influence of moonlight on activity of woolly opossums (Caluromys
philander). Journal of Mammalogy 78: 251–255.
Julien-Laferrière, D., and M. Atramentowicz. 1990. Feeding and reproduction of three didelphid
marsupials in two Neotropical forests (French Guiana). Biotropica 22: 404–415.
Julien-Laferrière, J. 1999. Foraging strategies and food partitioning in the Neotropical frugivorous
mammals Caluromys philander and Potos flavus. Journal of Zoology London 247: 71–80.
Julien-Laferrière, J. 2001. Frugivory and seed dispersal by kinkajous. Pages 217–225 in F. Bongers,
P. Charles-Dominique, P.-M. Forget, and M. Théry, eds. Nouragues, dynamics and plant-animal
interactions in a Neotropical rainforest. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic.
Jurgelski, W., Jr., and M.E. Porter. 1974. The opossum (Didelphis virginiana Kerr) as a biomedical
model. III. Breeding the opossum in captivity: methods. Laboratory Animal Science 24: 412–425.
Jurgilas, P.B., A.G.C. Neves-Ferreira, G.B. Domont, and J. Perales. 2003. PO41, a snake venom
metalloproteinase inhibitor isolated from Philander opossum serum. Toxicon 42: 621–628.
Kajin, M., R. Cerqueira, M.V. Vieira, and R. Gentile. 2008. Nine-year demography of the black-eared
opossum Didelphis aurita (Didelphimorphia: Didelphidae) using life tables. Revista Brasileira de
Zoologia 25: 206–213.
Kalka, M., and E.K.V. Kalko. 2006. Gleaning bats as underestimated predators of herbivorous
insects: diet of Micronycteris microtis (Phyllostomidae) in Panama. Journal of Tropical Ecology
22: 1–10.Kamler, J.E., and P.S. Gipson. 2004. Survival and cause-specific mortality among furbearers in a
protected area. American Midland Naturalist 151: 27–34.
Kanda, L.L., T.K. Fuller, P.R. Sievert, and R.L. Kellogg. 2009. Seasonal source-sink dynamics at the
edge of a species’ range. Ecology 90: 1574–1585.
Kasparian, M.A., E.C. Hellgren, and S.M. Ginger. 2002. Food habits of the Virginia opossum during
raccoon removal in the Cross Timbers Ecoregion, Oklahoma. Proceedings of the Oklahoma
Academy of Sciences 82: 73–78.
Kasparian, M.A., E.C. Hellgren, S.M. Ginger, L.P. Levesque, J.E. Clark, and D.L. Winkelman. 2004.
Population characteristics of Virginia opossum in the Cross Timbers during raccoon reduction.
American Midland Naturalist 151: 154–163.
Kaufman, D.W. 1974. Adaptive coloration in Peromyscus polionotus: experimental selection by owls.
Journal of Mammalogy 55: 271–283.
Kaufmann, J.H. 1962. Ecology and social behavior of the coati, Nasua narica, on Barro Colorado
Island, Panama. University of California Publications in Zoology 60: 95–222.
Kavaliers, M., and D.D. Colwell. 1995. Discrimination by female mice between the odours of
parasitized and non-parasitized males. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London B 261: 31–35.
Kay, R.F., and E.C. Kirk. 2000. Osteological evidence for the evolution of activity pattern and visual
acuity in primates. American Journal of Physical Anthropology 113: 235–262.
Kay, R.F., and R.H. Madden. 1997. Paleogeography and paleoecology. Pages 520–550 in R.F. Kay,
R.H. Madden, R.L. Cifelli, and J.J. Flynn, eds. Vertebrate paleontology in the Neotropics: the
Miocene fauna of La Venta, Colombia. Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution Press.
Kay, R.F., R.H. Madden, C. van Shaik, and D. Higdon. 1997a. Primate species richness is determined
by plant productivity: implications for conservation. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences USA 94: 13023–13027.
Kay, R.F., R.H. Madden, R.L. Cifelli, and J.J. Flynn (eds.). 1997b. Vertebrate paleontology in the
Neotropics: the Miocene fauna of La Venta, Colombia. Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution
Press.
Kay, R.F., S.F. Vizcaíno, and M.S. Bargo. 2012. A review of the paleoenvironment and paleoecology
of the Miocene Santa Cruz Formation. Pages 331–365 in S.F. Vizcaíno, R.F. Kay, and M.S. Bargo,
eds. Early Miocene paleobiology in Patagonia: high-latitude paleocommunities of the Santa Cruz
Formation. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Kays, R.W. 1999. Food preferences of kinkajous (Potos flavus): a frugivorous carnivore. Journal of
Mammalogy 80: 589–599.
Kays, R.W. 2000. The behavior and ecology of olingos (Bassaricyon gabbii) and their competition
with kinkajous (Potos flavus). Mammalia 64: 1–10.
Kays, R.W., M.E. Rodríguez, L.M. Valencia, R. Horan, A.R. Smith, and C. Ziegler. 2012. Animal
visitation and pollination of flowering balsa trees (Ochroma pyramidale) in Panama.
Mesoamericana 16: 56–70.
Kearn, G.C. 1998. Parasitism and the platyhelminths. London: Chapman & Hall.
Keesing, F., J. Brunner, S. Duerr, M. Killilea, K. LoGiudice, K. Schmidt, H. Vuong, and R.S. Ostfeld.
2009. Hosts as ecological traps for the vector of Lyme disease. Proceedings of the Royal Society
B 276: 3911–3919.
Kennedy, M.L., G.D. Schnell, M.L. Romero-Almaraz, B.S. Malakouti, C. Sánchez-Hernández, T.L.
Best, and M.C. Wooten. 2013. Demographic features, distribution, and habitat selection of the
gray mouse opossum (Tlacuatzin canescens) in Colima, Mexico. Acta Theriologica 58: 285–298.
Kerber, L., E.L. Mayer, A.M. Ribeiro, and M.G. Vucetich. 2016. Late Quaternary caviomorph
rodents (Rodentia: Hystricognathi) from the Serra da Capivara, northeastern Brazil, with
descriptions of a new taxon. Historical Biology 28: 439–458.Kielan-Jaworowska, Z., R.L. Cifelli, and Z.-X. Luo. 2004. Mammals from the age of dinosaurs. New
York: Columbia Univ. Press.
Killeen, T.J., A. Jardim, F. Mamani, and N. Rojas. 1998. Diversity, composition, and structure of a
tropical semideciduous forest in the Chiquitanía region of Santa Cruz, Bolivia. Journal of Tropical
Ecology 14: 803–827.
Kiltie, R.A. 2000. Scaling of visual acuity with body size in mammals and birds. Functional Ecology
14: 226–234.
Kimble, D.P. 1997. Didelphid behavior. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews 21: 361–369.
Kimmel, T.M., L.M. do Nascimento, D. Piechowski, E.V.S.B. Sampaio, M.J.N. Rodal, and G.
Gottsberger. 2010. Pollination and seed dispersal modes of woody species of 12-year-old
secondary forest in the Atlantic Forest region of Pernambuco, NE Brazil. Flora 205: 540–547.
Kirkendall, L.R., and N.C. Stenseth. 1985. On defining “breeding once.” American Naturalist 125:
189–204.
Kissell, R.E., and M.L. Kennedy. 1992. Ecologic relationships of co-occurring populations of
opossums (Didelphis virginiana) and raccoons (Procyon lotor) in Tennessee. Journal of
Mammalogy 73: 808–813.
Kitchings, J.T., and B.T. Walton. 1991. Fauna of the North American temperate deciduous forest.
Pages 345–375 in E. Röhrig and B. Ulrich, eds. Temperate deciduous forests (Ecosystems of the
world, vol. 7). Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Klein, B.C., L.H. Harper, R.O. Bierregaard, and G.V.N. Powell. 1988. The nesting and feeding
behavior of the ornate hawk-eagle near Manaus, Brazil. Condor 90: 239–241.
Kluge, A.G. 1981. The life history, social organization, and parental behavior of Hyla rosenbergi
Boulenger, a nest-building gladiator frog. Miscellaneous Publications Museum of Zoology
University of Michigan 100: 1–170.
Kolb, H., and H.H. Wang. 1985. The distribution of photoreceptors, dopaminergic amacrine cells,
and ganglion cells in the retina of the North American opossum (Didelphis virginiana). Vision
Research 25: 1207–1209.
Konecny, M.J. 1989. Movement patterns and food habits of four sympatric carnivore species in
Belize, Central America. Pages 243–264 in K.H. Redford and J.F. Eisenberg, eds. Advances in
Neotropical mammalogy. Gainesville, FL: Sandhill Crane Press.
Kraaijeveld, K., F.J.L. Kraaijeveld-Smit, and G.J. Adcock. 2003. Does female mortality drive male
semelparity in dasyurid marsupials? Proceedings of the Royal Society of London B (suppl.) 270:
S251–S253.
Kress, W.J., and D.E. Stone. 1993. Morphology and floral biology of Phenakospermum
(Strelitziaceae), an arborescent herb of the Neotropics. Biotropica 25: 290–300.
Kurz, C. 2007. The opossum-like marsupials (Didelphimorphia and Peradectia, Marsupialia,
Mammalia) from the Eocene of Messel and Geiseltal—ecomorphology, diversity, and
palaeogeography. Kaupia 15: 3–65.
Labruna, M.B., R.R. Cabrera, and A. Pinter. 2009. Life cycle of Ixodes luciae (Acari: Ixodidae) in the
laboratory. Parasitology Research 105: 1749–1753.
Lainson, R. 2010. The Neotropical Leishmania species: a brief historical review of their discovery,
ecology and taxonomy. Revista Pan-Amazônica de Saúde 1(2): 13–32.
Lambert, T.D., J.R. Malcolm, and B.L. Zimmerman. 2005. Variation in small mammal species
richness by trap height and trap type in southeastern Amazonia. Journal of Mammalogy 86: 982–
990.
Lammers, A.R., and A.R. Biknevicius. 2004. The biodynamics of arboreal locomotion: the effects of
substrate diameter on locomotor kinetics in the gray short-tailed opossum (Monodelphis
domestica). Journal of Experimental Biology 207: 4325–4336.Lareschi, M., J.P. Sanchez, M. C. Ezquiaga, A.G. Autino, M.M. Díaz, and R.M. Barquez. 2010. Fleas
associated with mammals from northwestern Argentina, with new distributional reports.
Comparative Parasitology 77: 207–213.
Laurance, S.G., and W.E. Laurance. 2007. Chaunus marinus (cane toad). Predation. Herpetological
Review 38: 320–321.
Laver, P.N., and M.J. Kelly. 2008. A critical review of home range studies. Journal of Wildlife
Management 72: 290–298.
Lawson Handley, L.J., and N. Perrin. 2007. Advances in our understanding of mammalian sex-biased
dispersal. Molecular Ecology 16: 1559–1578.
Lee, C.H., D.K. Jones, C. Ahern, M.F. Sarhan, and P.C. Ruben. 2011. Biophysical costs associated
with tetrodotoxin resistance in the sodium channel pore of the garter snake, Thamnophis sirtalis.
Journal of Comparative Physiology A 197: 33–54.
Leigh, E.G., A. O’Dea, and G.J. Vermeij. 2014. Historical biogeography of the Isthmus of Panama.
Biological Reviews 89: 148–172.
Leiner, N.O., and W.R. Silva. 2007a. Effects of resource availability on the use of space by the mouse
opossum Marmosops paulensis (Didelphidae) in a montane Atlantic Forest area in southeastern
Brazil. Acta Theriologica 52: 197–204.
Leiner, N.O., and W.R. Silva. 2007b. Seasonal variation in the diet of the Brazilian slender opossum
(Marmosops paulensis) in a montane Atlantic Forest area, southeastern Brazil. Journal of
Mammalogy 88: 158–164.
Leiner, N.O., and W.R. Silva. 2009. Territoriality in females of the slender opossum (Marmosops
paulensis) in the Atlantic Forest of Brazil. Journal of Tropical Ecology 25: 671–675.
Leiner, N.O., E.Z.F. Setz, and W.R. Silva. 2008. Semelparity and factors affecting the reproductive
activity of the Brazilian slender opossum (Marmosops paulensis) in southeastern Brazil. Journal
of Mammalogy 89: 153–158.
Leiner, N.O., C.R. Dickman, and W.R. Silva. 2010. Multiscale habitat selection by slender opossums
(Marmosops spp.) in the Atlantic Forest of Brazil. Journal of Mammalogy 91: 561–565.
Leite, M.S., T.L. Queiroz, M. Galliez, P.P. de Mendonça, and F.A.S. Fernandez. 2013. Activity
patterns of the water opossum Chironectes minimus in Atlantic Forest rivers of south-eastern
Brazil. Journal of Tropical Ecology 29: 261–264.
Leite, M.S., M. Galliez, T.L. Queiroz, and F.A.S. Fernandez. 2016. Spatial ecology of the water
opossum Chironectes minimus in Atlantic Forest streams. Mammalian Biology 81: 480–487.
Leite, Y.L.R., L.P. Costa, and J.R. Stallings. 1996. Diet and vertical space use of three sympatric
opossums in a Brazilian Atlantic Forest reserve. Journal of Tropical Ecology 12: 435–440.
Lemelin, P. 1999. Morphological correlates of substrate use in didelphid marsupials: implications for
primate origins. Journal of Zoology London 247: 165–175.
Lemelin, P., and D. Schmitt. 2007. Origins of grasping and locomotor adaptations in primates:
comparative and experimental approaches using an opossum model. Pages 329–380 in M.J.
Ravosa and M. Dagosto, eds. Primate origins: adaptations and evolution. New York: Springer.
Lemelin, P., D. Schmitt, and M. Cartmill. 2003. Footfall patterns and interlimb co-ordination in
opossums (family Didelphidae): evidence for the evolution of diagonal-sequence walking gates in
primates. Journal of Zoology London 260: 423–429.
Lenzi, H.L., A.M. Jansen, and M.P. Deane. 1984. The recent discovery of what might be a primordial
escape mechanism for Trypanosoma cruzi. Memórias do Instituto Oswaldo Cruz (supl.) 79: 13–
18.
Leone, M.F., A.C. Loss, R.G. Rocha, R.D. Paes, and L.P. Costa. 2019. To stripe or not to stripe?
Natural selection and disruptive coloration in two sympatric species of Neotropical marsupialsfrom the genus Monodelphis (Mammalia, Didelphidae). Boletim da Sociedade Brasileira de
Mastozoologia 85: 86–94.
Lessa, E.P., and R.A. Fariña. 1996. Reassessment of extinction patterns among the late Pleistocene
mammals of South America. Palaeontology 39: 651–662.
Lessa, E.P., B. van Valkenburgh, and R.A. Fariña. 1997. Testing hypotheses of differential
mammalian extinctions subsequent to the Great American Biotic Interchange. Palaeogeography,
Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology 135: 157–162.
Lessa, L.G., and F.N. da Costa. 2010. Diet and seed dispersal by five marsupials (Didelphimorphia:
Didelphidae) in a Brazilian cerrado reserve. Mammalian Biology 75: 10–16.
Lessa, L.G., and L. Geise. 2014. Food habits and carnivory by a small size opossum, Gracilinanus
agilis (Didelphimorphia: Didelphidae). Mastozoología Neotropical 21: 139–143.
Lessa, L.G., L. Geise, and F.N. da Costa. 2013. Effects of gut passage on the germination of seeds
ingested by didelphid marsupials in a Neotropical savanna. Acta Botanica Brasilica 27: 519–525.
Levey, D.J. 1990. Habitat-dependent fruiting behaviour of an understorey tree, Miconia centrodesma,
and tropical treefall gaps as keystone habitats for frugivores in Costa Rica. Journal of Tropical
Ecology 6: 409–420.
Levey, D.J., T.C. Moermond, and J.S. Denslow. 1994. Frugivory: an overview. Pages 282–294 in
L.A. McDade, K.S. Bawa, H.A. Hespenheide, and G.S. Hartshorn, eds. La Selva, ecology and
natural history of a Neotropical rainforest. Chicago: Chicago University Press.
Levings, S.C., and D.M. Windsor. 1996. Seasonal and annual variation in litter arthropod
populations. Pages 355–387 in E.G. Leigh, Jr., A.S. Rand, and D.M. Windsor, eds. The ecology of
a tropical forest (2nd ed.). Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution.
Lieberman, D., M. Lieberman, R. Peralta, and G.S. Hartshorn. 1996. Tropical forest structure and
composition on a large-scale altitudinal gradient in Costa Rica. Journal of Ecology 84: 137–152.
Liem, K.F. 1980. Adaptive significance of intra- and interspecific differences in the feeding
repertoires of cichlid fishes. American Zoologist 20: 295–314.
Lima, B.S., F. Dantas-Torres, M.R. de Carvalho, J.F. Marinho-Junior, E.L. de Almeida, M.E.F. Brito,
F. Gomes, and S.P. Brandão-Filho. 2013. Small mammals as hosts of Leishmania spp. in a highly
endemic area for zoonotic leishmaniasis in north-eastern Brazil. Transactions of the Royal Society
of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene 107: 592–597.
Lima, M., N.C. Stenseth, N.G. Yoccoz, and F.M. Jaksic. 2001. Demography and population dynamics
of the mouse opossum (Thylamys elegans) in semi-arid Chile: seasonality, feedback structure, and
climate. Proceedings of the Royal Society B 268: 2053–2064.
Lima, R.B.S., P.A. Oliveira, and A.G. Chiarello. 2010. Diet of the thin-spined porcupine (Chaetomys
subspinosus), an Atlantic Forest endemic threatened with extinction in southeastern Brazil.
Mammalian Biology 75: 538–546.
Linardi, P.M. 2006. Os ectoparasitos de marsupiais brasileiros. Pages 35–52 in N.C. Cáceres and
E.L.A. Monteiro-Filho, eds. Os marsupiais do Brasil. Campo Grande: Editora UFMS.
Lindenfors, P., J.L. Gittleman, and K.E. Jones. 2007. Sexual size dimorphism in mammals. Pages 16–
26 in D.J. Fairbairn, W.U. Blanckenhorn, and T. Székely, eds. Sex, size, and gender roles:
evolutionary studies of sexual size dimorphism. New York: Oxford University Press.
Lira, P.K., and F.A.S. Fernandez. 2009. A comparison of trapping- and telemetry-based estimates of
home range of the Neotropical opossum Philander frenatus. Mammalian Biology 74: 1–8.
Lira, P.K., A.S. Pires, H.S.A. Carlos, P.L. Curzio, and F.A.S. Fernandez. 2018. Resting sites of
opossums (Didelphimorphia, Didelphidae) in Atlantic Forest fragments. Mammalia 82: 62–64.
Lobova, T.A., C.K. Geiselman, and S.A. Mori. 2009. Seed dispersal by bats in the Neotropics.
Memoirs of the New York Botanical Garden 101: i–xii, 1–471.Loo, S.-K., and Z. Halata. 1991. Innervation of hairs in the facial skin of marsupial mammals.
Journal of Anatomy 174: 207–219.
Lopes, G.P., and N.O. Leiner. 2015. Semelparity in a population of Gracilinanus agilis
(Didelphimorphia: Didelphidae) inhabiting the Brazilian Cerrado. Mammalian Biology 80: 1–6.
Lopes-Torres, E.J., A. Maldonado, Jr., and R. Marisa-Lanfredi. 2009. Spirurids from Gracilinanus
agilis (Marsupialia: Didelphidae) in Brazilian Pantanal wetlands, with a new species of
Physaloptera (Nematoda: Spirurida). Veterinary Parasitology 163: 87–92.
López-Aguirre, C.L., S.J. Hand, S.W. Laffan, and M. Archer. 2018. Phylogenetic diversity, types of
endemism, and the evolutionary history of New World bats. Ecography 41: 1955–1966.
López-Arévalo, H., O. Montenegro-Díaz, and A. Cadena. 1993. Ecología de los pequeños mamíferos
de la Reserva Biológica Carpanta, en la Cordillera Oriental colombiana. Studies on Neotropical
Fauna and Environment 28: 193–210.
Loretto, D., and M.V. Vieira. 2008. Use of space by the marsupial Marmosops incanus
(Didelphimorphia, Didelphidae) in the Atlantic Forest, Brazil. Mammalian Biology 73: 255–261.
Loretto, D., and M.V. Vieira. 2011. Artificial nests as an alternative to studies of arboreal small
mammal populations: a five-year study in the Atlantic Forest, Brazil. Zoologia 28: 388–394.
Loretto, D., E. Ramalho, and M.V. Vieira. 2005. Defense behavior and nest architecture of
Metachirus nudicaudatus Desmarest, 1817 (Marsupialia, Didelphidae). Mammalia 69: 417–419.
Lorini, M.L., J.A. de Oliveira, and V.G. Persson. 1994. Annual age structure and reproductive
patterns in Marmosa incana (Lund, 1841) (Didelphidae, Marsupialia). Zeitshrift für
Säugetierkunde 59: 65–73.
Losos, J.B., R.E. Glor, J.J. Kolbe, and K. Nicholson. 2006. Adaptation, speciation, and convergence:
a hierarchical analysis of adaptive radiation in Caribbean Anolis lizards. Annals of the Missouri
Botanical Gardens 93: 24–33.
Loughry, W.J., and C.M. McDonough. 2013. The nine-banded armadillo: a natural history. Norman,
OK: University of Oklahoma Press.
Lukeš, J., T. Skalický, J. Týč, J. Votýpka, and V. Yurchenko. 2014. Evolution of parasitism in
kinetoplastid flagellates. Molecular & Biochemical Parasitology 195: 115–122.
Lunaschi, L.I., and F.B. Drago. 2007. Checklist of digenean parasites of wild mammals from
Argentina. Zootaxa 1580: 35–50.
Lunde, D.P., and W.A. Schutt. 1999. The peculiar carpal tubercles of male Marmosops parvidens and
Marmosa robinsoni (Didelphidae: Didelphinae). Mammalia 63: 495–504.
Luo, Z.-X., Q. Ji, J.R. Wible, and C.-X. Yuan. 2003. An Early Cretaceous tribosphenic mammal and
metatherian evolution. Science 302: 1934–1940.
Lutz, N.D., E. Lemes, L. Krubitzer, S.P. Collin, S. Haverkamp, and L. Peichl. 2018. The rod
signaling pathway in marsupial retinae. PLoS ONE 13(8): e0202089.
Lydekker, R. 1894. A hand-book to the Marsupialia and Monotremata. London: W.H. Allen & Co.
Lyne, A.G. 1959. The systematic and adaptive significance of the vibrissae in the Marsupialia.
Proceedings of the Zoological Society of London 133: 79–132.
MacArthur, R.H. 1972. Geographical ecology: patterns in the distribution of species. New York:
Harper and Row.
Macedo, L., F.A.S. Fernandez, J.L. Nessimian. 2010. Feeding ecology of the marsupial Philander
frenatus in a fragmented landscape in southeastern Brazil. Mammalian Biology 75: 363–369.
MacFadden, B.J. 2006. Extinct mammalian biodiversity of the ancient New World. Trends in
Ecology & Evolution 21: 157–165.
Mackessy, S.P. 2010. The field of reptile toxinology: snakes, lizards, and their venoms. Pages 3–23 in
S.P. Mackessy, ed. Handbook of venoms and toxins of reptiles. Boca Raton: CRC Press.MacMillen, R.E., and J.E. Nelson. 1969. Bioenergetics and body size in dasyurid marsupials.
American Journal of Physiology 217: 1246–1251.
Macrini, T.E. 2012. Comparative morphology of the internal nasal skeleton of adult marsupials based
on X-ray computed tomography. Bulletin of the American Museum of Natural History 365: 1–91.
Maga, A.M., and R.M.D. Beck. 2017. Skeleton of an unusual, cat-sized marsupial relative
(Metatheria: Marsupialiformes) from the middle Eocene (Lutetian: 44–43 million years ago) of
Turkey. PLoS ONE 12(8): e0181712.
Magnusson, W.E., E.V. da Silva, and A.P. Lima. 1987. Diets of Amazonian crocodilians. Journal of
Herpetology 21: 85–95.
Malcolm, J.R. 1990. Estimation of mammalian densities in continuous forest north of Manaus. Pages
339–357 in A.H. Gentry, ed. Four Neotropical rainforests. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Malcolm, J.R. 1991. Comparative abundances of Neotropical small mammals by trap height. Journal
of Mammalogy 72: 188–192.
Mangan, S.A., and G.H. Adler. 2000. Consumption of arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi by terrestrial and
arboreal small mammals in a Panamanian cloud forest. Journal of Mammalogy 81: 563–570.
Mangan, S.A., and G.H. Adler. 2002. Seasonal dispersal of arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi by spiny
rats in a Neotropical forest. Oecologia 131: 587–597.
Mani, M.S. 1968. Ecology and biogeography of high altitude insects (Series Entomologica 4). The
Hague: Dr. W. Junk.
Mann, G. 1978. Los pequeños mamíferos de Chile. Gayana (Zoología) 40: 1–342.
Mares, M.A., J.K. Braun, and D. Gettinger. 1989. Observations on the distribution and ecology of the
mammals of the Cerrado grasslands of central Brazil. Annals of Carnegie Museum 58: 1–60.
Marshall, A.J., and R.W. Wrangham. 2007. Evolutionary consequences of fallback foods.
International Journal of Primatology 28: 1219–1235.
Marshall, L.G. 1978a. Lutreolina crassicaudata. Mammalian Species 91: 1–4.
Marshall, L.G. 1978b. Chironectes minimus. Mammalian Species 109: 1–6.
Marshall, L.G., and C. de Muizon. 1988. The dawn of the age of mammals in South America.
National Geographic Research 4: 23–55.
Marshall, L.G., S.D. Webb, J.J. Seposki, Jr., and D.M. Raup. 1982. Mammalian evolution and the
Great American Interchange. Science 215: 1351–1357.
Marshall, L.G., T. Sempere, and R.F. Butler. 1997. Chronostratigraphy of the mammal-bearing
Paleocene of South America. Journal of South American Earth Sciences 10: 49–70.
Martin, G.M., and D.E. Udrizar Sauthier. 2011. Observations on the captive behavior of the rare
Patagonian opossum Lestodelphys halli (Thomas, 1921) (Marsupialia, Didelphimorphia,
Didelphidae). Mammalia 75: 281–286.
Martínez, J.I.Z., A. Travaini, S.Z.D. Procopio, and M.A. Santillán. 2012. The ecological role of
native and introduced species in the diet of the puma Puma concolor in southern Patagonia. Oryx
46: 106–111.
Martínez-Lanfranco, J.A., D. Flores, J.P. Jayat, and G. D’Elía. 2014. A new species of lutrine
opossum, genus Lutreolina Thomas (Didelphidae), from the South American Yungas. Journal of
Mammalogy 95: 225–240.
Martins, E.G., and V. Bonato. 2004. On the diet of Gracilinanus microtarsus (Marsupialia,
Didelphidae) in an Atlantic rainforest fragment in southeastern Brazil. Mammalian Biology 69:
58–60.
Martins, E.G., V. Bonato, H.P. Pinheiro, and S.F. dos Reis. 2006a. Diet of the gracile mouse opossum
(Gracilinanus microtarsus) (Didelphimorphia: Didelphidae) in a Brazilian cerrado: patterns of
food consumption and intrapopulation variation. Journal of Zoology 269: 21–28.Martins, E.G., V. Bonato, C.Q. da Silva, and S.F. dos Reis. 2006b. Seasonality in reproduction, age
structure, and density of the gracile mouse opossum Gracilinanus microtarsus (Marsupialia:
Didelphidae) in a Brazilian Cerrado. Journal of Tropical Ecology 22: 461–468.
Martins, E.G., V. Bonato, C.Q. da Silva, and S.F. dos Reis. 2006c. Partial semelparity in the
Neotropical didelphid marsupial Gracilinanus microtarsus. Journal of Mammalogy 87: 915–920.
Martins, R.L., and R. Gribel. 2007. Polinização de Caryocar villosum (Aubl.) Pers. (Caryocaraceae)
uma árvore emergente da Amazônia central. Revista Brasiliera de Botânica 30: 37–45.
Martins-Hatano, F., D. Gettinger, and H.G. Bergallo. 2002. Ecology and host specificity of laelapine
mites (Acari: Laelapidae) of small mammals in an Atlantic Forest area of Brazil. Journal of
Parasitology 88: 36–40.
Maslin, M., Y. Malhi, O. Phillips, and S. Cowling. 2005. New views on an old forest: assessing the
longevity, resilience, and future of the Amazon rainforest. Transactions of the Institute of British
Geographers 30: 477–499.
Massoia, E., and A. Fornes. 1972. Presencia y rasgos ecológicos de Marmosa agilis chacoensis Tate
en las provincias de Buenos Aires, Entre Ríos y Misiones (Mammalia-Marsupialia-Didelphidae).
Revista de Investigaciones Agropecuarias (ser. 1) 9(2): 71–82.
Mathews, A.G.A. 1977. Studies on termites from the Mato Grosso state, Brazil. Rio de Janeiro:
Academia Brasileira de Ciências.
May, M.R., S. Höhne, and B.R. Moore. 2016. A Bayesian approach for detecting the impact of mass￾extinction events on molecular phylogenies when rates of lineage diversification may vary.
Methods in Ecology and Evolution 7: 947–959.
Mayer, E.L., A. Hubbe, L. Kerber, P.M. Haddad-Martim, and W. Neves. 2016. Taxonomic,
biogeographic, and taphonomic reassessment of a large extinct species of paca from the
Quaternary of Brazil. Acta Palaeontologica Polonica 61: 743–758.
McKenna, M.C. 1980. Early history and biogeography of South America’s extinct land mammals.
Pages 43–77 in R.L. Ciochon and A.B. Chiarelli, eds. Evolutionary biology of the New World
monkeys and continental drift. New York: Plenum Press.
McKenna, M.C., and S.K. Bell. 1997. Classification of mammals above the species level. New York:
Colombia University Press.
McManus, J.J. 1970. Behavior of captive opossums, Didelphis marsupialis virginiana. American
Midland Naturalist 84: 144–169.
McManus, J.J. 1971. Activity of captive Didelphis marsupialis. Journal of Mammalogy 52: 846–848.
McNab, B.K. 1978. The comparative energetics of Neotropical marsupials. Journal of Comparative
Physiology 125: 115–128.
McNab, B.K. 1986. Food habits, energetics, and the reproduction of marsupials. Journal of Zoology
2008: 595–614.
Mebs, D., O. Arakawa, and M. Yotsu-Yamashita. 2010. Tissue distribution of tetrodotoxin in the red￾spotted newt Notophthalmus viridescens. Toxicon 55: 1353–1357.
Medellín, R.A. 1994. Seed dispersal of Cecropia obtusifolia by two species of opossums in the Selva
Lacandona, Chiapas, Mexico. Biotropica 26: 400–407.
Menezes, J.C.T., and M.A. Marini. 2017. Predators of bird nests in the Neotropics: a review. Journal
of Field Ornithology 88: 99–114.
Meredith, R.W., M. Westerman, J.A. Case, and M.S. Springer. 2008. A phylogeny and timescale for
marsupial evolution based on sequences for five nuclear genes. Journal of Mammalian Evolution
15: 1–36.
Meredith, R.W., C. Crajewski, M. Westerman, and M.S. Springer. 2009. Relationships and
divergence times among the orders and families of Marsupialia. Museum of Northern Arizona
Bulletin 65: 383–406.Meredith, R.W., J.E. Janecka, J. Gatesy, O.A. Ryder, C.A. Fisher, E.C. Teeling, A. Goodbla, et al.
2011. Impacts of the Cretaceous terrestrial revolution and KPg extinction on mammalian
diversification. Science 334: 521–524.
Merilaita, S., and M. Stevens. 2011. Crypsis through background-matching. Pages 17–33 in M.
Stevens and S. Merilaita, eds. Animal camouflage, mechanisms and function. Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.
Meserve, P.L. 1981. Trophic relationships among small mammals in a Chilean semiarid thorn scrub
community. Journal of Mammalogy 62: 304–314.
Mesquita, P.C.M.D. de, D.M. Borges-Nojosa, D.C. Passos, and C.H. Bezerra. 2011. Ecology of
Philodryas nattereri in the Brazilian semi-arid region. Herpetological Journal 21: 193–198.
Meyer-Lucht, Y., C. Otten, T. Püttker, R. Pardini, J.P. Metzger, and S. Sommer. 2010. Variety matters:
adaptive genetic diversity and parasite load in two mouse opossums from the Brazilian Atlantic
Forest. Conservation Genetics 11: 2001–2013.
Meza, A.V., E.M. Meyer, and C.A. L. González. 2002. Ocelot (Leopardus pardalis) food habits in a
tropical deciduous forest of Jalisco, Mexico. American Midland Naturalist 148: 146–154.
Mikkelson, T.S., M.J. Wakefield, B. Aken, C.T. Amemiya, J.L. Chang, S. Duke, M. Garber, et al.
2007. Genome of the marsupial Monodelphis domestica reveals innovation in non-coding
sequences. Nature 447: 167–177.
Milano, M.Z., and E.L.A. Monteiro-Filho. 2009. Predation on small mammals by capuchin monkeys,
Cebus cay. Neotropical Primates 16: 78–80.
Miles, M.A., A.A. de Souza, and M.M. Póvoa. 1981. Mammal tracking and nest location in Brazilian
forest with an improved spool-and-line device. Journal of Zoology London 195: 331–347.
Mills, J.R.E. 1967. A comparison of lateral jaw movements in some mammals from wear facets on
the teeth. Archives of Oral Biology 12: 645–661.
Mitchell, K.J., R.C. Pratt, L.N. Watson, G.C. Gibb, B. Llamas, M. Kasper, J. Edson, et al. 2014.
Molecular phylogeny, biogeography, and habitat preference evolution of marsupials. Molecular
Biology and Evolution 31: 2322–2330.
Mitchinson, B., R.A. Grant, K. Arkley, V. Rankov, I. Perkon, and T.J. Prescott. 2011. Active vibrissal
sensing in rodents and marsupials. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 366: 3037–
3048.
Mittermeier, R.A., and M.G.M. van Roosmalen. 1981. Preliminary observations on habitat utilization
and diet in eight Surinam monkeys. Folia Primatologica 36: 1–39.
Mondolfi, E., and G.M. Padilla. 1957. Contribución al conocimiento del “perrito de agua.” Memoria
de la Sociedad Ciencias Naturales La Salle 17: 141–155.
Monet-Mendoza, A., D. Osorio-Sarabia, and L. García-Prieto. 2005. Helminths of the Virginia
opossum Didelphis virginiana (Mammalia: Didelphidae) in Mexico. Journal of Parasitology 91:
213–219.
Monteiro-Filho, E.L.A., and V.S. Dias. 1990. Observações sobre a biologia de Lutreolina
crassicaudata (Mammalia: Marsupialia). Revista Brasileira de Biologia 50: 393–399.
Monticelli-Almada, P.F., and A. Gasco. 2018. Nesting behavior of Didelphis aurita: twenty days of
continuous recording of a female in a coati nest. Biota Neotropica 18(3): e20180550.
Mooney, H.A., and E.E. Cleland. 2001. The evolutionary impact of invasive species. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences 98: 5446–5451.
Moore, S.J., and G.D. Sanson. 1995. A comparison of the molar efficiency of two insect-eating
mammals. Journal of Zoology 235: 175–192.
Moraes, E.A., Jr., and A.G. Chiarello. 2005a. A radio tracking study of home range and movements
of the marsupial Micoureus demerarae (Thomas) (Mammalia, Didelphidae) in the Atlantic Forest
of south-eastern Brazil. Revista Brasileira de Zoologia 22: 85–91.Moraes, E.A., Jr., and A.G. Chiarello. 2005b. Sleeping sites of woolly mouse opossum Micoureus
demerarae (Thomas) (Didelphimorphia, Didelphidae) in the Atlantic Forest of south-eastern
Brazil. Revista Brasileira de Zoologia 22: 839–843.
Morales, V.R., and R.W. McDiarmid. 1996. Annotated checklist of the amphibians and reptiles of
Pakitza, Manu National Park Reserved Zone, with comments on the herpetofauna of Madre de
Dios, Peru. Pages 503–522 in D.E. Wilson and A. Sandoval, eds. Manu, the biodiversity of
southern Peru. Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution.
Morand, S., B.R. Krasnov, and R. Poulin (eds.). 2006. Micromammals and macroparasites: from
evolutionary ecology to management. Tokyo: Springer.
Mori, S.A., G. Cremers, C.A. Gracie, J.-J. de Granville, M. Hoff, and J.D. Mitchell. 1997. Guide to
the vascular plants of central French Guiana. Part 1. Pteridophytes, gymnosperms, and
monocotyledons. Memoirs of the New York Botanical Garden 76(1): i–viii + 1–422.
Mori, S.A., G. Cremers, C.A. Gracie, J.-J. de Granville, S.V. Heald, M. Hoff, and J.D. Mitchell.
2002. Guide to the vascular plants of central French Guiana. Part 2. Dicotyledons. Memoirs of the
New York Botanical Garden 76(2): 1–776.
Morton, S.R. 1980. Ecological correlates of caudal fat storage in small mammals. Australian
Mammalogy 3: 81–86.
Mothé, D., and L. Avilla. 2015. Mythbusting evolutionary issues on South American
Gomphotheriidae (Mammalia: Proboscidea). Quaternary Science Reviews 110: 23–35.
Motta, J.C., Jr. 2006. Relações tróficas entre cinco Strigiformes simpátricas na região central do
Estado de São Paulo, Brasil. Revista Brasileira de Ornitologia 14: 359–377.
Motta, J.C., Jr., S.A. Talamoni, J.A. Lombardi, and K. Simokomaki. 1996. Diet of the maned wolf,
Chrysocyon brachyurus, in central Brazil. Journal of Zoology, London 240: 277–284.
Mourelle, C., and E. Ezcurra. 1996. Species richness of Argentine cacti: a test of biogeographic
hypotheses. Journal of Vegetation Science 7: 667–680.
Muizon, C. de. 1994. A new carnivorous marsupial from the Palaeocene of Bolivia and the problem
of marsupial monophyly. Nature 370: 208–211.
Muizon, C. de. 1998. Mayulestes ferox, a borhyaenoid (Metatheria, Mammalia) from the early
Paleocene of Bolivia. Phylogenetic and paleobiologic implications. Geodiversitas 20: 19–142.
Muizon, C. de., and R.L. Cifelli. 2001. A new basal “didelphoid” (Marsupialia, Mammalia) from the
early Paleocene of Tiupampa, Bolivia. Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology 21: 87–97.
Muizon, C. de, G. Billet, C. Argot, S. Ladevèze, and S. Goussard. 2015. Alcidedorbignya inopinata, a
basal pantodont (Eutheria, Mammalia) from the early Paleocene of Bolivia: anatomy, phylogeny,
and paleobiology. Geodiversitas 37: 397–634.
Muizon, C. de, S. Ladevèze, C. Selva, R. Vignaud, and S. Goussard. 2018. Allqokirus australis
(Sparassodonta, Metatheria) from the early Paleocene of Tiupampa (Bolivia) and the rise of the
metatherian carnivorous radiation in South America. Geodiversitas 40: 363–459.
Murphy, J.C., and R.W. Henderson. 1997. Tales of giant snakes: a natural history of anacondas and
pythons. Malabar, FL: Krieger.
Murphy, P.G., and A.E. Lugo. 1986. Ecology of tropical dry forest. Annual Review of Ecology and
Systematics 17: 67–88.
Murray, K.G., S. Kinsman, and J.L. Bronstein. 2000. Plant-animal interactions. Pages 245–302 in
N.M. Nadkarni and N.T. Wheelwright, eds. Monteverde, ecology and conservation of a tropical
cloud forest. New York: Oxford University Press.
Muschetto, E., G.R. Cueto, and O.V. Suárez. 2011. New data on the natural history and
morphometrics of Lutreolina crassicaudata (Didelphimorphia) from central-eastern Argentina.
Mastozoología Neotropical 18: 73–79.Mustrangi, M.A., and J.L. Patton. 1997. Phylogeography and systematics of the slender mouse
opossum Marmosops (Marsupialia, Didelphidae). University of California Publications (Zoology)
130: i–x, 1–86.
Nadkarni, N.M., and N.T. Wheelwright. 2000. Monteverde: ecology and conservation of a tropical
cloud forest. New York: Oxford University Press.
Naranjo, M.E., C. Rengifo, and P.J. Soriano. 2003. Effect of ingestion by bats and birds on seed
germination of Stenocereus griseus and Subpilocereus repandus (Cactaceae). Journal of Tropical
Ecology 19: 19–25.
Nee, S., R.M. May, and P.H. Harvey. 1994. The reconstructed evolutionary process. Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society B 344: 305–311.
Nelson, B.W., V. Kapos, J.B. Adams, W.J. Oliveira, O.P.G. Braun, and I.L. do Amaral. 1994. Forest
disturbance by large blowdowns in the Brazilian Amazon. Ecology 75: 853–858.
Nettles, V.F., A.K. Prestwood, and W.R. Davidson. 1975. Severe parasitism in an opossum. Journal of
Wildlife Diseases 11: 419–420.
Neves-Ferreira, A.G.C., R.H. Valente, J. Perales, and G.B. Domont. 2010. Natural inhibitors: innate
immunity to snake venoms. Pages 259–284 in S.P. Mackessy, ed. Handbook of venoms and toxins
of reptiles. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press.
Newman, C., C.D. Buesching, and J.O. Wolff. 2005. The function of facial masks in “midguild”
carnivores. Oikos 108: 623–633.
Nickle, D.A., and J.L. Castner. 1995. Strategies utilized by katydids (Orthoptera: Tettigoniidae)
against diurnal predators in rainforests of northeastern Peru. Journal of Orthoptera Research 4:
75–88.
Nickle, D.A., and E.W. Heymann. 1996. Predation on Orthoptera and other orders of insects by
tamarin monkeys, Saguinus mystax mystax and Saguinus fuscicollis nigrifrons (Primates:
Callitrichidae), in north-eastern Peru. Journal of Zoology London 239: 799–819.
Nickol, B.B. 1985. Epizootiology. Pages 307–346 in D.W.T. Crompton and B.B. Nickol, eds.
Biology of the Acanthocephala. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Nicolson, S.W., and R.W. Thornburg. 2007. Nectar chemistry. Pages 215–264 in S.W. Nicholson, M.
Nepi, and E. Pacini, eds. Nectaries and nectar. Dordrecht: Springer.
Nilsson, M.A., G. Churakov, M. Sommer, N.V. Tran, A. Zemann, J. Brosius, and J. Schmitz. 2010.
Tracking marsupial evolution using archaic genomic retrotransposon insertions. PLoS Biology
8(7): e1000436.
Nitikman, L.Z., and M.A. Mares. 1987. Ecology of small mammals in a gallery forest of central
Brazil. Annals of Carnegie Museum 56: 75–95.
Noireau, F., P. Diosque, and A.M. Jansen. 2009. Trypanosoma cruzi: adaptation to its vectors and its
hosts. Veterinary Research 40: 26.
Norris, D., F. Michalski, and C.A. Peres. 2010. Habitat patch size modulates terrestrial mammal
activity patterns in Amazonian forest fragments. Journal of Mammalogy 91: 551–560.
Norton, A.C., A.V. Beran, and G.A. Misrahy. 1964. Electroencephalograph during “feigned” sleep in
the opossum. Nature 204: 162–163.
Nowack, J., S. Giroud, W. Arnold, and T. Ruf. 2017. Muscle non-shivering thermogenesis and its role
in the evolution of endothermy. Frontiers in Physiology 8(889): 1–13.
Nutting, W.B. 1985. Prostigmata-Mammalia, validation of coevolutionary phylogenies. Pages 569–
640 in K.C. Kim, ed. Coevolution of parasitic arthropods and mammals. New York: John Wiley &
Sons.
Nutting, W.B., F.S. Lukoschus, and L.E. Desch. 1980. Parasitic mites of Surinam, XXXVII.
Demodex marsupiali sp. nov. from Didelphis marsupialis: adaptation to glandular habitat.
Zoologische Mededelingen 56: 83–90.O’Connell, M.A. 1979. Ecology of didelphid marsupials from northern Venezuela. Pages 73–87 in
J.F. Eisenberg, ed. Vertebrate ecology in the northern Neotropics. Washington, DC: Smithsonian
Institution Press.
O’Connell, M.A. 1989. Population dynamics of Neotropical small mammals in seasonal habitats.
Journal of Mammalogy 70: 532–548.
OConnor, B.M. 1982. Evolutionary ecology of astigmatid mites. Annual Review of Entomology 27:
385–409.
OConnor, B.M., F.S. Lukoschus, and K.T.M. Giesen. 1982. Two new species of Marmosopus (Acari:
Astigmata) from rodents of the genus Scotinomys (Cricetidae) in Central America. Occasional
Papers of the Museum of Zoology University of Michigan 703: 1–22.
O’Dea, A., H.A. Lessios, A.G. Coates, R.I. Eytan, S.A. Restrepo-Moreno, A.L. Cione, L.S. Collins,
et al. 2016. Formation of the Isthmus of Panama. Science Advances 2(8): e1600883.
Oelkrug, R., E.T. Polymeropoulos, and M. Jastroch. 2015. Brown adipose tissue: physiological
function and evolutionary significance. Journal of Comparative Physiology B 185: 587–606.
Ojala-Barbour, R., C.M. Pinto, J. Brito M., L. Albuja V., T.E. Lee, Jr., and B.D. Patterson. 2013. A
new species of shrew-opossum (Paucituberculata: Caenolestidae) with a phylogeny of extant
caenolestids. Journal of Mammalogy 94: 967–982.
Ojeda, R.A. [no date]. Lista de los mamíferos de Ñacuñán (34° 02′ S, 67° 58′ W), Mendoza,
Argentina. Mendoza: IADIZA/CONICET.
Ojeda, R.A., and S. Tabeni. 2009. The mammals of the Monte Desert revisited. Journal of Arid
Environments 73: 173–181.
Oliveira, E.V., and F.J. Goin. 2015. A new species of Gaylordia Paula Couto (Mammalia, Metatheria)
from Itaboraí, Brazil. Revista Brasileira de Paleontologia 18: 97–108.
Oliveira, E.V., P.V. Nova, F.J. Goin, and L.D.S. Avilla. 2011. A new hyladelphine marsupial
(Didelphimorphia, Didelphidae) from cave deposits of northern Brazil. Zootaxa 3041: 51–62.
Oliveira, M.E., and R.T. Santori. 1999. Predatory behavior of the opossum Didelphis albiventris on
the pitviper Bothrops jararaca. Studies of Neotropical Fauna and Environment. 34: 72–75.
Oliveira-Filho, A.T., and J.A. Ratter. 2002. Vegetation physiognomies and woody flora of the
Cerrado biome. Pages 91–120 in P.S. Oliveira and R.J. Marquis, eds. The cerrados of Brazil,
ecology and natural history of a Neotropical savanna. New York: Columbia University Press.
Oliveira-Santos, L.G.R., M.A. Tortato, and M.E. Graipel. 2008. Activity patterns of Atlantic Forest
small arboreal mammals as revealed by camera traps. Journal of Tropical Ecology 24: 563–567.
Oliver, W.L.R. 1976. The management of yapoks (Chironectes minimus) at Jersey Zoo, with
observations on their behavior. Jersey Wildlife Preservation Trust 13: 32–36.
Olrog, C.C. 1979. Los mamíferos de la selva húmeda, Cerro Calilegua, Jujuy. Acta Zoológica
Lilloana 33: 9–14.
Olson, D.M. 1994. The distribution of leaf litter invertebrates along a Neotropical altitudinal
gradient. Journal of Tropical Ecology 10: 129–150.
O’Meara, R.N., and R.S. Thompson. 2014. Were there Miocene meridiolestidans? Assessing the
phylogenetic placement of Necrolestes patagonensis and the presence of a 40 million year
meridiolestidan ghost lineage. Journal of Mammalian Evolution 21: 271–284.
Ortolani, A. 1999. Spots, stripes, tail tips and dark eyes: Predicting the function of carnivore colour
patterns using the comparative method. Biological Journal of the Linnean Society 67: 433–476.
Ostfeld, R.S. 1990. The ecology of territoriality in small mammals. Trends in Ecology and Evolution
5: 411–415.
Oswaldo-Cruz, E., J.N. Hokoc, and A.P.B. Sousa. 1979. A schematic eye for the opossum. Vision
Research 19: 263–276.Owen, R.D., H. Sánchez, L. Rodríguez, and C.B. Jonsson. 2018. Composition and characteristics of a
diverse didelphid community (Mammalia: Didelphimorphia) in sub-tropical South America.
Occasional Papers Museum of Texas Tech University 358: 1–18.
Palacios, A.G., F. Bozinovic, A. Vielma, C.A. Arrese, D.M. Hunt, and L. Peichl. 2010. Retinal
photoreceptor arrangement, SWS1 and LWS opsin sequence, and electroretinography in the South
American marsupial Thylamys elegans (Waterhouse, 1839). Journal of Comparative Neurology
518: 1589–1602.
Palmeirim, A.F., M.S. Leite, M. Santos-Reis, and F.A.S. Fernandez. 2014. Habitat selection for
resting sites by the water opossum (Chironectes minimus) in the Brazilian Atlantic Forest. Studies
on Neotropical Fauna and Environment 49: 231–238.
Pardini, R. 1998. Feeding ecology of the Neotropical river otter Lontra longicaudis in an Atlantic
Forest stream, south-eastern Brazil. Journal of Zoology London 245: 385–391.
Park, O., A. Barden, and E. Williams. 1940. Studies in nocturnal ecology, IX. Further analysis of
activity of Panama rain forest animals. Ecology 21: 122–134.
Parker, G.A. 1974. Assessment strategy and the evolution of fighting behaviour. Journal of
Theoretical Biology 47: 223–243.
Parrish, S.S. 1997. The female opossum and the nature of the New World. William and Mary
Quarterly 54: 475–514.
Paruelo, J.M., E.G. Jobbágy, M. Oesterheld, R.A. Golluscio, and M.R. Aguiar. 2007. The grasslands
and steppes of Patagonia and the Río de la Plata plains. Pages 232–248 in T.T. Veblen, K.R.
Young, and A.R. Orme, eds. The physical geography of South America. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Passamani, M., and A.B. Rylands. 2000. Feeding behavior of Geoffroy’s marmoset (Callithrix
geoffroyi) in an Atlantic Forest fragment of south-eastern Brazil. Primates 41: 27–38.
Patel, B.A., and S.A. Maiolino. 2016. Morphological diversity in the digital rays of primate hands.
Pages 55–100 in T.L. Kivell, P. Lemelin, B.G. Richmond, and D. Schmitt, eds. The evolution of
the primate hand. New York: Springer.
Patrizi, G., and B.L. Munger. 1966. The ultrastructure and innervation of rat vibrissae. Journal of
Comparative Neurology 126: 423–435.
Patrón, J.C., U.H. Salinas, A.R. Bautista, S. Lozano-Trejo, and F. Marini-Zúñiga. 2011. Masticophis
(= Coluber) mentovarius (Neotropical whipsnake). Diet. Herpetological Review 42: 293.
Patterson, B., and R. Pascual. 1972. The fossil mammal fauna of South America. Pages 247–309 in
A. Keast, F.C. Erk, and B. Glass, eds. Evolution, mammals, and southern continents. Albany, NY:
State University of New York Press.
Patterson, B.D. 2008 (“2007”). Order Paucituberculata Ameghino, 1894. Pages 119–127 in A.L.
Gardner, ed. Mammals of South America, volume 1. Marsupials, xenarthrans, shrews, and bats.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Patterson, B.D, and M.A. Rogers. 2008 (“2007”). Order Microbiotheria Ameghino, 1889. Pages 117–
119 in A.L. Gardner, ed. Mammals of South America, volume 1. Marsupials, xenarthrans, shrews,
and bats. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Patton, J.L., M.N.F. da Silva, and J.R. Malcolm. 2000. Mammals of the Rio Juruá and the
evolutionary and ecological diversification of Amazonia. Bulletin of the American Museum of
Natural History 244: 1–306.
Pavan, S.E., and R.S. Voss. 2016. A revised subgeneric classification of short-tailed opossums
(Didelphidae: Monodelphis). American Museum Novitates 3868: 1–44.
Pavan, S.E., S.A. Jansa, and R.S. Voss. 2014. Molecular phylogeny of short-tailed opossums
(Didelphidae: Monodelphis): taxonomic implications and tests of evolutionary hypotheses.
Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution 79: 199–214.Pearson, O.P. 2008 (“2007”). Genus Lestodelphys. Pages 50–51 in A.L. Gardner, ed. Mammals of
South America, volume 1. Marsupials, xenarthrans, shrews, and bats. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Pedersen, A.B., and T.J. Greives. 2008. The interaction of parasites and resources cause crashes in a
wild mouse population. Journal of Animal Ecology 77: 370–377.
Peichl, L. 2005. Diversity of mammalian photoreceptor properties: adaptations to habitat and
lifestyle? Anatomical Record 287A: 1001–1012.
Penny, N.D., and J.R. Arias. 1982. Insects of an Amazon forest. New York: Columbia University
Press.
Perales, J., R. Muñoz, and H. Moussatché. 1986. Isolation and partial characterization of a protein
fraction from the opossum (Didelphis marsupialis) serum, with protecting properties against the
Bothrops jararaca snake venom. Anais da Academia Brasileira de Ciências 58: 155–162.
Perales, J., H. Moussatché, S. Marangoni, B. Oliveira, and G.B. Domont. 1994. Isolation and partial
characterization of an anti-bothropic complex from the serum of South American Didelphidae.
Toxicon 32: 1237–1249.
Peres, C.A. 1993. Diet and feeding ecology of saddle-back (Saguinus fuscicollis) and moustached (S.
mystax) tamarins in an Amazonian forest. Journal of Zoology 230: 567–592.
Pernetta, J.C. 1976. Diets of the shrews Sorex araneus L. and Sorex minutus L. in Wytham grassland.
Journal of Animal Ecology 45: 899–912.
Perret, M., and S.B. M’Barek. 1991. Male influence on oestrous cycles in female woolly opossum
(Caluromys philander). Journal of Reproduction and Fertility 91: 557–566.
Peters, R.H., and J.V. Raelson. 1984. Relations between individual size and mammalian population
density. American Naturalist 124: 498–517.
Pheasey, H., P. Smith, and K. Atkinson. 2018. Observations on the diet and behavior of captive
Monodelphis (Mygalodelphys) kunsi Pine, 1975 (Didelphimorphia: Didelphidae) from Paraguay.
Notas Mastozoológicas 4(2): 38–45.
Phillimore, A.B., and T.D. Price. 2008. Density-dependent cladogenesis in birds. PLoS Biology 6(3):
e71.
Piana, R.P. 2007. Anidamiento y dieta de Harpia harpyja Linnaeus en la comunidad nativa de
Infierno, Madre de Dios, Perú. Revista Peruana de Biología 14: 135–138.
Pianka, E.R. 1974. Niche overlap and diffuse competition. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences USA 71: 2141–2145.
Pigot, A.L., A.B. Phillimore, I.P.F. Owens, and C.D.L. Orme. 2010. The shape and temporal
dynamics of phylogenetic trees arising from geographic speciation. Systematic Biology 59: 660–
673.
Pilatti, P., and D. Astúa. 2016. Orbit orientation in didelphid marsupials (Didelphimorphia:
Didelphidae). Current Zoology 63: 403–415.
Pine, R.H, P.L. Dalby, and J.O. Matson. 1985. Ecology, postnatal development, morphometrics, and
taxonomic status of the short-tailed opossum, Monodelphis dimidiata, an apparently semelparous
annual marsupial. Annals of Carnegie Museum 54: 195–231.
Pineda-Munoz, S., and J. Alroy. 2014. Dietary characterization of terrestrial mammals. Proceedings
of the Royal Society B 281: 20141173.
Pinheiro, P.S., F.M.V. Carvalho, F.A.S. Fernandez, and J.L. Nessimian. 2002. Diet of the marsupial
Micoureus demerarae in small fragments of Atlantic Forest in southeastern Brazil. Studies on
Neotropical Fauna and Environment 37: 213–218.
Pinotti, B.T., L. Naxara, and R. Pardini. 2011. Diet and food selection by small mammals in an old￾growth Atlantic Forest of south-eastern Brazil. Studies on Neotropical Fauna and Environment 46:
1–9.Pinto, C.D., and T. de Lema. 2002. Comportamento alimentar e dieta de serpentes, gêneros Boiruna e
Clelia (Serpentes, Colubridae). Iheringia (ser. zool.) 92: 9–19.
Pinto, I. del S., J.R. Botelho, L.P. Costa, Y.L.R. Leite, and P.M. Linardi. 2009. Siphonaptera
associated with wild mammals from the central Atlantic Forest biodiversity corridor in
southeastern Brazil. Journal of Medical Entomology 46: 1146–1151.
Pinto, R.M., M. Knoff, D.C. Gomes, and D. Noronha. 2011. Nematodes from mammals in Brazil: an
updating. Neotropical Helminthology 5: 139–183.
Pires, A.S., and F.A.S. Fernandez. 1999. Use of space by the marsupial Micoureus demerarrae in
small Atlantic Forest fragments in south-eastern Brazil. Journal of Tropical Ecology 15: 279–290.
Pires, J.M., and G.T. Prance. 1985. The vegetation types of the Brazilian Amazon. Pages 109–145 in
G.T. Prance and T.E. Lovejoy, eds. Amazonia (Key Environments series). Oxford: Pergamon
Press.
Pires, M.M., E.G. Martins, L.D. Cruz, F.R. Fernandes, R.B.G. Clemente-Carvalho, M.N.F. da Silva,
and S.F. dos Reis. 2010a. Young didelphid consumption by Micoureus paraguayanus
(Didelphimorphia: Didelphidae) in southeastern Brazil. Mastozoología Neotropical 17: 183–187.
Pires, M.M., E.G. Martins, M.N.F. da Silva, and S.F. dos Reis. 2010b. Gracilinanus microtarsus
(Didelphimorphia: Didelphidae). Mammalian Species 42 (851): 33–40.
Pires, M.M., E.G. Martins, M.S. Araújo, and S.F. dos Reis. 2012. Between-individual variation drives
the seasonal dynamics in the trophic niche of a Neotropical marsupial. Austral Ecology 38: 664–
671.
Pizzatto, L., O.A.V. Marques, and K. Facure. 2009. Food habits of Brazilian boid snakes: overview
and new data, with special reference to Corallus hortulanus. Amphibia-Reptilia 30: 533–544.
Plavcan, J.M., and C.P. van Schaik. 1992. Intrasexual competition and canine dimorphism in
anthropoid primates. American Journal of Physical Anthropology 87: 461–477.
Pol, R., and J.L. de Casenave. 2004. Activity patterns of harvester ants Pogonomyrmex pronotalis
and Pogonomyrmex rastratus in the central Monte Desert, Argentina. Journal of Insect Behavior
17: 647–661.
Pollock, K.H., J.D. Nichols, C. Brownie, and J.E. Hines. 1990. Statistical inference for capture￾recapture experiments. Wildlife Monographs 107: 3–97.
Potkay, S. 1970. Diseases of the opossum (Didelphis marsupialis): a review. Laboratory Animal Care
20: 502–511.
Poulin, R. 2007. Evolutionary ecology of parasites (2nd ed.). Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press.
Power, M.L. 2010. Nutritional and digestive challenges to being a gum-feeding primate. Pages 25–44
in A.M. Burrows and L.T. Nash, eds. The evolution of exudativory in primates. New York:
Springer.
Prance, G.T. 1979. Notes on the vegetation of Amazonia III. The terminology of Amazonian forest
types subject to inundation. Brittonia 31: 26–38.
Pratas-Santiago, L.P., A.L.S. Gonçalves, A.M.V.M. Soares, and W.R. Spironello. 2016. The moon
cycle effect on the activity patterns of ocelots and their prey. Journal of Zoology 299: 275–283.
Pratas-Santiago, L.P., A.L.S. Gonçalves, A.J.A. Nogueira, and W.R. Spironello. 2017. Dodging the
moon: the moon effect on activity allocation of prey in the presence of predators. Ethology 123:
467–474.
Prevedello, J.A., R.G. Rodrigues, and E.L.A. Monteiro-Filho. 2009. Vertical use of space by the
marsupial Micoureus paraguayanus (Didelphimorphia, Didelphidae) in the Atlantic Forest of
Brazil. Acta Theriologica 54: 259–266.
Prévost, M.-F. 1983. Les fruits et les graines des espèces végétales pionnières de Guyane Française.
Revue d’Ecologie (La Terre et la Vie) 38: 121–145.Prevosti, F.J., E.P. Tonni, and J.C. Bidegain. 2009. Stratigraphic range of the large canids (Carnivora,
Canidae) in South America, and its relevance to Quaternary biostratigraphy. Quaternary
International 2010: 76–81.
Prevosti, F.J., A.M. Forasiepi, M.D. Ercoli, and G.F. Turazzini. 2012. Paleoecology of the
mammalian carnivores (Metatheria, Sparassodonta) of the Santa Cruz Formation (late Early
Miocene). Pages 173–193 in S.F. Vizcaíno, R.F. Kay, and M.S. Bargo, eds. Early Miocene
paleobiology in Patagonia: high-latitude paleocommunities of the Santa Cruz Formation.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Price, R.D., and K.C. Emerson. 1986. New species of Cummingsia Ferris (Mallophaga:
Trimenoponidae) from Peru and Venezuela. Proceedings of the Biological Society of Washington
99: 748–752.
Pridmore, P.A. 1992. Trunk movements during locomotion in the marsupial Monodelphis domestica.
Journal of Morphology 211: 137–146.
Prugh, L.R., and C.D. Golden. 2014. Does moonlight increase predation risk? Meta-analysis reveals
divergent responses of nocturnal mammals to lunar cycles. Journal of Animal Ecology 83: 504–
514.
Prum, R.O., and R.H. Torres. 2004. Structural coloration of mammalian skin: convergent evolution of
coherently scattering dermal collagen arrays. Journal of Experimental Biology 207: 2157–2172.
Puhakka, M., and R. Kalliola. 1995. Floodplain vegetation mosaics in western Amazonia.
Biogeographica 71: 1–14.
Pung, O.J., L.A. Durden, C.W. Banks, and D.N. Jones. 1994. Ectoparasites of opossums and
raccoons in southeastern Georgia. Journal of Medical Entomology 31: 915–919.
Quadros, J., and E.L.A. Monteiro-Filho. 2001. Diet of the Neotropical otter, Lontra longicaudis, in
an Atlantic Forest area, Santa Catarina State, southern Brazil. Studies on Neotropical Fauna and
Environment 36: 15–21.
Quaresma, P.F., F.D. Rêgo, H.A. Botelho, S.R. da Silva, A.J. Moura, Jr., R.G.T. Neto, et al. 2011.
Wild, synanthropic and domestic hosts of Leishmania in an endemic area of cutaneous
leishmaniasis in Minas Gerais state, Brazil. Transactions of the Royal Society of Tropical
Medicine and Hygiene 105: 579–585.
Quintela, F.M., M.B. Santos, A. Gava, and A.U. Christoff. 2011. Notas sobre morfologia, distribucão
geográfica, história natural y citogenética de Cryptonanus guahybae (Didelphimorphia:
Didelphidae). Mastozoología Neotropical 18: 247–257.
Quintela, F.M., G. Iob, and L.G.S. Artioli. 2014. Diet of Procyon cancrivorus (Carnivora,
Procyonidae) in restinga and estuarine environments of southern Brazil. Iheringia (ser. Zoologia)
104: 143–149.
Rabosky, D.L. 2010. Extinction rates should not be estimated from molecular phylogenies. Evolution
64: 1816–1824.
Rademaker, V., and R. Cerqueira. 2006. Variation in the latitudinal reproductive patterns of the genus
Didelphis (Didelphimorphia: Didelphidae). Austral Ecology 31: 337–342.
Radovsky, F.J. 1985. Evolution of mammalian mesostigmate mites. Pages 441–504 in K.C. Kim, ed.
Coevolution of parasitic arthropods and mammals. New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Radovsky, F.J. 1994. The evolution of parasitism and the distribution of some dermanyssid mites
(Mesostigmata) on vertebrate hosts. Pages 186–217 in M.A. Houck, ed. Mites, ecological and
evolutionary analyses of life-history patterns. New York: Chapman & Hall.
Ramamurthy, D.L., and L.A. Krubitzer. 2016. The evolution of whisker-mediated somatosensation in
mammals: sensory processing in barrelless S1 cortex of a marsupial, Monodelphis domestica.
Journal of Comparative Neurology 524: 3587–3612.Ramírez-Cañas, S.A., M. George-Nascimento, L. García-Prieto, and R. Mata-López. 2019. Helminth
community structure of the gray four-eyed opossum Philander opossum (Mammalia: Didelphidae)
in the Neotropical portion of Mexico. Journal of Parasitology 105: 624–629.
Rasmussen, D.T. 1990. Primate origins: lessons from a Neotropical marsupial. American Journal of
Primatology 22: 263–277.
Ravizza, R.J., H.E. Hefner, and B. Masterton. 1969. Hearing in primitive mammals, 1: Opossum
(Didelphis virginianus [sic]). Journal of Auditory Research 9: 1–7.
Redford, K.H., and J.G. Dorea. 1984. The nutritional value of invertebrates with emphasis on ants
and termites as food for mammals. Journal of Zoology London 203: 385–395.
Redford, K.H., and G.A.B. da Fonseca. 1986. The role of gallery forests in the zoogeography of the
Cerrado’s non-volant mammalian fauna. Biotropica 18: 126–135.
Redwood, S.D. 2019. The geology of the Panama-Chocó Arc. Pages 901–932 in F. Cediel and R.P.
Shaw, eds. Geology and tectonics of northwestern South America. Cham, Switzerland: Springer
International.
Reed, R.R. 2004. After the holy grail: establishing a molecular basis for mammalian olfaction. Cell
116: 329–336.
Regidor, H.A., and M. Gorostiague. 1996. Reproduction in the white eared opossum (Didelphis
albiventris) under temperate conditions in Argentina. Studies of Neotropical Fauna &
Environment 31: 133–136.
Reguero, M.A., and A.M. Candela. 2011. Late Cenozoic mammals from the northwest of Argentina.
Pages 411–426 in J.A. Salfity and R.A. Marquillas, eds. Cenozoic geology of the central Andes of
Argentina. Salta: SCS Publisher.
Reguero, M.A., J.N. Gelfo, G.M. López, M. Bond, A. Abello, S.N. Santillana, and S.A. Marenssi.
2014. Final Gondwana breakup: the Paleogene South American native ungulates and the demise
of the South American-Antarctica land connection. Global and Planetary Change 123 (part B):
400–413.
Reig, O.A., J.A.W. Kirsch, and L.G. Marshall. 1987. Systematic relationships of the living and
Neocenozoic American “opossum-like” marsupials (suborder Didelphimorphia), with comments
on the classification of these and of Cretaceous and Paleogene New World and European
metatherians. Pages 1–89 in M. Archer, ed. Possums and opossums: studies in evolution, vol. 1.
Sydney: Surrey Beatty.
Resende, B.D., V.L.G. Greco, E.B. Ottoni, and P. Izar. 2003. Some observations on the predation of
small mammals by tufted capuchin monkeys (Cebus apella). Neotropical Primates 11: 103–104.
Reynolds, H.C. 1945. Some aspects of the life history and ecology of the opossum in central
Missouri. Journal of Mammalogy 26: 361–379.
Reynolds, H.C. 1952. Studies on reproduction in the opossum (Didelphis virginiana virginiana).
University of California Publications in Zoology 52: [i–iv], 223–283.
Ribeiro, M.C.P., and J.E.P.W. Bicudo. 2007. Oxygen consumption and thermoregulatory responses in
three species of South American marsupials. Comparative Biochemistry and Physiology A 147:
658–664.
Richards, P.W. 1952. The tropical rain forest, an ecological study. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.
Richardson, D.J., W.B. Owen, and D.E. Snyder. 1992. Helminth parasites of the raccoon (Procyon
lotor) from north-central Arkansas. Journal of Parasitology 78: 163–166.
Rico-Guevara, A., and K.J. Hurme. 2019. Intrasexually selected weapons. Biological Reviews 94:
60–101.
Riek, A., and F. Geiser. 2014. Heterothermy in pouched mammals—a review. Journal of Mammalogy
292: 74–85.Riley, J. 1986. The biology of pentastomids. Advances in Parasitology 25: 45–128.
Robinson, B.W., and D.S. Wilson. 1998. Optimal foraging, specialization, and a solution to Liem’s
paradox. American Naturalist 151: 223–235.
Robinson, J.G., and K.H. Redford. 1986. Body size, diet, and population density of Neotropical
forest mammals. American Naturalist 128: 665–680.
Robinson, S.K. 1994. Habitat selection and foraging ecology of raptors in Amazonian Peru.
Biotropica 26: 443–458.
Rocha-Mendes, F., S.B. Mikich, J. Quadros, and W.A. Pedro. 2010. Feeding ecology of carnivores
(Mammalia: Carnivora) in Atlantic Forest remnants, southern Brazil. Biota Neotropica 10: 21–30.
Rodrigues, F.H.G. 2005. Bothrops neuwiedi pauloensis (Jararaca Rabo-de-osso). Predation.
Herpetological Review 36: 67–68.
Rodrigues, F.H.G., L. Silveira, A.T.A. Jácomo, A.P. Carmignotto, A.M.R. Bezerra, D.C. Coelho, H.
Garbogini, J. Pagnozzi, and A. Hass. 2002. Composição e caracterização da fauna de mamíferos
do Parque Nacional das Emas, Goiás, Brasil. Revista Brasileira de Zoologia 19: 589–600.
Rodriguez, L.B., and J.E. Cadle. 1990. A preliminary overview of the herpetofauna of Cocha Cashu,
Manu National Park, Peru. Pages 410–425 in A.H. Gentry, ed. Four Neotropical rainforests. New
Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Rogers, S.M., and S.J. Simpson. 2014. Thanatosis. Current Biology 24: R1031–R1033.
Rojas, D., O.M. Warsi, and L.M. Dávalos. 2016. Bats (Chiroptera: Noctilionoidea) challenge a recent
origin of extant Neotropical diversity. Systematic Biology 65: 432–448.
Roosmalen, M.G.M. van. 1985a. Fruits of the Guianan flora. Utrecht: Institute of Systematic Botany.
Roosmalen, M.G.M. van. 1985b. Habitat preferences, diet, feeding strategy, and social organization
of the black spider monkey (Ateles paniscus Linnaeus, 1758) in Surinam. Acta Amazonica 15
(3/4, suppl.): 1–238.
Rose, K.D. 2006. The beginning of the Age of Mammals. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University
Press.
Rosenberger, A.L. 1992. Evolution of feeding niches in New World monkeys. American Journal of
Physical Anthropology 88: 525–562.
Rosenthal, M.A. 1975. Observations on the water opossum or yapok in captivity. International Zoo
Yearbook 15: 4–6.
Rosenzweig, M.L., and R.D. McCord. 1991. Incumbent replacement: evidence for long-term
evolutionary progress. Paleobiology 17: 202–213.
Rossi, R.V. 2005. Revisão taxonômica de Marmosa Gray, 1821 (Didelphimorphia, Didelphidae).
PhD dissertation, Universidade de São Paulo.
Rossi, R.V., R.S. Voss, and D.P. Lunde. 2010. A revision of the didelphid marsupial genus Marmosa,
part 1. The species in Tate’s “Mexicana” and “Mitis” sections and other closely related forms.
Bulletin of the American Museum of Natural History 334: 1–83.
Rotureau, B. 2006. Ecology of the Leishmania species in the Guianan ecoregion complex. American
Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene 74: 81–96.
Rougier, G.W., J.R. Wible, and M.J. Novacek. 1998. Implications of Deltatheridium specimens for
early marsupial history. Nature 396: 458–463.
Rougier, G.W., J.R. Wible, R.M.D. Beck, and S. Apesteguía. 2012. The Miocene mammal
Necrolestes demonstrates the survival of a Mesozoic nontherian lineage into the late Cenozoic of
South America. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 109: 20053–20058.
Rowe, T.B., T.P. Eiting, T.E. Macrini, and R.A. Ketcham. 2005. Organization of the olfactory and
respiratory skeleton in the nose of the gray short-tailed opossum Monodelphis domestica. Journal
of Mammalian Evolution 12: 303–336.Rundell, R.J., and T.D. Price. 2009. Adaptive radiation, nonadaptive radiation, ecological speciation,
and nonecological speciation. Trends in Ecology and Evolution 24: 394–399.
Russell, E.M. 1982. Patterns of parental care and parental investment in marsupials. Biological
Reviews 57: 423–486.
Russell, E.M. 1984. Social behaviour and social organization of marsupials. Mammal Review 14:
101–154.
Ruxton, G.D., T.N. Sheratt, and M.P. Speed. 2004. Avoiding predation: the evolutionary ecology of
crypsis, warning signals, and mimicry. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Ryan, M.J., M.D. Tuttle, and L.K. Taft. 1981. The costs and benefits of frog chorusing behavior.
Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology 8: 273–278.
Rylands, A.B. 1993. Marmosets and tamarins: systematics, behaviour, and ecology. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Ryser, J. 1990. The mating system, ecology, and biology of the Virginia opossum, Didelphis
virginiana, in north-central Florida. PhD dissertation, University of Berne.
Ryser, J. 1992. The mating system and male mating success of the Virginia opossum (Didelphis
virginiana) in Florida. Journal of Zoology London 228: 127–139.
Ryser, J. 1995. Activity, movement, and home range of Virginia opossum (Didelphis virginiana) in
Florida. Bulletin of the Florida Museum of Natural History 38: 177–194.
Sabat, P., F. Bozinovic, and F. Zambrano. 1995. Role of dietary substrates on intestinal disaccharides,
digestibility, and energetics in the insectivorous mouse-opossum (Thylamys elegans). Journal of
Mammalogy 76: 603–611.
Salo, P., E. Korpimäki, P.B. Banks, M. Nordström, and C.R. Dickman. 2007. Alien predators are
more dangerous than native predators to prey populations. Proceedings of the Royal Society B
274: 1237–1243.
Saltré, F., M. Rodríguez-Rey, B.W. Brook, C.N. Johnson, C.S.M. Turney, J. Alroy, et al. 2016.
Climate change not to blame for late Quaternary megafauna extinctions in Australia. Nature
Communications 7:10511.
Samollow, P.B. 2008. The opossum genome: insights and opportunities from an alternative mammal.
Genome Research 18: 1199–1215.
Sampaio, E.M., E.K.V. Kalko, E. Bernard, B. Rodríguez-Herrera, and C.O. Handley, Jr. 2003. A
biodiversity assessment of bats (Chiroptera) in a tropical lowland rainforest of central Amazonia,
including methodological and conservation considerations. Studies on Neotropical Fauna and
Environment 38: 17–31.
Sánchez-Villagra, M.R. 2001. The phylogenetic relationships of argyrolagid marsupials. Zoological
Journal of the Linnean Society 131: 481–496.
Sánchez-Villagra, M.R., and R.J. Asher. 2002. Cranio-sensory adaptations in small faunivorous
semiaquatic mammals, with special reference to olfaction and the trigeminal system. Mammalia
66: 93–109.
Sánchez-Villagra, M.R., and R.F. Kay. 1997. A skull of Proargyrolagus, the oldest argyrolagid (late
Oligocene Salla beds, Bolivia), with brief comments concerning its paleobiology. Journal of
Vertebrate Paleontology 17: 717–724.
Sandom, C., S. Faurby, B. Sandel, and J.-C. Svenning. 2014. Global late Quaternary megafauna
extinctions linked to humans, not climate change. Proceedings of the Royal Society B 281:
20133254.
Santana, S.E., S. Strait, and E.R. Dumont. 2011. The better to eat you with: functional correlates of
tooth structure in bats. Functional Ecology 25: 839–847.
Santori, R.T., D. Astúa de Moraes, and R. Cerqueira. 1995. Diet composition of Metachirus
nudicaudatus and Didelphis aurita (Marsupialia, Didelphoidea) in southeastern Brazil. Mammalia59: 511–516.
Santori, R.T., D. Astúa de Moraes, C.E.V. Grelle, and R. Cerqueira. 1997. Natural diet at a restinga
forest and laboratory food preferences of the opossum Philander frenata in Brazil. Studies of
Neotropical Fauna and Environment 32: 12–16.
Santori, R.T., D. Astúa de Moraes, and R. Cerqueira. 2004. Comparative gross morphology of the
digestive tract in ten Didelphidae marsupial species. Mammalia 68: 27–36
Santori, R.T., O. Rocha-Barbosa, M.V. Vieira, J.A. Magnan-Neto, and M.F.C. Loguercio. 2005.
Locomotion in aquatic, terrestrial, and arboreal habitats of thick-tailed opossum, Lutreolina
crassicaudata (Desmarest, 1804). Journal of Mammalogy 86: 902–908.
Santori, R.T., D. Astúa, and M. Martins. 2016. An additional record for the rare black-shouldered
opossum Caluromysiops irrupta Sanborn, 1951 (Didelphimorphia: Didelphidae) in northwestern
Brazil. Check List 12(3): 1–3.
Sarmiento, G. 1976. Evolution of arid vegetation in tropical America. Pages 65–99 in D.W. Goodall,
ed. Evolution of desert biota. Austin, TX: University of Texas Press.
Sarmiento, L. 1954. Gigantorhynchus ortizi n. sp., an acanthocephalan from Metachirus
nudicaudatus. Journal of Parasitology 40: 448–452.
Saunders, R.C. 1975. Venezuelan Macronyssidae (Acarina: Mesostigmata). Brigham Young
University Science Bulletin (Biol. Ser.) 20(2): 75–90.
Sawaya, R.J., O.A.V. Marques, and M. Martins. 2008. Composition and natural history of a cerrado
snake assemblage at Itirapina, São Paulo state, southeastern Brazil. Biota Neotropica 8(2): 127–
149.
Sazima, I. 1992. Natural history of the jararaca pitviper, Bothrops jararaca, in southeastern Brazil.
Pages 199–216 in J.A. Campbell and E.D. Brodie, Jr., eds. Biology of the pitvipers. Tyler, TX:
Selva.
Scheibler, D.R. 2007. Food partitioning between breeding white-tailed kites (Elanus leucurus; Aves;
Accipitridae) and barn owls (Tyto alba; Aves; Tytonidae) in southern Brazil. Brazilian Journal of
Biology 67: 65–71.
Scher, H.D., and E.E. Martin. 2006. Timing and climatic consequences of the opening of Drake
Passage. Science 312: 428–430.
Schluter, D. 2000. Ecology of adaptive radiation. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Schmitt, D., and P. Lemelin. 2002. Origins of primate locomotion: gait mechanics of the woolly
opossum. American Journal of Physical Anthropology 118: 231–238.
Schupp, E.W. 1993. Quantity, quality, and the effectiveness of seed dispersal by animals. Vegetatio
107/108: 15–29.
Schweizer, M., S.T. Hertwig, and O. Seehausen. 2014. Diversity versus disparity and the role of
ecological opportunity in a continental bird radiation. Journal of Biogeography 41: 1301–1312.
Seelke, A.H.M., J.C. Dooley, and L.A. Krubitzer. 2014. Photic preference of the short-tailed opossum
(Monodelphis domestica). Neuroscience 269: 273–280.
Selig, K.R., E.J. Sargis, and M.T. Silcox. 2019. The frugivorous insectivores? Functional
morphological analysis of molar topography for inferring diet in extant treeshrews (Scandentia).
Journal of Mammalogy 100: 1901–1917.
Semedo, T.B.F., M.V. Brandão, A.P. Carmignotto, M.S. Nunes, I.P. Farias, M.N.F. da Silva, and R.V.
Rossi. 2015. Taxonomic status and phylogenetic relationships of Marmosa agilis peruana Tate,
1931 (Didelphimorphia: Didelphidae), with comments on the morphological variation of
Gracilinanus from central-western Brazil. Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society 173: 190–
216.
Seton, M., R.D. Müller, S. Zahirovic, C. Gaina, T. Torsvik, G. Shephard, A. Talsma, et al. 2012.
Global continental and ocean basin reconstructions since 200 Ma. Earth-Science Reviews 113:212–270.
Shattuck, M.R., and S.A. Williams. 2010. Arboreality has allowed for the evolution of increased
longevity in mammals. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 107: 4635–4639.
Shibuya, P.S., G.L. Melo, and N.C. Cáceres. 2018. Determinants of home range size and spatial
overlap of Gracilinanus agilis (Mammalia: Didelphidae) in central-western Brazil. Mammalia 82:
328–337.
Shine, R. 1989. Ecological causes for the evolution of sexual dimorphism: a review of the evidence.
Quarterly Review of Biology 64: 419–461.
Shuster, S.M., W.R. Briggs, and P.A. Dennis. 2013. How multiple matings by females affects sexual
selection. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 368: 20120046.
Sih, A., G. Eglund, and D. Wooster. 1998. Emergent impacts of multiple predators on prey. TREE 13:
350–355.
Sih, A., D.I. Bolnick, B. Luttberg, J.L. Orrock, S.D. Peacor, L.M. Pintor, E. Preisser, J.S. Rehage, and
J.R. Vonesh. 2010. Predator-prey naïveté, antipredator behavior, and the ecology of predator
invasions. Oikos 119: 610–621.
Silva, M.G.Q., and H.M.A. Costa. 1999. Helminths of the white-bellied opossum from Brazil.
Journal of Wildlife Diseases 35: 371–374.
Silveira, T.B. da, F.R de Melo, and J.E.P. Lima. 2014. New field data on reproduction, diet, and
activity of Glironia venusta Thomas, 1912 (Didelphimorphia, Didelphidae) in northern Brazil.
Mammalia 78: 217–222.
Silvestro, D., M.F. Tejedor, M.L. Serrano-Serrano, O. Loiseau, V. Rossier, J. Rolland, A. Zizka, S.
Höhna, A. Antonelli, and N. Salamin. 2019. Early arrival and climatically linked geographic
expansion of New World monkeys from tiny African ancestors. Systematic Biology 68: 78–92.
Simmen, B., and D. Sabatier. 1996. Diets of some French Guianan primates: food composition and
food choices. International Journal of Primatology 17: 661–693.
Simmons, N.B., and R.S. Voss. 1998. The mammals of Paracou, French Guiana: a Neotropical
lowland rainforest fauna. Part 1. Bats. Bulletin of the American Museum of Natural History 237:
1–219.
Simonetti, J.A., A. Poiani, and K.J. Raedeke. 1984. Food habits of Dusicyon griseus in northern
Chile. Journal of Mammalogy 65: 515–517.
Simpson, G.G. 1945. The principles of classification and a classification of mammals. Bulletin of the
American Museum of Natural History 85: i–xvi, 1–350.
Simpson, G.G. 1970. The Argyrolagidae, extinct South American marsupials. Bulletin of the
Museum of Comparative Zoology 139: 1–86.
Simpson, G.G. 1971. The evolution of marsupials in South America. Anais da Academia Brasileira
de Ciências 43 (suppl.) 103–118.
Simpson, G.G. 1980. Splendid isolation, the curious history of South American mammals. New
Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Smith, P., and R.D. Owen. 2015. The subgenus Micoureus (Didelphidae: Marmosa) in Paraguay:
morphometrics, distributions, and habitat associations. Mammalia 79: 463–471.
Smith, P., H. Pheasey, K. Atkinson, J. Ramakers, and J. Sarvary. 2012. The Didelphimorphia
(Didelphidae) of Reserva Natural Laguna Blanca, Departamento de San Pedro, Paraguay. Acta
Zoológica Lilloana 56: 141–153.
Smythe, N. 1978. The natural history of the Central American agouti (Dasyprocta punctata).
Smithsonian Contributions to Zoology 257: i–iv, 1–52.
Smythe, N. 1986. Competition and resource partitioning in the guild of Neotropical terrestrial
frugivorous mammals. Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics 17: 169–188.Smythe, N. 1996. The seasonal abundance of night-flying insects in a Neotropical forest. Pages 309–
318 in E.G. Leigh, Jr., A.S. Rand, and D.M. Windsor, eds. The ecology of a tropical forest (2nd
ed.). Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution.
Snyder, D.E., A.N. Hamir, C.A. Hanlon, and C.E. Rupprecht. 1991. Lung lesions in an opossum
(Didelphis virginiana) associated with Capillaria didelphis. Journal of Wildlife Diseases 27: 175–
177.
Sofroniew, N.J., and K. Svoboda. 2015. Whisking. Current Biology 25: R137–R140.
Soibelzon, L.H. 2011. First description of milk teeth of fossil South American procyonid from the
lower Chapadmalalan (late Miocene–early Pliocene) of “Farola Monte Hermoso,” Argentina:
paleoecological considerations. Paläontologische Zeitschrift 85: 83–89.
Solari, S., V. Pacheco, L. Luna, P.M. Velazco, and B.D. Patterson. 2006. Mammals of the Manu
Biosphere Reserve. Fieldiana Zoology 110: 13–22.
Solari, S., V. Pacheco, E. Vivar, and L.H. Emmons. 2012. A new species of Monodelphis (Mammalia:
Didelphimorphia: Didelphidae) from the montane forests of central Peru. Proceedings of the
Biological Society of Washington 125: 295–307.
Soong, T.W., and B. Venkatesh. 2006. Adaptive evolution of tetrodotoxin resistance in animals.
Trends in Genetics 22: 621–626.
Sperr, E.B., E.A. Fronhofer, and M. Tschapka. 2008. The Mexican mouse opossum (Marmosa
mexicana) as a flower visitor at a Neotropical palm. Mammalian Biology 74: 76–80.
Steiner, K.E. 1981. Nectarivory and potential pollination by a Neotropical marsupial. Annals of the
Missouri Botanical Garden. 68: 505–513.
Steiner, K.E. 1983. Pollination of Mabea occidentalis (Euphorbiaceae) in Panama. Systematic
Botany 8: 105–117.
Stonerook, M.J., and J.D. Harder. 1992. Sexual maturation in female gray short-tailed opossums,
Monodelphis domestica, is dependent upon male stimuli. Biology of Reproduction 46: 290–294.
Streilein, K.E. 1982a. Ecology of small mammals in the semiarid Brazilian caatinga. I. Climate and
faunal composition. Annals of Carnegie Museum 51: 79–107.
Streilein, K.E. 1982b. Ecology of small mammals in the semiarid Brazilian caatinga. III.
Reproductive biology and population ecology. Annals of Carnegie Museum 51: 251–269.
Streilein, K.E. 1982c. The ecology of small mammals in the semiarid Brazilian caatinga. V. Agonistic
behavior and overview. Annals of Carnegie Museum 51: 345–369.
Striedter, G.F. 2005. Principles of brain evolution. Sunderland, MA: Sinauer Associates.
Stroud, J.T., and J.B. Losos. 2016. Ecological opportunity and adaptive radiation. Annual Review of
Ecology, Evolution, and Systematics 47: 507–532.
Suárez-Villota, E.Y., C.A. Quercia, J.J. Nuñez, M.H. Gallardo, C.M. Hines, and G.J. Kenagy. 2018.
Monotypic status of the South American relictual marsupial Dromiciops gliroides
(Microbiotheria). Journal of Mammalogy 99: 803–812.
Sunquist, M.E., and J.F. Eisenberg. 1993. Reproductive strategies of female Didelphis. Bulletin of the
Florida Museum of Natural History (Biol. Sci.) 36: 109–140.
Sunquist, M.E., S.N. Austad, and F. Sunquist. 1987. Movement patterns and home range in the
common opossum (Didelphis marsupialis). Journal of Mammalogy 68: 173–176.
Sussman, R.W., and P.H. Raven. 1978. Pollination by lemurs and marsupials: an archaic
coevolutionary system. Science 200: 731–736.
Szeplaki, E., J. Ochoa, and J. Clavijo A. 1988. Stomach contents of the greater long-nosed armadillo
(Dasypus kappleri) in Venezuela. Mammalia 52: 422–425.
Taber, A.B., A.J. Novaro, N. Neris, and F.H. Colman. 1997. The food habits of sympatric jaguar and
puma in the Paraguayan Chaco. Biotropica 29: 204–213.Tantaleán, M., M. Díaz, N. Sánchez, and H. Portocarrero. 2010. Endoparásitos de micromamíferos
del noroeste de Perú. 1. Helmintos de marsupiales. Revista Peruana de Biología 17: 207–213.
Tarifa, T., and S. Anderson. 1997. Two additional records of Glironia venusta Thomas, 1912
(Marsupialia, Didelphidae) for Bolivia. Mammalia 61: 111–113.
Tarquini, J., N. Toledo, L.H. Soibelzon, and C.C. Morgan. 2018. Body mass estimation for
†Cyonasua (Procyonidae, Carnivora) and related taxa based on postcranial skeleton. Historical
Biology 30: 496–506.
Tarquini, J., C.C. Morgan, N. Toledo, and L.H. Soibelzon. 2019. Comparative osteology and
functional morphology of the forelimb of Cyonasua (Mammalia, Procyonidae), the first South
American carnivoran. Journal of Morphology 280: 446–470.
Tate, G.H.H. 1933. A systematic revision of the marsupial genus Marmosa with a discussion of the
adaptive radiation of the murine opossums (Marmosa). Bulletin of the American Museum of
Natural History 66: 1–250 + 26 pls.
Terborgh, J. 1971. Distribution on environmental gradients: theory and a preliminary interpretation of
distributional patterns in the avifauna of the Cordillera Vilcabamba, Peru. Ecology 52: 23–40.
Terborgh, J. 1983. Five New World primates, a study in comparative ecology. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.
Terborgh, J. 1986. Community aspects of frugivory in tropical forests. Pages 371–384 in A. Estrada
and T.H. Fleming, eds. Frugivores and seed dispersal. Dordrecht: W. Junk.
Terborgh, J., S.K. Robinson, T.A. Parker, III, C.A. Munn, and N. Pierpont. 1990. Structure and
function of an Amazonian forest bird community. Ecological Monographs 60: 213–238.
Teta, P., and U.F.J. Pardiñas. 2007. Mammalia, Didelphimorphia, Didelphidae, Chacodelphys
formosa (Shamel, 1930): range extension. Check List 3: 333–335.
Teta, P., U.F.J. Pardiñas, and G. D’Elía. 2006. Rediscovery of Chacodelphys formosa: a South
American marsupial genus previously known from a single specimen. Mammalian Biology 71:
309–314.
Teta, P., E. Muschetto, S. Maidana, C. Bellomo, and P. Padula. 2007. Gracilinanus microtarsus
(Didelphimorphia, Didelphidae) en la Provincia de Misiones, Argentina. Mastozoología
Neotropical 14: 113–115.
Teta, P., J.A. Pereira, E. Muschetto, and N. Fracassi. 2009. Mammalia, Didelphimorphia, Chiroptera,
and Rodentia, Parque Nacional Chaco and Capitán Solari, Chaco Province, Argentina. Check List
5: 144–150.
Thatcher, V.E. 2006. Os endoparasitos de marsupiais brasileiros. Pages 53–68 in N.C. Cáceres and
E.L.A. Monteiro- Filho, eds. Os marsupiais do Brasil. Campo Grande: Editora UFMS.
Thielen, D.R., A. Arends, S. Segnini, and M. Fariñas. 1997a. Population ecology of Marmosa
xerophila Handley and Gordon 1979 (Marsupialia: Didelphidae) in a semi-arid ecosystem from
northern Venezuela. Zoocriaderos 2(1): 1–19.
Thielen, D.R., A. Arends, S. Segnini, and M. Fariñas. 1997b. Food availability and population
dynamics of Marmosa xerophila Handley and Gordon 1979 (Marsupialia: Didelphidae).
Zoocriaderos 2(2): 1–15.
Thielen, D.R., D.R. Cabello, G. Bianchi-Pérez, and P. Ramoni-Perazzi. 2009. Rearing cycle and other
reproductive parameters of the xerophytic mouse opossum Marmosa xerophila (Didelphimorphia:
Didelphidae) in the Peninsula of Paraguaná, Venezuela. Interciencia 34: 195–198.
Thompson, S.D. 1988. Thermoregulation in the water opossum (Chironectes minimus): an exception
that “proves” a rule. Physiological Zoology 61: 450–460.
Thorén, S., P. Lindenfors, and P.M. Kappeler. 2006. Phylogenetic analyses of dimorphism in
primates: evidence for stronger selection on canine size than on body size. American Journal of
Physical Anthropology 130: 50–59.Timm, R.M., and R.K. LaVal. 2000. Observations on Monteverde’s mammals. Pages 235–236 in
N.M. Nadkarni and N.T. Wheelwright, eds. Monteverde, ecology and conservation of a tropical
cloud forest. New York: Oxford University Press.
Timm, R.M., and R.D. Price. 1985. A review of Cummingsia Ferris (Mallophaga: Trimenoponidae),
with a description of two new species. Proceedings of the Biological Society of Washington 98:
391–402.
Timm, R.M., D.E. Wilson, B.L. Clauson, R.K. LaVal, and C.S. Vaughan. 1989. Mammals of the La
Selva-Braulio Carrillo complex, Costa Rica. North American Fauna 75: 1–162.
Tipton, V.J., and C.E. Machado-Allison. 1972. Fleas of Venezuela. Brigham Young University
Science Bulletin (Biol. Ser.) 17(6): 1–115.
Tomassini, R.L., C.I. Montalvo, C.M. Deschamps, and T. Manera. 2013. Biostratigraphy and
biochronology of the Monte Hermoso Formation (early Pliocene) at its type locality, Buenos Aires
Province, Argentina. Journal of South American Earth Sciences 48: 31–42.
Torres, E.J.L., A. Maldonado, Jr., and R.M. Lanfredi. 2009. Spirurids from Gracilinanus agilis
(Marsupialia: Didelphidae) in Brazilian Pantanal wetlands, with a new species of Physaloptera
(Nematoda: Spiruridae). Veterinary Parasitology 163: 87–92.
Tortato, M.A. 2009. Predação de cuíca-d’água (Chironectes minimus) por gavião-carijó (Rupornis
magnirostris: Aves, Accipitridae). Mastozoología Neotropical 16: 491–493.
Trajano, E., and M. de Vivo. 1991. Desmodus draculae Morgan, Linares, and Ray, 1988, reported for
southeastern Brazil, with paleoecological comments (Phyllostomidae, Desmodontinae).
Mammalia 55: 456–459, pl. III.
Traub, R. 1985. Coevolution of fleas and mammals. Pages 295–437 in K.C. Kim, ed. Coevolution of
parasitic arthropods and mammals. New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Travaini, A., M. Delibes, and O. Ceballos. 1998. Summer foods of the Andean hog-nosed skunk
(Conepatus chinga) in Patagonia. Journal of Zoology London 246: 457–460.
Troyer, E.M., S.E.C. Devitt, M.E. Sunquist, V.R. Goswami, and M.K. Oli. 2014. Density dependence
or climatic variation? Factors influencing survival, recruitment, and population growth rate of
Virginia opossums. Journal of Mammalogy 95: 421–430.
Trupin, G.L., and B.H. Fadem. 1982. Sexual behavior of the gray short-tailed opossum (Monodelphis
domestica). Journal of Mammalogy 63: 409–414.
Tschapka, M., and O. von Helversen. 1999. Pollinators of syntopic Marcgravia species in Costa
Rican lowland rain forest: bats and opossums. Plant Biology 1: 382–388.
Tuttle, M.D., L.K. Taft, and M.J. Ryan. 1981. Acoustical location of calling frogs by Philander
opossums. Biotropica 13: 233–234.
Tyndale-Biscoe, C.H., and R.B. Mackenzie. 1976. Reproduction in Didelphis marsupialis and D.
albiventris in Colombia. Journal of Mammalogy 57: 249–265.
Tyndale-Biscoe, H., and M. Renfree. 1987. Reproductive physiology of marsupials. Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.
Tyson, E. 1698. Carigueya, seu marsupiale americanum. Or, the anatomy of an opossum, dissected at
Gresham-College by Edw. Tyson, M.D.[,] fellow of the College of Physicians and of the Royal
Society, and reader of anatomy at the Chyrurgeons-Hall, in London. Philosophical Transactions
20: 105–164.
Udrizar Sauthier, D.E., M. Carrera, and U.F.J. Pardiñas. 2007. Mammalia, Marsupialia, Didelphidae,
Lestodelphys halli: new records, distribution extension and filling gaps. Check List 3: 137–140.
Ujvari, B., N.R. Casewell, K. Sunagar, K. Arbuckle, W. Wüster, N. Lo, D. O’Meally, C. Beckmann,
G.F. King, E. Deplazes, and T. Madsen. 2015. Widespread convergence in toxin resistance by
predictable molecular evolution. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 112: 11911–
11916.Ungar, P.S. 2010. Mammal teeth: origin, evolution, and diversity. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins
University Press.
Valdujo, P.H., C.C. Nogueira, L. Baumgarten, F.H.G. Rodrigues, R.A. Brandão, A. Eterovic, M.B.
Ramos-Neto, and O.A.V. Marques. 2009. Squamate reptiles from Parque Nacional das Emas and
surroundings, Cerrado of central Brazil. Check List 5: 405–417.
Valiente-Moro C., C. Chauve, and L. Zenner. 2005. Vectorial role of some dermanyssoid mites
(Acari, Mesostigmata, Dermanyssoidea). Parasite 12: 99–109.
Valtierra-Azotla, M., and A. García. 1998. Mating behavior of the Mexican mouse opossum
(Marmosa canescens) in Cuixmala, Jalisco, Mexico. Revista Mexicana de Mastozoología 3: 146–
147.
VanBuren, C.S., and D.C. Evans. 2017. Evolution and function of anterior cervical vertebral fusion in
tetrapods. Biological Reviews 92: 608–626.
VandeBerg, J.L. 1989. The gray short-tailed opossum (Monodelphis domestica) as a model didelphid
species for genetic research. Australian Journal of Zoology 37: 235–247.
VandeBerg, J.L., and E.S. Robinson. 1997. The laboratory opossum (Monodelphis domestica) in
laboratory research. ILAR Journal 38: 4–12.
van Schaik, C.P., J.W. Terborgh, and S.J. Wright. 1993. The phenology of tropical forests: adaptive
significance and consequences for primary consumers. Annual Review of Ecology and
Systematics 24: 353–377.
Varela, O., A. Cormenzana-Méndez, L. Krapovickas, and E.H. Bucher. 2008. Seasonal diet of the
pampas fox (Lycalopex gymnocercus) in the Chaco dry woodland, northwestern Argentina.
Journal of Mammalogy 89: 1012–1019.
Veevers, J.J. 2004. Gondwanaland from 650–500 Ma assembly through 320 Ma merger in Pangea to
185–100 Ma breakup: supercontinental tectonics via stratigraphy and radiometric dating. Earth￾Science Review 68: 1–132.
Veilleux, C.C., and E.C. Kirk. 2014. Visual acuity in mammals: effects of eye size and ecology.
Brain, Behavior, and Evolution 83: 43–53.
Vellard, J. 1945. Resistencia de los “Didelphis” (zarigueya) a los venenos ofídicos (nota prévia).
Revista Brasileira de Biologia 5: 463–467.
Vellard, J. 1949. Investigaciones sobre inmunidad natural contra los venenos de serpientes.
Publicaciones del Museo de Historia Natural “Javier Prado” Serie A (Zoología) 1(2): 1–61, figs.
1–20.
Vicente, J.J., H. de O. Rodrigues, D.C. Gomes, and R.M. Pinto. 1997. Nematóides do Brasil. Parte V:
Nematóides de mamíferos. Revista Brasileira de Zoologia 14(suppl. 1): 1–452.
Vieira, E.M., and L.C. Baumgarten. 1995. Daily activity patterns of small mammals in a Cerrado area
from central Brazil. Journal of Tropical Ecology 11: 255–262.
Vieira, E.M., and P. Izar. 1999. Interactions between aroids and arboreal mammals in the Brazilian
Atlantic rainforest. Plant Ecology 145: 75–82.
Vieira, E.M., and E.L.A. Monteiro-Filho. 2003. Vertical stratification of small mammals in the
Atlantic rain forest of south-eastern Brazil. Journal of Tropical Ecology 19: 501–507.
Vieira, E.M., and G. Paise. 2011. Temporal niche overlap among insectivorous small mammals.
Integrative Zoology 6: 375–386.
Vieira, E.M., and A.R.T. Palma. 1996. Natural history of Thylamys velutinus (Marsupialia,
Didelphidae) in central Brazil. Mammalia 60: 481–484.
Vieira, M.F., and R.M. de Carvalho-Okano. 1996. Pollination biology of Mabea fistulifera
(Euphorbiaceae) in southeastern Brazil. Biotropica 28: 61–68.
Vignieri, S.N., J.G. Larson, and H.E. Hoekstra. 2010. The selective advantage of crypsis in mice.
Evolution 64: 2153–2158.Villarin, J.J., P.J. Schaeffer, R.A. Markle, and S.L. Lindstedt. 2003. Chronic cold exposure increases
liver oxidative capacity in the marsupial Monodelphis domestica. Comparative Biochemistry and
Physiology A 136: 621–630.
Volchan, E., C.D. Vargas, J.G. da Franca, A. Pereira, Jr., and C.E. da Rocha-Miranda. 2004. Tooled
for the task: vision in the opossum. BioScience 54: 189–194.
von May, R., E. Biggi, H. Cárdenas, M.I. Díaz, C. Alarcón, V. Herrera, R. Santa-Cruz, et al. 2019.
Ecological interactions between arthropods and small vertebrates in a lowland Amazon rainforest.
Amphibian & Reptile Conservation 13: 65–77.
Voss, R.S. 1988. Systematics and ecology of ichthyomyine rodents (Muroidea): patterns of
morphological evolution in a small adaptive radiation. Bulletin of the American Museum of
Natural History 188: 259–493.
Voss, R.S. 2013. Opossums (Mammalia: Didelphidae) in the diets of Neotropical pitvipers
(Serpentes: Crotalinae): evidence for alternative evolutionary outcomes? Toxicon 66: 1–6.
Voss, R.S., and L.H. Emmons. 1996. Mammalian diversity in Neotropical lowland rainforests: a
preliminary assessment. Bulletin of the American Museum of Natural History 230: 1–115.
Voss, R.S., and D.W. Fleck. 2017. Mammalian diversity and Matses ethnomammalogy in Amazonian
Peru. Part 2. Xenarthra, Carnivora, Perissodactyla, Artiodactyla, and Sirenia. Bulletin of the
American Museum of Natural History 417: 1–118.
Voss, R.S., and S.A. Jansa. 2003. Phylogenetic studies on didelphid marsupials II. Nonmolecular data
and new IRBP sequences: separate and combined analyses of didelphine relationships with denser
taxon sampling. Bulletin of the American Museum of Natural History 276: 1–82.
Voss, R.S., and S.A. Jansa. 2009. Phylogenetic relationships and classification of didelphid
marsupials, an extant radiation of New World metatherian mammals. Bulletin of the American
Museum of Natural History 322: 1–177.
Voss, R.S., and S.A. Jansa. 2012. Snake-venom resistance as a mammalian trophic adaptation:
lessons from didelphid marsupials. Biological Reviews 87: 822–837.
Voss, R.S., D.P. Lunde, and N.B. Simmons. 2001. The mammals of Paracou, French Guiana: a
Neotropical rainforest fauna. Part 2. Nonvolant species. Bulletin of the American Museum of
Natural History 263: 1–236.
Voss, R.S., A.L. Gardner, and S.A. Jansa. 2004a. On the relationships of “Marmosa” formosa
Shamel, 1930 (Marsupialia: Didelphidae), a phylogenetic puzzle from the Chaco of northern
Argentina. American Museum Novitates 3442: 1–18.
Voss, R.S., E. Yensen, and T. Tarifa. 2004b. An introduction to Marmosops (Marsupialia:
Didelphidae), with the description of a new species from Bolivia and notes on the taxonomy and
distribution of other Bolivian congeners. American Museum Novitates 3466: 1–40.
Voss, R.S., D.P. Lunde, and S.A. Jansa. 2005. On the contents of Gracilinanus Gardner and
Creighton, 1989, with the description of a previously unrecognized clade of small didelphid
marsupials. American Museum Novitates 3482: 1–34.
Voss, R.S., D.W. Fleck, and S.A. Jansa. 2009a. On the diagnostic characters, ecogeographic
distribution, and phylogenetic relationships of Gracilinanus emiliae (Didelphimorphia:
Didelphidae: Thylamyini). Mastozoología Neotropical 16: 433–443.
Voss, R.S., P. Myers, F. Catzeflis, A.P. Carmignotto, and J. Barreiro. 2009b. The six opossums of
Félix de Azara: identification, taxonomic history, neotype designations, and nomenclatural
recommendations. Bulletin of the American Museum of Natural History 331: 406–433.
Voss, R.S., E.E. Gutiérrez, S. Solari, R.V. Rossi, and S.A. Jansa. 2014. Phylogenetic relationships of
mouse opossums (Didelphidae: Marmosa) with a revised subgeneric classification and notes on
sympatric diversity. American Museum Novitates 3891: 1–70.Voss, R.S., J.F. Díaz-Nieto, and S.A. Jansa. 2018. A revision of Philander (Marsupialia:
Didelphidae), part 1: P. quica, P. canus, and a new species from Amazonia. American Museum
Novitates 3891: 1–70.
Voss, R.S., D.W. Fleck, and S.A. Jansa. 2019. Mammalian diversity and Matses ethnomammalogy in
Amazonian Peru. Part 3. Marsupials. Bulletin of the American Museum of Natural History 432:
1–87.
Wackermannová, M., L. Pinc, and L. Jebavý. 2016. Olfactory sensitivity in mammalian species: a
review. Physiological Research 65: 369–390.
Wallis, I.R., A.W. Claridge, and J.M. Trappe. 2012. Nitrogen content, amino-acid composition, and
digestibility of fungi from a nutritional perspective in animal mycophagy. Fungal Biology 116:
590–602.
Walls, G.L. 1939. Notes on the retinae of two opossum genera. Journal of Morphology 64: 67–87.
Walls, G.L. 1942. The vertebrate eye and its adaptive radiation (Cranbrook Institute of Science
Bulletin 19). Bloomfield Hills, MI: Cranbrook Institute of Science.
Webb, S.D. 1976. Mammalian faunal dynamics of the Great American Interchange. Paleobiology 2:
220–234.
Webb, S.D. 1985. Late Cenozoic mammal dispersals between the Americas. Pages 357–386 in F.G.
Stehli and S.D. Webb, eds. The Great American Biotic Interchange. New York: Plenum.
Webster, G.L. 1995. The panorama of Neotropical cloud forests. Pages 53–77 in S.P. Churchill, H.
Balslev, E. Forero, and J.L. Luteyn, eds. Biodiversity and conservation of Neotropical montane
forests. New York: New York Botanical Garden.
Weckel, M., W. Giuliano, and S. Silver. 2006. Jaguar (Panthera onca) feeding ecology: distribution
of predator and prey through time and space. Journal of Zoology 270: 25–30.
Weisbecker, V., and A. Goswami. 2010. Brain size, life history, and metabolism at the
marsupial/placental dichotomy. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 107:
16216–16221.
Weisbecker, V., and A. Goswami. 2014. Reassessing the relationship between brain size, life history,
and metabolism at the marsupial/placental dichotomy. Zoological Science 31: 608–612.
Weisbecker, V., and M. Nilsson. 2008. Integration, heterochrony, and adaptation in pedal digits of
syndactylous marsupials. BMC Evolutionary Biology 8(160): 1–14.
Weisbecker, V., and D.I. Warton. 2006. Evidence at hand: diversity, functional implications, and
locomotor prediction in intrinsic hand proportions of diprotodontian marsupials. Journal of
Morphology 267: 1469–1485.
Weisbecker, V., S. Blomberg, A.W. Goldizen, M. Brown, and D. Fisher. 2015. The evolution of
relative brain size in marsupials is energetically constrained but not driven by behavioral
complexity. Brain, Behavior, and Evolution 85: 125–135.
Werner, R.M., and J.A. Vick. 1977. Resistance of the opossum (Didelphis virginiana) to
envenomation by snakes of the family Crotalidae. Toxicon 15: 29–33.
Wesselingh, F.P., M. Räsänen, G. Irion, H. Vonhof, R. Kaandorp, W. Renema, L.R. Pittman, and M.
Gingras. 2002. Lake Pebas: a palaeoecological reconstruction of a Miocene long-lived lake
complex in western Amazonia. Cainozoic Research 1: 35–81.
Whitaker, J.O., Jr., and N. Wilson. 1974. Host and distribution lists of mites (Acari), parasitic and
phoretic, in the hair of wild mammals of North America, north of Mexico. American Midland
Naturalist 91: 1–67.
Whitaker, J.O., Jr., B.L. Walters, L.K. Castor, C.M. Ritzi, and N. Wilson. 2007. Host and distribution
lists of mites (Acari), parasitic and phoretic, in the hair or on the skin of North American wild
mammals north of Mexico: records since 1974. Faculty Publications from the Harold W. Manter
Laboratory of Parasitology 1: 1–173.White, T.D. 1990. Gait selection in the brush-tailed opossum (Trichosurus vulpecula), the northern
quoll (Dasyurus hallucatus), and the Virginia opossum (Didelphis virginiana). Journal of
Mammalogy 71: 79–84.
Wilcove, D.S. 1985. Nest predation in forest tracts and the decline of migratory songbirds. Ecology
66: 1211–1214.
Wilf, P., N.R. Cúneo, I.H. Escapa, D. Pol, and M.O. Woodburne. 2013. Splendid and seldom isolated:
the paleobiogeography of Patagonia. Annual Reviews of Earth and Planetary Sciences 41: 561–
603.
Wilkinson, G.S., and J.W. Boughman. 1998. Social calls coordinate foraging in greater spear-nosed
bats. Animal Behavior 55: 337–350.
Williams, G.C. 1957. Pleiotropy, natural selection, and the evolution of senescence. Evolution 11:
398–411.
Williamson, T.E., S.L. Brusatte, T.D. Carr, A. Weil, and B.R. Standhardt. 2012. The phylogeny and
evolution of Cretaceous–Palaeogene metatherians: cladistic analysis and description of new early
Palaeocene specimens from the Nacimiento Formation, New Mexico. Journal of Systematic
Palaeontology 10: 625–651.
Williamson, T.E., S.L. Brusatte, and G.P. Wilson. 2014. The origin and early evolution of metatherian
mammals: the Cretaceous record. ZooKeys 465: 1–76.
Wilson, D.E. 1970. Opossum predation: Didelphis on Philander. Journal of Mammalogy 51: 386–
387.
Wilson, D.E., and D.A. Reeder, eds. 2005. Mammal species of the world (3rd ed.), 2 vols. Baltimore,
MD: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Wilson, G.P., E.G. Ekdale, J.W. Hoganson, J.J. Calede, and A.V. Linden. 2016. A large carnivorous
mammal from the Late Cretaceous and the North American origin of marsupials. Nature
Communications 7: 13734.
Withers, P.C., C.E. Cooper, and A.N. Larcombe. 2006. Environmental correlates of physiological
variables in marsupials. Physiological and Biochemical Zoology 79: 437–453.
Withers, P.C., C.E. Cooper, S.K. Maloney, F. Bozinovic, and A.P. Cruz-Neto. 2016. Ecological and
environmental physiology of mammals. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Wittenberger, J.F. 1979. The evolution of mating systems in birds and mammals. Pages 271–349 in P.
Marler and J.G. Vandenbergh, eds. Handbook of behavioral neurobiology, vol. 3. New York:
Plenum.
Woinarski, J.C.Z., A.A. Burbidge, and P.L. Harrison. 2015. Ongoing unravelling of a continental
fauna: decline and extinction of Australian mammals since European settlement. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences 112: 4531–4540.
Woinarski, J.C.Z., M.F. Braby, A.A. Burbridge, D. Coates, S.T. Garnett, R.J. Fensham, S.M. Legge,
N.L. McKenzie, J.L. Silcock, and B.P. Murphy. 2019. Reading the black book: the number,
timing, distribution, and causes of listed extinctions in Australia. Biological Conservation 239:
108261.
Wolff, J.O. 1993. Why are female small mammals territorial? Oikos 68: 364–370.
Wolff, J.O., and D.W. Macdonald. 2004. Promiscuous females protect their offspring. Trends in
Ecology and Evolution 19: 127–134.
Wolff, J.O., and J.A. Peterson. 1998. An offspring-defense hypothesis for territoriality in female
mammals. Ethology, Ecology & Evolution 10: 227–239.
Woodburne, M.O. 2010. The Great American Biotic Interchange: dispersals, tectonics, climate, sea
level, and holding pens. Journal of Mammalian Evolution 17: 245–264.
Woodburne, M.O., and J.A. Case. 1996. Dispersal, vicariance, and the Late Cretaceous to early
Tertiary land mammal biogeography from South America to Australia. Journal of MammalianEvolution 3: 121–161.
Woodburne, M.O., and W.J. Zinsmeister. 1984. The first land mammal from Antarctica and its
biogeographic implications. Journal of Paleontology 58: 913–948.
Woods, H.A., II, and E.C. Hellgren. 2003. Seasonal changes in the physiology of male Virginia
opossums (Didelphis virginiana): signs of the dasyurid semelparity syndrome? Physiological and
Biochemical Zoology 76: 406–417.
Wright, D.D., J.T. Ryser, and R.A. Kiltie. 1995. First-cohort advantage hypothesis: a new twist on
facultative sex ratio adjustment. American Naturalist 145: 133–145.
Wright, J.D., M.S. Burt, and V.L. Jackson. 2012. Influences of an urban environment on home range
and body mass of Virginia opossums (Didelphis virginiana). Northeastern Naturalist 19: 77–86.
Wright, P.C. 1996. The Neotropical primate adaptation to nocturnality. Pages 369–382 in M.A.
Norconk, A.L. Rosenberger, and P.A. Garber, eds. Adaptive radiations of Neotropical primates.
New York: Plenum.
Wroe, S., M. Crowther, J. Dortch, and J. Chong. 2004. The size of the largest marsupial and why it
matters. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London B (suppl.) 271: S34–S36.
Wroot, A.J. 1985. A quantitative method for estimating the amount of earthworm (Lumbricus
terrestris) in animal diets. Oikos 44: 239–242.
Wunderle, J.M., Jr., M.R. Willig, and L.M.P. Henriques. 2005. Avian distribution in treefall gaps and
understorey of terra firme forest in the lowland Amazon. Ibis 147: 109–129.
Wüster, W., M.G. Salomão, J.A. Quijada-Mascareñas, R.S. Thorpe, and BBBSP. 2002. Origins and
evolution of the South American pitviper fauna: evidence from mitochondrial DNA sequence
analysis. Pages 111–128 in G.W. Schuett, M. Höggren, M.E. Douglas, and H.W. Greene, eds.
Biology of the vipers. Eagle Mountain, UT: Eagle Mountain Publishing.
Yotsu-Yamashita, M., J. Gilhen, R.W. Russell, K.L. Krysko, C. Melaun, A. Kurz, S. Kauferstein, D.
Kordis, and D. Mebs. 2012. Variability of tetrodotoxin and of its analogues in the red-spotted
newt, Notophthalmus viridescens (Amphibia: Urodela: Salamandridae). Toxicon 59: 257–264.
Youlatos, D. 2008. Hallucal grasping behavior in Caluromys (Didelphimorphia: Didelphidae):
implications for primate pedal grasping. Journal of Human Evolution 55: 1096–1101.
Youlatos, D. 2010. Use of zygodactylous grasp by Caluromys philander (Didelphimorphia:
Didelphidae). Mammalian Biology 75: 475–481.
Zangrandi, P.L., A.F. Mendonça, A.P. Cruz-Neto, R. Boonstra, and E.M. Vieira. 2019. The impact of
botfly parasitism on the health of the gracile mouse opossum (Gracilinanus agilis). Parasitology
146: 1031–1021.
Zapata, S.C., D. Procopio, A. Travaini, and A. Rodríguez. 2013. Summer food habits of the
Patagonian opossum, Lestodelphys halli (Thomas, 1921), in southern arid Patagonian shrub￾steppes. Gayana 77: 64–67.
Zapata, T.R., and M.T. Arroyo. 1978. Plant reproductive ecology of a secondary deciduous tropical
forest in Venezuela. Biotropica 10: 221–230.
Zarza, H., G. Ceballos, and M.A. Steele. 2003. Marmosa canescens. Mammalian Species 725: 1–4.
Zetek, J. 1930. The water opossum—Chironectes panamensis Goldman. Journal of Mammalogy 11:
470–471.
Zimicz, N. 2014. Avoiding competition: the ecological history of late Cenozoic metatherian
carnivores in South America. Journal of Mammalian Evolution 21: 383–393.
Zullinger, E.M., R.E. Ricklefs, K.H. Redford, and G.M. Mace. 1984. Fitting sigmoidal equations to
mammalian growth curves. Journal of Mammalogy 65: 607–636.Index
The letter “f” following a page number indicates a figure; the letter “t” indicates a table.
accipitrids (Accipitridae), 188, 191, 192t
adaptations, 98, 99, 237, 239; arboreal vs. terrestrial, 132; to arid conditions, 104; behavioral, 132,
151; carnivorous, 49; for crypsis (predator avoidance), 98, 99; cursorial, 42; defensive, 128,
132n5; dental, 34, 164, 165; dietary, 137, 160; digestive, 31; ecological, 67, 87, 101, 121; for
locomotion, 48, 76, 85, 94, 95, 100, 151; mammalian, 70; to minimize endoparasitism, 185;
morphological, 43, 44, 48, 98, 151; physiological, 165; to prevent cervical dislocation, 93; of
remote human ancestors, 2; sensory, 119, 238; for survival in cold climates, 102; trophic, 2, 96,
115, 119, 153, 166, 167, 238
adaptive radiation, 229; of Australasian marsupials, 98; of bats, 235; of birds, 235; of monkeys, 235;
of opossums, 67, 74, 118, 235, 240n1; of placental mammals, 239; of South American
metatherians, 16
allogrooming, 127
allometry, 87, 119
†Allqokirus, 18
†Alphadon, 9
Amazonia: central, 141, 216; floodplain and riparian landscapes in, 141; as locus of opossum
distributions, 32, 54, 138, 151; map of, 140f; northeastern, 25t, 150; parasitological surveys in,
180; separated from Atlantic Forest by Arid Diagonal, 143; southwestern, 85, 150; vegetation of,
137; western, 50, 141, 152, 161, 216. See also rainforest
Amazonian localities, 3, 196. See also Balta; Manaus; Nuevo San Juan; Paracou; Río Manu
“Ameridelphia,” 12n1, 13n1
amphibians, 141, 160, 170; as intermediate or paratenic hosts of helminth parasites, 176, 178; as
opossum prey, 38, 47, 117, 167; toxic defenses of, 48, 115, 117–19. See also frogs; toads
anal glands, 128, 180
Andes, 10, 48, 52, 118, 138, 140f, 144, 145, 173
†Andinodelphys, 18
ants (Formicidae), 43, 157, 158
arachnids (Arachnida), 52, 159, 247. See also harvestmen; mites; scorpions; spiders
argyrolagids (†Argyrolagidae), 13n1, 16, 17t, 19, 19t, 20, 232
armadillos, 22, 129, 196, 199, 200tarthropods (Arthropoda), 57, 141, 146, 172; as disease vectors, 178; as opossum prey, 31, 38, 40, 57,
153, 157, 158, 197; as parasites, 169, 170t, 182, 184, 247. See also arachnids; crustaceans; insects;
millipedes
artiodactyls (Artiodactyla), 22, 24, 25t, 180, 198
astrapotheres, 20
Atacama Desert. See desert
Atlantic Forest (Mata Atlântica): as locus of opossum research, 47, 58, 150, 151, 201, 202, 211, 220,
222, 224; map of, 140f; parasitological surveys in, 180; riparian extensions of, 140; separated
from Amazonia by Arid Diagonal, 143; vegetation of 138. See also rainforest
Australia, 3, 8, 14, 15, 239
Australian (Australasian) marsupials, 2, 9t, 10, 11f, 12n1; behavior of, 132, 133n5, 133n6; diets of,
165; longevity of, 226; morphology of, 96, 98, 99n4, 104; parasites of, 171; physiology of 101,
102, 104, 105, 111. See also dasyurids; peramelids
Australidelphia, 9t, 10, 11f, 12n1, 13n1
Balta, 200
basal metabolic rate (BMR), 101, 102, 119n1
bats: as flower visitors, 163t; infected with Trypanosoma cruzi, 180; metabolism of, 101; as opossum
competitors, 160, 196, 199–201, 245, 246; as pollinators, 205, 207t, 208; as potential prey of
arboreal opossums, 31; as problematic participants in GABI, 26n3; radiations of, 235, 236; as seed
dispersers, 202, 203t, 204, 209, 210n3. See also phyllostomids
beetles (Coleoptera), as flower visitors, 205; as intermediate hosts of helminth parasites, 175; in
opossum diets, 49, 57, 157, 158, 196, 247; as phoretic symbionts, 169
behavior, 121–33; agonistic, 127; climbing, 34, 98; copulatory, 130; defensive, 180; feeding, 2, 38,
89, 126, 154, 160, 208; food-handling, 156; foraging, 110, 197; grooming, 184; locomotor, 76, 84,
93–95, 124, 150, 196; maternal, 130; nesting, 129; of opossum predators, 191, 192t; scent￾marking, 120n4; social, 120n4, 127; trophic, 209. See also digging; diel activity; fighting; gaits;
gape display; locomotion; lunar phobia; mating; whisking
birds (Aves), 102, 161, 163t, 170, 237; as frugivores, 202; as intermediate or paratenic hosts of
tapeworms, 176; as hosts of malaria parasites, 179; as pollinators, 205, 207t; as potential
competitors, 160, 195; as predators, 188, 192t; as prey, 31, 38, 47, 52, 57, 148, 155, 159, 160; as
seed dispersers, 202–4, 209. See also phorusrhacids
BMR. See basal metabolic rate
“borhyaenids” (“borhyenoids,” etc.), 17t, 18, 232. See also sparassodonts
botflies (Oestridae), 170t, 172
brain, 87, 96, 97
breeding season, 108, 109, 215, 219–22, 225, 226n4. See also reproduction
Brinkmann’s organs, 79, 81, 99n3, 115
bufadienolides, 117, 118
burrowing. See digging
Caatinga, 104, 129, 140f, 143, 180, 226n1, 226n3
Cabassous, 25t, 197
caecum, 31, 96, 174. See also digestive tract
caenolestids (Caenolestidae), 9t, 17t, 20, 171, 172. See also paucituberculatans
caluromyines (Caluromyinae), 12, 29, 34, 62t; captive lifespan of, 110; evolution of pouch in
ancestor of, 82; possible sister taxon of, 32; unknown age of female puberty in, 105Caluromys, 29–31, 50, 62t, 241; alleged to be folivorous, 63n1; behavior of, 62t, 124, 130, 133n6;
diet of, 31, 62t, 165; habitats of, 30, 62t; microhabitat use by, 30, 149; morphology of, 70, 76t, 77,
81–84, 90, 91, 93, 98; parasites of, 175, 177, 178t, 180, 181; predators of, 186, 189, 190t
Caluromys derbianus, 29, 30, 30f, 241; caudal pelage of, 84; feeding behavior of, 126; as flower
visitor, 163t, 206f; locomotion of, 124; microhabitat of, 150
Caluromysiops, 29, 31, 32f, 62t, 241; absence of predation records for, 190; diel activity of, 62t; diet
of, 31, 62t; as flower visitor, 31, 163; habitat of, 31, 62t; locomotion of, 62t; longevity of, 110;
microhabitat of, 31, 149; morphology of, 73, 76t, 77, 81, 82, 84, 93
Caluromys lanatus, 241; diet of, 31; as flower visitor, 163, 208; microhabitat of, 150; pouch
morphology of, 82; sexual dimorphism of, 69t
Caluromys philander, 25t, 241; behavior of, 31, 121, 123; diet of, 31, 154, 246, 247; as flower
visitor, 163t; home range of, 212, 213t, 214f, 216; locomotion of, 124, 125; microhabitat of, 150;
morphology of, 77f, 82, 92f, 96; population density of, 217t, 218t; population turnover of, 224; as
potential competitor of kinkajous, 209; as prey of boa, 187f; reproduction of, 105–7; as seed
disperser, 203t
camels, 22, 23
canids (Canidae), 22–24, 238; as predators, 189, 192t, 194. See also coyotes; foxes
canine teeth, 87, 88; as advertisements of fighting ability, 88; displayed by oral gaping, 127;
morphology of, 88, 99n5; sexual dimorphism of, 88, 89, 99; as weapons, 88, 99, 126
carbohydrates, 31, 96, 156f, 158, 166
care of young, 130, 131
carnivorans (Carnivora), 18, 25t, 114t, 239; as flower visitors, 205; as GABI immigrant taxa, 15, 20–
22, 24; as hosts of microbial parasites, 180, 181; as opossum predators, 189–91, 193t, 236, 237,
239; snarling displays of, 88. See also canids; felids; mustelids; procyonids
caroloamegheniids (†Caroloamegheniidae), 16, 17t, 19, 232, 235
carpal tubercles, 75, 75t
Cebidae, 189, 192t. See also Cebus
Cebus, 190
Cenozoic, 14, 238. See also Eocene; Miocene; Oligocene; Paleocene; Pleistocene; Pliocene;
Quaternary; Tertiary
centipedes (Chilopoda), 157, 247
Central America, 24, 29, 36, 46, 52, 151, 241; few parasite surveys from, 173; habitats of, 138, 143,
144, 181
Cerrado, 48, 50; habitats of, 137, 140, 140t, 143, 147, 152n2; population studies in, 211; seasonal
reproduction in, 220; seed dispersal in, 202; termites eaten frequently in, 157; Trypanosoma cruzi
infections in, 180
cervids (Cervidae, deer), 22, 23, 198, 200t
Chaco, 50, 140t, 143, 147, 148f, 189
Chacodelphys, 36, 53, 62t, 232, 234, 243; as depauperon, 230; diel activity of, 62t, 122, 123; habitat
of, 53, 62t, 148f; locomotion of, 53, 62t; morphology of, 55, 67, 76t, 81, 84; predators of, 190t;
unknown diet of, 53, 235
Chilopoda. See centipedes
Chironectes, 25t, 36, 44, 45, 45f, 52, 62t, 243; behavior of, 44, 45, 62t, 78, 125, 126, 132, 132n1; as
depauperon, 230; diet of, 45, 62t, 63n4, 165; diurnal refugia of, 44, 63n4; evidence of female
territoriality in, 212; habitats of, 44; home range of, 44, 212, 213t; late Miocene ancestor of, 233;
microhabitat of, 149t; morphology of, 44, 71, 74–76, 78–84, 94, 98, 99n3; opportunity for
innovative research with, 115, 119; parasites of, 170, 177, 178; potential competitors of, 198, 199;
predators of, 188, 190t, 192; unknown population dynamics of, 225claw(s): absence of, on hallux, 80; of forefoot, 77f, 78; of hind foot, 80f, 81; used for climbing, 78;
used for digging or scratching in soil, 125; used for grooming, 81, 184; vestigial, of Chironectes,
44, 78
climbing, 33, 34, 47, 50, 58, 142; adaptations for, 59, 98, 100. See also locomotion
coatis (Nasua), 25t, 129, 189, 197, 199, 247
Coleoptera. See beetles
competition, 195, 198, 208, 239; diffuse, 199; exploitative, 196; interference, 196; intersexual, 70;
interspecific, 195, 196, 225; intraspecific, 224, 225; kin, 221; resource, 153, 195; sexual, 128;
sperm, 225; trophic, 208, 209
concealing coloration. See crypsis
coyotes (Canis latrans), 189, 191
Cretaceous, 8, 9, 12–15. See also mass extinction
cricetids (Cricetidae), 83; as GABI participants, 15, 20, 21, 23, 24; as hosts of ectoparasites, 170–73;
as potential competitors, 23, 199–201; as prey, 31, 57. See also mice; rodents
crustaceans (Crustacea), 45, 62t, 157, 165, 166, 198, 199
crypsis, 71, 99n2, 193
Cryptonanus, 36, 53, 54f, 61, 62t, 232, 234; diel activity of, 62t; habitats of, 53, 62t, 148f;
locomotion of, 62t; morphology of, 75, 76, 81; predators of, 190; unknown diet of, 53, 62t
dasyurids (Dasyuridae), 9t, 11f, 70, 132, 226, 226n4
Dasyuromorphia. See dasyurids
death feigning (thanatosis), 128, 129, 132n4, 133n5
deer. See Cervidae
demography, 177, 196, 211, 218, 225
dentition, 11, 32, 85, 87, 88; anterior, 89, 126; carnassialized, 49, 53, 238; postcanine, 126;
tribosphenic, 2. See also canine teeth; incisors; molars; premolars
depauperons, 230
Dermaptera. See earwigs
dermatoglyphs, 78, 81, 84
desert(s), 21, 52, 56, 59, 62t, 140, 151, 191; Atacama, 63n7, 146; coastal, 204; floras, 146; high￾altitude, 159; high-latitude, 146, 159; Monte, 104, 146; thornscrub, 36, 144, 146, 147f, 202,
210n1. See also steppe
desmans (Desmana), 83, 125
Didelphidae (didelphids): adaptive radiation of, 229–40; behavior of, 121–33; competitors and
mutualists of, 195–210; definition of, 10; diets of, 153–68; habitats of, 137–52; morphology of,
67–100; parasites of, 169–85; physiology of, 101–20; population biology of, 211–26; predators of,
186–94; stem metatherians formerly classified as, 9; as survivors in placental-dominated faunas,
24; taxonomy of, 29–63
Didelphimorphia (didelphimorphians), 9t, 10–12; definition of, 10; estimated molecular dates for, 12;
fossil record of, 16–20. See also Didelphidae
Didelphinae (didelphines), 34, 35, 62t, 105, 199, 230
Didelphini, 36, 42–44, 62t; morphology of, 68, 82, 84, 90; snake-venom resistance in, 116, 167
Didelphis (common opossums), 36, 44–48, 50, 52, 62t, 234, 238; behavior of, 125, 127, 128, 130,
156; breeding season of, 219; defensive adaptations of, 72, 94, 98, 128, 132n5; diet of, 47, 48, 62t,
165; habitats of, 45, 62t; home range of, 212; litter size variation of, 108; locomotion of, 47, 62t;
microhabitat of, 47, 149t; morphology of, 68, 71, 72, 76, 81, 82, 84, 132n5; in North American
fossil record, 24; ophiophagy by, 156; parasites of, 170, 171, 173, 175, 177, 178t, 180, 181;potential competitors of, 197; predators of, 186, 188–90; snake-venom resistance of, 116, 117,
167; toxin resistance of, 117, 118
Didelphis albiventris, 45, 46f; absence of lunar phobia in, 123; diet of, 154t; gastrointestinal
helminths of, 183t; habitat of, 147, 151; high post-reproductive mortality of, 222; instance of
communal denning by, 132n3; morphology of, 73, 76t, 81; nesting of, 129; reproduction of,
226n3; as seed disperser, 204; snake-venom resistance of, 48; vision of, 112
Didelphis aurita, 52; demography of, 222, 224; diet of, 154t; as flower visitor, 163t; habitat of, 151;
morphology of, 76t; snake-venom resistance of, 48; use of abandoned coati nests by, 129
Didelphis marsupialis, 25t, 45–47; behavior of, 123, 125, 130; breeding seasonality of, 219, 220t;
demography of, 222–24; diet of, 155; as flower visitor, 163t; habitat of, 141f; home range of, 212,
213t; jaguars avoid eating, 189; morphology of, 74, 76, 81, 93f; new genus of tapeworms
described from, 175; population density of, 216, 217t, 218t; as predator, 189; predators of, 191;
seeds dispersed by, 203, 209; toxic toads eaten by, 117
Didelphis virginiana: as atypical opossum, 3; behavior of, 121, 125, 127–30, 132; diet of, 47, 159,
161, 168n2; energy reserves of, 103, 104; geographic range of, 46, 181; habitat of, 147; hearing in,
113; home range of, 212, 213t, 215; as human commensal, 24; locomotion of, 47; morphology of,
76t, 81, 88, 96, 97, 100n8; as North American endemic, 232; parasites of, 171, 175t, 177, 181–84;
population density of, 215–217; predators of, 189, 191; reproduction of, 106t, 219, 221–23,
226n2; senescence of, 109, 110, 193t, 194; sexual dimorphism of, 69t, 70, 88, 89t, 90f; terrestrial
refugia of, 47; unusual size of, 24, 44, 67; toxic toads eaten by, 117; vision of, 111
diel activity, 121–23, 153, 197
diet(s), 153–68; of Caluromys, 31; of Chironectes, 45; of Didelphis, 47; of Gracilinanus, 55; of
Lestodelphys, 57; of Lutreolina, 49; of Marmosa, 38; of Marmosops, 59; of Metachirus, 42; of
Monodelphis, 40; morphological traits related to, 93, 96, 98, 234; of Philander, 52; of Thylamys,
60; of Tlacuatzin, 41; uncorrelated with BMR, 102
digestive tract, 96, 97, 155, 174, 177. See also caecum
digging (and burrowing), 16, 44, 78, 125
Diplopoda. See millipedes
†Diprotodon, 8
disparity, 132, 229, 234, 235
disruptive coloration, 71, 99n2
diversification, 12, 229, 230, 233–36, 240n1, 240n3
Dromiciops, 10, 70. See also Microbiotheriidae
dry forest(s): in Cerrado biome, 137; climate of, 143; geographic distribution of, 140f, 143; as
opossum habitat, 32, 38, 41, 45, 47, 53, 54, 57, 62t, 142; productivity of, 144; rainforest replaced
by, on precipitation gradient, 138; vegetation characteristics of, 143, 144
“dryolestoids,” 14
ears (pinnae), 70, 74, 110, 112, 113. See also hearing
earthworms (Lumbricidae, Oligochaeta): as intermediate hosts of parasitic nematodes, 177; as prey,
47, 49, 52, 154, 155, 158, 159, 196
earwigs (Dermaptera), 158, 167n1
†Ectocentrocristus, 12n1, 13n1
energy reserves, 103, 104. See also fat
Eocene, 12, 13n1, 15, 16, 17t, 20, 232
†Epidolops, 16
Eutheria (eutherians), 8, 8t, 239extinction(s), 7, 195, 230, 234, 235; of Australian marsupials, 239; end-Cretaceous (KPg) mass, 9;
end-Pleistocene mass, 24, 25n1; often caused by novel predators, 237; of opossums in Miocene,
233, 235–37; post-GABI, 22, 23; seldom due to competition, 239
exudates (gum), 31, 34, 96, 164, 197
eyes, 70, 73, 74, 87, 110–12. See also vision
fallback foods, 161, 166, 167
fat: brown, 102; catabolized for winter energy by Didelphis virginiana, 103, 104; ordinary white,
103; stored in tail, 57, 59, 83, 104, 119n2; subcutaneous, 103. See also lipids
fecal analysis: biases of, 59, 153–57, 159, 164, 168n2; dietary data from, 47, 52, 55, 59, 126, 154,
166; parasite data from, 183t; problematic for studies of trophic-niche overlap, 208
fecundity, 222–24
felids (Felidae), 22, 23, 110, 189, 192t, 238
fighting, 88, 89, 127, 128, 221
fleas (Siphonaptera), 170t, 172, 173, 182, 184
flowers, 142, 144, 204, 205, 210n2; eaten by opossums, 38, 154t; visited by opossums, 31, 42, 47,
162t, 164, 195, 206f, 207t, 208. See also nectar
flukes (Digenea), 173, 174t, 177, 181
forefoot (hand, manus), 75f, 76–79, 126, 124, 125. See also claws
fox(es), 129, 133n5, 189, 192
frogs, 40, 49, 52, 175, 197, 198. See also amphibians
frugivores, 43, 142, 195, 208, 209; niche-partitioning by, 142; opossums as, 153, 160, 209, 218t
fruit: availability in different habitats and microhabitats, 142, 144, 146–48, 152, 166; biased
representation in feces, 126, 154, 155; competition for, 196–99, 201; consumption correlated with
morphological traits, 90, 91, 96; nutritional qualities of, 160; physical properties of, 160; presence
or absence in opossum diets, 31–60, 62t, 63n4, 63n6, 153, 154t, 157; taxonomic diversity in
opossum diets, 160, 202; temporal availability of, 161
fungi, 154, 157, 164, 165, 167
fur. See pelage
GABI. See Great American Biotic Interchange
gaits, 30, 42, 124, 125. See also locomotion
gape display, 88, 127
generation time, 222
gestation, 7, 105, 106t, 219
Glironia, 32–34, 62t, 63n2; as depauperon, 230; diel activity of, 62t; habitats of, 32, 62t; locomotion
of, 33, 34, 62t; microhabitat of, 33, 149t; morphology of, 32, 73, 76, 78, 81, 84, 87, 92f; unknown
diet of, 34, 62t
Glironiinae, 32, 62t
gomphotheres, 21, 23
gondwanatheres, 14
Gracilinanus, 36, 53–55, 62t, 145f; diet of, 55, 62t, 90; habitats of, 54, 62t; locomotion of, 55, 62t;
microhabitat of, 149; morphology of, 55, 75, 76t, 81, 83, 90; parasites of, 172, 173, 178, 180;
potential competitors of, 199; predators of, 186, 190; torpor in, 102
Gracilinanus aceramarcae, 144
Gracilinanus agilis: diet of, 55, 154t, 158; habitat of, 142; home range of, 212, 213; parasites of, 172,
183t; reproduction of, 222, 226n4; sexual dimorphism of, 69t; sympatry with G. microtarsus, 54Gracilinanus emiliae, 25t, 54, 54f
Gracilinanus marica, 80f
Gracilinanus microtarsus, 54, 55, 125, 216–18, 220, 223
grassland: examples of species living in, 38, 46, 48, 53, 56, 147; as fire-maintained subclimax
vegetation in Cerrado, 143; as habitat for opossums, 147, 148t, 151, 152n2, 154. See also
savannas
Great American Biotic Interchange (GABI), 21–26, 195
grisons (Galictis), 189, 191, 198. See also mustelids
growth. See postweaning growth
gum. See exudates
gymnures, 70, 238
habitats, 137–152. See also desert; dry forest; grassland; montane forest; rainforest
hand. See forefoot
harvestmen (Opiliones), 157
“hathliacynids” (“Hathliacynidae”), 17t, 18–20, 232. See also sparassodonts
hearing, 110, 112, 113, 119n2, 238. See also ears
helminths, 169, 173–78, 181–85. See also parasites
†Herpetotheriidae (herpetotheriids), 12n1, 13n1, 17t
†Herpetotherium, 9, 13n1
hind foot (pes), 79t, 80, 81, 94, 124, 125, 184. See also claws
home range, 44, 211–15, 221
Hyladelphinae, 32, 34, 62t
Hyladelphys, 25t, 34, 35f, 62t; as depauperon, 230; diel activity of, 34, 62t; habitat of, 34, 62t, 141f;
locomotion of, 34, 62t; microhabitat of, 34; morphology of, 76t, 81–83; nest of, 35f, 129;
unknown demography of, 225; unknown diet of, 34, 62t, 235
incisors, 86f, 87, 88, 126, 185
infanticide, 215, 225
insectivores: opossums as, 153, 218
insects (Insecta): hematophagous, 129, 169; as intermediate hosts of helminth parasites, 175, 177; in
opossum diets, 62t, 126, 153, 157–59, 234, 238; parasitic, 170t, 172, 173; physical properties of,
90, 91, 158; spatiotemporal availability in opossum habitats, 141, 144, 146, 151, 158, 159, 219;
trophic competition for, 196, 197, 199. See also ants; beetles; fleas; invertebrates; lice;
orthopterans; termites; triatomines
invertebrates: diversity of in opossum diets, 153, 154t, 157–59; nutritional qualities of, 158;
spatiotemporal availability of in opossum habitats, 158, 159. See also arthropods; earthworms;
insects
katydids (Tettigoniidae), 157, 158, 197, 205, 208. See also orthopterans
†Khasia, 18
kinkajous (Potos flavus), 25t, 155, 163t; as flower visitors, 205, 207t; as potential competitors of
Caluromys, 160, 197, 209; as seed dispersers, 203, 204
La Cancha, 18, 19, 19t
lactation, 7, 104, 105, 106t, 219, 224
La Venta, 19–21, 237leaping, 34, 125, 132n2
Leishmania, 179–81
lemurs, 29, 70. See also primates
Lestodelphys, 36, 56, 56f, 57, 62t, 232, 234; behavior of, 122, 125, 129, 132, 156; dentition of, 88,
90, 91, 92f; as depauperon, 230; diel activity of, 62t, 122; diet of, 57, 161, 165; external
morphology of, 56, 57, 76t, 78, 80, 83, 84, 104; habitats of, 56, 62t, 146, 225; locomotion of, 57,
62t; parasites of, 178t; potential competitors of, 198; predators of, 190, 192; torpor in, 102
lice (Phthiraptera), 169, 170t, 172
lipids, 158–60, 166
litopterns, 20, 23,
litter size, 82, 97, 106t, 107, 108, 222, 223t
Llanos, 48, 219, 220f
locomotion, 62t, 124, 125, 151; adaptations for, 151; arboreal, 124, 125; below-branch quadrupedal,
124; cursorial, 93; efficiency of, 149; fossorial, 97; morphological traits associated with, 76t, 98;
semiaquatic, 124; terrestrial, 124. See also climbing; digging; gaits; leaping; swimming
longevity (senescence), 108–10, 186, 194, 226. See also semelparity
Los Alamitos, 14
lunar phobia, 123, 132, 186
Lutreolina, 36, 44, 48–50, 52, 62t, 63n5, 238; craniodental morphology, 87, 91; diet of, 49, 50, 165,
189; diel activity of, 62t, 122, 123; external morphology of, 73, 76t, 80, 82, 84; habitats of, 48;
locomotion of, 48, 62t, 125; Miocene ancestor of, 232; parasites of, 177, 178; potential
competitors of, 198; predators of, 190t; snake-venom resistance of, 116, 117, 167; unknown diel
activity of, 62t, 122, 123
Lutreolina crassicaudata, 48–50; diet of, 49, 50, 189; fictitious behaviors of, 48, 63n5; geographic
range, 48; habitats of, 147, 148t; locomotion, 48; morphology of, 48, 49, 87; snake-venom
resistance of, 50; unknown diel activity of, 122
Lutreolina massoia, 48, 49
mammae (nipples), 81, 82, 98, 105, 107, 130, 225
Manaus, 200
manus. See forefoot
Marmosa, 35–38, 62t, 230, 234; behavior of, 36, 37, 62t, 130, 133n6, 158; diet of, 38, 62t; habitats
of, 36, 62t 145f; locomotion of, 36, 62t; microhabitat of, 149t; morphology of, 75, 76t, 81, 83, 90,
95, 111; parasites of, 175, 178, 180, 181; potential competitors of, 197, 199; predators of, 186,
189, 190t; torpor in, 102
Marmosa constantiae, 68, 150
Marmosa demerarae, 25t, 132n2, 183t, 216, 217t, 218t
Marmosa isthmica, 38, 68, 69t, 99n1, 132n2
Marmosa mexicana, 164, 232
Marmosa murina, 25t, 38, 69t, 95f, 131f, 183t
Marmosa paraguayana: diel activity of, 122f; diet of, 154t, 157, 189; female territoriality in, 212;
home range of, 213t; leaping by, 125; nightly distance travelled by, 210n3
Marmosa robinsoni: behavior of, 130; female territoriality in, 212; fecundity of, 222, 223t;
morphology of, 74, 77f, 95, 96; parasites of, 170, 176f; population density of, 217t, 218t;
reproduction of, 105–7; subcutaneous fat in, 103; torpor in, 102
Marmosa rutteri, 69t, 92f, 150
Marmosa xerophila: 146, 147f, 158, 202, 204, 210n1, 223tMarmosa zeledoni, 37f, 73, 163t
marmosets (Callithrix), 164, 190, 197
Marmosini, 35, 36, 62t, 68
Marmosops, 36, 57–59, 62t, 230, 240n1; diel activity of, 62t; diet of, 59, 62t; habitats of, 57, 62t,
145f; locomotion of, 57, 58, 62t; microhabitat of, 57, 149t, 150; morphology of, 57, 75, 76t, 77f,
81, 83, 90; parasites of, 172, 173, 178t, 181, 183t; potential competitors of, 199; predators of,
190t, 191, 194n1
Marmosops carri, 58, 223t
Marmosops creightoni, 144
Marmosops incanus, 59, 69t, 77f, 154t, 183t, 204
Marmosops invictus, 164
Marmosops noctivagus, 58, 194n1
Marmosops parvidens, 25t, 58f, 59, 141f, 150
Marmosops paulensis: body weights of males and females, 69t; diet of, 59, 154t, 215; female
territoriality in, 212, 215; home range of, 213; microhabitat of, 58; uniseasonal/uniparous
reproduction of, 220, 222, 226n4
Marmosops pinheiroi, 25t, 59, 69t, 75f, 141f, 150
Marmosops soinii, 92f
marsupials (Marsupialia), 1–13; as allegedly poor competitors, 3, 24, 238, 239; as allegedly small￾brained mammals, 97; metabolism of, 101, 102; as metatherian crown clade, 7, 8, 8f; New World,
1, 9f, 10, 45, 161, 164; reproduction of, 7, 104, 105. See also Australian marsupials
marsupium. See pouch
mating (copulatory behavior), 41, 130, 132
mating system(s), 70, 215, 221
†Mayulestes, 8, 17t, 18
mechanoreception. See touch
Mesozoic, 11, 15
metabolism, 101–3
Metachirini, 36, 42, 62t
Metachirus, 36, 42, 43, 62t, 63n3; behavior of, 62t, 133n6; as depauperon, 230; diet of, 43, 62t, 62t;
habitat of, 42, 62t; locomotion of, 42, 43, 62t; microhabitat of, 42, 149t; Miocene ancestor of, 232;
morphology of, 42, 73, 76t, 81, 82, 84, 93, 94, 98, 100n8; parasites of, 177, 178, 181; predators of,
186, 190
Metachirus myosuros, 42, 43f; cannot be induced to leap, 125; diet of, 42, 43, 154t, 157; as inept
climber, 42; nesting behavior of, 129; parasites of, 176f, 183t
Metachirus nudicaudatus, 25t, 42, 123, 141f, 216, 217t, 218t
Metatheria (metatherians): 7–9, 13–20, 22, 23, 232, 235, 238, 239; distinguished from Marsupialia,
7, 8, 13n1
mice, 31, 40, 45, 49, 57, 88, 126, 156. See also Cricetidae; Rodentia
Microbiotheria (microbiotherians), 9t, 10, 11, 16–20, 23
microhabitat(s), 61, 137; ambient light in, 71; differential use of, 148–51; local vegetation types as,
150, 151; morphological correlates of, 76; vertical strata as, 149–50. See also vertical stratification
millipedes (Diplopoda), 157, 196
†Mimoperadectes, 13n1
Miocene, 9, 13n1, 15–21, 23, 232–37
mites (Acari), 169–72, 178, 182, 184
molars, 87, 89, 91–93, 97, 99n6, 158monkeys (Platyrrhini, platyrrhines), 119, 161, 235; diversification analysis of, 236; end-Pleistocene
extinctions of, 23; as opossum predators, 189, 190; as pollinators, 205, 207t; as potential
competitors, 197; as seed dispersers. 204. See also Cebidae; marmosets; primates; tamarins
Monodelphis, 35, 36, 38–40, 62t, 230; behavior of, 40, 125, 133n6; diel activity of, 40, 62t, 71, 123;
diet of, 40, 62t, 165; habitats of, 38, 62t; locomotion of, 62t; microhabitat of, 39, 40, 149, 150;
Miocene ancestor of, 232; morphology of, 38, 71–74, 76t, 78, 80–84, 86f, 90, 95, 98, 99; parasites
of, 172, 173, 177, 178, 180; predators of, 159, 189, 190; torpor in, 102; unusual trophic niche of,
235
Monodelphis americana, 39f, 40, 69t, 71, 72
Monodelphis dimidiata, 38, 40, 70, 82, 88, 147
Monodelphis domestica, 2, 3; accessory chemosensory system of, 120n4; diel activity of, 40, 123;
diet of, 40, 154; feeding behavior of, 126, 127; genome of, 2, 185; habitats of, 38, 142; hearing in,
113; heterothermy of, 103; locomotion of, 40, 124; mating behavior of, 130; morphology of, 69t,
74, 95f; nesting behavior of, 130; olfactory genes in, 114t; postweaning growth of, 108, 109f;
reproduction of, 105, 106t, 107f, 226n1; senescence in, 109; vibrissal mechanoreception in, 115;
water balance of, 104
Monodelphis gardneri, 38, 71, 144
Monodelphis iheringi, 71
Monodelphis palliolata, 223
Monodelphis scalops, 40, 71, 72
Monodelphis touan, 25t, 39f, 40, 141f
monotremes (Prototheria), 7, 8f
montane forest(s): climate of, 145; geographic distribution of, 140f, 144; as opossum habitat, 36, 38,
47, 48, 62t, 139t, 144, 151; productivity of, 146; replaces lowland rainforest on elevation gradient,
138, 140f; types of, 145, 146
Monte Desert. See desert(s)
Monte Hermoso, 19t, 20, 21
morphology, 67–100. See also adaptations; Brinkman’s organs; dentition; ears; eyes; forefoot; hind
foot; mammae; pelage; tail; viscera
mustelids (Mustelidae), 18, 116; as participants in GABI, 22, 23, 238; as potential competitors, 198;
as predators, 189, 192t
mutualisms, 195, 210. See also pollination; seed dispersal
†Necrolestes, 16
nectar: competition for, 197; nutritional qualities of, 164; in opossum diets, 31, 38, 42, 47, 52, 62t,
155, 157, 206f, 208; robbers, 204, 205; seasonal availability of, 164; undetectable by fecal
analysis, 155. See also flowers; pollination
nematodes (Nematoda), 171, 173, 174t, 176f, 177, 178, 181
nest(s): in abandoned bird nests, 37, 41, 60, 129; in abandoned coati nests, 129; artificial, 132n3, 149;
in burrows, 47, 129; carefully concealed and defended, of Metachirus, 42, 129; on ground, 42, 51,
129; occupancy, 122, 127; parasites and other symbionts in, 171, 172; under rocks, 60; in trees,
shrubs, or lianas 37, 41, 47, 51, 55, 60, 129; unusual, of Hyladelphys, 34, 35f, 129; vulnerable
young left in, 130, 131, 215
nesting behavior, 84, 129, 130, 133n6; affects exposure to parasites, 129, 185; fictitious, of
Lutreolina, 48, 63n5
newts (Salamandridae), 48, 117, 118, 160, 167. See also amphibians
niche incumbency, 239nipples. See mammae
†Nortedelphys, 12n1, 13n1
notoungulates, 20, 23
Nuevo San Juan, 139, 200
olfaction, 113–14, 188, 192t, 236
Oligocene, 12, 17–19, 21, 232–34
olingos (Bassaricyon), 163t, 197, 205, 207t
ophiophagy, 98, 116, 167, 188. See also snakes; venom resistance
Opiliones. See harvestmen
orthopterans (Orthoptera), 34, 157–59, 175, 208. See also katydids
otters (Lontra), 45, 198, 199, 200t. See also mustelids
otter shrews (Potamogale), 83
owls (Strigidae, Tytonidae), 123, 188, 191, 192, 192t
Paleocene, 8, 12, 14–18, 19t
Pampas, 48, 63n5, 147, 180
Pantanal, 48, 180
pantodonts, 15
Paracou, 25t, 139t, 141f, 200t
parasites, 109, 169–85
paucituberculatans (Paucituberculata), 9t, 10, 13n1, 16–20, 23, 239
peccaries (Tayassuidae, tayassuids), 21–23, 198, 200
†Pediomys, 9
pelage, 70–73, 84, 98, 99, 123, 234. See also underfur; vibrissae
†Peradectes, 9
“peradectids,” 13n1
peramelids (Peramelidae), 9t, 132
pes. See hind foot
Philander, 36, 42, 44, 50–52, 62t, 234; care of young, 130; diel activity of, 62t; diet of, 52, 62t, 159,
165; habitats of, 50, 62t; locomotion of, 62t; microhabitats of, 50–52, 149t; morphology of, 73,
76t, 81, 82, 84, 85, 93f; nests of, 51; parasites of, 170, 173, 175, 177, 178t, 180, 181; potential
competitors of, 198; predators of, 186, 190t; snake-venom resistance of, 116, 117, 167
Philander canus, 69t, 85
Philander mcilhennyi, 85, 150
Philander melanurus, 51f, 189
Philander opossum, 25t, 51f; cervical vertebrae of, 93; diet of, 52, 63n6; as flower visitor, 163t;
foraging behavior of, 52; habitat of, 141f; microhabitat of, 150; parasites of, 183t; population
density of, 216, 217t, 218t; population turnover of, 224; seeds dispersed by, 203
Philander pebas, 85, 150
Philander quica, 52, 106t, 110, 125, 129, 150, 154t, 189
Philander vossi, 183t, 232
phorusrhacids (terror birds), 236
phyllostomids (Phyllostomidae), 119, 165, 197, 199, 200, 237
phylogeny, 2, 29, 32, 231f, 233
physiology, 7, 67, 74, 96, 101–21, 131. See also energy reserves; metabolism; postweaning growth;
reproduction; sensory physiology; thermoregulation; toxin resistance; water balancepitvipers (Viperidae: Crotalinae): as opossum predators, 188, 236, 237; as opossum prey, 117, 156,
167; as participants in GABI, 22, 236, 237
placentals (Placentalia): as eutherian crown group, 7, 8f; morphology of, 82, 87, 96, 97, 110, 120n3;
as opossum predators, 189, 191; parasites of, 182, 184; as participants in GABI, 23, 24, 238, 239;
physiology of, 101, 102, 105, 113, 118, 119; as real or imagined competitors, 3, 24, 195–201, 208,
209, 239
Platyrrhini (platyrrhines). See monkeys
Pleistocene, 17t, 23, 24, 25n1. See also extinctions
Pliocene, 17t, 19t, 20, 23, 24, 68, 233, 234, 238; intercontinental faunal exchange in, 15, 232, 239;
uplift of Panamanian landbridge in, 15, 21
pollination: as mutualism, 195; nectarivory not synonymous with, 204; often inferred from indirect
evidence, 204, 205; by opossums, 205, 208. See also flowers; nectar
†Polydolopidae, 13n1, 17t
population density, 215, 216, 217t, 218t
porcupines, 133n5, 155, 198
postweaning growth, 70, 108, 109t
pouch (marsupium), 7, 50, 81, 82, 98, 130
predation: adaptations to avoid or survive, 71, 93f, 94, 98, 99, 123, 128, 133n5, 186, 193 (see also
death feigning; lunar phobia); as cause of extinctions, 24, 236, 237, 239; as explanation for early
senescence, 110, 193, 194; major cause of mortality, 186, 191; by opossums, 31, 168n3, 189; on
opossums, 71, 131, 152, 186–94
predator(s), 186–94; community of, on Río Manu, 192t; concealment from, 71, 129, 149; effects on
survivorship, 193, 194, 224; as novel immigrants during GABI, 23, 236, 237; opossums as, 40, 47,
156, 189; sensory cues used by, 71, 123, 186, 188, 192t; sympatric, numbers of, 191–93
premolars, 87, 89, 127. See also dentition
primate(s): diets of, 160, 164, 165, 208; ecogeographic diversity gradients of, 151; as Eocene
immigrants to South America, 15, 20, 239; as flower visitors, 205; as hosts of microbial parasites,
179, 180; locomotion by, 124, 125; morphology of, 2, 83, 85, 95, 100n7, 110, 237; nocturnal, 112,
239; olfactory genes in, 114t; physiology of, 101, 111, 112; as potential competitors, 197, 199–
201; in Recent rainforest fauna, 25t; as seed dispersers, 203t, 204; stem, in North America, 239;
strepsirrhine, phenotypic resemblances with opossums, 238. See also lemurs; monkeys
Priodontes, 197
procyonids (Procyonidae): as flower visitors, 205, 207t; as potential competitors, 197, 199–201; as
predators, 22, 189, 192t, 237; vision in nocturnal, 112. See also coatis; kinkajous; olingos;
raccoons
†Pucadelphys, 18
Quaternary, 25. See also Pleistocene
raccoons (Procyon), 45, 182, 184, 189, 190, 196–98
rainforest (lowland rainforest): Amazonian, 24, 138, 141, 150; as complex mosaic of successional
vegetation in floodplains, 141; geographic distribution of, 138, 140, 140f; as opossum habitat, 30,
36, 38, 42, 45, 50, 52, 54, 57, 62t, 118, 138–42, 151, 152; productivity of, 142, 151; South
American, 3, 232; structural complexity of, 140–42, 151; trophic characteristics of, 141, 151;
vertical stratification of opossum faunas in, 149–52
raptors. See accipitrids; owls
reptiles, 47, 141, 170, 173, 176. See also snakes; squamatesreproduction: and demography, 218–26; marsupial vs. placental, 7, 104, 105; morphological traits
associated with, 67, 98, 120n4; seasonality of, 218–20; synchronized episodes of, within breeding
season, 225, 226n2. See also breeding season; gestation; lactation; litter size; mating; mating
system
ribs, 93, 100n7. See also skeleton
Río Manu, 192
†Roberthoffsteteria, 18
rodents (Rodentia): 15, 24, 25t, 57, 71, 114t, 164; burrows of, used by Lestodelphys, 57, 129; caviid,
23; caviomorph, 15, 22, 24, 199, 239; cricetid, 15, 21, 23, 24, 31, 199; morphology of, 96, 115,
120n4; as opossum prey, 40, 47, 57, 148, 157, 159; parasites of, 170–73, 176, 179, 181; as
potential competitors, 198, 199, 200t; visual acuity of, 111; whisking behavior of, 115. See also
cricetids; mice; squirrels
†Sairadelphys, 24, 25n2
Santa Cruz Formation, 19, 19t
savanna(s): in Cerrado, 147; climatic conditions supporting, 143; geographic distribution of biomes
with, 140t; as opossum habitat, 36, 45, 46, 48, 52, 53, 54t, 59; potential competitors in, 200t;
predators in, 191; reproduction in, 220; vegetation, 137. See also grassland
scorpions, 40, 57, 126, 157
scrotum, 82
seed dispersal, 195, 201–4, 209, 210
semelparity, 222, 226, 226n4
senescence. See longevity
sensory physiology, 74, 110–15. See also hearing; olfaction; touch; vision
sexual dimorphism: in body size (weight), 68–70, 99, 99n1, 221; in canine teeth, 88, 89, 90f;
resulting from postweaning growth rates, 70, 108, 109t; in wrist morphology, 74, 75
sexual selection, 67, 70, 89, 99, 226. See also mating system
†Sinodelphys, 8
size (body size): as correlate of end-Pleistocene extinctions, 25n1; differences between potentially
competing species, 209; evolution, rate of, 234; as factor in morphological or physiological
comparisons, 87, 97, 101, 105, 234; regressions of population density on, 216; sexual dimorphism
in, 68, 70; taxonomic variation in, 61, 62t, 67, 68
skeleton, 85–95, 98; appendicular, 94, 95; axial, 93, 94. See also ribs; skull
skull (and mandible), 48, 85–87, 90t. See also dentition; turbinals
skunks, 129, 133n5, 198, 200
sloths, 22, 23, 165
snakes (Serpentes): as definitive or paratenic hosts of helminth parasites, 173, 175; as opossum
predators, 152, 186–88, 190, 191, 192t; as opossum prey, 48, 50, 52, 116, 117, 156, 159, 160, 167.
See also ophiophagy; pitvipers; venom resistance
social behavior, 120n4, 127
solenodons, 70
“sparassocynids,” 17, 20t
†Sparassocynus, 238
sparassodonts (†Sparassodonta), 16, 17t, 18–20, 22, 236. See also “borhyaenids”; “hathliacynids”;
†Mayulestes
spider(s), 157, 194n1
spiny-headed worms (Acanthocephala), 173–76, 181squamates, 159. See also reptiles
squirrels, 24, 133n5. See also rodents
steppe, 59, 146, 192
sternbergiids (†Sternbergiidae), 17t, 19, 232, 235
stomach contents: as alternative to fecal analysis, 155; dietary data from, 45, 47, 52, 57, 60, 117, 159,
160, 168n2
survivorship, 224, 225; affected by predation, 186, 193f, 194; curves, concave, 224; not
distinguishable from dispersal in trapping studies, 224
swimming, 44, 48, 63n5, 83, 125,
sympatry, 46, 137, 240n1
syndactyly, 99n4
syntopy, 137, 151
tail(s), 83–85; coloration of, 84, 85, 98; fictitious use of, 63n5; incrassate, 83, 98, 104, 119n2; lengths
compared, 76t, 83; “nonprehensile,” 76t; prehensile, 76t, 84, 98, 234; suspended by, while
copulating, 41, 130; used for locomotion, 124, 125; used to carry nesting material, 130, 133n6
tamarins (Saguinus), 158, 165, 197, 208
tapeworms (Cestoda), 173–77, 181
tapirs (Tapirus), 22, 23, 25t, 198, 200t
Tayassuidae. See peccaries
tenrecs (Tenrecidae), 70, 83
termites (Isoptera), 43, 157, 158
territoriality, 211, 214, 215
Tertiary, 3, 10, 13, 15, 21, 22, 232
tetrodotoxin, 117, 118
thanatosis. See death feigning
therian common ancestor, 70, 165
therians (Theria), 7, 8f, 14, 85, 90, 97
thermoregulation, 67, 83, 101. See also metabolism
thornscrub. See desert(s)
thylacosmilids (Thylacosmilidae), 17t, 18, 20
Thylamyini (thylamyines), 36, 52, 62t, 68, 83, 222
Thylamys, 36, 59–61, 62t, 232, 234; behavior of, 62t; diel activity of, 62t; diet of, 60, 62t; habitats of,
59, 60, 62t; locomotion of, 60, 62t; morphology of, 59, 62t, 70, 76t, 81, 83, 84, 90, 98; parasites
of, 173, 175, 178; physiology of, 102, 104; predators of, 190t
Thylamys elegans, 60, 111–13, 146, 192
Thylamys macrurus, 170
Thylamys pallidior, 60, 60t, 61, 69t, 104, 146, 154t
Thylamys pusillus, 69t, 104, 142, 148f
†Thylophorops, 24, 68, 238
ticks. See mites
Tiupampa, 14, 18, 19t
Tlacuatzin, 36, 40–42, 69t, 232; behavior of, 41, 69t; as depauperon, 230; diel activity of, 62t; diet of,
41, 69t; habitat of, 41, 69t; locomotion of, 41, 69t; morphology of, 40, 75, 76t, 81; predators of,
190
Tlacuatzin balsasensis, 42
Tlacuatzin canescens, 130, 142, 163Tlacuatzin sinaloae, 41f
toads (Bufonidae), 48, 117, 118, 160, 167, 168n2. See also amphibians
tongue worms (Pentastomida), 173, 175t
torpor, 102–4
touch (mechanoreception), 67, 74, 110, 114, 115. See also Brinkmann’s organs; vibrissae
toxin resistance, 115, 118, 119, 167. See also amphibians; ophiophagy; snakes; venom resistance
treeshrews (Scandentia), 70, 100n7, 165, 238
triatomines (Triatominae, kissing bugs), 169, 179, 180
Trypanosoma cruzi, 179, 180
turbinals, 85, 110, 113. See also olfaction
underfur, white (of Didelphis), 46f, 72, 132n5
venom resistance, 98, 116, 117, 167. See also toxin resistance
vertebrae, 93, 93f, 94, 98, 133n5
vertebrates: nutritional qualities of, 159; as opossum prey, 31, 38, 40–42, 45, 47–49, 52, 55, 59, 60,
62t, 159, 160; seasonal availability of, 160. See also amphibians; birds; reptiles; rodents
vertical stratification (of rainforest opossum faunas), 132, 149–52
vibrissae, 43f, 70, 73, 74, 110, 114, 115. See also touch
viperids (Viperidae). See pitvipers
viscera, 95, 173, 175t, 178, 183t. See also digestive tract
vision, 67, 71, 83, 87, 110–12, 192t, 204, 236. See also eyes
water balance, 104
whisking, 73, 115. See also vibrissae
xenarthrans (Xenarthra), 20, 101
