Optimization of 
Advanced Manufacturing 
ProcessesOptimization of 
Advanced Manufacturing 
Processes
Edited by
Sandip Kunar, PhD
Prasenjit Chatterjee, PhD
M. Sreenivas Reddy, PhD
Frontiers of Mechanical and Industrial EngineeringFirst edition published 2025
Apple Academic Press Inc. CRC Press
1265 Goldenrod Circle, NE, 2385 NW Executive Center Drive,
Palm Bay, FL 32905 USA Suite 320, Boca Raton FL 33431
760 Laurentian Drive, Unit 19, 4 Park Square, Milton Park,
Burlington, ON L7N 0A4, CANADA Abingdon, Oxon, OX14 4RN UK
© 2025 by Apple Academic Press, Inc.
Apple Academic Press exclusively co-publishes with CRC Press, an imprint of Taylor & Francis Group, LLC
Reasonable efforts have been made to publish reliable data and information, but the authors, editors, and publisher cannot assume 
responsibility for the validity of all materials or the consequences of their use. The authors are solely responsible for all the chapter 
content, figures, tables, data etc. provided by them. The authors, editors, and publishers have attempted to trace the copyright 
holders of all material reproduced in this publication and apologize to copyright holders if permission to publish in this form has 
not been obtained. If any copyright material has not been acknowledged, please write and let us know so we may rectify in any 
future reprint.
Except as permitted under U.S. Copyright Law, no part of this book may be reprinted, reproduced, transmitted, or utilized in any 
form by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including photocopying, microfilming, and 
recording, or in any information storage or retrieval system, without written permission from the publishers.
For permission to photocopy or use material electronically from this work, access www.copyright.com or contact the Copyright 
Clearance Center, Inc. (CCC), 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, 978-750-8400. For works that are not available on CCC 
please contact mpkbookspermissions@tandf.co.uk
Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks and are used only for identification 
and explanation without intent to infringe.
Library and Archives Canada Cataloguing in Publication
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
ISBN: 978-1-77491-602-5 (hbk)
ISBN: 978-1-77491-603-2 (pbk)
ISBN: 978-1-00348-712-8 (ebk)
CIP data on file with US Library of Congress
CIP data on file with Canada Library and ArchivesABOUT THE FRONTIERS OF 
MECHANICAL AND INDUSTRIAL 
ENGINEERING BOOK SERIES
EDITORS-IN-CHIEF
Dr. Prasenjit Chatterjee
Department of Mechanical Engineering, MCKV Institute of Engineering, 
West Bengal, India
Dr. Dilbagh Panchal
Department of Industrial and Production Engineering,
Dr. B. R. Ambedkar National Institute of Technology (NIT) Jalandhar, Punjab, India
Description of the Series
Mechanical engineering applies the principles of mechanics and materials 
science for analysis, design, manufacturing, and maintenance of mechanical 
systems, whereas industrial engineering involves figuring out how to make or 
do things better with minimum resource consumption. Mechanical and indus￾trial engineering utilize a deep foundational understanding of mathematics, 
physics, and analysis to develop machines and systems. The former specializes 
in thermodynamics, combustion, and electricity to make complex machines. 
The latter focuses on designing workflow and making production efficient.
This series reports on the cutting-edge developments to present novel 
innovations in the field of mechanical and industrial engineering. Volumes 
published in this series aim to embrace all aspects, subfields, and new 
challenges of mechanical and industrial engineering and to be of interest 
and use to all those concerned with research in various related domains of 
mechanical and industrial engineering disciplines. The series aims to provide 
comprehensive value-added resources to the body of the literature to serve 
as essential references for years ahead. Features of the volumes under this 
series explore recent trends, model extensions, developments, solutions to 
real-time problems, and case studies.
The coverage of the series is committed to provide a diverse yet rigorous 
research experience that builds on a solid knowledge of science and engi￾neering fundamentals and application-oriented knowledge of mechanical vi About the Frontiers of Mechanical and Industrial Engineering Book Series
and industrial engineering practices for efficient functioning in today’s global 
multidisciplinary rapidly changing work environment. It includes all new 
theoretical and experimental findings in mechanical, industrial engineering, 
and allied engineering fields.
Topics and Themes:
The primary endeavor of this series is to introduce and explore contemporary 
research developments in a variety of rapidly growing research areas. The 
volumes will deal with the following topics but not limited to:
• Automotive engineering
• Aerospace technology
• Big data in mechanical / manufacturing / industrial engineering
• Computational methods for optimizing manufacturing technology, 
robotics, mechatronics
• Decision science applications in mechanical, manufacturing, and 
industrial engineering
• Design and optimization of mechanical components
• Dynamical systems, control
• Engineering design
• Engineering thermodynamics, heat, and mass transfer
• Evolutionary computation
• Finite element method (FEM) modeling/simulation
• Fluid mechanics
• Fuzzy logic and neuro-fuzzy systems for relevant engineering applications
• Green and sustainable engineering techniques for modern manufacturing
• Innovative approaches for modeling relevant applications and real-life 
problems
• Life cycle engineering
• Machinery and machine elements
• Manufacturing
• Mathematical concepts and applications in mechanical and industrial 
engineering
• Materials engineering
• Mechanical structures and stress analysis
• MEMS
• Modeling in engineering applications
• Nanotechnology and microengineering
• Non-conventional machining in modern manufacturing systemsAbout the Frontiers of Mechanical and Industrial Engineering Book Series vii
• Precision engineering, instrumentation and measurement
• Numerical simulations
• Soft computing techniques
• Sustainability in mechanical, manufacturing, and industrial engineering
• Theoretical and applied mechanics
• Tribology and surface technology
The series aims to serve as a valuable resource for undergraduate, 
postgraduate, doctoral students, researchers, academicians, and industry 
professionals in mechanical, manufacturing, industrial engineering, product 
design, management, and more.
BOOKS IN THE SERIES
Optimization Methods for Engineering Problems
Editors: Dilbagh Panchal, PhD, Prasenjit Chatterjee, PhD, 
Mohit Tyagi, PhD, and Ravi Pratap Singh, PhD
Modern Manufacturing Systems: Trends and Developments
Editors: Rajiv Kumar Garg, PhD, Ravi Pratap Singh, PhD, 
Rajeev Trehan, PhD, and Ramesh Singh, PhD 
Multi-Criteria Decision-Making Methods in Manufacturing 
Environments: Models and Applications
Shankar Chakraborty, PhD, Prasenjit Chatterjee, PhD, and 
Partha Protim Das, PhD
Supply Chain Performance Measurement in Textile Enterprises
Editors: Pranav G. Charkha, PhD, Santosh B. Jaju, PhD, and 
Prasenjit Chatterjee, PhD
Electro-Micromachining and Microfabrication: Principles and 
Research Advances
Editors: Sandip Kunar PhD, Golam Kibria, PhD, and Prasenjit Chatterjee, PhD
Robotics and Automation in Healthcare: Advanced Applications
Editors: R. Thanigaivelan, PhD, Sanjay Singh, PhD, and 
Clement Christy Deepak C., PhD
Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
Editors: Sandip Kunar, PhD, Prasenjit Chatterjee, PhD, and 
M. Sreenivasa Reddy, PhDABOUT THE EDITORS
Sandip Kunar, PhD
Assistant Professor, Department of Mechanical Engineering, 
Aditya Engineering College, India
Sandip Kunar, PhD, is working as Assistant Professor in the Department of 
Mechanical Engineering at Aditya Engineering College, India. His research 
interests include nonconventional machining processes, micromachining 
processes, advanced manufacturing technology, and industrial engineering. 
He has carried out his research work at the Saha Institute of Nuclear Physics, 
Kolkata, and Raja Ramanna Centre for Advanced Technology, Bhabha 
Atomic Research Centre (BARC), Unit, India. He has published 28 research
papers in reputed international journals, 24 research papers in conference
proceedings, 35 book chapters, and 12 books with reputed international book
publishers. He has published one international webinar and has filed two 
patents. He is a life member of the Indian Society for Technical Education, 
New Delhi, India, and holds professional memberships in various other 
renowned international professional bodies. He has twice received best inno￾vative paper awards at international conferences and was awarded a national 
scholarship, a state fellowship for his PhD program, several college scholar￾ships, and 1st class in yoga and physical championship. He is a reviewer for 
over 20 highly reputed international journals, such as the Journal of Material 
Science and Technology, IEEE/ASME Transactions on Mechatronics, Mate￾rials and Manufacturing Processes, Journal of Physics D: Applied Physics, 
etc. He has also delivered lectures at faculty development programs, short￾term courses, workshops, and seminars. He completed his ME and PhD at 
Jadavpur University, Kolkata, India.
Prasenjit Chatterjee, PhD 
Professor of Mechanical Engineering and Dean (Research and 
Consultancy), MCKV Institute of Engineering, West Bengal, India
Prasenjit Chatterjee, PhD, is currently a Professor of Mechanical Engi￾neering and Dean (Research and Consultancy), at MCKV Institute of 
Engineering, West Bengal, India. He has over 130 research papers published 
in international journals and peer-reviewed conferences. He has authored x About the Editors
and edited more than 37 books on intelligent decision-making, supply chain 
management, optimization techniques, risk, and sustainability modeling. 
He has received numerous awards, including a Best Track Paper Award, 
Outstanding Reviewer Award, Best Paper Award, Outstanding Researcher 
Award, and University Gold Medal. Dr. Chatterjee is the Editor-in-Chief 
of the Journal of Decision Analytics and Intelligent Computing. He has 
also been a guest editor of several special issues in different SCIE/Scopus/
ESCI (Clarivate Analytics) indexed journals. He is also the Lead Series 
Editor of the book series Smart and Intelligent Computing in Engineering; 
Founder and Lead Series Editor of several book series, including Concise 
Introductions to AI and Data Science; AAP Research Notes on Optimization 
and Decision-Making Theories; Frontiers of Mechanical and Industrial 
Engineering; and River Publishers Series in Industrial Manufacturing 
and Systems Engineering. Dr. Chatterjee is one of the developers of two 
multiple-criteria decision-making methods: Measurement of Alternatives 
and Ranking according to COmpromise Solution (MARCOS) and Ranking 
of Alternatives through Functional mapping of criterion sub-intervals into a 
Single Interval (RAFSI). 
M. Sreenivas Reddy, PhD 
Director of Aditya Group of Educational Institutions, Surampalem, 
Andhra Pradesh, India
M. Sreenivas Reddy, PhD, is working as the Director of Aditya Group of 
Educational Institutions, Surampalem, Andhra Pradesh, India, where he is 
also Principal of Aditya Engineering College. He has more than 20 years 
of teaching experience and five years of industry experience. His research 
interests include nonconventional machining processes, manufacturing tech￾nology, etc. He has published more than 25 research papers in various reputed 
international journals and national and international conference proceedings. 
He has also published two books and over nine book chapters with reputed 
international book publishers. He is a life member of the Indian Society for 
Technical Education, member of the Institute of Engineers (India), fellow 
member of the Indian Society of Mechanical Engineers, and member of 
the Computer Society of India. He has filed 11 patents and is a reviewer 
for more than ten highly reputed international journals, such as Journal of 
Material Science and Technology (Elsevier), IEEE/ASME Transactions on 
Mechatronics, Materials and Manufacturing Processes (Taylor and Francis), 
Journal of Physics D: Applied Physics, and IOP Science. He was awarded 
his PhD by Jawaharlal Nehru Technological University, Kakinada, India.Contributors...........................................................................................................xiii
Abbreviations........................................................................................................xvii
Acknowledgments................................................................................................... xix
Preface ................................................................................................................... xxi
1. Introduction to Advanced Manufacturing Processes and 
Optimization Techniques................................................................................1
Sandip Kunar, Ashok Kumar Dargar, Sreenivasa Reddy Medapati, 
Nabankur Mandal, Prasenjit Chatterjee, and Norfazillah Talib
2. Modeling of Process Parameters for Electrical Discharge 
Face Grinding Process..................................................................................17
Akshat Srivastava Kulshrestha, Deepak Rajendra Unune, Ashok Kumar Dargar, 
Sandip Kunar, and Prasenjit Chatterjee
3. An ISM-AHP Integrated Approach to Prioritizing Factors for 
the Implementation of Green Value Stream Mapping ..............................33
Amber Batwara, Madhav Mittal, Vikram Sharma, and Mohit Makkar
4. Experimental Investigation on AISI D2 During Machining by 
Graphite Electrode in Electric Discharge Machine...................................57
Pritam Pain, Gairik Kumar Bose, and Goutam Kumar Bose
5. Multi-Objective Process Parameter Optimization in Single Point 
Incremental Forming of SS-304 Using Box-Behnken Design of 
Experiment and TOPSIS Optimization ......................................................77
S. Pratheesh Kumar and S. Nandhagopal
6. Optimization and Process Parameters Study in Single-Point 
Incremental Forming of Ti Grade 3 Using Taguchi Design of 
Experiments and Genetic Algorithm Optimization...................................99
S. Pratheesh Kumar and P. Mohit Akash
7. Multi-Objective Process Parameters Optimization in Single-Point 
Incremental Forming of C110 by Central Composite Design and 
MOORA Optimization Technique.............................................................117
S. Pratheesh Kumar, U. Akash, and S. Akash
CONTENTSxii Contents
8. Prediction of Mechanical Properties on Wire Arc Additive 
Manufacturing 316L Stainless Steel Using Fuzzy Logic .........................137
M. Sivakumar, J. Jerald, N. S. Balaji, G. Rajesh Kannan, S. Shriram, and S. Jayanth
9. Application of Taguchi Coupled with Overall Evolution Criteria in 
Friction Stir Welding Process for Process Parameters Optimization ....153
B. Singaravel, T. Niranjan, K. Deepa, Ch. Anusha, and M. Monish Reddy
10. Recent Developments and Optimization in Additive 
Manufacturing of Aluminum Alloys..........................................................167
Varnit Jain, Prerona Saha, Abhishek Ghosh, Arkajit Ghosh, Kalyan Das, 
Uttam Kumar Murmu, and Manojit Ghosh
11. Experimental Investigation and Optimization of Metal Cutting 
Parameters on Surface Roughness During Hard Turning of 
A-I-S-I 1043 Steel ........................................................................................185
Abdisa Sisay, Habtamu Beri, Moera Gutu, Devendra Kumar Sinha, 
Birhane Assefa Gemeda, and Ram Sewak Singh
12. Modeling and Optimization of Deformation Load in Warm 
Continuous Extrusion Process...................................................................207
Tariku Desta, Devendra Kumar Sinha, Perumalla Janaki Ramulu, 
Birhane Assefa Gemeda, and Ram Sewak Singh
13. Optimization of E-Pulse of WEDM Parameters on 
Ti-10V-2Fe-3Al Alloy by Gray Relational Analysis for 
Improving the Surface Integrity................................................................227
K. Parameshwar, Srinivasa Rao Nandam, and D. G. Thakur
14. Optimization of Wire EDM Process Parameters for EN-31 Steel..........243
Smrutiranjan Biswal, S.Tripathy, and D. K. Tripathy
Index.....................................................................................................................259CONTRIBUTORS
P. Mohit Akash
Department of Production Engineering, PSG College of Technology, Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu, India
S. Akash
Department of Production Engineering, PSG College of Technology, Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu, India
U. Akash
Department of Production Engineering, PSG College of Technology, Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu, India
Ch. Anusha
Department of Mechanical Engineering, Vignan Institute of Technology and Science, Hyderabad, 
Telangana, India
N. S. Balaji
Department of Mechanical Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirapalli, Andhra 
Pradesh, India
Amber Batwara
Department of Mechanical-Mechatronics Engineering, LNM Institute of Information Technology, 
Jaipur, India
Habtamu Beri
Department of Mechanical Engineering, Adama Science and Technology University, Adama, Ethiopia
Smrutiranjan Biswal
Department of Mechanical Engineering, Institute of Technical Education and Research, 
Siksha ‘O’ Anusandhan (Deemed to be University), Bhubaneswar, Odisha, India
Gairik Kumar Bose
Department of Manufacturing Engineering, National Institute of Foundry and Forge Technology, 
Ranchi, Jharkhand, India
Goutam Kumar Bose
Department of Mechanical Engineering, Haldia Institute of Technology, Haldia, West Bengal, India
Kumar Bose
Department of Manufacturing Engineering, National Institute of Foundry and Forge Technology, 
Ranchi, Jharkhand, India
Prasenjit Chatterjee
Department of Mechanical Engineering, MCKV Institute of Engineering, Howrah, West Bengal, India
Ashok Kumar Dargar
Department of Mechanical-Mechatronics Engineering, LNM Institute of Information Technology 
Jaipur, Rajasthan, India
Kalyan Das
Department of Metallurgy and Materials Engineering, Indian Institute of Engineering Science and 
Technology, Shibpur, Howrah, West Bengal, India
K. Deepa
Department of Mechanical Engineering, Christian Brothers University, Memphis, Tennessee, USAxiv Contributors
Tariku Desta
Mechanical Engineering Department, School of Mechanical, Chemical and Materials Engineering, 
Adama Science and Technology University Adama, Ethiopia
Birhane Assefa Gemeda
Department of Mechanical Engineering, Adama Science and Technology University, Adama, Ethiopia
Abhishek Ghosh
Department of Metallurgy and Materials Engineering, Indian Institute of Engineering Science and 
Technology, Shibpur, Howrah, West Bengal, India
Arkajit Ghosh
Department of Metallurgy and Materials Engineering, Indian Institute of Engineering Science and 
Technology, Shibpur, Howrah, West Bengal, India
Manojit Ghosh
Department of Metallurgy and Materials Engineering, Indian Institute of Engineering Science and 
Technology, Shibpur, Howrah, West Bengal, India
Moera Gutu
Department of Mechanical Engineering, Adama Science and Technology University, Adama, Ethiopia
Varnit Jain
Department of Metallurgy and Materials Engineering, Indian Institute of Engineering Science and 
Technology, Shibpur, India
J. Jerald
Department of Production Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirapalli, Tamil Nadu 
Pradesh, India
S. Jayanth
Department of Production Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirapalli, Tamil Nadu 
Pradesh, India
G. Rajesh Kannan
Department of Production Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirapalli, Tamil Nadu, 
India
Akshat Srivastava Kulshrestha
Department of Mechanical-Mechatronics Engineering, LNM Institute of Information Technology 
Jaipur, Rajasthan, India
S. Pratheesh Kumar
Department of Production Engineering, PSG College of Technology, Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu, India
Sandip Kunar
Department of Mechanical Engineering, Aditya Engineering College, Surampalem, India
Mohit Makkar
Department of Mechanical-Mechatronics Engineering, LNM Institute of Information Technology, 
Jaipur, India
Nabankur Mandal
Department of Mechanical Engineering, MCKV Institute of Engineering, Howrah, India
Sreenivasa Reddy Medapati
Department of Mechanical Engineering, Aditya Engineering College, Surampalem, IndiaContributors xv
Madhav Mittal
Department of Mechanical-Mechatronics Engineering, LNM Institute of Information Technology, 
Jaipur, India
Uttam Kumar Murmu
Department of Metallurgy and Materials Engineering, Indian Institute of Engineering Science and 
Technology, Shibpur, India
Srinivasa Rao Nandam
Defence Metallurgical Research Laboratory, DRDO, Ministry of Defence, Hyderabad, Andhra Pradesh, 
India
S. Nandhagopal
Department of Production Engineering, PSG College of Technology, Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu, India
T. Niranjan
Department of Mechanical Engineering, Vignan Institute of Technology and Science, Hyderabad, India
Pritam Pain
Department of Mechanical Engineering, Haldia Institute of Technology, Haldia, India
K. Parameshwar
Defence Metallurgical Research Laboratory, DRDO, Ministry of Defence, Hyderabad, Andhra Pradesh, 
India
S. Pratheeshkumar 
Department of Production Engineering, PSG College of Technology, Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu, India
Perumalla Janaki Ramulu
Mechanical Engineering Department, School of Mechanical, Chemical and Materials Engineering, 
Adama Science and Technology University Adama, Ethiopia
M. Monish Reddy
Department of Mechanical Engineering, Vignan Institute of Technology and Science, Hyderabad, 
Telangana, India
Prerona Saha
Department of Metallurgy and Materials Engineering, Indian Institute of Engineering Science and 
Technology, Shibpur, Howrah, West Bengal, India
Vikram Sharma
Department of Mechanical-Mechatronics Engineering, LNM Institute of Information Technology, 
Jaipur, Rajasthan, India
S. Shriram 
Department of Production Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirapalli, Tamil Nadu, 
India
B. Singaravel
Department of Mechanical Engineering, Vignan Institute of Technology and Science, Hyderabad, 
Telangana, India
Ram Sewak Singh
Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering, School of Electrical Engineering, and 
Computing, Adama Science and Technology University, Adama, Ethiopia
Devendra Kumar Sinha
Mechanical Engineering Department, School of Mechanical, Chemical and Materials Engineering, 
Adama Science and Technology University Adama, Ethiopiaxvi Contributors
Abdisa Sisay
Department of Mechanical Engineering, Bule Hora University, Bule Hora, Oromia, Ethiopia
M. Sivakumar
Department of Production Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirapalli, Andhra 
Pradesh, Telangana, India
Norfazillah Talib
Department of Manufacturing Engineering, Faculty of Mechanical and Manufacturing Engineering, 
Universiti Tun Hussein Onn Malaysia, Batu Pahat, Johor, Malaysia
D. G. Thakur
Department of Mechanical Engineering, DIAT (DU), Pune, Maharashtra, India
D. K. Tripathy
IIT Kharagpur, Kharagpur, India
S. Tripathy
Department of Mechanical Engineering, Institute of Technical Education and Research, Siksha ‘O’ 
Anusandhan (Deemed to be University), Bhubaneswar, Odisha, India
Deepak Rajendra Unune
Department of Mechanical-Mechatronics Engineering, LNM Institute of Information Technology 
Jaipur, Rajasthan, IndiaABBREVIATIONS
AHP analytical hierarchy process
AI artificial intelligence
AM additive manufacturing
AMEDDSG abrasive mixed electrical discharge diamond surface grinding
ANFIS adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference system
ANN artificial neural network
ANOVA analysis of variance
BBD Box–Behnken design of experiment
BPNN back propagation neural networks
CAD computer-aided design
CCD central composite design
CFRP carbon fiber reinforcement plastic
CI consistency index
CR consistency ratio
DED direct energy deposition
DF desirability function
DfAM design for additive manufacturing
DoE design of experiment
DoF degree of freedom
DSIF double-sided incremental forming
EBM electron beam melting
EDAX energy-dispersive analyzer X-ray
EDDG electrical discharge diamond grinding
EDFG electrical discharge face grinding
EDG Electrical discharge grinding
EDM electric discharge machining
FIS fuzzy inference system
FL fuzzy logic
FSW friction stir welding
GA genetic algorithm
GRA Gray relational analysis
GWS grinding wheel speed
ISM interpretive structural modeling
ISMF incremental sheet metal forming
LBM laser beam machining
LCA life-cycle assessment
LM layered manufacturingxviii Abbreviations
MCDM multi-criteria decision-making
MDCA multi-criteria decision analysis
MOORA multi-objective optimization based on ratio analysis
M-Q-L minimization of quantity lubrication
MRR material removal rate
MSE mean squared error
OA orthogonal array
OC overcut
OEC overall evaluation criteria
PCM photochemical machining
PDCA Plan-Do-Check-Act
PMEDM powder-mixed electrical discharge machining
RI random consistency index
RP rapid prototyping
RSM response surface methodology
SCD surface crack density
S-EDDG surface electrical discharge diamond grinding
SLM selective laser melting
SPIF single-point incremental forming
SR surface roughness
SS sum of squares
SSIM structural self-interaction matrix
TF table feed
Ton time
TPIF two-point incremental forming
TWR tool wear rates
USM ultrasonic machining
VMC vertical machining center
VSM value stream mapping
WEDM wire electrical discharge machining
WF wire feed
WLT white layer thicknessACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The understanding of this book is undoubtedly due to the contributions 
of various individuals for their persistent direction, helpful suggestions, 
ongoing association, support, encouragement, and excellent advice at every 
level of the book’s development, from the embryonic stage to the beginning 
stage. This work would not have gone as smoothly as it did toward comple￾tion without their constructive and timely suggestions. The editors owe them 
a debt of gratitude for their considerable time invested on this publication.
The editors express their gratitude to all of the authors for their important 
contributions to the book’s intellectual substance.
Simple words cannot express the editors’ gratitude to the entire editing 
and production teams of Apple Academic Press, particularly Sandra Sickels, 
Ashish Kumar, Sheetal Kumar, and Rakesh Kumar for their constant support, 
encouragement, and guidance throughout the publishing process. This effort 
would not have been possible without their great contributions.
The editors would like to express their gratitude to the reviewers who 
generously donated their time and skills in order to help shape such a high￾quality book on such a topical topic.
The editors thank their family members for their love, understanding, and 
support during the preparation of this book.
Finally, the editors would like to thank all of the readers for their support 
and hope that this book will continue to inspire and guide them in their future 
endeavors.
—Dr. Sandip Kunar
Dr. Prasenjit Chatterjee
Dr. M. Sreenivasa ReddyPREFACE
Optimization of advanced manufacturing processes is a global trend in 
this Fourth Industrial Revolution era to concurrently enhance productivity, 
quality, and sustainability. The available Industry 4.0 tools and methodologies 
enable the optimization of advanced manufacturing systems and processes. 
This book offers a thorough explanation of how to optimize various industrial 
systems and processes utilizing significant statistical and evolutionary meth￾odologies. Statistical, multicriteria decision-making, and evolutionary strat￾egies for single- and multi-objective optimization are sufficiently covered to 
provide sufficient theoretical details, salient characteristics, implementation 
processes, effectiveness, and results in manufacturing.
This book comprises 14 chapters on optimization of advanced manu￾facturing processes. Chapter 1 deals with the fundamental concept of opti￾mization for advanced manufacturing processes. Chapter 2 compares two 
modeling techniques for performance prediction of the electrical discharge 
face grinding process. Chapter 3 mainly focuses on the role of different 
enablers in implementing green value-stream mapping (VSM) and priori￾tizes the critical enablers for green VSM practices in Indian manufacturing 
systems. The analytical hierarchy process (AHP) method has been used to 
find the essential factors among these. In conclusion, the depiction of the 
hierarchical diagram shows the score of each criterion affecting the green 
VSM. A decision from the AHP-ISM method has been drawn to achieve 
sustainability. Chapter 4 deals with the consequence of input factors on AISI 
D2 material while machining by using graphite tool during electric discharge 
machining (EDM) process. During this process, other parameters, such as 
flow pressure and gap voltage, were kept constant so that this process can 
be generalized. During the machining, four responses, namely wear rate, 
surface finish (roughness), hole diameter, and crater diameter, are studied. 
Initially, an artificial neural network (ANN) has been employed to check 
the validation of this experiment. The genetic algorithm (GA) has been used 
to find the most suitable domain in which this tool–workpiece combination 
can be used. Then Multi-Objective Grey model has been used along with the 
fuzzy set theory to find the best parametric combination for this machining 
process. xxii Preface
Chapter 5 reveals the effects of control variables on output response 
such as surface roughness and final thickness of the incremental sheet metal 
forming process for SS304 alloy using the Box–Behnken design of experi￾ment. Chapter 6 helps in completing the process with higher geometrical 
accuracy and acquiring better output due to controlled inputs with the help of 
a specified hemispherical HSS tool on Ti grade 3 alloy sheet metal. Chapter 
7 shows how various input parameters influence the output parameters and 
helps to find the relationship between each parameter on the material C-110 
during incremental sheet metal forming. Chapter 8 utilizes a fuzzy logic 
model to predict the mechanical properties of wire arc additive manufac￾tured 316L SS under various post-heat treatment temperatures. Chapter 9 
discusses the optimization process to estimate optimum tool material and 
process parameters using Taguchi-based overall evaluation criteria (OEC) in 
friction stir welding. Chapter 10 demonstrates the utilization of an additive 
manufacturing technique for large-scale industrial manufacture of compli￾cated mechanical parts of sophisticated machines for future. 
Chapter 11 reveals the investigation of metal cutting of hard materials 
and determination of optimum metal cutting factors to obtain a desired 
quality-based metallic surface in dry hard-turning of hardened A-I-S-I 1043 
material. Chapter 12 discusses about the numerical investigation utilizing an 
FEM modeling tool DEFORM-3D to examine the impact of feedstock heat 
and extrusion wheel speed movement on processing variables such as load/
pressure required to feedstock deformation of the material between beginning 
feedstock entry to die release. Chapter 13 reveals a systematic experimental 
investigation by wire electrical discharge machining (WEDM) process on 
Ti-10V-2Fe-3Al with E-pulse to investigate the impact of process factors on 
the output factors that is, Kerf-width, material removal rate (MRR), white 
layer thickness and surface roughness. The Taguchi orthogonal array (OA) 
was utilized for the preparation of investigational matrix. The grey relational 
analysis (GRA) method was applied for the optimization of combined output 
responses. 
Chapter 14 explores the influence of input parameters, such as on time, 
off time, feed of the table, feed of the wire, and voltage on output responses 
such as material removal rate and surface roughness during WEDM process 
of EN-31 steel using brass wire.Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes. 
Sandip Kunar, Prasenjit Chatterjee, and M. Sreenivas Reddy (Eds.)
© 2025 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
INTRODUCTION TO ADVANCED 
MANUFACTURING PROCESSES AND 
OPTIMIZATION TECHNIQUES
SANDIP KUNAR1, ASHOK KUMAR DARGAR2, 
SREENIVASA REDDY MEDAPATI1, NABANKUR MANDAL3, 
PRASENJIT CHATTERJEE3, and NORFAZILLAH TALIB4
1Department of Mechanical Engineering, Aditya Engineering College, 
Surampalem, India
2Department of Mechanical-Mechatronics Engineering, 
LNM Institute of Information Technology Jaipur, India
3Department of Mechanical Engineering, MCKV Institute of 
Engineering, Howrah, India
4Department of Manufacturing Engineering, Faculty of Mechanical 
and Manufacturing Engineering, Universiti Tun Hussein Onn Malaysia, 
Johor, Malaysia
CHAPTER 1
ABSTRACT
Advanced manufacturing techniques have an important role in the fabrica￾tion of any manufactured goods. Production methods comprise crucial 
steps for transformation of unprocessed material to finished component that 
maintains the consumer requirements. Machining is another form of produc￾tion method in which unprocessed materials are converted into required 
dimensional product through regulated material elimination procedures. 
Advanced manufacturing processes are compulsory because advanced 
materials require to be fabricated with different parts, shapes, and precise 2 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
regular structures, such as straight edges, circular holes, and machined 
surfaces containing improved surface appearance and machining precision. 
The procedure of manufacturing components through regulated machining 
rate is known as subtractive manufacturing. The optimization technique 
using multi-criteria decision making (MCDM) is a sub-area of operation 
research that is extensively utilized in numerous areas, that is, food safety, 
construction, military applications, and other fields. There is an extensive 
diversity of MCDM system accessible and applied reliant upon the area of 
performance in which it is utilized. The MCDM method is applied to choose 
the best substitute among several substitutes sustaining many measures. This 
method is employed for resolving problems comprising many criteria which 
are related to advanced manufacturing processes. This chapter deals with the 
fundamental concept of optimization for advanced manufacturing processes.
1.1 INTRODUCTION
Manufacturing is described as the function of physical, chemical, and 
mechanical procedures to alter the properties and geometry of unprocessed 
material into finished component. This comprises all transitional methods 
for the manufacturing and combination of the finished component. Produc￾tion techniques consist of correlated steps which involve component design, 
selection of material, manufacturing method scheduling, manufacture, assur￾ance of quality, organization, and advertising of finished components. The 
modern-day production methods have developed tremendously complicated 
steps due to the industrial improvements in last few eras. The procedures and 
constituents primarily utilized to produce the components by different manu￾facturing methods are progressively advanced over the periods, utilizing 
innovative materials and further composite processes at the cumulative rates 
of manufacturing and improved superiority.1
The production methods are categorized into five types, that is, primary 
manufacturing methods, machining methods, forming methods, joining 
methods, and surface finish methods.
i. Primary manufacturing method: These methods are utilized to provide 
the unprocessed material for pre-definite form which comprises gas 
cutting, forging, powder metallurgy, etc.
ii. Machining method: Basic manufacturing method may not complete 
the production of finished products. This is one of the methods for 
manufacturing of basic shapes into final product. The method is used Introduction to Advanced Manufacturing Processes 3
to eliminate extra materials from the workpiece utilizing cutting 
tools, and is called as machining. The main objective is to provide 
the final dimension and required shape.
iii. Metal forming method: It is another different production method 
utilized to provide the required form using types of force. The 
perpetual distortion of metal is attained by utilizing the forces. These 
methods are also called mechanical manufacturing method.
iv. Joining method: This method is used to produce air-tight connections 
and perpetual fasteners. It is crucial to produce huge constructions.
v. Surface finishing: This method is utilized to achieve the required 
smoothing of the machined structures and to attain the needed surface 
finish. Very insignificant quantity of the materials is eliminated from 
the machined surface by this method and does not require any effi￾cient variation in the size and appearance.
1.2 ADVANCED MANUFACTURING PROCESSES
The mechanism of material ejection using traditional machining methods 
such as facing, tapping, grinding, etc., is performed by the chip fabrica￾tion method. In the modern era, the advanced materials are introduced 
with distinct characteristics, that is, high hardness, high toughness, high 
longevity, etc., because of various requirements from different applications. 
The fabrication of difficult materials produces different challenges such 
as quick depreciation of the machined tools, poorer feature of fabricated 
components, etc. The main causes behind these difficulties are production 
of elevated stress and heat during fabrication of difficult materials.2 It helps 
in the advancement and improvement of advanced manufacturing methods 
as effective and commercial substitutes to the traditional ones. Currently, 
advanced techniques with diverse fabrication proficiencies are accessible 
for a widespread of applications. Laser machining, chemical machining, and 
electron beam machining are some instances of advanced manufacturing 
processes. Furthermore, mechanical micromachining approaches, that is, 
micro turning, micro milling, etc., are categorized as advanced manufac￾turing processes. Some of the scholars also categorize ecological production 
approaches, that is, minimum amount of lubrication and cryogenic machining 
as advanced manufacturing processes. These approaches have some definite 
features which are dissimilar from the traditional procedures. The removal 
of material takes place without or with the formation of chip. For instance, 4 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
the material removal in AWJM occurs as the form of minute chips and, in 
electrochemical machining (ECM), the removal of material is formed owing 
to electrolysis at microscopic level. Other distinctive characteristics are that 
no tangible tool is contacted in laser beam machining (LBM) and machining 
is conducted by laser. Most of advanced manufacturing processes do not 
inevitably use automated power for removal of material, although they 
utilize diverse energy fields for machining. For instance, mechanical vitality 
is used to remove material in AJM and ultrasonic machining (USM), whereas 
electrolysis establishes material removal in ECM.3,4 As a result, the broad 
classification of unconventional machining techniques is kept up according 
to the type of energy used to remove material. According to the method used 
for material removal and the amount of energy used, different advanced 
manufacturing processes are categorized in Figure 1.1. The optimization 
of sophisticated manufacturing processes like LBM, EDM, and microma￾chining techniques like micro-drilling and micro-turning is the focus of this 
book. Micro drilling of carbon fiber reinforcement plastic (CFRP) composite 
for aviation application is also shown to have real-world applications.
FIGURE 1.1 Classification of advanced manufacturing processes.
1.3 REQUIREMENT FOR MODELING AND OPTIMIZATION OF 
ADVANCED MANUFACTURING METHODS
The production methods have become enormously complicated due to the 
latest industrial developments. Current production industry is attempting to 
focus on the challenges, that is, development requirements for protection, 
lowered time-to-market that involves quick production time, minimum 
production costs through the effective application of the supplies, and 
anticipated quality of extremely customized goods. Defining optimal input 
parameter combination significantly impacts efficiency, production cost, and 
quality. Consequently, optimal production of input parameter combination is Introduction to Advanced Manufacturing Processes 5
established as one of the most significant endeavor. Previously, technologists 
performed trial-and-error methodology which differs the understanding and 
perception to control preliminary input parameter combinations. However, 
this methodology is not appropriate in the framework of current produc￾tion procedures. Subsequently, the optimization of advanced manufacturing 
method factors needs new dependable techniques and methods to forecast 
the productivity of the advanced fabrication procedures.5
1.4 MODELING AND OPTIMIZATION IN ADVANCED 
MANUFACTURING METHODS
With the introduction of developed manufacturing methods, it is feasible 
to machine components containing intricate structures, difficult to machine 
materials with higher quality, high surface quality, high grade of toler￾ance, and no HAZ zone. But, to acquire these required attributes with 
lower production cost, improved superiority, and elevated productivity, it 
is required to accomplish the advanced machining at optimal parametric 
requirements. It is certainly a complicated job still for a highly skilled worker 
to understand the optimal process factor conditions to obtain the required 
output attributes. Performance of unconventional manufacturing procedures 
at specific settings where the factors are not optimized, may be responsible 
for consumption of machining time, lower surface quality, lower amount 
of material removal, and lower accuracy. Consequently, it is required the 
utilization of proper modeling and optimization methods in advanced manu￾facturing methods to find out the optimal input factor settings to achieve 
the greatest output attributes. Since superior manufacturing methods hold 
frequent input factors and the outputs are numerous, it is required to select 
an optimization method that is efficient to resolve such kinds of single and 
multi-optimization techniques for solving complex problems using optimal 
parameter settings. Usually, the outputs depend on the importance level of 
various parameters. The understanding and knowledge of the decision maker 
perform a crucial role for performing the problems. Improper selection of the 
input factors may proceed to nonoptimized solutions which may carry out 
an insignificant effect on the output results and productivity of the advanced 
manufacturing methods.
Additionally, ultimate selection of input factors from Databook 
evaluations is not a suggested approach as it does not provide the optimum 
outcomes. Because of the above causes, the ultimate selection of the input 
factors for advanced manufacturing methods is a complicated assignment 6 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
for multi-factor optimization problems. Similarly, it also comprises various 
characteristics with ambiguous information and objective and subjective 
data which create the optimization of the advanced manufacturing methods, 
and these are more complicated and difficult task. Hence, a sustainable and 
efficient decision-making methodology is a basic requirement for effec￾tive modeling and input factor optimization of advanced manufacturing 
techniques.6
1.5 MULTI-CRITERIA DECISION-MAKING OPTIMIZATION 
METHODS
MCDM is a sub-category of operation research that is extensively utilized 
in multiple arenas, that is, production system, agricultural production, and 
so on. There is an extensive variety of MCDM approaches accessible and 
utilized differing upon the area of application in which it is applied. MCDM 
method is applied to choose the greatest substitute among several substi￾tutes fulfilling numerous principles. In other words, MCDM procedure is 
employed for resolving evaluation and scheduling difficulties having various 
criteria which are distinct in nature.7
The categorizations of different MCDM approaches are given in Figure 
1.2. Some of the most eminent methods are PROMETHEE, ELECTRE, 
etc.8 But these approaches do not demonstrate the ambiguity concerns in 
the optimization. However, to cope with the ambiguity concerns, fuzzy￾based approaches are utilized.9 Different fuzzy-related MCDM approaches 
employed are fuzzy–ES, fuzzy–GA, etc. Review of past researchers demon￾strate that the commonly applied hybrid systems in MCDM are neural 
network, fuzzy logic, etc.
FIGURE 1.2 Category of MCDM approaches.Introduction to Advanced Manufacturing Processes 7
1.5.1 MCDM APPROACHES IN ADVANCED MACHINING 
METHODS
1.5.1.1 ELECTRIC DISCHARGE MACHINING METHOD
The removal of material is carried out by an electrical discharge that occurs 
between cathode and anode.10 Rapid and repeated spark discharge takes 
place between the tool electrode (cathode) and the electrically conductive 
workpiece (anode) while being affected by a suitable dielectric fluid. The 
EDM’s output responses include tool wear rate, roughness, etc. The input 
parameters are discharge current, voltage, etc.
The choice of parameters is crucial since there are many input parameters 
that affect the machining process. Figure 1.3 depicts the percentage of different 
optimization strategies that were used to model and improve the EDM process 
parameters. After analyzing the review of past researchers mentioned in the 
research articles,11–19 among 153 research papers on optimization strategies, 
it was found that only 37 papers (i.e., 26% of total number of papers) related 
to MCDM methods, while 29 papers (i.e., 83% of the 37 papers) associated 
with specific MCDM method and 11 papers (i.e., 23% of the 37 papers) 
related to hybrid methodology are employed for optimization and modeling 
of EDM-based methods. It is stated that among other MCDM methods, GRA 
is utilized by many investigators with 62% (among 39 papers).
FIGURE 1.3 Percentage use of MCDM techniques in EDM-based methods.8 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
1.5.1.2 ELECTROCHEMICAL MACHINING METHOD
The job and tool are attached to the electrolytic circuit, which is submerged 
in the electrolyte, for anodic dissolution.20 The workpiece’s final shape 
is a mirror reflection of the tool. The output responses are machining rate 
and surface roughness, while the input parameters are voltage, current, 
etc.
As there are many different input and output factors concerned in 
the machining method, careful parameter selection is crucial. Figure 1.4 
depicts a study of the application of several optimization approaches 
for ECM process. Considering the sources and material cited in the arti￾cles,21–26 six research articles (i.e., 20.6% of the total number of papers) 
relating to MCDM approaches are used for the modeling and optimization 
of ECM process parameters out of 34 research articles relating to various 
optimization techniques. Additionally, it has been noted that individual 
approaches based on MCDM, such as goal programming and GRA, as 
well as hybrid techniques (one article, or 85.45% of eight articles), have 
been used in six of eight publications. Eight papers use techniques like 
TOPSIS, DFA, and fuzzy set theory. It might be found that researchers 
with the most often used MCDM technique is GRA with 69.56% (among 
six papers).
FIGURE 1.4 MCDM techniques utilized in ECM method.Introduction to Advanced Manufacturing Processes 9
1.5.1.3 WIRE ELECTRIC DISCHARGE MACHINING METHOD
It uses a similar operating system to electrode discharge machining (EDM). 
A tiny wire diameter is utilized to cut the materials in the wire electric 
discharge machining (WEDM) process, which is a unique kind of EDM 
technique. Between the wire collector and supply spool, the cutting wire 
is continuously advanced, and the material is eliminated by a sequence of 
discharge phenomena. The dielectric fluid functions as both a coolant and 
a means of clearing away the trash.27 The area of discharge is warmed to 
an extremely high temperature, and the flowing dielectric fluid melts and 
removes it. Wire feed and voltage are the process parameters in WEDM 
while MRR and kerf width are the output responses.
There are several input and output process parameters in WEDM, thus 
choosing the parameters need to be done with the utmost care. Figure 1.5 
depicts a study of the application of several strategies for WEDM process 
optimization. The results demonstrate that 12 papers, or 10% of the 115 
publications, are connected to MCDM approaches, which are made up of 12 
separate articles, out of the 115 articles28–32 on modeling and optimization 
of WEDM input parameters. Twelve publications, or 88% of them, used 
MCDM approaches, including one hybrid MCDM and one GRA method 
were used in 10% of the articles creating an algorithm for a synthetic bee 
colony.
FIGURE 1.5 MCDM techniques applied in WEDM method.10 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
1.5.1.4 ULTRASONIC MACHINING (USM) PROCESS
An ultrasonically vibrated tool is used in the USM process to repeatedly 
strike abrasive particles (kept in a liquid media) against the work surface, 
chipping away small amounts of material.33 Roughness, accuracy, and MRR 
are the three main output responses, whereas abrasive particle size and abra￾sive concentration are the process factors.
The statistics for the various methods utilized to optimize the USM 
process are shown in Figure 1.6. The optimization of USM input factors has 
been the subject of 18 articles (mentioned and discussed in34–37), of which six 
are connected to MCDM techniques, or 30% of the total. The most common 
MCDM technique is adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference system.
FIGURE 1.6 MCDM techniques utilized in USM method.
1.5.1.5 ABRASIVE WATER JET MACHINING METHOD
This method involves the addition of coarse particles to the water to speed 
up the removal of metal, such as aluminium oxide or silicon carbide.38
Metallic, non-metallic, and composite materials may be cut using the AWJM 
technique, and it is especially effective for heat-affected materials that can’t 
be machined using conventional heat-generating methods. Abrasive flow 
rate and pressure are the AWJM input factors. Kerf geometry, Ra, and MRR 
are frequent output responses. Figure 1.7 provides the study of various Introduction to Advanced Manufacturing Processes 11
optimization strategies applied to the AWJM process parameters. Based on 
the study of papers referred to in,39,40 it is demonstrated that eight papers, 
or 21% of the 33 papers, are on MCDM methods. There are four individual 
MCDM methods, such as AHP and GRA. Additionally, it has been noted 
that 48% of MCDM projects uses GRA as their primary approach (among 
the eight articles).
FIGURE 1.7 MCDM techniques utilized in AWJM procedure.
1.5.1.6 LASER BEAM MACHINING (LBM) PROCESS
A coherent light beam of high energy is used in the LBM technique to 
dissolve and vaporize the material from workpieces.41 It is possible to 
machine any types of shapes with lasers. For creating accurate holes with 
high accuracy, LBM method is very well suited. Gas pressure and frequency 
are various factors that have been considered for optimization, with some 
typical machined responses. Figure 1.8 depicts a study of various optimiza￾tion methods applied to improving the LBM process parameters. The find￾ings indicate that out of 55 articles on optimization, 20 articles (36%) are 
associated to MCDM methods,42–47 with 14 manuscripts on separate MCDM 
method like fuzzy logic model and generalized estimating equations (GRA), 
and 16 papers on hybrid MCDM techniques.12 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
FIGURE 1.8 MCDM techniques utilized in LBM method.
1.6 CONCLUSIONS
This chapter gives a concise description of the optimization and 
modeling of different approaches utilizing MCDM methods, as well as 
the proportion of sub-methods used in the advanced techniques based 
on the past researchers. It is observed that among various techniques, 
photochemical machining (PCM) method is the least common at 7% 
with 40% of studies attempting modeling technique of EDM method as 
shown in Figure 1.9.
When compared to the other MCDM methods utilized in all advanced 
approaches, either alone or in combination, fuzzy and GRA contribute to 
about 98% of the total, according to the examination of various types of 
literature. Additionally, some MCDM methods including DEA, TOPSIS, 
GP, and AHP are used to advanced machining processes. The findings urge 
additional study and development in modeling and optimization of advanced 
machining processes using MCDM methodologies.Introduction to Advanced Manufacturing Processes 13
FIGURE 1.9 Percentage of MCDM methods utilized in advanced techniques.
KEYWORDS
• advanced manufacturing processes
• MCDM
• optimization
REFERENCES
1. Rao, R. V. Advanced Modelling and Optimization of Manufacturing Processes: 
International Research and Development; Springer Science & Business Media, 2013.
2. Shastri, A. S.; Nargundkar, A.; Kulkarni, A. J.; Sharma, K. K.; Multi-cohort Intelligence 
Algorithm for Solving Advanced Manufacturing Process Problems. Neural Comput. 
Appl. 2020, 32, 15055–15075.
3. Jain, V. K. Advanced (Non-traditional) Machining Processes. In Machining; Springer: 
London, 2008; pp 299–327.
4. Rao, R. V. Advanced Modelling and Optimization of Manufacturing Processes: 
International Research and Development; Springer Science & Business Media, 2010.
5. Di Orio, G.; Cândido, G.; Barata, J.; Scholze, S.; Kotte, O.; Stokic, D. In Self-learning 
Production Systems (SLPS)-optimization of Manufacturing Process Parameters for 14 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
the Shoe Industry, 2013 11th IEEE International Conference on Industrial Informatics 
(INDIN). IEEE, 2013; pp 386–391.
6. Mardani, A.; Jusoh, A.; Nor, K. M. D.; Khalifah, Z.; Zakwan, N.; Valipour, A.; Multiple 
Criteria Decision-making Techniques and Their Applications: A Review of the Literature 
from 2000 to 2014. Econ Res-Ekonomska Istraživanja, 2015, 28, 16–571.
7. Majumder, M. Impact of Orbanization on Water Shortage in Face of Climatic 
Aberrations, Springer Briefs in Water Science and Technology; Springer: New York, 
2015.
8. Hwang, C. L.; Yoon, K.; Multiple Attribute Decision Making Methods and Applications. 
In A State-of-the-art Survey: Lecture Notes in Economics and Mathematical systems; 
Springer: New York, 1979.
9. Bellman, R. E.; Zadeh, L. A. Decision-making in a Fuzzy Environment. Manage. Sci.
1970, 17 (4), B141–B164.
10. Abbas, N. M.; Solomon, D. G.; Bahari, F.; A Review of Current Research Trends in 
Electrical Discharge Machining (EDM). Int. J. Mach. Tools Manuf. 2007, 47, 1214–1228.
11. Lin, C. L.; Lin, J. L.; Ko, T. C.; Optimization of the EDM Process Based on the 
Orthogonal Array with Fuzzy Logic and Grey Relational Analysis Method. Int. J. Adv. 
Manuf. Technol. 2002, 19 (4), 271–277.
12. Lin, J. L.; Lin, C. L.; The Use of Grey–fuzzy Logic for the Optimization of the 
Manufacturing Process. J. Mater. Process. Technol. 2005, 160, 9–14.
13. Tzeng, Y. F.; Chen, F. C. Multi-objective Optimisation of High-speed Electrical 
Discharge Machining Process Using a Fuzzy-based Approach. Mater. Des. 2007, 28,
1159–1168.
14. Pradhan, M. K.; Biswas, C. K. Neuro-fuzzy and Neural Network-based Prediction of 
Various Responses in Electrical Discharge Machining of AISI D2 steel. Int. J. Adv. 
Manuf. Technol. 2010, 50, 591–610.
15. Reddy, V. C.; Sivaiah, P.; Venkata Chalapathi, K.; Sangha Mitra, R. K.; Multi-response 
Optimization of EDM Process of OHNS Using Fuzzy Logic approach. Int. J. Res. 
Advent. Technol. 2014, 2 (11), 9–14.
16. Pattnaik, S. K.; Priyadarshini, M.; Mahapatra, K. D.; Mishra, D.; Panda, S. In Multi￾objective Optimization of EDM Process Parameters Using Fuzzy Method, IEEE 
sponsored 2nd international conference on innovations in information, embedded and 
communication systems (ICIIECS); 2015.
17. Samantra, C.; Satyaranjan, S.; Kumar, A.; Multi-objective Optimization of EDM 
Process Parameters Using Fuzzy Based Approach. Int. J. Eng. Stud. Tech. Appr. 2016, 2 
(4), 2–10.
18. Reddy, V. V.; Valli, P. M.; Kumar, A.; Reddy, C. H. S.; Multi-objective Optimization 
of Electrical Discharge Machining of PH17-4 Stainless Steel with Surfactant-mixed 
and Graphite Powder—Mixed Dielectric Using—Data Envelopment Analysis—Based 
Ranking Method. J. Eng. Manuf. 2015, 229 (3), 487–494.
 19. Lin, J. L.; Lin, C. L. The Use of the Orthogonal Array with Grey Relational Analysis 
to Optimize the Electrical Discharge Machining Process with Multiple Performance 
Characteristics. Int. J. Mach. Tools. Manuf. 2002, 42, 237–244.
 20. Rajurkar, K. P.; Zhu, D.; McGeough, J. A.; Kozak, J.; De Silva, A.; New Developments 
in Electrochemical Machining. CIRP Ann. Manuf. Technol. 1999, 48 (2), 567–579.
 21. Batra, J. L.; Acharya, B. G.; Jain, V. K. Multi-objective Optimization of the ECM 
Process. Precis. Eng. 1986, 8 (2), 88–96.Introduction to Advanced Manufacturing Processes 15
 22. Santhi, M.; Ravikumar, R.; Jeyapaul, R. Optimization of Process Parameters in 
Electrochemical Machining (ECM) Using DFA–fuzzy Set for Titanium Alloy. 
Multidiscipline Model Mater. Struct. 2013, 9 (2), 243–255.
 23. Das, M. K.; Kumar, K.; Barman, T. K.; Sahoo, P.; Optimization of Surface Roughness 
and MRR in Electrochemical Machining of EN31 tool Steel Using Grey-Taguchi 
Approach. Procedia Mater. Sci. 2014, 6, 729–740.
 24. Chakradhar, D.; Venu Gopal, A.; Multi-objective Optimization of Electrochemical 
Machining of EN31 Steel by Grey Relational Analysis. Int. J. Model Optim. 2011, 1 (2), 
113–117.
 25. Manikandan, N.; Kumanan, S.; Sathiyanarayanan, C. Multiple Performance 
Optimizations of Electrochemical Drilling of Inconel 625 Using Based Grey Relational 
Analysis. Eng. Sci. Technol. Int. J. 2017, 20 (2), 662–671.
 26. Tang, L.; Yang, S. Experimental Investigation on the Electrochemical Machining of 
00Cr12Ni9Mo4Cu2 Material and Multi-objective Parameters Optimization. Int. J. Adv. 
Manuf. Technol. 2013, 67 (9–12), 2909–2916.
 27. Gupta, K.; Jain, N. K.; Laubscher, R. F.; Spark-erosion Machining of Miniature Gears: 
A Critical Review. Int. J. Adv. Manuf. Technol. 2015, 80 (9–12), 1863–1877.
 28. Gupta, K.; Jain, N. K. In On Productivity of Wire Electric Discharge Machining for 
Manufacturing of Miniature Gears, Proceedings of 2nd International Conference on 
Intelligent Robotics, Automation and Manufacturing, Indore, India, Dec 16–18, 2013; 
pp 428–439.
 29. Jana, A. K.; Akshay, R.; Anil Reddy, R.; Vardhan, V.; DH.; Sai Kumar, V. Optimization 
of Process Parameters in WEDM by Using GRA Technique for Machining Aluminium 
HE15WP. Int. J. Eng. Innovat. Technol. 2016, 5 (10), 74–79.
 30. Jangra, K.; Jain, A.; Grover, S. Optimization of Multiple-machining Characteristics 
in Wire Electrical Discharge Machining of the Punching Die Using Grey Relational 
Analysis. J. Sci. Ind. Res. 2010, 69, 606–612.
 31. Huang, J. T.; Liao, Y. S.; Optimization of Machining Parameters of Wire-EDM based on 
Grey Relational and Statistical Analyses. Int. J. Prod. Res. 2003, 41 (8), 1707–1720.
32. Kumar, A.; Gulati, V.; Goswami, A. Optimization of Process Parameter in WEDM for 
Monel K-500 Using Ultima-1F and Wire-cut EDM. Int. J. Res. Aeronaut. Mech. Eng. 
2015, 3 (4), 53–68.
 33. Pei Z. J; Ferreira P. M.; Haselkorn, M. Plastic Flow in of Ceramics. J Mater Process 
Technol. 1995, 48 (1–4), 771–777.
 34. Gauri, S. K.; Chakravorty, R.; Chakraborty, S. Optimization of Correlated Multiple 
Responses of (USM) Process. Int. J. Adv. Manuf. Technol. 2011, 53, 1115–1127.
 35. Chakravorty, R.; Gauri, S.K.; Chakraborty, S. Optimization of Multiple Responses of 
(USM) Process: A Comparative Study. Int. J. Ind. Eng. Comput. 2013, 4, 285–296.
 36. Gill, S. M.; Singh, J.; An Adaptive Neuro-fuzzy Inference System Modeling for Material 
Removal Rate in the Stationary Ultrasonic Drilling of Sillimanite. Expert Syst. Appl.
2010, 37 (8), 5590–5598.
 37. Singh, J.; Gill, S. G. Fuzzy Modeling and Simulation of Ultrasonic Drilling of Porcelain 
with Hollow Stainless Steel Tools. Mater. Manuf. Processes 2009, 24 (4), 468–475.
 38. Phokane, T. C.; Gupta, K.; Gupta, M. K. Investigations on Surface Roughness and 
Tribology of Miniature Brass Gears Manufactured by Abrasive Water Jet Machining. 
Proc. IMechE, Part C: J. Mech. Eng. Sci. 2018, 232, 4193–4202.16 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
 39. Gaidhani, Y. B.; Kalamani, V. S. Abrasive Water Jet Review and Parameter Selection by 
AHP Method. IOSR J. Mech. Civil Eng. 2013, 8 (5), 1–6.
 40. Jegaraj, J. J. R.; Babu, N. R.; A Soft Computing Approach for Controlling the Quality 
of Cut with Abrasive Water Jet Cutting System Experiencing Orifice and Focusing Tube 
Wear. J. Mater. Process. Technol. 2007, 185 (1–3), 217–227.
 41. Li, C. H.; Tsai, M. J. Multi-objective Optimization of Laser Cutting for Flash Memory 
Modules with Special Shapes Using Grey Relational Analysis. Optics Laser Technol.
2009, 41, 634–642.
 42. Mishra, S.; Yadava, V. Modeling and Optimization of Laser Beam Percussion Drilling 
of Thin Aluminum Sheet. Opt. Laser Technol. 2013, 48, 461–474.
 43. Pandey, A. K.; Dubey, A. K. Taguchi Based Fuzzy Logic Optimization of Multiple 
Quality Characteristics in Laser Cutting of Duralumin Sheet. Opt. Lasers Eng. 2012,
50, 328–335.
 44. Pan, L. K.; Wang, C. C.; Wei, S. L.; Sher, H. F. Optimizing Multiple Quality 
Characteristics via Method-based Grey Analysis. J. Mater. Process. Technol. 2017, 182, 
107–116.
 45. Syna, C. Z.; Mokhtar, M.; Feng, C. J.; Manurung, Y. H. P. Approach to Prediction of 
Laser Cutting Quality by Employing Fuzzy Expert System. Expert Syst. Appl. 2011, 38,
7558–7568.
 46. Badkar, S. D.; Pandey, K. S.; Buvanashekaran, G. Parameter Optimization of Laser 
Transformation Hardening by Using Method and Utility Concept. Int. J. Adv. Manuf. 
Technol. 2011, 52, 1067–1077.
 47. Sharma, A.; Yadava, V. Optimization of Cut Quality Characteristics During Nd:YAG 
Laser Straight Cutting of Ni-based Superalloy Thin Sheet Using Grey Relational 
Analysis with Entropy Measurement. Mater. Manuf. Proc. 2011, 26, 1522–1529.Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes. 
Sandip Kunar, Prasenjit Chatterjee, and M. Sreenivas Reddy (Eds.)
© 2025 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
MODELING OF PROCESS 
PARAMETERS FOR ELECTRICAL 
DISCHARGE FACE GRINDING 
PROCESS
AKSHAT SRIVASTAVA KULSHRESTHA1, DEEPAK RAJENDRA UNUNE1, 
ASHOK KUMAR DARGAR1, SANDIP KUNAR2,3, and 
PRASENJIT CHATTERJEE4
1Department of Mechanical-Mechatronics Engineering, 
LNM Institute of Information Technology Jaipur, India
2Department of Mechanical Engineering, Aditya Engineering College, 
Surampalem, India
3Jawaharlal Nehru Technological University Kakinada, Kakinada, 
East Godavari, India
4Department of Mechanical Engineering, MCKV Institute of 
Engineering, Howrah, India
CHAPTER 2
ABSTRACT
This chapter compares the two modeling techniques, namely, response 
surface methodology and adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference system, for perfor￾mance prediction of the electrical discharge face grinding process. The 
central composite design approach was used to lay out the experiments for 
machining the Monel 400 superalloy. Analysis of variance was applied to 
identify the influences of input process parameters (grinding wheel speed, 
peak current, pulse on time, and pulse off time) that significantly affect the 18 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
average surface roughness (output). A mathematical model of the quadratic 
type was also formed to quantify the performance characteristic. Further, the 
experimental data was used in training and testing for an adaptive neuro￾fuzzy inference system algorithm. The predictions done by both models 
were confirmed with validation experiments. The investigation revealed that 
the adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference system model had a better prediction 
accuracy due to its powerful learning capability.
2.1 INTRODUCTION
Electrical discharge grinding (EDG) is a hybrid electrical discharge 
machining (EDM) process that unites spark erosion of EDM and mechanical 
action of grinding for material removal purposes.1 EDG delivers higher 
material removal and better surface quality than the conventional EDM 
process.2 EDG employs an electrically conductive disc-shaped rotary tool 
or grinding wheel in contrast to the stationary tool in the case of die-sink 
EDM. The benefit of adopting a rotary tool is that the tool wear can be well 
distributed to the grinding wheel surface, and also rotary motion removes the 
debris particles in the inter electrode gap, improving the surface quality of 
the machined component.
When the flat face side of the grinding wheel is machining in EDG, such a 
setup is called electrical discharge face grinding (EDFG). The grinding wheel 
rotates around the spindle axis and feeds perpendicular toward the machine 
table.3 Yadav et al.4 developed the EDFG setup and, through the experimental 
analysis, claimed that EDFG was attributed to enhanced material removal 
rate (MRR) and average surface roughness (Ra). The recital of EDFG is 
categorized by maximum MRR, reduced tool wear rate (TWR), and Ra.
Gupta et al.5 found that MRR, TWR, and Ra increased with an increase in 
the peak current (Ip), grinding wheel speed (GWS), and pulse on time (Ton). 
The most significant factor affecting the EDFG robustness was Ip and Ton. It 
was also found that the size of the crater decreases with an increase in GWS. 
Helmi et al.6 performed EDG and found that Ip and Ton influence the Ra value.
Modeling is the process of representing the structure and working some 
process. Modeling can provide valuable information on the fundamental 
understanding of the process, but more importantly, it provides the means 
to predict many machining parameters reliably. The modeling fundamental 
purpose is to predict the effect of changes during the process.7 Several inves￾tigators have made efforts by employing various modeling techniques. Some 
for the investigation are shown in Table 2.1.Modeling of Process Parameters for Electrical Discharge Face 19
TABLE 2.1 Literature Review Related to Various Modeling Techniques.
Author Technique Processes Machining 
parameters
Response Remarks
Agrawal 
et al.8
Artificial neural 
network (ANN) 
technique
Surface electrical 
discharge 
diamond grinding
(S-EDDG) 
GWS, Ip, duty 
factor, depth 
of cut, and 
workpiece 
speed
MRR and 
Ra
MRR increases as Ip
and GWS increase.
Ra decreases with a 
rise in GWS. While 
the increases in Ip
Unune et 
al.9
Fuzzy logic 
artificial intel￾ligence technique
Abrasive mixed 
electrical 
discharge 
diamond surface 
grinding
(AMEDDSG)
GWS, abrasive 
concentration, 
Ip, and Ton
MRR and 
Ra
An increase in 
GWS, Ip, and Ton
contributes to an 
increase in MRR.
An increase in 
GWS contributes to 
reduced Ra
Singh, 
G.K10
Hybrid Taguchi 
methodology and 
response surface 
methodology 
approach 
Electrical 
discharge 
diamond grinding
(EDDG)
GWS, Ip, Ton, 
and duty factor
MRR and 
Ra
The developed 
response model has 
been found adequate 
for MRR and Ra
H. Baseri 
and G.11
Adaptive neuro￾fuzzy inference 
system (ANFIS)
Conventional 
grinding process
Dresser cross 
feed rate, depth 
Ra The ANFIS 
predicted Ra
values show a good 
comparison with 
experimental values
Khalid 
and 
Taylan12
ANFIS and polyno￾mial modeling 
approaches
Electrical 
discharge 
machining 
(EDM)
Ip, Ton, Toff, 
and electrode 
material
MRR ANFIS model is 
more potent than 
the conventional 
polynomial models
Ulas 
Çaydas et 
al.13
ANFIS Wire electrical 
discharge 
machining 
(WEDM)
Ton, open 
circuit voltage, 
and dielectric 
flushing
White layer 
thickness 
and Ra
ANFIS significantly 
improved the 
process responses: 
white layer thickness 
and Ra
As surveyed in the above literature, it could be inferred that ANFIS has 
not been employed in modeling the EDFG process. The foremost objective 
of this research work will be to evaluate the correlation between Ra and the 
input parameters (at three altered levels): GWS, Ip, Ton, and pulse off time
(Toff). As the modeling task will be accomplished using RSM and ANFIS, 
the performance of these modeling approaches was compared in the pres￾ence of qualitative parameters. The analysis of variance (ANOVA) findings 20 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
are therefore discussed and presented. The article concludes with the key 
highlights after making comparisons of the dissected modeling approaches.
2.2 METHODOLOGY
2.2.1 DESIGN OF EXPERIMENTS (DOE)
It is a valuable and practical approach for assessing, comprehending, and 
modeling the relationship between input parameters and performance 
measures. Typically, DoE is carried out in three stages: planning, conducting, 
and interpreting.14 Identifying the problem, determining the factors that 
may influence it, and finding an effective design to fluctuate the parameters 
following the selected design come under the planning stage. The following 
step is to conduct the experiments as anticipated. Finally, the findings should 
be analyzed and discussed. Here for DoE, central composite design (CCD) 
within RSM is used.
2.2.2 RESPONSE SURFACE METHODOLOGY (RSM)
It is an empirical modeling technique that seems critical in assessing the 
correlation among numerous process parameters and their responses to 
specific criteria. As a result, the relevance of the process parameters is deter￾mined.15 However, RSM is a statistical and numerical approach that predicts 
and optimizes response parameters. Tangible independent variables impact 
the response demand.16
In complex interactions, RSM could assess the relative importance of 
various factors. It is a valuable strategy for examining multiple process 
variables because it requires minimal experimental trials versus studying 
one variable at a time. RSM provides an answer to choosing the levels of the 
applied factors to attain the response desired value in the minimum number 
of experiments. RSM-independent process parameters for analysis can be 
represented as the eq 2.1.
2
0
11 1
 
nn n
i i ii i i i j
ii i
Y a a x a x a xx
= = =
=+ + + ∑∑ ∑ (2.1)
Y is output, a0 coefficients intended for unrestricted terms, ai coefficients 
for linear terms, aii coefficients for quadratic terms, and aij coefficients for 
the interface terms.Modeling of Process Parameters for Electrical Discharge Face 21
2.2.3 ADAPTIVE NEURO-FUZZY INFERENCE SYSTEM (ANFIS)
It seems to be a method of computational intelligence approach that engages 
preconfigured input/output data collections; Jang introduced the ANFIS in 
1993, and it is a software tool generated in fuzzy inference system (FIS).13
This amendment enables the fuzzy structures to understand their dispensation 
data.17 It practices the ANN statistical relationships to adapt rule-based fuzzy 
rules.18 ANFIS is a hybrid tool capable of generating complex nonlinear 
relationships between input and output variables. ANFIS is also used to 
simulate besides forecast machining outputs. In ANFIS Sugeno fuzzy model 
rule, Rk can be represented as:
: ( ) ( ) R IF AND y THEN f p x q y r k Ai µχ µ Bi =++ k k k
where k represents the number of rules, Ai and Bi stand as fuzzy membership 
functions symbolized by µ in the antecedent part of the rule Rk , and Pk qk
and rk were the linear parameters of the consequent part of the kth rule. 
Figure 2.1 illustrates the architecture of the ANFIS model.
FIGURE 2.1 Architecture for a Sugeno fuzzy model.
For fuzzy interpretation steps, ANFIS employs five network layers: 
“network layer one as input fuzzification,” “network layer second as fuzzy 
set database structure,” “network layer third as fuzzy rule vile structure,” 
“network layer fourth as a decision-making,” and “network layer fifth as 
output defuzzification.”19, 2022 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
2.3 EXPERIMENTATION AND TEST CONDITIONS
Experimentation was carried out on the EDM machine (ELTECH-D300) 
with an integrated EDFG attachment, as shown in Figure 2.2. Individually 
experiment was done for 30 min before evaluating the response parameter. 
The experimental planning of four process parameters with their selected 
levels is shown in Table 2.2. Figure 2.3 depicts the modeling approach used 
to predict the Ra.
FIGURE 2.2 EDM with an integrated EDFG attachment photograph.
TABLE 2.2 Experimental Input Parameters and Their Levels.
Levels GWS (rpm) Ip (A) Ton (µs) Toff (µs)
1 200 6 50 3
2 250 12 75 6
3 300 18 100 9Modeling of Process Parameters for Electrical Discharge Face 23
FIGURE 2.3 Flowchart for the modeling approach.
2.3.1 WORKPIECE MATERIAL AND GRINDING TOOL
Model 400, nickel-copper superalloy, known as difficult-to-cut material, 
was used as the workpiece in this work. Monel 400 is resistant to a wide range 
of corrosive conditions and has excellent strength and toughness. Lewis E. 
Shoemaker and Gaylord D. Smith21 stated that Monel 400 was frequently 
employed in the marine and chemical processing industries. Furthermore, 
nickel-based alloys possess excellent corrosion and thermal fatigue resis￾tance.22 The Monel 400 chemical composition is presented in Table 2.3. 
Cylindrical copper rods of tool lengths 50 mm and 14 mm (diameter) were 
taken for the grinding wheel.
TABLE 2.3 The Monel 400 Chemical Composition.
Elements Ni Fe Mn Cu Cr Mo Ti
% 65.31 1.76 1.01 30.63 0.83 0.08 0.0724 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
2.3.2 MEASUREMENT OF RESPONSE
All experiments were performed, and the surface roughness tester deter￾mined the response Ra (µm) (MITUTOYO SJ 200). The three times Ra
was measured, and their mean was dignified. The experimental plan and the 
measured Ra were presented in Table 2.4.
TABLE 2.4 Experimental Plan with Process Machining Parameters.
Sr. No. GWS (rpm) Ip(A) Ton (µs) Toff(µs) Ra (µm)
1 300 18 50 9 8.993
2 300 18 50 3 8.987
3 300 18 100 9 8.949
4 250 18 75 6 6.537
5 200 6 100 3 5.613
6 200 18 50 3 6.898
7 200 6 50 3 6.121
8 200 18 50 9 6.899
9 200 18 100 9 7.999
10 250 12 75 6 5.897
11 200 12 50 6 5.509
12 300 6 50 9 5.472
13 250 12 100 6 6.789
14 250 12 75 6 5.897
15 300 6 100 3 6.244
16 300 6 100 9 6.168
17 300 6 50 3 5.545
18 250 12 75 9 5.626
19 200 6 50 9 6.611
20 300 12 75 6 7.458
21 200 12 75 6 6.691
22 250 12 75 6 5.897
23 250 12 75 6 5.897
24 250 12 75 6 5.897
25 250 6 75 6 5.843
26 200 6 100 9 6.655
27 250 12 75 3 5.714
28 200 18 100 3 8.756
29 250 12 75 6 5.897
30 250 12 75 6 5.897Modeling of Process Parameters for Electrical Discharge Face 25
2.4 RESULT AND DISCUSSION
The experimental data were analyzed using the Design-Expert 12 software. 
ANOVA analysis was used to investigate the effect and influences of process 
parameters on Ra. To improve the model performances, the backward elimi￾nation method was used to eliminate insignificant terms.
2.4.1 ANOVA FOR Ra
Table 2.5 represents the ANOVA analysis for Ra, and the F-value of 13.39 
denotes that the model is significant. The model terms are significant 
if their value is less than 0.05, while GWS (A), Ip (B), AB, and A2 were 
significant terms, and Ton (C) was found as an insignificant term. The 
“R-Squared” value of 0.81 agrees reasonably with “Adj R-Squared” value of 
0.7495. A ratio greater than four is preferred for “Adeq precision” to measure 
the signal-to-noise ratio for the model. The Adeq precision ratio of 11.91 
suggests a sufficient signal in this case. Employing the backward elimination 
method during the ANOVA analysis, the term Toff (D) was found inessential, 
which is not shown in the ANOVA Table.
TABLE 2.5 ANOVA for Ra.
Source Sum of 
squares
df Mean 
square
F value p-Value 
Prob. > F
Remarks Contribution 
(%)
Model 28.64 7 4.09 13.39 <0.001 Significant
A- GWS 1.86 1 1.86 6.08 0.0220 Significant 5.26
 B- Ip 5.10 1 5.10 16.69 0.0005 Significant 14.42
 C-Ton 0.66 1 0.66 2.19 0.153 1.89
 A×B 3.31 1 3.31 10.84 0.003 Significant 9.36
 A×A 2.81 1 2.81 9.19 0.006 Significant 7.94
 B×B 1.18 1 1.18 3.85 0.06 3.33
 C×C 1.02 1 1.02 3.33 0.08 2.88
Residual 6.72 22 0.30 Press 0.14
Lack of fit 6.72 16 0.42 R-squared 0.81
Pure error 0.00 6 0.00 Adj R-squared 0.74
Cor. total 35.36 29 Adeq precision 11.91
2.4.2 REGRESSION EQUATIONS
The quadratic eq 2.2 shows the relationships between the input process 
parameters (GWS, Ip, and Ton) and the response characteristic (Ra).26 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
1 1.52594 0.007076 0.63835 0.12269 0.001631
0.000041 0.016303 0.000873
p on
p p p on on
Ra GWS I T
GWS I GWS GWS I I T T
= + × − ×− × +
× ×− × × + ××+ × ×
 (2.2)
2.4.3 ANFIS PERFORMANCES
The values of Ra shown in Table 2.4 will be assisted as an ANFIS 
model training dataset. Figure 2.4 depicts a fuzzy logic designer based on 
inputs such as GWS, Ip, Ton, and Toff along with output (Ra). Figure 2.5 depicts 
the ANFIS model structure used in this study.
FIGURE 2.4 ANFIS fuzzy logic designer structure of Ra.
FIGURE 2.5 ANFIS model structure of Ra.Modeling of Process Parameters for Electrical Discharge Face 27
Figure 2.6 depicts the arranged ANFIS architecture for the output param￾eter. These have four input layer and one output layer nodes. The hybrid 
learning algorithm is being used in the ANFIS structure, and the Gauss type 
membership function was used in this study. ANFIS training was stopped 
after 500 iterations. The root mean square error (RMSE) for the ANFIS 
model was assessed to be 0.41.
FIGURE 2.6 Planned ANFIS design.
2.4.4 VALIDATION EXPERIMENTS
Few random experiments were furthermore done to support the models 
verifications under changed machining conditions from Table 2.4. The 
predicted and experimental Ra values were summarized in Table 2.6. From 
the comparison, it was found that the ANFIS model provides a relatively 
low percentage error (pe) than the RSM model as shown in Table 2.6. The 
outcome of the ANFIS rule is shown in Figure 2.7. In addition, Figure 2.8 
shows the certification of inspection done for the Ra (second experiment 
from Table 2.6). To evaluate the models, the percentage error pe was deter￾mined using eq 2.3. The Ev, Pv signifies the experimental value and predicted 
value. Table 2.7 shows the models mean square error (MSE) calculation.
( ) e
v v 100%
v
E P
p E
− = × (2.3)28 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
TABLE 2.6 Predicted Ra by RSM and ANFIS Along with Experimental Output.
S.NO GWS Ip Ton Toff RSM 
pred.
ANFIS 
pred.
Exp. 
value
RSM 
(pe)
ANFIS 
(pe)
(rpm) (A) (µs) (µs) (µm) (µm) (µm) (%) (%)
1 87 5 95 4 5.98 5.44 5.02 19.12 8.36
2 70 7 100 8 5.41 4.78 4.75 13.89 0.6
3 78 7 100 5 5.51 4.85 4.89 12.67 0.8
FIGURE 2.7 The result of the ANFIS rule.
TABLE 2.7 MSE Calculation for the Models.
MSE for the RSM model MSE for the ANFIS model
RSM 
pred.
Exp. value Error Error 
square
ANFIS 
pred.
Exp. 
value
Error Error 
square
5.98 5.02 0.96 0.9216 5.44 5.02 0.42 0.1764
5.41 4.75 0.66 0.4356 4.78 4.75 0.03 0.0009
5.51 4.89 0.62 0.3844 4.85 4.89 -0.04 0.0016
MSE (RSM) 0.580 MSE (ANFIS) 0.059
2.4.5 SURFACE MORPHOLOGY
To analyze the machined surface, a scanning electron microscopy (SEM) 
image was taken for the second experiment value (lesser Ra) from Table 2.6. 
Some interesting floor results were identified, and there are discussed further. 
Figure 2.9(b) shows that there was some waviness. The crest created by a 
faster grinding wheel may flatten the waviness formed across the machined 
surface. These images depict a magnified overview of the confirmatory 
experiment conducted with the magnification level chosen at different 
locations for the machined surface. The microstructure reveals an accumula￾tion of debris across the machined surface in the form of micro-globules Modeling of Process Parameters for Electrical Discharge Face 29
and plateaus that could cause the higher Ra value, which can be due to the 
quenching process during the machining and inappropriate flushing across 
the machining zone. Microcracks may also be visible in Figure 2.9(a), which 
are caused by thermal stress. Thermal stress is generated during machining 
when the discharge energy per spark bombards the workpiece surface. Simi￾larly, craters can be visible, and the dimensions of the craters are greatly 
dependent on the amount of energy transferred from the electrode to the 
workpiece in a stochastic manner via electric discharges.
FIGURE 2.9 FESEM images of the machined surface.
FIGURE 2.8 Certification of inspection for Ra.30 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
2.5 CONCLUSIONS
The purpose of this investigation was to identify an appropriate predictive 
model for Ra in the EDFG process for grinding Monel 400. The experi￾ments were carried out with a CCD approach in RSM. The predic￾tions for Ra were made by RSM and ANFIS models and compared with the 
validation experiments. At the end of the study, we mentioned the following 
conclusions.
1. It can be seen from the ANOVA table that GWS and Ip had a highly 
significant effect as compared to other process parameters. The Ra
improves with decreasing Ip and GWS.
2. Both models evidence the prediction. But the results show that the 
ANFIS approach outperforms the RSM technique.
3. The predicted values using the ANFIS model approach were adja￾cent to the experimental values, and the MSE for the ANFIS model 
(0.059) is low compared to the RSM model (0.580).
4. The recast layer and plateaus can be visible on the machined surface 
if the proper amount of energy is not transferred from the tool to the 
workpiece.
KEYWORDS
• electrical discharge face grinding
• modeling
• ANFIS
• average surface roughness
• RSM
REFERENCES
1. Singh, G. K.; Yadava, V.; Kumar, R. Diamond Face Grinding of WC-Co Composite with 
Spark Assistance: Experimental Study and Parameter Optimization. Int. J. Precis. Eng. 
Manuf., 2010, 11 (4), 509–518. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12541-010-0059-3.
2. Shu, K. M.; Tu, G. C. Study of Electrical Discharge Grinding Using Metal Matrix 
Composite Electrodes. Int. J. Mach. Tools Manuf. 2003, 43 (8), 845–854. https://doi.
org/10.1016/S0890-6955(03)00048-8.Modeling of Process Parameters for Electrical Discharge Face 31
3. Abothula, B. C.; Yadava, V.; Singh, G. K. Development and Experimental Study of 
Electrodischarge Face Grinding. Mater. Manuf. Process. 2010, 25 (6), 482–487. https://
doi.org/10.1080/10426910903367436
4. Yadav, R. S.; Singh, G.; Yadava, V. Experimental Investigation of Electro-Discharge 
Face Grinding of Metal Matrix Composite (Al/Sic). ELK Asia Pacific J. – Spec. 2015, 4
(1), 31–37. https://doi.org/10.16962/elkapj/si.arimpie-2015.31
5. Gupta, I.; Tyagi, G. Optimization of Machining Parameters in Electrical Discharge 
Machining Process of Ti-6Al-4V Alloy by Taguchi Method. Int. J. Prod. Eng., 2017, 3
(2), 44–50. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.37628/ijpe.v3i2.461
6. Hafiz Helmi, M.; Azuddin, M.; Abdullah, W. Investigation of Surface Roughness and 
Material Removal Rate (MRR) on Tool Steel Using Brass and Copper Electrode for 
Electrical Discharge Grinding (EDG) Process. Int. J. Integr. Eng. (Issue Mech. Mater. 
Manuf. Eng. 2009, 31–40.
7. Anu Maria. S. Andradottir,. In Proceedings of the 1997 Winter Simulation Conference 
ed. S. Andradottir, K. J. Healy, D. H. Withers, and B. L. Nelson; 1997.
8. Agrawal, S. S.; Yadava, V. Modeling and Prediction of Material Removal Rate and 
Surface Roughness in Surface-Electrical Discharge Diamond Grinding Process of Metal 
Matrix Composites. Mater. Manuf. Process. 2013, 28 (4), 381–389. https://doi.org/10.1
080/10426914.2013.763678
9. Unune, D. R.; Marani Barzani, M.; Mohite, S. S.; Mali, H. S. Fuzzy Logic-Based 
Model for Predicting Material Removal Rate and Average Surface Roughness of 
Machined Nimonic 80A Using Abrasive-Mixed Electro-Discharge Diamond Surface 
Grinding. Neural Comput. Appl. 2018, 29 (9), 647–662. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s00521-016-2581-4
10. Machining, J. Robust Parameter Design and Multi-Objective Optimisation of Electro￾Discharge Diamond Face Grinding of HSS Gyanendra Kumar Singh, Vinod Yadava * 
and Raghuvir Kumar. 2012, 11 (1).
11. Baseri, H.; Alinejad, G. ANFIS Modeling of the Surface Roughness in Grinding Process. 
World Acad. Sci. Eng. Technol. 2011, 73 (1), 499–503.
12. Al-Ghamdi, K.; Taylan, O. A Comparative Study on Modelling Material Removal 
Rate by ANFIS and Polynomial Methods in Electrical Discharge Machining Process. 
Comput. Ind. Eng. 2015, 79, 27–41. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cie.2014.10.023
13. Çaydaş, U.; Hasçalik, A.; Ekici, S. An Adaptive Neuro-Fuzzy Inference System (ANFIS) 
Model for Wire-EDM. Expert Syst. Appl. 2009, 36 (3 PART 2), 6135–6139. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.eswa.2008.07.019
14. Antony, J. Fundamentals of Design of Experiments. Des. Exp. Eng. Sci. 2014, 7–17. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/b978-0-08-099417-8.00002-x
15. Kumar, R.; Singh, G. K.; Vates, U. K.; Sharma, B. P. In Analysis and Experimental Study 
of Electrical Discharge Face Grinding on Tungsten Copper Alloy, 10 th Conference 
on Precision, Meso, Micro and Nano Engineering, IIT Madras, Chennai; 2017, 3; pp
680–685.
16. Singh, S.; Yadava, V.; Yadav, R. S. In Development and Experimental Investigation 
of Electro- Discharge Diamond Face Grinding, 5 th International & 26th All India 
Manufacturing Technology, Design and Research Conference (AIMTDR 2014) 
December 12th–14th, 2014, IIT Guwahati, Assam, India; Guwahati, 2014, 1; pp 1–6.32 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
17. Buragohain, M.; Mahanta, C. A Novel Approach for ANFIS Modelling Based on Full 
Factorial Design. Appl. Soft Comput. J. 2008, 8 (1), 609–625. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
asoc.2007.03.010
18. Takagi, T.; Sugeno, M. Derivation of Fuzzy Control Rules From Human Operator’S 
Control Actions. IFAC Proc. Ser. 1984, 16 (13), 55–60. https://doi.org/10.1016/
s1474-6670(17)62005-6
19. Maher, I.; Eltaib, M. E. H.; Sarhan, A. A. D.; El-Zahry, R. M. Cutting Force-Based 
Adaptive Neuro-Fuzzy Approach for Accurate Surface Roughness Prediction in End 
Milling Operation for Intelligent Machining. Int. J. Adv. Manuf. Technol. 2015, 76
(5–8), 1459–1467. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00170-014-6379-1
20. Jang, J. S. R.; Sun, C. T.; Mizutani, E. Neuro-Fuzzy and Soft Computing-A Computational 
Approach to Learning and Machine Intelligence Book Review]. IEEE Trans. Automat. 
Contr. 2005, 42 (10), 1482–1484. https://doi.org/10.1109/tac.1997.633847
21. Shoemaker, L. E.; Smith, G. D. Nickel : A Century of Innovation A Century of Monel 
Metal : 1906 – 2006. J. Miner. Met. Mater. Soc. 2006, 58 (September issue 9,), 22–26. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11837-006-0077-x
22. Unune, D. R.; Mali, H. S. A Study of Multiobjective Parametric Optimisation of Electric 
Discharge Diamond Cut-off Grinding of Inconel 718. Int. J. Abras. Technol. 2016, 7 (3), 
187–199. https://doi.org/10.1504/IJAT.2016.078281Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes. 
Sandip Kunar, Prasenjit Chatterjee, and M. Sreenivas Reddy (Eds.)
© 2025 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
AN ISM-AHP INTEGRATED APPROACH 
TO PRIORITIZING FACTORS FOR THE 
IMPLEMENTATION OF GREEN VALUE 
STREAM MAPPING
AMBER BATWARA, MADHAV MITTAL, VIKRAM SHARMA, and 
MOHIT MAKKAR
Department of Mechanical-Mechatronics Engineering, 
LNM Institute of Information Technology, Jaipur, India
CHAPTER 3
ABSTRACT
Value stream mapping (VSM), a well-known lean tool, identifies and locates 
wastes in any industry. It adds value and improves performance. Green VSM 
is another popular concept that identifies the environmental waste associated 
with various processes. This chapter lists the five main factors and 21 sub￾factors that mainly affect the implementation of green VSM. All the factors 
are selected based on expert views through surveys and literature. In this 
article, the hierarchical and contextual relationship structures between green 
VSM drivers were addressed using the intergraded approach of “interpretive 
structural modeling (ISM)” and “analytical hierarchy process (AHP).” This 
study mainly focuses on the role of different enablers in implementing green 
VSM and prioritizes the critical enablers for green VSM practices in Indian 
manufacturing systems. The AHP method has been used to find the essential 
factors among these. In conclusion, the depiction of the hierarchical diagram 
shows the score of each criterion affecting the green VSM. A decision from 
the AHP–ISM method has been drawn to achieve sustainability.34 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
3.1 INTRODUCTION
Value stream mapping (VSM) contributes to helping corporations to focus 
on the demand for high production rates due to rising customer expecta￾tions.1 Factors such as the high energy cost, increasing pollution levels, 
rules regarding global warming, and encouragement given to green manu￾facturing lower price of products. To survive this scenario, more companies 
are adopting clean and green practices.2 In the modern global economy, the 
environmental impact of production processes is a significant concern. As 
a result, improving a company’s environmental performance is a business 
need, and ecological awareness has become a new competitive criterion.3
In recent decades, humans have faced the problem of degrading quality of 
the environment, lack of resources, and constant rise in population. These 
environmental challenges have arisen mainly due to high pollution levels, 
resource exploitation, and ecological depletion.4
VSM serves as a fundamental methodology for the assessment process 
and can uncover significant opportunities to improve production speed, cost 
reduction, save time, and cause minimum degradation to the environment. 
Now that the concept of integrating lean with green narrative has found its 
place and importance in the industries, VSM comes as the handiest and most 
easily accessible lean tool that can be modified to include the criteria of 
green production. It is known as either green-VSM (GVSM) or environ￾mental-VSM (EVSM).5 Various other models that aim at overcoming the 
shortcomings of traditional VSM that overlook the environmental impact of 
the processes is also coming up namely; Energy-VSM6 looks at the energy 
aspect of the model and aims at saving energy as well as the cost associated 
with its consumption for the manufacturer. Sustainable VSM (Sus-VSM) 
is another popular model that balances a process’s economic, social, and 
environmental aspects while drawing a CSM and FSM.7 Although the study 
prefers to focus on GVSM or EVSM only, the other non-traditional aspects 
that consider the environment in the form of energy or resources cannot be 
overlooked.
Traditionally, VSM would consider the relationship between the time 
taken in the process, to the time that adds some value. This would identify 
the processes that would waste time without adding significant value. This 
timeline would be a graphic representation that compared the two, but it paid 
no attention to the resources consumed in the process or the waste genera￾tion. The environmental impact was highly ignored. Now, such graphical 
representations with material lines of a timeline and can be created for any An ISM-AHP Integrated Approach to Prioritizing Factors 35
resource (like energy, water, exhaustible resources, etc.). A materials line, 
depicted as a variable line on a value stream map, indicates the number of 
raw materials consumed in each process in the value stream and the number 
of materials that end up adding some sort of value to the final product.
“Green manufacturing practices include using environmentally friendly 
raw materials, ecologically friendly packaging, environmentally friendly 
distribution, and environmentally friendly disposal or recycling of items at 
the end of their useful lives.”8 The combination of these green and lean meth￾odologies for continuous improvement is the best solution for organizations 
and it would also reduce costs, increase profit, and improve sustainability.
5
VSM is also expanded to cover and identify green wastes. First, we 
optimize a collection of environmental indicators using the VSM approach. 
According to our methodology, creating the current state map through the 
collection and adaptation of indicators into the present VSM provides a broad 
understanding of how natural resources and variables are behaving.9 We will 
try to formulate some general indicators, but those might vary in some cases 
depending on the individual needs of the industries and hence should be 
adjusted accordingly. The current state map identifies the problems and areas 
with the major scope for improvement. Since the resources in any industry at 
a given time are limited, all issues cannot be dealt with simultaneously. The 
weight of each green indication and its effect level are determined using the 
analytical hierarchy process (AHP) approach to simplify the procedure. With 
decision alternatives at the lowest level, AHP divides the complex problem 
into multiple levels of characteristics and criteria (Saaty, 1980). AHP can 
consider respondents’ subjective and objective evaluations of the relative 
relevance and rank of the alternatives.10 Improvements must be performed 
in priority order to obtain observable results in short durations according to 
the weights assigned by the AHP methodology.
3.2 DISCUSSION ON CRITICAL FACTORS FOR GVSM
3.2.1 IDENTIFICATION OF GREEN WASTES
EVSM or GVSM is a modified version of the traditional VSM. Like in 
conventional VSM, wastes are identified as non-value-added activities, 
time loss, etc. It represents time, resources, and processes unwanted by 
the customers and hence classified as NVA. Similarly, when considering 
the environment as one of the final products and waste recipients, we can 
identify seven undesirable substances that do not provide any value to the 36 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
ecosystem and contribute to its depletion. Wills (2009) called these the seven 
green wastes, and their identification and elimination are critical objectives 
of GVSM.
3.2.1.1 ENERGY WASTE
The elimination of energy waste is one of the most sought-after applications 
of GVSM. There is a narrow division of GVSM that primarily focuses on 
the elimination of a single type of waste only, known as Energy-VSM,11
suggested modification of a VSM to include the energy consumption as well 
as required. Several studies have been published in various countries and 
industries. About 30–40% of the articles included in this SLR also focus on 
energy waste only. The main reason behind its popularity is the high costs 
related to energy consumption. As the market becomes more competitive, the 
need to reduce energy consumption also increases. Energy refers explicitly 
to using fuels (such as natural gas) and electricity for environmental sustain￾ability (Wills, 2009). The combined environmental and economic damage 
incurred makes energy waste the most popular target.
3.2.1.2 WATER WASTE
The water waste is generated by paying for excess water consumption and 
the cost incurred to dispose off that water (Wills, 2009). The majority of 
the water demands of an organization should be met by using accessible 
water sources like rainwater harvesting. Also, the water should be recycled 
for use by removing the toxins. This way, the organization will save the 
costs involved in water consumption, and the environment will be kept from 
bearing a load of water extortion and disposal of toxins in wastewater into 
freshwater streams.
3.2.1.3 MATERIAL WASTE
The design of raw materials into items intended to be thrown in the trash 
is a widespread design mistake resulting in material waste. It will have a 
detrimental effect on the environment if a manufacturer uses the material to 
build its parts and products that are not recyclable, reused, or even includes 
hazardous materials (Wills, 2009). On the contrary, if a cycle approach of the An ISM-AHP Integrated Approach to Prioritizing Factors 37
3Rs (reduce, reuse, recycle) is followed, the economic benefits are enormous 
and leave a shallow environmental footprint. The toxicity and reusability/
recyclability of materials are the main determinants of this waste.
3.2.1.4 GARBAGE WASTE
Garbage waste is generated when the cost involves using something that 
will eventually be discarded. So, resources and money are consumed firstly 
in production and, later, at its disposal. Garbage waste can be eliminated by 
generating minimum toxins-free and biodegradable waste.
3.2.1.5 TRANSPORTATION WASTE
The unnecessary transportation of materials and people across long distances 
generates transportation waste. Cost is involved in buying fossil fuels, and 
the exhaust released harms the environment. Transportation costs can be 
minimized by transferring materials that are of top priority, meeting the 
requirements of local produce, and using eco-friendly means of transfer like 
e-vehicles, etc.
3.2.1.6 EMISSION WASTE
The exhaust of toxic gases, the discharge of polluted water, and the dumping 
of solid waste in landfills are all examples of emission wastes. As mentioned 
before, these emissions are a part of some processed materials and costs. 
The government fines and taxes levied add to the economic burden of the 
industry. Hence, emissions should be kept minimum, toxic solvents and 
raw materials should be avoided, and emissions should be treated before 
discharging into the environment.
3.2.1.7 BIODIVERSITY WASTE
The destruction of flora and fauna generates biodiversity waste to build the 
infrastructure and over-exploitation of natural resources to such an extent 
that their renewal becomes difficult. The establishment of industries should 
be done sustainably, and the destruction of biodiversity should be minimal. 
Steps of replenishment such as green roofs, tree plantation, etc., should be 
taken.38 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
3.2.2 ADDITIONAL COST
Integrating lean and green into the manufacturing process involves some 
costs. The resources of any company are limited, and hence the prices of 
GVSM must be considered to determine the feasibility of implementing 
environment-friendly practices.
3.2.2.1 INSTALLATION OF GREEN TECHNOLOGY
New machines and filters such as air and water purifying machines, exhaust 
control systems, air compressors, solar panels, low flow aerators/toilets, 
isothermal jackets for tanks and pipes to prevent heat loss, machines for 
recycling, e-vehicles, etc., have a cost attached to their installation in the 
factory. This installation may be one-time or might need service/replacement 
in a few years. This financial burden is associated with the removal of green 
wastes.
3.2.2.2 TRAINING OF EMPLOYEES
Environmental practices can only be adopted successfully if coupled with 
increased employee competency and understanding of environmental 
issues.12 A panel of experts must introduce these new techniques and their 
benefits. This cost of training the employees to execute the task of GVSM 
successfully will also involve some investment.
3.2.2.3 COST OF ADDITIONAL TIME CONSUMPTION
In terms of data collection, GVSM takes longer than VSM, which is an 
unavoidable problem because environmental waste can occasionally require 
more steps to measure, and some waste types, such as rubbish, may take 
longer to estimate an average value due to the fluctuation of volume.13 The 
additional requirement needs more effort and, sometimes, even an extra 
workforce. This spare time has a cost because it slows the manufacturing 
process.
3.2.3 SAVINGS
The economic or business benefits of going green are huge. The industries 
have a vast potential to access these benefits by practicing GVSM. This is a 
significant factor because if the savings exceed the additional cost, the green An ISM-AHP Integrated Approach to Prioritizing Factors 39
practices become economically and ecologically beneficial. Four important 
areas can yield the maximum benefits.
3.2.3.1 LESS ENERGY CONSUMPTION
Less consumption directly translates to lesser bills. The identification and 
elimination of areas of energy wastage and using renewable sources of 
energy like solar power can significantly reduce manufacturing costs within 
a short span of time.
3.2.3.2 EXEMPTION FROM GOVERNMENT TAXES AND FINES
Heavy taxes and fines are levied on industries that tend to discharge untreated/
toxic waste into the environment. This also tarnishes their corporate image 
and the trust of their customers. Recycling of wastes and proper treatment 
can prevent the industry from having to pay the heavy price and earn them a 
good reputation and the loyalty of environmentally aware customers.
3.2.3.3 ABILITY TO USE RECYCLED PRODUCTS
By employing fewer parts, more rational materials, and recycled compo￾nents, green manufacturing reduces waste and pollution and aids in the more 
efficient construction of things.4 Using recycled materials or reusing products 
with high environmental benefits significantly reduces manufacturing costs.
3.2.3.4 INCENTIVES AND GOVERNMENT AIDS FOR INSTALLING 
NEW TECHNOLOGY
The government’s clean technology initiatives and incentives for businesses, 
especially MSMEs, are undoubtedly the other approach to creating a vibrant 
green economy.2 To encourage and reward eco-friendly practices, the govern￾ment bears the partial cost of appointments like installation of solar panels, etc.
3.2.4 TRAINING OF EMPLOYEES
Human resource is an asset for any organization. Skills and aptitude determine 
the quality of this resource. To shift from ignorant to environment-friendly 
practices, the employees at different levels of an organization deserve special 
training and education.40 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
3.2.4.1 TOP MANAGEMENT COMMITMENT
“Most managers still view environmental waste minimization as a neces￾sary evil that they must practice simply to avoid legal sanctions rather than 
viewing it as an opportunity to be more competitive.”14 Because managers 
are unaware of the evidence demonstrating that benefits outweigh costs, they 
are hesitant to be environmentally proactive. The inspiration to adopt green 
flows from top to bottom; hence, awareness among the top management and 
their commitment and belief in the process is crucial.
3.2.4.2 USING SIMPLIFIED TECHNIQUES TO ENGAGE GROUND￾LEVEL WORKERS
The bottom-level employees are simply encouraged to learn the outcome by 
seeing a monthly report or announcement. As a result, they are only aware 
of the product rather than its cause. Companies become less able to react 
swiftly to the environment as a result.13 To get all the employees engaged 
in, proper education must be provided, and simple tools and GVSM should 
be used.
3.2.4.3 RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT CELL
To develop new practices according to company needs and implement green 
and lean, the companies are constantly looking at doing things differently to 
reduce the environmental footprint and costs. The area continuously evolves, 
with better practices emerging now and then. The idea is to keep innovating 
and reinventing to look outside the box.
3.2.5 INTEGRATION WITH OTHER LEAN TOOLS
To get the maximum benefits out of GVSM, several authors suggest its inte￾gration with one or more lean tools to identify and eliminate green waste, 
adopt a green approach more effectively, and consider multiple domains.
3.2.5.1 LIFE CYCLE ASSESSMENT (LCA)
Ref. [8] suggested extending life cycle assessment (LCA) and traditional 
VSM through green VSM (GVSM). From the extraction of raw materials 
to end-of-life treatment, LCA is a method for evaluating a product’s or 
service’s environmental effects.15 This approach gives rise to the model of An ISM-AHP Integrated Approach to Prioritizing Factors 41
sustainable-VSM or Sus-VSM. It considers the impact of the product on the 
environment not only during its manufacturing but at different stages of its 
life till it is discarded in the background.
3.2.5.2 PLAN-DO-CHECK-ACT (PDCA)
Ref. [1] suggest a method for conducting EVSM research based on the 
Deming’s plan-do-check-act (PDCA) improvement cycle. It aims at contin￾uous improvement and producing consistent and repeatable results.
3.2.5.3 KANBAN/PULL SYSTEM
Along with drawing GVSM, Ref. [16] recommends utilizing the pull produc￾tion approach, commonly known as Kanban—based on a demand-to-supply 
approach, this is. The prevalent push kind of system should be replaced with 
a pull type. This will lessen the production of excess inventory, which is 
subsequently connected with high storage costs for the inventory and results 
in wasteful transportation of the excess inventory. Additionally, advise estab￾lishing one-piece flow (continuous flow without stock); and using pull flow 
when continuous flow is impractical.
3.3 RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
3.3.1 ANALYTICAL HIERARCHY PROCESS
According to Saaty (1980), “AHP is a method of decision-making that 
divides a challenging MCDM problem into a hierarchy.” It is a theory based 
on the hierarchy and consistency of data, and it judges the data and provides 
a measure of its importance. AHP includes the opinions of all the experts in 
a final decision without having to produce their usability on various criteria 
by pairwise comparisons of different options.17
The first and foremost step in AHP is creating a hierarchical system in 
which the goal is kept at the first level. The criteria for selection are held at 
the second level and might consist of certain sub-criteria of their own. The 
sub-criteria should come at level 3 of the hierarchy because it is impossible 
to compare these factors directly. For example, the taxes and fines levied by 
the government cannot be compared directly with the integration of PDCA 
with VSM. Multi-criteria decision analysis (MDCA) tools like AHP are of 
great significance in such conditions. Decisions involving the environment 42 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
are often complex and have numerous stakeholders. The complexity and 
vitality of the issue make it essential for us to look for simple analytical 
techniques. MCDA methods are useful in assessing the value judgments of 
individual decision-makers and multiple stakeholders.18
Next, create a pairwise comparison matrix using Saaty’s nine-point scale 
(1–9), where 1 indicates equal importance, 3 indicates moderately greater 
importance, 5 indicates a strong greater importance, 7 indicates much greater 
importance, and 9 indicates enormously greater importance. The values of 
2, 4, 6, and 8 indicate the compromised values of importance.9 Table 3.1 
represents Saaty’s scale for pairwise comparison matrices.
TABLE 3.1 Saatys’ Scale of Importance for Pairwise Comparison Matrices.
Intensity of importance on 
scale
Definition
1 Equal importance
3 Moderate importance
5 Strong importance
7 Very strong importance
9 Extreme importance
2,4,6,8 Intermediate values
A pairwise comparison matrix was created concerning the objectives and 
constraints in each category based on the survey data gathered. In order to 
build the matrix of the comparison judgment, comparative judgments were 
merged while evaluating the expert perspectives by applying the geometric 
mean to the views. The consistency was calculated to make sure the elements 
are prioritized consistently. The maximum Eigenvector or relative weights 
were also calculated. Next, the equation was used to determine the consis￾tency index (CI) value for each order in eq 3.1 matrix. The equation can be 
used to get the consistency ratio based on the CI and random consistency 
index (RI). Following are the equations:
( )
1
max n
CI
n
− = −

(3.1)
The consistency ratio can be calculated as
CI CR
RI = (3.2)An ISM-AHP Integrated Approach to Prioritizing Factors 43
Where the arrangement of the matrix affects how the RI values vary, the 
value of RI for matrices of order (N) 1–10 are shown in Table 3.2 and was 
calculated by approximating random indices with a sample size of 500. The 
consistency ratio (CR) allowed range varies depending on the size of the 
matrix, that is, 0.05 for a 3 × 3 matrix, 0.08 for a 4 × 4 matrix, and 0.1 for all 
larger matrices, n ≥ 5. If the CR value is less than or equal to 5, it suggests 
that the matrix evaluation is reasonable or shows high consistency. However, 
if the CR is higher than the permissible number, there has been a matrix 
inconsistency, and the evaluation method needs to be evaluated, reassessed, 
and improved.
TABLE 3.2 Random Consistency Index Values.
N 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
RI 0 0 0.58 0.9 1.12 1.24 1.32 1.41 1.45 1.49
FIGURE 3.1 AHP hierarchical Model for GVSM.
AHP technique was used to solve a comparative matrix in the situation 
of factor prioritizing. Tables 3.3–3.8 have been used to calculate the param￾eters’ goal matrix and consistency ratio. The same process outlined for the 
sub-criteria factors was used to generate the other priority.44 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
TABLE 3.3 Matrix of Pairwise Comparisons for the Primary Criteria.
Main barriers F-1 F-2 F-3 F-4 F-5 Local priority weight Rank
F-1 1 1/2 1/4 3 3 0.1598 3
F-2 2 1 1/2 4 4 0.2628 2
F-3 4 2 1 5 5 0.4398 1
F-4 1/3 1/4 1/5 1 1 0.0681 4
F-5 1/3 1/4 1/5 1 1 0.0681 5
Consistency Index (CI) =0.03
In choosing a GVSM, it can be seen that (F-3) primary factor contribu￾tion is the biggest, followed by (F-2), (F-1), (F-4), and (F-5). The pairwise 
comparison matrices for the sub-criteria factors are displayed in Tables 
3.4–3.8. These pairwise matrices were resolved to produce the findings 
explained and shown in the following section. Following calculation, each 
matrix’s consistency index and consistency ratio are listed beneath the 
relevant table.
TABLE 3.4 Matrix of Pairwise Comparisons for the (F-1) Subfactors.
Subfactors F-1.1 F-1.2 F-1.3 F-1.4 F-1.5 F-1.6 F-1.7 Local criteria 
weight
Rank
F-1.1 1 3 3 4 6 4 5 0.518 1
F-1.2 1/3 1 1 2 5 2 3 0.237 2
F-1.3 1/3 1 1 2 5 2 3 0.237 3
F-1.4 1/4 1/2 ½ 1 3 1 2 0.135 4
F-1.5 1/6 1/5 1/5 1/3 1 1/3 1/2 0.0516 7
F-1.6 1/4 1/2 ½ 1 3 1 2 0.135 5
F-1.7 1/5 1/3 1/3 1/2 2 1/2 1 0.0826 6
Consistency Index (CI) =0.13
TABLE 3.5 Matrix of Pairwise Comparisons for the (F-2) Subfactors.
Subfactors F-2.1 F-2.2 F-2.3 Local criteria weight Rank
F-2.1 1 1 2 0.4 1
F-2.2 1 1 2 0.4 2
F-2.3 ½ 1/2 1 0.2 3
Consistency Index (CI) = 0An ISM-AHP Integrated Approach to Prioritizing Factors 45
TABLE 3.6 Matrix of Pairwise Comparisons for the Subfactors (F-3).
Subfactors F-41 F-42 F-43 F-44 Local criteria weight Rank
F-41 1 5 4 3 0.569 1
F-42 0.20 1 0.50 0.33 0.108 3
F-43 0.25 2 1 0.50 0.208 2
F-44 0.33 3 2 1 0.108 4
Consistency Index (CI) = 0.01.
TABLE 3.7 Matrix of Pairwise Comparisons for the (F-4) Subfactors.
Subfactors F-41 F-42 F-43 Local criteria weight Rank
F-41 1 7 5 0.724 1
F-42 1/7 1 1/3 0.083 3
F-43 1/5 3 1 0.192 2
Consistency Index (CI) =0.045
TABLE 3.8 Matrix of Pairwise Comparisons for the Subfactors (F-5).
Subfactors F-51 F-52 F-53 F-54 Local criteria weight Rank
F-51 1 3 3 3 0.5 1
F-52 1/3 1 1 1 0.1667 2
F-53 1/3 1 1 1 0.1667 3
F-54 1/3 1 1 1 0.1667 4
Consistency Index (CI) = 0.
FIGURE 3.2 Pictorial representation of AHP analysis (along with weights).46 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
3.3.1.1 INFERENCES AND FINDINGS
Savings (F3) is the most important factor in the main factors as it impacts 
the application of GVSM, followed by additional cost (F2). The main reason 
behind this is the economics determining the feasibility and interest of 
various industries to adopt green technology. If the “savings” are more than 
the “cost” incurred, even in the long run, it represents a positive environment 
for adopting GVSM and vice versa. Identification of green waste (F1) is 
also important as it helps the different types of industries identify the green 
wastes with the maximum scope of improvement. F4 and F5 come in the 
later stage, after a company has decided to adopt green practices, and are 
hence of comparatively less and secondary importance.
Subfactors
F1 – Identification of Green Wastes
Energy waste (1.1) is most important as it yields the most economic benefits. 
Energy-VSM or EVSM is a branch of VSM completely dedicated to making 
value streams compatible for obtaining energy-efficient processes. Water 
waste (1.2) and material waste (1.3) are next because recycling these wastes 
reduces the cost of procurement and disposal. Garbage waste (1.4) and emis￾sion waste (1.6) are next mainly because of the government’s cost of fines 
and taxes levied, and rules regarding their proper disposal may have negative 
effects.
F2 – Additional Cost
Installation of new machines and technology (2.1) and training of the 
employees (2.2) to making them compatible with the new technology make 
up the major chunk of the cost incurred by the company.
F3 – Savings
The cost savings from the reduced energy consumption (3.1) make up for 
most savings and benefits the company reap by going green. Recycling and 
using the waste produced (3.3) also contribute significantly to the savings.
F4 – Employee Awareness
The commitment of top management (4.1) acts as the driving force behind 
the interest and awareness among the employees toward GVSM. If the top 
management is aware of the benefits of GVSM and committed to its applica￾tion, the flow of information is very smooth. A research and development An ISM-AHP Integrated Approach to Prioritizing Factors 47
unit (4.3) is also important as it can design new methods or modify the 
existing GVSM according to their own needs
F5 – Integration with Other Lean Tools
LCA (5.1) assesses the environmental impacts associated with a product 
throughout its life cycle and is a perfect companion for GVSM. PDCA (5.2), 
Kanban (5.3) and Six Sigma (5.4) can all be equally effective when clubbed 
with GVSM.
3.3.2 INTERPRETIVE STRUCTURAL MODELING
ISM is a methodology used to simplify a given problem statement or a 
situation by establishing a relationship between various factors determining 
the result. The main reason behind the complexity of a problem is the 
interdependence of the factors on one another. ISM establishes a correlation 
between these factors and provides a definite structure.
ISM transforms complex that managers can use to make decisions. It is 
famous for identifying and summarizing information between different sets 
of variables that define an issue.
Interpretive allows a group of experts to decide and establish correlation 
and dependence between two factors.
Structural because based on the above information, the complex set of 
variables are simplified and extracted in an easily readable form
Therefore, it uses expertise on a subject to break down a complex problem 
into various sub-levels and produce a multi-level structured model. It is a 
qualitative model, making up for the factors that statistical models do not 
capture.
Here the problem statement or the issue under consideration is imple￾menting and smoothly functioning GVSM to make the system lean and 
sustainable.
The steps to implement ISM in the present scenario are as follows.
Step 0. Identification of Factors and Finding Correlation
The main factors remain the same as that in AHP analysis.
F1—Identification of green wastes
F2—Additional cost
F3—Savings
F4—Employee awareness
F5—Integration with other lean tools48 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
FIGURE 3.3 Dependence between variables.
Step 1. Structural Self-Interaction Matrix (SSIM)
Based on experts’ opinions, structural self-interaction matrix (SSIM) 
is created for the variables to show the pairwise relationship between the 
variables under consideration. The supply chain employs four symbols 
to represent the interaction between variables, with the coordination and 
responsiveness between parameters I and k is represented as follows:
V: Parameter I leads to parameter k.
A: Parameter k causes parameter I to be set.
X: The parameters I and k are connected.
O: Neither parameter I nor parameter k led to the other.
TABLE 3.9 Structural Self-Interaction Matrix.
GVSM criteria F1 F2 F3 F4 F5
Identification of green wastes F1 O O A O
Additional cost F2 V A A
Savings F3 O O
Employee awareness F4 V
Integration with other lean tools F5
Step 2. Reachability Matrix
• V, A, X, and 1s and 0s are substituted for the SSIM to create the 
initial reachability matrix, a binary matrix that represents the SSIM 
according to the specified rules.An ISM-AHP Integrated Approach to Prioritizing Factors 49
• The reachability matrix’s (i,j) entry becomes 1, and the (j,i) entry 
becomes 0 if the (i,j) entry in the SSIM is V.
• If the (i,j) entry in the SSIM is A, the reachability matrix’s (i,j) entry 
changes to 0 and the (j,i) entry changes to 1.
• If the (i,j) entry in the SSIM is X, then the (i,j) entry in the reachability 
matrix becomes 1 and the (j,i) entry likewise becomes 1.
• If the (i,j) entry in the SSIM is O, then the (i,j) entry in the reachability 
matrix becomes 0 and the (j,i) entry also becomes 0.19
TABLE 3.10 Initial Reachability Matrix.
Elements F1 F2 F3 F4 F5
F1 1 0 0 0 0
F2 0 1 1 0 0
F3 0 0 1 0 0
F4 1 1 0 1 1
F5 0 1 0 0 1
Final reachability matrix is obtained by incorporating the transitivity 
among the variables. Transitivity is a basic assumption made in ISM that if 
A is dependent on B and B is dependent on C, then A is also dependent on C.
TABLE 3.11 Final Reachability Matrix.
Elements F1 F2 F3 F4 F5 Driving power
F1 1 0 0 0 0 1
F2 0 1 1 0 0 2
F3 0 0 1 0 0 1
F4 1 1 1* 1 1 5
F5 0 1 1* 0 1 3
Dependence 2 3 4 1 2 Total = 12
Step 3. Level Partitioning
The reachability and antecedent for each factor are determined using the 
final reachability matrix. The factor itself and additional components that it 
aids in achieving are reachability. The element itself and other elements that 
aid in obtaining it make up the antecedent. For every element, the intersec￾tion of the two is listed.
The first level of the hierarchy contains items with the same reach￾ability and intersection sets. Other than themselves, they don’t contribute 50 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
to anything. The same iterations are used to continue assigning a hier￾archical value to each element after this element is eliminated from the 
database. The final ISM diagram and model are constructed using the 
discovered levels.
TABLE 3.12 Level Partitioning.
Level partitioning—iteration 1
Elements Reachability set Antecedent set Intersection Level
F1 F1 F1, F4 F1 I
F2 F2, F3 F2, F4, F5 F2
F3 F3 F2, F3, F4, F5 F3 I
F4 F1, F2, F3, F4, F5 F4 F4
F5 F2, F3, F5 F4, F5 F5
Level partitioning—iteration 2
Elements Reachability set Antecedent set Intersection Level
F2 F2 F2, F4, F5 F2 II
F4 F2, F4, F5 F4 F4
F5 F2, F5 F4, F5 F5
Level partitioning—iteration 3
Elements Reachability set Antecedent set Intersection Level
F4 F4, F5 F4 F4
F5 F5 F4, F5 F5 III
Level partitioning—iteration 4
Elements Reachability set Antecedent set Intersection Level
F4 F4 F4 F4 IV
Step 4. ISM Diagraph
Based on the relationships in the reachability matrix and the level of various 
enablers, a directed graph is drawn, and the transitive links are removed. This 
digraph helps visualize the dependent and driving factors in a hierarchical 
representation.
Savings (F3) and identification of green wastes (F3) are the top enablers 
and are hence kept on level 1. Employee awareness (F4) is the main driving 
factor that becomes essential for the smooth implementation and functioning 
of the rest of the factors. It is basic and is hence at level 4.An ISM-AHP Integrated Approach to Prioritizing Factors 51
FIGURE 3.4 ISM Diagraph.
3.3.2.1 MICMAC EVALUATION
MICMAC analysis aims to analyze the driving and dependence factors. The 
driving power of each element is the total number of elements (including 
itself) that it helps achieve. On the other hand, dependence power is the 
number of variables that help achieve it. These driving powers and dependen￾cies help classify the variables into four categories, namely (a) autonomous, 
(b) independent, (c) dependent, and (d) linkage.
The MICMAC diagram (Figure 3.5) or the driver-dependence diagram 
represents the variables graphically. The graph is divided in four quadrants, 
representing a category of variables.52 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
FIGURE 3.5 MICMAC diagram.
a. Autonomous Factors
These have low driver power as well as low dependency. These have 
few linkages and are comparatively cut off from the system. Identifi￾cation of green wastes (F1) falls in this category. It is only dependent 
on employee awareness regarding the company’s waste production. 
It does not affect any of the other variables directly.
b. Independent Factors
These have strong driving powers but low dependencies. Employee 
awareness (F4) and integration with other lean tools (F5) fall in this 
category. These factors are relatively secondary in whether to adopt 
green or not but acquire the center stage when the application comes 
into practice. F4 has the highest driving power and should become a 
management priority for continuous growth.
c. Dependent Factors
These have low driving power but are highly dependent on the 
remaining factors. Savings F3 and additional cost (F2) fall in this 
category. They are not responsible for other variables, but all other 
variables come together to determine these. F3 is the most important 
variable, as it acquires the top spot in ISM digraph. All the other 
factors determine this variableAn ISM-AHP Integrated Approach to Prioritizing Factors 53
d. Linkage Factors
Both their driving power and reliance are considerable. They are 
unstable. There were no linking factors in the scenario given.
3.4 CONCLUSIONS
The findings of the research show savings (F3) is the most important factor 
in the main factors as it impacts the application of GVSM, followed by addi￾tional cost (F2). The main reason behind this is the economics determining 
the feasibility and interest of various industries to adopt green technology. 
If the “savings” are more than the “cost” incurred, even in the long run, it 
represents a positive environment for adopting GVSM and vice versa. Iden￾tification of green waste (F1) is also important as it helps the different indus￾tries identify the green wastes with the maximum scope of improvement. F4 
and F5 come in the later stage, after a company has decided to adopt green 
practices, and are hence of comparatively less and secondary importance. In 
addition, these research implications are essential for GVSM in the Indian 
SME with specific contexts and drivers. This research offers valuable stra￾tegic guidance to key policy and industrial decision-makers in prioritizing 
measures to solve GVSM practices. This research provides scientists and 
practitioners with the potential to efficiently activate the collection of green 
drivers required to turn development from conventional VSM to GVSM.
KEYWORDS
• value stream mapping
• analytical hierarchy process
• interpretive structural modeling
• green value stream mapping
REFERENCES
1. Garza-Reyes, J. A.; Torres Romero, J.; Govindan, K.; Cherrafi, A.; Ramanathan, U. A 
PDCA-based Approach to Environmental Value Stream Mapping (E-VSM). J. Clean. 
Prod. 2018, 180, 335–348. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2018.01.12154 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
2. Nallusamy, D.; Dinagaraj, G.; Balakannan, K.; Satheesh, S. Manufacturing Practices in 
Small Scale Industries - a Case Study. Int. J. Appl. Eng. Res. 2015, 10 (62), 143–146.
3. Lorenzon dos Santos, D.; Giglio, R.; Helleno, A. L.; Campos, L. M. S. Environmental 
Aspects in VSM: A Study about Barriers and Drivers. Prod. Plan. Control. 2019, 30
(15), 1239–1249. https://doi.org/10.1080/09537287.2019.1605627
4. Zhu, X. Y.; Zhang, H.; Jiang, Z. G. Application of Green-modified Value Stream Mapping 
to Integrate and Implement Lean and Green Practices: A Case study. Int. J. Comput. 
Integr. Manuf. 2019, 00 (00), 1–16. https://doi.org/10.1080/0951192X.2019.1667028
5. Muñoz-Villamizar, A.; Santos, J.; Garcia-Sabater, J. J.; Lleo, A.; Grau, P., Green Value 
Stream Mapping Approach to Improving Productivity and Environmental Performance. 
Int. J. Product. Perform. Manag. 2019, 68 (3), 608–625. https://doi.org/10.1108/
IJPPM-06-2018-0216
6. Verma, N.; Sharma, V. Energy Value Stream Mapping a Tool to develop Green 
Manufacturing. Procedia Eng. 2016, 149, 526–534. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
proeng.2016.06.701
7. Faulkner, W.; Badurdeen, F. Sustainable Value Stream Mapping (Sus-VSM): 
Methodology to Visualize and Assess Manufacturing Sustainability Performance. J. 
Clean. Prod. 2014, 85, 8–18. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2014.05.042
8. Dimyati, A. F.; Singgih, M. L. Environmental Impact Evaluation Using Green Value 
Stream Mapping (Green-VSM) and Life Cycle Assessment (LCA). 2019, 8 (2).
9. Soltani, M., Aouag, H.,; Mouss, M. D. An integrated Framework Using VSM, AHP 
and TOPSIS for Simplifying the Sustainability Improvement Process in a Complex 
Manufacturing Process. J. Eng. Des. Technol. 2020, 18 (1), 211–229. https://doi.
org/10.1108/JEDT-09-2018-0166
10. Ahmed, R. O.; Al-mohannadi, D. M.; Linke, P. Multi-objective Resource Integration for 
Sustainable Industrial Clusters. J. Clean. Prod. 2021, 316 (December 2020), 128237. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2021.128237
11. Müller, E.; Stock, T.; Schillig, R. Energy Value-Stream Mapping—A Method to 
Optimize Value-Streams in Respect of Time and Energy Consumption. In Enabling 
Manufacturing Competitiveness and Economic Sustainability; Springer International 
Publishing, 2014; pp 285–290.
12. Dadashnejad, A. Study Investigating the Effect of Value Stream Mapping on Operational 
Losses: A Case Study. 2018. https://doi.org/10.1108/JEDT-11-2017-0123
13. Lu, S.; Hu, J. Visualization of Environmental Waste by Manufacturing—Equip VSM 
with Green Perspective Master thesis work. Chart 2011.
14. Tilina, D. I.; Zapciu, M.; Bendic, V The Link between Lean and Green Manufacturing— 
A Way to Reach Sustainable Development. Appl. Mech. Mater. 2014, 656, 534–541. 
https://doi.org/10.4028/www.scientific.net/AMM.656.534
15. Vinodh, S.; Ben Ruben, R.; Asokan, P. Life Cycle Assessment Integrated Value Stream 
Mapping Framework to Ensure Sustainable Manufacturing: A Case Study. Clean Technol. 
Environ. Policy. 2016, 18 (1), 279–295. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10098-015-1016-8
16. Verma, N.; Sharma, V. Energy Value Stream Mapping a Tool to Develop Green 
Manufacturing. 2016, 149 (June).
17. Melewar, T. C.; Alwi, S.; Hsu, P. F.; Lin, F. L. Developing a Decision Model for Brand 
Naming Using Delphi Method and Analytic Hierarchy Process. Asia Pacific J. Mark. 
Logist. 2013, 25 (2), 187–199. https://doi.org/10.1108/13555851311314013An ISM-AHP Integrated Approach to Prioritizing Factors 55
18. Kiker, G. A.; Bridges, T. S.; Varghese, A.; Seager, P. T. P.; Linkov, I. Application of 
Multicriteria Decision Analysis in Environmental Decision Making. Integr. Environ. 
Asses. Manag. 2005, 1 (2). 95–108. https://doi.org/10.1897/IEAM_2004a-015.1
19. Green Business. IGI Global. 2018.Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes. 
Sandip Kunar, Prasenjit Chatterjee, and M. Sreenivas Reddy (Eds.)
© 2025 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION ON 
AISI D2 DURING MACHINING BY 
GRAPHITE ELECTRODE IN ELECTRIC 
DISCHARGE MACHINE
PRITAM PAIN1, GAIRIK KUMAR BOSE2, and 
GOUTAM KUMAR BOSE1
1Department of Mechanical Engineering, Haldia Institute of 
Technology, Haldia, India
2Department of Manufacturing Engineering, National Institute of 
Foundry & Forge Technology, Ranchi, India
CHAPTER 4
ABSTRACT
Electric discharge machining (EDM) is one of the most predominant non￾traditional machinings which can be utilized in machining advanced conduc￾tive material. In the EDM process, the controlled spark from the cathode 
electrode strike upon the anode workpiece. As a result, the momentum 
energy of the electron creates enormous heat, which leads to instant melting 
of the workpiece material. A complex process like EDM has several process 
control parameters. In this research work, the authors have studied the 
effect of some process parameters like pulse-on time, pulse-off time, and 
gap current on AISI D2 material while machining by using the graphite 
tool. During this process, other parameters like flow pressure, gap voltage, 
etc., were kept constant so that this process can be generalized. During the 
machining, four responses, namely, wear rate, surface finish (roughness), 
hole diameter, and crater diameter were studied. Initially, artificial neural 58 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
network (ANN) has been employed to check the validation of this experi￾ment. The genetic algorithm (GA) has been used to find out the most suitable 
domain in which this tool-workpiece combination can be used. Then multi￾objective Grey model has been used along with the Fuzzy set theory to find 
out the best parametric combination for this machine. Then the obtained best 
parametric combination has been validated with actual experimental results 
and the result has been slightly improved.
4.1 INTRODUCTION
The purpose of secondary manufacturing processes or material elimination 
processes is to convey desired form and dimension to the work material 
with satisfactory tolerances, surface finish, and surface reliability. Electric 
discharge machining (EDM) is a broadly used nonconventional machining 
process in the manufacturing of complex dimensions dies, molds, and critical 
parts of precision-cutting molds, automobiles, bolt rollers, breaking knives, 
chip knives, and other hand-cutting tool applications.
In this machining process, the thermal energy of the electron from the 
cathode creates a spark on the anode workpiece and removes material from 
it by instantly melting and vaporizing from the surface. This process is inde￾pendent with respect to the hardness of the anode workpiece material; rather 
the conductivity of the material is predominant. In this process, the repetitive 
spark on the workpiece surface creates a noticeable removal of material and 
the newly generated profile will replicate the cathode tool profile. During 
this machining, the temperature becomes very high. The passing dielectric 
fluid drives away the temperature and also clears the debris from the work 
surface and creates room for the new spark to initiate. Many tools and die￾making industries use the EDM process for making precise parts. Therefore, 
controlling the process parameters for the EDM process is a very important 
criterion for making the process sound and steady. Figure 4.1 illustrates the 
machining setup of the EDM.
Brief literature of the earlier investigation work is presented here. Zeil￾mann et al. (2018)1 have presented their work with AISI H13 steel surface 
reliability study, by using EDM process with constant parameters and a 
Cu electrode with varying depths of cavity and pulse times to investigate 
surface roughness, surface textures, and crack density. They found out that 
cavity depth is the only parameter that has a significant effect on the rough￾ness of the workpiece material. Zeilmann et al. (2017)2 have discussed the Experimental Investigation on AISI D2 During Machining by Graphite 59
effect of the flushing flow and the radii of the electrode while varying the 
machining conditions on surface roughness and affected layer. Dewangan et 
al. (2014)3 have investigated the effect of different tool electrode materials 
such as copper, brass, and graphite and several other process parameters 
such as discharge current (Ip), duty cycle (τ), pulse-on time (Ton), and 
electrode polarity on EDM surface integrity. Dwivedi and Choudhury 
(2016) and Anil Kumar (2017)4,11 have investigated how the material 
removal rate (MRR) and tool wear rates (TWR) change with the alteration 
in the tool rotation speed and their influences on the surface integrity of 
the workpiece. Talla et al. (2017)5 applied graphite powder and estimated 
its role in amalgamation with concentration and machining constraints on 
surface crack density (SCD), surface roughness (Ra), microhardness depth 
profile, layer thickness, possible phase changes, and residual stress during 
powder-mixed EDM (PMEDM) of Inconel 625 (a nickel-based superalloy. 
Sahu and Mandal (2020)6 targeted estimating the adeptness of PMEDM in 
FIGURE 4.1 Illustration of EDM setup.60 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
refining the surface integrity. Tiwary et al. (2019)7 studied the influence of 
several conducting powders like copper, nickel, and cobalt with numerous 
concentrations assorted with deionized water dielectric, on several responses 
such as MRR, TWR, overcut (OC), and taper. Gadalla and Tsai (1989)8 have 
done some research on EDM of tool steels and on electric discharge drilling 
of carbon fiber-reinforced composite to understand the feasibility of using 
die-sinking EDM for machining WC carbides. Assarzadeh and Ghoreishi 
(2013)9 have presented a combined method for the modeling of the process 
and multi-objective optimization of electro-discharge machining parameters 
on cobalt-bonded tungsten carbide composite by applying response surface 
methodology (RSM) along with desirability function (DF) technique. Tawfiq 
and Najem (2014)10 have attempted an investigation to evaluate the effects of 
machining parameters while machining of AISI 304 SS by using the design 
of experiments (full factorial design) concept during experimentation. Das 
et al. (2012)12 investigated the optimization of the MRR, TWR, and surface 
roughness (Ra) in the EDM process when machining of RENE80 nickel 
super alloy material with aluminum as a tool electrode while applying RSM. 
Singh et al. (2016)13 studied the effect of EDM upon the responses, such as 
MRR, TWR, and surface roughness by applying the Taguchi methodology. 
Several other research work have been conducted to study the MRR, overcut, 
and surface condition.14–18
Very little or insufficient research work has been carried out in deter￾mining the wear rate, surface finish, hole diameter, and crater diameter 
simultaneously. This research work is mainly focused on satisfying the 
response requirements and is also focused to finding out the best multi￾objective optimized control parameters.
4.2 EXPERIMENTAL SETUP AND MATERIALS
4.2.1 EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
In this machining process, “electronica-smart CNC”-type EDM is used. This 
die-sinking servo-head machine maintains a constant gap between the tool 
and the workpiece. EDM oil 30 (boiling point temperature is 149 °C and 
flash point is 93 °C) is used as dielectric fluid with lateral flushing of pressure 
0.5 kgf/cm2. Graphite is selected as the cathode electrode material because 
of its high temperature resistance along with high electrical conductivity. A 
servo control unit is installed in the machine to maintain the predefined gap 
between the tool and the workpiece. It maintains the gap by measuring the Experimental Investigation on AISI D2 During Machining by Graphite 61
gap voltage and current and then regulates the gap distance. The work table 
along with the working tank can also move in X–Y axis. This tank contains 
job holding device, a tool holder, a feed pump, etc.
The process control parameters are altered within the maximum and 
minimum range, as presented in Table 4.1. Wear rate is measured as the 
weight loss in grams per second. Talysurfe pro 4.0 has been used as the 
roughness tester. According to ISO 4287 standers, this surface roughness 
measurement was performed at room temperature in three repetitions. The 
weight loss measurement was made by Radwag WLY and PM 4Y Series 
instruments, which can measure with an accuracy of 0.01 g. To measure hole 
diameter and crater diameter, Toolmaker’s microscope was used.
TABLE 4.1 Control Parameters and Levels.
Control parameter Symbol Unit
Level
L1 L2 L3
Current I amp 20 40 60
Pulse-on time Ton µs 200 400 600
Pulse-off time Toff µs 2 4 -
4.2.2 MATERIAL USED
In this experimental work, AISI D2 has been used as the anode workpiece 
material. The chemical composition of the material has been given in Table 
4.2.
TABLE 4.2 Chemical Composition (%) of the AISI D2 Tool Steel Used in This Study.
C Cr Mo V
1.55 12.0 0.8 0.9
4.3 METHODOLOGY AND RESULT ANALYSIS
4.3.1 ARTIFICIAL NEURAL NETWORK (ANN)
An artificial neural network (ANN) is imitating a biological neural network. 
In a neural network, nodes are interconnected simple processes. Each neuron 
accepts a set of inputs (Xi
, i = 1, 2…., n - 1, n) from other neurons and emits 
the output signals (Oi
, i = 1 to K) to the output nodes. The action of the 62 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
synapses is simulated by multiplying each input Xi
 by the associated weight 
Wi
 value and transfer the signal to the hidden layer. Eq 4.1 displays the total 
input to individual neuron in the hidden layer.
1
n
i ii
i
I WX =
= ∑ (4.1)
Usually, no output will be produced unless the activation level of the node 
exceeds a threshold value. The output of a neuron is commonly described by 
a sigmoid function shown in eq 4.2.
1 (I ) 1 i
O f i i I e− = = + (4.2)
Figure 4.2 shows the schematic diagram of an artificial neuron.
FIGURE 4.2 Schematic diagram of an artificial neural.
The most common neural network architectures are:
• Feedforward neural networks.
• Feedback neural networks.
• Self-organizing neural networks.
Figure 4.3 shows the architecture of a neural network.Experimental Investigation on AISI D2 During Machining by Graphite 63
FIGURE 4.3 Architecture of a neural network.
4.3.1.1 ANALYSIS OF THE RESULT
This arithmetical calculation is carried out by using Matlab R2015a analytical 
software. The following statistical algorithm is considered to carry out the 
calculation: divider and function has been used to divide the data, training has 
been done using Levenberg-Marquardt function, for performance mean squared 
error (MSE) has been used. The Simulink model for ANN while considering 
four control parameters to optimize the responses is illustrated in Figure 4.4. 
In the proposed ANN model, 27 experimental runs are conducted for training. 
After initializing the weight and biases, the training starts for the network.
FIGURE 4.4 Simulink diagram.64 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
The backpropagation algorithm is used for calculating the Jacobian and 
the gradient. In this backpropagation process, the backward chain rule is used 
to compute the results from the network. MSE between the network output 
and target value is applied in the ANN model. Epoch is used to calculate the 
new weight and biases from training (input and/or target) vectors. First, the 
maximum number of 1000 epoch was set to terminate the training for each case.
 The interaction between the output of the network and the targets can 
be presented by a regression curve. The four plots represent the training, 
validation, testing, and overall data. The discontinuous line in every graph 
shows the actual result – outputs = targets. The incessant line signifies the 
finest fit linear regression line among targets and outputs.
The R-value is a suggestion of the connection between the outputs plus 
targets. If R = 1, this shows that there is a particular linear connection between 
outputs and targets. If R is near to zero, then there is no linear connection 
between outputs and targets.
4.3.1.1.1 Analysis to Minimize Wear Rate
Here during computation, 65% of the data are considered for training, 25% 
of the data are considered for validation, and 10% of the data are considered 
for testing. After eight iterations, it was terminated since the mean square 
error is achieved. If the scale of the gradient is below 1.00 × 10-7, the training 
will stop. It is observed that the gradient here is 1.09 × 10-10. The quantity 
of validation checks signifies the number of consecutive iterations that the 
validation performance fails to decrease. If this number reaches 6 (the default 
value), the training will stop. Here, the number of consecutive iterations done 
for validation checks is 2. Figure 4.5 represents the neural network training 
performance progress.
FIGURE 4.5 Training performance progress for wear rate.Experimental Investigation on AISI D2 During Machining by Graphite 65
Best validation performance is 3.8388 × 10-6 at epoch 6, which is a low 
prediction error measured with MSE shown in Figure 4.6.
FIGURE 4.6 Performance plot for wear rate.
Figure 4.6 indicates the iteration at which the validation performance 
reached a minimum. The training continued till eight iterations before the 
training stopped. This figure does not indicate any major problems with the 
training. The validation and test curves are very similar to each other.
Here, in Figure 4.7, in case of training, R = 0.99706; in case of valida￾tion, R = 1; and in case of testing, R = 0.87162. Hence, overall R = 0.9365. 
Therefore, the training data indicates a good fit as the validation and test 
results both show R values that greater than 0.9.
4.3.1.1.2 Analysis to Minimize Surface Finish
Here, during computation, 70% of the data are considered for training, 15% 
of the data are considered for validation, and 15% of the data are considered 
for testing. After five iterations, it was terminated since the mean square 
error is achieved. If the scale of the gradient is below 1.00 × 10-7, the 
training will stop. It is observed that the gradient here is 1.66 × 10-9. The 
count of validation checks represents the number of consecutive iterations 66 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
that the validation performance fails to decrease. If this number reaches 6 
(the default value), the training will stop. Here, the count of consecutive 
iterations performed for validation checks is 1. Figure 4.8 represents the 
neural network training performance progress.
FIGURE 4.8 Training performance progress for surface finish.
FIGURE 4.7 Regression plot of wear rate.Experimental Investigation on AISI D2 During Machining by Graphite 67
Best validation performance is 0.21697 at epoch 5, which is a low predic￾tion error measured with MSE shown in Figure 4.9.
FIGURE 4.9 Performance plot for surface finish.
Figure 4.9 indicates the iteration at which the validation performance 
reached a minimum. The training continued till five iterations before the 
training stopped. This figure does not indicate any major problems with the 
training. The validation and test curves are very similar to each other.
Here, in Figure 4.10, in case of training, R = 1; in case of validation, R
= 0.9584; and in case of testing, R = 0.90615. Hence, overall R = 0.89712. 
Therefore, the training data indicates a good fit as the validation and test 
results both show R values that greater than 0.9.
4.3.1.1.3 Analysis to Maximize Crater Diameters
Here, during computation, 75% of the data are considered for training, 15% 
of the data are considered for validation, and 10% of the data are considered 
for testing. After seven iterations, it was terminated since the mean square 
error is achieved. If the scale of the gradient is below 1.00 × 107, the training 68 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
will stop. It is observed that the gradient here is 4.15 × 10-13. The count 
of validation checks represents the number of successive iterations that the 
validation performance fails to decrease. If this number reaches 6 (the default 
value), the training will stop. Here, the number of consecutive iterations done 
for validation checks is 8. Figure 4.11 represents the neural network training 
performance progress.
FIGURE 4.11 Training performance progress for surface finish.
FIGURE 4.10 Regression plot of wear rate.Experimental Investigation on AISI D2 During Machining by Graphite 69
Best validation performance is 0.028648 at epoch 4, which is a low 
prediction error measured with MSE shown in Figure 4.12.
FIGURE 4.12 Performance plot for surface finish.
Figure 4.12 indicates the iteration at which the validation performance 
reached a minimum. The training continued till seven iterations before the 
training stopped. This figure does not indicate any major problems with the 
training. The validation and test curves are very similar to each other.
Here, in Figure 4.13, in case of training, R = 99889; in case of validation, 
R = 0.98029; and in case of testing, R = 0.1. Hence, overall R = 0.90178. 
Therefore, the training data indicates a good fit as the validation and test 
results both show R values that greater than 0.9.
4.3.2 GENETIC ALGORITHM
If standard nonlinear programming techniques are used for optimizing a 
design that is mixed of continuous-discrete variables, and discontinuous and 
nonconvex design space, then this type of problem will be inefficient, and, 
in most cases, find a relative optimum that is closest to the starting point.1970 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
Genetic algorithm (GA) on the other hand is well suited for solving such 
problems, and, in most cases, it is efficient to find the global optimum solu￾tion with a high probability. GA is constructed on the theory of survival of 
the fittest by Darwin.
To find the optimum solution, the function needs to make two transfor￾mations. Using the penalty function, the first transformation transforms the 
original constrained function into an unconstraint function, as:
Minimize (X) (X) ( ) i f Rg + ΣΦ (4.3)
( ) ( ) Subjected to , 1, 2, ., l u
j jj x xx j n ≤≤ =  (4.4)
where Φ is a penalty function define as:
( ) 2 Φ= =〈 〉 Z Z (4.5)
FIGURE 4.13 Regression plot of wear rate.Experimental Investigation on AISI D2 During Machining by Graphite 71
where { 0
0 0
Zi Z f Z if Z
> = ≤ (4.6)
R is the penalty parameter constant.
Maximizing the fitness function, F(X), the second transformation func￾tion is minimized as:
max ( ) max
1
() () () ()
n
i
i
FX F f R g F f X =
  = − Χ+ Φ Χ = − ′     ∑ (4.7)
where max F fX > ′( ) (4.8)
F(X) denotes the fitness function.
It usually works with strings of typically binary numbers or bit (0/1) 
repressing the problem variables. A binary string can consider as a biological 
chromosome.
The regression equations for the experimental data have been obtained 
by using Minitab 17 software. Those eqs 4.9–4.11 have been subjected for 
this analysis.
Wear Rate = −0.00822 + 0.005533 Current + 0.000009 Ton + 0.000093 
Toff − 0.000005 Current*Ton − 0.000069 Current*Toff 
− 0.000000 Ton*Toff + 0.000000 Current*Ton*Toff (4.9)
Surface Finish = 1.10 + 0.470 Current + 0.00247 Ton - 0.0183 Toff 
+ 0.000192 Current*Ton + 0.00505 Current*Toff 
+ 0.000041 Ton*Toff - 0.000017 Current*Ton*Toff (4.10)
Crater Diameter = 67.3 + 6.71 Current + 0.0210 Ton - 0.228 Toff + 0.0159 
Current*Ton + 0.030 Current*Toff + 0.000189 Ton*Toff 
- 0.000051 Current*Ton*Toff (4.11)
4.3.2.1 ANALYSIS OF THE RESULT
In this section, multi-objective optimization is carried out so that three 
contradictory objectives namely minimum wear rate, minimum surface 
finish, and maximum crater diameter are satisfied simultaneously. Figure 
4.14 represents the different plot functions of GA.72 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
FIGURE 4.14 Plot functions for GA.
Here, the total number of iteration required for optimization is 128 and 
which gives 17 combinations for the control parameters. The corresponding 
output is illustrated in Table 4.3. Optimization ended as tolerance value has 
been touched. As the default setting of the GA is to lower the objective func￾tion, the negative sign is neglected for maximizing MRR. From Figure 4.14, 
it is evident that the response parameters vary within a range. For wear rate, 
the range is 0.00003 g/min to 0.00717 g/min; for surface finish, it is 2.278 
µm to 4.523 µm; and for crater diameter, it varies between 83.6184 μm to 
139.387 μm.
To find the ideal parametric settings from Table 4.3, Grey relation analysis 
(GRA) is employed.
4.3.3 MULTI-OBJECTIVE MODEL USING GREY RELATION 
ANALYSIS
To optimize certain responses concurrently which are reverse in nature, GRA 
is used. The Grey system theory was suggested by Deng in 1980s and now 
it is widely used for analyzing experimental design in which the model is 
indeterminate or the information is incomplete indicating a combination of 
known and unknown information.Experimental Investigation on AISI D2 During Machining by Graphite 73
4.3.4 WEIGHT CALCULATION BY FUZZY SET THEORY
Fuzzy set theory is a widely used to determine the weight of the control 
parameters for an experiment. Here, surface finish has the very high weight 
as EDM is a final process for any precise production system. Then, wear rate 
got the high weight and crater diameter got the moderate high weight.
4.3.5 MULTICRITERIA DECISION MAKING (MCDM) ANALYSIS
In this experimentation, unique weights are specified to three responses, 
namely, wear rate, surface finish, and crater diameter as calculated by Fuzzy 
set theory. The given weights are 36.7%, 45%, and 18.3%, respectively. 
The upper value of the Grey relation grade is selected as it states the multi￾objective optimization of control parameters. Table 4.4 represents the Grey 
relation co-efficient and grades corresponding to parametric settings and 
responses for the material in Table 4.3.
TABLE 4.3 Parametric Combination with Responses.
Exp. No.
Control parameters Responses
Current 
(amp) Ton (µs) Toff (µs) Wear Rate 
(g/min)
Surface 
finish (µm)
Crater diameter 
(µm)
1 2 220 59 0.00003 2.278 83.618
2 4 277 20 0.00717 3.760 115.216
3 2 426 26 0.00201 3.354 106.260
4 2 222 56 0.00024 2.457 87.110
5 4 530 24 0.00367 4.383 135.679
6 3 468 30 0.00235 3.791 118.698
7 4 428 24 0.00427 3.975 123.227
8 2 230 58 0.00015 2.526 88.453
9 3 408 58 0.00045 3.156 102.729
10 3 268 51 0.00086 2.984 98.328
11 4 565 21 0.00380 4.523 139.387
12 4 551 27 0.00285 4.401 137.242
13 4 518 31 0.00226 4.155 130.234
14 2 341 51 0.00027 2.858 95.299
15 3 346 39 0.00205 3.417 109.131
16 3 426 21 0.00345 3.651 114.066
17 2 248 58 0.00015 2.633 90.67874 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
TABLE 4.4 Grey Relation Co-efficient and Grades.
Exp. 
No.
Responses Grey co-efficient
GREY 
grade
Wear rate Rank
(g/min)
Surface 
finish (µm)
Crater 
diameter 
(µm)
Wear rate
(g/min)
Surface 
finish (µm)
Crater 
diameter 
(µm)
1 0.00003 2.278 83.618 1.00000 1.000 0.155 1.077 1
2 0.00717 3.760 115.216 0.26847 0.405 0.297 0.485 17
3 0.00201 3.354 106.260 0.56960 0.484 0.236 0.645 12
4 0.00024 2.457 87.110 0.92581 0.849 0.163 0.969 2
5 0.00367 4.383 135.679 0.41857 0.324 0.734 0.738 10
6 0.00235 3.791 118.698 0.53040 0.400 0.330 0.631 14
7 0.00427 3.975 123.227 0.38196 0.373 0.387 0.571 16
8 0.00015 2.526 88.453 0.95621 0.803 0.167 0.963 3
9 0.00045 3.156 102.729 0.86186 0.535 0.218 0.807 8
10 0.00086 2.984 98.328 0.75945 0.589 0.199 0.774 9
11 0.00380 4.523 139.387 0.41005 0.310 1.000 0.860 6
12 0.00285 4.401 137.242 0.48165 0.322 0.826 0.815 7
13 0.00226 4.155 130.234 0.54024 0.350 0.527 0.709 11
14 0.00027 2.858 95.299 0.91610 0.635 0.188 0.870 5
15 0.00205 3.417 109.131 0.56469 0.470 0.252 0.643 13
16 0.00345 3.651 114.066 0.43381 0.424 0.287 0.572 15
17 0.00015 2.633 90.678 0.95621 0.740 0.173 0.935 4
Table 4.4 represents the results of Grey relation co-efficient, Grey rela￾tion grade, and their ranks. The results show that experiment number 1 has 
the highest Grey relational grade value. As described above, this experi￾ment setup fulfills multiple response parameter optimizations. Therefore, 
the experimental run of 1 which has parametric combination current = 2 
amp, Ton = 220 μSec, and Toff = 59 μSec, which is the best among other 
experimental setups for having low wear rate, minimum surface finish, and 
maximum crater diameter.
The confirmation experiment performed with the above combination 
results in a Grey relational grade of 1.077 having wear rate, surface finish, 
and crater diameter as 0.00003, 2.278, and 83.618, respectively. It is found 
that surface finish and crater diameter improve considerably (as evident from 
computational results) by using optimal machining variables combinations. 
Table 4.5 represents the validation results considering the optimal machining 
parameters.Experimental Investigation on AISI D2 During Machining by Graphite 75
TABLE 4.5 Results of Machining Performance Using the Initial and Optimal Machining 
Parameters.
Control parameters Responses Grey 
grade Current 
(amp)
Ton (µs) Toff (µs) Wear rate 
(g/min)
Surface 
finish (µm)
Crater 
diameter (µm)
Exp 1. 2 220 60 0.00003 2.26828 83.4044 1.077
Validation data 2 200 60 0.00007 2.2028 82.244 1.108
Improvement of Grey grade 0.030
4.4 CONCLUSION
The experimental study indicates that while machining AISI D2 steel using 
the EDM process the responses are dependent on current, pulse-on time, and 
pulse-off time. ANN study shows that the experiment is conducted in the 
valid suitable experimental region, while the GA finds out the global solu￾tion for the experiment to conduct by varying those control parameters. The 
Grey analysis finds the best parametric combination for those contradictory 
responses namely, wear rate, surface finish, and crater wear.
KEYWORDS
• AISI D2
• artificial neural network (ANN)
• genetic algorithm (GA)
• metaheuristics process
• multicriteria decision making (MCDM) analysis
REFERENCES
1. Zeilmann, R. P.; Ivaninski, T.; Webber C. Surface Integrity of AISI H13 Under Different 
Pulse Time and Depths by EDM process. Procedia CIRP 2018, 71, 472–477.
2. Zeilmann, R., P.; Biasin, R. N.; Ost, C. A.; Ivaniski, T. M.; Webber, C. B. Effect of the 
Electrode Radii under Different Machining Conditions in Different Positions Along the 
Flushing Path. Adv. Mater. Proces. Technol. 2017, 3 (1), 101–110.
3. Dewangan, S. C.; Biswas, K.; Gangopadhyay, S. Influence of Different Tool Electrode 
Materials on EDMed Surface Integrity of AISI P20 Tool Steel. Mater. Manufact. Proces. 
2014, 29 (11–12), 1387–1394.76 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
4. Dwivedi, A. P.; Choudhury, S. K. Effect of Tool Rotation on MRR, TWR, and Surface 
Integrity of AISI-D3 Steel Using the Rotary EDM Process. Mater. Manufact. Proces.
2016, 31 (14), 1844–1852.
5. Talla, G.; Gangopadhyay, S.; Biswas, C. K. Influence of Graphite Powder Mixed EDM 
on the Surface Integrity Characteristics of Inconel 625. Part. Sci. Technol. 2017, 35 (2), 
219–226.
6. Sahu, D. R.; Mandal, A. Critical Analysis of Surface Integrity Parameters and 
Dimensional Accuracy in Powder-mixed EDM. Mater. Manufact. Proces. 2020, 35 (4), 
430–441.
7. Tiwary, A. P.; Pradhan, B. B.; Bhattacharya, B., Influence of Various Metal Powder 
Mixed Dielectric on Micro-EDM Characteristics of Ti-6Al-4V. Mater. Manufact. 
Proces. 2019, 34 (10), 1103–1119.
8. Gadalla, A. M.; Tsai, W. Electrical Discharge Machining of Tungsten Carbide-Cobalt 
Composites. J. Am. Ceramic Soc. 1989, 72 (8), 1396–1401.
9. Assarzadeh, S.; Ghoreishi, M. Statistical Modeling and Optimization of the EDM 
Parameters on WC-6%Co Composite Through a Hybrid Response Surface Methodology￾desirability Function Approach. Int. J. Eng. Sci. Technol. 2013, 5 (6), 1279–1284.
10. Tawfiq, M. A.; Najem, S. H. Assessment of Some Factors Influencing MRR on the EDM 
of AISI 304 by Multi Hole Electrode. Int. J. Curr. Eng. Technol. 2014, 4 (4), 2523–2530.
11. Kumar, A.; Micro-channel Fabrication Using Cu-sheets as Electrode in EDM Process 
and Optimization of Process Parameters Using Taguchi Method. Int. J. Curr. Eng. 
Technol. 2017, 7 (1), 15–18.
12. Das, M.; Rudrapati, R.; Ghosh, N.; Rathod, L. Input Parameters Optimization in EDM 
Process using RSM and JAYA Algorithm. Int. J. Curr. Eng. Technol. 2016, 1 (6), 
109–112.
13. Singh, A.; Singh, R. P. To Determine the Effect of Machining Parameters on Material 
Removal Rate of EN 31 Stainless Steel Using EDM. Int. J. Curr. Eng. Technol. 2016, 6 
(5), 1780–1783.
14. Manoharan, M.; Valera, A. P.; Trivedi, S. M.; Banker, K. S., Material Removal Rate, 
Tool Wear Rate and Surface Roughness Analysis of EDM Process. Int. J. Sci. Res. Dev.
2013, 1 (3), 407–409.
15. Abdullah, A.; Shabgard, M. R. Effect of Ultrasonic Vibration of Tool on Electrical 
Discharge Machining of Cemented Tungsten Carbide (WC-Co). Int. J. Adv. Manufact. 
Technol. 2008, 38, 1137–1147.
16. Bhaumik, M.; Maity, K. Experimental Investigation and Finite Element Simulation of 
AISI 304 During Electro Discharge Machining. Int. J. Modeling, Simul. Sci. Comput. 
2018, 9 (4).
17. Yang, S.-H.; Srinivas, J.; Mohan, S.; Lee, D.-M.; Balaji, S. Optimization of Electric 
Discharge Machining Using Simulated Annealing. J. Mater. Proces. Technol. 2009, 209, 
4471–4475.
18. Rizwee, M.; Rao, P. S. Analysis & Optimization of Parameters During EDM of 
Aluminium Metal Matrix Composite. J. Uni. Shanghai Sci. Technol. 2021, 23 (3),
218–223.
19. Deb, K. Multi-Objective Optimization Using Evolutionary Algorithm; Wiley: New 
Delhi, 2014.Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes. 
Sandip Kunar, Prasenjit Chatterjee, and M. Sreenivas Reddy (Eds.)
© 2025 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
MULTI-OBJECTIVE PROCESS 
PARAMETER OPTIMIZATION IN 
SINGLE POINT INCREMENTAL 
FORMING OF SS-304 USING BOX￾BEHNKEN DESIGN OF EXPERIMENT 
AND TOPSIS OPTIMIZATION
S. PRATHEESH KUMAR and S. NANDHAGOPAL
Department of Production Engineering, PSG College of Technology, 
Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu, India
CHAPTER 5
ABSTRACT
SS-304 alloy is the most widely used sheet metal component in automobile 
industries, due to its ductility and corrosion resistance property. To get 
automized and better-quality product, there is a need to study its process 
parameters and response parameters, which could be used for producing 
interchangeable products with more accuracy. In this study, the effects of 
control variables on output response such as surface roughness and final 
thickness of the incremental sheet metal forming process for SS304 alloy 
are studied by using the Box-Behnken design of experiment. Analysis of 
variance (ANOVA) is performed to analyze the significant control variables. 
A multicriterial decision-making method TOPSIS is performed in order 
to obtain the best set of control variables which could deliver the optimal 
output. The chosen control variables are feed rate (fr), tool rotational speed 
(N), and incremental depth (Δh). The combined effects of feed rate, tool 
rotational speed, and incremental depth for achieving the optimal value 78 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
of surface roughness and final thickness are found. This research is useful 
for developing new products efficiently and to choose the best process 
parameters.
5.1 INTRODUCTION
Metal forming refers to reshaping a metal into a required shape without 
adding or removing materials. This product is generally made by extrusion, 
rolling, forging, and drawing processes with or without the help of a die. 
Incremental sheet metal forming (ISMF) is a forming process utilizing a 
sheet material and forming tools in which an incremental forming tool is 
advanced over the surface of the sheet metal to form smaller incremental 
deformations to make the final finished surfaces. They use rotating single￾point tools with spherical or hemispherical heads to make indentations. 
Generally, ISMF process is done by using CNC and robotic arms in which 
the tool path and feed are controlled by computer coding. They can be done 
with or without the involvement of a die. If the die is attached to make a 
final product, it is referred as two-point incremental forming (TPIF) instead 
of single-point incremental forming (SPIF).1 The idea of the ISMF is to 
produce sheet material parts by using an incremental forming tool which 
is fed/follows the tool path over the sheet material with the help of a CNC 
machine, and the sheet material tends to deform plastically by applying 
the force greater than the yield strength of the sheet. The sheet is finally 
formed into the required shape. Here, the sheet is clamped between the bank 
holder, the tool attached to the CNC indents into the sheet, and produces 
contour over the surface; furthermore, it indents to produce next contour 
until the final product is formed. In negative forming methods, cracks can 
easily occur in a shape which contains sharp edges and corners. However, 
by using positive forming methods, cracks can be avoided.2 The factors that 
affect the formability of materials are feed rate, incremental depth, wall 
angle, tool diameter, tool speed, and thickness of sheet.3 The advantages of 
ISMF over the conventional forming process are homogeneity of the formed 
surface and die-less forming process if SPIF is performed.4 As ISMF is a 
cold working technique due to deformation in cold conditions, the material 
leads to work hardened and reduces the formability of materials; to prevent 
this, intermediate heat treatment can be performed.1 In this research, the 
process is initiated by selecting the suitable design and creating a CAD 
model—correspondingly the workpiece material is selected, and the form Multi-Objective Process Parameter Optimization in Single Point 79
tool is chosen as per the workpiece material. Then, the process parameters 
are listed, and the tool path is generated, where the tool path is generated by 
using software and sometimes the CAD model alone is enough to perform 
the forming operations. Later, the tool path is verified for proceeding with 
the operation. After performing this kind of set up, the process is performed 
by giving input to the CNC machine. Hence, this process can produce 
complex 3-dimensional shapes. If the parts need any alterations in their 
shape, the changes can be made to the CAD model, and it will be fed to the 
CNC machine. Finally, it can be automated, which leads to high-quantity 
production of sheet metal components, minimized manpower, increased 
repeatability, and minimal power consumption. ISMF can be performed 
without a die. So, the manufacturing cost of die is eliminated. This process is 
more flexible and mainly carried out in lower production units and products 
with complexity. The changes in part geometry can be easily modified. It 
also be performed for rapid prototyping for analyzing for mass production 
units. The surface finish of the process can be improved. Even though it is a 
versatile process, this process is to be limited to its geometric accuracy and 
thinning because of elastic spring back and thinning. The initial setting up 
of CNC machine and the production time for the ISMF process compared to 
the conventional metal forming process is very high. Thus, this process was 
limited to a lower production rate. ISMF is suitable for today’s competitive 
manufacturing environment for lower volume production as the customers’ 
need was unique; and the need for different featured products, ISMF can give 
solutions by produce products with thin and complex shapes at high quality 
and lower cost and it can produce a product with different geometrical shapes 
as required by the customers. It can be flexible for customizing a product 
with different geometry. It is very useful in today’s medical field through 
rapid prototyping of any required structure. It is applicable in areas such as 
aerospace, automobile, electronics, health sectors, nuclear reactors, etc.
FIGURE 5.1 Workflow chart.80 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
The SPIF is a deforming process used to produce final products by the 
indentations and it can be operated by using CNCs. The efficient/optimal 
input parameters given to the machine is unknown to produce good quality 
products and the parametrical influence on output responses are yet to be 
analyzed. For that, the literatures are studied; the input parameters are 
selected based on the research papers and the experimental techniques are 
understood. Hrairi et al.5 carried out incremental sheet forming to determine 
the combination of control factors by using Taguchi-based grey optimization 
and the study reveals that step depth influences 68.5%, tool diameter influ￾ences 9.7%, and followed by number of sheets with 6.1% for the responses 
wall angle, surface roughness, and the spring back to achieve high-quality 
products. Murugesan et al.6 conducted an experiment on AA3003-H18 Al 
alloy sheet with tool radius, spindle speed, and incremental depth as influ￾encing parameter by using Taguchi orthogonal array design and ANOVA; 
they found that the minimal 0.323 μm surface roughness is attained at 3.0 
mm of tool radius, 3000 rpm of spindle speed, 0.10 mm of incremental 
depth, and 2000 mm/min of feed rate, and also states 0.80 and 0.64 μm of 
surface roughness is achieved by using engine oil lubricant and the engine 
oil and grease lubricant blend. Shrivasata et al.7 in his experiment found 
that preheating the sheet improved forming load and reduction thickness of 
the AA1050A H14 alloy are improved by preheating the sheet. The results 
indicate that 218.973 N and 0.69512 mm are the optimal values by using a 
6 mm-diameter tool with a 0.2 mm-incremental depth setting at a 500 °C 
preheating temperature.
Jeswiet et al.8 in his research Asymmetric Single Point Incremental 
Forming of Sheet Metal describes that the formability decreases with the 
reduction of thickness and can be increased with increasing sheet to work 
relative velocity and decreases with reduction in tool size. Likewise, increase 
in incremental depth and increase in tool diameter results in increase in 
forming force. Baruah et al.9 in his study emphasized to understand the form￾ability and surface roughness for ISMF process on AA5052 alloy with input 
variables like incremental depth, spindle speed, feed rate, and lubricant. They 
have utilized Taguchi and Grey relational analysis (GRA) with ANOVA and 
observed that 0.5 mm incremental depth, 200 mm/min feed rate, 150 rpm 
of spindle speed, and the grease as the lubricant are the best settings for 
all the three directions. Lasunon10 in his study examined the influence of 
forming variables on the surface roughness of AA5052. He found that the 
feed rate of 25 in/mm, incremental depth of 0.015, and the wall angle of 45° 
results in the best surface roughness. Kumar and Gulati11 have performed Multi-Objective Process Parameter Optimization in Single Point 81
process parameter optimization in AA6063-O aluminum alloy to produce 
frustum by using incremental forming process with helical tool path with 
Taguchi (DOE) and ANOVA. By the analysis of ANOVA, the most optimal 
parameters to give good conditions for forming forces are 0.8 mm of thick￾ness, 0.2 mm of incremental depth, 7.52 mm of diameter of tool, 1000 rpm 
of spindle speed, 1000 mm/min of feed rate, and 50° of wall angle, with the 
hemispherical shaped tool.
Zaman and Dhar12 to improve the machinability with minimal lubrica￾tion in turning of Ti–6Al–4V alloy used response surface methodology and 
analysis of variance and the acquired values are 0.5 mm of nozzle diameter, 
20° primary nozzle angle, 15° of secondary nozzle angle, 20 bar of air pres￾sure, and oil flow rate of 50 mL/h for getting the minimal temperature, force, 
and roughness. Dabwan et al.,13 in their experiment to form conical shaped 
components for the fabrication of AA1050-H14 alloy to achieve required 
principal stresses, principal strains, and thinning of sheet metal, used full 
factorial design and GRA. The findings showed that the tool diameter, 
followed by sheet thickness, incremental depth, and feed rate influenced the 
thinning of the SPIF product. Gheysarian et al.14 aimed to achieve optimal 
parameters for ISMF process of Al/Cu (aluminum/copper) explosive welded 
bimetals by using design of experiments (DOE) and optimization with 
design expert software. They took tool diameter, incremental depth, tool 
path, and layer arrangements as parameters for the output responses such 
as surface roughness, thickness variation, forming time, and forming forces. 
They concluded that by using step tool path, maximum thickness variation 
increased with rise in tool diameter and incremental depth, the roughness 
increased with decrease in tool diameter, and rise in incremental depth with 
Al as first layer and the force increased with decrease in tool diameter and 
incremental depth. By using spiral tool path, the force increased with rise 
in tool diameter and incremental depth with Al as first layer. Echrif et al.15
examined the influence of control variables on the surface roughness of 
ISMF process by using Taguchi DOE and ANOVA; they chose the incre￾mental depth, forming tool diameter, spindle speed, and feed rate as the 
control variables, and found that tool diameter of 30 mm, spindle speed of 
1500 rev/s, incremental depth of 0.25 mm, and feed rate of 1500 mm/s are 
effective. Shamik Basak et al.16 dealt with the control variables like cutting 
speed, depth of cut, and feed rate for hard turning of titanium grade-I and 
examined the consequence of combination of control variables on the output 
responses like material removal rate (MRR) and surface roughness (Ra) by 
using Box-Behnken DOE (BBD) and Grey relation analysis with Taguchi 82 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
optimization. They have concluded that the optimal parameters achieved are 
500 rpm cutting speed, 0.5 mm depth of cut, and 0.09 mm/rev.
Pandey et al.17 dealt with the input factors such as depth of cut, feed 
rate, and cutting speed for hard turning of titanium grade-I and examined the 
impacts of process variables on the output responses like MRR and Ra by 
using BBD and Grey relation analysis and Taguchi optimization. The find￾ings indicate that the best input factors are 500 rpm, 0.5 mm, and 0.09 mm/
rev, respectively. Suresh Kurra et al.18 used a multi-objective optimization 
algorithm to get optimum factors with the help of BBD for the deep drawing 
of steel sheets. A minimum surface roughness of 0.512 mm is feasible for the 
variables 11.04 mm incremental depth, 0.15 mm tool diameter, 35.26° wall 
angle, 1100 mm/min feed rate, and 53.7 min production time. The minimum 
production time of 17 min is achievable with the input variables of 13 mm 
incremental depth, 0.289 mm tool diameter, 35° wall angle, and 1100 mm/
min feed rate for 0.742 mm surface roughness.
Kolli et al.19 used the abrasive aqua jet machining process to machine 
hybrid Al 7075/B4C/Gr composites. The factors affecting the machining, 
such as water jet pressure, stand-off distances, and traverse speed, were 
chosen. The effects of these factors on the output responses were then 
studied using central composite design and TOPSIS optimization. Based on 
the optimization results, WJP of 210 bars, SOD of 2 mm, and TS of 30 mm/
min result in the best outputs, which are MRR of 4.87 mm3/min, Ra of 3.57 
mm, and TA of 0.189°. Sivaiah and Chakradhar20 in their research studied 
the performance improvement for machining of 17-4 precipitated hardened 
stainless steel (PH SS). They used to study the best optimal conditions using 
Taguchi coupled with GRA and Taguchi coupled with technique for order 
of preference by similarity to ideal solution (TOPSIS) optimization for the 
process variables like cutting velocity, feed, and depth of cut and output 
responses like surface roughness, tool wear, and MRR and finally found 
that Taguchi coupled with GRA is more accurate. Khan and Maity21 used 
TOPSIS methodology with Taguchi DOE to achieve the best set of control 
factors for the turning of pure titanium (CP-Ti) grade 2. The output responses 
are cutting force, surface roughness, machining temperature, and MMR. 
Finally, the optimum set of control factors observed are 105 m/min cutting 
speed, 0.12 mm/rev feed rate, and 0.5 mm depth of cut.
Umamaheswararao et al.22 have conducted an experiment based on opti￾mizing the machining force and surface roughness for the cutting parameters 
of AISI 52100 steel with polycrystalline cubic boron nitride tools in lathe 
using central composite rotatable design (CCD) and TOPSIS optimization Multi-Objective Process Parameter Optimization in Single Point 83
procedures. The influencing factors are cutting speed, depth of cut, feed, 
negative rake angle, and nose radius. From the study, they had discovered
that negative rake angle is the most influencing factor with the optimized 
value of 45° followed by cutting speed of 200 rpm, feed of 0.1 mm/rev, depth 
of cut 0.8 mm, and nose radius of 1.2 mm. Maheswara Rao and Venkatasub￾baiah23 have conducted an experiment with AA7075 on CNC lathe. For the 
responses MRR and surface roughness (Ra), the contribution parameters are 
depth of cut, feed rate, and cutting speed. They discovered that feed rate 
is the primary affecting parameter using Taguchi’s standard L9 Orthogonal 
Array and TOPSIS optimization process. Ficko et al.24 used GRA and 
TOPSIS optimization to discover the ideal combination of process param￾eters to achieve minimal Ra and the highest MRR for the turning process 
of S355J2 carbon steel in CNC. The best combination is a cutting speed 
of 250 mm/min, a feed rate of 0.10 mm/rev, and a depth of cut of 1.8 mm. 
The nature of SS-304 alloy for giving better quality products for the ISMF 
process remains unclear. From the literature review, the parameters which 
affect the manufacturing of best quality products are selected and proceeded 
for the experiment with the help of BBD and TOPSIS optimization process. 
The results obtained are applicable for futuristic development of incremental 
forming process for SS-304 alloy.
5.2 EXPERIMENTAL METHODS AND MATERIALS
This research focuses on selecting the best set of control variables to achieve 
minimum surface roughness (Ra) and maximum final thickness (tf
) in the 
ISMF on SS-304 sheet to get the better-quality product. The optimization 
values are determined by using BBD and TOPSIS optimization process.
5.2.1 BOX-BEHNKEN DESIGN OF EXPERIMENTS
DOE is the study of interactions between control variables and output 
responses. DOE is a data collection and analysis platform, which utilizes 
parameters of different levels for the designed experiment and finds out 
the relevant factors to get the best output responses. Box-Behnken design 
and central composite design are the tools of response surface methodology 
(RSM). RSM is used to study the relation between input factors with the 
output responses and it can be explained with the help of contour plots and 
surface plots. Box-Behnken design has no axial points; the design points are 84 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
positioned within the region of interest but in CCD the axial design points 
may be located outside the region of the cube. The presence of axial points 
represents the factor levels which are impossible to consider due to several 
constraints. BBD is the best and efficient design compared to any other types 
of DOE. Hence, this DOE is selected for this experiment. In this DOE, three 
equally spaced levels of each factors are taken like − 1, 0, and +1. Because 
Box-Behnken is a quadratic model, it utilizes at least three factors. The 
number of experimental design points (N) required for the experiment is 
determined by the equation.
N kk = ++ 2 ( 1) 1 ( ) (5.1)
where k is the number of experimental factors.
The selected control variables are feed rate, tool rotational speed, and 
incremental depth. Feed rate is the velocity at which the tool advances 
against sheet metal. Incremental depth is the length at which a tool indents 
over a surface. Tool rotational speed is the total rotation that a tool rotates per 
minute. From the literature review, it is understood that the control variables 
like feed rate, tool rotational speed, and incremental depth are the most 
influencing process parameters to get the output responses and the same 
is used for this experiment. The input parameters used in the research are 
shown in the Table 5.1. The levels of the control variables are selected by 
performing the multiple trial of the experiment, based on this the best band of 
responses are selected. The output responses like surface roughness (Ra) and 
final thickness (tf
) are selected for ISMF process. These output responses are 
selected to achieve good quality of products with required strength, ductility, 
and with better surface finished parts.
TABLE 5.1 Experimental Parameters.
S. no. Feed rate (fr) Tool rotational speed (N) Incremental depth (Δh)
 (mm/min) (rpm) (mm)
1 1000 100 0.2
2 2000 550 0.4
3 3000 1000 0.6
5.2.2 TOPSIS OPTIMIZATION
Optimization is a method for choosing the best combination from the given 
set of possible combinations. These functions allow us to compare different Multi-Objective Process Parameter Optimization in Single Point 85
types of responses like maximum and minimum for determining the best. 
TOPSIS is an optimizing approach which compares the set of alternatives 
and calculates the geometrical separation between each alternative and the 
ideal alternatives for the Table 5.2. Because of comparing distance from 
the ideal solution, TOPSIS is very easy and efficient method. To get the 
combined optimization value for minimum surface roughness and maximum 
final thickness, the multi-objective optimization process is used as follows,
Step 1: TOPSIS is a MADM method in which experimental decision matrix 
of n criteria and m attributes is formulated as (xij) m×n.
Step 2: Then, the matrix is normalized. The matrix is normalized to eliminate 
the unit variation of attributes by using the equation:
2
1
ij m
i ij
xij r
x =
=
Σ (5.2)
where i = 1,2,3 …m; j= 1,2,3, …n; rij is the normalized matrix.
Step 3: Considering all the attributes are equal weight and the weight 
normalized matrix is calculated as
*
ij j ij t wr = (5.3)
where the value of weightage for surface roughness and final thickness 
obtained by the entropy method are 0.8844 and 0.1156.
Step 4: Identify both the extreme alternatives:
Case1: If the response has negative effect.
Aw = max (tij)
Ab = min (tij)
where i=1,2,3, …m; J=1,2,3, …n (only negative response);
Case2: If the response has positive effect.
Aw = min (tij),
Ab = max (tij)
where i= 1,2,3, …m; j=1,2,3, …n (only positive response);86 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
Step 5: The Euclidean separation for best and worst alternatives from ideal 
is calculated as:
2
1 ( ) n
iw j ij wj d tt =Σ − = (5.4)
2
1 (( ) n
ib j i j b j d tt =Σ − = (5.5)
where i = 1, 2, 3, ...m.
diw and dib are the separation from the ideal alternative to best and worst 
alternatives.
Step 6: Relative coefficient has been calculated thus paving way to obtain 
optimal solution, if the value of the relative coefficient (Diw)
 is higher than it 
is nearer to the ideal solution.
( ) ib
iw
ib iw
d D
d d = +
(5.6)
At last, the optimal value is chosen from the relative coefficient table 
based upon the nearer value.
This research focuses on selection of optimal parameters for the ISMF 
process on SS-304 sheet. BBD and TOPSIS optimization will be used to 
obtain the optimal parameters for ISMF. SS-304 alloy is the most widely 
used austenitic stainless steel known for its corrosion resistance, ductility, 
and toughness. This material is used for producing nuts, bolts, screws, and 
springs, with the chemical composition of 18% chromium and 8% nickel 
with density and young’s modulus of 8.0 g/cm2 and 193 GPa. Hence, this 
material is suitable for performing the experiment.
5.3 RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS
The impact of control variables on the output responses like surface rough￾ness and final thickness of the ISMF process on SS-304 sheet is discussed 
below. These study on the impact caused and the interaction control vari￾ables and output responses help to develop this process and to improve the 
required product.Multi-Objective Process Parameter Optimization in Single Point 87
TABLE 5.2 Experimentation Results.
S. 
no.
Feed rate 
(fr)
Tool rotational 
speed (N)
Incremental 
depth (Δh)
Surface roughness 
(Ra)
Final thickness 
(tf)
 (mm/min) (rpm) (mm) (μm) (mm)
1 1000 100 0.4 1.53 0.48
2 3000 100 0.4 3.09 0.51
3 1000 1000 0.4 1.98 0.57
4 3000 1000 0.4 3.14 0.63
5 1000 550 0.2 0.91 0.44
6 3000 550 0.2 1.78 0.39
7 1000 550 0.6 3.89 0.6
8 3000 550 0.6 4.92 0.65
9 2000 100 0.2 1.24 0.39
10 2000 1000 0.2 1.46 0.55
11 2000 100 0.6 4.17 0.41
12 2000 1000 0.6 4.77 0.61
13 2000 550 0.4 2.79 0.59
14 2000 550 0.4 2.75 0.58
15 2000 550 0.4 2.77 0.57
5.3.1 ANALYSIS ON SURFACE ROUGHNESS
The experimental data in Table 5.2 is evaluated for the determination of 
impact on the surface roughness. According to the Pareto chart in Figure 5.2, 
the incremental depth, followed by feed rate and tool rotating speed, are the 
control variables that have the greatest impact on surface roughness.
If the P (Probability) value is less than 0.05, the process parameter is 
significantly affecting the output, and the null hypothesis is rejected, as per 
analysis of variance (ANOVA), which aids in predicting significant param￾eters. Each input parameters significantly affects surface roughness (Ra) as 
shown in the study of P value from ANOVA table as shown in Table 5.3, as 
all input parameter values are less than 0.05.88 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
TABLE 5.3 ANOVA for Surface Roughness.
Source DF Adj SS Adj MS F-value P-value
Model 9 22.63 2.51 126.4 0
Linear 3 21.98 7.33 368.39 0
Feed rate 1 2.67 2.67 134.14 0
Tool rotational speed 1 0.22 0.22 10.95 0.02
Incremental depth 1 19.1 19.1 960.09 0
Square 3 0.56 0.19 9.43 0.02
Feed rate*feed rate 1 0.13 0.13 6.35 0.05
Tool rotational speed*tool rotational speed 1 0.08 0.08 4.18 0.1
Incremental depth*incremental depth 1 0.31 0.31 15.61 0.01
2-Way interaction 3 0.08 0.03 1.38 0.35
Feed rate*tool rotational speed 1 0.04 0.04 2.01 0.22
Feed rate*incremental depth 1 0.01 0.01 0.32 0.6
Tool rotational speed*incremental depth 1 0.04 0.04 1.81 0.24
Error 5 0.1 0.02
Lack-of-fit 3 0.1 0.03 82.21 0.01
Pure error 2 0.0 0.0
Total 14 22.73
FIGURE 5.2 Pareto chart for the standardized effects on surface roughness.Multi-Objective Process Parameter Optimization in Single Point 89
The regression equation of surface roughness (Ra) is shown in eq (5.7).
*
*** * *
1.333 0.00136 0.001204 0.94 0.0021
0.000001 7.25 0.00 0.0002 0.000106
a r r r
r r
R f N h ff
NN h h f N f h N h
=− + + + ∆ −
− +∆ − ∆ ∆ + ∆ + (5.7)
where fr: feed rate (mm/min), N: tool rotational speed (rpm), and Δh: incre￾mental depth (mm).
If the tool rotational speed decreases, slipping happens rather than rolling 
over the sheet which tends to increase in the surface roughness. Cavaler et 
al. in his experiment showed that for the lower tool rotational speed the tool 
slides and forms the rougher surface because of increase in friction due to 
larger contact area.25 Meanwhile, larger the incremental depth, more the tool 
indent and higher the surface roughness and production rate. When feed 
rate is higher, the tool-to-sheet interface is more and it leads to poor surface 
finish. Desai et al. in his study on (Al 1200-H14) alloy shows that lower 
incremental depth resulted in higher surface quality for the constant feed rate 
and tool rotational speed.26
5.3.2 INFERENCE ON SURFACE ROUGHNESS
Figure 5.3 surface plot graph shows that surface roughness of below 1.5 μm 
is achieved at a lower incremental depth of 0.24 mm at the tool rotational 
speed of 3000 rpm for the constant feed rate of 2000 mm/min, and the surface 
roughness of below 1.8 μm is achieved for the feed rate around 1000 mm/min 
at 0 rpm for the constant incremental depth of 0.4 mm, and the surface rough￾ness of below 1 μm is obtained for the feed rate of 1000 mm/min at a lower 
incremental depth of 0.2 mm for the constant tool rotational speed of 550 rpm.
The surface roughness keeps on increasing its trends in Figure 5.3(a). 
Because of increase in inter-path of tool motion, the surface roughness also 
increases. In Figure 5.3(b), the surface roughness increases about 3 μm 
and becomes steady as the tool rotating speed and feed rate increase. In 
comparison to other characteristics, the tool rotational speed has relatively 
little impact on the surface roughness. Desai et al. discovered that for the 
rise in incremental depth, the surface roughness keeps increasing in their 
experiment to explore the effect of control variables on surface roughness to 
produce the frustum of cone. Meanwhile, the surface roughness diminishes 
and stays constant as tool rotational speed increases.26 From Figure 5.3(c), it 
is evident that the surface roughness rises with the increase in feed rate and 
incremental depth.90 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
FIGURE 5.3 Surface plot for surface roughness: (a) feed rate (fr) vs incremental depth (Δh), 
(b) tool rotational speed (N) vs. incremental depth (Δh), and (c) feed rate (fr) vs. tool rotational 
speed (N).
5.3.3 ANALYSIS ON FINAL THICKNESS
Process variables are studied to acquire the influence on final thickness, the 
experimental response Table 5.2 is examined. The Pareto chart, as shown in 
Figure 5.4, concludes that there is a significant impact of tool rotating speed 
on final thickness. In general, the effect of incremental depth is as important 
as tool rotation speed.
By analyzing the ANOVA in Table 5.4, the P value of tool rotational 
speed and incremental depth are 0.021 and 0.033, which are less than 0.05 
and this are the parameters which are significantly affect the final thickness.
TABLE 5.4 ANOVA for Final Thickness.
Source DF Adj SS Adj MS F-value P-value
Model 9 0.09 0.01 2.75 0.14
Linear 3 0.07 0.02 6.57 0.04
Feed rate 1 0.0 0.0 0.27 0.62
Tool rotational speed 1 0.04 0.04 10.99 0.02
Incremental depth 1 0.03 0.03 8.46 0.03
Square 3 0.02 0.01 1.4 0.35
Feed rate*feed rate 1 0.0 0.0 0 0.97
Tool rotational speed*tool rotational speed 1 0.0 0.0 0.98 0.37Multi-Objective Process Parameter Optimization in Single Point 91
Source DF Adj SS Adj MS F-value P-value
Incremental depth*incremental depth 1 0.01 0.01 3.45 0.12
2-way interaction 3 0.0 0.0 0.28 0.84
Feed rate*tool rotational speed 1 0.0 0.0 0.06 0.82
Feed rate*Incremental depth 1 0.0 0.0 0.68 0.45
Tool rotational speed*incremental depth 1 0.0 0.0 0.11 0.76
Error 5 0.02 0.0
Lack-of-fit 3 0.02 0.01 60.92 0.02
Pure error 2 0.0 0.0
Total 14 0.11
FIGURE 5.4 Pareto charts for standardized effects on final thickness.
The regression equation of final thickness is given in eq (5.8).
* * *
** * *
0.202 0.000043 0.00025 1.176 0.00 0.00
1.469 0.0023 0.000125 0.000111
f r r r r
r r
T f f N h f f NN
hh f N f h N h
= − + + ∆− −
− + + ∆ + ∆ (5.8)
where fr: feed rate, N: tool rotational speed, and Δh: incremental depth.
TABLE 5.4 (Continued)92 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
When the tool rotational speed increases, the final thickness decreases 
due to an increase in deformation followed by an increase in depth of 
indentation. While increasing the incremental depth, reduction in thickness 
is observed due to the shearing action of the tool. Babu and Kumar in his 
study on incremental forming on AISI 304 sheet thickness of the sheet is 
reduced by increase in incremental.27 Hamilton et al. in his experiment 
states that feed rate doesn’t influence the final thickness of the sheet very 
much, which means the thickness distribution is similar for both high 
and low feed rates. It was similar to the results obtained in these research 
work.28
5.3.4 INFERENCE ON FINAL THICKNESS
The surface plot in Figure 5.5 shows that a final thickness above 0.63 mm is 
achieved for the feed rate of 3000 mm/min and tool rotational speed of 1000 
rpm at a constant incremental depth of 0.4 mm. Likewise, a final thickness 
of above 0.4 mm can be achieved at an incremental depth of above 0.48 mm 
and tool rotational speed above 700 rpm at a constant feed rate of 2000 mm/
min. The final thickness of above 0.6 mm can be obtained at a tool rotational 
speed of 550 rpm, at an incremental depth of above 0.48 mm, and a feed rate 
of above 2500 mm/min.
As the tools rotational speed and incremental depth increases as shown 
in Figure 5.5(a), the final thickness rises linearly and slowly becomes stable. 
This behavior is due to the impact of tool rotational speed over the incremental 
depth. According to Figure 5.5(b), the final thickness value is low and stable 
for an increase in feed rate at a constant tool rotational speed. Ultimately, 
the final thickness increases noticeably as the tool rotational speed is raised. 
Because the tool’s shearing action is reduced because of the shorter contact 
time. Due to decrease in contact time the shearing action of tool becomes 
lower. Based on Figure 5.5(c), the final thickness increases and bend slightly 
because of increased feed rate and incremental depth. Usually, the thickness 
decreases with rise in the incremental depth. Because of increase in feed 
rate, the tool and sheet contact time at a particular point become lesser which 
in-tern provides a good final thickness. Makwana et al. in his study about 
effect on feed and step depth on hole flanging stated that the similar effect of 
incremental depth and feed rate influencing the final thickness of the sheet 
as in this experiment.29Multi-Objective Process Parameter Optimization in Single Point 93
FIGURE 5.5 Surface plot for final thickness: (a) feed rate (fr) vs tool rotational speed (N), (b) 
tool rotational speed (N) vs. incremental depth (Δh), and (c) feed rate vs incremental depth (Δh).
5.3.5 TOPSIS OPTIMIZATION
TABLE 5.5 Optimization Results.
S. 
no.
Normalized matrix Weighted normalized 
matrix Worst 
distance
Best 
distance
Relative 
closeness 
coefficient
Rank
Ra tf Ra tf
1 0.1313 0.2303 0.1161 0.0266 0.0480 0.2573 0.8428 12
2 0.2651 0.2447 0.2345 0.0283 0.1656 0.1390 0.4564 6
3 0.1699 0.2735 0.1502 0.0316 0.0813 0.2233 0.7331 10
4 0.2694 0.3022 0.2383 0.0349 0.1692 0.1357 0.4451 5
5 0.0781 0.2111 0.0691 0.0244 0.0116 0.3043 0.9631 15
6 0.1527 0.1871 0.1351 0.0216 0.0676 0.2383 0.7791 11
7 0.3338 0.2879 0.2952 0.0333 0.2261 0.0790 0.2589 4
8 0.4221 0.3118 0.3733 0.0361 0.3043 0.0144 0.0453 1
9 0.1064 0.1871 0.0941 0.0216 0.0289 0.2792 0.9062 14
10 0.1253 0.2639 0.1108 0.0305 0.0421 0.2627 0.8619 13
11 0.3578 0.1967 0.3164 0.0227 0.2477 0.0569 0.1868 3
12 0.4093 0.2927 0.3620 0.0338 0.2929 0.0167 0.0539 2
13 0.2394 0.2831 0.2117 0.0327 0.1427 0.1620 0.5317 7
14 0.2360 0.2783 0.2087 0.0322 0.1397 0.1650 0.5416 9
15 0.2377 0.2735 0.2102 0.0316 0.1412 0.1635 0.5365 894 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
Optimal parameters are the best combination of input values which gives 
the best the output responses. To obtain the optimal value, TOPSIS optimiza￾tion technique was performed as mentioned. Initially, the experimental data 
obtained in the trials are taken and forms the decision matrix. Then, normal￾ization and weighted normalization was done to rescale the data obtained 
and bring the data uniformity by using eqs (5.2) and (5.3). After that, the 
ideal solutions are identified, and the best and worst distances form the ideal 
alternative are obtained from eqs (5.4) to (5.5). Finally, the relative closeness 
coefficient was calculated to find the similarity to the worst condition. The 
value which was larger and closer to 1 will has the best condition and the 
alternatives which was lower and nearer to 0 has the worst condition. From 
the Table 5.5, the highest relative closeness value is obtained by the 5th run. 
Thus, it is concluded that the best combination of parameters is achieved at 
5th run. The best quality manufacturing is obtained for 1000 mm/min, 550 
rpm, and 0.2 mm of control variables.
TABLE 5.6 Confirmation Experiment Results.
Trials Feed rate 
(fr)
Tool 
rotational 
speed (N)
Incremental 
depth (Δh)
Surface 
roughness 
(Ra)
Deviation 
of surface 
roughness
Final 
thickness 
(tf)
Deviation 
of final 
thickness
 (mm/min) (N) (mm) (μm) (%) (mm) (%)
1. 1000 500 0.2 0.93 2.19 0.44 0
2. 1000 500 0.2 0.91 0 0.43 2.27
3. 1000 500 0.2 0.90 1.09 0.44 0
To assess the validity of the statistical data obtained in this research, 
three experimental trials were conducted by repeating these experiments and 
the results were furnished in the table. The results shows that the output 
values are closely related to the optimal value obtained in this research and 
it confirms the conformity of the experiment.
5.4 CONCLUSIONS
The principle of this study is to find the optimal output responses like surface 
roughness and final thickness for the control variables such as feed rate, 
incremental depth, and tool rotational speed. This research was carried out 
to produce better-quality products with minimum surface roughness and 
maximum final thickness of SS-304 alloy for the ISMF process. The data 
obtained by analyzing and determining these outputs helps us to produce the Multi-Objective Process Parameter Optimization in Single Point 95
parts efficiently and time-conserving, which helps the manufacturing envi￾ronment to automate. It is clearly depicting that the interaction of process 
parameters on output response with optimized results are useful for devel￾oping different kinds of products efficiently and to choose the best value of 
control variables.
From the ANOVA, it is revealed that tool rotational speed and incremental 
depth significantly affect the final thickness, where all three parameters are 
significantly affecting the surface roughness.
• In accordance with the surface plot, applying tool rotational speed of 
1000 rpm and feed rate of 3000 mm/min at constant incremental depth 
of 0.4 mm will result in a final thickness of above 0.63 mm. When the 
feed rate of 1000 mm/min is used, together with a lower incremental 
depth of 0.2 mm at a constant tool rotating speed of 550 rpm, it is 
possible to produce a surface roughness value of less than 1 μm.
• Based on the optimization results, it has been determined that applying 
a process parameter combination of 1000 mm/min feed rate, 550 rpm 
tool rotation speed, and 0.2 mm incremental depth will result in the 
lowest surface roughness and the highest final thickness.
KEYWORDS
• single-point incremental forming
• design of experiment
• Box-Behnken
• TOPSIS
• optimization
REFERENCES
1. Kridli, G. T.; Friedman, P. A.; Boileau, J. M. Manufacturing Processes for Light Alloys. 
In: Materials, Design and Manufacturing for Lightweight Vehicles; Elsevier, 2021, pp 
267–320.
2. Park, J. J.; Kim, Y. H. Fundamental Studies on the Incremental Sheet Metal Forming 
Technique. J. Mater. Process. Technol. 2003, 140, 447– 453.
3. Khalil, U.; Aziz, M. H.; Jahanzaib, M.; Ahmad, W.; Hussain S.; Hafeez, F. Effects of 
Forming Tools and Process Parameters on Surface Roughness in Incremental Sheet 
Forming. Adv. Sci. Technol. Res. J. 2018, 12, 75–95.96 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
4. Button, S. T. Introduction to Advanced Forming Technologies. Compreh. Mater. 
Process. 2014, 3, 1–5.
5. Hrairi, M.; Daoud, J. I.; Zakaria, F. Optimization of Incremental Sheet Metal Forming 
Process Using Grey Relational Analysis. Int. J. Recent Technol. Eng. 2019, 7, 246–252.
6. Murugesan, M.; Yu, J. H.; Jung, K. S.; Cho, S. M.; Bhandari, K. S.; Lee, C. W. 
Optimization of Forming Parameters in Incremental Sheet Forming of AA3003-H18 
Sheets Using Taguchi Method. Materials 2022, 15.
7. Shrivastava, P.; Roy, J. J.; Samal, M. K.; Jain, P. K.; Tandon, P. Parameter Optimization 
of Incremental Sheet Metal Forming Based on Taguchi Design and Response Surface 
Methodology. ASME Int. Mech. Eng. Congress Exposition 2015, 57359, 13–19.
8. Jeswiet, J.; Micari, F.; Hirt, G.; Bramley, A.; Duflou, J.; Allwood, J. Asymmetric Single 
Point Incremental Forming of Sheet Metal. CIRP Ann. 2005, 54, 88–114.
9. Baruah, A.; Pandivelan, C.; Jeevanantham, A. K. Optimization of AA5052 in Incremental 
Sheet Forming Using Grey Relational Analysis. Measurement 2017, 106, 95–100.
10. Lasunon, O. U. Surface Roughness in Incremental Sheet Metal Forming of AA5052. 
Adv. Mater. Res. 2013, 753, 203–206.
11. Kumar, A.; Gulati, V. Experimental Investigations and Optimization of Forming Force 
in Incremental Sheet Forming. Sādhanā 2018, 43, 1–15.
12. Zaman, P. B.; Dhar, N. R. Multi-Objective Optimization of Double-Jet MQL System 
Parameters Meant for Enhancing the Turning Performance of Ti–6Al–4V Alloy. Arab. 
J. Sci. Eng. 2020, 45, 9505–9526.
13. Dabwan A.; Ragab, A. E.; Sale, M. A.; Ghaleb, A. M.; Ramadan, M. Z.; Mian, S. 
H.; Khalaf, T. M. Multi-Objective Optimization of Process Variables in Single-Point 
Incremental Forming Using Grey Relational Analysis Coupled with Entropy Weights. 
Proc. Inst. Mech. Eng. Part L: J. Mater. 2021, 235, 2056–2070.
14. Gheysarian, A.; Honarpisheh, M. Process Parameters Optimization of the Explosive￾Welded Al/Cu Bimetal in the Incremental Sheet Metal Forming Process. Iran. J. Sci. 
Technol. Trans. Mech. Eng. 2019, 43, 945–956.
15. Echrif, S. B. M.; Hrairi, M. Significant Parameters for the Surface Roughness in 
Incremental Forming Process. Mater. Manuf. Process. 2014, 29, 697–703.
16. Basak, S.; Prasad, K. S.; Mehto, A.; Bagchi, J.; Ganesh, Y. S.; Mohanty, S.; Sidpara, 
A. M.; Panda, S. K. Parameter Optimization and Texture Evolution in Single Point 
Incremental Sheet Forming Process. Proc. Inst. Mech. Eng. Part B: J. Eng. Manuf.
2020, 234, 126–139.
17. Pandey, B.; Mahto, S.; Jha, B. K.; Analysis and Optimization in Hard Turning of 
Titanium Grade-I Using Grey Relational Analysis. Int. J. Interact. Design Manuf. 2022,
1–13.
18. Kurra, S.; HR, N.; Regalla, S.; Gupta, A. K. Parametric Study and Multi-Objective 
Optimization in Single-Point Incremental Forming of Extra Deep Drawing Steel Sheets. 
Proc. Inst. Mech. Eng. Part B: J. Eng. Manuf. 2016, 230, 825–837.
19. Kolli, M.; Ram Prasad, A. V.; Naresh, D. S. et al. Multi-Objective Optimization of AAJM 
Process Parameters for Cutting of B4C/Gr Particles Reinforced Al 7075 Composites 
Using RSM-TOPSIS Approach. SN Appl. Sci. 2021, 3, 1–14.
20. Sivaiah, P.; Chakradhar, D. Performance Improvement of Cryogenic Turning Process 
During Machining of 17–4 PH Stainless Steel Using Multi Objective Optimization 
Techniques. Measurement 2019, 136, 326–336.Multi-Objective Process Parameter Optimization in Single Point 97
21. Khan, A.; Maity, K. Application of MCDM-Based TOPSIS Method for the Selection of 
Optimal Process Parameter in Turning of Pure Titanium. Benchmarking: Int. J. 2017.
22. Umamaheswarrao P.; Raju, D. R.; Suman, K. N. S.; Sankar B. R. Optimizing Cutting 
Parameters in Hard Turning of AISI 52100 Steel Using TOPSIS Approach. J. Mech. 
Energy Eng. 2019, 3, 227–232.
23. Rao, C. M.; Venkatasubbaiah, K. Application of WSM, WPM and TOPSIS Methods 
for the Optimization of Multiple Responses. Int. J. Hybrid Inf. Technol. 2016, 9, 59–72.
24. Ficko, M.; Begic-Hajdarevic, D.; Hadžiabdić, V.; Klancnik, S. Multi-Response 
Optimisation of Turning Process Parameters with GRA and TOPSIS Methods. Int. J. 
Simul. Model 2020, 19, 547–558.
25. Cavaler, L. C. C.; Schaeffer, L.; Rocha, A. S.; Peruch, F. Surface Roughness in the 
Incremental Forming of AISI 304L Stainless Steel Sheets. J. Mech. Eng. Phys. 2010,
1, 87–98.
26. Desai, B. V.; Desai, K. P.; Raval, H. K. Die-Less Rapid Prototyping Process: Parametric 
Investigations. Procedia Mater. Sci. 2014, 6, 666–673.
27. Chezhian Babu, S.; Senthil Kumar, V. S. Experimental Studies on Incremental Forming 
of Stainless Steel AISI 304 Sheets. Proc. Inst. Mech. Eng. Part B: J. Eng. Manuf. 2012,
226, 1224–1229.
28. Hamilton, K.; Jeswiet, J. Single Point Incremental Forming at High Feed Rates and 
Rotational Speeds: Surface and Structural Consequences. CIRP Ann. 2010, 59, 311–314.
29. Makwana, R.; Modi, B.; Patel, K. Effect of Feed and Step Depth in Hole Flanging Using 
Single Point Incremental Forming. J. Phys.: Conf. Ser. 2020.Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes. 
Sandip Kunar, Prasenjit Chatterjee, and M. Sreenivas Reddy (Eds.)
© 2025 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
OPTIMIZATION AND PROCESS 
PARAMETERS STUDY IN SINGLE￾POINT INCREMENTAL FORMING OF 
TI GRADE 3 USING TAGUCHI DESIGN 
OF EXPERIMENTS AND GENETIC 
ALGORITHM OPTIMIZATION
PRATHEESHKUMAR S. and P. MOHIT AKASH
Department of Production Engineering, PSG College of Technology, 
Coimbatore, India
CHAPTER 6
ABSTRACT
The optimum parameter for the ISMF process is to be found using opti￾mization techniques. This helps in completing the process with higher 
geometrical accuracy and acquiring better output due to controlled inputs 
with the help of a specified hemispherical HSS tool on Ti grade 3 alloy 
sheet metal. The machining output parameters that were considered in this 
study are forming force and the temperature whereas both must be as small 
as possible, and it was found out by using genetic algorithm process. The 
optimized results for the given range of input values can be followed to 
acquire enhanced outputs. Like many other method, sheet metal forming 
process too found a considerable advancements in many forms which may 
be computer aided or any other forms which would require accurate inputs 
to be provided and these accurate input values can be obtained from this 
optimization process.100 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
6.1 INTRODUCTION
Commonly a sheet metal is a metal formed into flat, thin pieces and predomi￾nantly used in metal working. Sheets thicker than 6 mm are considered plates 
and those thinner than that of 6 mm are considered a foil or a leaf. The 
raw material for this process is obtained by rolling process. A flat sheet of 
ductile metal is mechanically deformed plastically; here, the applied stress 
is of more than the ultimate tensile stress but not more than the breaking 
stress (which may lead to failure). Shearing operations are mostly carried 
out in incremental sheet forming (ISF) processes. ISF have a wide range of 
applications in aerospace, automobile industries, and in many bio-medical 
applications. This method serves major advantage as it is more cost-effective 
than conventional methods; changes can be easily altered, and good surface 
finish can be achieved along with increased material formability. The only 
restriction is that the range of dimensions of the sheet metal is affected due 
to the tool used.
ISF does not include punch and dye in its process in contrast to many other 
conventional methods, although it manages to acquire higher dimensional 
control. ISF consists of a deforming tool, CNC machine, and blank holder as 
its basic elements. Blank holder is used to hold the sheet metal rigidly and 
the deforming tool which is hemispherical is controlled by a CNC machine. 
The movement of the deforming tool along the sheet meal is important to 
deform properly, where the commands for these movements are generated 
using CAD software. The size of the tool varies for each process of various 
dimensions. The tool consists of a ball head, and it is coated with carbides 
to reduce wear and tear caused due to friction. An altered ISMF process, 
called as hybrid ISF, has also been practiced nowadays, where a single tool 
on the top moves along the trajectory path and the other side consisting of 
hydraulic setup forms the support. With a similar working process, two-point 
incremental forming consists of deforming tool and the supporting tool but 
single-point incremental (SPIF) only consists of a deforming tool.1
Some production sheet part which are of about the range of 70°–90° is 
difficult for via conventional processes such as single-point and two-point 
incremental forming process but its difficulty can be overcome by robotic￾assisted ISMF process and it also enhances the productivity and accuracy of 
the part. To improve the stiffness of the sheet metal, parallel kinematics can 
be designed in the robots. Tool path can be generated using MATLAB to 
simulate the forming process and characterize the properties such as stress, 
strain, etc. Ductile materials are well suited for the ISMF process as they Optimization and Process Parameters Study in Single-Point 101
have less brittleness and so there will be no fracture during the process of 
forming. Some materials exhibit higher formability at elevated temperature 
when compared to the formability when this process is carried out in room 
temperature and so the required amount of heat supplied and temperature 
varies with each material.2
Some of the driving factors that could impact the output are the size of the 
tool in terms of its hemispherical ball size at its end where the larger-sized 
tool have more contact with the sheet metal ensuring support during the 
forming process; in case of smaller-sized tool, formability is increased with 
increased heat and low contact surface area. The tool path is an important 
factor; the trajectory is developed by the CAD software as mentioned previ￾ously. The tool rotational speed with suitable feed rate should be maintained 
for each specific operation to attain better surface finish. Like tool rotation, 
forming speed should also be maintained, that is, both rotation speed and 
its feed rate and suitable sheet metal should be used for each application. 
As ISF is a progressive process, in each of its steps the step size should be 
maintained and suitable lubricants such as carbide should be used to reduce 
friction. The process of forming appears to be highly sensitive to the thick￾ness of the material as the forming limit increases along with the increase in 
thickness of the material. Usually, the formability of any material in practice 
is reduced once exposed to the welding as the properties such as hardness, 
tensile strength, and the fatigue strength depends upon the heterogeneity of 
the microstructure which is highly influenced by the process of welding. 
Many sheet metal forming processes are limited in many applications due to 
their fracture and should be overcome by finding alternate solutions.
ISMF process is carried out in many industrial applications in recent 
times, and it is also seen with many technical developments in this process 
of forming which also includes automated and robot-assisted as seen in any 
process. This study will be aiding the manufacturers to obtain optimum 
results with the most possible minimum input values thus increasing the 
productivity without compromising the quality of the product obtained. 
S.B. Chikalthankar3 analyzed the impact caused by some factors in the 
outcome of the metal forming process. Some factors as well as parameters 
related to the punches used in the sheet metal processes that impact are 
punch angle, punch height, punch radius, and punch load; the parameters 
related to dyes that affect the sheet metal process include dye opening, and 
dye lip radius; some other metallurgical factors are sheet metal material 
grain direction and prebend strip condition; and also many other certain 
as well as uncertain related conditions too. Sousa4 used a process in which 102 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
a sheet is shaped into final part shape by progressive application of force, 
which is called ISMF. The formability of the sheet metal reduces following 
the deformation of the sheet as the sheet metal hardens. The advantage of 
this process is that the process does not include the use of dyes contrary to 
other conventional methods. Jong-Jin Park and Yung-Ho Kim5 used the ISF 
process to produce sheet metal parts and their parameters has been analyzed 
during its production and it is concluded that the ISMF with following posi￾tive forming method is better than the conventional ones. Dejardin et al.6
examined that ISMF process may experience some defects such as shape 
distortion and spring back effects and this can be rectified by following 
a suitable tool path and stated that many more new technologies offer to 
provide the approach of cost reduction and customized production in ISMF 
process. Attanasio et al.7 performed the experimental optimization of the 
tool path in two-point incremental forming in manufacturing process and 
reported that following a suitable tool path is necessary to achieve better 
results in terms of geometric accuracy and thickness of the final part and also 
that TPIF can be performed without the need of dyes and also attain better 
results. Takano et al.8 took the deformation behavior in the non-uniform 
metals of sheet metals into account and then feasibility of cold recycling 
is tested and identified that cold recycling of the waste sheet metals can be 
done and the feasibility in forming of flattened sheet metal is same as that of 
the uniform sheet metal. Mohanty et al.9 made use of robot-assisted ISMF 
to overcome the complexity as conventional sheet metal forming processes 
might take larger time in making some complex shapes, and is carried out 
with the help of robotic manipulator and CNC tool. Using MATLAB simula￾tion, the tool path is generated and further employed to simulate the actual 
incremental metal forming process. Ambrogio et al.10 used a combined 
method of numerical and statistical approach to reduce the consumption of 
time and the cost expenses by deriving an analytical objective function by 
also using Taguchi’s method whereas the ANOM process helps in obtaining 
the best process setting in selected ranges with minimal error.
Reddy et al.11 used Taguchi orthogonal array and the S/N ratio to study 
the mechanical properties of the Al 8011 alloy and concluded by obtaining 
the relation between the temperature and amount of stress applied and their 
respective strain rate at each level. Khare et al.12 used Taguchi method, 
which predict the desired cutting parameters by developing the required 
mathematical model to acquire the most effective output from most possible 
minimum input which is highly expected in a manufacturing process 
by deciding the input process parameters to achieve higher performance. Optimization and Process Parameters Study in Single-Point 103
Hanrahan et al.13 used experimental design to evaluate better factors that 
influence a system which depends on the number of factors and the objec￾tives of the experiment. The relationship between the various factors and 
responses were shown mathematically in the form of a function as y = f (x1, 
x2,….,xn). The factors that influence the experiments were found and then 
optimal conditions for the experiments were found out. Hae-Young Kim14
carried out the comparison of two or more different groups and referred 
analysis of variance (ANOVA), which tests whether the means of three or 
more independent groups of continuous data have a significant difference 
with regard to a single or two factor.
Azad Abdulhafedh15 used regression analysis to determine the correla￾tions between two or more variables having effective relation, to make 
predictions. The availability of the lost data can be taken by frequency 
analysis which can be minimum or maximum conditions. Whereas the term 
“multiple linear regression” refers to more than one independent variable. 
Katoch et al.16 adapted genetic algorithms that includes the concept of selec￾tion, cross over, and mutation. The initial datasets are run through many 
number of iterations to solve problems of optimization, classification, and 
prediction of the relevant variables and the elimination of the noise was 
also carried out along with the simplification of mathematical model. Liu 
Wei and Yang Yuying17 used multi-objective genetic algorithm to optimize 
the sheet metal forming process considering blank-holding force and draw￾bead restraining force as the input factors, which was more accurate than 
many other conventional methods and some other trial and error methods. 
Ozge Polat and Ismail H Tuner18 used genetic algorithm for optimization in 
aerodynamic shape methodology to achieve maximum power production for 
each specific rotor speed, wind speed, and rotor diameter and the optimum 
chord length, twist distributions and blade and the geometry are well defined 
and considered the output factors to achieve maximum power production. 
Pandora et al.19 used the optimization method of genetic algorithm for the 
design of non-uniform circular antenna inside lobe reduction by adjusting 
the distance between the adjacent elements included in the setup having 
fixed beam width. The optimized parameters have a radiation pattern with 
maximum side lobe reduction.
ISMF is being performed in many applications in many industries upon 
various materials such as titanium and aluminum sheet metals with the 
help of CNC or a VMC and a hemispherical tool. The output has also been 
greatly influenced by tool path which is encoded via software. The desired 
cutting parameters can be decided by using Taguchi design of experiments 104 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
by forming a table with sample input parameters with their respective output 
parameter values. ANOVA can be performed to determine the influential 
input parameters for any parameters taken as output and their significance 
can be determined by inferring the Pareto charts obtained and by comparing 
the values obtained through ANOVA. The maximum and minimum condi￾tions of a process can be obtained by using a multiple linear regression equa￾tion run through the generated code, which can be considered the optimum 
conditions for a parameter.
6.2 EXPERIMENTATION METHODS AND MATERIALS
6.2.1 METHODOLOGY
The ISMF process has been carried out on a sheet metal made of alloy 
titanium grade 3 with the help of vertical machining center (VMC) with 
a hemispherical forming tool made of HSS with the tool path generated 
through solid works or any other related software. The design of experimen￾tation table has been generated for the selected range of input parameters 
and Taguchi method is used in obtaining the design of experimentation table 
followed by the analysis of variance. Fitness equation has been generated 
and used in acquiring the optimum value of input parameters by genetic 
algorithm.
Titanium grade 3 is one of the commercially pure titanium alloy with 
better strength to weight ratio than many other ferrous materials; it is an alpha 
phase alloy, the factor that distinguishes from other grades is the interstitial 
elements present in each grade. Titanium grade 3 is stronger than grade 1 and 
2. This can be used in weight-saving structures with reduced mass forces. It 
exhibits very low thermal expansion due to very low co-efficient of thermal 
expansion. The tensile strength is about 450 MPa with 18% elongation. The 
modulus of elasticity is about 105 GPA. It is primarily used in aerospace and 
bio-medical applications.20
The tool that has been used for the ISMF is hemispherical end forming 
tool made of material HSS. This hemispherical end of the tool offers easier 
formability due to its higher flexibility than using flat end during the process 
of sheet metal forming. The process can be influenced by many number 
of certain and uncertain factors, whereas the change in the magnitude of a 
parameter can change the parameter of the other one. The input factors of the Optimization and Process Parameters Study in Single-Point 105
process are feed rate, tool rotational speed, and incremental depth and their 
respective output factors taken are forming force and temperature.
Incremental depth delivers a major contribution in the shape of the final 
output of the sheet metal and therefore majorly influencing the forming force. 
The tool rotational speed also contributes to the temperature at the interface 
of tool and the sheet metal. The feed rate of the forming tool also increases 
the forming force due to the indirect influence of the shear strain exerted on 
the sheet metal and also on the forming temperature.
6.2.2 TAGUCHI 
Data from various experimental setups can be arranged in a design of 
experiments table to analyze the system’s output for the specific collection 
of parameters. This table can be used to compare the alternate solutions to 
attain an optimal response. This method looks forward into the impact on the 
mean and variance of a process with respect to the different input parameters. 
The parameters are arranged in orthogonal arrays and the Taguchi method 
tests the pair of combinations instead of testing all the possible combinations 
from the input levels as shown in Table 6.1.
TABLE 6.1 The Input Factors of the Increased Sheet Metal Forming Process.
Factors Unit Level 1 Level 2 Level 3
Feed rate (mm/min) 1000 2000 3000
Tool rotational speed (rpm) 100 550 1000
Incremental depth (mm) 0.2 0.4 0.6
The main objective of Taguchi method is to reduce the input cost by 
means of variability. The procedural steps include determination of the 
factors and identifying its possible test pair of test combinations, control￾ling the signal-to-noise ratio, and designing the matrix experiment, and 
then analyzing the data using the software and predicting the performance 
at certain conditions along with the individual factor combinations, relative 
factor interactions, and validating the experiments. By the prior knowledge 
of number of parameters and levels, the suitable orthogonal array can be 
selected. It can be preferred as it helps in narrowing down the scope close 
to the target value rather than certain specification limits. It allows for the 
identification of key factors having major influence on the performance 
easily with limited trials.21,22106 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
6.2.3 ANALYSIS OF VARIANCE
ANOVA is a statistical test which consists of a collection of statistical models 
and their associated estimation procedures by analyzing the differences 
among means to find out the statistical significance of differences between 
groups of data demanding the requirement of continuous response variable 
and at least one categorical factor with two or more levels from approxi￾mately normally distributed populations with equal variances between factor 
levels.23
6.2.4 GENETIC ALGORITHM
Genetic algorithm is a search-based optimization technique based on the 
principles of genetics and natural selection. The genetic algorithm carries 
out the process of optimization in a sequential process following the steps 
of defining the initial population, then selecting the suitable pair of parents 
and then mating is carried out between these pairs. Following these steps, 
the crossover takes place and then mutation; this process is repeated a certain 
number of times to obtain accuracy and then the process of optimization is 
terminated, thus the best point in the optimal solution from the generated 
population of points is taken.
A code is generated for the genetic algorithm and the optimized value 
is obtained from the output. The code includes the above-mentioned steps 
(selection, mating, cross over, and mutation) and receives the inputs such 
as the number of variables, the expected optimized value (minimal or 
maximal), the minimum and maximum input values, and the multiple linear 
regression equation (linear + interaction). The selection process can be done 
by the determining number of trials an individual can expect to obtain, 
then converted into a discrete number of half springs, and then cross-over 
produces new chromosomes of both parent’s genetic material. Following the 
above-described process, mutation takes place, where a new genetic struc￾ture is produced by replacement of one allele by the another. The objective 
function is to provide how each individual have performed whereas a fitness 
function is normally used to obtain measure of relative fitness derived from 
the multiple linear regression method.25 The multiple regression equation is 
generated by analyzing the DOE table along with their respective response 
values. The optimized values of the input parameters are obtained as the 
output of this code. In this case, the feed rate, tool rotational speed, and the 
incremental depth are the input parameters, and their respective minimum Optimization and Process Parameters Study in Single-Point 107
and maximum values are taken as input for the code and their response values 
taken for the analysis of variance are their respective forming force (kN) and 
the temperature (°C) which also delivering the multiple linear regression 
equation.
6.3 RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
6.3.1 INFLUENCE ON FORMING FORCE AND TEMPERATURE 
The process input parameters such as feed rate, tool rotational speed, and 
incremental depth have been examined based on the output parameters 
namely forming force and the temperature at each level. Incremental metal 
forming carried out in the Ti Grade-3 sheet metal is carried out in the three 
levels of input levels as shown in the Table 6.1 resulting in nine trials. 
The values of forming force and temperature has been noted down at each 
possible combination as shown in Table 6.2. 
TABLE 6.2 Experimentation Result Table.
Run 
Order
Feed rate 
(mm/min)
Tool rotational 
speed (rpm)
Incremental 
depth (mm)
Forming 
force (kN)
Temperature 
(°C)
1 1000 100 0.2 2.95 37.52
2 1000 550 0.4 3.58 48.72
3 1000 1000 0.6 4.37 39.49
4 2000 100 0.4 3.62 41.53
5 2000 550 0.6 4.28 57.18
6 2000 1000 0.2 3.01 42.43
7 3000 100 0.6 3.93 69.85
8 3000 550 0.2 2.59 64.17
9 3000 1000 0.4 3.11 60.94
6.3.2 ANALYSIS OF VARIANCE
The three input levels have been considered and ANOVA has been performed 
on the input parameters whereas nine trials have been taken, given with 
response parameters for each level. ANOVA helps in determining which 
one of the parameters provides higher influence on the output values. The 
P-values are generated by processing ANOVA—when P-value is less than 
0.05 then their respective input parameter can be considered as significant.108 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
TABLE 6.3 Analysis of Variance for Forming Force.
Source DF Adj SS Adj MS F-value P-value
 Feed rate (mm/min) 2 0.35927 0.17963 36.26 0.027
 Tool rotational speed (rpm) 2 0.00049 0.00024 0.05 0.953
Incremental depth (mm) 2 2.70947 1.35474 273.46 0.004
Error 2 0.00991 0.00495 – –
Total 8 3.07914 – – –
From Table 6.3, it is evident that the P-values for the input parameters 
such as feed rate and incremental depth are 0.027 and 0.004, respectively, 
whereas both are less than 0.05; thus, both are significant in the measure of 
forming force. As P-value of incremental depth is lesser than that of feed 
rate, incremental depth is more influential than feed rate in this case.
TABLE 6.4 Analysis of Variance for Temperature.
Source DF Adj SS Adj MS F-value P-value
Feed rate (mm/min) 2 880.76 440.38 20.44 0.047
Tool rotational speed (rpm) 2 136.11 68.06 3.16 0.24
Incremental depth (mm) 2 87.42 43.71 2.03 0.33
Error 2 43.1 21.55 – –
Total 8 1147.39 – – –
From Table 6.4, it is evident that feed rate is the only input parameter 
which has higher influence on the temperature of the process as its P-value 
is less than 0.05.
6.3.3 PARETO CHART
The Pareto chart helps in finding out the significance of each factors but 
doesn’t help in determining the increase or decrease of response factors. The 
Pareto chart in Figure 6.1(a) clearly states that the feed rate shows the major 
impact in the temperature of the process while being carried out whereas the 
impact caused due to the depth is comparatively less and the impact of tool 
rotational speed is too low and also insignificant.Optimization and Process Parameters Study in Single-Point 109
FIGURE 6.1 (a) Pareto chart of the standardized effects for temperature and (b) Pareto chart 
of the standardized effects for forming force. 
Figure 6.1(a) depicts that the temperature is highly influenced by the feed 
rate.
Figure 6.1(b) depicts that the forming force can be majorly influenced 
by factors, namely, incremental depth which is highly significant, and feed 
rate whose significance is comparatively low and contrasts to the others; the 
significance of tool rotational speed is almost negligible.
6.3.4 CONTOUR PLOT
The process input parameters such as feed rate, tool rotational speed, and 
incremental depth have been examined based on the output parameters 
namely forming force and the temperature at each level. The input level 
parameters have been examined by taking the output parameters independent 
to each other placed along two separate axes.
From the contour plot shown in Figure 6.2(a), it is obvious that there 
is an increase in incremental depth with respect to the increase in forming 
force and there is no major variation in incremental depth with respect to 
temperature and can be said that incremental depth is not so influenced by 
the temperature as compared to forming force. This criteria is influenced 
by the contact area between the tool and workpiece. Higher the contact, 
higher the forming force. Incremental depth or step depth has been the major 
contributing factor of thrust force or forming force as the tool acquires more 
force in order to push major amount of material to apply deformation.26110 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
FIGURE 6.2 (a) Interaction plot for incremental depth vs. forming force, temperature; (b) 
interaction plot for tool rotational speed vs. forming force, temperature; and (c) interaction 
plot for tool feed rate vs, forming force, temperature.
The examination of contour plot shown in Figure 6.2(b) provides the fact 
that the effect of tool rotational speed shows an unpredictable change to the 
forming force and the temperature. In this case, the maximum rotation speed 
ranging between 800 and 1000 rpm results in comparatively optimal value 
of temperature ranging between 42 and 45 °C and forming force ranging 
between 2.8 and 3.0 kN as both temperature and forming force are expected 
to be as low as possible for improved results. Increase in tool rotational speed 
is associated with both the increase in forming temperature and decrease in 
forming force. Tool rotations up to 2500 rpm provides better effectiveness 
in forming process in Ti grade 2 sheets whereas tool rotational speeds above 
4000 rpm provides no gain in formability.27
The contour plot shown in Figure 6.2© for feed rate against the output 
parameters shows that there is fluctuation in the feed rate until reaching 55 °C 
and experiences a gradual increase in temperature along with the increase in 
feed rate. There is no major influence of feed rate over formability or the heat 
generated indicating the forming temperature but there is a notable increase 
in forming force as seen in our study. For sheets with larger thickness, there 
will be no need to increase the feed for achieving the production targets.28
6.3.5 OPTIMIZATION OF PROCESS PARAMETERS
The genetic algorithm optimization process is carried for the acquired input 
factors and results and the code has been generated for this process.
The code receives the input about the number of variables included 
in the optimization process and the condition of the function to be found Optimization and Process Parameters Study in Single-Point 111
as maximum or minimum and the number of cycles to be conducted. 
The number of iterations can be given as high as possible to obtain more 
accurate outcome parameter. The code then receives the fitness function 
obtained through multiple linear regressions along with the maximum and 
minimum values of each input variables. Further number of iterations will 
be carried; whereas, the cycle includes selection, crossover, and mutation 
and then followed by fitness evaluation as mentioned in the code. Once the 
given number of iterations is completed, the optimized value is generated 
as output.
From the input factors, the maximum and minimum value of each input 
factors is given as input for the optimization process. The minimum and 
maximum values of the processes which are given as inputs for the code are 
1000 and 3000 mm/min for feed rate, 100 and 1000 rpm for tool rotational 
speed, and 0.2 and 0.6 mm for incremental depth; thereby, the number of 
variable is taken as 3. The fitness function obtained by the multiple linear 
regression is taken for forming force and temperature separately for the 
minimal conditions. The multiple linear regression method is applied under 
the linear + interaction criteria to also include the impacts caused due to the 
interaction of the input factors between each.
The fitness equations are as
22.0 0.0110 0.0018 21 0.000001
0.0002 0.000426
temperature f N Z f N
fN f Z
= + × − × + ×∆ + × ×
+ × × − × ×∆ (6.1)
min 2.091 0.000110 0.000515 5.05 0.000000
0.000426 0.00153
For gForce f N Z
fN f Z N Z
= − × + × + ×∆ −
× × − × ×∆ − × ×∆ (6.2)
Where
Feed rate is represented as “f” 
Tool rotational speed is represented as “N”
Incremental depth is represented as “ΔZ”
The optimum minimum possible values of the outputs are then 
acquired by running the code by the assistance of the above-mentioned 
required inputs. The most accurate answers can be acquired by increasing 
the number of iterations as much as possible and the number of iterations 
is taken as 1000 in our case. The number of iterations can also be further 
increased.112 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
FIGURE 6.3 Graphs representing the fitness at each iteration level for forming force and 
temperature.
The optimized values are considered for conducting the confirmation 
experiments thus verifying that the expected results are obtained at the speci￾fied operating conditions and can be concluded that the predictions are good.
TABLE 6.5 Confirmation Experiments Results to Obtain Optimal Forming Force.
Trials Feed rate 
(mm/min)
Tool rotational 
speed (rpm)
Incremental 
depth (mm)
Forming 
force (kN)
Actual 
value (kN)
% 
deviation
1 1682 978.36 0.568 3.93 3.96 0.70%
2 1682 978.36 0.568 3.93 3.92 0.20%
3 1682 978.36 0.568 3.93 3.94 0.25%
TABLE 6.6 Confirmation Experiments Results to Obtain Optimal Temperature.
Trials Feed rate 
(mm/min)
Tool rotational 
speed (rpm)
Incremental 
depth (mm)
Temperature 
(°C)
Actual 
value (°C)
% 
deviation
1 1067.8 859.89 0.5028 39.49 38.85 1.60%
2 1067.8 859.89 0.5028 39.49 39.95 1.10%
3 1067.8 859.89 0.5028 39.49 39.9 1.00%
From Tables 6.5 and 6.6, it has been verified that the most possible 
minimum values of forming force and temperature expected to be obtained 
can be achieved by providing the specified input parameters achieved 
through optimization.
6.4 CONCLUSIONS
The principal objective of this study is to find the optimum values of input 
parameters namely feed rate, tool rotational speed, and incremental depth to Optimization and Process Parameters Study in Single-Point 113
obtain most possible minimum values of output parameters such as forming 
force and temperature. This helps in increasing the efficiency of the forming 
operation by following the values obtained for the examined range of input 
and output parameters. This study also reveals about the extension to which 
a tool can be used in this process. This optimization process in this study can 
be carried out on the further widened range of input and output parameters 
thereby also increasing its application.
• The parameters that are highly significant on the forming force of the 
process are feed rate and incremental depth. Comparatively, incre￾mental depth shows more significance than feed rate on forming force 
of the ISMF process.
• The parameter that is highly significant on temperature of the ISMF 
process is feed rate.
• The Pareto chart working on the same principle as of ANOVA also 
suggests that forming force is highly influenced by feed rate and 
incremental depth.
• It is also evident that temperature of the sheet metal forming process 
is highly influenced by feed rate.
• As a result of this experiment, the minimum possible optimum input 
values for acquiring minimum forming force with higher efficiency is 
1682 mm/min feed rate with 978.36 rpm of tool rotational speed and 
0.5680 mm incremental depth.
• Similarly, 1067.8 mm/min feed rate with 859.89 rpm as tool rotational 
speed and 0.5028 mm incremental depth is required for acquiring 
minimum temperature.
KEYWORDS
• ISMF
• ANOVA
• Taguchi
• optimization
• genetic algorithm114 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
REFERENCES
1. Moayedfar, M.; Leman, Z.; Mirabi, H.; Baharuddin, B. T. H. T. The Effect of Forming 
Parameters on the Sheet Stretch in Incremental Sheet Forming (ISF) Process on CNC 
Lathe Machine. Adv. Mater. Res. 2013, 634, 2894–2898.
2. Chen, L.-feng, Chen, F.; Gatea, S.; Ou, H. PEEK Based Cranial Reconstruction Using 
Thermal Assisted Incremental Sheet Forming. Proc. Inst. Mech. Eng. Part B: J. Eng. 
Manuf. 2022, 236 (6 and 7), 997–1004.
3. Chikalthankar, S. B.; Belurkar, G. D..; Nandedkar, V. M. Factors Affecting on Springback 
in Sheet Metal Bending: A Review. Int. J. Eng. Adv. Technol. 2014, 3 (4), 247–251
4. Sousa, R. Incremental Sheet Forming Technologies. In: Reference Module in Materials 
Science and Materials Engineering; Elsevier, 2016.
5. Park, J.-J.; Kim, Y.-H. Fundamental Studies on the ISMF Technique. J. Mater. Process. 
Technol. 2003, 140 (1–3), 447–453.
6. Dejardin, S.; Thibaud, S.; Gelin, J.-C.; Michel, G. Experimental Investigations and 
Numerical Analysis for Improving Knowledge of Incremental Sheet Forming Process 
for Sheet Metal Parts. J. Mater. Process. Technol. 2010, 210 (2), 363–369.
7. Attanasio, A.; Ceretti, E.; Giardini, C. Optimization of Tool Path in Two Points 
Incremental Forming. J. Mater. Process. Technol. 2006, 177 (1–3), 409–412.
8. Takano, H.; Kitazawa, K.; Goto, T. Incremental Forming of Nonuniform Sheet Metal: 
Possibility of Cold Recycling Process of Sheet Metal Waste. Int. J. Mach. Tools Manuf. 
2008, 48 (3 and 4), 477–482.
9. Mohanty, S.; Regalla, S. P.; Rao, Y. V. D. Tool Path Planning for Manufacturing of 
Asymmetric Parts by ISMF by Means of Robotic Manipulator. Mater. Today: Proc. 
2017, 4 (2), 811–819.
10. Ambrogio, G.; Gagliardi, F.; Filice, L. Robust Design of Incremental Sheet Forming by 
Taguchi’s Method. Procedia CIRP 2013, 12, 270–275.
11. Reddy, D. M.; Lakshmi, A. A.; ulHaq, A. Experimental Taguchi Approach and Gray–
Taguchi Optimization on Mechanical Properties of Aluminum 8011 Alloy Sheet Under 
Uniaxial Tensile Loads. Mater. Today: Proc. 2019, 19, 366–371.
12. Khare, S. K.; Agarwal, S.; Srivastava, S. Analysis of Surface Roughness during Turning 
Operation by Taguchi Method. Mater. Today: Proc. 2018, 5 (14), 28089–28097. DOI: 
10.1016/j.matpr.2018.10.050.
13. Hanrahan, G.; Zhu, J.; Gibani, S.; Patil, D. G. Chemometrics and Statistics|Experimental 
Design. In: Encyclopedia of Analytical Science; Elsevier, 2005; pp 8–13.
14. Kim, H.-Y. Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) Comparing Means of More Than Two Groups. 
Restorative Dentistry Endodontics 2014, 39 (1), 74. DOI: 10.5395/rde.2014.39.1.74.
15. Abdulhafedh, A. Incorporating Multiple Linear Regression in Predicting the House 
Prices Using a Big Real Estate Dataset with 80 Independent Variables. OALib 2022, 09
(01), 1–21. DOI: 10.4236/oalib.1108346.
16. Katoch, S.; Chauhan, S. S.; Kumar, V. A Review on Genetic Algorithm: Past 
Present, and Future. Multimedia Tools App. 2020, 80 (5), 8091–8126. DOI: 10.1007/
s11042-020-10139-6.
17. Wei, L.; Yuying, Y. Multi-Objective Optimization of Sheet Metal Forming Process 
Using Pareto-Based Genetic Algorithm. J. Mater. Process. Technol. 2008, 208 (1–3), 
499–506.Optimization and Process Parameters Study in Single-Point 115
18. Polat, O.; Tuncer, I. H. Aerodynamic Shape Optimization of Wind Turbine Blades Using 
a Parallel Genetic Algorithm. Procedia Eng. 2013, 61, 28–31.
19. Panduro, M. A.; Mendez, A. L.; Dominguez, R; Romero, G. Design of Non-Uniform 
Circular Antenna Arrays for Side Lobe Reduction Using the Method of Genetic 
Algorithms. AEU-Int. J. Electron. Commun. 2005, 60 (10), 713–717.
20. de Viteri, V. S.; Fuentes, E. Titanium and Titanium Alloys as Biomaterials. In: 
Tribology—Fundamentals and Advancements; InTech, 2013.
21. Hamzaçebi, C. Taguchi Method as a Robust Design Tool. In: Quality Control—Intelligent 
Manufacturing Robust Design and Charts; IntechOpen, 2021.
22. Jeyapaul, R.; Shahabudeen, P.; Krishnaiah, K. Quality Management Research by 
Considering Multi-Response Problems in the Taguchi Method a Review. Int. J. Adv. 
Manuf. Technol. 2004, 26 (11 and 12), 1331–1337. doi: 10.1007/s00170-004-2102-y.
23. Norman, G. Likert Scales, Levels of Measurement and the ‘Laws’ of Statistics. Adv. 
Health Sci. Educ. 2010, 15 (5), 625–632.
24. Glover, F.; Kelly, J. P.; Laguna, M. Genetic Algorithms and Tabu Search: Hybrids for 
Optimization. Comput. Oper. Res. 1995, 22 (1), 111–134.
25. Singh, K.; Kumar, R. Optimization of Functional Testing Using Genetic Algorithms. Int. 
J. Innov. Manag. Technol. 2010, 1 (1), 43.
26. Ajay, V. C. Prediction of Forming Force in Incremental Forming of Ti-6Al-4V Alloy 
Material. Mater. Today Proc. 2021, 39, 1594–1599.
27. Uheida, E. H.; Oosthuizen, G. A.; Dimitrov, D. Investigating the Impact of Tool Velocity 
on the Process Conditions in Incremental Forming of Titanium Sheets. Procedia Manuf. 
2017, 7, 345–350.
28. Dwivedy, M.; Kalluri, V. The Effect of Process Parameters on Forming Forces in Single 
Point Incremental Forming. Procedia Manuf. 2019, 29, 120–128.Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes. 
Sandip Kunar, Prasenjit Chatterjee, and M. Sreenivas Reddy (Eds.)
© 2025 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
MULTI-OBJECTIVE PROCESS 
PARAMETERS OPTIMIZATION IN 
SINGLE-POINT INCREMENTAL 
FORMING OF C110 BY CENTRAL 
COMPOSITE DESIGN AND MOORA 
OPTIMIZATION TECHNIQUE
S. PRATHEESH KUMAR, U. AKASH, and S. AKASH
Department of Production Engineering, PSG College of Technology, 
Coimbatore, India
CHAPTER 7
ABSTRACT
Incremental sheet metal forming (ISMF) is a type of forming in which a 
required shape is produced by gradually a forming force in the sheet. A cutting 
tool is used to remove the unwanted material giving us the product. This study 
shows on how various input parameters influence the output parameters and 
helps us in finding the relationship between each parameter on the material 
C-110. Three input parameters have been taken into consideration and three 
output parameters have also been taken and after experimentation the values 
are taken; a design of the experiment is created which is central composite 
design (CCD) in this case. Then from the design of experiment (DOM) of 
various surface plots and analysis of variance (ANOVA) the influence on 
each parameter is obtained. From the above result optimization has been 
carried out and an average best value for all the three-output parameters has 
been picked out. This study could help the people and researchers in the field 
of aerospace, biomedical, and other industrial sectors where copper (C-110) 118 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
plays an important role. From the experiment, it has been shown that feed 
rate plays a major role in maximum height and tensile strength. Then tool 
rotational speed plays the major role in wall angle deviation.
7.1 INTRODUCTION
Forming is a process that is widely used in industrial applications in which 
the required shape of the product is produced without the addition or removal 
of material. The materials are made to undergo plastic deformation and the 
required shape is obtained. Compressive, tensile, bending, or shear forces are 
used to plastically deform the sheet metal. Typically forming processes are 
classified into two main types; they are bulk forming and sheet metal forming. 
Bulk forming has some subtypes including forging, rolling, extrusion, and 
wire drawing. Rolling is the process that reduces the thickness to compress 
the workpiece by using two rotating rolls. Forging the process compresses 
the workpiece using dies; the shape of the die will impact the workpiece. 
The extrusion process compresses or pushes the workpiece to convert the 
required shape. Sheet metal forming also has some types: bending, deep 
or cup, shearing, miscellaneous, incremental sheet metal forming, plastic 
extrusion, die-forming process, and thread rolling. Sheet metal forming is 
changing the shape of the sheet metal by forming process. Sheet metal thick￾ness will be varying depending on the application that we are going to use. 
Sheet metals are available in the form of flat pieces or coiled strips. Bending 
is a process that bends the workpiece by using pushes. Shearing is nothing 
but cutting the sheets by shearing action. Deep or cup is the process to create 
hollow or concave shapes using punch pushes. Thread rolling is the process 
to form an internal threat or external threads using the shaped tool commonly 
called a threat rolling die. Plastic extrusion is a high-volume manufacturing 
process. The raw plastic was melted and formed in a continuous profile. One 
among these is ISMF.
Incremental forming or also known as ISMF is a deformation process in 
which the desired shape is obtained by applying localized pressure with a 
deforming tool that moves along the metal sheet. There has been rapid growth 
in this sector of manufacturing; it is considered an agile forming method for 
low-volume flexible manufacturing systems. All other forming methods are 
based on die forming, but ISMF is a die less forming process, so it is quite 
different from other methods. ISMF is a sheet formed into a final shape by a 
series of incremental deformations. This method is suitable for small batch Multi-Objective Process Parameters Optimization 119
prototypes and prototypes. Unlike other manufacturing processes where 
only the final product is produced in ISMF the case is different; the forming 
process is divided into various steps and a more accurate shape is produced 
by this method. As the industrial sector is growing industries prefer to make 
more customized and made-to-order products and the solution for this is 
incremental sheet metal forming. This process is cost-effective even for low￾volume production and if there are any changes in design it can be imple￾mented easily. The principle behind ISMF is that a forming tool moves along 
a tool path and transforms the metal sheet into the desired shape required. 
Since its first arrival in the 1990s ISF has gone through many developments 
such as double-sided ISMF and many other hybrid processes. Compared to 
other conventional processes in ISF fewer forming loads are sufficient to 
carry out the entire process. CAD models were generated by software and 
that is fed into the machine, and the process is carried out from the input data 
given. ISMF is processed in such a way that the whole process was done by 
using a CNC machine or with the help of a robotic arm, with the help of these 
types of equipment a forming force is applied over the sheet metal which is 
much greater than the yield strength of the material and the body deforms 
into the desired shape. ISMF plays a major role in the manufacturing of 
prototypes and parts for various automotives, aerospace industries and it also 
has applications in medical industries like it has been used for making skull 
prostheses. ISMF helps us in preparing free-form shapes in the piece.
ISMF can be classified into two types of single-point incremental forming 
(SPIF) and double-sided incremental forming (DSIF). SPIF (single point 
incremental forming), a single tool, is used to form the sheet on only one 
side. DSIF (double-side incremental forming) is used to form the concave 
and convex shapes on each side with excellent surface finish by using two 
tools, one on each side of the blank. The thickness of sheet metal, F, tool 
diameter, spindle speed, and lubrication affect the quality of ISF. Before 
beginning the process, we must select the desired quality of sheet metal or 
else it may damage during the process. Uniform plastic strain and thickness 
can reduce the step-down. Decreasing the step-down can reduce the stress 
between the sheet metal and the tool. Using a small tool we can achieve high 
ISMF formability; larger tool diameter decreases the surface finish of the final 
product. A larger tool diameter means a larger contact surface which leads to 
an increase in the forming force; increasing the forming force will reduce the 
formability. The incremental sheet metal process has a lot of advantages as it 
changes the part design and shapes easily to give a high degree of flexibility 
of this method compared to other methods. This process does not require 120 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
positive or negative dies. This is a low energy consuming process and has 
high process efficiency also. Normally rapid prototype making is difficult, 
but this method is easy. Low formability material can also deform by using 
this method. The size of the machine has limited the size of the part, because 
of the usage of the small tool the amount of force remains small. Either 
conventional CNC milling machines or lathe machines are used for this 
process. The noise-free process is much quieter than other processes. This 
method has some disadvantages, and this is a time-consuming process. The 
formation of the right angle is much more difficult in this process; multiple 
steps are required to form a right angle. Current research on incremental 
sheet metal forming, developing rolling tools to decrease friction, reducing 
thinning sheets after forming, increasing accuracy by eliminating spring 
back improve roughness. During the deformation process, contact occurs 
only at the peak asperities of both tool and sheet surfaces, which create fric￾tion between those two surfaces. Determining the coefficient of friction is a 
very complex procedure because many variables influence friction.
SPIF has been implemented in many industries, but the dimensional 
accuracy of the outcome is still low. This method causes three main types of 
error which are unwanted sheet bending the corner of the plate, spring back 
affect an elastic phenomenon that occurs almost in all the caves, and pillow 
effect during the pressing a concave surface occurs at bottom of the part. 
Improving the dimensional accuracy is necessary to develop the SPIF. The 
measurement taper deviation is more difficult to measure. A lot of improve￾ments have been made so far. In modern days sheet metal forming is mainly 
used in international car manufacturing. A new paradigm of the collection 
of data at the end allows understanding the capability and performing the 
final product based on the previous specification. The potential of machine 
learning software supports understanding the given data from the sensor 
signals.
Park and Kim in their study have shown how different types of forming 
conditions were estimated and complex geometries were produced using 
aluminum sheet and the results concluded that the positive forming method 
takes the lead and is most preferable than the other conventional methods 
and is used to produce complex geometries. Timo Schafer and Rolf-Dieter 
Schraft2 in their paper introduced a new type of ISMF process by which a 
three-dimensional complex geometrical workpieces can be produced without 
using any die plate. Pengyang Li et al.3 in their study have applied ultrasonic 
vibration to single-point incremental forming; ABAQUS software was used 
to analyze the influence of different frequencies and amplitudes of ultrasonic Multi-Objective Process Parameters Optimization 121
vibration. It has been proven that a larger amplitude would result in better 
surface quality. Jigar Pathak4 in his paper has discussed different methods of 
ISMF, the deformation mechanism, effect of different parameters in ISMF 
and has concluded that the deformation mechanism of ISMF is still not prop￾erly understood. Yanle et al.5 in their reviews have discussed current research 
on ISMF relating to mechanisms and various other techniques and it has been 
studied using two methods analytical modeling and finite element modeling 
and came up with different types of hybrid ISMF strategies. Bhattacharya6 in 
his research has highlighted the recent approaches and optimization activi￾ties on the central composite design model, especially for pharmaceutical 
product development and it was proven that central composite designs are 
beneficial in sequential experiments.
Zhihong Zhang et al.7 in their paper have provided a comparison for 
various central composite designs. A simulation was performed on the motor 
assembly, and it concluded that an effective design experiment cannot be 
obtained without the correct selection of CCD. Petek et al.8 in their paper 
measured the deformation and formation forces by single-point ISMF. Force 
was measured using a specially designed measuring system. The result 
shows which parameters affect the forces. Sören Scheffler et al.9 in this paper 
are discussing the final assembly of the car exterior skin part. The TRIF is 
checked using the example of the rear mudguard. The result concludes the 
possibility for the selected automotive outer skin. Kumar et al.10 investigated 
different process parameters for experimentation. CNC milling machine 
was used to test the performance. The result of this experiment shows how 
surface roughness is affected by tool diameter. Shakir Gatea et al.11 in their 
reviews have discussed the detailed review of the current state of the art of 
ISMF; the result shows what are the factors that influence the parameter of 
the ISMF. Gadakh12 in his paper discusses the selection of suitable milling 
process parameters. They use six different types of illustrative examples to 
perform the application of this method. The result shows the outcome of 
various machining operations. Mandal and Sarkar13 are discussing how to 
select the best intelligent manufacturing system. The simple, systematic, and 
logical methods are used to demonstrate the result. From his experiment we 
can infer that the performance criterion is dependent on the relative effect.
Brauers et al.14 in their research on the development implement the new 
methodology of multi-alternative decisions. Multi-objective optimization on 
the basis of ratio analysis (MOORA) method is used to demonstrate this 
method. This case study has shown multi-objective analysis. Utami and 
15 in their paper develop a decision system for selecting an economically 122 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
poor student for a scholarship. They used the MOORA method to develop 
that system. The result of the system shows how good the MOORA system 
helps them to select the eligible participants. Bhattacharya6 in his research 
has discussed the various types of central composite design and their 
significance. Upon optimization methodology was used to demonstrate this 
experiment. Mandal and Sarkar13 in their study try to select the best intel￾ligent manufacturing system. They used MOORA method to demonstrate the 
experiment. The result shows the most suitable manufacturing system. Zhe 
Wang et al.,16 in their study discuss about the factors that influence in stress 
corrosion cracking in C110. The scanning electron microscope, TEM, and 
3-dimensional ultra-depth of field are applied. The result of the study shows 
how the factors affect the output parameters.
7.2 EXPERIMENTAL METHODS AND MATERIALS
7.2.1 DESIGN OF EXPERIMENTS
Design of experiments (DOE) is a tool that can be used in various experi￾mental procedures for analyzing the data and providing the required output. 
DOE comes under applied statistics which deals with analyzation and inter￾pretation of data that controls the value of parameters. We can use DOE to 
determine the best output or operating condition suitable for our experiment 
or product. It helps us in determining the various factors influencing the 
output. Nowadays due to resource constraints, because of the rise in cost, 
using the trial-and-error method is impossible. The designed experiment is 
a more efficient and powerful method. By using the trial-and-error method, 
it is impossible to find how the other factor affects the process. The rela￾tionship is called interaction when the process is altered by more than one 
factor. Many a times, interaction is more important than one factor at a time. 
In the DOE method, we can identify the effect of all the presence factors 
in the process. So, we move on to the DOE method instead of the trial￾and-error method. Response surface methodology (RSM) is used for model 
building with the help of mathematical tools and statistical techniques. This 
methodology was developed by Box and Wilson in 1951. This methodology 
aims to optimize responses, see how the input parameters influenced them, 
and reduce the cost and time of the experiment. When the given factors are 
from a continuous range of variables, the RSM method is the best choice to 
improve and develop the response variables, to attain high accuracy with 
reliably low cost and time.Multi-Objective Process Parameters Optimization 123
7.2.2 CENTRAL COMPOSITE DESIGN
The central composite design (CCD), also known as Box–Wilson central 
composite design, is an RSM type that is more accurate and precise for 
building a second-order quadratic model without going into a three-level 
factorial experiment. This is the most used Response surface method. This 
method consists of center points and various axial points by using which the 
curve is plotted. The first procedure in CCD would be to determine the ‘α’ 
value and depending on this value the design changes. If the α value comes 
as 1 then the axial points stand within the factorial region; otherwise, it is 
called a face-centered design. To determine the value of α the formula used 
s α=(2k) 0.25 The main advantage of this over other methods is that maximum 
information can be attained from a minimum experimental trial and helps us 
to estimate curvature in continuous responses.
7.2.3 MOORA OPTIMIZATION
Multi-objective optimization based on ratio analysis (MOORA) is a method 
of optimization by which both the beneficial and nonbeneficial criteria are 
measured, and an alternative is selected from a set of alternatives. This 
method consists of very few mathematical procedures which give an advan￾tage to this method over other methods, and it is widely used for optimizing 
processes. The MOORA method was first used by Brauers. The MOORA 
method consists of five simple steps for optimizing the parameter, first is to 
create a decision matrix with several alternatives and several criteria present. 
11 12 1
21 22 2
1 2
 
n
n
m m mn
aa a
aa a
A
aa a
 
 
⋅ ⋅⋅⋅ = ⋅ ⋅⋅⋅
⋅ ⋅⋅⋅
 



whereαij is a performance measure of the ith alternative on the jth criteria.
After normalizing the decision matrix, the alternatives are compared to 
the same denominator. The ratio is
2
1 / m
i j ij i ij aa a = Σ = (7.1)124 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
The next step MOORA optimization is multi-objective optimization. 
The normalized values are added and subtracted to find the maximization 
(beneficial) and minimization (nonbeneficial) of the objective
1 1 i
g n
i j j j g ij ya a =Σ −Σ = = + (7.2)
where g is the maximized attributes, (n–g) is the minimized attributes.
Then to find the weighted assessment this is an important step than others.
1 1
g n
i j j ij j g j ij y wa wx =Σ − ⋅ = = + ⋅ Σ (7.3)
where wj is the priority of jth criteria which can be assigned using different
multi-criteria decision methods.
Finally, the decisions are in order of decreasing value of yi
.
The copper (C110) material was used for this test; this material has 
good malleability and ductility. C110 also has heat conductivity as well as 
electrical conductivity. This material has a wide range of applications, such 
as skylight frames, roofing, soldering coppers, rivets, and wire screening. 
The chemical composition of C110 is Cu-99.99%, O-0.1%. The typical 
mechanical properties are 42,100 PSI tensile strength and 36,300 PSI of 
yield point.
7.3 RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS
The given experimental response table (Table 7.1) shows the impact of given 
input parameters such as tool rotational speed, feed rate, incremental depth, 
tensile strength, and wall angle deviation of sheet metal. Twenty trails have 
been taken and all the results were shown in the experimental result table 
(Table 7.1).
7.3.1 EFFECT ON MAXIMUM HEIGHT
This ANOVA for maximum height (Table 7.2) shows how the increasing 
height impacts the surface and the Pareto chart (Fig. 7.1) shows the result 
clearly. The ANOVA helps to predict which input parameter significantly 
affects the parameter outcomes, if the P (probability) value is less than 0.05, 
it will significantly affect the output.Multi-Objective Process Parameters Optimization 125
TABLE 7.2 ANOVA for Maximum Height.
Source DF Adj SS Adj MS F-value P-value
Model 9 183.849 20.4276 89.13 0
Linear 3 163.295 54.4317 237.49 0
Feed rate (mm/min) 1 97.594 97.5938 425.81 0
Tool rotational speed (rpm) 1 25.059 25.0589 109.33 0
Incremental depth (mm) 1 40.643 40.6426 177.33 0
Square 3 17.89 5.9634 26.02 0
Feed rate (mm/min) *feed rate (mm/min) 1 0.133 0.1326 0.58 0.465
Tool rotational speed (rpm)*tool rotational speed (rpm) 1 0.002 0.0018 0.01 0.931
Incremental depth (mm)*incremental depth (mm) 1 11.005 11.005 48.02 0
2-Way interaction 3 2.663 0.8877 3.87 0.045
Feed rate (mm/min)*tool rotational speed (rpm) 1 1.629 1.629 7.11 0.024
Feed rate (mm/min)*incremental depth (mm) 1 0.702 0.7021 3.06 0.111
Tool rotational speed (rpm)*incremental depth (mm) 1 0.332 0.3321 1.45 0.256
Error 10 2.292 0.2292 
Lack-of-fit 5 2.288 0.4577 621.25 0
Pure error 5 0.004 0.0007 
Total 19 186.141 
TABLE 7.1 Experimental Result Table.
Run 
order Feed rate Tool rotational 
speed
Incremental 
depth
Maximum 
height
Tensile 
strength
Wall angle 
deviation 
 (mm/min) (rpm) (mm) (mm) (KN) (deg)
1 1000 1000 0.6 55.28 1.023 3.21
2 2000 550 0.2 57.42 0.985 2.74
3 1000 100 0.2 60.48 0.789 1.52
4 3000 550 0.4 49.14 1.394 2.92
5 2000 550 0.4 53.21 1.114 2.73
6 2000 1000 0.4 50.84 1.368 3.31
7 3000 100 0.2 55.73 1.073 1.94
8 2000 550 0.4 53.15 1.117 2.75
9 2000 550 0.6 52.61 1.354 2.68
10 1000 100 0.6 57.38 0.935 1.47
11 2000 550 0.4 53.23 1.119 2.78
12 2000 550 0.4 53.21 1.114 2.72
13 1000 1000 0.2 58.67 0.849 3.17
14 3000 100 0.6 51.97 1.383 1.96
15 2000 100 0.4 55.24 1.045 1.76
16 2000 550 0.4 53.2 1.116 2.73
17 3000 1000 0.6 47.54 1.475 3.53
18 2000 550 0.4 53.21 1.115 2.79
19 1000 550 0.4 56.45 0.878 2.39
20 3000 1000 0.2 52.64 1.351 3.58126 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
FIGURE 7.1 Pareto chart for maximum height.
The regression equation of maximum thickness is
Maximum Height (mm) = 69.72 − 0.00110 F − 0.00074 N − 45.88 ∆Z 
− 0.000000 F*F + 0.000000 N*N + 50.01 ∆Z*∆Z − 0.000001 F*N 
− 0.001481 F*∆Z − 0.00226 N*∆Z (7.4)
where F is feed rate (mm/min), N tool rotational speed (rpm), and ∆Z incre￾mental depth (mm).
From Fig. 7.1 the given feed rate highly contributes to the maximum 
height of the sheet metal followed by the incremental depth and tool rota￾tional speed. The contribution of rotational speed is lower compared to the 
feed rate. Tunc and Dave Stoddart17 in their study discuss on how the feed 
rate influences the material removal rate.
7.3.1.1 INFERENCE ON MAXIMUM HEIGHT
The given surface plot diagram (Fig. 7.2) shows that the maximum height 
above 50.5 mm is achieved for the tool rotational speed of 1000 rpm and 
incremental depth of 0.4 mm. As well as the maximum height of 60 mm 
was attained by the feed rate of 1000 mm/min and the incremental depth is 
0.2 mm. Likewise, the maximum height of 48 mm was attained by the tool 
rotational speed of 1000 mm/min and feed rate of 3000 rpm.Multi-Objective Process Parameters Optimization 127
FIGURE 7.2 Surface plot for maximum height: (a) feed rate vs tool rotational speed, (b) 
incremental depth vs tool rotational speed, and (c) incremental depth and feed rate.
7.3.2 EFFECT ON TENSILE STRENGTH
The ANOVA for tensile strength (Table 7.3) and the Pareto chart (Fig. 7.3) 
clearly shows how the various input parameters affect the outcomes of the 
sheet metals. These tables and the Pareto chart help to predict how the output 
was affected by the input.
TABLE 7.3 ANOVA on Tensile Strength.
Source DF Adj SS Adj MS F-value P-value
Model 9 0.699311 0.077701 15.53 0
Linear 3 0.681721 0.22724 45.43 0
Feed rate (mm/min) 1 0.48488 0.48488 96.93 0
Tool rotational speed (rpm) 1 0.070728 0.070728 14.14 0.004
Incremental depth (mm) 1 0.126113 0.126113 25.21 0.001
Square 3 0.006684 0.002228 0.45 0.726
Feed rate (mm/min) *feed rate (mm/min) 1 0.00482 0.00482 0.96 0.349
Tool rotational speed (rpm)*tool 
rotational speed (rpm) 1 0.002255 0.002255 0.45 0.517128 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
FIGURE 7.3 Pareto chart for tensile strength.
The regression equation of tensile strength is
Tensile strength (KN) = 0.291 + 0.000325 F − 0.000004 N + 0.707 ∆Z − 
0.000000 F*F + 0.000000 N*N − 0.21 ∆Z*∆Z + 0.000000 F*N + 0.000071 
F*∆Z − 0.000219 N*∆Z (7.5)
where F is feed rate (mm/min), N tool rotational speed (rpm), and ∆Z 
incremental depth (mm).
The above Pareto chart (Fig. 7.3) clearly shows that the tensile strength 
of the sheet metal was highly affected by the feed rate followed by the 
parameters of incremental depth and tool rotational speed. The combination 
of incremental depth contributes a very less amount to the tensile strength. 
Increasing the feed rate damages the workpiece as well as tensile strength. 
Mishra et al.19 in their study also give the same output, as what we get.
7.3.2.1 INFERENCE ON TENSILE STRENGTH
The surface plot (Fig. 7.4) shows that the tensile strength above1.3 kn was 
achieved by the tool rotational speed of 1000 rpm and incremental depth of 
0.6 mm. As well as tensile strength above 1 kn was achieved by the feed rate 
of 2000 mm/min and 0.4 mm of incremental depth. The minimum depth of 
0.8 kn was attained by the 1000 mm/min speed rate and 0.2 mm incremental 
depth.Multi-Objective Process Parameters Optimization 129
FIGURE 7.4 Surface plot for tensile strength: (a) feed rate vs tool rotational speed, (b) 
incremental depth vs feed rate, and (c) incremental depth vs tool rotational speed.
7.3.3 EFFECT ON WALL DEVIATION ANGLE
The process parameter that affects the wall deviation angle was tested by the 
ANOVA table (Table 7.4). The ANOVA table (Table 7.4) and Pareto chart 
(Fig. 7.5) predict how the various inputs affect the wall deviation angle.
TABLE 7.4 ANOVA for Wall Deviation Angle.
Source DF Adj SS Adj MS F-value P-value
Model 9 7.28143 0.80905 292.56 0
Linear 3 7.11414 2.37138 857.53 0
Feed rate (mm/min) 1 0.47089 0.47089 170.28 0
Tool rotational speed (rpm) 1 6.64225 6.64225 2401.94 0
Incremental depth (mm) 1 0.001 0.001 0.36 0.561
Square 3 0.16314 0.05438 19.66 0
Feed rate (mm/min) *feed rate (mm/min) 1 0.00471 0.00471 1.7 0.221
Tool rotational speed (rpm)*tool rotational speed (rpm) 1 0.07161 0.07161 25.89 0
Incremental depth (mm)*incremental depth (mm) 1 0.00051 0.00051 0.18 0.676
2-way interaction 3 0.00415 0.00138 0.5 0.69
Feed rate (mm/min) *tool rotational speed (rpm) 1 0.00405 0.00405 1.46 0.254
Feed rate (mm/min) *incremental depth (mm) 1 0.00005 0.00005 0.02 0.896
Tool rotational speed (rpm)*incremental depth (mm) 1 0.00005 0.00005 0.02 0.896
Error 10 0.02765 0.00277 
Lack-of-fit 5 0.02345 0.00469 5.58 0.041
Pure error 5 0.0042 0.00084 
Total 19 7.30908 130 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
FIGURE 7.5 Pareto chart for wall deviation angle.
The regression equation of wall deviation angle is
Wall Angle Deviation (deg) = 0.908 + 0.000415 F + 0.002777 N- 0.313 ∆Z 
− 0.000000 F*F − 0.000001 N*N + 0.341 ∆Z*∆Z − 0.000000 F*N 
− 0.000012 F*∆Z + 0.000028 N*∆Z (7.6)
where F is feed rate (mm/min), N tool rotational speed (rpm), ∆Z incremental 
depth (mm).
The Pareto chart for the wall deviation angle shows that the tool rotational 
speed highly contributes to the wall deviation angle followed by feed rate and 
a combination of the tool rotational speed. And the combination of the feed 
rate and incremental depth affects a very less amount of the wall deviation 
angle. The tool’s rotational speed increases the heat of the workpiece, which 
will affect the wall deviation angle. Uheida et al.18 in their study also give the 
same result of our experiment.
7.3.3.1 INFERENCE ON WALL DEVIATION ANGLE
The surface plot (Fig. 7.6) shows that the wall deviation angle of 3.6 degrees 
was achieved by the tool rotational speed of 1000 rpm and feed rate of 3000 
mm/min. Likewise, the wall deviation angle of 2.5 degrees can be achieved 
by the 500 rpm of tool rotational speed and incremental depth of 0.4 mm. 
The minimum deviation of a 2.4-degree angle is attained by a 1000 rpm 
speed rate and 0.2 mm incremental depth.Multi-Objective Process Parameters Optimization 131
FIGURE 7.6 The surface plot of the wall deviation angle concerning: (a) tool rotational 
speed vs incremental depth, (b) feed rate vs rotational speed, and (c) feed rate vs incremental 
depth.
7.3.4 MOORA PROCESS PARAMETERS OPTIMIZATION
TABLE 7.5 MOORA Weight Calculation.
Run order Normalizing matrix Ln (Nij) Nij * Ln (nij)
1 0.0512 0.0009 0.003 − 2.973 − 6.9625 − 5.819 − 0.152 − 0.01 − 0.0173
2 0.0531 0.0009 0.003 − 2.935 − 7.0004 − 5.977 − 0.156 − 0.01 − 0.0152
3 0.056 0.0007 0.001 − 2.883 − 7.2223 − 6.567 − 0.161 − 0.01 − 0.0092
4 0.0455 0.0013 0.003 − 3.091 − 6.6531 − 5.914 − 0.141 − 0.01 − 0.016
5 0.0492 0.001 0.003 − 3.011 − 6.8773 − 5.981 − 0.148 − 0.01 − 0.0151
6 0.047 0.0013 0.003 − 3.057 − 6.6719 − 5.788 − 0.144 − 0.01 − 0.0177
7 0.0516 0.001 0.002 − 2.965 − 6.9148 − 6.323 − 0.153 − 0.01 − 0.0114
8 0.0492 0.001 0.003 − 3.012 − 6.8746 − 5.974 − 0.148 − 0.01 − 0.0152
9 0.0487 0.0013 0.002 − 3.022 − 6.6822 − 5.999 − 0.147 − 0.01 − 0.0149
10 0.0531 0.0009 0.001 − 2.936 − 7.0525 − 6.6 − 0.156 − 0.01 − 0.009
11 0.0493 0.001 0.003 − 3.011 − 6.8728 − 5.963 − 0.148 − 0.01 − 0.0153
12 0.0492 0.001 0.003 − 3.011 − 6.8773 − 5.985 − 0.148 − 0.01 − 0.0151
13 0.0543 0.0008 0.003 − 2.913 − 7.149 − 5.832 − 0.158 − 0.01 − 0.0171
14 0.0481 0.0013 0.002 − 3.035 − 6.661 − 6.312 − 0.146 − 0.01 − 0.0114132 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
Run order Normalizing matrix Ln (Nij) Nij * Ln (nij)
15 0.0511 0.001 0.002 − 2.974 − 6.9413 − 6.42 − 0.152 − 0.01 − 0.0105
16 0.0492 0.001 0.003 − 3.011 − 6.8755 − 5.981 − 0.148 − 0.01 − 0.0151
17 0.044 0.0014 0.003 − 3.124 − 6.5966 − 5.724 − 0.137 − 0.01 − 0.0187
18 0.0492 0.001 0.003 − 3.011 − 6.8764 − 5.959 − 0.148 − 0.01 − 0.0154
19 0.0522 0.0008 0.002 − 2.952 − 7.1154 − 6.114 − 0.154 − 0.01 − 0.0135
20 0.0487 0.0013 0.003 − 3.022 − 6.6844 − 5.71 − 0.147 − 0.01 − 0.0189
SUM − 2.994 − 0.14 − 0.292
Eij 0.9995 0.048 0.09746
Dij 0.0005 0.952 0.90254
Wij 0.0003 0.513 0.48647
TABLE 7.6 Optimization Results.
Run 
order
d1 d2 d3 d4 d5 d6 d7 d8 d9 d10 Rank
1 3055.9 1.047 10.3 0.2284 0.2 0.266 6.56E-05 0.1024 0.129 − 0.03 19
2 3297.1 0.97 7.508 0.2373 0.192 0.227 6.81E-05 0.0986 0.11 − 0.01 18
3 3657.8 0.623 2.31 0.2499 0.154 0.126 7.17E-05 0.079 0.061 0.018 7
4 2414.7 1.943 8.526 0.203 0.272 0.242 5.83E-05 0.1396 0.118 0.022 6
5 2831.3 1.241 7.453 0.2199 0.217 0.226 6.31E-05 0.1115 0.11 0.002 12
6 2584.7 1.871 10.96 0.2101 0.267 0.274 6.03E-05 0.137 0.133 0.004 9
7 3105.8 1.151 3.764 0.2303 0.209 0.161 6.61E-05 0.1074 0.078 0.029 4
8 2824.9 1.248 7.563 0.2196 0.218 0.228 6.3E-05 0.1118 0.111 0.001 13
9 2767.8 1.833 7.182 0.2174 0.264 0.222 6.24E-05 0.1356 0.108 0.028 5
10 3292.5 0.874 2.161 0.2371 0.182 0.122 6.8E-05 0.0936 0.059 0.035 2
11 2833.4 1.252 7.728 0.2199 0.218 0.23 6.31E-05 0.112 0.112 2E-04 14
12 2831.3 1.241 7.398 0.2199 0.217 0.225 6.31E-05 0.1115 0.109 0.002 10
13 3442.2 0.721 10.05 0.2424 0.166 0.262 6.96E-05 0.085 0.128 − 0.04 20
14 2700.9 1.913 3.842 0.2147 0.27 0.162 6.16E-05 0.1385 0.079 0.06 1
15 3051.5 1.092 3.098 0.2283 0.204 0.146 6.55E-05 0.1046 0.071 0.034 3
16 2830.2 1.245 7.453 0.2198 0.218 0.226 6.31E-05 0.1117 0.11 0.002 11
17 2260.1 2.176 12.46 0.1964 0.288 0.292 5.64E-05 0.1477 0.142 0.006 8
18 2831.3 1.243 7.784 0.2199 0.217 0.231 6.31E-05 0.1116 0.112 − 0 15
19 3186.6 0.771 5.712 0.2333 0.171 0.198 6.69E-05 0.0879 0.096 − 0.01 16
20 2771 1.825 12.82 0.2175 0.264 0.296 6.24E-05 0.1353 0.144 − 0.01 17
0.4865 242 5.126 12.086
TABLE 7.5 (Continued)Multi-Objective Process Parameters Optimization 133
The optimization result table gives which compilation of input parameters 
can give the best output of the process. To obtain the final value by using of 
MOORA optimization, initially the data are taken as a matrix form. Then 
the normalizing and multi-objective optimization was calculated by using 
eqs (7.1) and (7.2). After the weighted assessment was done by eq (7.3), the 
results are tabulated, the higher rank 1 was attained in the 14th trail. Thus, 
the best combination is 3000 mm/ min feed rate, 100 rpm tool rotational 
speed, 0,6 mm of incremental depth.
TABLE 7.7 Conformation Table.
Trail Feed 
rate
Tool 
rotational 
speed
Incremental 
depth
Maximum 
height
Deviation Tensile 
strength
Deviation Wall 
deviation 
angle 
Deviation
mm/min Rpm mm mm % mm % deg %
1 3000 100 0.6 51.95 2 1.385 0.2 1.99 3
2 3000 100 0.6 51.96 1 1.382 0.1 1.94 5
3 3000 100 0.6 51.98 1 1.380 0.3 1.98 1
To check the result, which was taken from this paper, three experimental 
trials are conducted by repeating the experiment by using the same values; 
the results are shown in the conformation table (Table 7.7), which shows the 
output values are very close to one another, and it confirms the conformity 
of the experiment.
7.4 CONCLUSIONS
The goal of this study is to determine the appropriate input parameters, 
such as maximum height, wall deviation angle, and tensile strength, for the 
process parameters, such as tool rotating speed, feed rate, and incremental 
depth. With the maximum height, tensile strength, and wall deviation angle 
of the C110 copper alloy, this research was employed to make a better-quality 
product. The outcome of this research aids in improving the effectiveness of 
producing C110 sheet metal. The main research of this study has been the 
framing of the central composite design and the MOORA optimization for 
material C110. The interaction of process factors on output response and 
optimum results is clearly shown to be effective for improvement.
• Both the maximum height and incremental depth have a significant 
impact on the supplied feed rate, which is then controlled by height. 134 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
The specified feed rate of 3000 mm/min and 100 rpm of feed rate was 
used to achieve the 48 mm maximum height.
• A maximum height of 48 mm was permitted by the set feed rate of 
3000 mm/min and 100 rpm of feed rate. The angle of the sheet metal’s 
wall deviation is significantly influenced by tool rotating speed, then 
by incremental depth. By using a tool rotating at 1000 rpm and adding 
0.2 mm of incremental depth, a wall angle variation of 3.5 degrees 
was achieved.
• The tensile strength has the most impact on the feed rotational speed, 
followed by the incremental depth’s characteristics. The maximum 
feed rate of 3000 mm/min and an incremental depth of 0.6 mm were 
used to achieve the 2.85 KN tensile strength.
• The 14th experiment, which had a maximum height of 51.97 mm 
and a tensile strength of 1.383 KN, was found to have the optimal 
combination of process parameters, including feed rate of 3000 mm/
min, tool rotating speed of 100 rpm, and incremental depth of 0.6 mm.
• From the confirmation table it has been concluded that similar results 
have been obtained and then it proves the optimum values form opti￾mization table.
KEYWORDS
• incremental sheet metal forming (ISMF)
• central composite design (CCD)
• response surface methodology (RSM)
• optimization
• multi-objective optimization based on ratio analysis (MOORA)
REFERENCES
1. Park, J.-J.; Kim, Y.-H. Fundamental Studies on the Incremental Sheet Metal Forming 
Technique . J. Mater. Process. Technol. 2003, 140, 447–453.
2. Schafer, T.; Schraft, R. D. ISMF by Industrial Robots. Rapid Prototyping J. 2005.
3. Li, P.; He, J.; Liu, Q.; Yang, M.; Wang, Q.; Yuan, Q.; Li, Y. Evaluation of Forming 
Forces in Ultrasonic Incremental Sheet Metal Forming. Aerospace Sci. Technol. 2017,
63, 132–139.Multi-Objective Process Parameters Optimization 135
4. Pathak, J. A Brief Review of Incremental Sheet Metal Forming. Int. J. Latest Eng. 
Manag. Res. 2017, 2, 35–43.
5. Li, Y.; Chen, X.; Liu, Z.; Sun, J.; Li, F.; Li, J.; Zhao, G. A Review on the Recent 
Development of Incremental Sheet-Forming Process. Int. J. Adv. Manuf. Technol. 2017,
92, 2439–2462.
6. Bhattacharya, S. Central Composite Design for Response Surface Methodology and Its 
Application in Pharmacy. In Response Surface Methodology in Engineering Science; 
IntechOpen, 2021.
7. Zhang, Z.; Xiaofeng, B. Comparison About the Three Central Composite Designs with 
Simulation. 2009 Int. Conf. Adv. Comput. Control 2009, 163–167.
8. Petek, A.; Kuzman, K.; Kopač, J. Deformations and Forces Analysis of Single Point 
Incremental Sheet Metal Forming. Arch. Mater. Sci. Eng. 2009, 35, 107–116.
9. Scheffler, S.; Pierer, A.; Scholz, P.; Melzer, S.; Weise, D.; Rambousek, Z. ISMF on the 
Example of Car Exterior Skin Parts. Procedia Manuf. 2019, 29, 105–111.
10. Kumar, A.; Gulati, V.; Kumar, P. Investigation of Surface Roughness in Incremental 
Sheet Forming. Procedia Comput. Sci. 2018, 133, 1014–1020.
11. Gatea, S.; Ou, H.; McCartney, G. Review on the Influence of Process Parameters in 
Incremental Sheet Forming. Int. J. Adv. Manuf. Technol. 2016, 87, 479–499.
12. Gadakh, V. S. Application of MOORA Method for Parametric Optimization of Milling 
Process. Int. J. Appl. Eng. Res. 2010, 1, 743.
13. Mandal, U. K.; Sarkar, B. Selection of Best Intelligent Manufacturing System (IMS) 
Under Fuzzy MOORA Conflicting MCDM Environment. Int. J. Emerg. Technol. Adv 
Eng. 2012, 2, 301–310.
14. Brauers, W. K. M.; Zavadskas, E. K.; Peldschus, F.; Turskis, Z. Multi-Objective 
Optimization of Road Design Alternatives with an Application of the MOORA Method; 
Vilniaus Gedimino technikos universitetas, 2008.
15. Utami, A.; Ruskan, E. L. Development of Decision Support System for Selection of 
Yayasan Alumni Scholarship Using MOORA Method. In: Sriwijaya International 
Conference on Information Technology and Its Applications (SICONIAN 2019) 2020; 
pp 706–710.
16. Wang, Z.; Wang, P.; Zeng, D.; Shi, T.; Deng, W. A Study on the Influential Factors of 
Stress Corrosion Cracking in C110 Casing Pipe. Materials MDPI 2022, 15, 801.
17. Tunc, L. T.; Stoddart, D. Tool Path Pattern and Feed Direction Selection in Robotic 
Milling for Increased Chatter-Free Material Removal Rate. Int. J. Adv. Manuf. Technol.
2017, 89, 2907–2918.
18. Uheida, E. H.; Oosthuizen, G. A.; Dimitrov, D. M.; Bezuidenhout, M. B.; Hugo, P. A. 
Effects of the Relative Tool Rotation Direction on Formability During the Incremental 
Forming of Titanium Sheets. Int. J. Adv. Manuf. Technol. 2018, 96, 3311–3319.
19. Mishra, R.; Malik, J.; Singh, I.; Davim, J. P. Neural Network Approach for Estimating 
the Residual Tensile Strength After Drilling in Uni-Directional Glass Fiber Reinforced 
Plastic Laminates. Mater. Design 2010, 31, 2790–2795Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes. 
Sandip Kunar, Prasenjit Chatterjee, and M. Sreenivas Reddy (Eds.)
© 2025 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
CHAPTER 8
PREDICTION OF MECHANICAL 
PROPERTIES ON WIRE ARC ADDITIVE 
MANUFACTURING 316L STAINLESS 
STEEL USING FUZZY LOGIC
M. SIVAKUMAR1, J. JERALD1, N. S. BALAJI2, G. RAJESH KANNAN1, 
S. SHRIRAM1, and S. JAYANTH1
1Department of Production Engineering, National Institute of 
Technology, Tiruchirappalli, India
2Department of Mechanical Engineering, National Institute of 
Technology, Tadepalligudem, India
ABSTRACT
The 316L stainless steel (SS) wall was fabricated by wire arc additive manu￾facturing (WAAM) through metal inert gas (MIG) welding for various aero￾space, automobile, and marine applications. The WAAM 316L SS sample 
was subjected to different post-heat treatment temperatures such as 650, 800, 
1000, 1100, and 1200°C with constant cooling time. The mechanical prop￾erties were measured experimentally along the built directions and vertical 
directions for as-build and heat treatment samples. A fuzzy logic model has 
been developed for predicting the mechanical properties of wire arc additive 
manufactured 316L SS such as tensile strength, yield strength, and elongation 
under various post-heat treatment temperatures. It was observed that the fuzzy 
model effectively predicted the mechanical properties at various post-heat 
treatments with good accuracy. Under varied post-heat treatment conditions, 
an average absolute percentage error level of 0.099% for tensile strength, 
0.352% for yield strength, and 0.689% for elongation were achieved. 138 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
8.1 INTRODUCTION
Additive manufacturing (AM) technology appears to be a viable option for 
producing complex components and its subcomponent which are widely 
used in various industries.1 In the AM process, the material is added layer 
by layer to transform the data of a three-dimensional object into the final 
component. The benefits of AM are the ability to produce very complex 
structures, resource savings, and free-form design.2
In this work, an AM technique that utilizes direct energy deposition 
(DED) is known as wire arc additive manufacturing (WAAM). In the WAAM 
process, an electric arc that forms the heat source is used to melt and deposit 
the metal part according to the data. The main advantage of WAAM when 
compared to other AM is a higher deposition rate, shorter manufacturing 
time, less pollution, maximum utilization of wire material, less size limita￾tion of parts, and lower cost. WAAM can also be used to repair damaged 
parts and also form in-situ composite parts.3
SAE 316L stainless steel or A4 stainless steel is an austenitic phase stain￾less steel that has chromium and nickel as the major constituent.4 In WAAM 
316L, the research investigation so far done mostly focused on microstruc￾ture and tensile properties. In WAAM 316L, austenite dendrites which are 
found in the form of reticulated or skeletal ferrite and intermetallic σ phase, 
and austenite grains in the form of the coarse columnar structure are found 
along the direction of build with grain orientation along the direction. The 
WAAM 316L has good strength and plasticity and exhibits anisotropy.5
In order to make the microstructure in the remelted area and area in which 
overlapping occurs heat treatment should be done to remove the multilayer 
structure, minimize anisotropy, and improve the cross-section elongation. 
The prediction of temperature for heat treatment by using artificial intel￾ligence (AI) systems has attracted many researchers. Some of the AI systems 
include back propagation neural networks (BPNN), genetic algorithms (GA), 
fuzzy systems, and neuro-fuzzy systems.6
In this chapter, the fuzzy inference system (FIS) is employed which is 
one of the most powerful branches of AI, capable of dealing with the solution 
of difficult and ill-defined systems with numerous relevant factors. Fuzzy 
logic uses linguistic data gathered from subject-matter specialists to cope 
with higher-level thinking. The benefit of the fuzzy systems employed in 
this work is their ability to transparently depict complicated and nonlinear 
multivariable problems.7 The study aims to use fuzzy logic to evaluate the 
yield strength, ultimate strength, and elongation at intermediate post-heated 
temperatures based on experimental data previously obtained.Prediction of Mechanical Properties on Wire Arc Additive 139
8.2 EXPERIMENTAL METHODS AND MATERIALS
8.2.1 MATERIALS
The samples for this analysis were made using the wire arc additive manufac￾turing technique in a MIG welding machine as illustrated in Figure 8.1. The 
fabrication process parameters are listed in Table 8.1. An as-built WAAM 
316L SS sample with the dimension of 100 × 100 × 5 mm3 was fabricated 
using a 1.2 mm diameter 316L stainless steel MIG wire, and Table 8.2 shows 
the chemical composition (in wt.%) of 316L SS material. The fabricated 
sample was cleaned by face milling and the required tensile specimens were 
prepared using wire cut EDM. 
TABLE 8.1 Input Parameters for WAAM 316L SS Sample.
Input parameters for the WAAM process
Arc voltage (V) 14.1
Arc current (A) 150
Shielding gas 98% Argon +2% CO2
Wire feeding rate (m/min) 11
Shielding gas flow late (L/min) 20
TABLE 8.2 Chemical Composition of 316L SS MIG Machined Wire Spool.
Cr C Mo Si P Mn Ni S Fe
19.24 0.013 2.64 0.30 0.020 1.68 12.92 0.0021 Bal
FIGURE 8.1 Wire arc additive manufacturing setup.140 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
8.2.2 HEAT TREATMENTS 
The different heat treatment processes were conducted to improve the 
mechanical properties of wire arc additive manufactured 316L SS samples. 
The heat treatment temperature, holding time, and associated cooling 
methods are mentioned in Table 8.3.
TABLE 8.3 Heat Treatments Details for WAAM 316L SS Samples.
Sl.no. Temperature (°C) Holding t (h) Cooing method Remarks
1 650 1 Furnace Homogenization
2 800 1 Water quenching Homogenization 3 1000 1 Water quenching
4 1100 1 Water quenching Second phase solution 5 1200 1 Water quenching
8.2.3 TENSILE TEST
The heat-treated samples were cut into tensile samples with gauge lengths of 
30 mm, gauge widths of 12.5 mm, and gauge thicknesses of 2 mm as shown 
in Figure 8.2. All tensile samples were honed and polished to a mirror finish 
before being loaded to failure at 0.0025 1/s. The mechanical properties for 
the as-build WAAM 316L sample such as tensile strength, yield strength, and 
elongation are 585.5 MPa, 395.2MPa, and 28.92% in the horizontal direction 
and 552.7 MPa, 339.3 MPa, and 30.54% in the vertical direction, respec￾tively. The mechanical properties of different heat-treated WAAM 316L SS 
sample results are shown in Table 8.4.
FIGURE 8.2 Tensile test specimen preparation from WAAM 316L SS plate.Prediction of Mechanical Properties on Wire Arc Additive 141
TABLE 8.4 Mechanical Properties of AM 316L SS at Different Post-Heat Treatments.
Sl. 
no.
Temperature Direction Tensile strength 
(MPa)
Yield strength 
(MPa)
Elongation (%)
1 650°C H 612.7 370.9 26.51
2 650°C V 563.7 319.4 27.34
3 800°C H 593.4 295.4 30.15
4 800°C V 581.3 280.6 35.42
5 1000°C H 531.2 256.2 31.36
6 1000°C V 529.7 253.9 38.34
7 1100°C H 499.3 244.9 43.53
8 1100°C V 481.3 242.0 49.43
9 1200°C H 516.1 216.5 56.84
10 1200°C V 493.6 206.1 58.56
H, Horizontal; V, Vertical.
8.2.4 FUZZY LOGIC ALGORITHM
Artificial neural networks (ANNs) and fuzzy logic (FL) systems, two types 
of modeling and prediction methods, have gained popularity over the past 
two decades and have been used by many researchers in a wide range of 
engineering applications.8–13 The fuzzy logic system was introduced in the 
year of 1965 by Zadeh for predicting the mechanical behaviors of high￾voltage insulation cables. Zadeh developed the fuzzy set theory for found 
better prediction values of insulation cables.14 The Fuzzy Logic Toolbox 
adds capabilities for fuzzy logic system design to the MATLAB technical 
computing environment. Fuzzy inference system design is simplified with 
the help of graphical user interfaces (GUIs). Several widely used fuzzy logic 
procedures, such as fuzzy clustering and adaptive neuro-fuzzy learning, are 
implemented as functions.
Fuzzy logic is predicated on uncertainty, or more specifically on the 
fuzziness of human judgment when faced with non-numerical data. Human 
decision-making processes are modeled by fuzzy logic, which uses linguistic 
reasoning. Mathematical theory combining multivalued logic, probability 
theory, and artificial intelligence techniques forms the basis for fuzzy logic 
modeling, which can be applied to difficult problems. There are three main 
parts to the framework of a fuzzy inference system: the rule base, which 
stores the set of fuzzy rules, the database (or dictionary), which defines 
the membership functions employed by the fuzzy rules, and the reasoning 142 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
mechanism, which executes the inference procedure on the rules and the 
given facts to arrive at a reasonable output or conclusion.15,16
Each decision made by a fuzzy system is based on a set of linguistic 
variables that serve as inputs and outputs, respectively. IF-THEN rules 
are used to test the variables. where the rules asserted determine which 
response is generated. Each rule’s outputs are determined by computing the 
centroid of the responses and then weighing them according to the degree of 
membership of their inputs. Fuzzy logic technology equips expert systems 
and decision aids with strong deductive reasoning capacities. The fuzzifier 
uses membership functions to generate random values from the inputs, and it 
is constrained by a minimal set of rules. Fuzzy reasoning on fuzzy data can 
be used with the inference engine to produce a fuzzy value. The defuzzifier 
transforms the muddled value into a clean one. All numbers were converted 
to their corresponding linguistic values for use in the fuzzy modeling process. 
Fuzzy sets, such as low, low medium, medium, high medium, and high, are 
used to express the selected meaningful linguistic statements for each vari￾able. A membership function is used to represent the fuzziness of the input 
and output variables.
The following outlines the idea of fuzzy reasoning for a two-input and 
three-output fuzzy logic unit. There are two inputs (fuzzy variables) and three 
outputs (multi-objectives) (y1, y2, y3) that make up the fuzzy rule base.17
Rule 1: if x1 is A1 and x2 is B1 and x3 is C1 then y is D1 and z is F1 else
Rule 2: if x1 is A2 and x2 is B2 and x3 is C2 then y is D2 and z is F1 else
Rule n: if x1 is An and x2 is Bn and x3 is Cn then y is Dn and z is Fn.
In this chapter, we outline the framework of the fuzzy logic system that 
guided our research. There are now ten fuzzy rules in place. By taking the 
max–min compositional operation, the fuzzy reasoning of these rules yields 
a fuzzy output. If we give the fuzzy logic unit two values, x1, and x2, as 
inputs, the MF of the fuzzy reasoning’s output is y1, y2, and y3.
8.2.4.1 BUILDING A FUZZY INTERFACE SYSTEM
For the output vector, fuzzy inference uses user-defined rules to interpret 
the input vector’s values and then assigns those values. The Fuzzy Logic 
Toolbox contains the graphical user interface editors and viewers that can be 
used to construct rules sets, define membership functions, and examine the 
operation of a fuzzy inference system (FIS). These editing tools and viewing 
applications are provided for your convenience. The structure of the fuzzy 
logic system is shown in Figure 8.3.Prediction of Mechanical Properties on Wire Arc Additive 143
An FIS Editor will show you the fundamentals of a fuzzy inference 
system. Editor for Membership Functions-The FIS’s input and output vari￾ables can be modified via the membership functions, which are linked to 
them in the system’s variable editor. The Rule Editor allows you to view 
and modify fuzzy rules in three different formats: a full English-like syntax, 
a concise symbolic notation, and an indexed notation. The Rule Viewer 
provides a comprehensive analysis of FIS activity, allowing you to analyze 
the impact of adjusting input variables and debugging individual rules. The 
Surface Viewer creates a three-dimensional surface based on user input and 
the results of a fuzzy inference system.
8.2.4.2 FIS EDITOR
The FIS Editor was establishing the input and out responses based on the 
Mamdani method to generate a set of output variables based on the input 
FIGURE 8.3 Structure of the fuzzy logic system.144 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
variables shown in Figure 8.4. The temperature and build direction are taken 
as input parameters and tensile strength, yield strength, and elongation were 
taken as output responses. 
FIGURE 8.4 FIS editor.
8.3 RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
8.3.1 FUZZY LOGIC MEMBERSHIP FUNCTION MODELS
All the input and output variables were fuzzified using a membership func￾tion that was graphically designed in the toolbox. How each arbitrary coor￾dinate in the input space is converted into a membership value (or degree of 
membership) between 0 and 1 is specified by the fuzzy membership function. 
The Mamdani model utilized fuzzy variables for both input and output. In 
our case two input variables and three output variables were used to develop 
the membership functions. Fuzzification membership functions, both the 
event and the type of membership function, are heavily context dependent. 
Fuzzy sets for input variables are described by a membership function with a 
Gaussian distribution. Fuzzy set variables with triangular membership func￾tions produce the most accurate results. From among trapezoidal, Gaussian, 
and sigmoid membership functions, the triangular membership function 
was chosen because it yields the most reliable prediction model. Low, low 
medium, medium, high medium, and high are assumed to be inputs, while 
low, low medium, medium, high medium, and high are assumed to be output. 
The range of input parameters and input conditions for experimental data are 
shown in Tables 8.5 and 8.6. Using the triangular vector model, the input Prediction of Mechanical Properties on Wire Arc Additive 145 TABLE 8.5 Range of Input Parameters. Yield strength Elongation (%) Tensile strength Temperature Direction Yield strength (MPa) Condition Elongation (%) Condition Tensile strength (MPa) Condition Temperature (°C) Condition Direction Condition 200–240 Low 20–28 Low 480–510 Low 650 Low Horizontal Low 241–280 Low medium 29–37 Low medium 511–540 Low medium 800 Low medium Vertical High 281–320 Medium 38–46 Medium 541–570 Medium 1000 Medium 321–360 High medium 47–54 High medium 571–600 High medium 1100 High medium 361–400 High 55–65 High 601–630 High 1200 High TABLE 8.6 Input Conditions for Fuzzy Logic Analysis. Sl. no. Temperature Condition Direction Condition Tensile strength (MPa) Condition Yield strength (MPa) Condition Elongation (%) Condition 1 650°C L H L 612.7 H 370.9 H 26.51 L 2 650°C L V H 563.7 M 319.4 M 27.34 L 3 800°C LM H L 593.4 HM 295.4 M 30.15 LM 4 800°C LM V H 581.3 HM 280.6 LM 35.42 LM 5 1000°C M H L 531.2 LM 256.2 LM 31.36 LM 6 1000°C M V H 529.7 LM 253.9 LM 38.34 M 7 1100°C H M H L 499.3 L 244.9 LM 43.53 M 8 1100°C H M V H 481.3 L 242.0 LM 49.43 HM 9 1200°C H H L 516.1 LM 216.5 L 56.84 H 10 1200°C H V H 493.6 L 206.1 L 58.56 H H, High; M, Medium; L, Low.146 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
values and output values are graphed as the result. Figure 8.5 displays the 
membership plots.
FIGURE 8.5 Fuzzy Logic membership Function Models.
8.3.2 RULES EDITOR
In order to perform inference in a rule-based fuzzy model, an implication 
function must be used to represent the fuzzy propositions. Fuzzy if-then 
rules or fuzzy conditional statements perform the implication function. For 
the most part, the fuzzy If-Then rule looks like this 
If X is A then Y is B
In this case, A and B are fuzzy set representations of linguistic values. 
The information used to describe the behavior system is generalized using 
fuzzy sets. The If part of a rule is known as the premise, while the Then part 
is known as the consequence. The rules are generated and entered using the 
following Mat lab windows after various levels of input and output variables 
are formulated based on their correlation. Edit fuzzy rules in a full English￾like syntax, a concise symbolic notation, or an indexed notation with the 
Rule Editor. Figure 8.6 illustrates the editor window for fuzzy rules.
8.3.3 RULES VIEWER
The input values are entered into the fuzzy rules viewer and the output values 
are displayed instantly based on the training of the fuzzy system in Figure 
8.7.Prediction of Mechanical Properties on Wire Arc Additive 147
FIGURE 8.6 Rules editor.
FIGURE 8.7 Rules viewer.148 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
8.3.4 SURFACE VIEWS FOR FUZZY MODELING RESULTS
Figures 8.8(a–c) depict a surface view of the relationship between tempera￾ture and direction changes in terms of tensile strength, elongation, and yield 
strength. It can be seen in the figure that the optimal tensile strength occurs 
at a temperature and orientation somewhere in the middle. The predicted 
mechanical properties of AM 316L SS at post heat-treated temperatures of 
750 and 1150°C are shown in Table 8.7. 
FIGURE 8.8A Tensile strength between the variation of temperature and direction.
FIGURE 8.8B Yield strength between the variation of temperature and direction.Prediction of Mechanical Properties on Wire Arc Additive 149
FIGURE 8.8C Elongation between the variation of temperature and direction.
8.3.5 VALIDATION OF RESULTS
To obtain the accuracy of the Fuzzy model a set of four different input condi￾tions were tested to confirm the results. We compare the experimental values 
with the predicted values obtained from both the experiments and the fuzzy 
logic results. After applying eq (8.1) for mathematical model validation, the 
error percentage was determined.
Experimental value-Predicted value Absolute percentageerror= *100
Experimental value (8.1)
An evaluation of the fuzzy logic model’s precision was performed by 
calculating the error percentage of the dataset result. The experimental 
values, the measured tensile strength, yield strength, and elongation and the 
predicted values from the fuzzy model are shown in Table 8.7. In general, 
fuzzy models had a less than 0.7% margin of error when making predictions. 
The fuzzy logic model’s predictions of tensile strength were very close to the 
actual experimental values, as indicated by the average absolute percentage 
error level of 0.099% for tensile strength, 0.352% for yield strength, and 
0.689% for elongation. After comparing these results, the proposed fuzzy 150 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
logic model gives promising solutions for tensile strength, yield strength, 
and elongation.
FIGURE 8.9 Predicted mechanical properties of AM 316L SS at post heat-treated 
temperatures of 750 and 1150°C.
TABLE 8.7 Predicted Results from Fuzzy Logic and Experimental Values. Sl. no. Temperature (°C) Direction
Tensile strength 
(MPa) Yield strength (MPa) Elongation 
Experimental 
Fuzzy logic
Absolute % 
error
Experimental
Fuzzy logic
Absolute % 
error
Experimental
Fuzzy logic
Absolute % 
error
1 750 H 579 581 − 0.345 302 300 0.662 35 33 5.714
2 750 V 587 585 0.340 258 260 -0.775 32 33 − 3.125
3 1150 H 493 490 0.608 261 260 0.383 41.5 42 − 1.204
4 1150 V 489 490 − 0.204 263 260 1.140 51 50.3 1.372
Average absolute % error 0.099 0.352 0.689Prediction of Mechanical Properties on Wire Arc Additive 151
8.5 CONCLUSION
As an alternative to costly and time-consuming laboratory experiments, 
fuzzy logic can be used to predict how the process will perform when 
subjected to experimental parameters. With respectable error, the proposed 
Fuzzy Logic models reproduce the same nonlinear characteristics obtained 
in the laboratory, providing values that are very close to the experimental 
results. The predicted values from the fuzzy logic method were almost near 
to the experimental values for post-heated 750°C and 1150°C samples. 
KEYWORDS
• wire arc additive manufacturing
• heat treatments
• mechanical properties
• optimization
• fuzzy logic
REFERENCES
1. Knofius, N.; van der Heijden, M. C.; Zijm, W. H. M. Consolidating Spare Parts for Asset 
Maintenance with Additive Manufacturing. Int. J. Prod. Econ. 2019, 208, 269–280. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.IJPE.2018.11.007.
2. Gao, W.; Zhang, Y.; Ramanujan, D.; Ramani, K.; Chen, Y.; Williams, C. B.; Wang, 
C. C. L.; Shin, Y. C.; Zhang, S.; Zavattieri, P. D. The Status, Challenges, and Future 
of Additive Manufacturing in Engineering. Comput. Des. 2015, 69, 65–89. https://doi.
org/10.1016/J.CAD.2015.04.001.
3. Srivastava, S.; Garg, R. K.; Sharma, V. S.; Sachdeva, A. Measurement and Mitigation 
of Residual Stress in Wire-Arc Additive Manufacturing: A Review of Macro-Scale 
Continuum Modelling Approach. Arch. Comput. Methods Eng. 2020, 28 (5), 3491–3515. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/S11831-020-09511-4.
4. Yakout, M.; Elbestawi, M. A.; Veldhuis, S. C. On the Characterization of Stainless Steel 
316L Parts Produced by Selective Laser Melting. Int. J. Adv. Manuf. Technol. 2017, 95
(5), 1953–1974. https://doi.org/10.1007/S00170-017-1303-0.
5. Wang, L.; Xue, J.; Wang, Q. Correlation Between Arc Mode, Microstructure, and 
Mechanical Properties during Wire Arc Additive Manufacturing of 316L Stainless Steel. 
Mater. Sci. Eng. A 2019, 751, 183–190. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.MSEA.2019.02.078.152 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
6. Asadi, S.; Hadavandi, E.; Mehmanpazir, F.; Nakhostin, M. M. Hybridization of 
Evolutionary Levenberg–Marquardt Neural Networks and Data Pre-Processing for Stock 
Market Prediction. Knowl.-Based Syst. 2012, 35, 245–258. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.
KNOSYS.2012.05.003.
7. Nilashi, M.; Ibrahim, O.; Reza Mirabi, V.; Ebrahimi, L.; Zare, M. The Role of Security, 
Design and Content Factors on Customer Trust in Mobile Commerce. J. Retail. Consum. 
Serv. 2015, 26, 57–69. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JRETCONSER.2015.05.002.
8. Özger, M. Prediction of Ocean Wave Energy from Meteorological Variables by Fuzzy 
Logic Modeling. Expert Syst. Appl. 2011, 38 (5), 6269–6274. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.
ESWA.2010.11.090.
9. Benli, H. Determination of Thermal Performance Calculation of Two Different Types 
Solar Air Collectors with the Use of Artificial Neural Networks. Int. J. Heat Mass Transf. 
2013, 60, 1–7. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.IJHEATMASSTRANSFER.2012.12.042.
10. Kuşan, H.; Aytekin, O.; Özdemir, I. The Use of Fuzzy Logic in Predicting House 
Selling Price. Expert Syst. Appl. 2010, 37 (3), 1808–1813. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.
ESWA.2009.07.031.
11. Jayabal, S.; Rajamuneeswaran, S.; Ramprasath, R.; Balaji, N. S. Artificial Neural 
Network Modeling of Mechanical Properties of Calcium Carbonate Impregnated 
Coir-Polyester Composites. Trans. Indian Inst. Met. 2013, 66 (3), 247–255. https://doi.
org/10.1007/S12666-013-0255-9/FIGURES/16.
12. Balaji, N. S.; Jayabal, S. Artificial Neural Network Modeling of Mechanical Behaviors 
of Zea Fiber-Polyester Composites. Proc. Inst. Mech. Eng. Part E J. Process Mech. Eng. 
2016, 230 (1), 45–55. https://doi.org/10.1177/0954408914539939/ASSET/IMAGES/
LARGE/10.1177_0954408914539939-FIG2.JPEG.
13. Balaji, N. S.; Jayabal, S.; Kalyana Sundaram, S. A Neural Network Based Prediction 
Modeling for Machinability Characteristics of Zea Fiber-Polyester Composites. Trans. 
Indian Inst. Met. 2016, 69 (4), 881–889. https://doi.org/10.1007/S12666-015-0571-3/
FIGURES/11.
14. Zadeh, L. A. Fuzzy Sets. Inf. Control 1965, 8 (3), 338–353. https://doi.org/10.1016/
S0019-9958(65)90241-X.
15. Yilmaz, O.; Eyercioglu, O.; Gindy, N. N. Z. A User-Friendly Fuzzy-Based System for 
the Selection of Electro Discharge Machining Process Parameters. J. Mater. Process. 
Technol. 2006, 172 (3), 363–371. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JMATPROTEC.2005.09.023.
16. Jang, J.-S. R.; Sun, C.-T.; Mizutani, E. Neuro-Fuzzy and Soft Computing-A 
Computational Approach to Learning and Machine Intelligence [Book Review] 
Network Analysis View Project. Artic. IEEE Trans. Autom. Control 1997. https://doi.
org/10.1109/TAC.1997.633847.
17. Lin, J. L.; Wang, K. S.; Yan, B. H.; Tarng, Y. S. Optimization of the Electrical Discharge 
Machining Process Based on the Taguchi Method with Fuzzy Logics. J. Mater. Process. 
Technol. 2000, 102 (1–3), 48–55. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0924-0136(00)00438-6.Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes. 
Sandip Kunar, Prasenjit Chatterjee, and M. Sreenivas Reddy (Eds.)
© 2025 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
APPLICATION OF TAGUCHI COUPLED 
WITH OVERALL EVOLUTION 
CRITERIA IN FRICTION STIR WELDING 
PROCESS FOR PROCESS PARAMETERS 
OPTIMIZATION
B. SINGARAVEL1, T. NIRANJAN1, K. DEEPA2, CH. ANUSHA1, and 
M. MONISH REDDY1
1Department of Mechanical Engineering, Vignan Institute of 
Technology and Science, Hyderabad, India
2Department of Mechanical Engineering, Christian Brothers University, 
Memphis, TN, USA
CHAPTER 9
ABSTRACT
The friction stir welding (FSW) process is categorized as a solid-state welding 
process. The significant advantages of the FSW process are no melting, 
chemical reaction, secondary phase formation, and microstructure-controlled 
welding process. Also, it can be classified as an eco-friendly process due 
to the absence of smoke and sparks. In FSW, tool material and process 
parameters significantly influence the process performance. Optimization of 
process parameters plays an important role in improving the effectiveness 
of a particular process. In this work, an optimization process is carried out 
for the estimation of optimum tool materials and process parameters using 
the Taguchi-based overall evaluation criteria (OEC) in FSW. Tool materials 
considered are carbon steel, H13 tool steel, and high-carbon high-chromium 
steel. The process parameters considered are tool rotational speed and 154 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
traverse feed. Taguchi L9 orthogonal matrix is selected for performing the 
experiments. Tensile strength and microhardness of the FSW samples are 
considered as response parameters. The optimized results of 700 rpm rota￾tional speed and 25 mm/min tool feed with H13 tool steel are obtained using 
Taguchi coupled with OEC. The results of the optimization process showed a 
better combination of input and output parameters. Also, the steps involved in 
the Taguchi-based OEC are simple to understand and easy to execute.
9.1 INTRODUCTION
FSW is categorized as a solid-state welding process in which generated heat 
is used to soften the base material and develop recrystallization grain. In 
FSW, newly formed grain is refined in nature when compared with the base 
material and provides good mechanical properties. The important advantage 
of the FSW process is microstructure-controlled welding. Another significant 
advantage is that there is no secondary phase formation or chemical reaction. 
It can be categorized as an eco-friendly process due to the absence of smoke, 
sparks, and fluxes.1–3
The process efficiency can be enhanced by optimizing its process param￾eters. The Taguchi method is a basic and standard optimization technique, 
but it can be used to solve a single objective optimization problem. The 
Taguchi steps include the selection of an orthogonal array, calculation of the 
signal-to-noise ratio, and the estimation of process parameter significance.4, 
5 But in real-time applications, all engineering problems need to be solved 
simultaneously. Hence, multiobjective optimization techniques play a 
significant role in the enhancement of process efficiency.6–8 Generally, the 
Taguchi technique is coupled with the gray relation method, the utility idea, 
and the approach of the desirability function. Based on this direction, the 
Taguchi method is coupled with the overall evaluation criteria (OEC). OEC 
converts multicriteria into single-equivalent criteria.9–13
9.2 LITERATURE REVIEW
Boukra et al.14 used Taguchi and gray relational analysis (GRA) methods to 
optimize process parameters in the FSW process. The consequences of input 
parameters on output parameters were investigated. The results of the experi￾ments showed the effectiveness of the process. Vijayan et al.15 used the Taguchi–
GRA method for optimization of the FSW process condition. Input parameters 
considered were force, tool rotational speed, and traverse speed. Response Application of Taguchi Coupled with Overall Evolution Criteria 155
parameters were the tensile strength and power consumption. The result revealed 
that optimized parameters improved performance in terms of minimized power 
consumption and a high value of tensile strength. Kumar et al.16 studied the 
effect of tool materials on FSW process. Tungsten-based two different tools were 
considered. The result revealed that tungsten lanthanum oxide performed better 
in terms of mechanical strength and microstructural properties. Singarapu et al.17
used different tool materials for performance comparison in FSW of magnesium 
alloy. Tool material performance on new grain formation and mechanical prop￾erties were investigated. Tool materials, such as rustless steel, H13 steel, and 
high-speed steel, were considered. The result observed was that rustless steel as 
a tool material performed better than other tools.
Krishna and Patowari9 used the Taguchi-based optimization tool for 
process parameter optimization in the electric discharge coating process. In 
their work, electric discharge coating was performed for surface modifica￾tion. A Taguchi-based design procedure was adopted for performing as well 
as analyzing the experimental results. ANOVA was performed for the estima￾tion of the significance of process parameters. The optimized result observed 
that an appropriate percentage of material was coated to target. Ashok et al.10
investigated the powder-mixed spark erosion process. Taguchi steps coupled 
with OEC were used to optimize the process parameters. Nanopowder 
Al2O3 was mixed with dielectric fluid in a ratio of 2% wt. An investigation 
on response parameters by considering process parameters influence was 
carried out. The results revealed that the powder-mixed spark erosion process 
was improved with optimized parameters. The Taguchi-based OEC method 
was easy to execute and solved multiple objective problems simultaneously. 
Oztop et al.11 conducted a fry of potato slices using the microwave process. 
Process parameters (power, fry time, and oil type) of the microwave oven 
were optimized with the help of the Taguchi-coupled OEC approach. The 
result of optimization showed that less oil was observed with fried pota￾toes when compared with conventionally fried potatoes. Wangikar et al.12
conducted a photochemical machining process on copper, and optimization 
steps were used to obtain better process parameters using the hybrid Taguchi 
and OEC technique. The result of optimization was matched with the need of 
industrial standards. Shukla et al.13 used a hybrid Taguchi and OEC approach 
to optimize the process parameters for forming characteristics. ANOVA was 
performed to find the significant outcome of cutting conditions on form￾ability. A new matrix model was developed and analyzed with hybrid Taguchi 
and OEC. The result concluded that improved performance was noticed 
with optimized parameters. From the past literature, it has been noticed that 156 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
limited studies have been reported using the Taguchi technique coupled with 
the OEC approach, and very few studies are reported, particularly in the area 
of machinability. Hence, an effort has been made to optimize the process 
parameters with the help of Taguchi coupled with OEC.
9.3 EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
The friction stir welding (FSW) process is mostly suitable for aluminum 
alloys. It works below the melting point of the work material. Generally, 
joining aluminum alloys by the fusion method leads to weld solidification 
cracks due to low melting eutectics. Al-6061 T6-grade aluminum alloy 
is used as a workpiece. It is a light-weight material widely used in rail 
coach, shipbuilding, automobile, and aerospace applications. It has better 
mechanical properties such as corrosion resistance and weldability. The 
FSW process is performed using the vertical machining center (VMC). 
Figure 9.1 shows the VMC setup. The welding direction is normal to the 
rotating direction. Joints are prepared using single-pass welding. Three 
different tool materials are used, namely carbon steel, H13 tool steel, and 
high-carbon high-chromium steel. The process parameters selected are tool 
rotational speed and traverse feed. Table 9.1 presents the process parameters 
selected in FSW. Tensile strength and microhardness of welded joints are 
considered as response parameters. A tensile test specimen is prepared based 
on ASTM-E8-04. Wire-cut electric discharge machining (EDM) is used for 
the preparation of tensile samples, and a universal tensile testing (UTM) 
machine is used for conducting tensile tests. Figure 9.2a and b shows the 
setup for wire EDM and UTM. The microhardness of the welded samples is 
measured using a Vickers microhardness testing machine. Figure 9.3a and b 
shows the testing facility of microhardness measurement. Table 9.2 shows 
the experimental results.
TABLE 9.1 Process Parameters Levels.
Parameters/levels Level 1 Level 2 Level 3
Tool materials Carbon steel H13 tool steel High-carbon high-chromium steel
Tool rotational speed in rpm 700 900 1100
Welding speed in mm/min 25 35 45Application of Taguchi Coupled with Overall Evolution Criteria 157
FIGURE 9.1 Vertical machining center.
FIGURE 9.2 FSW sample and preparation for testing.
FIGURE 9.3 Testing facilities.158 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
TABLE 9.2 Experimental Results.
Sl. 
no.
Tool material Tool rotational 
speed in rpm
Welding speed 
in mm/min
Tensile strength 
in N/mm2
Microhardness 
in VHN
1 Carbon steel 700 25 125 192
2 Carbon steel 900 35 108 153
3 Carbon steel 1100 45 92 124
4 H13 tool steel 700 35 235 268
5 H13 tool steel 900 45 214 292
6 H13 tool steel 1100 25 198 240
7 High-carbon high￾chromium steel 700 45 160 182
8 High-carbon high￾chromium steel 900 25 201 210
9 High-carbon high￾chromium steel 1100 35 155 165
9.4 METHODOLOGY
Optimization is the process of estimating the maximization or minimiza￾tion function by considering the variables continuously. In the optimization 
process, single and multiple objective problems are the inside classifications. 
The Taguchi method is a popular unique optimization technique for solving a 
single objective problem. But in real time, application problems are related to 
multiple objectives. Hence, researchers are attempting to consider the Taguchi 
concept coupled with gray concept, the utility idea, and the desirability 
approach. In this investigation, we made an effort on the Taguchi concept 
coupled with OEC for optimization of the FSW process. OEC can be defined 
as when a process needs to satisfy multiple responses, then the samples are 
tested under each trial condition with a multicriteria evaluation. This multicri￾teria evaluation can be converted into a single equivalent function.9–13
Step: 1 Input and output parameters
In this work, tool rotational speed and welding speed are considered as input 
parameters. The tensile load and microhardness of the welded samples are 
the output parameters.
Step: 2 Experimental design
Three levels of input parameters are selected. Taguchi L9 designs of experi￾ments are selected to conduct the experiments.
Step: 3 Estimation of signal-to-noise (S/N) ratio
In this work, output parameters are considered as maximization types 
(microhardness and tensile strength of the welded joint).Application of Taguchi Coupled with Overall Evolution Criteria 159
Equation 9.1 is utilized for the calculation of the S/N ratio.
10 2
1`
1 1 / 10
n
i ij
S N log
n y =
  = −    ∑ (9.1)
where n indicates the number of replications and y indicates the corresponding 
output parameter. Table 9.3 shows the estimated S/N ratio.
Step: 4 Calculation of OEC
Quality characteristics enhancement is performed to improve the process 
performance. The important task is to consider the important combinations 
of possible evaluation measures. Then these possible multiple measures are 
converted into single comparable measures. OEC is used to find the single, 
comparable measure function by considering the normalization of output 
data and multiplying it by its relative weight. Equal weightage is considered 
for response parameters. In OEC, output data are normalized and considered 
to have relative importance with respect to individual criteria. The following 
equation (eq 9.2) is considered for OEC estimation.
( )
( )
( )
( ) 1 2
11 2 2
OEC RW RW
11 2 2
SW S W
BW B W
   − − = ×+ ×    − −    (9.2)
where W represents the minimum value, B represents the maximum value, 
RW represents relative importance, S represents the sample value, 1 repre￾sents the S/N ratio for tensile strength, and 2 represents the S/N ratio for 
microhardness. RW represents the relative weights of selected output param￾eters. Table 9.4 shows the evaluation criteria and their description. Tables 9.5 
and 9.6 show the estimated OEC values and their means.
TABLE 9.3 S/N Ratio Value of Response Measurement.
Sl. 
no.
Tool material Tool rotational 
speed in rpm
Welding speed 
in mm/min
S/N value of 
tensile strength 
S/N value of 
microhardness 
1 Carbon steel 700 25 41.93 45.66
2 Carbon steel 900 35 40.66 43.69
3 Carbon steel 1100 45 39.27 41.86
4 H13 tool steel 700 35 47.42 48.56
5 H13 tool steel 900 45 46.60 49.30
6 H13 tool steel 1100 25 45.93 47.60
7 High-carbon high-chromium steel 700 45 44.08 45.20
8 High-carbon high-chromium steel 900 25 46.06 46.44
9 High-carbon high-chromium steel 1100 35 43.80 44.34160 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
TABLE 9.4 Evaluation Criteria and Their Description.
Criterion Maximum 
S/N value
Minimum S/N 
value
Relative 
importance in %
Objective type
Tensile strength 47.42 39.27 50 Maximization
Microhardness 49.30 41.86 50 Maximization
TABLE 9.5 Estimated OEC Value.
Exp. No OEC
1 0.4186
2 0.2081
3 0.012
4 0.9499
5 0.95009
6 0.7941
7 0.5190
8 0.7242
9 0.4448
TABLE 9.6 Mean Table for OEC.
Parameters Level 1 Level 2 Level 3
Tool materials 0.2089 0.8980 0.5627
Tool rotational speed 0.6292 0.6274 0.4130
Welding speed 0.6456 0.5343 0.4897
Step: 5 ANOVA
The main significant effect of individual input parameters (output 
control, percentage contribution, and error) in terms of percentage on 
output parameters is determined through ANOVA. It involves degree of 
freedom (DOF), sum of squares (SS), mean square (MS), and percentage 
contribution (P). The significance of the parameter effects of OEC 
using ANOVA is shown in Table 9.7. The result of ANOVA indicated a 
percentage contribution to output parameters. It is noticed that tool mate￾rial has 59%, tool rotation speed has 18%, followed by welding speed of 
about 14%.Application of Taguchi Coupled with Overall Evolution Criteria 161
TABLE 9.7 ANOVA Results for OEC.
Source of variation DOF Sum of squares Mean square F ratio %
Tool material 2 432.435 216.2175 6.955873 59.02
Tool rotational speed 2 135.0393 67.51965 2.172156 18.43
Welding speed 2 102.9998 51.4999 1.656789 14.05
Error 2 62.16833 31.08417 2.172156 8.48
Total 2 135.0393 67.51965 100
9 − 1 = 8 732.6425
9.5 RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
In this work, an attempt at the FSW process with different cutting tool mate￾rials and process parameters is investigated. Cutting tool materials (carbon 
steel, H13 tool steel, and high-carbon high-chromium steel) and process 
parameters (tool rotational speed and welding speed) are selected. The tensile 
strength and microhardness of the FSW process samples are estimated. The 
Taguchi-based OEC technique was used to optimize process parameters. 
ANOVA is utilized for the estimation of significant process parameters.
The Taguchi-coupled OEC method is considered based on its overall 
evolution criteria value. The value of the mean table in OEC is used to 
predict the optimum combination of process parameters and tool material. 
The optimum process parameters using Taguchi-based OEC are 700 rpm 
of rotational speed and 25 mm/min of welding speed with H13 tool steel. 
Tensile strength of 235 N/mm2 and microhardness of 268 VHN are the 
optimum conditions. It is understood that good pulsating action and finely 
strengthened material formation occur with welded joints. Similar results 
were obtained by Elangovan et al.22 Figure 9.4 indicates the microstructure 
observation after FSW at optimum conditions. The result of microstructure 
showed a fine-grained microstructure. It is noticed that the fine-grained 
microstructure and appropriate material flow at the optimum condition of 
the FSW sample. H13 tool steel consists of a high value of hot hardness, 
which is used to prevent thermal fatigue cracking. This will be useful when 
cyclic heat and cooling cycles are involved. These combined advantages of 
hot hardness, toughness, and thermal fatigue crack of H13 tool steel perform 
better than other tool materials.162 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
FIGURE 9.4 Microstructure of welded sample at optimum condition.
The optimized results revealed that pulsating action and stir action 
were effective. The result of the microstructure proved that fine-equiaxed 
material flowed after FSW. The tensile strength and hardness of the FSW 
samples are significantly influenced by tool rotational speed and traverse 
feed. A high range of welding speed leads to a low value of tensile strength 
due to less stirring action. In the case of a low value of welding speed, it 
involves a higher temperature and a lower cooling rate. It is understood that 
tool rotational speed with increased traverse feed is used to decrease the 
axial force involved and ensure proper material flow. The result of tensile 
strength is higher in a low range of tool rotational speed, and vice versa.
The pulsating action of the tool significantly influences the dynamic volume 
compared to the static volume. It influences grain refinement and annealing 
while welding.23 The significant benefits are noticed with Taguchi-based 
OEC as simple execution and more analytic than other methods. Also, it 
does not involve any assumption of constant parameters, which is involved 
in other optimization methods.
9.6 CONCLUSION
The FSW process is performed on the Al-6061 T6 alloy, and the optimization 
process is carried out using the Taguchi-based OEC approach.
1. FSW results are analyzed using OEC coupled with Taguchi steps. 
According to Taguchi-based OEC, 700 rpm of tool rotational speed 
and 25 mm/min of welding speed with H13 tool steel are obtained.Application of Taguchi Coupled with Overall Evolution Criteria 163
2. An optimal combination of results such as tensile strength (235 N/
mm2) and microhardness (268 VHN) is observed. It is shown that 
appropriate material flow and stirring action happened with a 700 
rpm tool rotational speed and 25 mm/min of traverse feed with 
H13 tool steel. The results of tensile strength and microhardness 
are observed to be higher at low ranges of tool rotational speed and 
traverse feed.
3. Tool material and its hardness play a significant role in the coefficient 
of friction and heat generation. It leads to better pulsating action, stir 
action, and appropriate material flow.
4. Microstructure analysis is carried out on the FSW sample to evaluate 
the weld quality with optimum condition. It is noticed that the refine￾ment structure is fine after FSW.
5. Taguchi-coupled OEC is successfully used to optimize process 
parameters in the FSW. This method can be used to solve multiple 
objectives problems effectively. It has the advantages of less compu￾tation time, simple execution, and no assumption constant.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the AICTE-MODROB scheme for providing 
funding support. Ref No: F.No: 9-226/IDC/MODROB/Policy-1/2019-20.
KEYWORDS
• FSW
• tool material
• process parameters
• optimization
• Taguchi-coupled OEC
REFERENCES
1. Singh, R. P.; Dubey, S.; Singh, A.; Kumar, S. A Review Paper on Friction Stir Welding 
Process. Mater Today Proc. 2021, 38, 6–11.
2. Gite, R. A.; Loharkar, P. K; Shimpi, R. Friction Stir Welding Parameters and Application: 
A Review. MaterToday Proc. 2019, 19, 361–365.164 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
3. Soori, M.; Asmael, M.; Solyal, D. Recent Development in Friction Stir Welding Process: 
A Review. SAE Int J Mater Manuf. 2020, 14, 63–80.
4. Singaravel, B.; Selvaraj, T. Optimization of Machining Parameters in Turning Operation 
Using Combined TOPSIS and AHP Method. Teh Vjesn. 2015, 22, 1475–1480.
5. Singaravel, B.; Selvaraj, T. Application of Taguchi Method for Optimization of 
Parameters in Turning Operation. J. Manuf. Sci. Eng. 2016, 16, 183–187.
6. Sandiri, D.; Malkapuram, R.; Balasubramaniyan, S. Experimental Investigation of 
Textured Inserts on Machining Performance of Al-MMC Using Taguchi Method. Tribo 
Ind. 2022, 44, 54.
7. Singaravel, B.; Selvaraj T. Multi Criteria Optimisation Using Analytic Hierarchy 
Process in Turning Operation. IJMMM. 2017, 19, 218–229.
8. Singaravel, B.; Shankar, D. P.; Prasanna, L. Application of MCDM Method for the 
Selection of Optimum Process Parameters in Turning Process. Mater Today Proc. 2018,
5, 13464–13471.
9. Eswara Krishna, M.; Patowari, P. K. Parametric Optimisation of Electric Discharge 
Coating Process with Powder Metallurgy Tools Using Taguchi Analysis. Surf. Eng.
2013, 29, 703–711.
10. Ashok, M.; Niranjan, T.; Chokalingam, S.; Singaravel, B. Investigation of Powder 
Mixed Electrical Discharge Machining and Process Parameters Optimization using 
Taguchi Based Overall Evaluation Criteria. IOP Conf. Ser. Mater Sci. Eng. 2021, 1057,
012075.
11. Oztop, M. H.; Sahin, S.; Sumnu, G. Optimization of Microwave Frying of Potato Slices 
by using Taguchi Technique. J. Food Eng. 2007, 79, 83–91.
12. Wangikar, S. S.; Patowari, P. K.; Misra, R. D. Parametric Optimization for Photochemical 
Machining of Copper using Overall Evaluation Criteria. Mater Today Proc. 2018, 5, 
4736–4742.
13. Shukla, A. K.; Raghu, T.; Rajesham, S.; Balasundar, I. Analysis of Significant 
Parameters Influencing Formability of Titanium Alloy by using Over all Evaluation 
Criteria and New Matrix model Based on Taguchi Method. Trans. Indian Inst. Met. 
2014, 67, 721–730.
14. Boukraa, M.; Chekifi, T.; Lebaal, N. Friction Stir Welding of Aluminum Using a Multi￾Objective Optimization Approach Based on Both Taguchi Method and Grey Relational 
Analysis. Exp Tech. 2022, 1–15.
15. Vijayan, S.; Raju, R.; Rao, S. K. Multiobjective Optimization of Friction Stir Welding 
Process Parameters on Aluminum Alloy AA 5083 Using Taguchi-Based Grey Relation 
Analysis. Mater Manuf Process. 2010, 25, 1206–1212.
16. Kumar, S. S.; Murugan, N.; Ramachandran, K. K. Influence of Tool Material on 
Mechanical and Microstructural Properties of Friction Stir Welded 316L Austenitic 
Stainless Steel Butt Joints. Int. J. Refract. Hard Met. 2016, 58, 196–205.
17. Singarapu, U.; Adepu, K.; Arumalle, S. R. Influence of Tool Material and Rotational 
Speed on Mechanical Properties of Friction Stir Welded AZ31B Magnesium Alloy. J. 
Magnes Alloy. 2015, 3, 335–344.
18. Elangovan, K.; Balasubramanian, V.; Valliappan, M. Effect of Tool Pin Profile and Tool 
Rotational Speed on Mechanical Properties of Friction Stir Welded AA6061 Aluminium 
Alloy. Mater Manuf. Process. 2008, 23, 251–260.Application of Taguchi Coupled with Overall Evolution Criteria 165
19. Elangovan, K.; Balasubramanian, V.; Valliappan, M. Influences of Tool Pin Profile and 
Axial Force on the Formation of Friction Stir Processing Zone in AA6061 Aluminium 
Alloy. J. Adv. Manuf. Technol. 2008, 38, 285–295.
20. Elangovan, K.; Balasubramanian, V. Influences of Tool Pin Profile and Welding Speed 
on the Formation of Friction Stir Processing Zone in AA2219 Aluminium Alloy. J. 
Mater Process Technol. 2008, 200, 163–175.
21. Elangovan, K.; Balasubramanian, V. Influences of Tool Pin Profile and Tool Shoulder 
Diameter on the Formation of Friction Stir Processing Zone in AA6061 Aluminium 
Alloy. Mater Des. 2008, 29, 362–373.
22. Kumar, A.; Raju, L. S. Influence of Tool Pin Profiles on Friction Stir Welding of Copper. 
Mater Manuf. Process. 2012, 27, 1414–1418.
23. Padmanaban, G.; Balasubramanian, V. Selection of FSW Tool Pin Profile, Shoulder 
Diameter and Material for Joining AZ31B Magnesium Alloy–an Experimental 
Approach. Mater Des. 2009, 30, 2647–2656.Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes. 
Sandip Kunar, Prasenjit Chatterjee, and M. Sreenivas Reddy (Eds.)
© 2025 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
RECENT DEVELOPMENTS AND 
OPTIMIZATION IN ADDITIVE 
MANUFACTURING OF ALUMINUM 
ALLOYS
VARNIT JAIN, PRERONA SAHA, ABHISHEK GHOSH, 
ARKAJIT GHOSH, KALYAN DAS, UTTAM KUMAR MURMU, and 
MANOJIT GHOSH
Department of Metallurgy and Materials Engineering, Indian Institute 
of Engineering Science and Technology, Shibpur, India
CHAPTER 10
ABSTRACT
Additive manufacturing is one of the most innovative engineering 
breakthroughs in recent history. Its applications are many in scientific 
and technical domains. AM was originally produced using stereolithog￾raphy, and it has been the subject of ongoing study ever since. Various 
new AM techniques have been created on a regular basis to improve 
the efficiency of this manufacturing approach. Selective laser melting, 
which involves melting off a specific portion of the substrate using a 
high-power laser, is one of the most extensively used AM processes. 
This manufacturing technique offers a lot of potential for large-scale 
industrial manufacture of highly complicated mechanical parts of 
sophisticated machines in the future. AM has also made its way into 
biomedical engineering and nanotechnology, where it may be used to 
fabricate sophisticated technologies.168 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
10.1 INTRODUCTION
10.1.1 ADDITIVE MANUFACTURING (AM)
Additive manufacturing (AM), or 3D printing, is now evolving at a very high 
rate. It is finding its way into almost every aspect of the modern era. In recent 
times, a lot of development has been done to manufacture complex parts or 
structures out of metallic materials such as titanium, aluminum, and even 
steel. As defined by ASTM, AM is “a process of joining materials to make an 
object from 3D model data, usually layer upon layer, as opposed to subtrac￾tive manufacturing methodologies.”1 It has been dubbed with several names, 
such as layered manufacturing (LM) and rapid prototyping (RP). In simpler 
terms, it involves a layering of the desired material to manufacture a unique 
part or a whole complex system. These desired materials can be of any type, 
be it metallic, polymer, carbon-based, or even biological.2 Even though work 
and research on AM date back as far as the mid-80s, only recently has it been 
used on a grand scale. In 1987, Charles “Chuck” Hull developed the first 
stereolithographic file from a computer-aided design (CAD) file that could 
be 3D printed into a final product. Ever since then, the AM industry has been 
one of the fastest-growing sectors.
In comparison to traditional manufacturing processes, AM is relatively 
new in this field; in the mid-1990s, the rapid prototyping market for AM 
reached $1 billion.3 Since it’s a recently developed technique, there are 
various constraints that are still to be worked upon.
10.1.2 ADVANTAGES AND DISADVANTAGES OF ADDITIVE 
MANUFACTURING
Being one of the recent manufacturing processes, AM has an edge over other 
conventional manufacturing processes as it was designed to overcome the 
problems faced in other manufacturing processes. One of the major problems 
faced by the manufacturers was the crafting of new parts of manufacturing 
machines for a specific complex system design. AM provides users the 
ability to design and develop without any prior tooling of the AM machine. 
This reduced tooling helps to reduce production costs significantly, and the 
major cost for AM is just the maintenance cost of the additive machine. These 
huge cost savings are one of the main reasons that AM has caught the atten￾tion of so many industries. In conventional methods, if the required tooling 
part cannot be developed, then the required design might not be feasible 
to manufacture. This does not happen with the AM; it has complete design Recent Developments and Optimization in Additive Manufacturing 169
freedom. The freedom of design in AM makes it easier to create lightweight 
and strong parts. Another perk of AM is that the part constructed via AM is 
a near-shaped product, so the waste produced during the process is minimal 
and can easily be recycled for redeposition. When comparing conventional 
methods and AM, as the complexity of the desired product increases, the 
cost per part also increases, and AM reduces this cost with its minimal waste 
production and external tooling requirements.
The material being used for the process depends majorly on the type of 
AM process itself. Researchers have been trying to develop various compos￾ites with astonishing properties, as AM provides the flexibility to manufac￾ture with any sort of material. Even though there is no extra cost for external 
tooling equipment, AM does require an initial cost for setting up an AM 
printer. This could be a heavy expense for small-scale manufacturers. One 
of the other major issues reported for AM is the irregular surface finishing 
postproduction. Products crafted via the AM route require proper polishing 
and surface finishing after they have been manufactured.
It is quite visible that AM has started to be incorporated into heavy manufac￾turing such as aeronautics, automotive, and ballistics due to its ability to create 
lightweight and strong parts. Tekinalp H et al.4 developed a highly oriented 
carbon fiber polymer composite through AM. The developed composite 
displayed excellent tensile strength compared to being crafted via conventional 
methods. Dickson A. et al.5 were able to fabricate continuous carbon, glass, and 
Kevlar fiber-reinforced polymer composites using AM. Hu Y et al. wrote an 
amazing review on laser deposition AM of ceramics-reinforced metal matrix.
10.1.3 APPLICATIONS OF AM IN ALUMINUM INDUSTRY
Aluminum has always been looked upon due to its astonishing properties 
and vast applications in almost every field. Its properties coincide with the 
need for lightweight, high-strength, and inexpensive materials. Aluminum 
and its alloys are being extensively used to manufacture aeronautical, auto￾motive, and large industrial equipment. One of the benefits that AM has over 
conventional casting is the heightened cooling rate.
The rapid cooling rate of AM helps in refining the microstructures of 
aluminum during the manufacturing process itself.6,7 This is not possible 
during casting, in which chemical modifiers are integrated together with cast 
alloys to improve their strength. Another observation of AM of aluminum 
is the formation of metastable phases.8 These phases include amorphous 
structures developed due to quick solidifying alloys, and depending on the 170 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
addition of alloying elements and their composition, even at a moderate rate 
of cooling, the formation of quasicrystal line phases has been observed.
Compared to other alloys, AM of aluminum alloys is constrained due to 
several factors, such as low powder flowability, poor absorptivity of aluminum 
alloys at certain wavelengths of lasers, the formation of surface oxide, and 
high thermal conductivity of the material. Recently, researchers are trying 
to overcome these restrictions by developing Al–Si alloys. Silicon helps 
improve flowability and provides strength to the final synthesized material.9
10.1.4 DIFFERENT TYPES OF AM TECHNIQUES
10.1.4.1 FUSED DEPOSITION MODELING (FDM)
One of the most cost-effective AM processes includes feeding a thin filament 
of plastic to the machine, which further melts it at the printing head and 
extrudes the melted plastic to a thickness of around 0.25 mm. This is one of 
the simplest and earliest methods of AM. FDM does have some disadvan￾tages as well. Compared to other AM methods, the resolution in the Z axis is 
very small. Another disadvantage is the postprocessing of the manufactured 
part, which can take a long time, in some cases, days to develop complex 
parts. FDM offers two modes of manufacturing; these include dense mode 
and sparse mode. The dense mode provides high-quality products but takes 
up time, whereas the sparse mode compensates for the time by reducing the 
mechanical properties of the final product.
10.1.4.2 3DP
Licensed by MIT, this process is very similar to inkjet printing, which is 
applied to two-dimensional paper printing. A water-based binder is thrown 
at the starch-based powder through a jet. The design is printed from the data 
provided by a CAD. The powder materials are kept on a bed, and they bind 
as soon as the binder from the jet interacts. This process has been known to 
handle a wide variety of polymers as the base material.10
10.1.4.3 SELECTIVE LASER MELTING (SLM)
SLM involves the melting and fusion of the sample materials at specific 
locations based on the product design. The melting is performed by using a 
high-energy laser beam. Sample materials are loosely kept on the chamber 
bed, and the chamber is heated up to the melting point of the material. The 
height of the product is maintained by a piston that lowers it to the height Recent Developments and Optimization in Additive Manufacturing 171
of the preceding layer. SLM is one of the most efficient AM processes. This 
process offers a variety of materials that can be used for manufacturing. These 
materials range from ceramics to organic polymers, plastics, glass, reinforced 
composites, and metallic alloys. SLM does require a polymeric binder to 
produce metal-based parts, which can be further removed via different heat 
treatment processes. The efficiency of the process is constrained by a few 
factors, such as the avoidance of oxidation of the material by following the 
process in an inert gas atmosphere. The process also requires it to be executed 
at a constant temperature in a range close to its melting point.
10.1.4.4 ELECTRON BEAM MELTING (EBM)
EBM shares similarities with SLM. The setup is the same as that of the SLM 
for this process. Instead of a high-energy laser, a high-voltage electron laser 
beam, typically in the range of 30–60 kV, is targeted at the sample material in 
a vacuum chamber. One of the advantages of the EBM is that it can be used to 
cast complex parts out of prealloyed metallic materials. Recently, researchers 
have tried to implement the EBM process in outer space for manufacturing 
because of its requirement to be used in a high vacuum chamber.
10.1.5 WHY SELECTIVE LASER MELTING (SLM)
One of the newer AM techniques, SLM, was developed recently in the 
mid-90s by German scientists. The process involves heating the materials 
up to their melting points in a chamber consisting of an inert gas environ￾ment. SLM provides an edge over other conventional methods of forging, 
casting, extrusion, and powder metallurgy in several ways, such as its ability 
to produce parts in short production runs with reduced cost loss. SLM also 
has pros over other AM techniques. One of the major advantages of SLM 
is the permeability of crafting prototypes of device components to validate 
the design before mass production can be continued. The customization of 
complexity in a product design is very flexible if produced via the SLM 
method. SLM allows the manufacturing of porous parts with porosity at 
specific locations, which is not quite possible in any of the conventional 
manufacturing methods. Another way this process proves to be cost-efficient 
is by reducing the use of expensive external tooling or assembly requirements.
10.1.6 AIM OF THIS CHAPTER
This chapter is aimed at discussing the advancements, developments, and 
applications of AM in different fields of engineering and science. We have 172 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
emphasized the various types of AM techniques and the principles behind 
their work. Moving further ahead, a unique and one of the most used AM 
techniques, SLM, is discussed in detail. SLM has proven itself to be very 
efficient and successful at a commercial level. In the later sections, the focus 
of the chapter revolves around the principles, workings, and understanding 
of the SLM process.
10.2 RELEVANT TOPICS
10.2.1 GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF SELECTIVE LASER MELTING 
(SLM)
SLM is one of the AM processes. In this newer field, it is developed as 
a newer technology.11 SLM needs an energy source to liquefy completely 
(or melt) and to meld the selective areas of the metallic powder with the 
help of a high-intensity laser. It is done layer by layer as per the CAD data. 
The model can be divided into cross sections with the help of software that 
directly takes place in the process. The important function is scanning the 
laser beam over a thin powder-layer surface that was already deposited on a 
substrate earlier.12
FIGURE 10.1 SLM operating principle.
Source: Reprinted with permission from Ref. [13] © 2011 Elsevier.Recent Developments and Optimization in Additive Manufacturing 173
SLM mainly uses metallic powders. In this, full-density parts can be 
produced without any prior requirement for postprocessing steps, and the mate￾rials can be used in serial production. The metal powder is fully melted to reach 
a high density. The SLM process requires higher-energy-density lasers. SLM 
also has one of the main problems during the process of formation, which is the 
thermal distortion of the model.14 This is done along the laser path and is done 
in a protective environment, so the molten metal is cooled rapidly. This step is 
repeated again to obtain a new three-dimensional component. This layerwise 
approach has an advantage in the formation of complex structures and compo￾nents that are thin-walled. The feedstock utilization rate is increased, and the 
production cost is reduced when the metallic powder is used for recycling.15
10.2.2 APPLICATIONS OF SELECTIVE LASER MELTING
SLM mostly involves three types of metals: iron, nickel, and titanium. SLM 
uses titanium alloys because of their low Young’s modulus, low density, 
good corrosion resistance, high compatibility, and good mechanical proper￾ties. They possess high specific strength and elastic moduli almost near the 
bone. They can be used as custom-fit implants during surgery.16
SLM uses nickel because of its potential. It can also be required to be used 
in the presence of high temperatures. They also have resistant properties to 
fatigue, wear and tear, and corrosion. Besides these, good weldability and high 
strengths at high temperatures are an addition to the same. It also has magne￾tostrictive properties, due to which it can also be used as a transducer. These 
can also be used in turbine blades, nuclear reactors, combustion chambers, 
and repair patches. Nickel can also be used as a cost-effective chemical cata￾lyst. It can also be used as an alternative to gold when it comes to biosensing 
applications.17 Hastelloy X has applications in aircraft engines due to its high 
oxidation resistance and strength to tolerate high temperatures.11 SLM also 
uses iron parts for their mechanical properties and can be used for microstruc￾ture and processing conditions. The melting threshold value of iron powder 
is not reached even with high scanning speed and lower laser power. Energy 
input density is required for this. The SLM-fabricated iron has greater tensile 
strength than the standard iron, and elongated grains are generally not seen.18
10.2.3 TYPES OF DEFECTS
Defects are the major problems and are also found during the process of 
SLM. Defects caused in the SLM process depend on some parameters like 
hatch spacing, layer thickness, laser power, scan speed, powder materials, 174 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
and chamber environment. The general defects that are present include 
incomplete fusion holes, porosities, and cracks.
i. Porosities—They are generally less than 100 μm and have a spherical 
shape. When the cooling rate is high during the process of solidification, 
there is no route for the dissolved gas to escape from the molten pool’s 
surface, and porosities are formed in the fabricated part. These porosities 
on their internal surfaces have ridges. Porosities can also be generated 
when laser energy is high and is put into the molten pool. Gas bubbles are 
induced because of the vaporization of low-melting-point elements in an 
alloy, and when these bubbles of gas accumulate in the pool of molten 
metal, it results in regular spherical porosities as the solidification rate is 
high and there is insufficient time for the gas bubbles to escape from the 
surface. These porosities are quite difficult to get rid of when they are 
distributed randomly in an SLM-fabricated part.
FIGURE 10.2 Typical defects of the SLM parts: open porosity.
Source: Reprinted with permission from Ref. [19] © 2014 Elsevier.
ii. Incomplete Fusion Holes—They are lack-of-fusion defects and are 
caused when an SLM process is going on due to a shortage of energy 
input. This is caused due to improper melting. They are seen because 
the powders of metal remain unmelted to accumulate a new layer 
on the preceding layer with enough overlay. There are two types of 
defects: (i) poor bonding defects, which are caused when there is a 
lack of molten metal during the process when it solidifies and (ii) 
defects present in unmelted powders. The laser input energy is low, Recent Developments and Optimization in Additive Manufacturing 175
which results in poor overlap between the tracks of scanning. These 
defects are observed when there is poor interlayer bonding. The 
place where the defects are just formed is generally rough and results 
in poor flow of the molten metal.20
FIGURE 10.3 Incomplete fusion holes.
Source: Reprinted from Ref. [21]; http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0.
iii. Residual Stress Accumulation—These internal stresses are caused 
due to fast solidification, high thermal gradients, and energy density. 
Alternate heating and cooling cause compressive tensile stresses in 
the nearby layers.20176 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
FIGURE 10.4 (a) Satellites and balling formation on the sample surface of AlSi10Mg, 
(b) a cross-sectional grayscale image for balling on the sample surface of AlSi10Mg, 
and (c) a cross-sectional grayscale image displaying a satellite that settled on a single 
track of AlSi10Mg with the satellite featuring a microstructure alike to the fresh powder.
Source: Reprinted with permission from Ref. [22] © 2022 Elsevier.
iv. Cracks—The SLM process includes metal powders to be melted and 
solidified rapidly with the help of a laser energy input, which must be 
high. The temperature gradient is high, which combined with great 
residual stress, is the main reason for the formation of cracks. They 
are inclined to initiate from the surface, which is partly attached to 
the melted metal powders. Nickel-based superalloys and stainless 
steels have low thermal conductivity and a high thermal expansion 
coefficient and have a susceptibility to forming cracks.
As seen in Figure 10.5, the defects that were common in all the samples 
were porosities and extensive cracks. When the scanning speed is low, 
spherical-shaped porosities are formed due to the high energy density. There 
is a decrease in the spherical porosities only when there is an increase in 
scanning speed. When there is a lack of fusion and the scanning speed is 
higher, irregular flaws are observed, and the crack extension is decreased. 
The sample of AA6061, which is not modified, shows cracking significantly 
almost at all the scanning speeds. There are cross sections across XY, and the 
cracks are often seen as network in cellular forms.Recent Developments and Optimization in Additive Manufacturing 177
10.2.4 OPTIMIZATION OF ADDITIVE MANUFACTURING 
PROCESSES
The SLM process has many factors that were determined before and are related 
to scan, powder, temperature, and laser. Laser energy input is responsible for 
the flow of molten metal and the melt condition of the powders. The size 
and morphology of metal powders, which also include powder flowability 
and powder bed smoothness, play a significant role in the process of SLM. 
The strategy of scanning influences heat transfer, the condition of powders 
melting, and defects.18 When defects are caused by the SLM process, there 
are also some preventive measures and possible remedies for the defects. 
Prevention of cracks is also important, as is avoiding defect formation like 
keyholes, lack of fusion, and so on. This prevention can be ensured by 
controlling the solidification temperature range and path, resisting thermal 
stresses, and controlling the melt pool geometry.
10.2.4.1 CONTROLLING PROCESS PARAMETERS
There are four process parameters: laser power, focal offset distance, hatch 
distance, scanning speed, powder layer thickness, and powder bed tempera￾ture. There are scores of ways to control each challenge in a collective 
manner or even in an individual manner. The common theme among these is 
FIGURE 10.5 (a) The as-built AA6061, which is not modified, shows the micrographs 
that are optically tested when the structures are cross-sectional at laser power of 200 and 350 
W. (b) These are the micrographs taken optically, and the sample used here is Zr-modified 
AA6061. The laser power used here is 200 and 350 W.
Source: Reprinted with permission from Ref. [23] © 2021 Elsevier.178 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
the control of process parameters. The process parameters can be categorized 
into three parts: preprocess, in-process, and postprocess. Parameters such as 
laser power, stress relief, and speed of scanning are being closely examined. 
As evident from Figure 10.6, manipulating the scan speed along with laser 
power can heavily influence the crack density due to solidification.
FIGURE 10.6 Solidification crack density vs scan speed in XY and XZ section of 
unmodified AA6061 and Zr-modified AA6061 alloy at left: 200 W and right: 350 W.
Source: Reprinted with permission from Ref. [23] © 2021 Elsevier.
Powder characterization has taken place among the preprocess parame￾ters. In general, there are mainly three categories of powder characterization: 
particle chemistry, particle morphology, and particle microstructure. The 
powder properties include packing density and flowability, optical penetra￾tion depth, and thermal conductivity.24 When line scanning is performed, the 
difference noted in directional stresses is the highest, and on the other hand, 
the rotation of the scan area reduces the difference. The residual stress is 
reduced by shorter scan vectors. Pre- and post-scanning of each layer is also 
considered a means of reducing residual stress during the process of SLM 
building.25
Laser machining is hampered by the nondeterministic character of the 
processes (i.e., unpredictability), output parameters (e.g., MRR, surface 
roughness, etc.), and more process disturbances: erratic behavior, lack of 
control on some input parameters, and difficulty to monitor and measure 
process output online. Stabilization of the melt pool is needed during the 
process, and laser power is applied to the powder material in a controllable 
time during the scanning of the geometry. The laser power can be adjusted 
when scanning is done with a single vector since control of the laser power 
level is not dependent on the motion of the scanner.26 Hatch distance is 
responsible for causing modifications in tracks’ geometric characteristics 
and surface morphology.27Recent Developments and Optimization in Additive Manufacturing 179
10.2.4.2 CHANGING THE COMPOSITION OF THE MATERIALS
Many techniques and research are carried out to manufacture parts with 
high-quality standards and excellent mechanical properties while opti￾mizing the characteristics of SLM. The high thermal conductivity leads to 
heat dissipation into the powder bed during the melting process of SLM. 
During the process of aluminum alloy casting, the addition of silicon in the 
metal is preferred to make the process a bit more improved and to introduce 
decrement in the melting temperature and an increment in the fluidity while 
reducing the thermal expansion. For example, in Al7075, when Si is added,
cracks are hardly observed. Si helps to produce ultrafine grains, which are 
seen in small and isolated zones.28
FIGURE 10.7 (a)–(c) These are the cross sections of the as-built alloy sample that present 
back scatter electrons on the micrographs, which are optically tested. The power used here 
is 350 W. It was observed that multiple cracks were seen in the unmodified AA6061. (d)–(f) 
These show the equiaxed grains from the melt pool of the as-built Zr-modified AA6061 
sample. They also depict grains, which are observed to be fine and columnar. The grains, 
which are fine and columnar, are seen to be normal to the boundaries of the melt pool.
Source: Reprinted with permission from Ref. [23] © 2021 Elsevier.
The as-built Zr-modified AA6061 sample, when compared to the 
unmodified sample, presents the grains to be fine, columnar, and equiaxed. 
Basically, it shows the refinement of grains. A decrease in porosity is also 
observed in this sample without any solidification cracks. The unmodified 
AA6061 sample formed cracks and porosities and showed poor printability. 
The mechanical properties like yield strength and tensile strength are greater 
in the as-built Zr-modified sample than in the unmodified one.23180 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
10.2.4.3 HEAT TREATMENT
There is a change observed in the microstructure and residual stresses 
within the samples due to the periodic cooling and subsequent heating of 
the layers in the AM. More intermetallic phases can be lessened by the heat 
treatment, and the cooling rate is faster than in powder bed systems. The 
heating gradient can also be increased, and the cooling rate is kept fixed so 
that major mechanical changes are not observed.29 Titanium’s heat treatment 
can be used to reduce residual stresses and produce an optimum combina￾tion of ductility and structural stability. This also helps in improving other 
mechanical properties, like tensile strength. If a material contains porosity, 
then it can be a source of crack nucleation and propagation. It can also reduce 
the fatigue life span.30
This method is responsible for the deformation behavior of porous alloys 
of aluminum, which is caused by SLM and leads to compression on a more 
stable deformation behavior. To make use of the properties obtained by the 
application of heat treatment, it is required to study the microstructures and 
the development of Al alloys fabricated during the process of SLM.31
10.3 FUTURE DIRECTIONS
Manufacturing is the basis of any civilization. An efficient manufacturing 
process has always been looked upon as a sign of the forward development 
and growth of a nation. Various types of AM techniques have been devel￾oped recently and are yet to be commercialized. One of the aspects of AM 
that still needs to be heavily researched and worked upon is the design for 
additive manufacturing (DfAM). The flexibility to generate a high number 
of complex designs for better performance is still in its primal phase. AM 
still has a lot of potential applications ranging in almost every scientific field, 
be it in outer space or on an industrial scale, to be explored. This process 
also demands the development and setup of highly sophisticated labs and the 
production of cost-efficient AM machines.
Even though AM seems to be modern and efficient compared to conven￾tional manufacturing processes, there is still a large gap between academic 
knowledge and the industrial setup. Other challenges that need to be tackled 
to reliably put AM on a large industrial scale are to collectively perform 
research rather than having different segments of a “print-it-all” paradigm. 
This fraction of research for specific parts results in nonreusable investments. 
There is a lot of scope in finding the optimal solutions for the discussed 
shortcomings of AM.Recent Developments and Optimization in Additive Manufacturing 181
10.4 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION
This chapter systematically discusses one of the pioneering manufacturing 
techniques, AM. It is clearly visible that AM will very soon overpower other 
conventional manufacturing processes. The rate at which developments 
are made to commercialize AM is rapid. This will surely aid and abet cost￾efficient manufacturing. Out of all the different AM methods, SLM proves to 
be the most promising for now, with its low-cost setup and high production 
rate. This AM process has already established itself as an industrial-level 
manufacturing process for metal and composite-based products, but it does 
have some limitations. Research is required to implement SLM for large￾scale infrastructure, and thus is the investment. It is very clear that in the near 
future, the desired parts of any complex system will require properties that 
are efficiently provided through AM. Developments in AM can also further 
nurture their applications in extreme conditions where human intervention 
is not quite feasible. It can be understood that AM is the next step in the 
evolution of manufacturing processes, and the gap between theoretical 
understanding and practical applications will be minimized.
KEYWORDS
• additive manufacturing
• selective laser melting
• aluminum
• 3D printing
• computer-aided design
REFERENCES
1. Kumar, S. A.; Prasad, R. V. S. Chapter 2 - Basic Principles of Additive Manufacturing: 
Different Additive Manufacturing Technologies. In Additive Manufacturing; Manjaiah, 
M., Raghavendra, K., Balashanmugam, N., Davim, J. P., (Eds.); Woodhead Publishing, 
2021; pp 17–35. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-822056-6.00012-6
2. Bourell, D.; Kruth, J. P.; Leu, M.; Levy, G.; Rosen, D.; Beese, A. M.; Clare, A. 
Materials for Additive Manufacturing. CIRP Annals. 2017, 66 (2), 659–681. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.cirp.2017.05.009.
3. https://www.sandia.gov/media/lens.htm.182 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
4. Tekinalp, H. L.; Kunc, V.; Velez-Garcia, G. M.; Duty, C. E.; Love, L. J.; Naskar, A. K.; 
Blue, C. A.; Ozcan, S. Highly Oriented Carbon Fiber–Polymer Composites via Additive 
Manufacturing. Compos. Sci. Technol. 2014, 105, 144–150. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
compscitech.2014.10.009.
5. Dickson, A. N.; Barry, J. N.; McDonnell, K. A.; Dowling, D. P. Fabrication of 
Continuous Carbon, Glass and Kevlar Fibre Reinforced Polymer Composites Using 
Additive Manufacturing. Addit. Manuf. 2017, 16, 146–152. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
addma.2017.06.004.
6. Stefanescu, D. M.; Ruxanda, R. Fundamentals of Solidification. Materials Park, OH: 
ASM International, 2004, 2004, 71–92.
7. Hunt, J. D. Solidification and Casting of Metals. Metal Soc. London. 1979, 3.
8. Ruhr, M.; Baram, J. C.; Lavernia, E. J. Extended Al (Mn) Solution in a Rapidly Solidified 
Al-Li-Mn-Zr Alloy. Metallurgic. Trans. A (Phys. Metall. Mater. Sci. U. S. A. 1990, 21
(6).
9. Kimura, T.; Nakamoto, T.; Mizuno, M.; Araki, H. Effect of Silicon Content on 
Densification, Mechanical and Thermal Properties of Al-XSi Binary Alloys Fabricated 
Using Selective Laser Melting. Mater. Sci. Eng. A. 2017, 682, 593–602.
10. Cooper, K. Rapid Prototyping Technology; Marcel Dekker Inc.: New York, 2001.
11. Yap, C. Y.; Chua, C. K.; Dong, Z. L.; Liu, Z. H.; Zhang, D. Q.; Loh, L. E.; Sing, S. L. 
Review of Selective Laser Melting: Materials and Applications. Appl. Phys. Rev. 2015,
2 (4), 041101. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4935926
12. Yadroitsev, I.; Bertrand, P.; Smurov, I. Parametric Analysis of the Selective Laser 
Melting Process. Appl. Surf. Sci. 2007, 253 (19), 8064–8069. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
apsusc.2007.02.088
13. Louvis, E.; Fox, P.; Sutcliffe, C. J. Selective Laser Melting of Aluminium Components. 
J. Mater Process Technol. 2011, 211 (2), 275–284. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jmatprotec.2010.09.019
14. Contuzzi, N.; Campanelli, S. L.; Ludovico, A. D. 3D Finite Element Analysis in the 
Selective Laser Melting Process. Int. J. Simul. Model. 2011, 10 (3), 113–121. https://doi.
org/10.2507/IJSIMM10(3)1.169
15. Zhang, J.; Song, B.; Wei, Q.; Bourell, D.; Shi, Y. A Review of Selective Laser Melting 
of Aluminum Alloys: Processing, Microstructure, Property and Developing Trends. J. 
Mater. Sci. Technol. 2019, 270–284. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmst.2018.09.004
16. Zhang, L. C.; Attar, H. Selective Laser Melting of Titanium Alloys and Titanium Matrix 
Composites for Biomedical Applications: A Review. Adv. Eng. Mater. 2016, 463–475. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/adem.201500419
17. Yap, C. Y.; Tan, H. K.; Du, Z.; Chua, C. K.; Dong, Z. Selective Laser Melting of 
Nickel Powder. Rapid Prototyp J. 2017, 23 (4), 750–757. https://doi.org/10.1108/
RPJ-01-2016-0006
18. Song, B.; Dong, S.; Deng, S.; Liao, H.; Coddet, C. Microstructure and Tensile Properties 
of Iron Parts Fabricated by Selective Laser Melting. Opt. Laser Technol. 2014, 56, 
451–460. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.optlastec.2013.09.017
19. Jia, Q.; Gu, D. Selective Laser Melting Additive Manufacturing of Inconel 718 
Superalloy Parts: Densification, Microstructure and Properties. J. Alloys Compd. 2014, 
585, 713–721. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jallcom.2013.09.171
20. Singla, A. K.; Banerjee, M.; Sharma, A.; Singh, J.; Bansal, A.; Gupta, M. K.; Khanna, 
N.; Shahi, A. S.; Goyal, D. K. Selective Laser Melting of Ti6Al4V Alloy: Process Recent Developments and Optimization in Additive Manufacturing 183
Parameters, Defects and Post-Treatments. J. Manufact. Process. 2021, 161–187. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.jmapro.2021.01.009
21. Zhang, B.; Li, Y.; Bai, Q. Defect Formation Mechanisms in Selective Laser Melting: 
A Review. Chinese J. Mech. Eng. 2017, 30 (3), 515–527. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10033-017-0121-5
22. Aboulkhair, N. T.; Simonelli, M.; Parry, L.; Ashcroft, I.; Tuck, C.; Hague, R. 3D Printing 
of Aluminium Alloys: Additive Manufacturing of Aluminium Alloys Using Selective 
Laser Melting. Prog. Mater. Sci. 2019. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pmatsci.2019.100578
23. Mehta, A.; Zhou, L.; Huynh, T.; Park, S.; Hyer, H.; Song, S.; Bai, Y.; Imholte, D. D.; 
Woolstenhulme, N. E.; Wachs, D. M.; Sohn, Y. Additive Manufacturing and Mechanical 
Properties of the Dense and Crack Free Zr-Modified Aluminum Alloy 6061 Fabricated 
by the Laser-Powder Bed Fusion. Addit. Manuf. 2021, 41. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
addma.2021.101966
24. Shipley, H.; McDonnell, D.; Culleton, M.; Coull, R.; Lupoi, R.; O’Donnell, G.; Trimble, 
D. Optimisation of Process Parameters to Address Fundamental Challenges during 
Selective Laser Melting of Ti-6Al-4V: A Review. Int. J. Machine Tools and Manufact. 
2018, 1–20. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijmachtools.2018.01.003
25. Ali, H.; Ghadbeigi, H.; Mumtaz, K. Effect of Scanning Strategies on Residual Stress 
and Mechanical Properties of Selective Laser Melted Ti6Al4V. Mater. Sci. Eng. A. 2018,
712, 175–187. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.msea.2017.11.103
26. Kruth, J.-P.; Duflou, J.; Mercelis, P.; van Vaerenbergh, J.; Craeghs, T.; de Keuster, J. 
On-line Monitoring and Process Control in Selective Laser Melting and Laser Cutting.
27. Yadroitsev, I.; Smurov, I. Surface Morphology in Selective Laser Melting of Metal 
Powders. Phys. Proc. 2011, 12, 264–270. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.phpro.2011.03.034
28. Montero Sistiaga, M. L.; Mertens, R.; Vrancken, B.; Wang, X.; van Hooreweder, B.; 
Kruth, J. P.; van Humbeeck, J. Changing the Alloy Composition of Al7075 for Better 
Processability by Selective Laser Melting. J. Mater Process Technol. 2016, 238, 
437–445. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmatprotec.2016.08.003
29. Khorasani, A. M.; Gibson, I.; Awan, U. S.; Ghaderi, A. The Effect of SLM Process 
Parameters on Density, Hardness, Tensile Strength, and Surface Quality of Ti-6Al-4V. 
Addit. Manuf. 2019, 25, 176–186. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.addma.2018.09.002
30. Sercombe, T.; Jones, N.; Day, R.; Kop, A. Heat Treatment of Ti-6Al-7Nb Components 
Produced by Selective Laser Melting. Rapid Prototyp J. 2008, 14 (5), 300–304. https://
doi.org/10.1108/13552540810907974
31. Takata, N.; Kodaira, H.; Sekizawa, K.; Suzuki, A.; Kobashi, M. Change in Microstructure 
of Selectively Laser Melted AlSi10Mg Alloy with Heat Treatments. Mater. Sci. Eng. A.
2017, 704, 218–228. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.msea.2017.08.029Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes. 
Sandip Kunar, Prasenjit Chatterjee, and M. Sreenivas Reddy (Eds.)
© 2025 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION 
AND OPTIMIZATION OF METAL 
CUTTING PARAMETERS ON SURFACE 
ROUGHNESS DURING HARD 
TURNING OF A-I-S-I 1043 STEEL
ABDISA SISAY1, HABTAMU BERI2, MOERA GUTU2, 
DEVENDRA KUMAR SINHA2, BIRHANE ASSEFA GEMEDA2, and 
RAM SEWAK SINGH3
1Department of Mechanical Engineering, Bule Hora University, 
Bule Hora, Oromia, Ethiopia
2Department of Mechanical Engineering, Adama Science and 
Technology University, Adama, Ethiopia
3Electronics and Communication Engineering, School of Electrical 
Engg, and Computing, Adama Science and Technology University, 
Adama, Ethiopia
CHAPTER 11
ABSTRACT
Nowadays, products of high-quality machined components has highlighted 
the effect of several process factors, specifically in the fine finish quality of 
machined parts. The contribution of this research study is the investigation 
of metal cutting of hard materials and determining optimum metal cutting 
factors to obtain a desired quality-based metallic surface in dry hard-turning 
of hardened A-I-S-I 1043. The turning cutting tool is a combined Al2O3-
TiC ceramic insert. Three experimental runs were repeated, each test was 186 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
performed with new metal cutting tool insert to confirm accurate surface 
roughness test data. The G. Taguchi L9 orthogonal design arrays were 
nominated on behalf of experimental program and characteristic S/N ratio 
was utilized. Moreover, data variance analysis (ANOVA) was implemented 
to investigate domination along with metal cutting/machining factors on 
surface texture/roughness data. The variance analysis revealed that metal 
cutting/machining depth, tool feed, and cutting speed were 0.75%, 22.33%, 
and 74.22%, respectively, and the best cutting factors achieved were 1.24 
µm, and it was established that hard turning could efficiently and effectively 
replace cylindrical grinding. Hard metal turning machining occurring into 
AISI/1043 hardened steel materials metals obtained a robust surface smooth￾ness and finish quality at high machining speeds of 120 m/min, intermediate 
tool feed at 0.1 mm/rev, and smaller depths to metals cut at 0.15 mm.
11.1 INTRODUCTION
Hard material turning has a turning technology that uses hard materials with 
hardness ranging from 45 to 65 HRC, which including tool steel, hardened 
steel, HSS, bearing steels, alloy steels, specific rare super-alloys, and ther￾mally exposed metallurgical components. Hard turning firms that are modern 
and sophisticated focus great, resilient, and robust surface characteristics for 
a product’s appearance, aesthetics, and finish. Obtaining a sufficient grade of 
hard material is a difficult operation, even though hard turning is commonly 
employed in product development.1,2
Because of their outstanding weldability and temperature performance, 
creep resistance, minimum fatigue strength, corrosion resistance, and 
improved formability, hard materials are critical in a variety of sectors, 
including automotive, engine component, and aerospace. A specially 
designed cutting tool for hardened components has been developed and is 
readily available in any work-based machine shop.3 Due to the dominance 
of the production process, metal cutting blades utilized within hardened/
hard metals turning modify quality performance of constituent parts , which 
include macro-geometry, micro-geometry, and the sub-surface zones impact 
component quality.4,5 The effects and impact occurring in machining vari￾ables on the metallic free machining brass surface quality/smoothness has 
been investigated.6 The study shows that at greater speeds of metal cutting, 
the maximum turning parameters were 50 m/min, lower rate of tool feed 0.3 
m-m/rev, and higher metal cut depth of 3.5 m-m and the minimum metallic Experimental Investigation and Optimization of Metal Cutting Parameters 187
surface-roughness at optimum cutting factors was 1.63 microns. The 
domination of machining factors on performance/capability proficiency of 
cutting/machining tools is studied. The obtained results revealed that major 
influential factors were effective cooling and lubrication technique, which 
are the key features to enhance performance of cutting tool. Of these factors, 
the tool feed rate and spindle speed are the core machining factors.7 Hard 
machining has become a cost-effective production procedure for producing 
components with excellent geometric accuracy and metallic surface quality 
and robust surface smoothness.8,9 Hard metal turning is becoming more 
frequent in the manufacture of industrial and consumer goods as metal 
cutting tools and manufacturing technologies progress. However, processes 
vitality is an important factor in industrial applications in tool designing.10–14
Hard turning is a promising approach because of its potential scope, 
which includes the shortest cycle time, production side flexibility, increased 
productivity through decreased production period, and lower manufacturing 
costs. Potentially higher removal material rate, dry machining capability, 
cost-effectiveness, capacity to make complicated shapes, suitable surface 
roughness without the application of coolant, enhanced work-piece quality, 
and environmental concerns are minimized. Hard turning can provide high￾quality surfaces and dimensional tolerances like cylindrical grinding.15,16
Identifying factors that affect process ability of hardened metallic mate￾rials and establishing optimized values variables at that superior surface 
texture finishing solve cutting issues, especially those related to surface 
feature quality/finishing and cutting tool attrition. High metal cutting 
parameter values increased efficiency while compensating for the potential 
risks of degraded metallic surface polish and cutting machining tool perfor￾mance. According to the authors of Ref. [17], optimizing cutting parameter 
settings can extend tool service life through 30% and efficiency perfor￾mance via 50% at a cost per machine and process. Researchers in Ref. [18] 
evaluate metal cutting force generated during cutting steel hardened and 
determined that trust force was the major contribution among three metal 
cutting forces and more sensitive toward work-piece hardness, anti-positive 
rake angle, cutting tool life wear/fatigue, and tool geometry changes. 
Researchers investigated the effect of cutting/machining factors and hard￾ness of work piece on metal cutting force normal components during hard 
turning finish of A-I-S-I (52100) steel using G. Taguchi’s L27 orthogonal 
design array. In another study,19 effects occurring in tool as and nose radius 
on machining metal and cutting/machining tool power all through hard/
hardened metals turning A-I-S-I 52100 steel with carbide-based coated 188 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
inserts was examined using variance analysis and computation (ANOVA). 
In another studies,20,21 the depth attained in metal cut revealed maximum 
domination of cutting force in comparison to the tool feed and speed of 
cutting. Studies22 explored the metal cutting force/power and surface-finish 
by using the G. Taguchi and results have revealed that tool feed rate has a 
domination on forces of metal cutting and surface-roughness. Investigations 
in utilizing a coated cemented carbide machining/cutting tool on steel with 
high strength indicate that the expansion in speed of metal cutting tends 
decreases the forces of metal cutting and enhances surface-quality and also 
the cutting forces of metal reduction.23 Because it has the versatility to 
decrease costs, increase production, and provide a high level of safety envi￾ronment conditions for operators, an online tool surveillance system with 
various sensors was created for predicting metallic cutting tool lifetime. 
Various tool monitor and tracking systems are utilized to monitor metallic 
cutting tools throughout the hard-machining process.24,25 The evaluation 
and measures for tool wear resistance is one of the critical factors in metal 
cutting operations.26 The maximum efficiency production of a machining 
100-Cr-6 utilizing the CBN-tool throughout hard/hardened metallic mate￾rials turning was attained at even a speed of 120 m/min with a 0.4 mm 
detrimental single—point tool cutting flank wear and attrition. Reserchers27
investigated the propensity of CBN-tool attrition and wearing on tempered 
treated steel, as well as the dominance of machining processes speed on 
tool wear properties of hard metal turning. Researchers28 mentioned two 
non-convectional/advanced machine turning procedures and progression 
such as rotary turning and turn-milling; they observed tool wear under the 
different conditions of metal cutting for both processes in comparison with 
conventional turning process. Researchers investigated the metal cutting 
environments, namely, dry, continuous coolant; chilled pressurized trial 
runs were carried out on various hardened materials using various coated 
tools, and air cooling was used to increase cutting tool life.29 Studies30
reported on A-I-S-I-D-2 hardened steel at various hardness designations 
by utilizing the PCBN tools, at a consistent rate of speed metal cutting, 
depth of cut within metal, and tool feed advancement. The investigational 
results revealed which hardness of the workpiece has a great domination of 
wear on flank when compared to abrasive wear mechanism for 40–55 HRC. 
Researchers31 reported automatic online machining tool attrition monitoring 
and wear compensation strategy by using the recursive filter algorithm 
technique. Researchers32 mentioned the domination of metal cutting factors 
on tool wear by using the concept of minimization of quantity lubrication Experimental Investigation and Optimization of Metal Cutting Parameters 189
(M-Q-L) in hard turning of A-I-S-I 1060 steel with cemented carbide coated 
cutting tool. Their research work explained the metal cut depth; speed of 
metal cutting was discovered by determining and effecting cutting machine 
tool wear/attrition; and moderating and regulating wear deformation mecha￾nisms processes such as built-up edge, adhesion, and abrasion was observed. 
Figure 11.1 shows the photographic images of flank surface under MQL 
condition by using carbide insert with coating during turning of hardened 
steel.
Researchers33 investigated morphology of chips in hard machining of 
A-I-S-I 4340 at high speeds. They mentioned that discontinuous chips were 
produced due to initiation of internal fissures within tool’s path and beyond 
the metallic cutting tool edge. According to a survey,34 a saw-blade teeth 
chips usually occur in the metal cutting of die steel, bearing steel, hardened 
steel, and titanium alloy due to metal cutting forces, frequencies, and vibra￾tion of a cutting tool. Researchers proposed the flow between fractures and 
stress/forces models during machining of A-I-S-I (52100) bearing steel. Even 
when cutting hard metallic materials, a frictional sticking phenomena occurs 
somewhere around the cutting/leading edge contacting of chips, and the 
fictitiously created shearing stress is referred to as sliding friction. Frictional 
stress is primarily determined by the friction coefficient,35 which occurs 
upstream of the cutting-edge joining and connecting planes used by chips. 
The perfection of machined surfaces parts or components are governed/
decided mostly through metallic surface integrity and finish. Roughness and 
final finish imply the integrity has a domain and covers the former two.36,37
It reveals the uneven asperities of the metallic surface. In the disciplines of 
optics and electronics, medical devices, micro-fluid, and material properties 
FIGURE 11.1 The supplementary flank edge of encrusted carbide inserts during the hard 
material turning process.190 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
with something like a stronger fatigue lifespan, toughness and favorable 
wear/attrition resistance, and high surface finish are required. Surface polish 
is determined by a variety of factors, including feed, nose radius, cutting 
velocity, and work-piece hardness, however feed is the most important.38
Surface finish in hardened steel with hardness 45–65 HRC generated with a 
particular tools are impacted through cutting settings, tool attrition and work 
piece comportment properties.39
According to the experimental result, among machining factors, the feed 
of the tool is the most significant factor on surface-roughness. According 
to studies,40–43 more surface irregularity rate results in deteriorated surface 
smoothness and a machined product’s lower fatigue lifespan. Therefore, the 
derived equation of machined surface texture quality modeling/simulations is:
* r
a r
e
f R =
32R (11.1)
where R*a = surface irregularities/roughness/(mm).
fr
 = feed amount ratio/rate/ mm
rev
     
Re = nose radius of cutting tools (mm).
11.2 MATERIALS AND METHODS
11.2.1 MATERIAL PREPARATION
The steel A-I-S-I 1043 was utilized during machining throughout this 
investigation. Before becoming machined together into variety of sizes 
and shapes, the work piece material was suitably heat-treated to achieve an 
approximate hardness of around 50 HRC. The dimension/size of the selected 
work piece was 60 mm in diameter and 300 mm long, and with a small 
length-to-diameter ratio so that the chattering problems can be avoided. Work 
portion was treated at 860 °C and was maintained at that temperature for 30 
min in an RX12-30-12 electrical box furnace, succeeded by quenching at 
180 °C in oil media (Voluta 1041Coil) and induced hardness of 50-HRC. In 
Table 11.1, the chemical constituents of the workpiece have been given. In 
the consecutive sections, chemical constituents, cutting tool utilized, experi￾mental trial running design, variance analysis/computation, orthogonal array 
selections, and measurements occurring in metallic surface-roughness has 
been explained.Experimental Investigation and Optimization of Metal Cutting Parameters 191
TABLE 11.1 Chemical Constituents of A-I-S-I/1043 Steel (wt.-%).
Constituent C Si Mn Cr S Ni P Fe
Amount Wt.% 0.42–0.50 0.17–0.37 0.17–0.80 0.25 0.045 0.30 0.04 Balance
11.2.2 MACHINES FOR MACHINING AND CUTTING TOOLS
The readiness work pieces are fixed and machined/manufactured on the 
typical lathe with model number CDG150, 7.5 KW of power, and a spindle 
speed range of 15 rpm–1500 rpm. A combination of Al2O3-TiC ceramic 
inserts within ISO standard TNGA/160408 and holder/clamp for tools 
MTJNR-2525-M16 was used, with 21% TiC, 77% Al2O3, and 2% extra mate￾rial. Depending on the orthogonal rake tool geometry, methodology standard, 
and specification, utilized tools inserted have a 0°, 6°, 30°, -6°, -6°, 6°, and 0.8 
mm tools nomenclature. This table includes the inclination angle, rake angle, 
supplementary orthogonal clearances, primary flank clearance, nose radius of 
tool adjunct, and cutting-edge angle plug/insert. It should be emphasized that 
every machining operation employed a new tool insertion to guarantee that 
the impact of tool wear was uniform throughout all experiments conducted.
FIGURE 11.2 Experimentation set up in hard turning.
Experiments were carried out on AISI 1043 steel with various metal 
cutting factors and the same length of metal cut of 30 mm. Experiments 192 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
1–3 used the comparable 80 m/min metal machining speed but within three 
various feed rates of 0.05, 0.1, and 0.15 and cut depths of 0.15, 0.2, and 0.25, 
respectively. Experiments 4, 5, and 6 used a comparable metal cutting speed 
of 100 m/min but within three various feed rates of 0.05, 0.1 and 0.15 and 
cut depths of 0.15, 0.2, and 0.25, respectively. Experiment numbers 7, 8, 
and 9 used a comparable metal cutting speed of 120 m/min but within three 
various feed rates of 0.05, 0.1, and 0.15 and cut depths of 0.15, 0.2, and 0.25, 
respectively.
FIGURE 11.3 Samples after turning process.
11.2.3 DESIGN OF EXPERIMENT (DOE)
For more than a decade, the G. Taguchi technique has been widely used 
to maximize machining performance variables because it is a complex 
problem-solving methodology that has the potential to increase performance 
level outcomes. Hard metal machining/cutting factors such as metal cutting 
conditions and speed, tool feed rate, and metal cut depth were varied in 
the sets of studies. To evaluate the most important metal cutting factors in 
A-I-S-I 1043 steel hard turning, the G. Taguchi L9 orthogonal array (OA) 
was used in this study, as shown in Table 11.2.
TABLE 11.2 List/Catalog by Factors and Design Levels/Stages.
Metal cutting/machining factors Labels Level 1 Level 2 Level 3
Metal cutting/machining speed (m/min) A 80 100 120
Tool feed advancement (mm/rev) B 0.05 0.10 0.15
Depths metal cut (mm) C 0.15 0.2 0.25Experimental Investigation and Optimization of Metal Cutting Parameters 193
TABLE 11.3 Depicts the Experimental Configuration Utilized by an L-9 OA.
Exp. no. Cutting/machining speed (m/min) Feed rate (mm/rev) Cutting depth (mm)
1 80 0.05 0.15
2 80 0.10 0.20
3 80 0.15 0.25
4 100 0.05 0.20
5 100 0.10 0.25
6 100 0.15 0.15
7 120 0.05 0.25
8 120 0.10 0.15
9 120 0.15 0.20
11.3 RESULT AND DISCUSSION
Experiments are conducted to assess the extant of dominance of metal 
cutting/machining variables in metallic surface-quality/finish of AISI 1043 
Steel throughout hard-turning operations. The scheme occurring in experi￾mental rounds were utilized throughout the order to acquire maximum peaks 
in machining variables and in the most important cutting variables required 
for surface quality/smoothness. The mean metallic surface-roughness/irregu￾larities value for each of the factors are stated in Table 11.5. The following 
are, for instance, the computations targeted at component B:
1.72 1.88 1.44 / 1 1.68
3
S NB + + = = (11.2)
1.53 1.62 1.24 / 2 1.46
3
S NB + + = = (11.3)
1.84 1.81 1.38 / 3 1.67
3
S NB + + = = (11.4)194 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
TABLE 11.4 Experimental Results for the Average Scoring Rate of Metallic Surface 
Roughness/Irregularities.
Expt. 
no.
Metal machining 
speed (m/min)
Tool feed/loading 
(mm/rev)
Metal cut to 
depths (mm)
Roughness of the surface, (µm) Avg. Ra 
(µm)
S/N 
Trial-1 Trial-2 Trial-3 ratios
1 80 0.05 0.15 1.64 1.90 1.61 1.72 -4.71
2 80 0.10 0.20 1.69 1.42 1.48 1.53 -3.69
3 80 0.15 0.25 1.81 2.03 1.69 1.84 -5.30
4 100 0.05 0.20 1.86 1.79 1.98 1.88 -5.48
5 100 0.10 0.25 1.60 1.42 1.84 1.62 -4.19
6 100 0.15 0.15 1.40 2.42 1.61 1.81 -5.15
7 120 0.05 0.25 1.12 1.24 1.98 1.44 -3.17
8 120 0.10 0.15 1.25 1.21 1.25 1.24 -1.87
9 120 0.15 0.20 1.18 1.66 1.29 1.38 -2.80
The mean value of average results efficiency 1.61 -4.04
Figure 11.4 illustrates a controllable factor’s main-effect graph 
on behalf of variations in an average metallic rate occurring in surface 
roughness. The given data result indicates that smaller rate is preferable 
for the surface texture unevenness rate yield outcomes (Delta = optimum/
optimal mean minus smallest mean). According to Table 11.5, cutting/
machining speeds have the biggest influence, mostly on mean (Delta = 
0.42, Rank = 1). A depth of metallic cut has the least influence, mostly on 
mean (Delta = 0.04, Rank = 3).
Because mean graphs of the main effects/influences may be used to change 
the mean to a more favorable value, certain variable levels with greater 
sample surface completion rates, such as A3B2C1, would be regarded as a 
feasible variable mixture for higher values. This is because the maximum 
turning factor was identified at maximum metals cutting speed, medium tool 
feed rate, and A3B2C1 metal cut depths.
TABLE 11.5 Mean Effects Plot Output Response Tables for Smaller/Lesser is Preferable.
Level Machining processes 
cutting speed
Feed rate of the tool Metal cutting depth
A B C
1 1.70 1.68 1.59
2 1.77 1.46 1.60
3 1.35 1.67 1.63
Delta 0.42 0.22 0.04
Response rank 1 2 3Experimental Investigation and Optimization of Metal Cutting Parameters 195
FIGURE 11.4 Main influence graph regarding means.
For instance, tool feed raised from 0.05 m/rev upto 0.1 mm/rev, 
metallic surface irregularities/roughness reduced from 1.72 µm up to 1.53 
µm and consequently increased to 1.84 µm at metal machining/cutting 
speed of 80 m/min, as shown in Figure 11.5(a). Furthermore, when a 
metal cut depth grew between 0.15 and 0.20 mm, the surface topography 
texture roughness reduced, then enlarged whenever the metal cutting 
depth extended toward 0.25 mm by a metal cutting/machining speed 80 
m/min, as shown in Figure 11.5(b). The use of optimal cutting parameters 
resulted in minimal metallic surface roughness. At 80 m/min, the impact 
of tool feed (a) metal cut depth (b) on metallic surface-roughness is shown 
in Figure 11.5.
Irregularities/roughness in surface texture of metals could reduce from 
1.44 to 1.24 µm by raising tool feed from 0.05 to 0.1 m-m/rev, and subse￾quently raised to 1.38 microns at 100 m/min cutting speed, as displayed 
in Figure 11.6(a). When the metallic cutting depths was raised from 0.15 
to 0.25 mm at a metal cutting/machining speed 100 m/min, the metallic 
surface topography texture unevenness/finish rose beginning 1.24 microns 
up to 1.44 microns, as shown in Figure 11.6(b). So, when score represents 
the confidence interval, i.e., R > 0.95, an experimental and computational/
mathematical model matching those data are fully agreed upon. In an 
equation, (y) corresponds to the average metallic surface roughness/
quality and (x) the metal cut depth/tool feed. Whenever the tool’s feed 196 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
of machined component rate is enlarged or raised up from 0.05 to 0.15 
mm/rev, a surface-roughness topography of machined part increases to 
1.88 m at a constant speed of metal cutting of 100 m/min. The metallic 
surface finish rose as the metal cut depth grew from 0.15 to 0.2 m-m, and 
subsequently reduced as the metal cut depth rose to 0.25 mm at a speed 
of 100 m/min.
FIGURE 11.5 The variation of (a) feed and (b) cut depth on Ra at Vc = 80 m/min.Experimental Investigation and Optimization of Metal Cutting Parameters 197
FIGURE 11.6 Variation of (a) feed rate and (b) depth of cut Ra, Vc = 100 m/min.
Figure 11.7 demonstrates that when the metal cutting increase in speed of 
machining process starting from 80 to 100 m/min, a metallic surface quality/
roughness rises on continuous feed rates 0.05 and 0.1 m/rev. However, at 
a tool feed rate of 0.15 m-m/rev, the metallic surface roughness dropped 
gradually at first, rising from 80 to 100 m/min, and at that moment fast at 
what time the metal cutting/machining speeds were raised toward 120 m/min 
machining speed. Figure 11.8 depicts the influence of metal cutting speed on 
metallic surface roughness/quality at 0.05, 0.1, and 0.15 m-m/rev feed rates.198 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
FIGURE 11.7 Illustrated the variation of (a) feed and (b) the cut depth upon Ra at Vc=120 
m/min.
The smaller mean value is used to pick three criteria for forecasting the 
correct reply. The ideal level of variables mean value for roughness of the 
surface is A3B2C1. The preceding regression analysis calculation formulas 
are utilized which decide the expected rate to replies (surface roughness 
rating):
Yopt = m mA3 m + mB2 m mC1 m + − −+ − ( ) ( ) ( ) (11.5)Experimental Investigation and Optimization of Metal Cutting Parameters 199
where m denotes the overall average capability mean amount for machined 
surface and 3 denotes the optimal level score of component A variable, 1 = 
optimized level value for factor B parameters, 3 = optimized level value for 
factor C.
y = 1.61 + 1.35-1.61 + 1.46-1.61 + 1.59-1.61 opt ( ) ( ) ( ) (11.6)
opt y 1.19 = (Forecasts the mean amount of surface quality/smoothness and 
irregularities.)
11.3.1 S/N RATIO ANALYSIS
Through tests, the G. Taguchi technique uses the S/N ratio to discover 
disparities throughout surface roughness measurements. The formulae 
used to estimate S/N is dependent arranged to a properties occurring into 
responses parameters are evaluated. For this investigation, Table 11.6 shows 
the responses table for S/N where lower is preferable. The example that 
follows shows a computation for an output consequence table for an S/N for 
variable C (depth of cut):
( ) ( ) ( ) 4.71 5.15 1.87
/ 1 3.9, 3
S NC
− +− +− − = = − (11.7)
FIGURE 11.8 Demonstrates the impact of machining operations speed on machined 
surface quality/roughness.200 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
( ) ( ) ( ) 3.70 5.48 2.80
/ 2 40
3
S NC
− +− +− = = − (11.8)
( ) ( ) ( ) 5.30 4.19 3 17
/ 3 4.22
3
S NC
− +− +−− = = − (11.9)
The cutting speed wt.% has the biggest influence on the S/N, rank = 1, 
delta = 2.33 to which extent of cut depth has a lowermost impact based upon 
S/N (rank = 3, delta = 0.31). Table 11.6 demonstrates the optimum process 
variable where surface reliability nature of the combo on smaller is superior, 
as per the result of this study. A variable configuration A3B2C1 is viable 
for improving sample surface properties. Figure 11.8 depicts the main-effect 
graph of the control variable for the surface texture quality S/N ratio.
TABLE 11.6 Resulting Response for S/N Where Smaller is Preferable.
Levels Speed of metal cutting Tool feed/loading Metal cutting depth
A B C
1 -4.57 -4.45 -3.91
2 -4.94 -3.25 -4.00
3 -2.61 -4.42 -4.22
Delta 2.33 1.2 0.31
Rank 1 2 3
FIGURE 11.9 S/N ratio main/fundamental influences graph.Experimental Investigation and Optimization of Metal Cutting Parameters 201
The computed scoring and rating of the maximum peak points obtained 
within every graph represents the optimal at a certain level and the amount 
of this equivalent attribute. These additionally demonstrate an ideal circum￾stances within an experimental observations array. Since a smaller S/N ratio 
is better for this investigation, the lowermost S/N were chosen, as shown 
Figure 11.8. Accordingly, the combination configuration for A3B2C1 was 
setup as follows—the cutting/machining speed was set to stage 3, the feed 
rate was set to stage 2, and the depth of cut was set to stage 1 
11.3.2 ANALYSIS TO VARIANCE (ANOVA) FOR SURFACE 
ROUGHNESS
The analysis of variance (ANOVA) method was used to discover the far 
more crucial elements influencing the surface quality roughness occurring 
in a produced product item. Each factor’s percentage contribution was 
determined. At 95% level of confidence, simply the cutting/machining speed 
components have statistical and physical importance for determining the 
value of surface irregularity throughout cutting/machining condition vari￾ables. It was computed and shown in Table 11.7, with percentage contribu￾tions for each element, where D-O-F stands for degree of freedom, S-S-T 
represents the total/entire sum of squares, S-S-T-R is an abbreviation for 
treatment sum of squares, M-S-E is an abbreviation for mean square error, 
and F = F ratio is determined using the Minitab-18 program.
TABLE 11.7 Surface Roughness Data with Analysis of Variance.
Source S-S-T S-S-T-R M-S-E F P %, Contribution Significance 
Α = 0.05
Cutting/machining speed 0.30 0.30 0.15 28.54 0.03 74.44% High significant
Feed 0.09 0.09 0.05 8.89 0.10 22.33% Significant
Depth of cut 0.003 0.003 0.002 0.31 0.76 0.75% Less significant
Residual error 0.01 0.01 0.005 2.48%
Total 0.403 100%
Table 11.8 shows that metal cutting wt.% (74.22%), metal cut depths 
(0.75%), and tool feed of response (22.33%), all have a substantial influence 
on the surface roughness of hardened A-I-S-I 1043 steel circular specimens. 
Therefore, speed of metal cutting is an effective machined surface texture 
and topography roughness of hardened A-I-S-I 1043 in the dried hard/hard￾ened turning operation/procedure process. Table 11.8 displays a maximum 202 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
factors setting for machined surface as determined by the experiment’s 
design and experimental results. In this investigation, the optimal parameters 
were chosen to be at a greater cutting speed, a moderate rate of feed, and a 
minimal metal cut depths of A3B2C1.
TABLE 11.8 Optimal Variables Configurations Level and Respective Results Amounts.
Governable factors Level nominated Rate of level Rank of influencing reaction/response
Cutting/machining speed 3 120 1
Feed rate/loading 2 0.1 2
Cutting depth 1 0.15 3
11.3.3 CONFIRMATION/VALIDATION EXPERMENT 
EXAMINATION
The experimental results have confirmed the best mix of process components 
and their calculated amounts to ensure optimum results. Finally, the projected 
values were compared with the experimental results. If one of the measured 
data in the orthogonal design array validated the optimal process factors 
and related optimum levels, no confirmation test was necessary. Taking this 
into account, this study did not need a confirmation test because the optimal 
grouping into variables and its proximal (A3B2C1) matched in the direction 
of investigation of orthogonal array (OA) through trail investigations of 
eight circumstances. As a result, a mean was derived by averaging the trial’s 
summary statistics. The optimum condition of parameters from Table 11.8 
was 120 m/min metal cutting/machining speed, 0.1 mm/rev amount of feed 
advanced rate, and 0.15 mm metal cut depths on machined surface. Table 
11.9 compares confirmed experimental and projected outcomes for surface 
roughness/quality measurements. Table 11.9 shows that the difference 
between experimental results and expected results, which is quite minor. 
The score/rating forecasting by the Taguchi technique are quite close to the 
ones found practically. These results demonstrate that the experiment surface 
roughness findings are highly linked with the assessed outcomes.
TABLE 11.9 Comparison with Expected and Actual Practical Data Confirmation.
Response/reaction Optimum factor Projected rate Investigational rate
Surface Irregularity/roughness (µm) A3B2C1
Mean S/N Mean S/N
1.19 -1.69 1.24 -1.87Experimental Investigation and Optimization of Metal Cutting Parameters 203
11.4 CONCLUSION
The pioneering investigations using the G. Taguchi orthogonal design arrays 
showed the valuable/efficient useful tool method by lowering the amount of 
experiments trials; as a result, the usage of assets in hard machined mate￾rialturning of hardened A-I-S-I 1043 steel workpiece material may be reduced. 
The work piece cutting/machining speed through 120 m/min, intermediate 
rates of feed/loading tool by 0.1 mm/rev, and smaller metal cutting depths 
by 0.15 mm were chosen for the harder material turning operation of A-I-S-I 
1043 steel for smallest surface roughness/finish (excellent surface quality). 
A3B1C3 optimizes cutting settings to achieve reduced surface roughness, 
resulting in a superior finish of surface of the machined product, which was 
the study’s goal. According to the variance analysis (ANOVA), the speed of 
machining operations emerged as the crucial/influential point component for 
machined surface, following with feed rate/value, impacting with approxi￾mately 74.22% and 22.33%, respectively. Hard metallic material turning 
during dry conditions can substitute cylindrical grinding, well with added 
benefit of an ecologically benign manufacturing process (to minimize envi￾ronmental dangers) caused due to the utilization of cutting coolants. This 
investigation has shown mainly the hard metallic material turning of A-I-S-I 
1043 hardened steel provided superior surface finish/smoothness properties 
with minor cutting tool attrition at a greater metal cutting speed of 120 m/
min, a moderate rate of feed/loading tool with 0.1 mm/rev, and a lower metal 
cut depths of 0.15 mm.
Future research might focus on employing MQ and nano-coolants to 
better optimize cutting settings, as well as studying stress, tooltip deforma￾tion, and strain utilizing numerical simulation and modeling. Since those 
criteria are tough to examine through experimentation.
KEYWORDS
• surface quality
• hard machining
• tool wear
• Taguchi S/N-based optimization204 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
REFERENCES
1. Cristina-Iuliana, B. Factors Influencing Surface Integrity in Hard Machining of 
Steels—A Review. Int. J. Sci. Eng. Res. 2015, 6 (5), 38–43.
2. Wang, X.; Huang, C.; Zou, B.; Liu, H.; Zhu, H.; Wang, J. a New Method to Evaluate the 
Machinability of Difficult-to-Cut Materials. Int. J. Adv. Manuf. Technol. 2014, 75 (1–4), 
91–96.
3. Karkalos, N. E.; Galanis, N. I.; Markopoulos, A. P. Surface Roughness Prediction for 
the Milling of Ti–6Al–4V ELI Alloy with the Use of Statistical and Soft Computing 
Techniques. Measurement 2016, 90, 25–35.
4. Markopoulos, A. P.; Davim, J. P. Advanced Machining Processes: Innovative Modeling 
Techniques; CRC Press, 2017.
5. Gajrani, K. K.; Suvin, P. S.; Kailas, S. V.; Sankar, M. R. Hard Machining Performance 
of Indigenously Developed Green Cutting Fluid Using Flood Cooling and Minimum 
Quantity Cutting Fluid. J. Clean. Prod. 2019, 206, 108–123.
6. Temam, K.; Jiru, M.; Sisay, A. Optimization of Cutting Parameters for Free Cutting 
Brass Using Taguchi Method. Ethiop. J. Sci. Sustain. Dev. 2020, 7 (2).
7. Zhang, X.; Peng, Z.; Li, Z.; Sui, H.; Zhang, D. Influences of Machining Parameters on 
Tool Performance when High-Speed Ultrasonic Vibration Cutting Titanium Alloys. J. 
Manuf. Process. 2020, 60 188–199.
8. Gajrani, K. K.; Suresh, S.; Sankar, M. R. Environmentally Friendly Hard Machining 
Performance of Uncoated and MoS2 Coated Mechanical Micro-Textured Tungsten 
Carbide Cutting Tools. Tribol. Int. 2018, 125, 141–155.
9. Günay, M.; Yücel, E. Application of Taguchi Method for Determining Optimum Surface 
Roughness in Turning of High-alloy White Cast Iron. Measurement 2013, 46 (2), 
913–919.
10. Azizi, M. W.; Belhadi, S.; Yallese, M. A.; Mabrouki, T.; Rigal, J. F. Surface Roughness 
and Cutting Forces Modeling for Optimization of Machining Condition in Finish Hard 
Turning of AISI 52100 Steel. J. Mech. Sci. Technol. 2012, 26 (12), 4105–4114.
11. Li, B.; Zhang, S.; Zhang, Q.; Li, L. Simulated and Experimental Analysis on Serrated 
Chip Formation for Hard Milling Process. J. Manuf. Process. 2019, 44, 337–348.
12. Panda, A.; Sahoo, A. K.; Kumar, R.; Das, R. K. A Review on Machinability Aspects for 
AISI 52100 Bearing Steel. Mater. Today: Proc. 2020, 23, 617–621.
13. Kurniawan, R.; Park, G. C.; Park, K. M.; Zhen, Y.; Kwak, Y. I.; Kim, M. C.; Lee, J. 
M.; Ko, T. J.; Park, C.-S. Machinability of Modified Inconel 713C Using a WC TiAlN￾coated Tool. J. Manuf. Process. 2020, 57, 409–430.
14. Das, S. R.; Mohapatra, D. K.; Routray, P. C.; Rout, B. A. Effects and Optimization of 
Machining Parameters in Hard Turning Process. J. Eng. Innov. Res. 2015, 5 (1), 1–9.
15. Dogra, M.; Sharma, V. S.; Sachdeva, A.; Suri, N. M.; Dureja, J. S. Tool Wear, Chip 
Formation and Workpiece Surface Issues in CBN Hard Turning: A Review. Int. J. 
Precis. Eng. Manuf. 2010, 11 (2), 341–358.
16. Mali, N. M.; Mahender, T. Wear Analysis Wear Analysis Of Single Point Cutting Tool 
With And Without Coating. Int. J. Adv. Manuf. Technol. 2015.
17. Borse, S. C. Optimization of Turning Process Parameter in Dry Turning of SAE52100 
steel. Int. J. Mech. Eng. Technol. 2014, 5 (12), 01–08.
18. Bouacha, K.; Yallese, M. A.; Mabrouki, T.; Rigal, J. F. Statistical Analysis of Surface 
Roughness and Cutting Forces Using Response Surface Methodology in Hard Turning Experimental Investigation and Optimization of Metal Cutting Parameters 205
of AISI 52100 Bearing Steel with CBN Tool. Int. J. Refract. Met. Hard Mat. 2010, 28
(3), 349–361.
19. Pradeep, A. V.; Raju, D. L.; Ramakrishna, S. Cutting Force Analysis in Hard Turning 
of AISI 52100 Steel Using Multi-layer Coated Carbide Inserts-RSM Approach. Mater. 
Today: Proc. 2019.
20. Kumar, M.; Baran, A. Analaysis of Cutting Force and Optimazation of Cuttind 
Parameters in High-speed Ball end Milling. J. Proc. Mater. Sci. 2014, 1623–1632.
21. Kumar, M.; Baran, A. Analaysis of Cutting Force and Optimazation of Cuttind 
Parameters in High-Speed Ball end Milling. J. Proc. Mater. Sci. 2014, 1623–1632.
22. Saez-de-Buruaga, M.; Gainza, L.; Aristimuno, P.; Soler, D.; Ortiz-de-Zarate, G.; 
Aizpuru, O.; Arrazola, P. J. FEM Modeling of Hard Turning 42CrMoS4 Steel. Proc. 
CIRP 2019, 82, 77–82.
23. An, Q.; Wang, C.; Xu, J.; Liu, P.; Chen, M. Experimental Investigation on Hard Milling 
of High Strength Steel Using PVD-AlTiN Coated Cemented Carbide Tool. Int. J. 
Refract. Metals Hard Mat. 2014, 43, 94–101.
24. Kene, A. P.; Choudhury, S. K. Analytical Modeling of Tool Health Monitoring System 
Using Multiple Sensor Data Fusion Approach in Hard Machining. Measurement 2019,
145, 118–129.
25. Kaladhar, M. Evaluation of Hard Coating Materials Performance on Machinability 
Issues and Material Removal Rate During Turning Operations. Measurement 2019, 135,
493–502.
26. Kumar, S. R.; Kulkarni, S. K. Analysis of Hard Machining of Titanium Alloy by Taguchi 
Method. Mater. Today: Proc. 2017, 4 (10), 10729–10738.
27. Yallese, M. A.; Chaoui, K.; Zeghib, N.; Boulanouar, L.; Rigal, J. F. Hard Machining of 
Hardened Bearing Steel Using Cubic Boron Nitride Tool. J. Mater. Proc. Technol. 2009,
209 (2), 1092–1104.
28. Karaguzel, U.; Olgun, U.; Uysal, E.; Budak, E.; Bakkal, M. Increasing Tool Life in 
Machining of Difficult-to-cut Materials Using Nonconventional Turning Processes. Int. 
J. Adv. Manuf. Technol. 2015, 77 (9–12), 1993–2004.
29. Kim, S. W.; Lee, D. W.; Kang, M. C.; Kim, J. S. Evaluation of Machinability by Cutting 
Environments in High-speed Milling of Difficult-to-cut Materials. J. Mater. Process. 
Technol. 2001, 111 (1–3), 256–260 .
30. Tang, L.; Sun, Y.; Li, B.; Shen, J.; Meng, G. Wear Performance and Mechanisms of 
PCBN Tool in Dry Hard Turning of AISI D2 Hardened Steel. Tribol. Int. 2019, 132,
228–236 .
31. Shouszhi, D.; Yanting, D.; Weixiang, S. The Detection and Compensation of Tool Wear 
in Process. J. Mater. Proc. Technol. 1995, 48 (1–4), 283–290 .
32. Mia, M.; Dey, P. R.; Hossain, M. S.; Arafat, M. T.; Asaduzzaman, M.; Ullah, M. S.;
Zobaer, S. T. Taguchi S/N Based Optimization of Machining Parameters for Surface 
Roughness, Tool Wear and Material Removal Rate in Hard Turning Under MQL Cutting 
Condition. Measurement 2018, 122, 380–391.
33. Guo, Y. B.; Yen, D. W. A FEM Study on Mechanisms of Discontinuous Chip Formation 
in Hard Machining. J. Mater. Process. Technol. 2004, 155, 1350–1356.
34. Zhang, X.; Wu, S.; Wang, H.; Liu, C. R. Predicting the Effects of Cutting Parameters 
and Tool Geometry on Hard Turning Process Using Finite Element Method. J. Manuf. 
Sci. Eng. 2011, 133 (4).206 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
35. Umbrello, D.; Hua, J.; Shivpuri, R. Hardness-based Flow Stress and Fracture Models for 
Numerical Simulation of Hard Machining AISI 52100 Bearing Steel. Mater. Sci. Eng. A
2004, 374 (1–2), 90–100.
36. Puchkin, V. N.; Solonenko, V. G.; Solonenko, L. A.; Kononenko, T. V. Influence of the 
Temperature in Machining Hard-to-work Steel. Russ. Eng. Res. 2010, 30 (8), 830–834.
37. Thiele, E. W., Jr., Kundig, K. J.; Murphy, D. W.; Soloway, G.; Duffin, B. Comparative 
Machinability of Brasses, Steels and Aluminum Alloys: CDA’s Universal Machinability 
Index. SAE Transac. 1990, 362–371.
38. Sharma, V. S.; Dhiman, S.; Sehgal, R.; Sharma, S. K. Estimation of Cutting Forces and 
Surface Roughness for Hard Turning Using Neural Networks. J. Intell. Manuf. 2008, 19
(4), 473–483.
39. Chen, W. Cutting Forces and Surface Finish when Machining Medium Hardness Steel 
Using CBN Tools. Int. J. Mach. Tools Manuf. 2000, 40 (3), 455–466 .
40. Hessainia, Z.; Belbah, A.; Yallese, M. A.; Mabrouki, T.; Rigal, J. F. On the Prediction 
of Surface Roughness in the Hard Turning Based on Cutting Parameters and Tool 
Vibrations. Measurement 2013, 46 (5), 1671–1681.
41. Sahin, Y.; Motorcu, A. R. Surface Roughness Model in Machining Hardened Steel with 
Cubic Boron Nitride Cutting Tool. Int. J. Refract. Metals Hard Mat. 2008, 26 (2), 84–90.
42. Patel, V. D.; Gandhi, A. H. Analysis and Modeling of Surface Roughness Based on 
Cutting Parameters and Tool Nose Radius in Turning of AISI D2 Steel Using CBN Tool. 
Measurement 2019, 138, 34–38.
43. Ahmed, G. M. S.; Quadri, S. S. H.; Mohiuddin, M. S. Optimization of Feed and Radial 
Force in Turning Process by Using Taguchi Design Approach. Mater. Today: Proc.
2015, 2 (4–5), 3277–3285.Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes. 
Sandip Kunar, Prasenjit Chatterjee, and M. Sreenivas Reddy (Eds.)
© 2025 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
MODELING AND OPTIMIZATION 
OF DEFORMATION LOAD IN WARM 
CONTINUOUS EXTRUSION PROCESS
TARIKU DESTA1, DEVENDRA KUMAR SINHA1, 
PERUMALLA JANAKI RAMULU1, BIRHANE ASSEFA GEMEDA1, and 
RAM SEWAK SINGH2
1Mechanical Engineering Department, School of Mechanical, 
Chemical and Materials Engineering, Adama Science and Technology 
University Adama, Ethiopia
2Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering, School 
of Electrical Engg. and Computing, Agama Science and Technology 
University, Adama, Ethiopia
CHAPTER 12
ABSTRACT
Throughout the continuous extrusion fabrication, the influence of feedstock 
heat and extrusion wheels speed motion on feedstock deform are crucial. The 
warmed operating work strategy enabling deformations of feedstock base 
materials mostly in continuous extrusion operations have been provided. 
The numerical investigation was carried out utilizing an FEM modeling tool 
DEFORM-3D to examine the impact of feedstock heat and extrusion wheels 
speed movement on processing variables, like load/pressure, required for 
feedstock deformation of the material between beginning feedstock entry to 
die release. The investigations were planned and designed using the response 
surface methodology (RSM). Within continuous extrusion manufacturing 
and fabrication method, a mathematical formulation had also been employed 
to maximize the feedstock temperature. For confirmation of the constructed 208 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
computational formula, a statistical variance analysis (ANOVA) was done. 
The appropriate temperature of the feedstock and extrusion wheels’ speed for 
reduction of the total overall force/load required to feedstock deform have 
indeed been determined using surfaces and contours graphs. A confirmatory 
experiment was performed using an available-on-the-market CONFORM 
extrusion device setup system TBJ 350 to reconcile the mathematical findings 
against the experimental data. The micrographs and hardness of something 
like the extruded samples component after deforming were contrasted to 
the characteristics of the feedstock material prior to deformation at optimal 
extrusion velocity of wheels (10 RPM) and feedstock heating temperature 
(200°C). The improvement rises in temperature feedstock reduced the 
deformation pressure/load and improved the metallurgical and mechanical 
characteristics of the component and item-produced product qualities.
12.1 INTRODUCTION
The need/requirement of continued product profiling throughout multidisci￾plinary engineering research purposes is expanding daily. The British Atomic 
Energy Department initiated the continuous shaping technique.1 The primary 
restriction of the traditional extrusion technique is that it is unable to generate 
redistricted infinite product geometries. The traditional forming technique 
enables the formation of unlimited lengths of goods of component item with 
great dimensional precision and outstanding metallurgical and mechanical 
qualities. Figure 12.1 depicts the continuous forming extrusion process and 
the tooling employed.2
FIGURE 12.1 Principle of continuous extrusion process.
Source: Reprinted with permission from Ref. [27]. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by/4.0/Modeling and Optimization of Deformation Load 209
Kim et al. investigated the impact of process factors on the conforming 
system’s process parameters. The flowing behavior of the material, the 
strain efficiency, and temperature dispersed or spread were all investigated. 
DEFORM-3D, a numerical modeling software, was used in the inquiry.3
Kim et al. used upper bound techniques to estimate the power needed 
during feedstock deformation of the material between feedstock entrances 
to die exhaust. Conceptual findings were confirmed against statistical and 
mathematical simulation outcomes, which were determined to be in excellent 
agreement.4 Under varied friction circumstances, the technique phenomenon 
of flash creation in the continuous extrusion method for materials for copper 
feedstock were explored.5,6 The flash of mechanics production within contin￾uous extrusion fabrication approaches were investigated using an analytical 
mathematical framework model. The functional connection was discovered 
among flash creation, extrusion force, and magnitude dimension of the flash 
gap and friction.7 Therefore, for forecasting of temperatures, stress, strain 
rate, and strain domains within workpiece material, a mathematical formalism 
model for continuous extrusion manufacturing methods were constructed. 
Crucial data on system optimization and control was supplied.8 The material 
movement and processing parameters were influenced through changes in the 
geometry of tool in continuous extrusion operation and procedure techniques. 
It really is advised to simplify tool designs.9 Control and sensing mecha￾nisms were developed with advancement and improvement in quality of the 
product.10–12 Both analytical and numerical examinations were conducted for 
the investigation occurring in surface defects and the curling phenomena.13–15
During the manufacturing of copper bus bars, the influence velocity of wheel 
on continuous extrusion approaches was explored again for study of effec￾tive stresses and strains, temperature area distribution, and damages area.16
Inside this continuous extrusion fabrication method, the best combination of 
wheel velocity is identified for enhancing the consistency quality of grain 
dimension and growth using AA 6063 feedstock composition material.17,18
The influence on feedstock heat was studied during continuous extrusion 
to figure out the appropriate load and power necessary for extrusion of the 
feedstock component material through die perforation.19–21 The temperatures 
of both extrusion wheel, temperature of such feedstock rod, and the circum￾ference speed of an extrusion wheel, all exert a substantial influence on the 
whole continuous extrusion techniques.22–24 The slab technique was used to 
do load consideration of the potential upon the deformation that occurs on 
Al-Ti-B alloy, which is the feedstock material.24,25 Many studies had indeed 
been undertaken in the continuous fabrication industry with pure aluminum 210 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
and copper, although relatively few studies on the combined significance of 
feedstock impact temperatures and velocity of wheel for extrusion within the 
continuous extrusion method on its deformation plastic operation features had 
been undertaken. Therefore, as a consequence, this study used DEFORM￾3D to conduct a numerical examination of the pressure/force necessary 
for extrusion occurring into feedstock material analysis. Response surface 
methodology (RSM) was used to optimize process variables throughout the 
continuous extrusion manufacturing and fabrication method; these extrusion 
wheel velocity and feedstock temperatures were considered for this study. 
This study has found that several researches have indeed been performed 
and the results validated by running experiments using an available-on-the￾market continuous extrusion device, the TBJ 350. Metallographic, hardness, 
and tensile tests have been used to compare the mechanical and metallurgical 
characteristics of the feedstock material both before and after deformation.
12.2 MATERIALS AND PROCEDURES
This study models and optimizes process variables of continuous extrusion 
techniques for aluminum alloy AA1100 feedstock materials. Thorough 
computational examinations have been carried out at different wheel speeds 
and feedstock condition of temperatures. DEFORM-3D was employed as 
just a simulation platform. Minitab was utilized to design and plan the inves￾tigations’ trials in the experimental design. RSM was used to anticipate the 
optimal output variable/extrusion load in the continuous extrusion-forming 
fabrication methods by determining the appropriate maximum value of 
both velocity of wheel extrusion and feedstock conditions temperature. Its 
model appropriateness has also been assessed by using the variance analysis 
test (ANOVA). To validate the projected outcome, a confirmation test was 
performed using a commercially available TBJ 350 conform extrusion 
system. Hardness and metallographic examinations were used to compare 
the metallurgical and mechanical parameters of the feedstock material both 
before and after deformation. Second-order polynomial response surface 
equations of mathematical model may be used to determine the link realized 
between process input variables and the response factors of the continuous 
extrusion fabrication approach and techniques as follows:
2
0 Y b bx b x b x x u = +∑ +∑ +∑ i iu ii iu ij iu ju (12.1)
whereas Yu represents the corresponding responsible for the generation, xiu
represents the coded values/parameters of i-th continuous extrusion variables for Modeling and Optimization of Deformation Load 211
the u-th tests, and bi
 and bii represent the second-class or second-order coefficient 
of regression determination. This second derivative seems to be throughout this 
polynomial equation’s summed signal referring to the linear influence; whereas, 
the third term reflects the greater order effect. The interaction impacts of process/
operation variables/factors are included in the fourth term of the formulation.
To maximize the experimentation circumstances, a two-factor design 
matrix with three different levels was adopted. The factorial experiments’ 
fundamental goal is to demonstrate the link between both the answer as 
predictor/dependent variables and the parameter/attribute values. This 
method aids in understanding how well the modifications/improvements in 
parameter amounts influence the response. Any combination of multiple 
variable levels results in a distinct optimum response with strongest reason.
Table 12.1 depicts the actual or reality score of the variables utilized in 
this study. Table 12.2 contains the experimentation strategy as well as the 
design matrix. The fitness model is vital and a very well-demanded overall 
data processing. The model’s correctness is checked using tests for the 
relevance of the regression analysis, the importance of model coefficients, 
and the testing against a lack of fit. Variance analysis (ANOVA) was utilized 
for performance investigation of the achievement of these goals.
TABLE 12.1 Experimental Factors and Levels.
Parameters Level
1 0 1
Velocity of wheel (X1) 4 6 8
Feedstock temperature (X2) 100 400 700
TABLE 12.2 Experimental Plan Design Matrix Depend on CCRD Technique.
No. trail/experiment Velocity of wheel (rpm) Temperature of feedstock (°C)
Coded Actual Coded Actual
1 2 2 0 400
2 0 6 0 400
3 0 6 0 400
4 0 6 0 400
5 1 8 1 700
6 1 4 1 100
7 1 4 1 700
8 0 6 2 200
9 0 6 2 1000212 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
No. trail/experiment Velocity of wheel (rpm) Temperature of feedstock (°C)
Coded Actual Coded Actual
10 1 8 1 100
11 2 10 0 400
12 0 6 0 400
13 0 6 0 300
12.3 RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS
12.3.1 NUMERICAL SIMULATION OF AA1100 FEEDSTOCK 
MATERIAL
A Ø9.5 mm aluminum alloy (AA 1100) feedstock material was numerically 
simulated by using the finite element modeling program, DEFORM-3D. Its 
rigid-plastic finite element’s fundamental equations are as follows:26
Formula of equilibrium:
, 0 σ ij j = (12.2)
Compatibility and incompressibility equations:
1
2
u u ij ij ji ε   = +     
0 v ij ε = = u (12.3)
Equations of constitutive:
( ) 23 3 , , 22 2 ij ij ij ij ij ij
σ
σ ε σ σ σ ε εε
ε ′ = =  ′ ′  =   (12.4)
Boundary conditions:
 , ij i j F i i u σ n F on S u U on S = = (12.5)
where ij and ji are the strain rate and stress, respectively; σ̄ and ɛ˙̄ are the 
effective strain rate and stress, respectively; Fj is the force on the Sf surface 
boundary; and Su is the velocity of deformation on the SU boundary surface. 
The variation method may be used to solve eqs 12.2–12.5 to get the weak 
form of rigid-plastic FEM.
0 F
v v i v S
σδε ε δε δ dv K dV Fi u dS +−= ∫ ∫∫ (12.6)
TABLE 12.2 (Continued)Modeling and Optimization of Deformation Load 213
whereas S and V are the surface area and volume to material, respectively; 
and K is the penalty constant. Von Mises yielding criteria are employed to 
solve problems (in the DEFORM-3D). Effective strain and stress are shown 
in eqs 12.7 and 12.8, respectively.
( ) ( ) ( ) 2 2 2
12 2 3 3 1
2
3
ε εε ε ε ε ε = ++ −− − (12.7)
( ) ( ) ( ) 222
12 2 3 3 1
1
2
σ σσ σ σ σ σ = ++ −− − (12.8)
where I and I are the principal strain and stress in direction I, respectively.
Table 12.3 displays the data for the different variables utilized in numer￾ical simulation/modeling.
TABLE 12.3 Variables Utilized in FE Simulation/Modeling.
S. No. Factors Details
Geometry data
1 Diameter of wheel, D (mm) 350
2 Diameter of die, d (mm) 6
3 Size of flash-gap, G (mm) 1
4 Length of die, L (mm) 10
Modeling data
1 Velocity of wheel, N (RPM) 4,6,8
2 Starting temperature (°C) 100
3 Surrounding atmosphere temperature(°C) 20
4 Temperature of die (°C) 450
Data of material (AA1100)
1 Yield stress (N/mm2) 31.9
2 Strain sensitivity rate 0.22
3 Capacity of heat (N/mm2 °C) 2.3
4 Conductivity (N/s °C) 238
5 Coefficient of convection N/s °C mm 0.02
6 Emissivity 0.3
7 Boltzmann constant (N/s °C mm4) 5.669 × 10-11
8 Coefficient heat transfer interface 
(N/s °C mm)
30
9 Coefficient of friction 0.95 (wheel groove and feedstock), 0.95 (feedstock 
and shoe), 0.95 (feedstock and abutment), 0.05 
(feedstock and die)214 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
Tetrahedral mesh components were utilized for meshing the various 
aspects of the 9.5 mm aluminum feedstock material continuous extrusion. 
The features of different mesh components within continuous extrusion 
method are shown in Figure 12.2.
TABLE 12.4 Tetrahedron Mesh Component Details of Ø9.5 mm AA1100.
S. no. Objects Mesh-elements
1 Work material piece 72580
2 Wheel of extrusion 157019
3 Shoe of extrusion 26757
4 Wheel of coining 75902
5 Abutment 75380
6 Die 46132
FIGURE 12.2 Mesh component details.
Table 12.4 lists the features of tetrahedral mesh elements. The mathemat￾ical simulations were run at several temperature heats. Figures 12.3–12.5 
illustrate the load/pressure disseminations in Y directions by 100, 300, and 
700 °C.Modeling and Optimization of Deformation Load 215
FIGURE 12.3 Load spreading/dispersing along the Y axis at 100 °C.
The overall load/pressure needed for feedstock deformation of the mate￾rial at 6 RPM of velocity of wheel extrusion were 110.96 kN at 100 °C, 102.79 
kN at 300 °C, and 111.95 kN at 700 °C shown as the analysis. According 
to the data, when temperature of feedstock increases, the overall load/force 
demanded for both the feedstock material extrusion rises and then becomes 
lowest at a certain temperature and furthermore rise in feedstock temperature 
raises the total load necessary again for extrusion of feedstock material. This 
is because the extent to temperature raises, the softening and hardness of 
the feedstock rise, providing less resistance of shear for the deformation of 
plastic process. However, once the temperature rises over a certain point, the 
sticking circumstances become more apparent, raising the force required for 
feedstock extruded. Figure 12.6 depicts the influence of feedstock tempera￾tures at 6 RPM of velocity of wheel extrusion and temperatures of 100, 300, 
and 700 °C.
12.3.2 EXTRUSION LOAD OPTIMIZATION AND MATHEMATICAL 
MODELING
RSM was utilized to perform mathematical modeling and optimization of 
the extrusion pressure necessary to deform the feedstock material within 
continuous extrusion techniques. The experimental strategy illustrated 
in Table 12.5 shows the varied extrusion wheel velocities and feedstock 216 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
temperatures. The confidence level of 95% analysis of variable relevance 
was performed. If a given effect’s P < 0.05, it does have a massive effect the 
out-response variable, that is, the extrusion load needed. The significance 
level of factor influencing extrusion load/pressure is shown in Table 12.6.
FIGURE 12.4 Load/pressure spreading/dispersing along the Y axis at 300 °C.
FIGURE 12.5 Load/force spreading/dispersing along Y direction at 700 °C.Modeling and Optimization of Deformation Load 217
FIGURE 12.6 Effect of feedstock temperature on load required for extrusion.
Through using outcomes display within Table 12.6, the generated math￾ematical model is given as follows:
Load P 106.069 0.133 1 3.433 2 1.500 1 2 ( ) =− + + X X X X (12.9)
An analysis of variance test has been carried out to estimate whether 
the derived model is statistically significant or not. The variance analysis 
is shown in Table 12.7, which shows that F values are exceptionally high 
for every one of the principal and interaction impacts of velocity of wheel 
extrusion and temperature feedstock. As a result, the resulting model shows 
statistical significance.
TABLE 12.5 Display to Experimental Strategy and Results for a Second-Order Central 
Composite Rotational Design.
Experiment 
No.
Velocity of wheel (rpm) Temperature of feedstock (°C) Load/pressure (kN)
Coded Actual Coded Actual
1 2 2 0 400 110
2 0 6 0 400 103
3 0 6 0 400 103
4 0 6 0 400 103
5 1 8 1 700 112
6 1 4 1 100 104
7 1 4 1 700 108218 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
Experiment 
No.
Velocity of wheel (rpm) Temperature of feedstock (°C) Load/pressure (kN)
Coded Actual Coded Actual
8 0 6 2 200 107
9 0 6 2 1000 120
10 1 8 1 100 102
11 2 10 0 400 108
12 0 6 0 400 103
13 0 6 0 300 103
R2 and adjusted R2 rate/amount are 99.93% and 99.91%, respectively, 
showing that the mathematics model is statistically significant and most well 
correlated. The residual values are similarly well dispersed along the best￾fitting line, indicating the model’s appropriateness, as shown in the residual 
graph (Figure 12.7). Figures 12.8–12.10 depict the surface, contour, and 
optimization graph of extrusion load required for different combination of 
velocity of wheel extrusion and temperature of feedstock.
TABLE 12.6 Examination of Significance to Load of Extrusion.
Term Coefficient t P
Constant 106.069 3609.662 0.000
Wheel velocity (X1) 0.133 4.359 0.002
Feedstock temperature (X2) 3.433 112.257 0.000
Wheel velocity *feedstock
Temperature (X1X2)
1.500 28.316 0.000
TABLE 12.7 Analysis Outcome of ANOVA to Load of Extrusion.
Source Degree of 
freedom
Sum of squares Mean sum of 
squares
F value P value
Regression 3 150.667 50.222 4474.11 0.000
Linear 2 141.667 70.838 6310.28 0.000
Interaction 1 9.000 4836.2 801.78 0.000
Residual error 1 0.101 193.3
Lack of fit 5 0.101 386.5
Pure error 4 0.0 0.0
Total 12 150.768
TABLE 12.5 (Continued)Modeling and Optimization of Deformation Load 219
FIGURE 12.7 Extrusion load/pressure residual graphs.
The surface and contour graph show that if the velocity of wheel extru￾sion is between 9 and 10 RPM and temperature of feedstock is between 150 
and 300 °C, the load needed for feedstock material extrusion is less than 
95 kN. The optimal load of extrusion seen from the optimum graph is 92.9 
kN for the aspects in mind combo of 10 RPM velocity of wheel extrusion 
and 200 °C temperature of feedstock. The optimized figure shows that the 
composite acceptability for this best parametric combo of velocity of wheel 
extrusion and temperature of feedstock is 1.0.
FIGURE 12.8 Load of extrusion contour graph.220 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
FIGURE 12.9 Load of extrusion surface graph.
FIGURE 12.10 Load of extrusion optimization graph.Modeling and Optimization of Deformation Load 221
The confirmation experiment was performed using an available commer￾cially continuous extrusion system, the TBJ 350. At 10 RPM velocity of 
wheel extrusion and 200 °C temperature of feedstock, 9.5 mm aluminum 
(AA 1100) rod feedstock was extruded to a Ø6 mm product. The overall 
load/pressure needed for feedstock material extrusion at 10 RPM and 200 °C 
was determined to be 97.55 kN. Therefore, the optimal value produced by 
RSM was validated with 5% as the error both experimental and numerical 
findings. The rod feedstock of Ø9.5 mm was extruded to product of Ø6 mm 
rod has been shown in Figure 12.11.
FIGURE 12.11 Al alloy extruded products (Ø6 mm at 10RPM, 200 °C).
The microstructure examined was performed on specimens both before 
and after deformation of extrusion. Figure 12.12 displayed specimens of rod 
feedstock and extruded products both prior to and after deformation.
FIGURE 12.12 Hardness and morphology of extruded rods and feedstock specimens 
respectively before and after 10 RPM and 200 °C deformation.
Subsequently refining the specimens during surface morphology, the 
faces of synthesized samples on which microstructures are to be acquired 
are polished on abrasive sheets, intermediate, and finest grades in lateral 
and longitudinal directions to prevent scratching and achieve mirror-like 222 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
faces. Polished specimens are critical in the microstructure study of various 
materials. Because certain materials, including aluminum, are particularly 
vulnerable to pressure, polishing them takes significantly longer time than 
polishing comparable materials, including brass and copper.
Polishing of generated samples was done until the surfaces of the 
synthesized samples had a scratched free mirrored. When polishing the 
fabricated specimens, Brasso, velvet cloth, and kerosene were utilized. 
After polishing, the specimens were etched with an appropriate etchant. 
Keller’s reagent (3 mL HCl, 5 mL HNO3, 2 mL HF, 190 mL water) was 
employed as an etchant for aluminum specimens. Eventually, the scratch￾free polished specimens were placed mostly on slide and under the 
microscope within various amplifications for attaining morphology of the 
synthesized specimens.
After suitable polishing, an OM (Optical Microscope) was utilized to get 
photographs of the microstructure. For capturing pictures under the magni￾fication and quantifying grain size by creating standard length, respectively, 
PL-Ink capture and Axiovision Rel 4.8 software were used.
Figures 12.13 and 12.14 illustrate the morphology of a feedstock prior 
to extrusion and the subsequent morphology of the extruded beneath extru￾sion wheel velocity of 10 RPM and 200°C, respectively. The morphology 
photographs of all specimens reveal no significant improvements in grain 
size prior to deformation of extrusion; however, grain morphologies vary 
as they are extended subsequent deformation to extrusion. Throughout 
continuous extrusion, the feedstock contains homogeneous granules. 
The morphology with fine and homogeneous grains is achieved using 
a velocity of wheel extrusion 10 RPM and a temperature of feedstock 
200°C.
FIGURE 12.13 (a) and (b) depict the morphologies of 9.5 mm aluminum specimens obtained 
from raw feedstock.Modeling and Optimization of Deformation Load 223
FIGURE 12.14 (a)–(c) depict the morphologies for aluminum specimens of Ø6 mm 
dimension at 10 RPM.
The hardness test was performed using a Vickers hardness testing 
equipment to determine the hardness of rod feedstock and extruded speci￾mens before and after deformation. According to one research, raising the 
temperature of feedstock at a specific amount of velocity of wheel extru￾sion enhanced the hardness of the extruded product. The hardness of the 
feedstock rod prior to extrusion was 28.8 VHN, whereas the hardness after 
deformation was 32.1 VHN.
12.4 CONCLUSION
The investigations were created with the CCRD design of experimentation 
tool. Using RSM, the CE process variables of Al alloy feedstock materials 
were optimized. The CAE simulation package DEFORM-3D was utilized to 
do the mathematical models of something like the continuous extrusion fabri￾cation product. The optimal load determined in the mathematical modeling 
and optimization procedure of continuous extrusion with Aluminum (AA 
1100) feedstock was concluded to be 10 RPM as velocity of wheel and 
200 °C as temperature of feedstock for a minimal extrusion load/pressure 
of 92.9 kN. The confirmatory/validity test outcome on a commercialized 
configuration was 97.55 kN, indicating a 5% discrepancy within allowed 
zone. The hardness of the extruded product was enhanced (32.1 VHN) as 
comparison toward the hardness of a raw feedstock material (28.8 VHN). 
The morphology test demonstrated elongation in the extruded product grains 
following deformation. The ideal amount of optimum CE process variables 
has forecasted and confirmed to assist metal forming manufacturers in the 
domain of continuous extrusion to improve rate of production, decrease 
energy consumption, and create robust surface finish products with excep￾tional surface quality and strength. The findings of this study was useful to 224 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
metal forming researchers working on continuous extrusion of non-ferrous 
alloys, particularly for non-ferrous feedstock materials.
KEYWORDS
• continuous extrusion
• finite element method
• simulation, DEFORM-3D
• response surface methodology
• analysis of variance
REFERENCES
1. Green, D. Continuous Extrusion-Forming of Wire Sections. J. Inst. Met. 1972, 100,
296–300.
2. Bridewater, M.; Maddock, B. In New Developments in Conform Technology for 
Continuous Extrusion, Proceedings of the Fifth International Aluminium Extrusion 
Technology Seminar, Chicago, USA, Aluminium Extruders Council and the Aluminium 
Association, Vol. 1, 1992; pp 413–419.
3. Kim, Y. H.; Cho, J. R.; Kim, K. S.; Jeong, H. S.; Yoon, S. S. A Study on Optimal Design 
for CONFORM Process. J. Mater. Proc. Technol. 1998, 80–81 (1), 671–675. DOI: 
10.1016/S0924-0136(98)00173-3
4. Cho, J. R.; Jeong, H. S. Parametric Investigation on the Surface Defect Occurrence in 
CONFORM Process by the Finite Element Method. J. Mater. Proc. Technol. 2000, 104
(3), 236–243. DOI: 10.1016/S0924-0136(00)00572-0
5. Manninen, T.; Katajarinne, T.; Ramsay, P. Analysis of Flash Formation in Continuous 
Rotary Extrusion of Copper. J. Mater. Proc. Technol. 2006, 177 (1–3), 600–603. DOI: 
10.1016/j.jmatprotec.2006.04.051
6. Pisano, A. A.; Fuschi, P.; Polizzotto, C. A Strain-Difference Based Nonlocal 
Elasticity Theory for Small-Scale Shear-Deformable Beams with Parametric 
Warping. Int. J. Multiscale Comput. Eng. 2020, 18 (1), 83–102. DOI: 10.1615/
IntJMultCompEng.2019030885
7. Manninen, T.; Katajarinne, T.; Ramsay, P. Numerical Simulation of Flash Formation in 
Continuous Rotary Extrusion of Copper. J. Mater. Process. Technol. 2006, 177 (1–3), 
604–607. DOI: 10.1016/j.jmatprotec.2006.04.054
8. Lu, J.; Saluja, N.; Riviere, A. L.; Zhou, Y. Computer Modelling of the Continuous 
Forming Extrusion Process of AA6061 Alloy. J. Mater. Process. Technol. 1998, 79
(1–3), 200–212. DOI: 10.1016/S0924-0136(98)00011-9Modeling and Optimization of Deformation Load 225
9. Manninen, T.; Ramsay, P.; Korhonen, A. S. In Three-Dimensional Numerical Modeling 
of Continuous Extrusion, 7th International Conference on Technology of Plasticity 
(ICTP) At: Yokohama, Japan, 2002.
10. Khawaja, K.; Clode, M. P.; Seneviratne, L. Benefits of Wheel-Tool Gap Sensing in 
Conform™ Extrusion Machinery. IEEE/ASME Transac. Mechatro. 2005, 10 (4), 
428–436. DOI: 10.1109/TMECH.2005.852486
11. Khawaja, K.; Seneviratne, L. In Sensing & Control of Conform™ Extrusion Gap 
Between Wheel and Tooling Plates, IEEE/ASME International Conference on Advanced 
Intelligent Mechatronics Proceedings, 2001. DOI: 10.1109/AIM.2001.936520
12. Khawaja, K.; Clode, M. P.; Althoefer, K.; Seneviratne, L. Gap Sensing Benefits in 
Conform (™) Extrusion Machinery. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom. Proc. 2004, 1 (1), 
529–534. DOI: 10.1109/ROBOT.2004.1307203
13. Cho, J. R.; Kim, Y. H.; Kim, K. S.; Jeong, H. S. ; Yoon, S. S. A Study of the Application 
of Upper Bound Method to the CONFORM Process. J. Mater. Process. Technol. 2000,
97 (1–3), 153–157. DOI:10.1016/S0924-0136(99)00366-0
14. Cho, J. R.; Jeong, H. S. Parametric Investigation on the Curling Phenomenon in 
CONFORM Process by Three-dimensional Finite Element Analysis. J. Mater. Process. 
Technol. 2001, 110 (1), 53–60. DOI: 10.1016/S0924-0136(00)00658-0
15. Cho, J. R.; Jeong, H. S. CONFORM Process: Surface Separation, Curling and Process 
Characteristics to the Wheel Diameter. J. Mater. Process. Technol. 2003, 136 (1–3), 
217–226. DOI: 10.1016/S0924-0136(03)00164-X
16. Peng-yue, W. U.; Shui-sheng, X. I. E.; Hua-qing, L. I.; Ming, Y. A. N.; Guo-jie, H.; 
Lei, C. Effect of Extrusion Wheel Angular Velocity on Continuous Extrusion Forming 
Process of Copper Concave Bus Bar. Trans. Nonferrous Met. Soc. China 2007, 17 (2), 
280–286. DOI: 10.1016/S1003-6326(07)60085-5
17. Zhao, Y.; Song, B.; Pei, J.; Jia, C.; Li, B.; Linlin, G. Effect of Deformation Speed 
on the Microstructure and Mechanical Properties of AA6063 During Continuous 
Extrusion Process. J. Mater. Proc. Technol. 2013, 213 (11), 1855–1863. DOI: 10.1016/j.
jmatprotec.2013.05.006
18. Rostami, R. B.; Schmauder, S. XFEM Simulation of Fatigue Crack Growth in Aluminum 
Zirconia Reinforced Composites. Int. J. Multiscale Comput. Eng. 2019, 17 (5), 469–481.
DOI: 10.1615/IntJMultCompEng.2019029470
19. Sinha, D. K.; Kumar, S. In Effect of Feedstock Temperature in Continuous Extrusion, 
Conference on AIMTDR, IIT, Guwahati, 2014.
20. Sinha, D. K.; Kumar, S.; Kumar, A.; Yadav, A. Mathematical Modeling to Predict 
Mechanical Properties of Copper (C101) Feedstock in Continuous Extrusion. IOP Conf. 
Mater. Sci. Eng. 2018, 404 (1). DOI: 10.1088/1757-899X/404/1/012052
21. Sinha, D. K.; Kumar, S.; Kumar, A.; Yadav, A. In Optimization of Process Parameters 
in Continuous Extrusion of Aluminum Alloy. IEEE International Conference on 
Computational and Characterization Techniques in Engineering and Science (CCTES), 
2018. DOI: 10.1109/CCTES.2018.8673980
22. Hodek, J.; Zemko, M. FEM Model of Continuous Extrusion of Titanium in Deform 
software. COMAT Recent Trends Struc. Mater. 2012, 11, 21–22. Corpus ID: 137801349
23. Zemko, M.; Hodek, J.; Kraus, L.; Dlouhy, J. FEM Modelling of Continuous Extrusion 
of High Strength Metals using commercial ConformTM Machine. Adv. Sci. Lett. 2013,
19 (3), 701–704. DOI: 10.1166/asl.2013.4807226 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
24. Cao, F.; Wen, J.; Ding, H.; Wang, Z.; Li, Y.; Guan, R.; Hou, H. Force Analysis and 
Experimental Study of Pure Aluminum and Al-5%Ti-1%B Alloy Continuous Expansion 
Extrusion Forming Processes. Transac. Nonferr. Metals Soc. China 2013, 23, 201–207. 
DOI: 10.1016/S1003-6326(13)62447-4
25. Formica, G.; Milicchio, F.; Lacarbonara, W. Storage and Damping Optimization in 
Hysteretic Multilayer Nanocomposites. Int. J. Multiscale Comput. Eng. 2020, 18 (2), 
141–157. DOI: 10.1615/IntJMultCompEng.2020032669
26. Yang, T. S. Finite Element Analysis of Square Cup Deep Drawing of Pure Titanium 
Metal Sheet at Elevated Temperatures. In Advanced Design and Manufacture to Gain a 
Competitive Edge; Vol. 1, 2008; pp 33–42. DOI: 10.1007/978-1-84800-241-8_4
27. Desta, Tariku & Sinha, Devendra & Ramulu, Perumalla & Beri, Habtamu. (2021). 
Microstructural and mechanical studies of feedstock material in continuous extrusion 
process. International Journal of Mechanical and Materials Engineering. 16. 10.1186/
s40712-021-00135-5.Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes. 
Sandip Kunar, Prasenjit Chatterjee, and M. Sreenivas Reddy (Eds.)
© 2025 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
OPTIMIZATION OF E-PULSE OF 
WEDM PARAMETERS ON TI-10V-2FE￾3AL ALLOY BY GRAY RELATIONAL 
ANALYSIS FOR IMPROVING THE 
SURFACE INTEGRITY
K. PARAMESHWAR1, SRINIVASA RAO NANDAM1, and 
D. G. THAKUR2
1Defence Metallurgical Research Laboratory, DRDO, 
Ministry of Defence, Hyderabad, Andhra Pradesh, India
2Department of Mechanical Engineering, DIAT (DU), Pune, 
Maharashtra, India
CHAPTER 13
ABSTRACT
A high-strength near-beta alloy called Ti-10V-2Fe-3Al is employed 
in airplane construction and other applications. For the machining of 
materials that are challenging to cut, wire electrical discharge machining 
(WEDM) is the most popular nontraditional machining technique. The 
surface integrity affects the performance of component as well. The white 
layer thickness (WLT) and surface roughness (SR) of WEDM surfaces 
generated by E-pulses on Ti-10V-2Fe-3Al were investigated along with 
the kerf-width and maximum material removal (MRR) rate. DOE, L9 
OA was preferred for performing the experiments with varying pulse￾off-time (T-off), pulse-on-time (T-on), servo voltage, and peak current. 
It is observed that the SR along with kerf-width and MRR are mainly 
attributed to the peak current whereas the WLT is attributed to T-on. The 228 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
gray relational analysis (GRA) was utilized to regulate the optimum factor 
setting for maximum MRR as well as minimum SR, kerf-width, and WLT. 
The validated optimized process parameter values are T-on of 12 µs, T-off 
of 40 µs, IP No. of 10, and SV of 20 V, which gave 14% of the significant 
reduction in WLT, 2% of SR, 12% of kerf-width, and 5% improvement in 
MRR.
13.1 INTRODUCTION
Alloys made of titanium exhibit excellent high strength-to-weight ratio, 
corrosion resistance, and strong fatigue resistance.1 As a result, these alloys 
are frequently employed in high-temperature applications in the aerospace 
and other industries. Alpha-beta alloy Ti-6Al-4V is utilized in both aero 
engine and airframe applications.2 Very recently, the beta-titanium alloy is 
introduced in airframe applications due to its greater strength and higher 
corrosion resistance. Ti-10V-2Fe-3Al is an indigenously developed high 
strength near-beta alloy for use in wings, wing supports, etc.3,4 However, the 
titanium alloys are tough for machining owing to its low thermal conduc￾tivity, low modulus of elasticity, and high chemical affinity with cutting tool 
materials.5,6
WEDM is a highly desired unconventional machining method due to its 
ease in the control of the machining process and process repeatability. Here, 
the electrical energy is utilized to create electric sparks and the removal of 
material is mainly attributed due to the generated sparks.7 The significant 
output responses are MRR, SR, and surface hardness. The vital input param￾eters that affect the output responses are the pulse-off-time peak current (IP), 
and pulse-on-time.8
Several researchers have carried out various investigations in the 
WEDM process on Ti-6Al-4V to improve the process performance to obtain 
better machining characteristics. But very limited literature is available on 
wire EDM machining of near beta-titanium alloy. The experiments have 
been conducted on the Ti-10V-2Fe-3Al alloy. However, the selection of 
suitable parameters for wire EDM for Ti-10V-2Fe-3Al alloy is challenging 
to increase the enhanced working accuracy. The quality of components and 
the rate of production can be greatly improved by the different performance 
optimization methods. The critical observations of some research have been 
presented in Table 13.1.Optimization of E-Pulse of WEDM Parameters 229
TABLE 13.1 Literature on Wire EDM Machining of Titanium Alloy.
Sl. 
no.
Author Material 
used
DOE 
technique
Findings of the study
1 Danil 
Ghodsiyeh et 
al.9
Ti-6Al-4V Taguchi 
method and 
RSM
HAZ and MRR rise with higher IP and 
T-on. The IP is a substantial factor that 
affects the surface crack density and WLT. 
2 Neerajshrama 
et al.10
Ti-6Al-4V Taguchi and 
GRA
Cutting speed increases with increasing the 
T-on due to increases in discharge energy. 
SR also increases with higher T-on. The 
SV, T-on, and T-off considerably affect the 
machined surface.
3 Feroze et al.11 Titanium 
alloy
Taguchi 
method
The table speed has a main influence on 
the recast layer thickness, whereas T-off 
has a lesser impact on the recast layer 
thickness.
4 Shivaprakasham 
et al.12
Ti-6Al-4V Response 
surface 
method
The voltage, feed rate, and capacitance 
have substantial effect on MRR. 
5 Prasad et al.13 Ti-6Al-4V Taguchi 
method
Both IP and T-off were the most important 
factors on MRR and SR. 
6 Mitali S. Mhatre 
et al.14
Ti-6Al-4V Taguchi and 
GRA 
IP is the vital factor that influences 
overcut, MRR, and surface integrity.
7 Kumar et al.15 Pure 
titanium
Response 
surface 
method
T-off, T-on, and IP setting number have 
deteriorated the surface integrity of the 
machined surfaces. 
8 Kumar et al.16 Pure 
titanium
Response 
surface 
method
T-on and IP have significantly worsened 
the microstructure of the machined 
surfaces. The machined surfaces 
have greater overlapping craters, and 
micro-cracks.
It is observed from the above literature that many researchers have 
studied the titanium alloy for the WEDM process on E-pulse for MRR and a 
few surface integrity aspects as a standalone response, but a combined study 
was not carried out. Therefore, a systematic experimental investigation has 
been performed by the WEDM process on Ti-10V-2Fe-3Al with E-pulse to 
study the effect of T-on, T-off, IP, and SV on the output responses of MRR, 
SR, Kerf-width, and WLT. DOE technique, Taguchi orthogonal array (OA), 
was utilized for the preparation of investigational matrix. Gray relational 
analysis (GRA) method was applied for the optimization of combined output 
responses.230 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
13.2 EXPERIMENTATION
13.2.1 WORK MATERIAL AND SPECIMEN PREPARATION
A thick disc of size diameter 60 × 20 mm was cut by the WEDM process from 
a forged Ti-10V-2Fe-3Al alloy rod of 1 m length. A rectangular specimen of 
58 × 30 × 20 mm size was separated from these round discs by the WEDM 
method. The composition of workpiece in weight percentage is revealed in 
Table 13.2.17
TABLE 13.2 Chemical Composition.
Sl. No. Element Weight %
1 V 9.0–11.0
2 Fe 1.6–2.2
3 Al 2.6–3.4
4 O 0.13
5 N 0.05
6 C 0.05
7 H 0.015
8 Y 0.005
9 Ti Balance
Source: Reprinted with permission from Ref. [17]. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by/4.0/
13.2.2 EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
The investigational system consists of three major subsystems, such as 
CNC pulse generator, machine tool, and dielectric unit as shown in Figure 
13.1(a). The WEDM 5 axis model of ultra-cut S2 from M/s Electronica, 
Pune, is used as a machine tool. The machine tool has a maximum travel 
of X: 600 mm, Y: 400 mm, and Z: 300 mm. Deionized water serves as a 
flushing agent, removing any debris generated during the cutting process; it 
also controlled the sustained ionization conditions within the spark gap by 
acting as a semiconductor between the workpiece and wire. The workpiece 
was held on the work table with a parallel clamp during the experiment. 
The workpiece and wire electrode were connected to the power supply of 
positive (anode) and negative (cathode) terminals, respectively, as shown in 
Figure 13.1(b).Optimization of E-Pulse of WEDM Parameters 231
FIGURE 13.1 (a) Wire EDM tool. (b) Workpiece held on the work table.
Source: Reprinted with permission from Ref. [17]. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by/4.0/
13.2.3 PROCESS PARAMETERS AND LEVELS
The results of the preliminary machining experiments were used to govern 
the range of the specified process limitations. The experimental parameters 
and their ranges selected for the experimentation are presented in Table 
13.3. A peak voltage setting of 1, water pressure of 106 cm²/kg, servo feed 
of 25 mm/min, wire tension of 10 grams, wire feed of 10 m/min, and wire 
diameter of 0.25mm were selected for the WEDM experiments. Experi￾ments were performed along the width of the job for 10 mm cutting length 
as per the DOE, Taguchi OA run order. An offset of 5 mm was maintained 
along the length of the workpiece to avoid the overlap of HAZ.
TABLE 13.3 Experimental Parameters and Levels.
Sl. 
no.
Coding Machining parameters Units Levels
1 2 3
1 A T-on µs 6 9 12
2 B T-off µs 40 50 60
3 C IP No. 10 11 12
4 D SV V 10 15 20
Source: Reprinted with permission from Ref. [17]. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by/4.0/232 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
13.2.4 CHARACTERIZATION TECHNIQUES
13.2.4.1 KERF-WIDTH
The machined test specimen is shown in Figure 13.2. The kerf was measured by 
an Optical profile projector (M/s Baty, UK, Model SM20) with an edge detector 
under 20 X magnification. The measurement of kerf width was performed at 
three distinct locations: start, middle, and end of Wire EDM pass. The enlarged 
view of kerf width measurement locations is shown in Figure 13.3.
FIGURE 13.2 Test specimen with machined slots.
FIGURE 13.3 Locations for Kerf-width measurement.
13.2.4.2 SURFACE ROUGHNESS
Surface roughness is an important aspect of the surface integrity. The 
selected three locations (left-hand side, middle, and right-hand side) on the 
WEDM machined surface for the measurement of surface roughness across 
the wire movement and along the direction on the wire pass are shown in Optimization of E-Pulse of WEDM Parameters 233
Figure 13.4. The cut-off length was set as 0.8 mm as per the ISO-3274 
standard. The Gaussian-type filter and an evaluation length of 4 mm with a 
traverse speed of 1 mm/s were applied. The Ra was evaluated by a contact￾type surface profilometer, Talysurf Intra–II, M/s Taylor Hobson, UK.
FIGURE 13.4 Surface roughness measurement locations.
13.2.4.3 WHITE LAYER THICKNESS
These samples were mounted into the Bakelite molds as indicated in Figure 
13.5 to analyze the cross-section of the WEDM machined surface. The 
samples were polished using a graded series of emery papers, diamond 
paste, and common metallographic methods. It was followed by dip etching 
with Kroll’s reagent. The white layer thickness analysis was performed by 
a digital optical microscope. The white layer thicknesses were measured on 
a wire EDM machined surface. The data was further analyzed by statistical 
software, Minitab 18.
FIGURE 13.5 Cross-sectional view of the wire EDM machined surface.234 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
13.2.4.4 MRR
MRR will significantly influence the component machining time. The 
machining time reduces with higher MRR. The readings of cutting speed 
were achieved from the machine controller. The MRR was computed 
utilizing eq (13.1).
MRR = CS × KW × HW (13.1)
where CS is the cutting speed in mm/min, KW is the kerf-width in mm, and 
HW is the height of the test specimen in mm.
13.3 RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS
The experimental results are revealed in Table 13.4. The higher value of 
MRR and lower values of SR, kerf width, and WLT are needed to enhance 
the component quality in the WEDM process. This multi-parametric optimi￾zation is performed using grey relational grade (GRG).
TABLE 13.4 Experimental Results.
Run order Kerf-width (mm) SR (µm) MRR (mm3/min) WLT (µm)
1 0.270 1.7218 0.972 6.120
2 0.338 2.8585 10.546 6.553
3 0.345 2.9228 9.936 8.308
4 0.320 2.6438 7.040 3.874
5 0.323 2.8160 7.687 9.023
6 0.284 1.6733 0.795 5.933
7 0.339 2.9096 10.238 7.670
8 0.286 1.7468 0.858 5.4604
9 0.331 2.8492 8.805 7.562
13.3.1 GRAY RELATIONAL ANALYSIS
The normalized results of MRR, SR, kerf-width, and WLT are displayed in 
Table 13.5. The deviation of sequences is indicated in Table 13.6. Table 13.7 
reveals the GRG and rank for each run order. It can be observed that the run 
order 1 has achieved highest GRG.Optimization of E-Pulse of WEDM Parameters 235
TABLE 13.5 Normalized Experimental Results.
Run
Order
Kerf-width
(mm)
SR
(µm)
MRR
(mm3/min)
WLT
(µm)
1 1.0000 0.9611 0.0181 0.5638
2 0.0933 0.0515 1.0000 0.4797
3 0.0000 0.0000 0.9375 0.1388
4 0.3333 0.2233 0.6405 1.0000
5 0.2933 0.0855 0.7069 0.0000
6 0.8133 1.0000 0.0000 0.6001
7 0.0800 0.0105 0.9684 0.2628
8 0.7867 0.9412 0.0064 0.6919
9 0.1867 0.0589 0.8214 0.2837
TABLE 13.6 Deviation Sequence.
Run Order Kerf-width 
(mm)
SR (µm) MRR (mm3/
min)
WLT (µm)
1 0.0000 0.0389 0.9819 0.4362
2 0.9067 0.9485 0.0000 0.5203
3 1.0000 1.0000 0.0625 0.8612
4 0.6667 0.7767 0.3595 0.0000
5 0.7067 0.9145 0.2931 1.0000
6 0.1867 0.0000 1.0000 0.3999
7 0.9200 0.9895 0.0316 0.7372
8 0.2133 0.0588 0.9936 0.3081
9 0.8133 0.9411 0.1786 0.7163
TABLE 13.7 Gray Relational Coefficients and GRG.
Run 
order
Kerf-width 
(mm)
SR (µm) MRR (mm3/
min)
WLT (µm) GRG Rank
1 1.0000 0.9279 0.3374 0.5341 0.6999 1
2 1.0515 0.3452 1.0000 0.4901 0.5477 5
3 1.0000 0.3333 0.8888 0.3673 0.4807 7
4 1.2500 0.3916 0.5817 1.0000 0.6005 4
5 1.2075 0.3535 0.6304 0.3333 0.4329 9
6 3.1786 1.0000 0.3333 0.5556 0.6543 2
7 1.0435 0.3357 0.9406 0.4041 0.5081 6
8 2.8438 0.8947 0.3348 0.6187 0.6373 3
9 1.1148 0.3470 0.7369 0.4111 0.4689 8236 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
FIGURE 13.6 Main effect plots of: (a) kerf-width, (b) surface roughness, (c) MRR, and (d) 
WLT.Optimization of E-Pulse of WEDM Parameters 237
Figures 13.6 shows the main influences on individual process parameter. 
The kerf-width, SR, and MRR increase with higher IP. WLT rises with higher 
IP and T-off, whereas WLT decreases with higher in SV. The WLT increases 
with greater T-off due to the reduction of number of discharge cycles.
TABLE 13.8 Mean Response Table for GRG.
Parameters L-1 L-2 L-3 Delta (max–min) Rank
A 0.5761 0.5625 0.5381 0.0380 4
B 0.6028 0.5393 0.5346 0.0682 2
C 0.6638 0.5390 0.4739 0.1899 1
D 0.5339 0.5700 0.5728 0.0389 3
Mean value of GRG (γt) = 0.5589.
FIGURE 13.7 GRG graph
The GRG as a function of each level of variables is revealed in Figure 
13.7. The higher GRG values are displayed in bold in Table 13.8. The 
optimal values for improving the multiple output responses were A1B1C1D3.
T-on was 6 µs (level-1), T-off was 40 µs (level-1), IP was 10 (level-1), and 
SV was 20 V (level-3).
13.3.2 ANOVA FOR GRG
ANOVA was performed by using the Minitab software to find out the signifi￾cance of the individual parameter on GRG values. Table 13.9 displays the 238 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
ANOVA findings for the GRG values. It is found that the IP is the most 
important factor followed by T-off for the multi-output responses.
TABLE 13.9 ANOVA Results for GRG Values.
Source DF Seq SS Adj MS Contribution (%)
A 2 0.4751 0.23753 3
B 2 2.1568 1.07841 13
C 2 13.2438 6.62188 78
D 2 1.0771 0.53856 6
Total 8 16.9528 100
13.3.3 OPTIMAL GRG
The best GRG is predicted at the controllable parameters. The optimal level 
selected was A1 (T-on), B1 (T-off), C1 (IP) and followed by D3 (SV). The 
predicted GRG was calculated by using eq (13.2)
ˆ 1 ( ) p
t i it γγ γγ = +∑ − =
(13.2)
where γt
 is the total mean of GRG and γi
 is the mean of the GRG at the optimal 
level. The confirmation machining experiments were conducted with the 
optimized values achieved from GRG. The responses were measured on the 
machined geometries as like regular experiment run order. The confirmation 
experiment sample is shown in Figure 13.8. The predicted optimal GRG 
values along with the experimental data are presented in Table 13.10. WLT 
and kerf-width are reduced by 14 and 12% respectively along with a reduc￾tion of surface finish of 5% and an improvement of MRR in 2%.
TABLE 13.10 Predicting GRG Optimal Values.
Condition Initial control 
parameters
Optimal control parameters Percentage (%)
Prediction Experiment
Level A2B2C3D1 A1B1C1D3 A1B1C1D3 A3B2C1D3
Kerf-width (mm) 0.323 0.284 12.07
SR (µm) 2.816 2.6743 5.03
MRR (mm3/min) 7.687 7.832 1.88
WLT (µm) 9.023 7.7492 14.11
GRG 0.4329 0.7077 0.5292 22
Improvement in GRG value = 0.0963.Optimization of E-Pulse of WEDM Parameters 239
FIGURE 13.8 Confirmation experiment sample.
13.4 CONCLUSIONS
The experiments were conducted with controllable parameters of E pulses 
of WEDM method using various levels of T-on, T-off, IP, and SV by using 
Taguchi OA. The responses of MRR, SR, kerf-width, and WLT are opti￾mized through the GRA technique. The deductions from the experimentatal 
investigation are as follows:
• The best combination of parameter levels from optimum GRA mean 
grades to increase the MRR and reduce the SR, kerf-width, and WLT 
is T-on of 6 µs, T-off of 40 µs, IP of 10, and SV of 20 V.
• IP is found to be a major contributing parameter among others by the 
ANOVA technique. The contribution of IP is 78%, T-off is 13%, SV 
is 6%, and T-on is 3%.
• MRR, SR, and kerf-width are highly influenced by IP and T-off.
• The significant factors for the WLT are IP and T-off followed by SV 
and T-on.
• The predicted GRG values are verified by a validation experiment. 
The WLT, kef width, and SR are reduced by 14, 12, and 5% respec￾tively, whereas the MRR is improved by 2%.
Thus, the GRA technique can be successfully utilized in the assessment 
of optimal values from the multi-objective responses. The evolved optimum 240 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
parameters of WEDM by the GRA technique for machining of Ti-10V-2Fe￾3Al alloys can be used in the manufacture of precision components.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors are sincerely thankful to Dr. G. Madhusudhan Reddy, Outstanding 
Scientist and Director, DMRL for his encouragement and kind permission to 
publish this work. The authors are grateful to Shri Deepak Kumar Gupta, 
Scientist- F of TAG, for arranging the work material. The authors are also 
grateful to Shri Umashanker Gupta, Sc-E, Shri D. Madhusudhan, TO-B, 
Smt. E. Vijaya Lakshmi, TO-B, Shri M. Nagamalleshwara Rao, TO-A, Shri 
Chandan Kumar Sharma, TO-A, and other officers and staff of MEG, SFAG, 
and EMG of DMRL for carrying out the experiments and evaluation of the 
results. The authors are also thankful to DRDO for the financial support.
KEYWORDS
• WEDM
• Ti-10V-2Fe-3Al alloy
• Taguchi method
• gray relational analysis
REFERENCES
1. Veiga, C.; Davim, J. P.; Loureiro, A. J. R. Properties and Applications of Titanium 
Alloys: A Brief Review. Rev. Adv. Mater. Sci. 2012, 32 (2), 133–148.
2. Peters, M.; Kumpfert, J.; Ward, C. H.; Leyens, C. Titanium Alloys for Aerospace 
Applications. Adv. Eng. Mater. 2003, 5 (6), 419–427.
3. Boyer, R. R. Aerospace Applications of Beta Titanium Alloys. JOM 1994, 46 (7), 20–23.
4. Srinivasu, G.; Natraj, Y.; Bhattacharjee, A.; Nandy, T. K.; Rao, G. N. Tensile and 
Fracture Toughness of High Strength β Titanium alloy, Ti–10V–2Fe–3Al, as a Function 
of Rolling and Solution Treatment Temperatures. Mater. Design 2013, 47, 323–330.
5. Niknam, S. A.; Khettabi, R.; Songmene, V. Machinability and Machining of Titanium 
Alloys: A Review. Mach. Titanium Alloys 2014, 1–30.
6. Rahman, M.; San Wong, Y.; Zareena, A. R. Machinability of Titanium Alloys. Int. J. Ser. 
C Mech. Syst. Mach. Elements Manuf. 2003, 46 (1), 107–115.Optimization of E-Pulse of WEDM Parameters 241
7. Singh, J.; Singh, R.; Kumar, R. Review on Effects of Process Parameters in Wire Cut 
EDM and Wire Electrode Development. Int. J. Innov. Res. Sci. Eng. Technol. 2016, 2, 
701–706.
8. Muthuramalingam, T.; Mohan, B. A Review on Influence of Electrical Process 
Parameters in EDM Process. Arch. Civ. Mech. Eng. 2015, 15 (1), 87–94.
9. Ghodsiyeh, D.; Akbarzadeh, S.; Izman, S.; Moradi, M. Experimental Investigation of 
Surface Integrity After Wire Electro-Discharge Machining of Ti–6Al 4V. Sādhanā 2019,
44 (9), 1–15.
10. Sharma, N.; Khanna, R.; Sharma, Y. K.; Gupta, R. D. Multi-Quality Characteristics 
Optimization on WEDM for Ti-6Al-4V Using Taguchi-Grey Relational Theory. Int. J. 
Mach. Machinability Mater. 2019, 21 (1 and 2), 66–81.
11. Feroze, W.; Srinivasan, V. R.; Prakash, C. P. S. Investigation of Recast Layer Formed 
on Titanium Alloy Machined by Wire Electric Discharge Machining. IJIRST, ISSN 
23496010.
12. Sivaprakasam, P.; Hariharan, P.; Gowri, S. Modeling and Analysis of Micro WEDM 
Process of Titanium Alloy (Ti–6Al–4V) Using Response Surface Approach. Eng. Sci. 
Technol. Int. J. 2014, 17 (4), 227–235.
13. Prasad, A. R.; Ramji, K.; Datta, G. L. An Experimental Study of Wire EDM on Ti-6Al-4V 
Alloy. Procedia Mater. Sci. 2014, 5, 2567–2576.
14. Mhatre, M. S.; Sapkal, S. U.; Pawade, R. S. Electro Discharge Machining Characteristics 
of Ti-6Al-4V alloy: A Grey Relational Optimization. Procedia Mater. Sci. 2014, 5.
15. Kumar, A.; Kumar, V.; Kumar, J. Multi-Response Optimization of Process Parameters 
Based on Response Surface Methodology for Pure Titanium Using WEDM Process. Int. 
J. Adv. Manuf. Technol. 2013, 68 (9), 26452668.
16. Kumar, A.; Kumar, V.; Kumar, J. Surface Integrity and Material Transfer Investigation 
of Pure Titanium for Rough Cut Surface After Wire Electro Discharge Machining. Proc. 
Inst. Mech. Eng. Part B: J. Eng. Manuf. 2014, 228 (8), 880–901.
17. Parameshwar, K.; Nandam, S. R.; Thakur, D. G. Performance Evaluation of AE-Pulse 
of Wire EDM Process on Ti-10V-2Fe-3Al Alloy by Taguchi GRA Technique. IOP Conf. 
Ser.: Mater. Sci. Eng. 2021, 1126 (1).Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes. 
Sandip Kunar, Prasenjit Chatterjee, and M. Sreenivas Reddy (Eds.)
© 2025 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
CHAPTER 14
OPTIMIZATION OF WIRE EDM 
PROCESS PARAMETERS FOR EN-31 
STEEL
SMRUTIRANJAN BISWAL1, S.TRIPATHY1, and D. K. TRIPATHY2
1Department of Mechanical Engineering, Institute of Technical 
Education and Research, Siksha ‘O’ Anusandhan 
(Deemed to be University), Bhubaneswar, India
2IIT Kharagpur, Kharagpur, India
ABSTRACT
Wire electrical discharge machining (WEDM) has found enormous use in 
the manufacture of tools, production of dies and molds and is applied for 
the shaping up of exotic materials that cannot be machined by conventional 
machining operations. This study aims to explore the influence of input 
parameters like on time (Ton), off time (Toff), feed of the table (TF), feed of 
the wire (WF), and voltage (V) on output responses like material removal rate 
and surface roughness during the WEDM process of EN-31 steel using brass 
wire. Taguchi’s design of experiments has been implemented to optimize 
the input parameters. L27 orthogonal array (OA) with five parameters and 
three levels has been used for the experiments. Ton and voltage have been 
observed to be the most substantial parameters affecting MRR and surface 
roughness (Ra). The surface morphology study was performed using SEM 
for the material specimen having highest and lowest MRR and Ra values. 
Results show that as Ton rises, MRR also increases and Ra gets reduced. As 
the voltage rises, MRR decreases and Ra increases.244 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
14.1 INTRODUCTION
The Wire-EDM process is used to create desired contours on the work￾piece surface by rotation of a metallic wire in conjunction with a dielectric 
fluid. In WEDM, the erosion of metal takes place because of the local 
heating through electric sparks.1 A metallic wire of very small diameter is 
inserted for shaping the workpiece immersed in the dielectric fluid such 
as deionized water. WEDM finds wide applications in cutting of plates of 
thickness up to 300 mm. It is also used to make punches, dies, and tools 
of hard metals with high strength.2 The inherent properties of the process 
make the machining of complex parts and precise components easy in hard 
conductive materials. The workpiece should be electrically conductive for 
the wire EDM process to produce burr-free surfaces.3 WEDM is used to 
produce components with complex profiles. The process of WEDM has 
found wide applications in all industries including automotive, aerospace, 
tool and die, sports, and many other industries. Manufacture of cams, 
special gears, bearings, press tools, and other parts involves the use of 
WEDM.4
14.2 EXPERIMENTAL TECHNIQUES
14.2.1 MATERIALS AND METHODS
The machining process has been carried out on an Electronica Ecocut 
WEDM machine with bed size of 250 × 350 × 200 mm, maximum taper 
angle 3°, wire spool capacity 3.5 kg, and capacity of tank as 135 L. The 
dielectric fluid was chosen as deionized water and brass wire of diameter 
0.25 mm for machining of EN-31 steel. The work material is used for making 
dies, cutters, punches, ball and roller bearing, spinning tools, beading rolls, 
etc. The material demonstrates severe wear resistance and is used to make 
components which undergo high abrasion and loading. Dimension of chosen 
work specimen is (306 × 10 × 6) mm selected for conducting the experiment 
shown in Figure 14.1. The chemical makeup of the EN-31 workpiece is 
C-0.90-1.10%, Si-0.35-1.10%, Mn-1.1%, P-0.055% maximum, S-0.055% 
maximum, Cr-1-1.15%, the rest being iron. The mechanical properties of 
EN-31 are presented in Table 14.1.Optimization of Wire EDM Process Parameters for EN-31 Steel 245
FIGURE 14.1 EN-31 steel workpiece.
TABLE 14.1 Important Properties of EN-31 Steel.
Yield 
strength 
(N/mm2)
Tensile 
strength 
(N/mm2)
% of 
elongation
Brinell 
hardness
Rockwell 
hardness
Density 
(kg/m3)
Modulus of 
elasticity 
(N/mm2)
450 750 30 59 65 7.85 215,000
14.2.2 ASSESSMENT OF MACHINING FEATURES
The WEDM process is controlled by many input parameters which, if 
optimized, result in better performance and economy. The output responses 
considered in the present study are:
14.2.2.1 RATE FOR MATERIAL ERODED FROM THE WORKPIECE 
SURFACE (MRR)
MRR is considered the weight variation prior to the machining and post 
machining with respect to the machining time in minutes.5,6 Electronic 
balance of precision 0.01 g is used to measure the weight difference of the 
machined specimen.
weight loss from the workpiece MRR
Density of the workpiece×Machining time =246 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
14.2.2.2 SURFACE TEXTURE DETERMINATION
The variation of the generated surface from the nominal surface is the surface 
roughness and is expressed in µm.7 SR is measured using “MITUTOYO 
Surftest SJ-210” tester considering the sampling length as 0.6 mm and by 
taking three readings of Ra. The average value gives the roughness value.
14.2.3 EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN
Taguchi’s experimental design has been used for the experimental runs. L27 
orthogonal array is the appropriate design after considering the number of 
factors and their levels. The input parameters considered are on time (Ton), 
off time (Toff), feed of the table (T.F), feed of the wire (W.F), and voltage 
(V) at three levels. Table 14.2 represents the important parameters and the 
selected levels.
TABLE 14.2 Levels and Parameters.
Control parameters L1 L2 L3
Ton 4 8 10
Toff 2 6 9
WF 2 4 6
TF 5 8 10
V 7 8 9
14.2.4 TAGUCHI’S L27 ORTHOGONAL ARRAY
The obtained results have been analyzed through Mini Tab 15 software using 
Taguchi’s single-objective optimization method. Higher-the-better principle 
applies to MRR whereas SR fits into lower-the-better type characteristics. 
The main effect plots and interaction plots have been analyzed and the opti￾mized parameters for MRR and Ra have been identified. Necessary plots are 
drawn to show the relationship among factors.
14.3 RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Experiments have been performed on WEDM for EN 31 steel with the aim 
of achieving high MRR and low Ra. The influence of various control param￾eters such as Ton, Toff, V, WF, and TF has been investigated on MRR and Optimization of Wire EDM Process Parameters for EN-31 Steel 247
Ra. The most significant factor using Taguchi’s single-objective optimization 
has been found out. The obtained results have been analyzed using Mini Tab 
15 version software. The main effect on MRR and Ra has been analyzed and 
the graphs have been plotted.
14.3.1 EFFECT OF CONTROL PARAMETERS ON RATE OF 
MATERIAL REMOVAL
FIGURE 14.2 Main effect plot for MRR.
14.3.1.1 INFLUENCE OF TON ON MRR
The influence of Ton on MRR can be identified by the main defect plot 
presented in Figure 14.2. It may be interpreted that with the increase in Ton, 
MRR increases. Maximum MRR is achieved at the third level of Ton.
14.3.1.2 INFLUENCE OF TOFF ON MRR
The influence of Toff on MRR has been shown in the main effect plot 
represented in Figure 14.2. When Toff increases MRR decreases as can be 
seen from the figure. The optimized set of process parameters to achieve 
maximum MRR is the first level of Toff. This shows that Toff and MRR are 248 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
inversely proportional to each other. So it may be concluded that the MRR 
will be good when the Toff is less.
14.3.1.3 INFLUENCE OF TABLE FEED ON MRR
The influence of TF on MRR has been shown in the main effect plot 
represented in Figure 14.2. There is no significant impact of TF on MRR as 
observed. MRR is more at the second level of TF. It is due to the effect of 
other factors occurring while the process is taking place.
14.3.1.4 INFLUENCE OF WF ON MRR
The influence of WF on MRR has been shown in the main effect plot 
represented in Figure 14.2. The figure demonstrates that WF has not a much 
significant effect on MRR. Highest MRR is observed at the third level of WF 
and lowest at the second level. This shows that more is the WF, more will be 
the removal rate.
14.3.1.5 INFLUENCE OF V ON MRR
The influence of V on MRR has been shown in the main effect plot. The 
value of MRR is more at the first level of V. The figure shows that as voltage 
rises, MRR falls. This is because more discharge energy results in more 
amount of material removed, which if not flushed away completely during 
Toff decreases the removal rate by getting deposited on the surface.
14.3.2 INFLUENCE OF DIFFERENT PARAMETERS ON RA
 The surface irregularity of the machined specimen rises with intense sparks 
due to the increase in dispersive energy resulting in impulsive forces. The 
cooling occurs during flushing and the molten metal that is not flushed away 
completely gets solidified increasing the Ra. The results from the Taguchi 
method have been analyzed using Minitab software. The main effect plots 
on Ra are analyzed using the criterion smaller is better.8–10 The analysis is 
shown in Figure 14.3.Optimization of Wire EDM Process Parameters for EN-31 Steel 249
FIGURE 14.3 Main effect plot for Ra.
14.3.2.1 INFLUENCE OF TON ON RA
The influence of Ton on Ra has been shown in Figure 14.3 by the main effect 
plot. It is evident that with the increase in Ton, Ra also increases to some 
extent but then it decreases. This can be related to the effect of other param￾eters generating desirable surface finish. Minimum Ra is achieved at the first 
level of Ton.
14.3.2.2 INFLUENCE OF TOFF ON RA
The influence of Toff on Ra has been shown in the main effect plot represented 
in Figure 14.3. The figure clearly demonstrates that with the increase in Toff, 
Ra increases. This shows that an optimum setting of Ton and Toff is required 
to get a desirable surface finish. During the Toff time when flushing takes 
place, the eroded material does not get flushed away completely. As the time 
gap is more, the material gets sufficient time to solidify and redeposit on the 
surface.250 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
14.3.2.3 INFLUENCE OF TF ON RA
The relationship between Ra and Tool Feed in Figure 14.3 shows that TF has 
less impact on Ra. Other parameters influence the surface texture and TF 
cannot control the roughness of the surface independently. As TF rises, Ra
gets lowered.
14.3.2.4 EFFECT OF WF ON RA
From the relationship plot between Ra and WF it is clear that as the WF 
increases, Ra rises.
14.3.2.5 EFFECT OF V ON RA
Voltage has tremendous influence on Ra as observed from the main effect 
plot. V is directly proportional to Ra and when voltage rises, Ra also rises 
rapidly. So to get good surface roughness the value of voltage should be low.
14.3.3 INTERACTION PLOT BETWEEN PROCESS PARAMETERS 
AND MRR
The interaction plots have been drawn between the control parameters and 
the response factors to assess the individual influence of parameters on 
MRR. These plots are represented in Figure 14.4.
FIGURE 14.4 Interaction plots between input parameters and MRR.Optimization of Wire EDM Process Parameters for EN-31 Steel 251
14.3.4 INTERACTION PLOT BETWEEN PROCESS PARAMETERS 
AND RA
The interaction plots among the control parameters and the response factors 
have been shown to estimate the individual influence of the control factors 
on Ra. The plots are represented in Figure 14.5.
FIGURE 14.5 Interaction plot between Ra and input parameters.
14.3.5 SURFACE MORPHOLOGY ANALYSIS
Surface texture can be analyzed using scanning electron microscope. The 
model of SEM used for the current study is SEM (SU 3500, HITACHI) 
model. The microstructures of the machined surface have been analyzed 
after the machining operation has been performed with different settings 
for the samples having maximum MRR, minimum MRR, maximum surface 
roughness, and minimum surface roughness. To determine the chemical 
composition of the machined surface and identify the presence of elements 
in the surface generated post machining, energy-dispersive analyzer X-ray 
(EDAX) analyzer has been utilized.252 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
14.3.5.1 EDAX ANALYSIS FOR MRR
EDAX analysis shows the presence of various elements on the surface 
generated by WEDM which helps determine the surface properties. EDAX 
analysis has been performed with proper sample preparation for specimen 
having lowest and highest MRR. From Figure 14.6, it is found that the work￾piece having highest MRR has less globules in its surface area. The distribu￾tion of globules in surface area is also less. Figure 14.7 represents that the 
surface contains many pores distributed at random and spread over the entire 
surface. This is due to the high thermal gradient produced, which causes 
erosion of material. Higher machining time allows the workpiece to remain 
at high temperatures allowing more time for erosion from the surface. So 
the debris particles act as obstacles at the time of moving of the wire which 
results in less MRR for the workpiece.
FIGURE 14.6 SEM of the workpiece having higest MRR.Optimization of Wire EDM Process Parameters for EN-31 Steel 253
FIGURE 14.7 SEM of workpiece having Lowest MRR.
14.3.5.2 EDAX ANALYSIS
FIGURE 14.8 EDAX analysis of workpiece having highest MRR.
FIGURE 14.9 EDAX analysis of workpiece having lowest MRR.254 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
By comparing data from Figures 14.8 and 14.9, it is found that the pres￾ence of oxyzen is more in lowest MRR workpiece than the higest MRR 
workpiece. It is because of the higher machining time which allows the 
workpice to get oxidized.
14.3.5.3 EDAX ANALYSIS FOR SURFACE ROUGHNESS
EDAX analysis has been performed with a proper sample preparation for 
specimen having lowest and highest SR. Figure 14.10 shows that the rough￾ness of the workpiece is less due to a minimized irregular distribution of 
globules on the workpiece surface. Figure 14.11 depicts that Ra is high due 
to irregular distribution of pores, cracks, and eruptions which propagate 
beneath the surface layers. Irregularities occur as a result of redeposition in 
the form of recast surface during machining. It may be attributed to the high 
machining times which allow for sufficient time for the recast layers to be 
formed by the carbon deposition which is undesirable. The debris becomes 
the cause of erosion from workpiece in an irregular fashion and also causes 
the erosion of wire material.
FIGURE 14.10 SEM of workpiece having lowest roughness.Optimization of Wire EDM Process Parameters for EN-31 Steel 255
FIGURE 14.11 SEM of workpiece having highest roughness.
FIGURE 14.12 EDAX analysis of workpiece having lowest surface roughness.
FIGURE 14.13 EDAX analysis of workpiece having highest surface roughness.256 Optimization of Advanced Manufacturing Processes
The morphological study shows that high MRR and low surface rough￾ness depend upon the globule distribution on the surface. The chemical 
composition of the workpiece also depends upon the oxidation of material 
during machining. So to obtain good MRR and less surface roughness, the 
machining times have to be reduced and adequate steps should be taken to 
avoid more oxidation deposition during machining.
14.4 CONCLUSIONS
In the present work, wire EDM has been performed on EN-31 to investigate 
the effect of process parameters. The major findings are as follows:
a. The experimental results show that the control parameters are solely 
responsible for the increase or decrease of the machining rates which 
is consequent to the removal rates.
b. To obtain high MRR in wire EDM of EN31 steel, on time (Ton), and 
WF must increase whereas off time (Toff) and voltage (V) should 
decrease. The optimized set of process parameters for highest MRR 
obtained to be 3.522 mm3/min is on time (Ton) of 8 µs, off time (Toff) 
of 2 µs, table feed of 8 mm, wire feed of 6 mm, and voltage (V) of 
7 V.
c. To get a good surface finish, the obtained data has been analyzed by 
the Taguchi method. It shows that the value of Ra increases with on 
time and voltage. This opposes the conditions for higher material 
removal rate.
d. To obtain low Ra values, on time (Ton) and table feed (TF) must 
increase. At the same time voltage and off time (Toff) must decrease 
and WF has no significant effect on Ra. The optimum Ra is at 1.580 
µm obtained in run 19. The optimized set of process parameters for 
minimum Ra are on time (Ton) of 10 µs, table feed (TF) of 10 mm, 
wire feed (WF) of 4 mm, off time (Toff ) of 2 µs, and voltage (V) of 
7 V.
e. From this study, it is concluded that to obtain higher MRR with good 
surface finish all the above suitable combinations of parameters 
should be chosen at their optimum levels.Optimization of Wire EDM Process Parameters for EN-31 Steel 257
KEYWORDS
• wire-EDM
• Taguchi technique
• EN-31
• surface morphology
REFERENCES
1. Tripathy, S.; Tripathy, D. K. Grey Relational Analysis and Its Application on Surface 
Properties During EDM and Powder Mixed EDM. J. Eng. Sci. Technol. 2017, 12 (9), 
2374–2392.
2. Choudhury, S. K.; Daroun, R. S. Current Advanced Research Development of Electric 
Discharge Machining (EDM): A Review. Int. J. Res. Advent Technol. 2014, 2 (3), 
273–297.
3. Pecas, P.; Henriques, E. Electrical Discharge Machining Using Simple and Powder 
Mixed Dielectric: The Effect of the Electrode Area on the Surface Roughness and 
Topography. J. Mater. Process. Technol. 2008, 200, 250–258.
4. Singh, S.; Yeh, M. F. Optimization of Abrasive Powder Mixed EDM of Aluminium 
Matrix Composites with Multiple Responses Using Gray Relational Analysis. J. Mater. 
Eng. Perform. 2014, 21 (4), 481–491.
5. Singh, B.; Singh, P.; Tejpal, G.; Singh, G. An Experimental Study of Surface Roughness 
of H-11 in EDM Process Using Copper Tool Electrode. Int. J. Adv. Eng. Technol. 2012, 
3 (4), 30–33.
6. Talla, G.; Sahoo, D. K.; Gangopadhyay, S.; Biswas, C. K. Modeling and Multi-Objective 
Optimization of Powder Mixed Electric Discharge Machining Process of Aluminium/
Alumina Metal Matrix Composite. Eng. Sci. Technol.: Int. J. 2015, 1–5.
7. Tripathy, S.; Tripathy, D. K. Multi-Attribute Optimization of Machining Process 
Parameters in Powder Mixed Electro-Discharge Machining using TOPSIS and Grey 
Relational Analysis. Eng. Sci. Technol.: Int. J. 2016, 19 (1), 62–70.
8. Senthil, P.; Vinodh, S.; Singh, A. K. Parametric Optimisation of EDM on Al-Cu/TiB2 
In Situ Metal Matrix Composites Using TOPSIS Method. Int. J. Mach. Machinability 
Mater. 2014, 16 (1), 80–94.
9. Singh Sidhu, S.; Batish, A.; Kumar, S. ED Machining of Particulate Reinforced MMC’s. 
Int. J. Mech. Aerospace, Ind. Mechatron. Manuf. Eng. 2014, 8 (3), 503–509.
10. Datta, S.; Bandyopadhyay, A.; Pal, P. K. Solving Multi-Criteria Optimization Problem 
in Submerged Arc Welding Consuming a Mixture of Fresh Flux and Fused Slag. Int. J. 
Adv. Manuf. Technol. 2008, 35, 935–942.INDEX
A
Abrasive water jet machining method 
(AWJM), 10–11
Adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference system 
(ANFIS), 21
Additive manufacturing (AM), 138
advantages and disadvantages, 168–169
aluminum industry, 169–170
controlling process parameters, 177–178
defects, 173–177
heat treatment, 180
processes, 177
types
electron beam melting (EBM), 171
fused deposition modeling (FDM), 170
selective laser melting (SLM), 170–171
Zr-modified AA6061, 179
Advanced manufacturing processes
AWJM, 4
carbon fiber reinforcement plastic 
(CFRP), 4
electrochemical machining (ECM), 4
experimentation and test conditions
EDM machine (ELTECH-D300), 22
grinding tool, 23
measurement of response, 24
workpiece material, 23
laser beam machining (LBM), 4
mechanical micromachining, 3
methodology
adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference system 
(ANFIS), 21
design of experiments (DOE), 20
response surface methodology (RSM), 20
modeling and optimization, 4–5
Databook evaluations, 5
multi-factor optimization, 6
unconventional manufacturing 
procedures, 5
multi-criteria decision-making 
optimization methods (MCDM), 6
abrasive water jet machining method 
(AWJM), 10–11
electric discharge machining method, 7
electrochemical machining method, 8
laser beam machining (LBM), 11
ultrasonic machining (USM), 10
wire electric discharge machining 
(WEDM), 9
result and discussion
ANFIS performances, 26–27
ANOVA for Ra, 25
regression equations, 25–26
surface morphology, 28–29
validation experiments, 27
ultrasonic machining (USM), 4
Alpha-beta alloy, 228
characterization techniques
KERF-width, 232
MRR, 234
surface roughness, 232–233
white layer thickness, 233
experiment
process parameters and levels, 231
setup, 230
specimen preparation, 230
work material, 230
results and discussions
ANOVA, 237–238
grey relational grade (GRG), 234, 237
optimal GRG, 238–239
T-off, 235
Al-Ti-B alloy, 209
Analysis of variance (ANOVA), 19, 87
Analytical hierarchy process (AHP), 33, 41–44
Artificial neural network (ANN), 61–63
B
Backpropagation algorithm, 64
Box-Behnken design, 83–84
Box-Behnken DOE (BBD), 81
British Atomic Energy Department, 208260 Index
C
Carbon fiber reinforcement plastic (CFRP), 4
Central composite design (CCD), 123
CNC milling machine, 121
CONFORM extrusion device, 208
D
Databook evaluations, 5
Deformation load
materials and procedures, 210
variance analysis (ANOVA), 211–212
results and discussions
extrusion load optimization, 212–223
mathematical modeling, 212–223
numerical simulation, 212–215
Design of experiments (DOE), 20, 81
E
Electric discharge machining (EDM), 58, 59
experimental methods and materials
Box-Behnken design, 83–84
TOPSIS optimization, 84–86
experimental setup and materials
control parameters, 61
graphite, 60
material used, 61
genetic algorithm (GA), 69–70
Fuzzy set theory, 73
grey relation analysis (GRA), 72–73
results, 71–72
method, 7
methodology and result analysis
arithmetical calculation, 63
artificial neural network (ANN), 61–63
backpropagation algorithm, 64
maximize crater diameters, 67–69
minimize surface finish (MSF), 65–67
minimize wear rate (MWR), 64–65
multicriteria decision making (MCDM) 
analysis, 73–75
results and discussions, 86
surface roughness
analysis of variance (ANOVA), 87
final thickness, 90, 92
inference on, 89
tool rotational speed, 89
TOPSIS optimization, 93–94
Electrical discharge grinding (EDG), 18
Electrochemical machining (ECM), 4
method, 8
Electron beam melting (EBM), 171
Experimentation and test conditions
EDM machine (ELTECH-D300), 22
grinding tool, 23
measurement of response, 24
workpiece material, 23
F
Friction stir welding (FSW), 153
experimental setup, 156
gray relational analysis (GRA) methods, 
154–156
methodology, 158–161
results and discussion, 161–162
Taguchi method, 154–156
Fused deposition modeling (FDM), 170
Fuzzy inference system (FIS), 138
G
Genetic algorithm (GA), 69–70
Fuzzy set theory, 73
grey relation analysis (GRA), 72–73
results, 71–72
Gray relational analysis (GRA), 228, 229
methods, 154–156
Green manufacturing, 34
Green-VSM (GVSM), 34
additional cost
additional time consumption, 38
green technology, 38
training of employees, 38
critical factors
biodiversity waste, 37
emission waste, 37
energy waste, 36
garbage waste, 37
green wastes, 35–36
material waste, 36–37
transportation waste, 37
water waste, 36
employee training, 39
bottom-level employees, 40
research and development cell, 40
top management commitment, 40Index 261
lean tools
Kanban/pull system, 41
life cycle assessment (LCA), 40–41
plan-do-check-act (PDCA), 41
results and discussion
analytical hierarchy process (AHP), 
41–44
inferences and findings, 46–47
interpretive structural modeling (ISM), 
47
level partitioning, 49–50
MICMAC evaluation, 51–53
reachability matrix, 48–49
structural self-interaction matrix 
(SSIM), 48
savings, 38
government aids, 39
heavy taxes and fines, 39
incentives, 39
less consumption, 39
recycled products, 39
Grey relational analysis (GRA), 72–73, 80
Grey relational grade (GRG), 234, 237
Grinding wheel speed (GWS), 18
H
Hard material turning, 186
materials and methods
design of experiment (DOE), 192
machining and cutting tools, 191–192
preparation, 190
result and discussion, 193–199
analyses of variance (ANOVA), 201–202
confirmation/validation experment 
examination, 202
S/N ratio analysis, 199–201
I
Incremental sheet metal forming (ISMF), 78
CNC milling machine, 121
experimental methods and materials
central composite design (CCD), 123
design of experiments (DOE), 122
multi-objective optimization based on 
ratio analysis (MOORA), 123–124
forming, 118
multi-objective optimization on the basis 
of ratio analysis (MOORA)
method, 121, 122
results and discussions
maximum height, 125, 126
multi-objective optimization based on 
ratio analysis (MOORA), 131, 133
tensile strength, 127–128
wall deviation angle, 129–130
types, 119
Interpretive structural modeling (ISM), 33
K
Kanban/pull system, 41
L
Laser beam machining (LBM), 4, 11
Life cycle assessment (LCA), 40–41
M
Material removal rate (MRR), 18
Metal forming, 78
Minimize surface finish (MSF), 65–67
Minimize wear rate (MWR), 64–65
Multi-criteria decision making (MCDM), 2
analysis, 73–75
optimization methods, 6
abrasive water jet machining method 
(AWJM), 10–11
electric discharge machining method, 7
electrochemical machining method, 8
laser beam machining (LBM), 11
ultrasonic machining (USM), 10
wire electric discharge machining 
(WEDM), 9
Multi-objective optimization based on ratio 
analysis (MOORA), 123–124
method, 121, 122
O
Optimum parameter
analysis of variance (ANOVA), 103
experimentation methods and materials
analysis of variance (ANOVA), 106
genetic algorithm (GA), 106–107
methodology, 104–105
Taguchi method, 105
incremental sheet forming (ISF), 100
MATLAB, 100
results and discussion
analysis of variance (ANOVA), 107–108262 Index
contour plot, 109–110
force and temperature, 107
optimization process, 110–112
Pareto chart, 108–109
single-point incremental (SPIF), 100
P
Plan-do-check-act (PDCA), 41
R
Response surface methodology (RSM), 20, 
210
S
Selective laser melting (SLM), 170–171
Single-point incremental forming (SPIF), 
78, 80, 100
Structural self-interaction matrix (SSIM), 48
Surface roughness
analysis of variance (ANOVA), 87
final thickness, 90, 92
inference on, 89
tool rotational speed, 89
TOPSIS optimization, 93–94
Surface roughness (SR), 227
T
Taguchi method, 154–156
Tool rotational speed, 89
Tool wear rate (TWR), 18
Two-point incremental forming (TPIF), 78
U
Ultrasonic machining (USM), 4, 10
Unconventional manufacturing procedures, 5
V
Value stream mapping (VSM), 33
W
White layer thickness (WLT), 227
Wire arc additive manufacturing (WAAM), 
138
experimental methods and materials, 139
FIS Editor, 143–144
fuzzy inference system (FIS), 142–143
fuzzy logic algorithm, 141–142
heat treatment, 140
tensile test, 140
results and discussion
Fuzzy logic membership function 
models, 144–146
rules editor, 146
rules viewer, 147
surface views, 148
validation of results, 149–150
Wire electrical discharge machining 
(WEDM), 9, 227, 229, 243
control parameters, 246
effect, 250
FEED on MRR, 248
influence of, 249, 250
Toff on MRR, 247–248
TON on MRR, 247
V on MRR, 248
WF on MRR, 248
experimental design
orthogonal array, 246
Taguchi’s experimental design, 246
experimental techniques
materials and methods, 244
interaction plot
RA, 251
interaction plot, process parameters
MRR, 250
machining features
surface texture determination, 246
workpiece surface, 245
results and discussion, 246
surface morphology analysis
EDAX analysis, 251–253
surface roughness, 254–256
Z
Zr-modified AA6061, 179
